A GEOGRAPHICAL DICTIONARY

Representing the Present and Ancient NAMES and STATES OF ALL THE Countries,
Kingdoms, Provinces, Remarkable Cities, Universities, Ports, Towns, Mountains,
Seas, Streights, Fountains, and Rivers of the whole WORLD; THEIR Distances,
Longitudes, and Latitudes, WITH A short HISTORICAL ACCOUNT of the same, and a
general INDEX of the Ancient and Latin Names.

Very necessary for the right understanding of all Ancient and Modern
Histories, and especially of the diverse Accounts of the present Transactions of
EUROPE.

Begun by EDMUND BOHUN, Esquire.

Continued, Corrected, and Enlarged with great Additions throughout, and
particularly with whatever in the Geographical Part of the Voluminous Morery
and Le Clerk occurs observable, By Mr. BERNARD.

Together with all the Market Towns, Corporations, and Rivers, in England,
wanting in both the former Editions.



LONDON: Printed for Charles Brom, at the Gun at the West End of S. Paul's.
MDCXCIII.

A REFLECTION upon Le Grand Dictionaire Historique, etc. OR, THE Great
Historical Dictionary OF LEWIS MORERY, D. D. Printed at UTRECHT 1692. with the
Supplement of J. Le Clerc, D. D. in Four TOMES in Folio, French; AND An Account
of this Edition of the following BOOK.
THE Great Historical Dictionary of Monsieur Morery, was an unexpected Work to
come from a Person, who understood not any Greek or Hebrew; and had but an
indifferent knowledge of Latin. For it will be allowed, amidst such a
multiplicity of Subjects, to contain many very ingenious things. Yet I desire
not to commend him for the Invention he ascribes to the Chinese of the Province
of Xamsi: who boil their Victuals (he says) over Pits of Subterraneous Fires,
proceeding from the Bowels of the Earth: Which, to make the Fire burn the
quicker and stronger, they contract at the Mouths in such a manner, as only to
leave room for the Caldron to stand. For though the Chinese are famous over the
World for their Inventions; yet the Wit of this has so little in it of the
Wisdom of their Other, or Common Sense, that it supersedes the Civility of the
least pretense to approve of it. Neither yet is it possible for me to be
reconciled to his Account of a Tribe of the Troglaedytes; dwelling continually
in the Caverns of a Mountain, in the Island of Malta; near to a House of
Pleasure, belonging to the Great Master of the Order of the Knights there. A
tall, robust, long-lived, inhospitable people, as he describes them: Who speak
altogether the pure Arabic Language, in which they are instructed, as to
matters of Religion, by the Maronites that come to Malta. For there appears no
more Probability of an Arabian Race of Christian Troglaedytes at Malta, than of
a Nation of Pygmies in the Neighborhood of the Nile. Therefore in a word,
Monsieur Morery, as he has his Excellencies, so he has his great Faults too:
And it seems to be none of the least remarkable of the Latter, That let a thing
be never so Fabulous in Pliny and Herodotus, or the Histories of the old
Greeks; never so extravagantly reported by the Modern Books of Voyages and
Discoveries, or the Common Memoires of the Times; yet he mixes it with his
purer Geography. Which has given me continual reason to admire the Patience
and Labor of his Pen: but I disagree with his Fancy, if he thought such
Collections pleasing to Men of Sense; and with his Judgment, if he thought them
true.

In his Geography of the Kingdom and Counties of England, there is no body but
must be offended with him upon other Accounts. The principal of our Rivers
(next the Thames) the Severn, the Trent, the Humber, the Medway, the Derwent,
etc. None of them have their Names with Descriptions in his Work. Peterborough,
Wells, Cambridge, Shrewsbury, Richmond, and Rippon, are wholly omitted out of
our Chief Towns and Cities. Cambridgeshire, Hertfordshire, Cheshire, Shropshire
and Wiltshire, out of our Counties. And all the Description that he gives to
Eleven of our Counties more, with the Capital Towns thereunto belonging, will
be justly rehearsed in about Eleven Lines. To Southhampton, he says, a Town and
County in the South of England, with a Port to the Sea. To Stafford, a Town and
County of England, toward the middle of the Kingdom. To Surrey, a County in
the South part of England. To Sussex, a County in the South of England, whereof
Chichester is the Capital. To Warwick, a Town and County of England. To
Westmorland, a County in the North of England, which was a part of the Country
of the ancient Brigantes. To Huntingdon and Leicestershires, he adds the Names
of the Rivers Ouse and Stower, with two or three Towns. To Middlesex, a small
County in the East of England, included in the ancient Kingdom of the East
Saxons, and only considerable for London its Capital. To Rutland, a County in
the middle of England, but little considerable, having no more than one Town
called Oakcham in it. To Suffolk, a Town and County in the East of England.
This is Monsieur Morery's way of describing a next Neighbor Kingdom, and one of
the most Powerful in the World. Which is the least that a Geographer says, of
the most distant and obscure Provinces of China and Japan, or the unknown
Regions of the Asiatick Tartary. And though he may be something larger upon
London, Rochester, Bristol, and now and then a County; yet he does it with so
little Care and Art, so ungeographically in comparison to his Illustration of
other Countries; that take his Accounts of England all together (with which
those of Scotland, Ireland, and Wales, are done after the like manner) and they
will be found the crudest and meanest and the most Contemptible part of his
Volumes.

I need take no Notice of his Mistakes about Rutland and Suffolk; which occur
even in those diminitive Sketches that he gives them, and are already sensible
to every running Eye. He is no less mistaken about the Bishopric of Coventry
and Lichfield. A Bishopric (says he) about the year 656. was established at
Lichfield. And there being another Bishopric afterward established at
Coventry, these two Bishoprics in time became united in one. Whereas it never
from the beginning was otherwise than one and the same Bishopric; primarily
established at Lichfield in 656: Next removed to Chester in 1067; or as others,
in 1075. From Chester, removed to Coventry in 1088: and from Coventry returned
to Lichfield again in 1186. Whereupon followed an Agreement under Bishop
Alexander de Savensby (who succeeded to the Sea in 1220), that the Episcopal
Style should be derived from both Coventry and Lichfield, yet with the
Precedence to Coventry. Mons. Morery is no less mistaken in the ancient Seat of
the Bishops of Lincoln; which was Dorchester in Oxfordshire, situated at the
Confluence of the Them and the Isis. For he has the fortune, not only to
attribute it to Dorchester in Dorsetshire, upon the River From; but to quote
William of Malmsbury for the same, to aggravate the matter, in mistaking both
his Author and the place together. It is very pleasant to observe in his
Account of Northumberland, what an extent he gives to it. All Northumberland
(says he) comprehends six Counties; York, Durham, Lancaster, Westmorland,
Cumberland and Northumberland. To which he ought to have added the South parts
of Scotland too, as far as Edenborough; if he knew no other, than that the
Limits of Northumberland now remain in the same State, as they were eleven
hundred years ago, in the time of Saxon Heptarchy. Perhaps a Stranger will
continually admire at the meaning of such Words as Lerbie, Barthe, Lanclastre,
Torriger, etc. He may be pleased to know therefore, that Monsieur Morery is not
much to be trusted for the Right Proper Names of Places or Persons (Ancient or
Modern), out of his own Country. Yet neither can our Nation blame him for it,
more than another. His Misnomers are most Universal: and the meaning of those
mentioned, is Irebye in Cumberland, the Bath, Lancashire, and the ancient
Britain Vortiger. It is more strange to see him Misplace the Houses of Lords
and Commons in the Abbey of Westminster; and to see Dr. Barrow of Cambridge
attributed throughout his Character to the Chairs and Preferments of Oxford;
and Dr. Stillingfleet quoted with the Title of the present Bishop of
Winchester. Yet there is a stranger and a more admirable Passage still,
expecting to be also remembered here; which says, in illustrating the occasion
and manner of the Descent of the Troops from Holland in 1688. that they were
landed at Torbay in Wales.

It is true, these particular Defects and Errors import no more, than the
unskilfulness of the Author, in the Geography and History of England; whereof
the disparagement redounds to himself only, with Monsieur Le Clerc his late
Editor at Utrecht, who certainly is the Father of a share. But if M. Morery
has happened to be as unfortunate as Maimbourg and Varillas, in mistaking in
Particulars relating to England; He is also as injurious as Scaliger and
Sorbiere in some of his General Characters of it. It is fit, I should repeat
his Words. First, he bestows a line or two of commendation upon the Gentry and
Nobility, who perfect their Natural Parts and Educations by Travel and
Conversation with Strangers, (Voc. Angleterre) But on the Contrary (he adds)
the People of England, are cruel, insolent, brutal, seditious, Enemies to
Strangers. The abundance of all the Necessaries of life produced by their
Country with little pain, renders them proud and negligent. They have not the
same Industry, nor the same Address to Works and Manufactures, as their
Neighbors and other People; who are made to love labor, and be industrious,
by necessity and the sterility of their Country. It has been long since said,

Anglica Gens est Optima flens, sed pessima ridens. To be persuaded of the
Truth whereof, one need only consider the Evils that England has suffered
these thirty or forty years, by the Transport and the Malice of its sour,
querulous, opiniative, and dissembling Spirits. -- The Men of Letters often
compose their Works with a Pipe of Tobacco in their hands. -- The Citizens and
Peasants delight in the fighting of Bears and Bulls, Cock-fighting, and
Wrestling; which agree with their Inclinations, which are a little cruel. --
The Women go without Ceremony to the Taverns. The Gallants carry their
Mistresses to them; to pleasure whom the Treat must be concluded with the
fighting of Bears and Bulls, Cock-fighting and Wrestling, and many times with
all those three together. By saying all three together, he imagines we fight
the Bears and Bulls with one another. Now as my Grandfather Heylyn answers to
the like Calumnies of Scaliger, by the shooting of the Bow, we may easily guess
the quality of the Archer.

If the People of France lived with all the Innocence and the Freedom of the
Golden Age, their Censures might have been allowed to pass with the Authority
of Oracles. But as it is their unhappiness to be Slaves to the Rack, and the
Wheel, and the Galleys; who have filled the Universe with the Outcries of their
Persecutions at Home, and their Devastations abroad; and can never be forgotten
for the blood of Henry III. and IV. the Barracades of Paris, and the Nuptials
of S. Bartholomew's Eve; before they begin the Cry of Cruelty and Seditiousness
upon another Nation; let them remember that Divine Character of a Man, who
quarrels with a Mote in his Brothers Eye, whilst he has a Beam in his own. If
I know any thing of the Native English Temper, Cruelty is the very Antipodes to
it. There is nothing more odious in History amongst us, than the Memory of a
Prince, who stains his Reign with Blood. As our Government is a Monarchy
without Tyranny, it requires our Obedience without Servility. Torture is
excluded our Laws with an abhorrence; not only as a Servility unfit for
Christians, but a Barbarity unfit for Men. And that famous ancient comparison
of Angli tanquam Angeli, shines most especially in the beauty of their minds;
composed of Simplicity, Integrity, Modesty, Mercy, Open and Free-heartedness,
Peace, Gratitude, Generosity, Gallantry and Love; which are all comprehended in
one Word, they call Good Nature, so appropriated by God to them and their
Language, that it scarce admits of a direct Translation into any other. The
true Reading of the Verse, that is quoted by Monsieur Morery, is by an Abuse
corrupted and turned into Anglica gens. Otherwise it is

Rustica gens est Optima flens, sed Pessima ridens. And understands the
Peasantry, not of Ours, or any Particular Nation, but all in Common. Though the
Sense and Equity of it neither so is any better than the Poetry: And I dare be
confident the Rhiming Monk that wrote it, never knew in himself what Labor and
Oppression means. Whilst the Peasant by the condition of his Being carries a
Cross, to add to the weight whereof is barbarous in Oppressing the Oppressed.
It is no small sign of a Disposition contrary to Brutal, Insolent, Querulous
and Cruel, that England is to a Proverb the Paradise of the Tender Sex. For
whom Monsieur Morery has prepared such a Treat of Sports, as has I believe at
least one excellence in it, Not to be Common. He ought to have excused those
Sports from Cruelty in their favors too; and to have known, that the
particular pleasure of the Peasantry therein, is only to see the courage of
their Beasts, or laugh at Cowardice even in Beasts. But for the Evils which
England (he says) has suffered these thirty or forty years, or more, it is
very unjust to forget the Praises of all the Persons that were innocent of
them, and to draw the Character of the whole Nation from the Crimes of the
guilty only. Who so far as they forsook Peace, and Love, and the rest of the
Virtues abovementioned, degenerated from the Native Spirits of Englishmen.
Whilst fearing beyond reason, and immoderately persecuting a Phantosme of
Cruelty in others, they begat the Monster amongst themselves. So odious is the
apprehension of Cruelty, Slavery, and Brutality here; that the Evils of England
have been occasioned by nothing more, than a false fear taken at their Names.

His other Character of the People of England, is, that they are Enemies to
Strangers. For which, I never could learn a better Argument, than that of Mons.
Sorbieres; (see Dr. Sprats Observations upon the Voyages of Mons. Sorbiere;)
because he was rudely called Monsieur, and not respected in the quality of
Historiographer Royal to the K. of France, by the Children and Schoolboys of
Dover. For long before the reception of the French Protestants, the numbers of
Strangers at Norwich, Canterbury, and London, were computed to be more than
constantly resided at any twenty Cities, either of France, or Spain, or Italy.
Virtue, Merit and Civility in Persons of a Foreign Country, like the
Commodities imported thence, charm the hearts of the English; and have a
greater value set upon them, than the equal products of our own. So far are we
from being inclined to be Enemies to Strangers, that we are ambitious to be
Friends to Strangers, even till we are Enemies to our selves. It is for their
benefit, that in the Court of Admiralty we constantly retain the use of the
Civil Law; and have enlarged it with the addition of those admirable Laws of
Oleron, published by our King Richard I. which have equalized the Fame and
Justice, as to Marine causes, of the ancient Laws of the Rhodians. And how very
careful both our Common and Statute Laws are, in doing the exactest justice in
all Pleas betwixt Strangers and Denizens, or the King and Strangers; I need
only appeal to the Inquest of Medietas Linguae, given by the Statutes of the
27. and 28. of Edw. III.

Another Part of his Disgraces of the People of England, is, their Pride and
Negligence, want of Industry, and of a Genius to Works and Manufactures,
occasioned by their relyance upon the fertility of their Country. I must
observe he joins their Pride and want of Industry very ill together: For if
ever they pretend to be proud of any thing, it is of the Effects of their
Industry, and the Works of their Hands. Their Plantations in the West Indies,
and Commerce thither; Their African, Levant, East-Indian, Russia, Groenland,
Hudsons Bay, Spanish, French, Hamborough, and Merchant Adventurers Companies,
for other Foreign Commerce: At Home, their Enclosures and Tillage; the New
Rivers of the Fenns, the Coal Mines of the North, the Lead Mines of Derby, and
the Tin Mines of Cornwall; the Orchards of Hereford, and the Plough-lands of
other Counties: Their Manufactures in Clothes, Stuffs, Linen, Iron, Copper,
etc. The Quantities of their Commodities transported yearly beyond Sea; Their
Discoveries in the Mechanic Arts, and their Perfection in the Learned; Their
Books in all the Faculties and Sciences, upon all sorts of Subjects; Their
Restoration of London in three years, which was supposed to be the Work of an
Age; Their Ships of Trade and War; their Riches, their Knowledge, their Power
by Land and Sea: All these, as they are the undeniable Demonstrations of a most
Ingenious and Industrious People from the meanest to the highest quality; so
they are justly verified of the English in the view of the World. Who
notwithstanding insult over no Foreign State; neither detract from the Praises
of any greater Trade: But if they value and caress themselves upon the happy
Effects of their Industry, it is a Virtuous Pride that is so well grounded.

When Monsieur Sorbiere traveled into England, he could not but take notice of
the Convenient form of the Bridge at Rochester, for being so contrived, that
the Men's Hats cannot be blown over it. We have altogether as worthy an
Observation here of Mons. Morery; that the Men of Letters in England often
compose their Works with a Pipe of Tobacco in their hands. Whereby I truly,
with regard both to the English and French Men of Letters, am as fully
satisfied, that the Fancies of particular Persons, and sometimes of Nations are
unaccountable; as when I remember that the sage and noble Egyptians of old (and
from them the Israelites) set such a high value upon Garlic and Onions, as to
honor them with a place in the number of their Titular Deities. For if any
English Man of Letters is so addicted to the Weed, to write and smoke together;
yet the Fancy of Monsieur Morery seems no less unaccountable; first to employ
his Observation upon such trivial and insignificant particulars; and next to
print them in a Voluminous Work, amidst the general Character of one of the
most illustrious Kingdoms in the World.

If all the rest of his Geography had been conformable to this of England,
there had been no occasion to use him in an unpleasing Labor that has
happened to be obtained from me. Particularly as to his own Country, he spares
no Pains nor Eloquence to adorn it. And to be sure, he suppresses the ancient
Glory of the Atchievments of the Victorious English in France, as much as
possibly he can. Indeed the Interests of the French Crown, and the Use that
Mons. Pompone made (sometime Secretary of State to Lewis XIV.) of the
Obligations he laid upon the Author, are visible; not in that only, but in the
great care that is taken in rehearsing the Titles, Pretenses and Dependences of
the Crown of France, as if they did desire to entitle it to all the Ancient
Gallia, according as it was bounded in the times of Julius Caesar. I have
followed him throughout his four Tomes from Place to Place; leaving his
Adulterinae Meroes, the Infinite Trash that is in him, as undisturbed as Ashes
of the Dead; to take what is purely Geographical and Chronological, proper, and
easy, and short, according to the Quality and Genius of the following
Dictionary. Which is therefore in this Edition not only enlarged with the
Ancient Geography, and all such other Descriptions of Places, as occur in the
French Work, above what it was possible to contain in the Editions of this
Dictionary in lesser Volumes; and also with some Improvements made in the
Geography of England in the like manner: But I have further taken care to
supply the Defects of the Descriptions themselves, in those Editions, with
whatever accrued that was really necessary to suggest a more perfect knowledge
of each Respective Place. The Duodecimo ascribed to Monsieur Du Vall,
(Geographer to the French King) and printed the fourth time in English 1681.
with the Title of a Geographical Dictionary, was rather a Geographical
Nomenclature, than a Dictionary. It was Begun to be made properly into a
Dictionary by Mr. Edmund Bohun, at the Persuasion and Charge of the Proprietor
of the Copy. And undoubtedly, whatever the Faults of Mr. Bohun's Octavo are;
yet it will always remain an useful Book, and a light Companion (as he
proposes), for Travelers: when, such is the Necessity and Pleasure of a piece
of this Nature in the hands of all; that the very Nomenclature of Du Vall is
entertaining still. But the advancing of this Work to an Absolute Perfection is
a matter of a higher Consideration: which requires the diligence of many Years,
and the succession perhaps of many Hands, and must be content to proceed by
Degrees. And tho the labor in encountering oftentimes a dry and difficult Soil
is unpleasing and deterring; which caused Mr. Bohun to declare, he never
desired to do it a second time; yet as it is like to redound as well to the
Honor of the English Language, as the Universal benefit of Learning amongst
us; it will abide an encouragement to consider, that every Mite bestowed upon
this Corban is Meritorious; and every Endeavor toward the Completing so great
a Good may be placed in the number of Public Services; for which reason, I am
not only satisfied with my own contributing a Share thereto; but am obliged
also to tell the World, that the Table of Measures was adjusted to my Hand by
the Ingenious Mr. Halley.

J. A. BERNARD.

ADVERTISEMENT. December. 30. 1692.
IN March next will be Published, a complete HISTORICAL and POETICAL Dictionary,
representing Alphabetically the Lives and most considerable Actions of all
those Personages of both Sexes, who have at any time been illustrious in the
World; as Emperors, Kings, Princes, Heroes, Captains, etc. Prelates, Doctors,
Heretics, Philosophers, famous Artists, learned Authors, etc. with the time
when each Person flourished: Also an account of the several Sects, Heresies,
Factions and Orders, either Religious or Military, that have been considerable
in any Age. Compiled out of the most select Writers, whether Sacred, Profane,
or Fabulous: Wherein is contained not only whatsoever is worthy of Notice in
the bulky Labor of Monsieur Morery, and the Interpolations of Le Clerc, but
also vast Additions from the best Authors by them omitted; especially great
care is taken that the tedious Impertinences, the palpable Errors, and fulsom
Partialities, every where apparent in the French Work, be corrected or pared
off. This Piece having been for above Four Years preparing for the Public by
several Hands is now in the Press, and will be Published in March next, as is
said above, without Subscription; that so the Buyer may see what he purchases
before he lays down his Money. In Folio. Printed for C. Harper, at the
Flower-de-luce over against S. Dunstan's Church, Fleetstreet.

These Two Volumes will not only comprise every useful Matter in the pretended
Grand Dictionary; but excel it in very considerable Improvements, as will
appear; and by being Printed in Two Volumes is made more commodious as well as
cheaper; the Geographical Enquirer being at his choice to buy, or turn over
only what concerns himself; and he who searches after any matter merely
Historical, not being obliged to the charge or trouble of the other.

Of Diverse MEASURES.
THE Measures of differing Nations, and especially those of the Distances of
Places, being very various, it was necessary to premise something about them,
that the English Reader might not be at a loss when he meets with them in the
following Work.

The English Mile by Statute Law consists of 5280 London Feet, or 1760 Yards,
and eight Furlongs. Of these Miles the Experiments of Mr. Norwood and Mr.
Picart, do demonstrate 69, and somewhat more, to be a Degree of the Earths
Surface; tho till lately a Degree has been reckoned but 60 English Miles.

A Marine League is the twentieth part of a Degree, and most Nations agree to
reckon so for Distances at Sea.

A French League is the twenty fifth part of a Degree, being nearly two English
Miles and three quarters.

A German Mile is reckoned to be the fifteenth part of a Degree, or better than
four English Miles.

A Dutch Mile, such as are now used in Holland, is by the Experiment of
Snellius, nearest the nineteenth part of a Degree, being about three English
Miles and a half.

An Italian Mile is mill passus, or a thousand Paces of five Roman Feet each;
and the Roman Foot being of an Inch less than the London Foot, or as 29 to 30,
it follows that nearest 76 Italian Miles are a Degree. And the Turkish Miles
are reputed equal to the Italian.

The Danes, Swedes, and Hungarians make long Miles, being about a German Mile
and half, or at least five or six English Miles. The Polish Miles are nearly
equal to the Dutch Miles, and reckoned about 20 to a Degree.

The Scotch and Irish Miles are longer than the English, by about half, and are
not defined by any certain measure, that I can learn.

The Spanish League is estimated at four Italian Miles, and are reckoned 17 and
a half to a Degree.

The Russians use a short Measure they call Vorst, which is little more than
three quarters of an English Mile.

The Arabian Mile, both Ancient and Modern, is about an English Mile and a
quarter.

As to the Measures of the Ancients,
The old Roman Mile was nearly equal to the present Italian Mile, described
already, and was divided into eight Stadia, or Furlongs, of 625 Roman Feet each.

The Greeks measured by Stadia only, consisting of 600 Greek Feet, or 100
Orgyiae; eight of these made the Roman Mile, the Greek Foot being to the Roman,
as 25 to 24, nearly.

The Persian League or Parasanga, was much about a Spanish League, being 30
Stadia, or three Italian Miles and three quarters.

The Schoenus or Egyptian League was of two sorts, the greater of 60 Stadia,
and the lesser of 40, the one of five, the other seven and a half Italian Miles.

A GEOGRAPHICAL DICTIONARY, In which are Represented The Present and Ancient
NAMES of all the Countries, Provinces, Remarkable Cities, Towns, Ports, Seas,
Streights, Fountains, Rivers, Mountains, Universities, etc. of the Whole WORLD.
AA, a River of Transisselane, or Over-Issel, a Province of the Low Countries.
It washes the Walls of Steenwick and the Fort of Blockzil, and then falls into
the Zuyder-Sea. The Word Aa is an usual Name in Germany for Rivers, especially
of the lesser.

Aa, a River of Westphalia, falling into the Yssel, supposed by some to be the
Velicer.

Aa, a small River in the Canton of Bern in Suitzerland, called by the
Inhabitants des Arquebusades, from the virtue it has for curing Wounds made by
Gunshot.

Aa, another River in the Territory of Bologne, called also Agnio and Euneno,
disemboguing it self into the Sea at Graveline.

Aade, a small River of Brabant which runs not far from Boisleduc.

Aahuis, a small Town in the Bishopric of Munster, situate on the River Aa,
from whence it has its Name.

Aar, Arola, the principal River in Suitzerland, it springs from S. Gothards
Hill near the Head of the Rhosne, and being increased with many Rivers, falls
into the Rhine at Waldshut, one of the Forest Towns. There are two other little
Rivers in Germany thus called.

Aarbourg, or Aarberg, a pleasant little Town in Suitzerland, full of wealthy
Tradesmen, tempted to fix their Habitations there by the Pleasantness of the
Situation, and the frequent Marts there holden.

Aba, a Town in Arabia Felix, according to modern Geographers. Also a Mountain
in the Confines of the Greater Armenia, at the foot whereof arises the River
Euphrates. A Town in Phocis in Greece, which gave the Surname Abaeus to Apollo,
who had a Temple there. Being burnt by Xerxes, the Inhabitants retired into the
Isle of Negropont, formerly Euboea; from them at that time called Abantis.

Abacares, a People in the South of America upon the River Madera.

Abahius, Abahuis and Abanhi, different Names of the River Nile.

Abaimbe, Abaibe, Abibe; Abaibae, a Ridge of Mountains in Peru, in the Province
of Carthagene near the Gulf of Vraba.

Abanbo, a River of Ethiopia, it falls into the Nile a little above Meroe, it
is supposed to be Ptolomy's Astapus.

Abancay, a River rising in the Mountains of Andes in Peru, and after having
washed a Town of the same Name with it self, falling into the River Maragnon in
the Province of Lima.

Abano, in Latin Aponus, a Village in the Territories of Padua, supposed by
some to be the Birthplace of Titus Livius, anciently famous for its Baths.

Abantes, the Inhabitants of Aba. See Aba.

Abanwiwar, a County of the Upper Hungary upon the Tibiscus, the Capital of
which is Caschaw; it is called by the Germans Abaviwar.

Abara or Abaraner, a City upon the River Alingeac in Armenia Major. The
Archbishop of Nassivan frequently makes it his place of Residence.

Abaraus and Aboraas, a Town in Guinea, upon the River Volta, about twenty five
Leagues from the Sea.

Abarim, a Ridge of Mountains in the Rocky Arabia, of which Mount Nebo and
Mount Pisgah, mentioned in Scripture, are parts.

Abarimon, a Country in Scythia, at the foot of the Mountain Imaus.

Abasses or Abcasses, a People of Mount Caucasus, bordering on Mengrelia,
well-shap'd and vigorous. They cherish Customs much differing from the People
of other Countries.

Abbefort, a Town in Norwey with a good Port, in the Government of Aggerhuys,
about 20 Leagues from Anslo, and 25 or 30 from Stafanger.

Abbeville, a City of the County of Ponthieu in Picardy, upon the River Sum;
it is well fortified, large and beautiful, and lies 34 Leagues from Paris to
the North. It belonged heretofore to the Abbey of S. Riquer, and from thence had
its Name.

Abdera, an ancient City of Thrace, famous, among other things, for the Madness
of the Inhabitants. Of latter days it was called Clazomenae, then Polystile or
Astrizze, and at this time Asperosa.

Abensperg, a little Town of Bavaria three German Miles from Ratisbon, and one
from the Danube. It gave Birth and Surname to Joannes Aventinus a Learned
Historian, who wrote Annals of his Country from the Flood to 1460. in Ten Books.

Aberconwey, in Latin Conovium, a Town in the County of Carnarvon in Wales
seated on the River Conwey and the Irish Sea.

Aberdeen, in Latin Aberdenia and Devana, a City of Scotland, built upon the
River Don, fifty Miles distant from S. Andrews to the North-East; Here is an
Episcopal Chair brought thither in 1100. and an University founded in 1480. The
Site thereof is of late times removed nearer the River Dee. It was yielded to
the English without constraint, in 1651. Long. 18. 12. Lat. 57. 15.

Aberfraw, Gadiva, a Town in the Isle of Anglesey, the Royal Seat of eleven
Kings of North Wales, whereof Amarawd the first began his Reign there, A. C.
877. and Llewellin the last of all the British Kings was slain in Battle, Ann.
Chr. 1282. Long. 15. 20. Lat. 53. 10.

Abergavenny, in Latin Gobannium, a Town in the County of Monmouth in Wales: It
belonged to the Silures when the Romans conquered them; it is fortified with a
Wall and Castle, and seated where the Vske and Gevenny meet. It was erected
into a Barony, which in 1685. was possessed by George Nevil, Lord Abergavenny,
first Baron of England.

Abernethy, a Town on the River Tay in Strathern in Scotland, anciently the
Seat of the Kings of the Picts, and since a Bishops Sea, is now removed to S.
Andrews, where we shall speak further of it.

Abia and Abiamu, a great River in Zagathay, coming into the Caspian-Sea on the
East side; the Oxus of the Ancients. The former Name denoting the upper part,
and the latter the lower part thereof.

Abilene, a Territory of Judaea, so named from Abila the chief Town thereof,
the Tetrarchate of Lysanias, mentioned Luke iii. 1.

Abington, a Corporation in Barkshire, on the Thames, between Oxford and
Wallingford, garrisoned for the Parliament against Charles the First, in 1644.
which proved a great Inconvenience to that Prince. It stands about 5 Miles
South of Oxford. The Right Honorable James Bertie was created Earl of this
place November 30. 1682. by Charles II.

Abissinia, see Aethiopia.

Abiz, Jatrus, Ischar, a small River of Bulgaria which falls into the Danube a
little below Nicopolis.

Ablon, a little Town with a Castle, about 3 Leagues from Paris, where the
Protestants were for some time allowed the Exercise of their Religion, till
they had a Church at Charenton.

Abo, the Capital City of Finland, under the Archbishop of Vpsal, upon the
River Aviaroki in South Finland, near the Shoars of the Baltic Sea, 25 German
Miles from Revel to the North-West, and 31 from Stockholme to the North-East.
Longit. 45. Latit. 63. This City was well nigh burnt to the ground in 1678.

Abocharana, a Town in Arabia the Happy, situate on a high Mountain, the
Passage to which is for seven Miles so strait, that not above two Men can go
abrest. Here the Grand Seignior keeps his Treasure.

Aboras, or Chaborras, a River in Mesopotamia, sometimes called Giulap.

Aborigines, were the most ancient People of Latium, the Seat of the first
Original Romans; they are mentioned by Tacitus Annal. 11. as one of the first
Nations in Italy which received Letters from Evander the Arcadian. They are
supposed to have been the first People which entered Italy after the Flood. The
Word is generally used to signify the first Inhabitants of any Country, of
whose Original no account can be given.

Aboy, a Market Town in East Mead, in the Kingdom of Ireland.

Abrener, a City of Armenia the Greater. See Abara.

Abreoios, otherwise Baxos de Babueca; certain Rocks near the Island of
Hispaniola, so called by the Spaniards because of the great danger of them:
their Name signifying Open your Eyes.

Abrolhos, a litte Isle with a Ridge of Rocks near the Shore of Brasil, for the
same reason thus called by the Portuguese as those aforenam'd by the Spaniards.

Abruckbanya, Aurariarum, a Town in Transylvania.

Abruzzo, called by the Romans Aprutium, is a Province of the Kingdom of
Naples; it is bounded on the East with Apulia, now Puglia, on the West with
Marca Anconitana, on the North with the Adriatic Sea, and on the South with
the Apennine; it was anciently the Seat of the Piceni, and the Samnites, which
latter People by their Valor put the conquering Romans to the last refuge of
choosing a Dictator four times, and afforded them the Honor of XXX. Triumphs.
Their last was in 481. year of Rome, 270 years before our Saviors Birth: This
is one of the greatest, richest, and best peopled parts of the Kingdom of
Naples.

Absorus, an Island and City on the Coast of Illyriam, mentioned by Hyginus.

Abugana, a Province in the Realm of Angota, part of the Dominions of the Grand
Negus.

Abuyo, one of the Philippine Islands in the East Indies, between Luzonia and
Mindanao; in this and the rest the Spaniards have Forts, and drive a great
Trade with their American Territories.

Abutich, heretofore Abydus, a very eminent City of Egypt, 22 Miles from
Ptolemais to the North; it stands upon the Nile. Here was the Palace of Memnon,
and the Temple of Osiris, so much celebrated in the ancient Poetry, and Mythick
History. Long. 61. 20. Lat. 26. 50.

Abydos, a Fortress in Asia opposite to Sestos in Europe on the Hellespont,
both which are now called the Dardanelli; made famous by the Love of Hero and
Leander, and by the vast Bridge here laid cross the Sea by Xerxes.

Abyla, a Mountain in Afric, answering to Calpe another Mountain in Spain on
the European side of the Straight of Gibraltar; they are usually called
Hercules Pillars, because they were the bounds of his Travels Westward. This is
now called by the Mariners Apes-Hill, either corruptly from Abyla; or, as they
say, from the multitude of Apes there to be seen.

Abyso, anciently Orinus, is a River of Sicily, which falls into the Sea
between Syracusa and Pachynus, or Cape Passaro, the most Southern Promontory of
that Island.

Aca, Acre, Acri, or Acon, a Seaport in Phenicia, which was called by the
Grecians and Romans Ptolemais, the latter fixed here a Colony: After the loss
of Jerusalem, in the times of the Holy War it was the Capital of that Kingdom
for some time, till being taken by the Moors it was entirely ruined, it lies 24
Miles South of Tyrus. Long. 66. 30. Lat. 33. 00. From this place the Knights of
S. John of Jerusalem removed to Rhodes.

Acachuma, the Achuma of Ptolomy, a Town in Ethiopia, which the Inhabitants
take to have been the Residence of Maqueda Queen of Sheba.

Acada, Sangarius, a River of Bithynia.

Acadinus, a Fountain in Sicily, where they tried the verity of an Oath, by
writing it on a Board, and throwing it into the Water, where if it sunk, it
betoken'd it to be false.

Acafran, otherwise Celef or Quinalaf, a River of Mauritania, now called
Vetxilef.

Acamante or Acamas, a Promontory on the West side of the Isle of Cyprus, at
this time known by the name of Crusocco, or Capo di S. Epifanio.

Acanes, two Cities of Guinea in Africa; one called the Greater, the other
Acanes the Less.

Acanthus, the ancient Name of several Towns and Cities at this time unknown,
except one in Acarnania, now called Erisso according to Sophian, and another in
Egypt now named Bisalta.

Acapulco, a City of New Spain, in the Pacific Sea, or Mar del Zur, near 100
Leagues from Mexico, where they usually imbark for Peru and the Philippine
Islands.

Acarnania, the ancient Name of a Province of Epirus, now by Niger said to be
called Despotato, parted from Aetolia by the River Achelous and Mount Pindus;
heretofore remarkable for the Luxury of its Inhabitants, and the Excellency of
the Horses there bred. A Town also there was of this Name in Sicily, not far
from Syracuse, mentioned by Tully to have been famous for a Temple there
dedicated to Jupiter; which Temple was afterward destroyed by the Goths.

Acaxi, a City of Japan, 25 Leagues from Meaco the Capital City of that Kingdom.

Acaxulta, a considerable Port in New Spain on the Shore of Mar del Zur, about
seven Leagues from S. Salvador, between New Leon and S. Jago de Guatimala.

Accadia, a Province on the North-East Coast of America, part of Nova Francia,
seized by the English, and by them called Nova Scotia; but returned to the
French upon the Treaty of Breda, 1667. Also a little City in the farther
Principate of the Kingdom of Naples.

Accadie, a Peninsula in New France.

Accara, The Name of two Towns in Guinea, the Greater and the Less, between the
River Volta and Fort S. George de Mina.

Accaraig or Accarig, a Town in Peru, near the River Parana, called also the
Nativity of the Blessed Virgin.

Accaron, Ekron, heretofore a famous City of the Philistines, now a poor
Village, and called by the same Name.

Accettura, a little City in that part of Naples called the Basilicate.

Acci, Guadix, a City, Bishopric and Colony of Spain, in the Kingdom of
Granada, nine Leagues from Granada East. It lies at the Foot of the Mountains
not far from the Head of the River Guadalentin; it was taken from the Moors, in
1489. The Bishop of it is under the Archbishop of Sevil.

Accia, a City and Bishopric of the Island of Corsica, now ruined, and the
Bishopric united with that of Mariana.

Acdeniz, the present Turkish name of the Egean Sea, or Archipelago.

Aceldama, a Field near the Valley of Tophet in Judaea, to the South of Mount
Sion and of the Valley of Jehoshaphat, serving for a Burying-place for
Strangers and Pilgrims that die at Jerusalem. This Name signifying a Field of
Blood, was given it instead of that of The Potters Field, because it was bought
with the thirty Pieces of Silver, which were the price of Judas his betraying
our Savior.

Acellaro, by some called Abisso and Atellari, the Elorus of the Ancients, a
River in Sicily, falling into the Sea near the Ruins of the old City Elorus.

Acerenza, or Cirenza, anciently known by the name of Acherontia, a City of the
Kingdom of Naples in the County called the Basilicate, which is a part of
Calabria; this City lies upon the River Bradanum at the foot of the Apennine,
it was formerly an Archbishopric, but the City being in a declining state, the Sea is united to that of Mateola.

Acerno or Acierno, a little City in the Citerior Principality of the Realm of
Naples, 15 Miles from Salern to the East.

L'Acerra, a City and Bishopric of the Kingdom of Naples, under the Archbishop
of Naples, and but 8 Miles distant from the Capital City: it lies in Terra di
Lavoro in the Road to Benevento.

Acesine, a River in Sicily, having its rise on the North of Mount Aetna, said
to be now called Cantara and Alcantara. Also the ancient Name of a considerable
River in Asia, which falls into the Indus, famous for the large Canes growing
on its Banks. Another there is so named in the Taurica Chersonesus or Przecop.

Acha, Achza, a River of Bavaria, it flows through the Lake of Chiemeze, and
falls into the River Inns, which last River falls into the Danube at Passaw.

Achacica, Achachica, Achiacica, a Town of New Spain, where there are several
Mines of Silver; it lies 18 Leagues North from S. Angelo.

Achaia, is taken in a twofold signification, either denoting the whole Country
of Hellas or Greece; still enjoying the same Appellation, as well as that of
Livadia, by which Name also it is now called. It contained the Provinces of
Boeotia, Attica, Doris, Phocis, etc. being bounded on the East by the Aegean
Sea or Archipelago, on the South by the Gulfs of Saronique and Corinth with the
Isthmus, on the West by Epirus, and on the North by Thessaly: Remarkable for
the great Confederacy made by the Cities hereof against the Romans. Or else it
denotes a little Region in the Peloponnesus called Achaia propria, between
Sicyon and Elis. It was also the Name of a City in Crete, and of another in
Rhodes, and of a Fountain in M^ssenia.

Acham, a Province of Africa, on the Coast of Zanguebar, in the possession of
the Arabians, bordered on the South by a Country inhabited by Negros and
Heathens.

Achamba, See Ceylan.

Achasse, a River in East- France in the Territory of Vivarez, rising in the
Hills near Viviers, and having Teil on the left, soon after falling into the
Rhosne.

Achatbaluc or Achbaluo, by some Achbaluc-Mangi, or White Town, a little City
in the Province of Tainfeu in Cathay, giving its Name to the adjacent Territory.

Achates, the old Name of a River in Sicily, now called Drillo.

Achbaluck, a City of the Asiatick Tartary, in the Province of Tainfeu, not far
from Cambalu, and built upon a Lake. The same with Achatbaluc.

Achelo, Anchialus, called by the Turks Keuchis, a City of Thrace, upon the
Euxine Sea, mentioned by Orpheus and Ovid, 24 Miles from Develto.

Achelous, a famous River among the Poets and fabulous Writers. It rises in
Mount Pindus, and dividing Aetolia from Acarnania, falls into the Ionian Sea.
It has at several times had the Names Geromlea, Catochi, Aspropotame, Aspri,
and now is called Pachicolamo.

Achem, a very large City, the Capital of a Kingdom of the same Name in the
North part of Sumatra, in the East Indies. The King of this City is in league
with the Dutch, who export from hence many rich Commodities, and much Pepper.

Acheron, a River in Epirus, rising in the Marsh Acherusia, and having received
several lesser Rivers in its passage falling into the Sinus Ambracius in the
Adriatic Sea. Now called Velichi and Verlichi. Another River in Calabria, now
named Bassento, Sanuto, or Campagnano according to several Authors.

Acherusia, the name of several Loughs or Marshes; one in Epirus aforenam'd.
Another in Egypt* whereinto the Inhabitants were wont to put the dead Corpse of
their Friends in order to be transported to the contrary shore by a Ferryman
there plying, in the language of the place called Charon. Hence many Fables.
Another in Campania, between Capua and Baiae, now named Lago di Colluccia.

Achillea, otherwise Achillis cursus, (...), a Peninsula near the Mouth of the
River Borysthenes. Now called Cacearia according to some.

Achlar, Araxis, a famed River of Armenia Major, it is called in the latter
Maps Arais, by others Caiacz, by the Persians Arass: Its ancient Name is
fetched from the violence of its Stream. The Fountains of this River are within
16 Miles of the Fountains of the Euphrates. And it divides Armenia from Media
Atropatia, and falls into the Caspian Sea. Busbequius says, that in his time (
viz. 1545.) this River was the bound between the Persian and the Turkish
Empires, as I believe it is still. There is another of the same name in
Mesopotamia, which falls into Euphrates below Thapsacum.

Achonry, a decaying City in the Province of Connaught in the Kingdom of
Ireland in the County of Letrim; it is an Episcopal Sea under the Archbishop of
Tuam; the City is sinking every day more into ruin.

Achrida, Achris, Achridius, Adirida, by the Turks called Giustandil, Justinian
the Emperor being born here, rebuilt it, and called it Justiniana, and made it
the Metropolis of Macedonia, in which it stands, and of Bulgaria; it is still a
strong and populous City governed by a Sangiack, it is situated near the Lake
of Lychnidum. It has been in the Turks hands 200 years.

Achterwaldt, Silva Arduenna, a famous Wood, that heretofore extended very near
the whole breadth of Germany.

Achyr, a City of Poland in the Palatinate of Kiovia, upon the River Vorsklo
toward the borders of Moscovia: It has a Castle and is well fortified; some
few years since it has been in the hands of the Moscovites. It stands 25
Polonian Miles beyond the Borysthenes.

Ac^aponda, a Town of the East Indies, in the confines of the Bay of Bengala,
and of the Kingdom of Pegu: it has a Harbor belonging to it.

Acierno, a small Episcopal City in the Citerior Principate, under the
Archbishop of Salerno, from whence it is distant 25 Miles to the South-East.

Acojo^lu, Armenia Minor.

Acqs, commonly Dax, Aquae Augustae, called heretofore Tasta also, is an
Episcopal City of Gascoigne, under the Archbishop of Euse, in Aquitain in
France; upon the River Dour, or Adour, which falls into the Aquitain Sea at
Bajonne. This City has Baths in it, and is distant about five Miles from the
Ocean, and about ten from Bajonne to the South-East.

Acquapendente, a City in S. Peter's Patrimony, seated on a rising ground by
the River Pelia; abounding in Waters, from whence it has its name. It was made
a Bishops See by Pope Innocent X, in 1650. instead of Castro a ruined City; 40
Miles distant from Senis.

Acqui, Aquae Statiellae, a City of Liguria, in the Dukedom of Montferrat,
under the Dominion of the Duke of Mantua; and a Bishops See under the
Archbishop of Milan: it lies upon the River Bormia toward the Apennine, about
16 Miles from Asta, to the North East. Here are several hot Baths, to which
there is great resort of People. This City suffered much damage in the last
Italian Wars.

Acsa, a Lake in Bithynia, and a River of the same name.

Acsar, Acserai, Ain-zarba, Anazarbus, A City of Cilicia, heretofore an
Archbishops See under the Patriarch of Antioch; now ruined by the Turks: it is
18 Miles distant from Flaviada toward the East, upon the River Pyramus. Long.
64. 20. Lat. 38. 50. Dioscorides was born here, a famous Physician in Nero's
times; who wrote several things which are still extant.

Actium, a most celebrated Promontory with a City of the same name in Epirus.
It was here that Augustus overthrew Marc Anthony and Cleopatra in the year of
Rome 722 or 23, about 30 years before the coming of our Savior. Apollo had a
magnificent Temple dedicated to him, and Games every five years were celebrated
in his honor in this City* after the manner of the Olympicks. Strabo gives us
a particular description of all that Augustus did to it, to eternalize the
memory of his Victory. He reedified the Temple of Apollo, revived the Games,
and called the City Nicopolis to carry the remembrance of his Victory in its
very name. The Promontory is now called, Trigalo. See Trigalo.

Aczud, Aczudia, a small Town in Moldavia upon the River Missovo above Breslaw.

Adamah or Admah, mentioned Genesis ^0. 19. One of the Cities of the Plain that
God destroyed by fire from Heaven with Sodom and Gomorrha.

Adavoi, a People of Guinea in Africa.

Adda, Addua, a River that parts the Dukedom of Milan from the State of Venice,
it arises in the Alps, and falls into the Po, 6 Miles above Cremona toward
Placentia, also the name of a Country in the Milanese betwixt this River and
Serio; memorable for the Victory obtained by Lewis XII. of France over the
Venetians May. 14. 1509.

Adea, a Kingdom of Aethiopia in Africa, extended upon the Eastern Ocean at the
entrance of the Red Sea: It was once under the Kings of Aethiopia, but has now
a King who does not depend upon them. Magadoxo, the Capital of this Kingdom and
a Seaport, is become a separate Kingdom also; it lies in three degrees of
Northern Latitude.

Adegele, Chrysorrhoas, a River of Damascus, in Scripture called Pharpar: it
flows through Damascus and its fields, where it is lost and never reaches the
Sea: its Fountains are in Libanus. This is one of the Rivers mentioned by
Naaman the Syrian, 2 King. 5. as better than all the Waters of Israel.

Adel, a small Kingdom in Africa at the mouth of the Red Sea, heretofore called
Azania; with a City and a River of the same name.

Adelsperg, Postonia, Pistonia, a Town in Croatia.

Aden, a very strong Town in Arabia Foelix, at the Foot of the Mountains not
far from the Mouth of the Red Sea. It has a very large Seaport, and is also
the head of a Kingdom of the same name. The Turks in 1538. took this Town and
hanged up their King, but not long after the Inhabitants revolted and put
themselves under the Protection of the King of Mocha, and expelled the Turks
again. This Country was known to the Romans by the name of Adana, who had here
a great Trade. Also a Mountain in the Kingdom of Fez, remarkable for Mines of
Silver. There is a City of the same name in Cilicia, which is an Archbishopric
under the Patriarch of Antioch, upon the River Malmistra or Piramus, and often
mentioned by the ancient Geographers.

Ader, or Eder, a Tower within a Mile of Bethlehem, said to be built by the
Patriarch Jacob and that here the Shepherds were advertised by Angels of the
Birth of our Savior.

Aderborn, a small Town in Pomerania upon the Oder, a little above Stetin,
belonging to the Swedes.

Aderburg, a small Town in the Electorate of Brandenbourg upon the Oder.

Adiabene, a Province of the ancient Assyria which for some time was itself a
Kingdom; now called Bolan, or according to others Mesere and Sarca. Its two
Rivers, Adiabas and Diabas, are mentioned by A. Marcellinus.

Admirati, a River of Sicily. Whether this or Bajaria be the Eleutherus of the
Ancients is a dispute amongst Geographers.

Adon, a small River of Bretagne in France, which falls into the Vilaine.

Adonis, a River of Phaenicia in Syria, arising near to Mount Libanus and
dividing the Kingdom and Patriarchate of Jerusalem from Tripoli and the
Patriarchate of Antioch, falls into the Mediterranean near Gibel.

Adour, a River of Aquitain, vide Dour.

Adra, a small Seacoast Town in the Kingdom of Granada in Spain, with a Port
and a strong Castle: it stands upon the Mediterranean Sea, 9 Leagues to the
West of Almeria, which has robbed it of the Bishops Sea, heretofore belonging
to it.

Adran, Adranon, a Town in Sicily, of old famous for an Idol Temple of the name.

Adraon, Adraton, a City and sometime a Bishops See in Arabia, mentioned
corruptly by the name of (...) for (...) in the 16th. Session of the Council of
Chalcedon.

Adraste, a Territory, and an ancient City in Mysia, famous heretofore for a
Temple dedicated to Nemesis.

Adria, Atri, Hadria, a City, and an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of
Ravenna, in the Polesine, in the States of Venice; little inhabited. Some
believe the Adriatique Ocean, which we now call the Gulf of Venice, derived
its Name from hence.

Adrianople, Vscudama, Oresta, is a City in the midst of Thrace, taken by
Bajazet in 1362. after which it became the Seat of their Empire till the
taking of Constantinople, An. 1403. This City was rebuilt by Hadrian the Roman
Emperor, from whom it has its Name, but is now called by the Turks Endrem, by
the French Adrianople. It is an Archbishops See, under the Patriarch of
Constantinople, and is distant from it 150 Miles West, being seated upon the
River Mariza, ( Hebrus.) The late deposed Emperor of the Turks for the most
part resided in it; he hating Constantinople, and loving Hunting.

Adrinza, the present Name of Assyria, once the Mistress of the World.

Adrobe, a River of that part of the Asian Tartary, which is subject to the
Moscovites: it falls into the Wolga beneath Cazan.

Adrumete, the same with Mahometa.

Adula, the Name of a part of the Alps from S. Gothard.

Aduliten, Adulis, an ancient City in Africa upon the red Sea, now called
Ercoco.

Adyrmachides, an ancient People of Libya toward Egypt. Their Daughters, newly
married, were presented to their King, who had a right to use or refuse them.

Aethiopia, is about one half of Africa: it is divided into two parts, the
Upper and the Lower. The Upper is bounded on the North by Egypt and Libya, on
the West by the Lower Aethiopia, as also on the South; on the East it is
bounded by the Red Sea, and the Arabian and Barbarian Bays: it contains Nubia,
Abissinia, the Kingdoms of Muaci, Macoci, and Zanguebar, etc.

The Lower Aethiopia is bounded on the North by Libya, on the East by the Upper
Aethiopia, on the West and South by the Ethiopian Ocean: It contains the
Kingdoms of Monomotapa and Monemugi, the Western Aethiopians, which are divided
into the Kingdoms of Congi, Loangi, and Angola, etc. This more Southern Part of
Africa, which was little known to the Ancients, was found out by the Portugals.

Aferat, The present Name of Euphrates, one of the most celebrated Rivers in
the World: called by the Arabians Frat; it springs from the Mountains of
Armenia Major, and running to the West receives the Harpage and Arsametes; then
it bends to the South, and divides the greater Armenia from the lesser. Then it
washes Mesopotamia on the West and South, and divides it from Syria, and
Arabia Deserta; and at Cresiphon, it runs into the Tigris, with which it falls
into the Persian Gulf beneath Teredon and Balsera.

Afra, a strong Castle upon the Frontiers of Zaara in Africa, and stands
divided into Egypt, Barbary, Biledulgerid or Numidia, Zaara or Libya, Nigritia
and Aethiopia.

AFRICA, one of the four principal Parts of the Earth, so called by the
Grecians, because it seldom feels any Cold: it is bounded on the North by the
Mediterranean Sea, on the West and South by the Ocean, on the East by the
Arabian Gulf and the Red Sea, being only joined to Asia by a Neck of Land. It
was anciently known no farther South than to the Mountains of the Moon, till
the Portugueses of late discovered the Southern Parts. The inland parts of it
are generally barren, and almost Desert by reason of the Sands, and venomous
Creatures, and want of Water: it is almost twice as big as Europe.

Afrique, Africa, the Aphrodisium of the Ancients, a Town and Port in Barbary
in the Kingdom of Tunis, 20 Leagues from Mahometa. Charles V. took it from the
King of Morocco, and demolished it.

Aga or Agag, a Kingdom with a City of the same Name in the Upper Aethiopia.

Agades, a Kingdom with a City of the Name in Nigritia in Africa; tributary to
the King of Tombut.

Agan or Pagan, an Islet in the Eastern Ocean, betwixt Chomocoan and Guagan;
where the famous Portegueze, Magellan, was assassinated as he was going in
search of the Moluccaes.

Aganara or Aganagare, a City on this side the Ganges in the East Indies,
remembered by Ptolomy.

Aganippe, a Fountain in Boeotia in Greece, celebrated by the ancient Poets.

Agaosi, a People in the Kingdom of Bagamedri in the Upper Aethiopia.

The Agarens or Hagarens, a People of Arabia Foelix, descended from Agar and
Ismael, who went to war with the Tribes of Ruben, Gad, and Manasse, in the time
of Saul. Their capital City is called after their own Name Agarena or Agranum.
When they revolted from the Roman Empire under Trajan, that Emperor attempted
the Reduction of them without success: and since Mahomet was born amongst them,
they have been of his Religion.

Agarus, Sagaris, a River of the European Sarmatia, which falls into the Danube
in Moldavia, now called Stiret, according to Ortelius.

Agathyrse, Agatyrium, Agathyrna, an ancient City and Promontory in Sicily. The
Promontory is the same with that they now call Cape d'Orlando.

Agathyrses, an ancient People of Scythia, applauded by Historians for their
Hospitality to one another.

Agde, a City in Languedoc in France, the Bishop of which is a Suffragan to the
Archbishop of Narbone: It is a fine and well built place; seated at the mouth
of the River Eraud, which there falls into the Mediterranean Sea.

Agdus, a famous Rock upon the Frontiers of Phrygia in Asia Minor.

Again, a City and Bishopric in Guienne in France, under the Archbishop of
Bourdeaux, and the Capital of the County of Agennois, which gives the Title of
an Earl. It stands upon the Garonne, where it receives on the opposite side the
River L'Egers. It is large, beautiful, and one of the best Cities of Aquitain,
being also the Birthplace of Joseph Scaliger; about 15 Leagues from Bourdeaux
to the North-East.

Aggerhuis, a Province of Norway, so called from a Castle in it. It is bounded
on the East with the Kingdom of Sweden, on the South with the Sound, on the
West with the County of Bergen, and on the North with that of Drontheim, from
which last it is separated by the Mountain Sevone. It reaches in length from
the North to the South 240 Miles. The chief Cities of it are Ansloga,
Fredericstad, Saltzbeg, and Ton^b^g: The whole of it is under the King of
Denmark.

Agion Oros, Athos, a Mountain in Macedonia, in the Province of Jamboli, called
by the Italians il Monte Santo, by the Greeks (...), the Holy Mount. It runs
into the Aegean Sea, like a Peninsula; it is joined to the Continent by a Neck
of Land, of an Italian Mile and half, which Herodotus says, was cut through by
Xerxes. It is 90 Miles in compass, called by the Turks Scididag and Monastir,
by reason of the vast numbers of Monasteries in it, being about 24 Cloisters of
Caloirs, or Greek Monks, the chief of which are Garopedos, and Agias Laura, in
which two are 600 Monks, in all 5000. Most of these Monasteries are fortified
to secure them from Pirates. From hence the Patriarch of Constantinople fetches
most of the Bishops he needs for his Patriarchate, it being now the School or
University of all Greece, the Monks are all of the Order of S. Basil. This
Mountain lies between the Bay of Strymon on the North, and that of Singo to the
South.

Agira, Agurium, Argirium, and Agnina Vrbs, is a City in Sicily near Mount
Aetna. The Birthplace of Diodorus Siculus, now called San Philippo d'Argirone.

Aglie, a celebrated Castle in the Province of Canavois in Savoy, which gives a
Name to one of the most illustrious Houses in that Country.

Agmet, the Emere of Ptolomy, an ancient City in the Province of Marocco,
sometime the Seat of that Empire, and very populous and strong, before Marocco
was built.

Agmundesham, a Corporation seated upon a small River which falls into the
Isis, a little above Vxbridge, in the County of Bucks. It sends two Burgesses
to our Parliament, and is not otherwise remarkable to my knowledge. It stands 9
Miles from Vxbridge to the North-West, and about 8 from Maidenhead to the
North-East.

Agnabet or Agnetlin, one of the principal Towns of Transylvania, seated upon
the River Harbach, which falls into the Alt. In this place Q. Isabella
assembled a Diet for the preservation of her Son, which Martinsius dissolved,
and began a War upon his Master, which ended in both their ruins.

Agno, Clanus, a River of Campania in Italy, called afterward Liris: it rises
in Mount Tiphate, and flowing West between Avella and Nola, enters Terra di
Lavoro, makes the Lake of Linterna, and at last ends in the Sea of Tuscany
between the Ruins of Cuma and the Mouth of the River Voltorno.

Agnone, a Town in the Province of Abruzzo in Italy, understood by some to be
the ancient Aquilonia.

Agobel, a City in the Kingdom of Tremissen in Barbary, understood by some to
be the Victoria of Ptolomy. Also another in the Province of Hea in the Kingdom
of Marocco.

Agol, a City in the Upper Aethiopia toward the Mountain Amara.

Agore, Agorum, a small City upon the River Cordevol in the Dominions of the
Republic of Venice.

Agouges or D'Agouges, a small River of Auvergne in France, which falls into
the Allier a little above San Porzain.

Agouste, Augusta, a City in Sicily, built by Frederick the Emperor in 1229*
upon a Peninsula, which in the last Age was turned into a little Isle with a
Bridge to communicate betwixt it and the Continent. It has a very large Haven
defended by 3 Cittadels to the Sea. Taken by the French in 1675. and abandoned
by them in 1678.

Agout, Acutus, a small River in Languedoc in France, washing the two Cities of
Castres and Lavaur, it falls into the River Tarne.

Agra or Agara, a new City seated in a Province of the same Name in India
beyond Ganges: It is the Capital of the Moguls Empire, and his residence; a
rich and beautiful City, built by Ekebar, one of his Predecessors, in the last
Age upon the River Gemini. It is of a vast circuit, and adorned with a stately
Palace; on the other side of the River lies another City called Serandra, which
is well built, and but a kind of Suburb to Agra.

Agragas. See Gergenti.

Agramont, Agramontium, a Town in Catalonia, in the Plain of Vrgel, between
Solsona and Lerida.

Agreeable, an Island in the Kingdom of Fez, formed by the River Lisse.

Agreda, a small City in the Kingdom of Popayan in the South America, belonging
to the Spaniards. Also a Town in Arragon upon the River Queiles, which some
understand to be the Grachuris, others the Augustobriga of the Ancients.

Agri or Acri, a River in the Basilicata in the Kingdom of Naples. It arises at
the Apennines, and passes by Marsico to the Gulf of Tarentum.

Agria, called by the Germans Erlaw, is a little but very strong City of the
Upper Hungary, upon a River of the same Name, which falls into the Tibiscus 12
Miles beneath it. It is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Gran. This Town
was taken by the Turks, An. 1596. But after a long Blockade surrendered to the
Christians in 1687. It is 17 Miles distant from Buda to the North-East, in the
Confines of Austria.

Agrimonte, Grumentum, an ancient City, and a Bishops See in the Basilicata in
Naples. The latter has been since united to that of Marsico.

Agriophag^s, an ancient People toward the West of Aethiopia, who lived, says
Solinus, altogether upon the Flesh of Panthers and Lions.

Agropoli, Acropolis, a Town in the hither Principate in the Kingdom of Naples.

Agualua, and Agua de Moura, two Rivers in Portugal which fall into the Cadaon
in Estremadura.

Agueda, a Town in Portugal, built upon the Ruins of the ancient Aeminium. It
takes this Name from a River which passes by it.

Aguer, at City at the foot of Mount Atlas in Africa. Taken by the Portugueze
in 1536. and since retaken by an Army of 50000 Moors.

Aguila, a City in the Province of Habat in the Kingdom of Fez, upon the River
D'Erguile.

Aguilard, Agilaria, a pretty considerable Town in old Castile about 14 Leagues
from Burgos.

Agulha, Acus, an Island in the Ethiopian Ocean, 300 Miles from Madagascar to
the North.

Ahausen, Ahuis, Ahusa, a small City in Schonen upon the Baltic Sea, to which
it has a very commodious Port: four Leagues from Christianstad. Under the
Swedes.

Aia, Allia, a small River in Italy, which falls into the Tiber near Monte
Rotundo in the States of the Church. The Gauls under Brennus defeated the
Romans upon the Banks of it.

Ajaluni, a City of Caria upon the Borders of Lydia.

Ajan, or the Coast of Ayan, a Country in Aethiopia, which lies along the Coast
of the Sea of Zanguebar, from Magadoxo to the Cape Guardafuy. It contains the
Kingdoms of Adea, Adel, etc.

Ajas, a City of Arabia Foelix, two days journey from Aderi. Thevet calls it
Hegias, and makes a Kingdom of it.

Ajazzo, Ajaccio, Adjacium, Vrcinum, an Episcopal City of Corsica, under the
Archbishop of Pisa; on the Western Shore; it has a strong Castle and a large
Haven, and is a neat and beautiful City, flourishing now under the Dominion of
the Republic of Genoua; the greatest part of it is surrounded by the Sea, and
it lies at the foot of the Mountains not above a Mile from the Old Adjacium.

Aichstadt, Aureatum, as appears by an old Inscription found there; a City upon
the River Altmul, which falls into the Danube between Ingolstad and Ratisbon;
it is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Mogunce: It lies in the Confines of
Bavaria, and the Dukedom of Schwaben, and is under the Civil Jurisdiction of
its Bishop; two miles distant from Neuburg toward the North, eleven from
Ratisbon to the West. There is some Controversy amongst learned Men about the
old Name of this City.

Aidinelli, Caria, a Province of the Lesser Asia; it lies right over against
Rhodes, and has had several fine Cities in it, but they are all ruined by the
Turks, who have been a long time Masters of this poor Province.

Aidos, Abydus, a City of the Lesser Asia, upon the Bosphorus; distant about a
Mile and three quarters from Sesto, on the Thracian Shore; heretofore a
Suffragan See, under the Archbishop of Cyzicum, from whence it is distant 21
Miles to the South; but now the Bishop of it is made a Metropolitan. It has a
strong Castle, well fortified by Mahomet II. after he had taken Constantinople;
and it is one of the Dardanels, which has ever in it a good Turkish Garrison to
defend the Passage, and secure Constantinople.

Aiducal, ATLAS, the greatest Mountain in all Africa; it begins in Mauritania,
near the Atlantic Ocean, to which it gives Name; by Cap de Guer, and by
various windings, it extends it self Eastward as far as the Deserts of Barca;
raising it self out of barren Sands, it hides its towering Head in the Clouds;
and has variety of Names. The great height of it was the cause the Antiens
feigned Atlas, (whom they make a King) bore the weight of Heaven on his
Shoulders. There is another Mountain called Atlas Minor, now Errif, which parts
the Kingdom of Fez from that of Morocco.

Ajc^lo, a Duchy in the Province of Abruzzo in the Kingdom of Naples,
belonging to the Prince of Massa.

L'Aigle, Aquila, a small City in Normandy upon the River Rille, which gives
the Title of a Baron.

Aigueperse, the capital City of the Duchy of Montpensier in France, near
whereunto the ancient Castle of Montpensier stood, till it was demolished in
1634.

Aigues Caldes, Aquae Calid^, a City with natural Baths in it, in Gallicia in
Spain. It is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Compostel, upon the River
Minio.

Aigues-Mortes, a City in the lower Languedoc, upon an Arm of the Rhosne and
near the Sea. The Seat of the Excises upon Salt.

Aiguilles, or Capo de Agulhas, a Promontory of Africa to the Cape of Good Hope.

Aiguillon or Eiguillon, a City with the Title of a Duchy in the County of
Agennois in France, upon the Confluence of the Le and the Garonne, between Again
and Nerac. It once sustained a Siege of fourteen Months against John Duke of
Normandy.

Ailesbury, a fair Market Town, well peopled, and built upon the rising of a
Hill, by the Bank of Tame, in the middle of the County of Buckingham. Taken by
Cuthwulf the Saxon, from the Britains, Anno 572. Famous heretofore for S. Edith
here born. The Honorable Robert Bruce, was created Earl of this place, on
March 8. 1684. It is a Corporation, and sends Burgesses to the Parliament.

Ailly, a Seigniory in Picardy, whence one of the noblest and antientest
Families of that Province, the D'Aillyes, receive their Name.

Ailzall, an Islet, or rather a Shelf upon the Coast of Scotland toward
Galloway.

Ainaon, Ahinaon, an Island to the Southern Coast of China. Its capital City
bears the same Name.

Aindre, once an Island 3 Leagues below Nantes in Brittany, at the falling of
the Loyre into the Sea. It had a Monastery in it built by S. Hermeland; but
both that and the Island have since been swallowed up by the Waters.

Ains, Ens, Indus, Indis, Danus, and Idanus, a River of France which rises in
the Valley of Meige in Burgundy, and passes to the Rhosne by Chateau-Vilain,
Constances, etc.

Ainza, a small City in Arragon upon the River Cinga, and the Capital of the
Tract of Sobarbe, which has sometime born the Title of a Kingdom.

Ainzia, a Tract in the County of Buchan in Scotland.

Air, Aturum, the chief Town of Gascoine, and a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Aux; it stands upon the River Adour, in the Borders of the County
of Armagnac, four Aquitane Leagues above S. Sever, and sixteen from Bajonne.

Air, Aria, called by the Flandrians, Arien; by the Spaniards, Ere: it is a
strong City in Artois, seated in a Marsh upon the River Leye, which falls into
the Scheld at Gaunt; taken by the French in 1641. and presently recovered by
the Spaniards; but it was retaken ^; the French in 1676. and is now in their
possession by the Treaty of Nimeguen. It is 12 Leagues from Bologn to the East.

Air, Aeria, by the Scotch Air, is a small City and Sheriffdom in Scotland,
upon Dunbritain-Frith, on the West of that Kingdom: it stands 22 Scotch Miles
from Donbritoun, South-West.

Airu, a River of Scotland, which springs from the Mountains of Mar, and unites
with the Spei in Buchan. The City Air stands upon it.

Airy, Airiacum, a Village in Burgundy in Auxerrois near Clamecy. Here was a
National Council held in 1020. under Pope Benedict VIII.

Aisa^ce, a small River in Normandy which joins the Colsnon below d'Autrain.

Aisne, Axona, a River of France, rises in the Dukedom of Barois; and flowing
through the Provinces of Champagne, and the Territory of Argonne, and that of
Soissons, cuts the City of Soissons in two parts; and at last ends in the River
Oise, a little East of Compeigne in the Isle of France.

Aix, Aquae Sextiae, a City of Provence in France. It was a Roman Colony, and
is now an Archbishops See, and the Seat of the Parliament of that Province: a
fair growing Town, seated in a large Plain, upon a small Rivolet, about 15
Leagues from Arles, and 13 from Avignon to the East.

Aix, in Savoy, an ancient City at the foot of the Mountains, between Chambery,
Annecy, and Rumilly, giving the Title of a Marquess. It is famous for Mineral
Waters.

Aix la Chapelle, Aquisgranum, called by the Germans Aa^b, by the Dutch Aken,
by the French Aix, by the Italians Aquisgrana; it is an Imperial free City of
Germany, in the Circle of Westphalia, within the Borders of the Dukedom of
Juliers, under which Prince it now is. Charles the Great of France died here
Jan. 24. 814. and here he was buried; having been the Restorer of this City
after Attila the King of the Huns had ruined it. It was almost entirely ruined
by Fire again in 1656. but is now rebuilding. In 1658. there was a famous Peace
made here between the present Kings of France and Spain. Diverse Councils have
been held here. This City stands 8 German Miles from Cologn, 7 from Liege, in a
low place, almost incircled with Hills.

Aizu, a Province of Japan, with a Town of the same Name, which is one of the
best in the Country.

Akerhuys, a Seaport Town in the County of Aggerhuys, not above 15 Miles from
Christianstadt in Norway.

Akerman, Alba, a City of Moldavia.

Akersondt, an Island belonging to Norway, in the German Ocean, over against
the Cape of Shagen.

Akertewe, a City in the Isle of Maragnan on the Coast of Brasil.

Akill, Achill, Achillia, a small Island on the Coast of Connaught in Ireland,
over against the County of Mayo.

Akroczim, a City in the Palatinate of Mazovia in Poland, fortifyed with a
Castle.

Aksteede. Acsteda, a small City upon the River Lun in the Duchy of Bremen in
Saxony, under the Swedes.

Akza, a River of Georgia, in Asia.

Al, a River of Prussia, believed by some to be the Guttalus of Pliny.

Alahanda. See Eblaba.

Alacranes, Islands infested with Scorpions, in the New America, 20 Leagues
from Jucutan.

Aladuli, the Turkish Name of Armenia major.

Alagon, a River of Spain, in the Province of Estremadura, and Kingdom of Leon:
it falls into the Taio, a little above Alcantara, as Rodericus Sylva says.

Alaine, a small River in the Province of Nivernois in France.

Alais, Alesia, a City of Languedoc, upon the River Guerdon, at the foot of the
Mountain Cevennes, 10 Leagues from S. Esprit to the East.

Alalcomene, Alalcomenium, an ancient City of Boeotia, famous for a Statue of
Minerva, and the Tomb of Tiresias. Afterward called Ithaca, says Plutarch, and
the Birthplace of Ulysses.

Alan, a small River in Cornwall in England; it falls into the Irish Sea at
Padstow: at the Head of it is a small Village called Camelford, where King
Arthur is reported to have been slain in Battle. Padstow lies about 17 Miles
West from Launceston.

Aland, an Island of the Baltic Sea, at the entrance of the Botner Sea, under
the Dominion of the King of Sweden.

Alar, a River of Persia in Hyrcania, falling into the Caspian Sea.

Alarcan, Illarco, a Town in New Castile in Spain.

Alares, an ancient People of Pannonia. Tacit.

Alasch^hir, Hipsius, Vpsu, an ancient City of Phrygia, and sometime the Sea of
a Suffragan Bishop.

Alatri, Alatrium, Alatrinum, a City of Campania in Italy, and a Bishops See,
dependent immediately on the Pope. Mentioned by the Ancients.

Alava, a small Territory in Biscay in Spain.

Alba, or Albe, Alba Pompeia, a City of Monferrat, upon the River Tangro; it is
an Episcopal See. under the Archbishop of Millan; heretofore subject to the
Duke of Mantua, but taken from him in 1631. by a Treaty of Peace, and ever
since under the Duke of Savoy. This City of latter times having suffered great
changes, is reduced into a consumptive State for want of Inhabitants. It is
distant from Aste 12 Miles to the South.

Albana, a City of Albania in Asia, with a Port to the Caspian Sea.

Albania, an ancient Province upon the Caspian Sea in Asia, Westward; now
called Zuirie, under the Turks. Also a Province of Turkey in Europe, which was
anciently the Western part of Macedonia, and part of Illyrium, upon the
Adriatique Ocean; reduced under the Dominion of the Turks by Mahomet 2. Its
chief Cities are Croia, Durazzo, etc. The Inhabitants for the most part are
Christians of the Greek Church.

Albany, Albania, called in Scotland Braid-Albin, is a Dukedom in the highest
part of Scotland, as the Name imports; the Seat of the Old Scots, upon the
declining Western part of Mount Grampus, next Lorn and Argile. Charles I. in
his Infancy at two years of age, was created Duke of Albany. This Title was
also conferred on the Lord Darnly, his Grandfather; and given by Charles I. to
his Second Son, afterward James II.

Albano, Alba Longa, the Mother of Rome, from which it lies about 12 Miles. It
has been ruined many Ages. It stood betwixt a Lake and a Mountain of the same
Name. There has been another Albano built near its Ruins, which is a Bishops
See, a Principality, and the Title of a Cardinal. Also a City with the Title of
a Principality in the Kingdom of Naples.

Albanopolis, an ancient City of Macedonia in Greece.

Alba Julia. See Weissenburg.

Alba Regalis, called by the Inhabitants Ekekes Fesarwar; by the Germans
Stoel-Weissemburg: Is a City of the Lower Hungary, once the Capital of that
Kingdom, famous for the Coronation and Burial of the Kings of Hungary. It
stands in a Marsh upon the River Sarwitz. Taken by the Turks Anno 1543* retaken
by the Christians in 1601. taken again by the Turks in 1602. surrendered again
to the Imperialists upon Articles, May 9. in the beginning of the Campaign of
the Year 1688. The Imperialists found 84 Pieces of Cannon in it, with almost an
incredible quantity of Ammunition and small Arms. It is 45 Miles from Buda
West, and 60 from Comorra South. Long. 41. 10. Lat. 47. 8.

S. Albans, [ Verulamium] is the fairest and the best Town in the County of
Hertford. It arose out of the Ruins of Verulam, a Town more strong and ancient,
seated on the opposite side of the River Ver. This new Town took its Name from
one Alban a Citizen of Verulam, who in the Dioclesian Persecution, suffered
Death for the Christian Religion, and is esteemed the first of the British
Martyrs. To whose memory the Britains built a fair Church, which being ruined
in the Wars between them and the Saxons, Offa King of the Mercians built here a
Monastery to his honor, An. Chr. 795. the Abbot of which obtained from Pope
Adrian, the Precedence of all English Abbots, to which an end was put, Dec. 5
1539. by the surrender of the said Abbey to Hen. VIII. Near this place Richard
Duke of York overthrew Henry VI. and took him Prisoner Anno Dom. 1455. who four
Years after was restored to his liberty again, by a Victory obtained here too.
This Town had the Honor of an Earldom bestowed upon it by Charles II. April 27.
1660. in the person of Henry Jermin, then Baron of S. Edmondsbury in Suffolk.
Since raised to a Dukedom by the same King. This Town lies upon the River Ver,
10 Miles from Hertford to the South-West. The Old Town I shall speak of in its
proper place.

Albarazin, Albarazinum, a City, and a Bishops See in Arragon in Spain, under
the Archbishop of Saragossa.

Albasequia, a City of Sarmatia in Asia, supposed to be the Ampsulis of Ptolomy.

Albegna, Albania, Almiana, a River in Tuscany, which falls into the Gulf of
Telamont.

Albemarle, called by the French Aumale, is a Town in Normandy in France, near
the Head of the River B^ssine, in the Confines of Picardy. It is memorable for
giving the Title of an Earl to the Noble Family De fortibus: And of Duke to
Edward Earl of Rutland, after Duke of York. Given with the same Title to the
Loyal, Wise, and Valiant George Monk, by Charles II. ( July 7. 1660. who died
Jan. 3. 1669.) It stands 14 Leagues from Roven East.

Alben, Albins, a Mountain of Carniola, remarkable for Mines of Quicksilver.
Also a River ( Alpis) in Corinthia, which runs into the Save.

Albenga, a City and Port in the Republic of Genoua, ancient, large, handsome,
but not very healthful. In 1175. it was burnt by those of Pisa. Pope Alexander
3. made it a Bishops See in 1179. Titus Alius Proculus the Emperor was a Native
of it. Over against it stands an Islet of the same Name.

Alberg, a City and Bishops See in Jutland. It lies not far from the Baltic
Sea, in 58. degrees. of Lat.

Alberton, a Town and Port in Barbary.

Albigeois, a small Territory in Languedoc in France, with a City in it called
Alby. This Province is divided by the River Tarn, and very much taken notice of
in Church History, for those great Oppositions, the Albigenses, its
Inhabitants, made long since against the Church of Rome.

Albila, Merce, an Island made by the Nile in Aethiopia, before it enters Egypt.

Albion, the ancient Name of Great Britain.

New Albion. See New Albion.

Albon, a Territory in the Province of Vienne in Dauphine, giving the Title of
a Count.

Albona, Albonea, a River in the Duchy of Milan in Italy, which passes by the
Province of Novara to the Po.

Alboran, or Albusama, Erroris Insula, a small Island with some Villages in it,
and a Castle, upon the Coasts of the Kingdom of Fez.

Alborg, Ae^burgum, a City, and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Lunden in
the Province of Jutland in Denmark, upon the Bay of Limfort.

Alborno, Alburnus, a Mountain in the Kingdom of Naples, mentioned by Virgil;
now called Monte di Postiglione, and Montagna della Petina by the Italians.

Albret, a City, County, and Duchy in Gascony, the Original of the late Royal
Family of Navar.

Albs, the same with Savio, a River of Italy.

Albufera, Amaenum Stagnum, a Lake in the Kingdom of Valencia in Spain.

Albula, the ancient Name of Tiber.

Albuquerque, a City and Duchy in the Province of Estremadura in Portugal.

Alby, Albia, Albiga, a City of Languedoc in France, upon the River Tarn, the
Capital of Albigeois, of great Antiquity. Sometime an Episcopal See under the
Archbishop of Bourges, but by P. Innocent X^. at the instance of the present
French King Lewis XI^. translated into an Archbishopric. The famous Albigenses
took their Name from hence. Also a small City in the States of the Duke of
Savoy, betwixt Annecy and Aix, upon the declension of a Mountain.

Alcairo, Memphis, a famous City of Egypt, seated a little above the Delta,
where the Nile is first divided; it is called in Scripture Noph, and Migdol.
Now wholly desolate.

Alcala, Complutum, is a City of the Kingdom of Castile in Spain, seated upon
the River Henarez. It was heretofore a Bishops See, but belongs now to the
Archbishops of Toledo. One of which Franciscu^ Ximenius Cisn^rus Archbishop of
Toledo, and a Cardinal, in the year 1517. in the time of Alphonsus Sapiens,
opened here an University: it is 6 Leagues from Madrid, and ^ from Toledo.
Long. 17. 30. Lat. 41. 00.

Alcantara, Norba Caesarea, Pons Trajani, Turobrica, a City of the Kingdom of
Leon, upon the River Tajo. It is a small City, and of late years has been
sortified to preserve it from the Incursions of the Portugueze, being but 3
Leagues distant from the Borders of that Kingdom. It is ennobled by a Bridge
built over the River, of 670 foot in length, and 28, foot wide, which is
generally attributed to Trajan; it stands upon 6 Pillars. This City was taken
from the Moors by Alphonsus VIII. Anno 1013.

Alcay, a fertile Mountain, well inhabited, twelve Leagues from Fez.

Alcazar-Quivir, the capital City of the Province of Asgar, upon the Coast of
Barbary. Built by Jacob Almansor, King of Fez. Taken by Alphonsus V. K. of
Portugal in 1448.

Alcazer-Zeguer, a Town in the Province of Habat in the Kingdom of Fez, upon
the Streights. Built by Jacob Almansor, K. of Fez. Taken by Alphonsus V. King
of Portugal, 1458. Abandoned by John III. K. of Portugal in 1540. yet now under
the K. of Portugal.

Alcmaer, a Town in the Northern parts of Holland, besieged by the Spaniards in
1573. without success.

Alcozar d'Osal, Salacia, a small City of Portugal upon the River Zadaon.

Alcyone, an ancient City of Thessalia. Also the Name of a deep Lake in the
Morea, near Corinth; where there was in ancient times a Temple dedicated to
Amphiaraus, which gave this Lake the Name of Fons Amphiarai.

Aldebourg, a Village in Flanders.

Aldeburgh, Isurium, a small Corporation in the County of Suffolk, situated
upon the Sea Shore, which sends two Burgesses to Parliament.

Aldego, Aldegus, a River in the Province of Verona in Italy, which unites with
the Adige in the States of Venice.

Aldenburg, Brannesia, a ruined City in Holstein, 8 Miles from Lubeck, which
robbed it of its Bishopric in 970. This is by some called Olden-borch. It is
but 2 Miles from the Baltic Sea; there is now nothing but a Castle left.

Aldenburg, a Town of Misnia in Germany, upon the River Pleiss, which
heretofore was a free Imperial City; but in 1308. was taken by Frederick,
Marquess of Misnia, and united to Misnia. In the Castle of this Town was the
ancient Residence of the Dukes of Saxony. It is 6 German Miles distant from
Lipsi^k to the South, and 8 from Misnia to the West. Some call it Altenburg.

Aldernay, an Island on the Coast of Normandy.

Ale, the Name of a Kingdom in Africa, belonging to the Barbeci.

Alegransa, a small Island with a convenient Haven and Castle near the Canaries.

Alentejo, or Enter Tejo Guadiana, a Province in Portugal, South-East of
Estremadura, divided into 5 Counties; the chief City of which is Evora. A part
of old Lusitania and Boetica.

Alenzon, Alenconium, a large and well built City in Normandy, adorned with the
Title of a Duchy; it stands upon the River Sarte. This Title has been carried
by Eight of the Royal Family of Valois, and has since been conferred,
occasionally, on many of the younger Princes of the Royal Family of France. It
is 42 Miles from Paris.

Aleppo, Berrhoea, Beroa, is a City of Syria, seated upon the River Marsya,
which falls into Euphrates; at this day the greatest City of Syria, a Mart
filled with innumerable Inhabitants, and European Merchants; being 6 Miles in
compass, with 3 Suburbs, 10 Gates, and an oblong Castle, which is very strong.
It is the Seat and Government of a Bassa, 28 Leagues distant from Scanderoon
toward the Euphrates, and 200 Miles Northward from Damascus; the English,
French, and Venetians, have each of them a Consul here. Long. 58. 20. Lat. 31.
25.

Alexia, an ancient City, and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Pisa in the
Island of Corsica; now ruined. A River of the same Name runs thereby, which is
supposed to be the Rhotanus of Ptolomy.

Alesa, an ancient City of Sicily, with a River by it of the same Name, now
called Pittineo.

Alesham, or Aylesham, a Market. Town in Norfolk, in the Hundred of
South-Erpingham.

Alessio, Lyssus, a City of Albania, near the falling of the River Drin into
the Adriatique; also a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Durazzo: famous for
the Sepulcher of the great Scanderberg, who died here in 1467.

Alessio, Alex, a River of Calabria in Italy, which falls into the Bay of
Tarento.

Alet, Alecta, a City of Languedoc in France, and a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Narbone; out of which Diocese it was taken by Pope John XXII. It
is 5 Leagues from Carcassone, and stands at the foot of the Pyrenean Hills.

Alexandretta. See Scanderone.

Alexandria, a City of Egypt, called by the Turks Scanderik, a celebrated Mart,
and the Seat of the second Patriarch; built by Alexander the Great, Anno Mundi
3618. that is, 330 years before Christ. It was considered much more than now,
before the building of Grand Cairo. Heretofore the great Trade for Spices was
driven here, which were brought by Camels from the Red Sea; but are now brought
to us by Sea from the East- Indies. Yet this Town is still much frequented by
the European Ships for the sake of the Harbor. It is inhabited by about 2000
Souls, which being too few for so vast a City, accordingly much of it is
nothing but Ruins. The Pharoal, once an Isle, is now joined to the City, and a
Fort built upon it by the Turks, with a Garrison for the security of the Port.
This City was taken from the Christians by Amrus the Moor, after a Siege of 13
Months; retaken from them in the times of the Holy War, Anno Christi 1167. but
it fell soon after into their hands again. Long. 58. 20. Lat. 31. 25. There is
another City of this Name built by Alexander M. beyond the River Tanais. A
third, in the Palatinate of Lusuc in Poland upon the River Horin. And a fourth
in Susiana in Asia.

Alexandria, Alexandrinum, a small Town in the Palatinate of Braclaw in Poland.

Alexandria della Paglia, Alexandria Statelliorum, a large and well fortified
City in the Dukedom of Milan in Italy; built upon the River Tanaro, which
divides it. It was made a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Milan, by Pope
Alexander III. Anno 1175. from whom it had its Name. It is 52 Miles from Milan
to the North-West, and 12 from Casal to the South. This City, in 1656. being
besieged by the Prince of Conti, and the Duke of Modena, their Army was forced
to rise for want of Money. Brietius. Long. 30. 30. Lat. 43. 54.

Alexie. See Alize.

Alfissah, a Country in the Southern part of the Isle of Madagascar.

Aleford, a Market Town in Lincolnshire, in the Division of Lindsey and Hundred
of Calceworth.

Alfreton, a Market Town in Darbyshire, in the Hundred of Scarsdale.

Algarria, a Northern Province of the Kingdom of New Castile, whose Bounds are
not known; so that it is thought that both Madrid and Toledo are in this
Province.

Algarve, a small part of Spain, which under Alphonsus III. was added to
Portugal, with the Title of a Kingdom; Tavira is the chief place in it: it has
Portugal on the North, on the West and South it is washed by the Ocean, and on
the East lies Andaluzia.

Algezire, a Town and Port upon the Streights of Gibraltar in Spain; supposed
by some to be the Cartheia of the Ancients. Taken from the Moors by Alphonsus
XI. King of Castile in 1344. now ruined.

Algiers, or Argiers, Julia Caesarea, aliis Ruscurum, Rusucurum, a City and
Republic in Africa, upon the Confines of Barbary, on the Mediterranean Sea;
famous for Piracies, and for the loss of a vast Fleet of Ships by a Tempest,
belonging to Charles V. in 1541. when that Victorious Prince attempted the
Conquest of this place. The English have had better success against them; twice
entered their strong Harbors, and burnt their Ships. First under Admiral Blake,
April 4. 1655. And afterward (having been forced to a Peace in 1668. by Sir
Thomas Allen, which they broke the year following), in 1670. Capt. Beach
meeting 7 of their Men of War, forced them on shore; two of which they burnt
themselves, and the English the other five, releasing 250 Christian Captives.
In 1670. Sir Edward Sprague destroyed 9 more of their Ships near the Castle of
Bugia, which played upon him with their Cannon. This last Victory reduced those
Pirates to beg a Peace, which, with the English they have kept the better since.
The French Fleet commanded by Marescal D'Estree, discharged 10420 Bombs into
the Town, in July 1688. whereby above two thirds of it were destroyed; also 5
Ships in Port, belonging to the Government there, were sunk or burnt. The
Algerines enraged thereat, shot off the French Consul at the Mouth of a Cannon,
with several poor Captives; which was revenged by the French upon three
Algerine Officers they had brought in custody with them, whom they shot to
death, and put their Bodies upon a Hurdle of Planks to be driven ashore, to
warn their Countrymen of the effects of their Cruelty. This Town is seated 100
Miles from Sally, right over against Minorca. Long. 20. 15. Lat. 32. 45.

Algher, Algaria, Corax, a City of Sardinia, called by the Spaniards Alguer; it
stands on the Western Shore of that Isle, in the Northern part of it. This City
is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Sassari, from whence it is did. 16
Miles to the South. The Bishopric was translated from Orana hither, by Julius
II. in 1504.

Algow, Agovia, a County of Schwaben, a Province of Germany. It is bounded on
the North by the Danube, and by the Lech, on the East by the Lake of Constance,
by the Territory of Hegow to the West, and by the Earldom of Tirol to the
South. In this County lie the Marquisate of Burgow, Ausburg, and several other
considerable Cities and Towns.

Alhama, Artigi, a City of the Kingdom of Granada, seated upon steep Hills,
which was the place of delight to the Moorish Kings of Granada; it lies 7
Leagues from Granada North-West; called in the latter Maps Alcala-real.

Alhilet, Sin, a Desert of Arabia.

Alibaluch, an Island in the Caspian Sea, over against the Province of Taristan
in Persia, under the King of Perse.

Alicant, Alonae, a Port of the Kingdom of Valentia in Spain, on the
Mediterranean Sea, 10 Leagues from Murcia to the North-East, and from New
Carthage, now Valentia, 14. the Bay that comes up to it is now called the Gulf
of Alicant.

Alicate, a Town upon the Coast of Sicily.

Alifa, Allipha, a City and a Bishops See under the Archb. of Benevento in the
Terra di Lavoro in Naples, upon the River Voltorno. Almost ruined. Fabius
Maximus gained a Victory over the Samnites here.

Aliola, a small Island between Africa and Madagascar, called in the Maps Alion.

Alize, or Alise, Alexia, a place in the Duchy of Burgundy, now ruinous;
formerly famous for the Siege it endured against Jul. Caesar.

Alkebulan, one of the Names by which Africa is called.

Alla, a River in the Ducal Prussia in Poland.

Allatur, a Town in the Kingdom of Cazan in Moscovy upon the River Cama.

Alleburg, a small Town upon the River Alla in the Ducal Prussia in Poland.

Allelujah, a remarkable Monastery in Aethiopia, so called from the continual
singing of Allelujahs in it.

Allemaign. See Germany.

Allendorf, a small Town in Germany under the Landgrave of Hesse Cassel upon
the River Wertz, 5 Leagues from Cassel.

Allere, Allera, a River in the Lower Saxony, which rises in the Duchy of M
gdebourg, and passes through that of Lunebourg by Zell and Ferdin to join the
Weser.

Allersberg, a small Market Town on the West of the District of Newmarckt, in
the upper Palatinate: it belongs to the House of Newburg.

Allia, a River of the Province of Sabina in Italy. See Aia.

Allier, Elaver, a River of France, which rises in Languedoc, in the Territory
of Guivandan, in the Village of Condress, at the foot of Losere, the highest of
the Mountains of Cevennes; then running to the North, it waters and divides
the County of Auvergne, as likewise that of Bourbon; where it slides by
Moulins, and a little beneath Nevers, falls into the Loire.

Allobroges, an ancient People of the Province of Narbona in Gallia*
Transalpina, so called from the River Labroya, upon the Banks of which they had
their Habitations at first, according to Viterbius. They assisted the
Carthaginians against the Romans. In the Year of Rome 632. the Romans overthrew
them under Cne^^ Domitius Aenobarbus, and Fabius Maximus, whence the latter
obtained the* Title of Allobrogicus.

Allyn, a great Lake in the County of Kildare in Ireland.

Almagra, a Village in the Kingdom of Castile in Spain, remarkable for being
the Birth place, and giving Name to Diego Almagra, Pizarro's Comerade in the
discovery of Peru in 1525. These two perfidious base-born Vilains taking up
Arms afterward against each other, Almagra became Pizarro's Prisoner, and was
killed by Pizarro's Brother.

Almaguer, Almagra, a small Town 20 Leagues from Popayan in the Southern
America.

Almedine, a Town sometime rich and populous, and the Capital of the Province
of Duguela in the Kingdom of Marocco, but now ruined.

Almeria, a City and Port in the Kingdom of G^anada, which is a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Granada; seated upon the Mediterranean; having its Name
from Amalricus, a Gothish King, who built it; it is distant about twenty Miles
from Granada, South-East. There is another Town of the same name in new Spain
with a good Port, upon the Gulf of Mexico; called also Villaricca, and by the
Indians Naothalon from a River of that name.

Almina, Abyla, a Mountain in the Kingdom of Fez in Barbary, near the Mouth of
the Streights of Gibraltar, or the entrance of the Mediterranean, supposed to
be one of Hercules's Pillars.

Almis^a, Almisum, Dalmatium, by the Sclavom ans called Omisc, is a City in
Dalmatia upon the Adriatique, under the Turks. It was sometime a Bishops See
before it was united to the Archbishopric of Spalatro.

Almo, a Rivulet in Campagna di Roma, which falls into the Tibur at Rome. The
Priests of the Goddess Cybele used to wash the Victims that they Sacrificed to
her in these streams.

Almondbury, Camulodunum, a Town in Yorkshire, in the West Riding, seated upon
the River Calder, about 7 miles from Halifax to the South-East; which was once
a famous Roman and Saxon City, now a Village.

Almoravides, a People near Mount Atlas in Africa, who Possessed themselves of
the Kingdom of Fez in the year 1052.

Almouchiquois, Savages of New France, toward the River Covacourt and the Isle
of Bacchus.

Almunequar, a Town in the Kingdom of Granada

Alnewick, a Market Town in Northumberland on the River Alne (Alaunus), which
gives name to it, and soon after falls into the German Ocean. William the Lion,
King of Scots, fought a Battle here with the English in the Reign of Henry II.
and was taken Prisoner.

Alney Is^e, a small Island near Gloucester made by the Severn. Here Edmond,
surnamed Ironside, one of the Saxon Kings of England, fought a single Combat
with Canutus the Dane, an Invader, in the view of both their Armies: After
which they agreed to reign in Conjunction, each in his part, dividing the
Kingdom betwixt them.

Aload, one of the Names of Nilus.

Alopecki, a People of Attica near Athens, amongst whom, according to Diogenes
Laertius, Socrates had his Nativity.

Alost, a Town in Flanders, upon the River Dender. This Town was taken by the
French in 1667; but restored to the Spaniards again, who now have it. It lies
in the middle between Brussels and Gaunt, one mile from Dendermonde. There was
an Earldom belonging to this place; which had Earls of its own till 1165. when
it fell to Philip E. of Flanders, by Inheritance, and was by him united for
ever to Flanders.

Alps, called by the Germans Alben, is a long Ridg of* Mountains, which divide
Italy from France and Germany. It begins at Port Monaco, a Town belonging to
the States of Genoua, upon the Mediterranean, but in the Hands of the French
ever since the Year 1641. And ends at the Gulf of Carnaro, a part of the
Adriatic Sea, South of Istria, a Province belonging to the Republic of
Venice. It is divided into diverse parts, and each of them has its proper Name,
besides the General. From the Port of Monaco to the Fountains of the River Var,
they are called the Maritim Alps. From thence to Susa the Cottian Alps, from
Susa to S. Bernard the less, they are called the Greek Alps: from thence to S.
Gothard the Pennine Alps: next to these follow the Grison Alps, to the
Fountain of the River Piave; that part of them which lie near the City of
Trent, are called by its Name. Those that follow as far as Dolak, are called
the Norician Alps; from the Fountains of Tajamento to those of the Drove, they
are called the Carinthian Alps; the last are the Julian or Pannonian Alps.
Yet some extend them as far as Dalmatia, and others carry them to Thrace, and
the Euxine Sea; but it is the most received opinion, that they end at the
Fountains of the River di Kulpe in Liburnia. Thus far Cluvirius.

Alpheus. See Orfea.

Alpon, Vecchio, Alpinus, a River in the Territories of Verona, which falls
into the Adige; a River which belongs to the States of Venice.

Alpuxaras, Alpuxarae, a considerable body of Mountains in the Kingdom of
Granada in Spain; they were once well peopled, but are almost desolate now; the
Moors that inhabited them, having been banished by Philip III.

Alre, Alera, a River in Saxony in Germany. See Allere.

Alrick, or Elrick, Alriens, a River in Twedale in Scotland, which falls into
the Tweede.

Als, or Alsits, Alisuntia, a River of the Dukedom of Luxemburg in the
Low Countries; which washes the Walls of the principal City; and then with the
Saar, another River of the same Dukedom, falls into the Moselle above Treves.

Alsatia, called by the Germans Elsass, by the French Alsace, in a Province of
Germany in the upper Circle of the Rhein: lying between Schwaben on the East,
Lorain on the West; the lower Palatinate, the Territory of Spire, the Dukedom
of Bipont, toward the North: and upon the Switzors toward the South. It is
divided into three parts. Alsatia, (properly so called) and into the lower and
upper Alsatia: which two last parts, with the Bishopric of Basil, Spire, and
Philipsburgh, submitted to Lewis XIII. in 1634. and were yielded to the French,
by the Peace of Munster in the Year 1648. The Territories of the Bishop and
Chapter of Strasburg, which lie on this side the Rhine, belong to the lower
Alsatia.

Alsen, Alsa, or Alsia, is an Island of Denmark in the Baltic Sea, on the
Eastern-Shoar of the Dukedom of Sleswick, from which it is parted by a small
Channel. At the South end of it stands a magnificent Castle called Suderburgh,
which belongs to a branch of the House of Holsatia, with the Title of Duke; and
at the North end there is another Castle called Nordoburg, possessed by another
Ducal Family. The whole Island is under the Dominion of the D. of Sunderburgh,
and is a part of the Dukedom of Sleswick.

Alsford, a Market Town in Hantshire.

Alster, a River in the Duchy of Holstein in Germany, falling into the Elb
above Hamburgh.

Alssfeldt, one of the antientiest Towns in Hassia. The Burgers of this Town
were the first that embraced Luthers Reformation.

Alt, Alta, a small River in Lancashire, falling into the Irish Sea at Ahnouth.
Another in Transylvania. See Olt.

Altahein, Alteimum, an ancient Town in the Country of the Grisons.

Altai, a Mountain, the same with Belgon.

Altaich, the Upper and Lower, is the Name of two famous Monastries on the
Danow, in the upper Palatinate. They have their Names from Altaha Altachum, or
Altaichum, two great old Oaks.

Altamura, or Altavilla, Altus Murus, a Principality and City in the Province
of Bari in Naples.

Altem-bourg, vide Aldenburg.

Altembourg, the Name also of a Town in Transylvania, and of another in the
Lower Hungary, by the Hungarians called Owar* ^ Of another in Bavaria upon the
Danube; as likewise of a Ruinated Castle of the Province of Argow in
Switzerland, giving the Title of a Count.

Alten, and Altenbotten, a River and Branch of the Norwegian Ocean, in the
Province of Werdhuss.

Altino, Altinum, an ancient City and Episcopal See within the States of
Venice, upon the River Sile, betwixt Padoua and Concordia. Ruined by Attila,
King of the Huns. The Bishopric is Transferred to Torcello.

Alton, a Market Town in Hampshire.

Altorf, Altorfium, the Capital City of the Canton of Vri, upon the River Russ
in Switzerland, at the Foot of the Alps. Also a City and University in
Franconia, upon the River Schwartzac. The University was Founded by the
Magistrates of Nuremberg in 1579. and received its Privileges from the Emperor
Rodolph II. in 1581. There is a Castle to it. A small, but ancient Town, within
2 miles of Ravenspurg, in the upper Schwaben in Germany* the Guelpian Family
were usually Buried here. This Town belongs to the House of Austria, and is the
Residence of the high Commissioners of Suevia.

Altringham, a Market Town in Cheshire, in the Hundred of Buclow.

Alzira, a rich and pleasant (tho small) City in the Kingdom of Valencia in
Spain, betwixt two Arms of the River Xucar, over which it has two Bridges;
about 5 Leagues from Valencia.

Am, a famous City in Armenia, computed to have 100000 Houses, and 1000
Churches. Taken by the Tartars in 1219.

Amachaches, Amacari, an American People in Brasil, toward St. Sebastian.

Amacusa, an Island and Province under Japan in the East Indies, having its
Capital City of the same Name.

Amadabat, or Armadabat, a Populous City, of great Trade in the Kingdom of
Guzurate in the East Indies, which finds out of its own Revenue, for the
Service of the Great Mogul, 12000 Horse, and 50 Elephants. The Chan or
Governor, assumes the quality of a Prince. It is 18 Leagues from Cambaya, near
the River Indus, adorned with a Mosque of extraordinary magnificence, where lie
the Sepulchers of many of their ancient Kings, being heretofore and Idol Temple
of the Heathens, till the Turks got the Possession of it.

Amadan, one of the finest and most considerable Cities in Persia, about 9 days
Journey from Hispahan, at the Foot of a Mountain.

Amager, o^ Amac, Amagria, a Fruitful Island in the Baltic Ocean over against
Copenhagen, under the Crown of Denmark.

Amaguana, one of the Luccaye Islands in America, near St. Domingo.

Amalfi, Amalphis, an Archiepiscopal City, and Dukedom of the Kingdom of
Naples; but notwithstanding these great Honors, it is little, and ill built.
It stands upon the Bay of Salerno, the West part of which is called La Costa d'
Amalfi. It is said the Body of S. Andrew is kept here. And in this place Flavio
Gioia found out the use of the Compass in the Year 1300. It is ^^ miles distant
from Salerno, and 24 from Naples, to the North-East.

Amana, another of the Luccaye Islands.

Am^nthea, Amantia, a City and Bishops* See, under the Archbishop of Regio in
Calabria in the Kingdom of Naples, upon the Mediterranean. There is a Castle to
it, which, with the adjacent Country, depends upon the Prince of Bisignano.

Amanus, or Amana, a Mountain mentioned Cantic. 4. 8. dividing Cilicia from
Syria. Alexander III. overthrew Darius the first time at this passage into
Syria, called by the ancients Amanicae Portae.

A^apai^, a Province of new Andalusia in America, near the River Orenoque.

Amara, an high Mountain with a City of the same Name built upon it, which
gives Name to a Kingdom, in the very midst of Aethiopia; we are told the
Children and Reltations of the Royal Family are here kept in Custody, and that
upon the death of their Prince, they fetch another from hence. But others
pretend they are kept in Ovohni in the Province of Oinadag. It lies under the
Line, in 65 degrees of Longitude.

Amarantes, an ancient People of Colchis in Asia Minor, dwelling upon a
Mountain of the same Name, whence arises the River Phasis.

Amasia, a City of Cappadocia, in Asia the Less, upon the River Casalmach (
Iris,) which falls into the Euxine Sea. This City is called by the Turks
Amnasan; it was an Archbishopric, with four Suffragans. The Turks have been
possessed of it three Ages: it is large, the Capital of those Countries, and
the Seat of the Beglerbeg of Cappadocia, now called by the Turks Tocat. Strabo,
the ancient Geographer, who was born here, gives a very particular Account of
this place. It now gives the Title of Archbishop to Signior D'Adda, the late
Nuncio in England from P. Innocent XI. who promoted him to a Cardinalate
amongst Ten others, Feb. 13. 1689. It lies in Long. 65. 52. Latit. 44. 25.

Amath, Epiphania, a Town in Palestine. Built by Amath, the Son of Chanaan; and
mentioned by Josephus as extant in his time. Pliny speaks of another in the
East Indies.

Amathonte, Amathusa, an ancient City of Cyprus, in which Venus had formerly a
Temple Consecrated to her of great Fame: Since a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Nocosia.

Amatique, or S. Thomas, a Town of North America in New-Spain, in the Province
de Honduras, 18 Leagues distant from the North Sea; which was Built Anno 1597.
There is a River in the same Province called Amatitu^.

Amato. See Lameto.

Amaxie, an ancient City of Troas in Asia Minor, where Apollo had a Temple in
his Honor. Another of Cilicia, given by Marc Anthony to Cleopatra.

Amaxobient, an ancient People of Sarmatia.

The River of Amazons is one of the biggest Rivers in the World: it belongs to
the South America, and rises near Quitum, a City of Peru, out of two Marshes
which lie within two Leagues of each other at the foot of the Mountains of
Cordillera; then running to the East, and being augmented by the Streams of
Coca, Napo, and others, it passes the Provinces of Canela and Pacamor, where
it receives the River Xauxa or Maranio; so passing many other Provinces after a
Course of 1200 Leagues, it falls into the North Ocean between Brasile and
Guiana. The mouth of it is very large, and full of Islands: it was first found
in 1541. by Joannes Orellano a Spaniard, and therefore some have called it the
River of Orellan. Peter Texeira, a Spaniard, has made a very exact Description
of it, having spent 10 Months in surveying it, in 1639.

Ambadar, a Town upon the Nile, in the Kingdom of Bagamedri in Abyssinia.

Amba-Geshen, a Mountain almost impregnable in the Confines of Amhara,
prodigiously high (in the form of a Castle, built of Freestone. It is half a
Portugal League broad at the top, and at the bottom half a days Journey about.

Ambarri, an ancient People amongst the Gauls, mentioned by Caesar.

Amber, Ambrus, a River of Bavaria in Germany. It arises toward Tirol, and
falls into the Iser near Landshut.

Amberg, a City of Germany, in the Province of Northgow, upon the River Wills:
it belongs now to the Duke of Bavaria; but both it, and the Country about it,
did belong to the Elector Palatine. It is 7 German Miles from Ratisbone, and 8
from Noremborg.

Ambiam, a Kingdom of the Higher Ethiopia, between the Kingdoms of Bagmid and
Quara. It takes its Name from the head City of it.

Ambiancativa, a City and Kingdom of Ethiopia the Higher, which has the Nile on
the East, and the Lake of Amasen on the West.

Ambibarri, an ancient People amongst the Gauls, mentioned by Caesar, and
supposed to be those of the Diocese (now) of Avranches in Normandy.

Ambie, or Hambie, a Town in Normandy, thought to retain its Name from the
Ambibarri.

Amboina, is an Island of the East Indies: the whole Circuit whereof is 16
Leagues; but yet it is of great Consideration, by reason of the plenty of Spice
which it affords. It was discovered by the Portuguese in 1515. In 1605. the
Dutch drove out the Portugal Forces, and possessed themselves of Amboina, the
principal Town, by one Stephen van Hagan; but that which makes this Island most
infamous, was, the Cruelties of the Dutch executed upon the English in 1618. It
lies not far from the Moluccoes, and is reckoned among the Selebes. This Island
lies West of Banda 24 Leagues, and very near the Line.

Amboise, Ambacia, is a Town and Castle in Touraine in France, near the Loir,
over which it has a Bridge. The Kings of France have often retired hither for
their Privacy and Pleasure. Charles VIII. was born here 1470. and died here
April 7. 1498. But most memorable is this place for the Surprise intended
against Francis II. by the Hugonots in 1560. which gave Birth to a lasting War
in France. This Town lies 6 Leagues from Tours, and 10 from Blois.

Amboule, a fruitful Valley in the Southern part of the Isle of Madagascar.

Ambracia, a considerable Episcopal City of Epirus, upon a Bay of the same
Name, in which the Battle of Actium was sought by the Fleets of Augustus and
Mark Antony. This was the Regal City of the famous Pyrrbus, King of Epirus;
distant from Prevesa, ( Nicopolis) 25 Miles.

Ambres-bury, Ambresburia, a Town in Wileshire, about 5 Miles West of
Salisbury, and 2 Miles North of Stone-^enge, seated upon the River Avon; which
takes its Name from Ambrosius, the first King of the Britains after the Romans
forsook them, who is here supposed to have been slain and buried. Cambden.

Ambrisi, Ambrisius, a River in the remotest Aethiopia, in the Kingdom of
Congo: it arises in the Mountains near the City of Tinda, and falls into the
Aethiopick Ocean between Lelunda and the Lose, about 5 degrees. from the Line South.

Ambroise, a small Town at the entrance into Piedmont, upon the River Doria.
Near to it stands the celebrated Abbey of L'Ecluse, that they say was built by
the hands of Angels; belonging to the Benedictines, and one of the four chief
Houses in Europe of that Order.

Ambroni, an ancient People of Switzerland^, or according to some, of Dauphine
in France on the side of Ambrune. Marius gave them a bloody Overthrow near the
little River Arc in Provence, between Aix and S. Maximin, in the year of Rome
652. The Marks of this Victory being yet extant upon the Rests of a Pyramid
there.

Ambrune, a City in the Dauphinate of France, called in Latin Ebrodunum: It is
an Archbishops See, small but strong; seated upon the River Durance, which
falls into the Rhosne, one League beneath Avignon: it lies 23 Leagues
North-East of Grenoble, and 37 from Li^nt.

Amel, a Kingdom of Africa upon the Atlantic Ocean, between the Outlets of the
River Niger, and on the Western side of it.

Amelant, an Island belonging to the Dutch in the German Ocean, on the Shoars
of Friseland.

Amelia, a City of S. Peter's Patrimony in Italy, said to be built 964 years
before Perseus: It is an independent Bishops See, about 6 Miles from Narni. The
Ameria of the Ancients, and the birthplace of that Roscius whose Cause is
defended by Cicero.

AMERICA, the Fourth Part of the World, and greater than the other Three.
Wholly unknown to us till 1499. when Christopher Columbo, or Colono, a
Genouese, first discovered it; at the Charges of Ferdinando and Isabella, King
and Queen of Spain. Americus Vespuccio, a Florentine, seven years after being
sent by Emanuel, King of Portugal, went further, and discovered the Continent,
and from him it has its Name; but it is no less frequently called the
West Indies. It lies in length, from North to South, under the shape of two
vast Peninsula's, knit together by the Streights of Panama, where the Land is
not above 17 Leagues from Sea to Sea. On the Western side it has the Pacifick
Ocean; on the East the Atlantic; on the South the Streights of Magellan or
Le-Maire; but as to the North, the Bounds of it are not disco^ered, by reason
of the great Cold, and nearness to the Northern Pole. Great part of it is under
the Spaniards, viz. Peru, New Spain, Terra firma, Paragua, Chili, and many of
the Northern and Southern Islands; yet diverse of the Maritime parts are under
the Portugals, English, French, and Hollanders. Particularly the English,
either by being first Occupants, or else by Conquest have made themselves
Masters of the large Northern Continents adjoining to Hudson's Bay, New
England, Virginia, Maryland, Carolina, and of many adjacent Islands: and in
the more Southern Parts they are possessed of the wealthy Islands of Jamaica,
Barbados, Mevis, etc. Those Natives that live in these parts with the
Europeans are much civilized; but those that inhabit the Inland Countries
retain their ancient barbarous Customs. This vast Continent is divided into the
Southern and Northern Ameica, by the Bay of Mexico and the Streights of Panama.
The Islands which lie about it in both the Oceans, are too numerous to be here
recounted.

Amersford, a small Town in the State of Vtrecht in Holland, upon the River Em,
under the Dominion of the United States, tho once an Imperial City. In 1624. it
was taken by the Spaniards, but soon after retaken by the Dutch; and in 1672.
it fell into the hands of the French, who deserted it two years after. It lies
about 3 Leagues East of Vtrecht.

Amersham, a Market Town in Buckinghamshire. See Agmundesham.

Amhara. See Amara.

Amida. See Caramit.

Amiens, Samarobrina, Samarobriga, the chief City of Picardy, and a Bishops See
under the Archbishop of Rheims; it stands upon the River Sum, midway in the
Road between Calais and Paris, about 25 French Miles from each. It was a long
time the Frontier Town of France, surprised by the Spaniards in 1597. but soon
after retaken by that Victorious Prince Henry IV. Built by Antonius Pius the
Emperor, and was called at first Samarobriga, that is, the Bridge upon Samara.
In the Cathedral Church of Nostre Dame they preserve the Head of S. John
Baptist, which they say was found by a Gentleman of Picardy at the taking of
Constantinople in 1204. as a most extraordinary Relic. There is an Historical
Treatise of this Head, written by the Sieur du Cange. The Country l' Amiennois
takes it Name from Amiens.

Amilo, Amulus, a River in Mauritania mentioned by Pliny.

Amiterno, an ancient City in the Province of Abruzzo in Italy, and sometime an
Episcopal See, which has been translated to Aquila. It was the Birth place of
the Historian Salust. The Ruins of a Theater, a Church, and a great Tower are
yet to be seen.

Amititan, or Amuitan, a Lake in New Spain in America.

Amixoeares, an American People of Brasil.

Ammerze, Ammer, a great Lake or Marsh in Bavaria in Germany.

The Ammonites, an ancient People of Palestine, descended from Ammon the Son of
Lot; in the History of the Old Testament, famous for their Wars with Israel,
who gave them several great Defeats under Jephtha, Saul, Joab, Joatham, and
Judas Macchabeus. Also another ancient People of Libya in Africa, who lived
toward the Temple of Jupiter Ammon.

Amond, Almon, a River in the County of Lothain in Scotland. It falls into
Edenburg Fyrth.

Amone, or Lamone, a River arising at the foot of the Apennines in Italy, and
passing by Faenza to fall into the Po near Ravenna.

Amorbach, Amorbachium, a Town of Franconia in Germany, upon the River Muldt,
under the Elector of Mentz.

Amorium, an ancient City of Phrygia in Asia Minor, and sometime an
Archiepiscopal See under the Patriarch of Constantinople. Taken and burnt by
the Saracens in 840.

The Amorites, an ancient People of Palestine, descended from Canaan: who, with
their two Kings Sehon and Og, were vanquished by the Israelites, and their
Country distributed amongst the Tribes of Ruben, Gad, and Manasseh.

Ampatres, an Indian People in the Island of Madagascar.

Ampelusia, Ampelos, a Cape upon the Streights of Gibraltar in Mauritania
Tingitana, now called Cape Esparto. Also a Town and Cape in Macedonia, called
now Capo Canistro. And a Cape in Crete, now called Capo Sagro.

Amphaxe, a small Town upon the Gulf of Contessa in Macedonia. It did
anciently give Name to the Country Amphaxites.

Amphipolis. See Emboli.

Amphryse, a River in Thessalia. Another in Phrygia in Asia Minor, and a Town
in Phocis.

Ampthill, a Market Town in Bedfordshire. The Earl of Alesbury has a noble Seat
here.

Ampurdan, a Country of Catalonia; its capital City was the ancient Emporiae
(Ampurias) upon the Mediterranean, 6 Leagues from Girona; sometime divided
betwixt 3 Nations, Spaniards, Greeks, and Romans. Cato obtained a signal
Victory over the Spaniards here, in the year of Rome 558. It was afterward the
Seat of a Bishop; but being ruined in the Wars with the Moors, the Sea was
translated to Girona.

Amrom, or Amrod, an Island toward the Duchy of Sleswick in Denmark.

Amsterdam, Amstelodamium, is the chief Town of the Province of Holland, seated
upon the River Yam. It is a new City, first Fortisied in 1492. but within this
last hundred Years it has received its greatest growth, and is now one of the
greatest Marts in Europe. It takes its Name from the River Amstel, which glides
by it: and has a large, convenient, and a well-traded-haven. The Riches, number
of Ships, and Merchants belonging to it, are equal to those of most Cities in
Christendom. It was taken by the Hollanlers under Prince William of Nassau,
from the Spaniard, in 1578. having been heretofore one of the Imperial Cities:
it stands about two Leagues from the Zuider Sea, and four from Vtrecht. The
Hollanders have given the Name of Amsterdam to an Island in the Frosen Sea,
toward Greenland. To a Town and Port of theirs in their Colonies in the
Northern America. To an Island in the Indian Ocean, betwixt Madagascar and new
Holland. And lastly, to another Island by them discovered toward Japan.

Amu, or Amus, a Lake in the Country of Vsbech in Tartary.

Amudez, a Town in the Kingdom of Tunis in Africa.

Amurgos, or Murgos, an Island in the Archipelago, with a City that has
sometime been the Seat of a Bishop. Simonides the ancient Poet was born here.

Amyclea, an ancient City in the Terra di Lavoro in Italy; whose surprisal and
destruction by the Enemy, occasioned that known Proverb, Amyclas perdidit
silentium.

Amycles. See Scala Marmorea. The Name also of an ancient City in the Morea,
where Apollo had his Temple.

Amydon, an ancient City of Macedonia, upon the River Axius.

Amyrus, a River of Thessalia.

Amyzon. See Mezo.

Ana, a Town of Arabia Deserta, upon the River Euphrates.

Anabagatha, a City and an Archiepiscopal See, under the Patriarch of Antioch
in Asia.

Anacandrians, Indians in the Isle of Madagascar.

Anachimoussi, other Indians in the same.

Anactoire, an ancient City of Epirus upon the Bay of Ambracia: the Anactorium
of the Ancients. And another in Ionia.

Anacuies, Indians of Brasil.

Anaf, or Anfa, a Town, sometime the Capital of the Province of Temesen, in the
Kingdom of Fez upon the Atlantic Ocean. Burnt by Alphonsus King of Portugal in
1468.

Anaghelome, a small Town in the County of Down in ulster in Ireland upon the
River Ban.

Anagni, or Agnani, a City and Bishops See in the States of the Church in
Italy. Rich and powerful in the time of the old Romans; now almost ruined and
little inhabited.

Anagyrus, a Tract in Achaia; so called from the growth of Bean-Cod Trees there.

Anandale, is a County in the West of Scotland, upon the River Solway, which
parts Scotland from England: It takes its Name from the River Anan, as does
also the principal Town in it, which (says Camden) lost all the Glory and
Beauty it had by the English War in the Reign of Edward VI.

Anapanomene, a Fountain of Epirus mentioned by Pliny.

Anaph, an Island in the Archipelago, now called Nanfio.

Anaplyste, an ancient Maritim Town in Greece near Athens.

Anapo, Anapus, a River of Sicily. Also another of Epirus.

Anapuia, a Province of Venezuela in the South America.

Anaquito, a Country in the Province of Quito in Peru; where the two Parties of
Almagra and Pizarro (joynt-discovers of Peru) engaged each other in Battle in
1546. See Almagra.

Anatolia, Asia Minor, called by the Turks, Natolie, is a considerable part of
Asia, extending it self Westward to the Shoars of Greece. It is bounded on the
North with the Euxine or Black Sea; on the East it is separated from Syria and
Armenia Major by the Euphrates; on the South it has the Mediterranean; and on
the North it is severed from Greece and Thrace by the Bosphorus and many other
Seas. It is all of it in miserable Slavery under the Turks, who have strangly
depopulated, impoverished, and ruined this once most rich and powerful Country.

Anatolico, A Village of the Province of Despotato (or the ancient Aetolia) in
Greece: built in a Marsh like Venice.

Anazarbe, See Aczar.

Anazzo, Gnazzi, or Torre d'Anasso; a City in the Province of Bari, in the
Kingdom of Naples; supposed to be the ruinated Egnatia, whose Episcopal See is
transferred to Monopoli.

Ancam, Ancamia; an Island on the Coast of China to the Province of Canton.

Ancamares or Anoamares, Indians in the South America, along the River Madera.

Ancaster, the ancient Crocolana or Crorolana; a Town upon Lincoln Heath,
within 12 Miles of Lincoln.

Ancenis, Ancenesium, a City in Britany in France upon the Loyre. The Castle
that it had is ruined.

Anchiale, the same with Kenkis. Also a City of Cilicia in Asia, remarkable for
the Tomb and Statue of the Effeminate Sardanapalus.

Anchisa, a part of the Mountain Atlas.

Anchora, Asine, an ancient small City in the Morea near Modon,

Anclam,, Anclamum, a very strong Town in Pomerania, under the Government of
the King of Sweden, upon the River Pene. It was taken from the Swedes by the
Duke of Brandenburg in 1676. and restored to them in 1679. It lies 8 German
Miles South-East from Stetin.

Ancona, the principal City of Marca Anconitana; which Territory takes its name
from this City: it stands upon the Adriatic Sea, near the Promontory of S.
Ciriaco. Built by the Syracusans, who fled hither to avoid the fury of their
Tyrant. The Haven was built by Trajan the Emperor, and is one of the fairest in
the World, but not so safe as capacious In 1532. Pope Clement the VII. built
here a a very strong Castle, upon pretense of securing the City against the
Turks, but in reality to bring it into a greater subjection to the Popedom, in
whose Dominions it is; tho formerly a kind of a Republic: it has a Bishop who
is not under any Archbishop. It is distant from Rome 110 Miles to the
North-East, and from Vrbino 53 Miles to the South-East.

Ancyra, See Engury

Anczakrich, Anczacricus, a River of Vkrane in Poland, which falls into the
Black Sea. within one Polish Mile of Oczakow, which is now in the Possession of
the Turcks, and stands near the Mouth of the Neister, [ Borysthenes.]

Andaguaslas, Indians of Peru in America, between the Rivers Abanca and Xauxa.

Andaluzia, Vandalitia, a Kingdom in the South of Spain: bounded on the North
with the Province of Estremadura and New Castile; on the East with the Kingdom
of Granada; on the South with the Ocean and the Mediterranean, and on the West
with the Atlantic Ocean and Algarve in Portugal: This is the most rich and
fertile Country in all Spain The Moors erected in it two Kingdoms, that of
Corduba, and that of Sevil ( Hispalis,) which were both re-conquered and added
to Castile by Ferdinand II. in 1248. It is divided into two parts by the River
Guadalquivir ( Betis) and the chief City is Sevil.

New Andalusia, a Province of the Terra-firm^ in America, between Venezuela and
Guiana. The chief City of it is new Corduba. They used to fish for Pearl upon
those Coasts.

Anoanagar, a City in the Kingdom of Decan in the East Indies, almost ruined.

Andance, Andancia, a small Town in Vivarets in Languedoc in France; where the
River Dome falls into the Rhosne.

Andarge, a River arising in the Valleys of Vns^an in France, which falls into
the Arron near Verneuill.

Andaye, a Town in France upon the frontiers of Spain, two Leagues from S. Jean
de Luz.

Andeli, Andelium, Andeliacum, a Town in Normandy upon the Seine. Anthony of
Bourbon King of Navarre and Father to Henry IV. dyed here of the Wounds he
received at the Siege of Rouen.

An^e^^e, a River of France, arising hard by la Ferte, which falls into the
Seine at l'Arche.

Andelot, a Town in Champagne in France, upon the River Rougn^n* of
extraordinary Privileges.

Andema^n, the name of halt a dozen Islands in the Gulf of Ganges, near the
Kingdom of Pegu, in the East Indies.

Andera, a City of Phrygia in Asia Minor.

Anderna^, Antenacum, a Town upon the Rhine, in the Archbishopric of Cologne.

Anderskaw or Andershouw, a great Monastery heretofore, now a strong Castle in
the Island of Seeland in Denmark; delicately built. Here Frederick II. dyed, in
1548.

Andes, called by some the Cordillera's, is one of the vastest and highest
Ridges of Mountains in the World: they begin in the North part of the Kingdom
of Peru, and are continued from thence, without any Interruption, to the
Streights of Magellan by the space of 1000 Spanish Leagues: much of the same
height, and seldom above 20, 30 or 40 Leagues from the Pacifick Ocean: many of
them burn perpetually toward Chili.

Andiatoroque, a Lake of New France in America

Andore, a fruitful Valley of the Pyranees in Catalognia.

Andover, is a Corporation in the North-west part of the County of Hampshire,
which sends Burgesses to Parliament, and gives the Title of a Viscount to the
Honorable Earls of Berkshire, now in the Possession of Tho. Howard: it is
seated about 18 Miles from Southampton to the North-west.

Andra or A^dra, a River upon the Coast of Guinea in Africa.

Andragiri or Gudaviri, a City and Kingdom in the Island of Sumatra in Asia,
almost under the Equinoctial.

Andres, Androsia, a City of Galatia near Engury, mentioned by Ptolomy.

S. Andrews, [ Andreapolis,] a City of Fife in the South of Scotland, North of
the Frith of Edinburgh, upon the German Ocean, into which it has a fair
Prospect, and upon which it has a large Haven. The ancient name of this place
was Regimund: it has an University, erected by James I. An. Dom. 1426. It is
also an Archbishops See, erected by Pope Sixtus IV. An. 1471. instead of
Aberneath. The Archbishops of all Scotland were heretofore under the Archbishop
of York, till James III. of Scotland representing to the Pope that there were
frequent Wars between England and Scotland, obtained from the said Pope, That
the Archbishop of S. Andrew should be independent Primate of Scotland, in the
twel^th year of his Reign: yet Innocentius VIII. who immediately succeeded him,
obliged this Primate and his Successors to observe the laudable Customs of the
famous Metropolitan Church of Canterbury. This City in 1651. not surrendering
upon the first Summons, to our English victorious Rebels was sinned Five hundred
Pounds; but had it remitted upon showing they were poor Scholars. It is 38
Miles from Edinburgh, to the North-east, and 23 from Aberneath to the East: it
lies in Lon. 17. 28. Lat. 57. 46.

Andro, Andros, Andria, an Island in the Archipelago, with a City of the same
name, which is an Episcopal See under Athens, inhabited by Greeks, Latins and
Turks. The Ancients call this Island, Cauros, Lysia, Nonagria, and by several
other names.

Androgynes, an ancient People of Africa, composed they say of both Sexes;
their right Breast a Man's, the left a Woman's. Pliny and Aristotle.

Androsen or Androsen, Androsa, a small Town in the County of Cunningham in
Scotland, upon the Western Shore.

Anduze, Andusa ad Gardonem, a Town in Languedoc in France, upon the River
Gardon; heretofore fortified; demolished by Lewis XIII.

Anenas or Andenas, an Island upon the Coast of Norway, Southward.

Anet, a Town in the Isle of France upon the River Eure, adorned with a Castle
of extraordinary Magnificence, which was built in the Reign of Henry II. It
gives the Title of a Principality to the Duke of Vendosme.

Angamala, a City in the Promontory of Malabar, in the East Indies, upon the
River Aicot, as likewise a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Goa, till Pope
Paul V. in 1609. changed it into the Archiepiscopal See of Cranganor, and
constituted that as Metrapolitan of the Christians of S. Thomas,

Angediva, a small Island under the Portuguese, in the Kingdom of Decan in the
East Indies.

Angeles, Angelepolis, or Puebla de los Angeles, a City in a Province of the
same name, (otherwise called Tlascala by the Indians) in New Spain in America;
built in 1531. by the Spaniards, who have established an Episcopal See in it
under the Archbishop of Mexico.

Angermund, vid. Tangermund.

Angers, Juliomagus, in Caesar Andes, is the Head of the Dukedom of Anjou, a
large well built City, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tours. It is
Seated on the River Sar^re, in a very good Air; and is also an University,
founded by Lewis II. Duke of Anjou, the Son of King John of France, Anno 1388.
This City is 26 Leagues from Tours toward the West, and within 1 League of the
Loire. In 1685. Lewis XIV. established by his Letters Patents an Academy here
of Thirty ingenious Persons, who are all to be born in the Province of Anjou,
under the Title of the Royal Academy of Angers. The famous Berengarius was
Archdeacon here.

Angitia, the ancient name of Selva d'Albi, a Forest between the City of Albi
in Languedoc, and the Lake Fucinus.

Anglesey, Mona, called by the Welsh, Mon or Tir-mon, and Anglesey from the
English after they conquered it: it is compassed on all sides with the Irish
Sea, which separates it from the County of Carnarvan in Wales, by so narrow a
Channel, that in some places it may be forded at low Water: it is in compass
sixty Miles, making one of the Counties of Wales, and the most fruitful. This
Island was the Seat of the British Druides, subdued for the Romans by
Suetonius Paulinus, in the Reign of Nero; but he not being able to perfect the
Conquest, Julius Agricola his Successor, did it effectually. Edward I. brought
it in Subjection to the Crown of England in 1282, till which time it was under
the Kings of North Wales. The Right Honorable Arthur Annesly, a great lover of
Learning and Books, was lately Earl of this County.

Angola, a Kingdom in Africa, upon the South of the Kingdom of Congo.

Angote, a City and Kingdom in the Upper Aethiopia.

Angoulesme, Engolisma, is an Episcopal City in Aquitaine in France, under the
Archbishop of Bourdeaux; it stands upon the River Charm, which falls into the
Ocean right over against the Island of Orleron. There is belonging to it also a
Dukedom which is bounded upon the North with Poictou, upon the East with
Limosin, upon the South with Pericort, and upon the West with Xantogn. This
Dukedom is called by the name of Angoumois.

Angra, the chief City of the Island of Tercera, and a Bishops See under the
Archbishop of Lisbon.

Anguien, Enguien, Angia, a small City in Hainault, between Mons and Brussels.
It has the Honor to give the Title of a Baron to the Princes of the House of
Bourbon.

Anguilla, is one of the Caribby Islands planted by the English: it lies in 18
degrees. 21 min. Nor. Lat. and 330 of Longit. in length about 10 Leagues, in
breadth 3. formerly called Snake Island, from its shape. The Tobacco of this
Island is well esteemed.

Anguillara, a Town and Lake in the Padouan in the States of Venice. Also a
Town in the States of the Church, upon the Lake of Bracciano.

Anhalt, a City almost ruined, and a Principality, but little considerable, in
the Upper Saxony in Germany, watered by the River Sala. The House of Anhalt has
possessed the Electorates of Brandenburgh and Saxony for several Ages.

Anian, a Straight, supposed to be between Asia and America, but could never
yet be discovered where or whether there be any such Passage or no: It is
thought to lie North of China and Japan, and to disjoyn the Eastern part of
Asia from the Western part of America.

Anian^u, a City in the Province of Chuqnami in China.

Aniava, Aniwa, a Promontory discovered by the Hollanders in the Terra de Jesso
to the North of Japan.

Anigre, Anigrus, a River of the Morea.

Animacha, a River arising in the Kingdom of Callecutt in the East Indies,
which falls into the Ocean six Leagues off Cranagor, giving its Name to a Town
in its way.

Anjou, Andegavia, is one of the noblest Dukedoms of France: bounded on the
East with La Beausse, on the West with Britain and part of Poictou, on the
South, in part by Berry, and in part by Poictou, in which Circumference are
included Anjou, Tourein, and Maine. This Country is for the most part very
fruitful and pleasant, especially in Tourein, and along the Loire. Anjou,
properly so called, is seated between Tourein and Maine, and was so called from
the Andegavi, the old Inhabitants of it. Henry II. King of England, was Earl of
Anjou by Inheritance from his Father, as he was K. of England by Maud his
Mother, Daughter to Henry I. King John, his Son, lost it; and ever since it has
been annexed to the Crown of France, or given to the younger Sons of that Royal
Family.

Anna. See Ana. The Name also of a Town upon the River Astan in Arabia deserta.

Annaberg, a City of Misnia in Germany upon the River Schop, near Marienberg.

Annacious, Annacieugi, a People of Brasil in America toward Porto Seguro.

Annagh, a Town in the County of Cavan in Vlster in Ireland. Another in the
County of Down.

Anneci, Annecium, a neat City in Savoy, with a Castle. It is the Capital of
the Dukedom of Geneva, seated upon a Lake of the same name; where the River
Tioud issues out of the Lake at the foot of the Mountain Saymenoz: heretofore
greater, but now it is little, and not well inhabited, tho the Sea of the
Bishops of Geneva has been translated thither above 100 years. In this place
rests the Body of S. Francis de Sales, who was Bishop and Prince of Geneva,
near the time of the Reformation of Calv^^ This City is 6 Leagues from Geneva,
South.

Annibi, a Lake of North Tartary in Asia, where there are Mountains of the same
name.

Annobon, an Island upon the Coast of Guiney, 10 Leagues in circuit toward the
Isle of S. Thomas. The Portuguese gave it that name, because they discovered it
upon a New Years Day.

Annonay, Annonaeum, Annoniacum, a City with the Title of a Marquisate in the
Province of Vivarets in France, upon the River Deume.

Anon, Anonium, or Roque de Non, a Town in the Milanese in Italy upon the
River Tana^^, almost ruined.

Anossi, Carcanossi, Androbeizaba, a Province of the Isle of Madagascar. There
are some Colonies of French in it.

Anot, a small City of Provence in France.

Anoth, one of the Scilly Islands.

Anpadore, Cataractus, a River of Candia.

Ansa, a River in the Province of Friuli in Italy. It passes by Aqueleia to the
Adriatique Ocean.

Anse, a small City in the Province of Lyennois in France. 4 Leagues from
Lions. Made a Roman Garrison in the time of Augustus, who gave it the name of
Antium.

Ansene, Angria, a small City in Egypt, 20 Leagues from Cairo, near the Nile.

Ansianactes, a People of the Western part of the Isle of Madagascar.

Ansiquains, Ansicani, a People of Abyssinia, commended for their Fidelity and
Honesty.

Anslo, or Opslo, Anslooa, a City of the Province of Aggerhuys in Norway, with
a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Drontheim, seated upon a Bay of the same
name, 35 Miles from the Baltic Sea, Northward: it has a Castle near it called
Aggerhuslo. This City was miserably ruined by Fire, in the Reign of Christian
IV. who rebuilt it in Anno 1614. and called it Christianstad from his own Name.
In this City were celebrated the Nuptials of James I. King of England, with the
Lady Ann, Daughter of Frederick II. King of Denmark, November, 23. 1589. It
stands 56 German Miles from Stockholme, Went.

Anspach. See Onspach.

Antavares, a People on the South part of the Isle of Madagascar. The French
had settled themselves amongst them, and were afterward Massacred by them.

Ante, Anta, a River in Normandy which washes the Town of Failaise, and 3
Leagues lower falls into the Dive, which last falls into the British Sea, 4
Leagues East of Caen.

Ante, Anta, a small Town and Port in Guiny in Africa, 3 Leagues from the Cape
of Three Heads East.

Antego, one of the Caribby Islands placed in 16 d. 11. ^. of Northern Lat. and
339 of Long. inhabited by the English for some years, and is about 6 or 7
Leagues in length and breadth; difficult of Access, and not much stored with
Springs, which the Inhabitants supply by Ponds and Cisterns.

Antequera, a small ill built City of New Spain in America, 80 Leagues from
Mexico, which in 1535. was made a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Mexico,
by Pope Paul III. Also a small Town in the Kingdom of Granada in Old Spain.

Antessa, Antissa, an ancient City in the Island of Lesbos, which was
heretofore a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Mitylene. Ovid speaks of it,
as also the ancient Geographers, under the notion of its being it self an
Island in their times: whence some believe, that the Canal betwixt Lesbos and
it, has, by degrees, filled up and united with the Island of Lesbos.

Antibes, a Town and Port in Provence in France, which was heretofore a Bishops
See under the Archbishop of Ambrun; but the Sea is since transferred to la
Grace. There is a Castle to it.

Anticyra, an Island of Thessalia, famous for its Hellebore.

Antifello, Antiphellus, an ancient City of Lysia in Asia upon the
Mediterranean, and sometime the Sea of a Bishop.

Antigonia, the capital City of the Province of Chaonia in Epirus: Heretofore
considerable. Another of Macedonia. Also an Island discovered by the Portuguese
near the Island of S. Thomas.

Antilaban, an inhabited Mountain in Syria over against Mount Libanus.

Antilles, the same with the Caribby Islands.

Antinoe, Antios, Antinopolis, a City of Egypt, 6 Leagues from the Nile, and
heretofore a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Thebes. It had Twelve
Religious Houses in it for Women in the time of Palladius. Now utterly ruined.

Antioch, Antiochia, called by the Turks Antachia; by the Arabians, Anthakia.
It was built by Seleucus, the Son of Antiochus King of Syria, one of the
Successors of Alexander the Great, and called after his Fathers Name. This City
was, during the times the Greeks and Romans were possessed of it, the Capital
of Syria, or rather of the East; here the Disciples and Followers of our
Savior Jesus Christ were first called Christians; and accordingly, the Bishop
of this City was accounted the Third Patriarch of the World, Rome being the
First, and Alexandria the Second: others count it the Second Patriarchate. As
it had these great Honors, so it was excellently built, strongly fortified both
by Art and Nature, and very Populous, till it fell into the hands of the
Arabians, Mamalucks and Turks, who have made it desolate, and suffered all its
stately, and most of its common Buildings, to fall into decay. June 3. 1098. it
was recovered by the Christians, but in 1188. it was again betrayed into the
hands of the Mahometans, who have been the Masters of it ever since: it is
encompassed with a double Wall, one of Stone and the other of Brick, with 460
Towers within the Walls: the greatest part of these Walls remain with a most
impregnable Castle at the East end of the City, but almost all the Houses are
falling down; so that the Patriarch has removed his Dwelling to Damascus. This
City is built on both sides of the River Orontes over which there was a Bridge.
It stands about 12 Miles from the Mediterranean, the River Pharpar passing on
the South side of it. This place is called in the Prophets, Ri^lah, and was
memorable in those times for the Tragedies of ^ec^nias and Zedechias, Kings of
Judah. It stands about 20 Miles from Scanderone, South, and 22 from Aleppo: in
68. d. 10. m. Long. and 36. 20. Lat.

Antiochia Ciliciae, was a City of Asia the Less in Cilicia, a Bishops See,
seated upon the River Pyramus; but what it is now is not known.

Antiochia Meandri, See Tachiali.

Antiochia Comagenae, was a City and a Bishops See at the foot of Mount Taurus
in Syria, between Anazarbe and Antioch upon the Euphrates. Some say it still
retains its name.

Antioch upon the Euphrates. This City is mentioned by Pliny, and upon the
reverse of a Medal of the Emperor Severus. Perhaps the same with that which the
Syrians call Arados in Stephanus; who recounts 10 others of this name, of less
importance: the places of Situation are now unknown.

Antiochia in America, a small City in the Kingdom of Popayan in the South
America, 15 Leagues from S. Foy.

Antiochia Pisidiae, mentioned Acts 13. 14. was afterward an Archbishops See;
but it is now a mean Village, and called by the Turks Versacgeli, or as others
say Antachio: it is distant from Iconium 60 Miles North-West, from Ephesus 160
East.

Antipatride, Antipatris, a City of Palestine, built by Herod the Great, and so
called in Honor of Antipater his Father. Baldwin I. King of Jerusalem took it
in 1101. and erected the Church into an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of
Caesarea: in 1265. the Saracens took it again and have quite ruined it. It
stood 6 Leagues from Joppe.

Antiscoti, or the Isle of Assumption, an Isle in the Gulf of S. Lawrence in
New France in America, where the French have established some Colonies.

Antium, Antio Rovinato, an ancient City of Italy, the Capital of the Volsci;
Famous in the Roman times for a Temple consecrated to Fortune: Sometime also a
Bishops See, but since ruined by the Saracens.

Antivari, Antibarum, a Metropolitan City of Dalmatia, seated upon a Mount upon
the Shoars of the Adriatic Sea, under the Dominion of the Turks. The
Archbishop of this City had 9 suffragan Bishops under him* it is distant from
Budoa West, and Dolcingo East, 10. Miles; from Scutari South, 18 Miles.

Antongil, a Bay and Country in the Northern part of the Isle of Madagascar.

Antrim, the most Northern County in the Province of Vlster in Ireland; divided
into 9 Baronies, which are bounded on the East by S. Georges Channel, on the
the West by the River Banne, that parts it from Londonderry; on the North the
Deucalidonian Ocean, on the South the County of Down. The chief Town is
Carrick-fergus.

Antron, an ancient Town of Thessalia. The Asses of this Country were said to
be prodigiously great, whence the Proverb Asinus Antronius, for a very ignorant
Person.

Antros, a small Island at the Mouth of the Garonne, on the Coast of Guienne in
France, where stands the celebrated Tour de Cordovan, to light the Vessels that
go to Bordeaux.

Antwerp, Anversa, called by the French, Anvers; by the Germans, Antorf, is a
City of the Low Countries in the Dukedom of Brabant, upon the River Scheld. It
is a large and beautiful City, and was about 100 years since, the most populous
and best traded City in all those Provinces; and in 1559. was made a Bishops
See, by Paul IV. In 1569. the Duke de Alva built here a strong Castle. In 1576.
the Hollanders plundered it. In 1585. the Duke of Parma reduced it under the
Dominion of the Spaniard again, in whose hands it now is: but all these
Mutations, and the building of Forts upon the River by the Hollanders, has
reduced much of its ancient Glory, and it is now decaying. Abraham Ortelius, a
learned Geographer, who was born here, has described this City at large, as
also Lewis Guicciardin, in his Description of the Low Countries. It stands 10
Miles from Ghant, and as many from Brussels.

Anzerma, or S. Anna d' Anzerma, a small City in the Kingdom of Popayan in
America.

Aoaxe, a River of Abissinia in Africa; it rises in the Borders of the
Provinces of Xao and Oggo, and being augmented with the Streams of Machi, it
runs Eastward through the Kingdom of Adel; the Capital of which, Avea Guerela,
being watered by it, it falls into the Gulf of Arabia.

Aonia, a mountainous Country of Baeotia in Greece with a River of the same
Name:

Aorna, Aornus, a City of Bactria and a very strong rocky Castle in the Indies,
both taken heretofore by Alexander the Great. Also a River of Arcadia, and a
certain contagious Lake of Epirus, and a Lake in Italy, mentioned by Virgil.

Aouste, Augusta praetoria, a City and Dukedom of Piedinont: It is an Episcopal
See under the Archbishop of Tarantaise, and a part of the Dominions of the Duke
of Savoy: it stands in a mountainous, but fruitful Soil; at the foot of the
Grecian Alps, upon the River Doria, where it receives the River Bauteggio,
which do both fall into the Po. This City was a Roman Colony, called by Pliny,
Italiae Limes, the Frontier of Italy. It is 50 Miles from Turin, East. S.
Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury, was born here.

Apalaches, Apalachites, Indians of Florida, dwelling in several distinct
Provinces near the Mountains of Apala^ai. Their capital City is Melitot in the
Province of Bemarin. Their King resides there, who acts the Sovereign over all
the Chiefs of the other Provinces.

Apaches, a numerous People of New Mexico in America, divided by the Spaniards
into four sorts of Nations, the Country is so vast where they live, and
Fortified with Castles upon the Mountains.

Apamea, See Hamen.

Apamea C^lene, a City and an Archbishops See in Phrygia, of good Antiquity;
now little inhabited, and almost ruined. The Turks call it Miarlea. Also two
other Cities in Mesopotamia; one upon Tigris, and one upon the Euphrates.

Apantum, a Province of the Terra firma in America.

Ap^r^^, a Province of Peru in America, near the River of Amazons.

Apennino, Apenninus, a known and very great Chain of Mountains, which divide
Italy into two parts: it is 700 Miles long, and begins at the Maritim Alps,
and extends itself to the utmost bounds of Calabria; where one Branch of them
ends at Capo dell' Arm, 12 Miles East of Reggio; and the other Branch at Capo
di Santa Maria in Apulia, at the Mouth of the Gulf of Venice. In all this long
Course there is only the River Offanto ( Aufidus) that crosses it near the
City Conza. It has diverse names given it in several places.

Apenrade, Apenrora, a little City of South Jutland, in the Dukedom of
Sleswick, near the Baltic Sea; it belongs to that Duke with the adjacent
Territory, and is distant from Hader Sleven, South, 3 Danish Miles. It has a
large Haven, secured from the South-East Wind by the Island of Alsen.

Apetous, Apetubae, a People of Brasil in America.

Aphace, a place in Palestine, Dedicated sometime to the Worship of Venus in
all manner of Luxury.

Aphet^s, an ancient City of the Province of Magnesia in Thessaly, upon the
Gulf now called del Vallo.

Aphrodisium, a Cape now called Cap de Creuz, upon the Mediterranean, near
Rosas in Catalogna.

Aphytis, an ancient City of Thrace, heretofore famous for a Temple of Apollo.

Apina, an ancient City of Puglia in Italy, long since ruined.

Apiola, an ancient City of Italy. Taken by Tarquin.

Apodisia, Aphrodisias, a City of Caria in Asia Minor; heretofore a
Bishops-See, under the Archbishop of Stauropolis. And the Birthplace of
Alexander Aphrodisaeus; now almost Ruined.

Appenzel, Abbatiscella, a very rich Borough in Switzerland, and the Head of
the last of the Cantons, it not joining with them till 1513. It has its Name
from this Town, and was once a part of the Jurisdiction of the Abbey of S. Gall.
It is seated at the Rise of the River Sintra; distant from Curia 12 French
Leagues, from Zurich 6 German Miles Eastward. The Inhabitants of this Canton
are mixed, of the Protestant and Romish Religion.

Appleby, Aballaba, the County Town of Westmorland, almost encompassed with the
River Eden; an ancient Roman Town, and the Station of the Aurelian Moors. It
has a pleasant Situation, being built upon the easy Ascent of a rising Hill;
with only one Street, and that not mightily inhabited: yet for the great
Antiquity of it, the Assizes and Sessions are kept here; and it has the right
of sending two Burgesses to the Parliament. William, King of Scotland,
surprised this Town, but King John soon after recovered it again.

Appledore, a Market Town in Kent, in the Hundred of Scray Lath, upon the River
Rother.

Apollonia Mygdonia. See Serres

Apollonia in Polinam. See Pollina.

Apollonia Magna, Anthium, now called Sissopoli, is a City in a small Island in
the Euxine Sea, near Thrace. Heretofore a Colony of the Milesians, and had a
Temple to Apollo in it. The same Name was born by a City upon Mount Athos in
Macedonia, and now called Erissos; by two others in the Island of Crete; by
four in Asia Minor; by one in Palestine, near Joppe; one in Syria, near Haman;
one in Caelesyria; one in Egypt; besides others, of which we have nothing
extant.

Aprio, Apros, Apri, a City of Thrace, and sometime an Archiepiscopal See,
under the Patriarch of Constantinople; so beloved by the Emperor Theodosius,
that it was also called Theodosiopolis from him.

Apt, Apta, Julia, a City and Bishopric in Provence upon the River Calavone,
at the foot of the Mountains. This Bishop is a Suffragan to the Archbishop of
Aix: it is a small place, distant from Avignon 9 Miles to the East.

Aptera, Apteron, Atteria, a City in the Island of Crete.

Apuies, Apui, Indians of Brasil in America.

Apulia, a Province of the Kingdom of Naples, bounded with Abruzzo on the East,
with Terra di Otranto, and the Adriatic Sea on the North; and on the South
with Calabria. The Italians do call this commonly Puglia, as the French call it
Poui^^e.

Apulia Daunia, is that part of Puglia which lies next to Abruzzo, from which
it is parted by the River Fortore; and so extends Eastward as far as the
River Lofanto, where it meets with Peucetia.

Apulia Peucetia, extends from the Banks of Lofanto to the Land of Otranto,
East.

Apurima, a River of Peru in America, arising at the foot of the Andes, from
whence it passes to Cusco and falls into the Xauxa, after a course of 60
Leagues.

Apuro^aca, Capera Vaca, or Piragua, a great River in Guiana in America.

Aqua Dolce, Glecinero, Athiras, a River of Thrace falling into the Propontis
by Selivrea.

Aquapendente. See Acquapendente.

Aqua-sparta, a small City in the Dukedom of Spoleto in Italy, upon a Hill,
giving the Title of a Duchy to a noble Family.

Aqua Uiva, and Aqua Via, a Town in the Province of Bars, in the Kingdom of
Naples; giving its Name to an illustrions Family in that Kingdom.

Aqui, and Aquita, a City and Province in the Island of Niphonia, belonging to
Japan.

Aquigires, Aquigirae, Indians of Brasil in America, toward the Praefecture of
S. Esprit.

Aquila, the chief City of Abruzzo in the Kingdom of Naples. It is a Bishops
See, once under the Archbishop of Chieti, but now exempted from his
Jurisdiction: seated on a Hill, and has a strong Castle in it; the River
Pescara flows near it* it is 60 Miles distant from Rome, to the South-East.

Aquileja, is called by the French Aquilee, by the Germans Aglar, and Aglareu:
a Patriarchal City of Italy; in ancient times very great, and one of the
principal Cities of Italy, the Residence of some Emperors. In 452. Attila,
King of the Huns, took and destroyed it, after a Siege of 3 Years: after this,
being rebuilt by Narsetes, it was again Burnt and Ruined by the Lombards in
590. and was after this rebuilt by Popon^, Patriarch of it. In ancient times it
was under the temporal Jurisdiction of these Patriarchs; but being afterward
taken by the Dukes of Austria, it remains to this day in their hands. It is now
almost desolate, by reason of its bad Air, troublesome Rubbish and Ruins, and
the Vicinity of Venice, which draws all Trade from it. This City lies between
the River Isonzo to the East, and Ansa to the West; and is not above 9 Miles
distant from the Shoars of the Adriatic Sea on the North. It lies in 36. 10.
Long. and 45. 45. Lat.

Aquino, Aquinum, a very ancient City in the Terra di Lavoro, in the Kingdom of
Naples: a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Capona, and heretofore a Roman
Colony. Almost Ruined, and little consiberable now, but for its being the
Birthplace of S. Thomas Aquinas, as formerly of the Poet Juvenal.

Aquisgrana, Aquisgranum. See Aix la Chapelle.

Aqutaine, Aquatania, a third Part of the ancient Gaul, supposed to be so
called from the abundance of its Waters. The Emperor Augustus divided it into
Prima and Secunda, including within both, Bordeaux, Agne, Angoulesme, Xaintes,
Poitiers, Perigueux, Bourges, Clermont, Rodes, Albi, Cahors, Limoges, Mende,
and Puy. Whereunto the Emperor Adrian added a third Province, by the Name of
Novempopulonia. See Gascoigne. This Country continued in Obedience to the Roman
Empire, till Honorius about the Year 412. yielded part thereof* to Athaulfe,
King of the Goths, whose Successors took occasion thereupon to Usurp the
whole. About the Year 630. it came into the Possession of the Crown of France
entirely: The Gascoigners soon revoulted, giving to Eudos their Leader, the
Title of Duke of Aquitain; which brought on a War that was not ended till the
powerful Reign of Charles the Great. In 778. Charles the Great erected
Aquitaine into a Kingdom, in the Person of Lewis the Debonnaire his Son. It
continued a Kingdom about 100 Years, and then broke into particular Fiefs and
Hereditaments. In 1152. it came to the Crown of England, as Dukes of Aquitaine,
in the right of Eleanor Wife to Henry II. For its fortunes since, see Gascoigne.

Arabia, is a very large Country in Asia: having on the North Syria and
Diarbechia; upon the East the Persian Gulf, and the Streights of Basor, by
which it is separated from Persia; on the South it has the Arabian Sea, and on
the West the Red Sea, which cuts it off in great part from Africa. The Southern
and Eastern parts, which are the greatest, are well cultivated; but the
Northern is for the most part barren and sandy, having but few Inhabitants or
Cities, by reason of the vast Deserts, barren Mountains, and want of Water. It
is all under Princes of its own, except a small part of Arabia Petraea, in
which the Turks have some few Forts. This vast Country is divided into three
Parts, viz. The Desert, The Happy, and The Stony.

Arabia Deserta, ( the Desert) is the least part of all the three, and lies
most North: called by the Asiaticks Berii Arabistan; bounded on the South by
the Mountains of Arabia the Happy, on the East by the Province of Iraca,
heretofore Chaldea; upon the North by Diarvechia, from which it is separated by
the River Euphrates; upon the West by Syria, the Holy Land, and Arabia the
Stony.

Arabia Foelix, ( the Happy) is the greatest of all the three parts, and lies
extended to the South and East: it is called by the Inhabitants Jemen, and is
encompassed on all sides by the Sea, except toward the North, where it bounds
upon the other two Arabia's. There are in this part many Kingdoms and great
Cities, the Soil being fruitful, and the Country not easy to be invaded by the
neighbor Nations, by reason of its Situation.

Arabia Petraea, ( the Stony) lies more West, and is called by the Turks
Dase-lik Arabistan, or as others say, Baraab Arabistan by the Natives: it is
bounded on the North by the Holy Land, and part of Syria; on the East by Arabia
Deserta in part, and by Arabia Foelix in part, as also on the South; and on the
West it has the Red Sea and Egypt. Two things have made these Countries known
to all the World, The wandering of the Children of Israel 40 Years, in the
first; and the Birth of that great Deceiver Mahomet, in the latter of these
three Parts.

Aracu^es, a People of Chili, which are the most Warlike of all the Americans.

Arach, Parthia, a Province of the Kingdom of Persia.

Arach, Petra, the chief City of Arabia Petraea, once the capital City of Moab,
and then called Rabath; afterward an Archbishops See, under the Patriarch of
Jerusalem, being taken from the Patriarch of Alexandria; it was also once
called Cyriacopolis, and Mons Regalis; by some now, Krach: it stands upon the
Confines of Palestine, near the Brook Zareth, and lies in 66. 45. Long. and 30.
20. Lat.

Arad, Caucasus, is a Mountain of Asia, which the Fable of Prometheus has made
very well known. It is that part of Mount Taurus which lies betwixt the Euxine
or Black Sea on the West, and the Caspian Sea on the East; including the
Mengrelians ( Coraxicos) Caitachians ( Heniochos) and the Achaeans ( Achaeos.)
It is continued also amongst the Asiatick Tartars, as far as to the Cimmerian
Bosphorus, now commonly called Cocas. This Mountain is very high, and always
covered with Snow. It is called by Hayton, the Armenian Cochias; by others
Albsor; by Niger, Adazer; by Circassians, Salatto; and by the French, le mont
de Circassie.

Aradus, an Island and City of Phaenicia in the Syrian Ocean over against
Tortosa: sometime the Seat of a Bishop, till it fell under the Tyranny of the
Turks.

Arafat, a Mountain within a League or two of Mecca in Arabia. On the top of it
there is a Mosque, whither the Mohammedan Pilgrims repair tofinish their
Devotions, after their performance of the Ceremonies of Mecca. It is the same,
they say, that Abraham would have Sacrificed his Son Isaac upon: in
Commemoration whereof, before they part, they kill some Sheep in the Valley of
Mina below; and what they present not amongst their Friends, they distribute to
the Poor, by the name of Corban, that is, their Oblation.

Aragon. See Arragon.

Arais, Araxes. See Achlar.

Arakil-Uanc, a Celebrated Village and Monastery at the foot of Ararat in
Armenia, in great esteem amongst the People there; who believe it to be the
place where Noah, after the Deluge, retired to offer his Sacrifices of
Thanksgiving to God for his miraculous Preservation.

Aran, Arania, is a very fruitful Vale in Aquitain ^n France, which lies
between the Pyrenean Hills and the County de Bigorre, of which it was a part
tiil 1192. when Alphonsus, King of Arragon, seized on it (as Peter de Marca
says) and annexed it to the Kingdom of Arragon, tho it lies on the French side
of the Pyraenei. In this Vale rises the River Garonne, one of the greatest in
France; and there are in it 33 Castles or Villages, of which Viella is the
chief.

Aranios, Aranus, a River of Transylvania arising near Clausenberg, and
afterward falling into the Mash.

Ararat, Arat, by the Armenians called Mesesousar, or the Mountain of the Ark,
by the Persians Agri; is a part of the Caspian Mountains near Erivan in
Armenia, and the most renowned of all others, for sustaining the Ark of Noah,
after the Universal Deluge. It exceeds in height Caucasus and Taurus, carrying
its head into the temperate Region, whilst some of the lower part of it is
covered with continual Snow. Every 5 Leagues upwards, the Christians have built
a little Hermitage, where the curious Traveller may be refreshed. They will
tell you there is a Cell, and ordinarily a Hermit in it, upon the highest Top,
who lives as a Recluse for his Life. But the story of Noah's Ark remaining
uncorrupted and entire to this day, by reason of the temperature of the Air,
which the said Hermit shows you, I suppose is grounded upon as good an
Authority.

Arasch, a Town and Port in the Province of Asgar in the Kingdom of Fez:
fortified with a strong Wall and a Castle.

Arauco, a City, River, and Valley, in the Kingdom of Chili in America. The
Natives had maintained a War against the Spaniards above 100 Years, before a
Peace was made in 1650.

Araxai, Araxius, a River of Brasil in America, which falls into the Mongagombe
in the Province of Pairaba.

Araxes. See Achlar.

Arba, or Arbee, a Town in Palestine, called in Scripture Hebron and Mamre,
being the Sepulture of the Patriarchs. Also an Island and City, which is a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Zara, in the Adriatique Ocean, upon the
Coast of Dalmatia.

Arbela, an ancient City of Sicily. The People thereof were stupid to a Proverb.

Arbelles, a Town in Assyria upon the River Lycus; where Alexander M. entirely
defeated Darius the Third time, in the 423 Year of Rome, and 331 before the
coming of our Savior.

Arbogen, or Arbo, a Town upon the River of the same name, in the Province of
Westmania in Sweden.

Arbon, Arborfoelix, a City of Switzerland under the Bishop of Constance.

Arboriches, the ancient People of the Province of Zeland in Holland.

Arbois, a Town in the Franche* County, famous for the good Wines it yields.

Arc, or L'Arc, a little River of Provence in France, which passes by Aix to
the Berre.

Arcadia, Pelasgia, an ancient Province of Peloponesus, (or the Morea) now
called by the Turks Tzaconia, with a City of the same name. In the Year of Rome
386, the Lacedaemonians gave the People of this Country a bloody Overthrow; by
reason their Sacrilege in Pillaging the Temple of Jupiter Olympius had
contracted upon them the hatred of all Greece. Also the Name of a City
heretofore famous in the Island of Crete, with a Suffragan Bishops See thereto.
The Gulf of Arcadia is the same with Cyparissus Sinus of the ancients.

Arcani, Apsarus, a River of the Mengrelians, which rises from the Mountains
of Chielder in Armenia Major; and running Northward, falls into the Euxine Sea
at Arcani, a Town of Mengrelia, seated upon the Sea between Trapezunt, (from
which it is distant 150 Miles), and Phazzeth a City of Mengrelia.

Arcas, a small Town in the Kingdom of Castile in Spain. Heretofore a Bishops
See, under the Archbishop of Toledo; but united to that of Cuenca, by P. Lucius
III. at the request of Alphonsus IX. King of Castile.

Arce. The same with Petra in Arabia Deserta.

Archangel, is a very famous Seaport in the North of Muscovy, in the Province
of Dwina, upon the River Dwin; which near this place is divided into two
Branches, making the Island of Podesmeske, and then falling into the White-Sea,
6 German Miles beneath this City. The passage by Sea to this City was first
sound out by one Richard Chandler, an Englishman, in the Year 1554, or near
that time, before which the Muscovites had no Communication with these parts of
the World, excepting by the Baltic Sea, by Narva, and Poland: accordingly, the
English were at first treated with great Kindness by the Princes of Muscovy,
and in the Year 1569, obtained from Basilovits, the Emperor of Muscovy, that
none but the English should Trade here; but since that, the Dutch, Danes, and
Swedes, have had their share; and Archangel, which when it was discovered was
a Village, is now become a rich and populous City. This City lies in 64d. of
lat.

Archidona, a Town in Andaluzia in Spain. Also a small City of Peru in America.

Archipelago, Archipelagus, mare Aegaeum, is a part of the Mediterranean Sea,
which lies between Greece, the Lesser Asia, and the Isle of Creet: this Sea is
stored with an innumerable Shoal of small Islands; and by Allusion, late
Writers have for that reason given the same names to diverse other Seas in the
East and West Indies; as Archipel de S. Lazare, des Maldives, du Chiloe, de
Mexico, etc.

Arcissa, Arcisso, the Lake of Van. See Van.

Arcklow, is a small Town, with a County belonging to it, in the Province of
Leinster in Ireland: seated upon the Irish Sea, 31 Miles South of Dublin; and
deserves the rather to be mentioned, because it belongs to the Noble and Loyal
Family of the Dukes of Ormond, who are Barons of it.

Arcuevil, a spruce Village within a League of Paris. its proper Name is
Arc-Julien, which was given it by Julian the Apostate, in Commemoration of the
Aqueducts he made here, whilst he sejour'd at Paris, in the Years 357, and 360.

Ardaschat, Artaxata, a City of Armenia, upon the Confines of the Territory of
Erivan: where are to be seen the rests of the magnificent Palace of Tyridates,
called by the Inhabitants Tact-terdat, or the Throne of Tyridate.

Ardagh. There are Four Towns in Ireland of this Name; the 1st. in the County
of Letrim; 2d in the County of East-Meath; 3d. in the County of Longford; and
the 4th. in the County of Cork.

Ard bracan, a small Town in the County of East-Meath in Munster in Ireland.

Ardea, a City heretofore of Italy, the capital of Rutilij, and antienter than
Rome: Now a Village of small consideration.

Ardevil, Ardevila, a Town in the Province of Servan in the Kingdom of Persia,
about 20 Leagues from the Caspian Sea. It is a large City, but not Walled;
remarkable for its being able to show the Sepulchers of many of the Kings of
Persia; and in the Year 1618, the Turks and Persians fought near this place a
dreadful Battle; the Persians getting the Victory with a vast loss, which ended
in a speedy Peace, offered by the Victors, and accepted by the Turks. Brietius.

Ardee, Ardea, a River of Normandy, which falls into the British Sea at
Auranches, near the Limits of the Dukedom of Britain.

Ardee, or Atherdee, a small Market Town in the County of Louth in the Province
of Vlster in Ireland. King James II. lay encamped upon the Plains here, with an
Army of 20000 Men, whilst the Duke of Schomberg and his Forces were so strongly
entrenched at Dundalk: who not accepting of a Battle, when it was presented by
King James; both the Armies retired soon after, without fighting, into their
Winter Quarters, November 1689.

Ardembourg, or Rodenbourg, Ardenburgum, a Town in Flanders. Taken by the
Hollanders in 1604. One League from Sluys.

Ardennes, Ardenna Sylva, called by the Germans Ardenner-waldt, and
Luitticher-waldt, is the greatest Forest in all the Low Countries; it reaches
above 100 Miles in length; as this day extending itself through the Dukedom of
Luxemburgh, the Bishoprich of Liege* the South part of Henalt, and to the
Borders of Champaign; it is taken notice of by Caesar and Tacitus.

Ardes, a Tract in the County of Down in Vlster in Ireland, upon the Lake of
Coin, in the form almost of a Peninsula.

Ardesche, a River of the Province of Vivarets in France. It passes by Aubenas
to the Rhosne, into which it discharges itself near S. Esprit, and separates*
Languedoc from Vivarets.

Ardfeart, a Town in the County of Kerry in the Province of Munster in Ireland.

Ardila, a River of Spain, whichriseth in Andaluzia, and discharges itself
into the Guadiana, below the City of Olivenza in Portugal.

Ardmonack, is a Territory in the County of Rosse in Scotland, belonging to the
Royal Family of Scotland. Charles I. as second Son to King James I. had the
Title of Baron of Armonack, given him at two year of Age.

Ardrach, a Town in the County of Longford in the Province of Connaught in
Ireland.

Ardres, Ardra, is a little, but well fortified, Town in the County of Guienne
in Picardy in France: it stands in the Marshes, in the Borders of Artois, three
Leagues from Calis toward the South, and a little more from Gravelin. Francis
I. and Henry VIII. King of England, had an enterview with each other near this
Town, in 1520. Both Courts appearing so magnificent, that they called the
place, a Field of Cloth of Gold. In 1596 Cardinal Albret took it for the
Spaniards, who did not keep it long. Also the Name of a Kingdom and City in
Guiney in Africa.

Ardret, Ardrathen, or Ardrat, Ardatum, a City, and a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Armagh in the County of Kerry in Ireland.

Are, Arus, a River of Yorkshire. It arises upon the Borders of Lancashire,
and falls into the Ouse below York.

Arembourg, Areburium, a Town of the lower Germany, lately adorned wiah the
Title of a Principality: it lies between Colen to the North, and Treves to the
South, upon the River Aer. 7 German Miles from Juliers, to the South, and 4
from the Rhine, West.

Arequipa, one of the most considerable Cities of Peru in America, upon the
River Chila, 7 Leagues from the South Sea; 70 from Cusco. And a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Lima, with a commodious Port. It is made rich by the
Silver Mines of the Andes, that are found within 14 Leagues of it. In 1582. an
Earthquake (as the Country here is very subject to them) almost shook it to
pieces. In 1600, the Vulcano which stands by it, broke out into terrible
Flames. They did use to bring the Treasure of Potosi hither; but the difficulty
of the Road has driven them to Arica.

Arestinga, Liba, an Island in the Indian Ocean, toward the Provinces of
Kherman and Dulcinca, in Persia.

Arethusa, a City of Syria, which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of
Apamea. Another in Macedonia, by some called Taino and Renina, upon the Bay of
Contessa. Also a Lake in Armenia Major, near the source of the River Tigris.

Arezzo, Aretium, a City, and a Bishops See, immediately under the Pope, in
Tuscany in Italy. Famous in the time of the old Romans.

Arg, Argus, a River of Swabia in Germany. Passing by Wangen, it afterward
falls into the Lake of Constance:

Argan, a Town in New Castile in Spain. A Council here held in 1473, enjoins
every Bishop to say Mass thrice, and simple Priests four times at least a year;
and that none be preferred to Ecclesiastical Dignities, who understand not
Latin. It seems the Learning and Devotion of that age went toutes par la main.

Argens, Argenteus, a River of Provence in France. It arises from three several
Sources; then falls into the Ocean near Frejus.

Agentan, Argentomum, Argentomagum, a City of Normandy in France, upon the Vrne.

Argenten, a Town in the Dukedom of Berry in France, upon the Creuse.

Argentor, a River in the Province of Angoumois in France, falling into the
Charente at Porsac.

Argentrevil, Argentolium, a small Town three Leagues from Paris. There is a
Priory in it, dependent of the Abbey of St. Denis.

Argile, Argathelia, a very large County in the Western parts of the Kingdom of
Scotland, upon the West of Dunbritaine Frith. This was the first Country the
Scots who came out of Ireland possessed themselves of, as is shown by Camden
out of Bid. First also made a County or Earldom by James II. King of Scotland,
who invested Colin, Lord Campbell, with the Title of Earl of Argile, in regard
of his own, and of the worth of his Family, which is derived from the ancient
Princes of this Country. They have also, (says Camden) been made Lords of
Lorn, and for a good while General Justices of Scotland: but the two last Earls
were unfortunate.

Anginuses, an Island of Greece, where the Athenians under Conon, obtained a
great Victory over the Lacedaemonians, in the Year of Rome 347.

Argipeeni, an ancient People of Sarmatia. They never would go to War with
their Neighbors.

Arglas, is a small Town in the Province of Vlster, in the County of Down in
Ireland, with a Haven belonging to it. The Lord Cromwell of Oakham is Earl of
this place.

Argonne, a Territory, part in Champagne, and part upon the Borders of Loraine
in France. Beaumont and Clermont stand in it.

Argos, the ancient capital City of a Kingdom of the same name in the Morea,
now called the Province of Romania. This Kingdom was Founded by Inachus
contemporary with Moses, or 346 years before him, in Eusebius's Calculation. It
continued 546 Years; then changed into a Republic, which maintained several
Wars with the Grecians. The City has been first an Episcopal, and next an
Archiepiscopal See. In 1383, the Venetians bought it. In 1463* the Turks took
it. In 1686. General Morosini reduced it under the Venetians again.

Argos, Amphilogium, was a City of Epirus, ruined long ago. There was another
of the Name in Thessalia in Macedonia, called now Armiro.

Argow, one of the four parts of Switzerland, taking its name from the River
Arg, upon the Borders of Constance.

Arguin, [ Arguinum] a small Island, with a Fort upon it, belonging to the
Hollanders, upon the Coast of Nigritia. This Fort was built by the Portugals in
1455. Taken from them by the Hollanders in 1633. Taken from the Hollanders by
the English, of late Years; and it was again taken and ruined by the French in
1678; and is now again under the Hollander. It lies in the Atlantic Ocean,
upon the Coast of the Kingdom of Gualata, about, or in 20 d. of Northern Lat.

Arhon, Asopus, a River of the Morea, falling into the Gulf of Corinth.

Arhusen, Arhusia, a City of Denmark, in the Dukedom of Jutland, upon the
Baltic Sea: it is a Bishops See, under the Archbis^op of Lunden, seated upon
the River Good; 10 Miles South of Alburg, 2 West from the Island of Fuinen, and
about 26 North of Lubeck. This City was taken, and severely treated by the
Swedes in 1644. but is since that in the Pos^ession of the Danes again.

Aria, an ancient Province and City of Persia. The one is now called Chorasan,
the other Herat or Serat.

Ariano, Arianum, a City in the further Principate in the Kingdom of Naples,
and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Benevento, giving the Title of a
Duke.

Ariano, upon the Po, is a small City in the Ferrarez in Italy, and Capital of
a Territory called Polesin^ di Ariano, upon the Borders of the States of Venice.

Arica, a Port in the Kingdom of Peril, in the Province de los Charcas, where
they ship the Silver brought from Potosi. It is a small Town, but has a
capacious Haven, and a strong Castle, distant from La Plata to the South-East,
and from Cusco to the South, 80 Leagues.

Ariccia, or la Riccia, was heretofore a considerable Town in the Campagna di
Roma in Italy, upon a Lake of the name, now called lago di Nemi. It has since
become a small Village, yet gives the Title of a Duke.

Ariel, a River of the Precopensian Tartars, which falls into the Nieper, (
Borysthenes) below Terki.

Arieni, an ancient People of Germany. Another in Asia, whom the Gauls reduced.

Arima, a Town and Port of Japan, in the Kingdom of Ximo or Sa^cok. The
Infidels have extirpated the Christians thence.

Arimaspi, an ancient People of Sarmatia Europaea.

Ariminum. See Rimini.

Arimoa, an Island discovered by the Hollanders in 1618. near New Guiney,
betwixt Moa and Schouten.

Arles, Arelas, a City and Archbishopric in Provence of France, upon the
Rhone. In this place there was celebrated a great Council of the Western and
African Bishops, by the Order of Constantine the Great, in the Year 312, or as
Cabasutius says, in 314. that is, about 16 years before the General Council of
Nice; and there has been several others held in aftertimes in the same Place.
This City was once made the Head of a Kingdom, which had Kings of its own from
the Year 879. to 1032. sometimes called the Kingdom of Arles, and sometimes of
Burgundy beyond the J^ur. ( Jurana) It is seated on the left side the River
Rhone, over which there is a Timber Bridge, 12 Leagues from Marseilles to the
West. The Academy established here in 1669* and the grand Obelisk of Roman work
erected in 1677* ought not to be forgotten.

Arlington, a little Village in Middlesex, between Harlington and Shepeston;
which being the Birthplace of the Right Honorable Henry Bennet, he was by
Charles II. created Baron of Arlington, the 14th. of March 1664* and Earl of
the same the 22d of April 1672. sworn Lord Chamberlain of the Household to King
Charles II. Sept. 11. 1674. and died in the first Year of the Reign of King
James II. in great Honor and Esteem.

Arlon, Arlun, Arlunum, Orolunum, a Town in the Duchy of Luxembourg, in the
Low Countries, which has given the Title of a Marquess from the Year 1103. It
stands 4 Leagues from Luxembourg, 6 from Montmidi.

Arma, a Province and City in the Kingdom of Popayan in America, 25 Leagues
from St. Troy.

Armadabat. See Amadabat.

Armagh, Armacha, a County of Vlster in Ireland, encompassed with the River
Neury on the East, with the Country of Louth, on the South, and with the
Blackwater North. This is one of the most fruitful Counties in all Ireland.
Upon the River Kalin, which falls into the Blackwater, (a River so called)
stands Armagh, a poor decayed City, tho an Archiepiscopal See, and the Primate
of the whole Kingdom. This Primate was subject to the Archbishop of Canterbury
till 1142. when it was exempted by one John Papyrio, a Papal Legate, as Camden
faith. The City was taken by Cromwell, in 1650.

Armanac, Arminiacensis Comitatus, a County of Aquitain, or the upper Gascony
in France, bounded on the North by the Counties of Agenois and Condome, on the
East by Languedoc, on the West by Gascony, properly so called, Bearn and
Bigorro, and on the South by the County de Cominge. The Earl of this County
are much celebrated in the ancient French History.

Arman^th. See Ardmonack.

Armanson, Armentio, a River of France in Burgundy. It rises by semur, receives
the Brenne, passes by Tonnere, and falls into the Lionne nigh Auxerre.

Armenia major, called by the Inhabitants Curdistan, by the Georgians
Armenioba; a very large and well known Country of Asia; being divided from the
Georgians, Mengrelians and Muscovites, by the Mountains; on the South by Mount
Taurus from Mesopotamia, and by Mount Niphate from Assyria, on the West it has
the Euphrates, by which it is divided from Cappadocia, and Armenia the Less:
The greatest part of it is under the Turks, but a small part toward the East
is under the P^rsi^n. In this Country both Euphrates and Tigris have their
Fountains.

Armenia minor, called now by some Aladuli, by others Ac-coionlu, is a part of
Asia the Less, and was heretofore a part of Capadocia: bounded on the North by
the Mengrelians and the Pontus, or Euxine Sea, on the South by Cilicia and
Syria, on the East by Armenia major, and on the West by Cappadooia. This whole
Country is now under the Dominion of the Turks.

Armentiers, Armentariae, a Town of Planders upon the River Ley ( Legia) which
falls into the Schelde at Ghant. This Town was the Theater of great Actions
during the former Wars, and was left to the French by the Treaty of Aquisgrane,
who have had it ever since the Year 1668. It is a fair Town distant from Ghant
10 Miles, and something less from Cambray.

Arms, a Seigniory in the Province of Nivernois in France, giving its name to
a Noble Family there.

Armorica. See Bretagne.

Armoy, or Earmoy, a Barony in the County of Cork and Province of Munster in
Ireland.

^nautes, an errant vagabond People of Albania.

Arnay le Due, Arnaeum Ducium, a small Town in Burgundy in France; 5 Leagues
from Autun, very agreeable.

Arnebourg, a Town in the ancient Marquisate of Brandenbourg upon the Elb;
ruined in the German Wars.

Arneda, a City and Port upon the Pacifick Ocean, in Peru in America.

The Land of Arnheim, is a part of the Terra Australis, discovered by the
Hollanders, to the South of New Guiney.

Arnheim, Arenacum, one of the principal Cities of Guelderland, and one of the
States of Holland; seated upon the Rhine, which a little above it is divided
into 2 Branches, the Ysel to the East and the Rhine to the West: it is a neat
Town, and has belonged to the United Provinces ever since the Year 1585. It
lies 2 Leagues from Nimeghon, (the chief Town of Guelderland) and 7 from
Vtrecht. Taken by the French in 1672. and deserted 2 years after; the
Fortifications of it being first demolished by them.

Arno, Arnus, a River of Tuscany in Italy, which springs from the Apponnine,
not far from the Head of Tiber; and running West, it obliquely passes between
Florence and Pisa. From the Sea, as far as Florence, it is Navigable.

Arnon, a River arising from the Mountains of Arabia, which traverses all the
Desert, then falls into the Lake Asphaltites, and divides the ancient Seats of
the Moabites from the Amorites; God Almighty rendered the passage over it
miraculously easy to the People of Israel, Numb. 21. 13, 14.

Arnsbourg, the Capital City of the Island of Oesel in the Baltic Sea, with a
Castle, under the Swedes.

Aroe, Arren, Aria, an Island in the Baltic Sea under the King of Denmark,
dependent of the Duchy of Sleswick.

Aromaia, a Province of New Andaluzia in America, near the mouth of the River
Orenoque.

Arona, a Town and Castle in the Milaneze in Italy, upon a Lake, belonging to
the Family of the Borromeos. The famous S. Charles Cardinal Borromeo Archbishop
of Milan was born here October. 2. 1538.

Arool, a Town in Muscovy 40 Leagues from Moscow.

Arosen, Arosia, a City and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Vpsal in
Sweden. It is the Capital of the Province of Westimania, with a Fortress upon
the Lake Meler. Here Gustavus I. deseated Christiern II. about the year 1521.
And in 1540. the States here assembled declared the Crown of Sweden Hereditary.

Arow, Aarow, a frank Town in the Canton of Bern in Switzerland, upon the River
Aar, from whence it takes its name. The Protestant Cantons are used to hold
their Dyets here.

Arpaia, Caudium, a City heretofore, now a Village, in the further Principate
in the Kingdom of Naples. Near to it, there is a very narrow defile for two
Persons to pass, betwixt two Mountains, called Stretto d'Arpaio, and formerly
Furcae Caudinae; where the Samnites having obliged the Roman Army under T.
Vetrurius and Sp. Posthumous, Consuls, to render themselves upon discretion,
put them to the disgrace of passing under a Traverse of Pikes, with Hands tied,
disarmed and bare headed.

Arpaion, an ancient Barony in the Province of Rovergue in France, erected into
a Duchy in 1651.

Arpentras, A City heretofore upon the Lake Lemane in Switzerland, now a
Village they call Vidy, built out of the Ruins thereof. Great numbers of
ancient Medals are found here.

Arpino, Arpinum, a Town and Castle in the Terra di lavoro in the Kingdom of
Naples. Caius Marius (Seven times Consul) was born here. Cicero is Surnamed
Arpinas from hence, it being but 3 Miles from the place of his Nativity.

Arques, a Town in the Duchy of Bar in France near the Meuse, supposed to be
the Birthplace of Joane of Arc, the Maid of Orleans, famous in the Reign of
Charles VII.

Arques, Arca, a Village in Normandy in the pais de Caux, upon the River
Arques, 2 Miles South from Diepe. This place was made illustrious by a great
Victory Henry IV. obtained there in the Year 1589.

Arra, a Barony in the County of Tipperary in M^nster in Ireland.

Arracan, Arracaon, Arrachamum, a considerable Kingdom and a City upon the
River Martaban, beyond the Ganges in the East Indees.

Arragon, Aragonia, a very large, and indeed one of the three principal
Kingdoms in Spain; bounded on the North by Navarre and France, from which last
it is divided by the Pyrenees, on the East it has Catalonia, on the West New
and Old Castile, and on the South it has the Kingdom of Valentia. This Kingdom
was united to Castile in the Year 1479.

Arran, a Barony made up of four Islands, upon the Coast of the County of
Dungal in the Province of Vlsier. And made an Earldom in 1661. in favor of
Richard, the Second Son of James Duke of Ormond. These Islands lie in the
Western Ocean.

Arran, Arania, Glotta, an Island on the West of Scotland in Dunbritain Frith
near Argile, which was anciently an Earldom.

Arras, Atrebatum, Nemetocerna, called by the Dutch Atrecht, a great Episcopal
See under the Archbishop of Rheims; the Head City of the Earldom of Artois, and
stands upon the River Scarpe* which flows also by Douay. It is considerably
well sortified, and has a strong Castle; it came into the hands of the French
in 1640, and when the Spaniards 1654* attempted by force to retake it, their
Army was defeated the 25th. of August of that Year, since which time the French
have peaceably enjoyed it. This was one of the greatest Actions of Cardinal
Mazarine, and won him much Honor in France. It is 15 Leagues from Tournay, and
5 from Doway.

Arren. See Aroe.

Arroux, Arosius, a River of Burgundy in France: it rises by Amay le Duc,
passes by Autun, and joins the Loyre by Bourbon-Lancy.

Arsa, Arsia, a River of Istria which divides Italy from Illyrium. It falls
into the Adriatique near Pola.

Arsinoe, a City of Cilicia in Asia Minor, betwixt Antioch and Seleucia.

Arsinoe in Egypt. See Suez.

Arsinoe, between Berenice and Ptolemais in Africa, is a City and a Bishops See
under the Archbishop of Cyrene; some say now called Trochara. The Artients give
us three more of this name in the Island of Cyprus, whereof we have no farther
account.

Arta, or Larta, a City of Epirus in Greece upon the River Acheron, 15 Miles
from the Sea, and a days Journey from Ambracia. Adorned with a Metropolitan See
and a noble Church.

Artois, Artesia, bounded on the North with the Country of Flanders, on the
West and South with Picardy, and on the East in part by Flanders, in part by
Hanalt and Cambray. It lies in length from North to South 26 Leagues. It was
once the East part of Flanders, but became a separate Earldom in 1198. and
continued so till 1382. when it returned to the Earls of Flanders, but at the
Pyrenaean Treaty in 1659. and that of Nimeguen in 1678. it was entirely yielded
to the French. This was the Country of the ancient Atrebates. The Capital City
of it is Arras.

Aru, a City and Kingdom in the Isle of Sumatra in the East Indies. Also an
Island of Asia, between the Moluccaes and New Guiney.

Arva, called by the Germans Orova, a Town in the Upper Hungary, near the
Confines of Poland, toward the Carpathian Mountains upon the River Vag (
Vagus) six Miles from Bistricz, North, which Town gives Name to a County.

Arva, a rapid River of Savoy. It springs out of the high Mountains of
Fossigni, and passing by Bonne Ville, falls into the Rhosne at the Gates of
Geneva. Gold is found amongst its Sands.

Arundale, Aruntina Vallis, a Corporation in Sussex, upon the River Arun; in
which there is a Castle, a stately place,* strong by Art and Nature. The Name
State and Dignity of Earl belongs to whoever is possessed of this Manor and
Castle, without any other Consideration or Creation to be an Earl, as Mr Camden
acquaints us out of the Parliament Rolls of the 11. H. VI. This Castle stands 9
Miles East of Chichester, and the Fee is in the Hands of the most Noble Henry
Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshal of England by Inheritance; granted by Charles II.
in 1672. to the Father of this present Duke; who is the Eldest Duke, Earl and
Baron in England, and the first Protestant of this Noble and Illustrious
Branch. The marmora Arundeliana have made this name universally known amongst
the Ingenious of all parts, The Corporation sends Two Burgesses to the
Parliament.

Arzilla, Zilia, Azella, a maritime Town in the Province of Hasbata in the
Kingdom of Fez, upon the Atlantique Ocean; well fortified. Alphonsus V. King of
Portugal, surnamed Africanus, took it in 1471. The King of Fez besieged it in
1508. without Victory. Afterward the Portuguese abandoned it.

Arzeron, Aziris, a City of Armenia upon the Euphrates; the Turkish Viceroy of
which has under him 17 subordinate Governors.

Asasi, a Town in the Kingdom of Marocco.

Asaph, El^^a, Asaphopolis, a Town and Bishops See in Flintshire in Wales: this
Bishopric was erected by Kentigern Bishop of Glascow in Scotland, in the year
560. He returning afterward into Scotland made Asaph, a holy Man, Bishop of
this place, from whom it has its Name. There is in this Diocese 128 Parishes.
The Town is mean as well as the Church, and it stands upon the River Cluyd,
about three Miles from the Sea, and sixteen from Chester. Lat. 53. 22. Long. 3.
17.

Asborn, a Market Town in Darbyshire, in the Hundred of Wirksworth.

Ascalon, was heretofore a City of Judaea in the Tribe of Dan upon the Sea
Coast, and one of the strongest holds of the Philistines. Baldwin I. King of
Jerusalem took it from the Saracens about the year 1153. It was made a Bishops
See, but so destroyed since, that not above 50 Families now dwell in it, who
are Moors and Turks.

Ascania, an ancient Town in the Principality of Anhalt in Germany, betwixt
Magdebourg and Northuhausen: it gives the Title of a Count.

Aschaffenbourg, Asciburgum, a City in Germany in the Diocese of Mentz, but in
the Limits of Franconia, and therefore by some ascribed to that Province.
Heretofore an Imperial or Hans-Town, but afterward exempted; it is divided
into two parts by the River Mayn, which falls into Rhine at Mentz. There is in
it a stately Palace, built of square Stone, called Johansburg, where the
Elector of Mentz often resides: This Town is distant from Frankford 6 Miles,
Eastward.

Aschen, a Castle in Bavaria.

Aschersleben, Ascania, an old Town in the Diocese of Halberstad in the
Principality of Anhalt in Germany: whence the House of Anhalt receives the Name
of principes Ascanii: almost ruined.

Ascherne, Aschenten, Askarna, a Town in the County of Limerick in Munster in
Ireland, upon a River of the Name.

Ascoli di Satriano, ( Asculum Apulum) a small decaying City, an Episcopal See
under the Archbishop of Benevento in the Kingdom of Naples, in the County
called the Principate, at the foot of the Apennine, 35 Miles East from
Benevento. This City is built on a Hill; a former which stood near it having
been ruined in the year 1399. by a dreadful Earthquake: this was built in the
year 1410. by the Inhabitants of the other.

Ascoli upon the River Tronto, a City in the Marcha Anconitana in Italy, with
an Episcopal See immediately under the Pope. The Birthplace of Pope Nicholas
IV. as formerly of Betutius Barrus an Orator mentioned by Cicero. In 1557. the
French and Spaniards had a Battle near this place. The ancient Inhabitants were
the first that confederated against the Romans in the Marsick War. Sometime
after that it was almost ruined; but rebuilt, and fell to be one of the first
Temporal Demains of the Pope.

Ascot, a Manor in the County of Buckingham, which has long belonged to the
Loyal Family of the Dormers, Earls of Carnarvan, and Viscounts of Ascot; who
were advanced to this Honor Aug. 2. 1628. by Charles I. for whom Robert, the
first Earl, died fighting in the Battle of Newberry, in 1643.

Asebin, Nisivis. See Nisbin.

Asgar, a Province in the Kingdom of Fez in Africa, to the West, between the
Provinces of Fez and Habat. Its principal Towns are, Arasch and Alcasar-Quivir.

Ashby de la Zouch, a Market Town and Barony* in Leicestershire, which, says
Camden, is now in the Earls of Huntington; one of which Family, Sir* William
Hastings, procured the Town the Privilege of a Fair in the Reign of Henry VI.
It stands in the North-West Corner of the County, about eleven Miles North-East
from Eaton.

Ash-burtun, a Corporation seated upon the River Dart in Devonshire, which
sends two Burgesses to the Parliament: it stands about 17 Miles from Exeter, to
the South-West, and 5 Miles from Newton.

Ashdale, a Place in Scotland, of which the late Duke of Monmouth was Baron.

Ashdod, Azotus, a City in the Holy Land, which was one of the Principalities
of the Philistines: in S. Jerome's time it was a Bishops See under the
Archbishop of Caesarea; now a Village, called Alzete by the Turks. See Azotus.

Ashford. a Market Town in Kent, upon the River Stower in Scray-Lath.

Ashkrig, a Market Town in Yorkshire in the North Riding, and the Hundred of
Hang West.

A S I A, the first of the Four parts of the World; the Mother, and for a long
time the Nurse and Mistress of Mankind; for here in this, Man was created; and
after the Deluge, this was the Place God chose to give Mankind a second
Beginning in: the 2 first of the General Monarchies, ( viz. the Assyrian and
Persian) were in this part; and to it chiefly was the Church confined till our
blessed Savior came. It is washed on three sides by the vast Ocean, which on
the East is called the Eastern or Pacifick Ocean; on the North the Tartarian
Ocean or Mar del Norte, on the West the Ethiopian Ocean and the Red Sea; and
it is divided from Europe by the Mediterranean and Black Sea, with the Rivers
of Tanais ( Don or Tana) Rha and Obb. It is only parted from Europe by the
space of 300 German Miles, more or less, by these Rivers: connected to Africa
by a Neck of Land of about 30 Miles; and whether the North-East part of it is
not united with the North-West part of America, could never yet be discovered;
tho probably there is a straight or narrow Sea between them; so that lying in
the midst of the other three, it was the fittest place to be made the Cradle of
Mankind, from whence the other were all to be peopled. It lies in length from
the Hellespont to Malacca, the utmost Eastern Mart, 1300 German Miles: its
breadth between the Mouth of the Red Sea and the supposed Streights of Aman, is
1220 Miles: now divided into five principal Parts, 1 Tartary, 2 China, 3 India,
4 Persia, 5 and the Turkish Empire.

Asia Minor. See Natolia.

Asine, the same with Anchora.

Asoph, Tanais, called Azack or Azeck by the Inhabitants, la Tana by the
Italians, is a City of the Precopensian Tarters, at the Mouth of the River
Tanais, which cuts the City into two parts, and then immediately falls into the
Lake of Moeotis. It has a large Haven, and a strong Castle which stands by the
River: taken by the Muscovites, anno 1638. which upon false Accusation, cost
Cyrillus Lucaris, Patriarch of Constantinople, his Life; but it was re-taken by
the Turks, who are now Masters of it: the Town is square, and built at the foot
of a Hill in 67 d. of Long. and 54. 30. of Lat.

Asopus, the name of 3 Rivers, one in Achaia, now called Arhon, the second in
the Morea, and the third in Asia minor near Laodicea.

Aspe, a Valley of the Canton of Bearn in Switzerland: watered by the Gave de
Oleron. Its principal Town is Accous.

Asphaltites, or the Dead Sea, by the Arabians sometimes called Baar Lout,
(that is, the Sea of Lot, in Memory of his Deliverance,) is a Lake of Judaea in
the same place where formerly the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah were consumed.
The Rivers Jordan, Arnon and others fall into it: 580 Furlongs long, and 150
broad, according to Josephus. They say no Fish can live in it, for the
Bituminousness of its Water, and that nothing ever grows upon its Banks.

Assasiniens, a People formerly inhabiting about 12 Towns in Phaenicia near
Tire, under a King of their own Electing. Whilst they paid a Tribute to the
Templers, they offered to turn Christians, to be discharged of the same; but
the Templers refused it; which, says William of Tire, has been the cause of the
ruin of Religion in the East. In 1231 Lewis of Bavaria was assassinated by
these People. In 1257 the Tartars came upon them and killed their Ancient (or
King) and took their Towns: and we have had no further account of them ever
since.

Assinarius, a River of Sicily. See Falconara.

Assinshire, Assinus, a County in the North-western part of Scotland: it has
Strathnavern on the North, the Mountains of Marble and Alabaster on the East,
Rosse on the South, and the Irish Sea on the West. This is properly a part of
the County of Rosse and therefore little is said of it.

Assisi, Aesisium, Assisium, a City of Vmbria in the Patrimony of St. Peter: it
is a Bishops See, built on a Hill, 5 Miles from the River Asio.

L'Assumption, Assumptio, a small new City in the Southern America, near the
River of Plate in Paragua: it is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop de la
Plata.

Assyria, the first of all the Empires and Kingdoms in the World. It subsisted
for 1300 years under 37 Kings, or according to the computation of others, for
1484 years under 41 Kings, that is from Nimrod and Ninus (the first of which
reigned at Babylon in the year of the World 1879, the other at Ninive) down to
Sardanapalus; who burnt himself in 3178. 876 years before the coming of our
Savior. Now it is a Province of Asia, called otherwise Mosul and Arzerum,
between Diarbeck and Persia, under the Grand Seignior, See Mosul.

Asta, a City and Roman Colony, lying between Piedmont and Montferrat: it is a
Bishops See under the Archbishop of Milan, well fortified, with a strong new
Castle belonging to it: once a Commonwealth, then it became a part of the
Dukedom of Milan, and was under the Viscounti; being disjoined from that
Dukedom, in the year 1531. after various changes itfell into the hands of the
Duke of Savoy, who is still Master of it. It is 15 Miles distant from Casal, to
the South. There is another City of the same name in Andalusia, and another in
the East Indies in the Kingdom of Decan.

Astabat, a City of Armenia upon the Frontiers of Persia, within a League of
the River Aras: not great, but very beautiful, and enriched with excellent Wine.

Astaces, the ancient name of a River in the Kingdom of Pontus in Asia Minor.

Astachar, Astacara, a City of Persia upon the River Bendemir, near the Ruins
of Persepolis; which was once the Capital of the Kingdom of Persia, but is now
decaying.

Astarac, or Estarac, Astaracensis tractus, a little County 7 or 8 Leagues long
in the Province of Gascoigne in France.

Asterabath, or Sterabath, Asterabatia, a City and Province of Persia toward
the Caspian Sea. The City stands 20 Leagues from Gorgian.

Astetlan, a Province of the new Kingdom of Mexico in America, upon the Coast
of the Vermiglian Ocean.

Astora, Astura Augusta, a City and Bishopric in the Kingdom of Leon in Spain,
9 Miles from Leone, (the Archbishops See) to the South. This City is also
called Astorga.

Astracan, Astracanum, the Capital City of a Tartarian Kingdom in Asia, near
the Mouth of the River Rha, or rather Wolga, where it falls into the Caspian
Sea: it is built in an Island made by that River about 25 German Miles from the
Sea-shoar; and has been in the Hands of the Muscovites ever since the Year
1554. before which time it had Kings of its own. The Kingdom of Astracan is a
considerable part of the Czar's Dominion: it lies in Tartaria Deserta, from the
Head of the River Rha to the Caspian Sea; and extends West to the River Tanais,
which parts it from the Precopensian Tartars. It was conquered by Johannes
Basilovits, Emperor of Muscovy.

Asturia, was once a Kingdom, but is now a part of the Kingdom of Leon in
Spain: it lies in length from Biscay to Galaesia. The eldest Son of the King
of Castile is styled Prince of the Asturia's (it being divided into two parts),
as the English Prince is of Wales, of which this is an Imitation; as also the
Delphinate in France.

Atacama, a Desert in the Province of los Charcas in the Kingdom of Peru in
America, along the Coast of the Pacifick Ocean.

Atad, Caucasus, a Mountain in Asia, much celebrated by the ancient Poets. Also
a Country beyond Jordan in the Holy Land, where the obsequies of the Patriarch
Jacob were performed by his Children. Genesis 50. 10.

Atavillos, a People of Peru.

Atha, a River of Germany in the Dukedom of Bavaria, which falls in the Danube,
a little above Ingolstad.

Athamania, a Country of Epirus, between Acarnania, Aetolia and Thessalia:
free, and under Princes of its own, till it submitted to Philip King of Macedon.

Athamas, a River of Aetolia in Greece, with a Mountain of the same name, from
whence it springs.

Aeth, Athum, a small, but strong Town in the Province of Henalt, upon the
River Dender, (Tenera) which falls into the Schelde: 2 Leagues distant from the
Confines of Flanders, 5 East from Tournay. Taken in 1667. by the French; and by
the Treaty of Aquisgrane, this and the Territory belonging to it was yielded to
them; but by the Treaty of Nimeguen, in 1679. it returned under the Spanish
Dominion. In this place in 1357. there was a League concluded between
Venceslaus Duke of Brabant, and Lewis Earl of Flanders.

Athens, Athenae, one of the most ancient and most noble Cities of Greece, the
Capital of Attica. Built by Cecrops an Egyptian, A. M. 2350. according to
Helvicus in 2390. the last of which Accounts precedes the going up of the
Children of Israel out of Egypt, 64 years. It was governed by Kings to the
Death of Codrus, A. M. 2882. under Archons for Life, till 3190. after which it
had Archons for ten years, till the year of the World 3268. when it became a
perfect Republic, and had never more any rest or peace till it fell into the
hands of the Kings of Macedonia first, and afterward of the Romans. About
3430. Xerxes invading Greece, the Athenians burnt their own City, and sent
their Wives and Children into the Islands of the Mediterranean: prevailing
afterward against that great Prince, they built the City much more gloriously
than before. The Reputation they gained in this War made them great at home
amongst their Neighbors; till growing proud and injurious, their Neighbors
became their Enemies, so that they fell into the Hands of the Lacedaemonians,
who ruined their Walls, A. M. 3546. They recovered their Liberty, but not their
Reputation; and in 3613. they fell into the hands of Philip the Father of
Alexander the Great; who, by being made the General of a Holy War, became the
the Sovereign of all Greece. The Romans conquering Perseus, the last King of
Macedonia, A. M. 3782. they became in some sort the Subjects of that Empire;
yet under the Romans they had a shadow of Liberty, till the Mithridatick War,
when being over-persuaded by Aristion, an Epicurean Philosopher, they incensed
the Roman Powers against them; and Sylla, in the year of the World 3863. 86
years before the Birth of our Savior, by a Siege reduced them to the necessity
of eating Man's Flesh, and took the City by storm in the Night. This was the
Evening of all their Dominion, Glory and Liberty. But in this Interval, between
their becoming a free and a subject People, they raised themselves to a greater
degree of Glory by Learning, than ever they could have required by Arms,
without it. Solon, who lived a little before the Babylonian Captivity, and
became the Athenian Legislator about the 3359th year of the World, laid the
Foundations of this, which Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Xenophon, Thucydides,
Demosthenes, Isocrates, and the rest that followed, raised to such an height,
that Athens was truly more the Mistress of the World on the account of Arts,
than ever Rome was on the score of her Arms; and tho both their times are past,
yet Athens, being Dead, speaks still in her Philosophers, Orators and
Historians. To pursue her Fate, she rose out of her Ashes after the Syllian
Ruin by the favor of the Romans; and flourished, till Alaricus the Goth, laid
her in the Dust, under the Reign of Valens, about the year of Christ 378. She
recovered again under Theodosius, Arcadius and Justinian; Eudocia the Queen of
Theodosius II. being an Athenian by Birth, as Irene the Lady of Leo IV. also
was. About 1435. Antonius Comnenus Acciajolus was Duke of Athens; about 20
years after she fell the second time into the hands of the Turks, being taken
by Mahomet II. since which last Captivity, not only her Flesh but her Skin is
wasted, and she is become a Skeliton. An. 1687. the Venetians having taken
Napoli di Romania in the Morea, arrived at Port Lione, (that is, the Harbor of
this Town, formerly called Pyraeus) September 21. with the Fleet, commanded by
General Morosini: the Greeks immediately sent their Deputies with the Tenders
of their Submission to him. The Turkish Garrison, being about 600 Men, retired
to the Castle, to make some resistance; but were forced to surrender in two or
three days after the Besiegers began to play their Batteries, tho the Castle
was strong, seated upon the old Acropolis with Precipices on three sides of it,
a Wall on the other, and 20 Pieces of Canon within. About 300 Souls embraced
the Christian Religion, with the Christian Government. The famous Temple of
Minerva being made a Magazine for Ammunition, was set on fire by a Bomb, that
fell among the Stores in the Attack. Some Remains of Lycurgus's Tower, of
Phidias and Praxiteles's curious Works are yet to be seen. And the Athenians
excelling all others throughout those Countries, in Merchandise and Crafts, may
be thought to retain some Seeds of their former Politeness still. To this City,
St. Paul Preached the Gospel of Christ and the Resurrection as we read Act. 17.
Publius and Quatratus were Bishops of it under the Emperor Adrian: the former
suffered Martyrdom in the Year 123, and animated great numbers of Athenians by
his death, to embrace the like with courage and joy. The latter, together with
Aristides, presented that Emperor at his coming hither in the Year 126, with
an excellent Apology for Christianity. Since advanced to an Archbishopric.
They reckon about 10000 Inhabitants, most Christians, in it; who have ^oo
Churches, and diverse other Chapels, according to the Rites and Customs of the
Graecians. Now called Setino, lying in Long. 50. 12. Lat. 38. 51.

Athenree, or Atherit, a City and Barony in the County of Galloway, in the
Province of Connaught in Ireland: More rich and more considerable formerly,
than now.

Atherston, a Market Town in Warwickshire, near the River Anchor, in the
Hundred of Hemlingford.

Athlone, Athlona, Atlon^a, is a small Town in the County of Rosecomen, in the
Province of Connaught in Ireland; in the Confines of Leinster; seated upon the
River Shannon, where it comes out of the Lake of Lough Ree, 16 Irish Miles from
Longford, South. This Place was the Refuge of the Rebels in the Irish
Rebellion, who fled thither from Kilkenny in 1650. being pressed upon by other
Rebels; where they had not much rest, the Town being taken by Hewson in 1651.
The Strength of it lies in the Castle: whither, when Douglas with 10 Regiments
of Foot and 4 of Horse of the Forces of King William, arrived, in order to a
Siege, about the middle of July, 1690. the Irish retired, burning the Town, and
breaking the Bridge. And at the last he was forced to leave it in their
possession. But it could not withstand the Army of General Ginckle the year
after

Athol, Atholia, is a small County or Earldom in the heart of Scotland; between
the Mountain Grampus on the West, and the Sherifdom of Pertb on the East; in
which rises the River Tau, the greatest River in all Scotland. This County is
remarkable for nothing but its Earls, which have been great men both in England
and Scotland.

Athos. See Agion Oros.

Atlantides, an ancient name given to the People that dwelt about Mount Atlas
in Africa.

Atlas. See Aiducal.

Atri, Atria, Adria, and Hadria, a City of Abruzzo in the Kingdom of Naples,
where Hadrian the Emperor was born. This is an independent Bishopric, subject
to no Archbishop, instituted by Innocent IV. Anno Chr. 1252. The City is built
upon a high Hill, within 4 Miles of the Adriatic Sea; and tho it has few
Inhabitants, yet it has the Honor of giving the Title of a Duke to the Family
of the Aquaviva's. It stands 10 Leagues from Pinna to the North, and 15 from
Theate, East: it lies in 38. 18. Long. 42. 51. Lat. There is another Town
belonging to the Venetians of the same Name, but almost swallowed up by the Sea.

Attica, Cecropia, a Province of the ancient Achaia in Greece, upon the Aegean
Sea; now called the Duchy of Athens from its Capital City. It was divided in
those times first into 10, then into 13 Tribes. Each Tribe assumed its
denomination from some or other Hero of the Country, and was made to contain a
certain number of Towns and Villages, amounting in the whole to 174; being then
as populous a Region as Holland now. It extended its Dominion almost over all
the Isles of the Archipelago: had Mines of Silver within its Mountains: and
each Tribe furnished 50 Persons a piece, to be the Judges of the Polity at
Athens.

Attigny, Attiniacum, a Town in the Province of Champagne, in the Dukedom of
Reimes, upon the River Aisne (Axona) 11 Miles from Reimes to the South-East, in
which Chilperi^us, King of France, died, Anno. Christ. 72^. Lewis the
Debonnaire, King of France and Emperor, did Penn^nce and made a public
Confession of his Crimes before a Council here Assembled in 822.

Attleborough a Market Town in Norfolk in the Hundred of Shropham.

Ava, or Aba, a Kingdom, City, and River, in the Terra-firma of the Indies,
between the States of Siam and Arachan. Also a Province and Town of the Isle of
Xicoco, belonging to Japan.

Availle, Avallensis Comitatus, a Territory in Aquitaine, in the Province of
Limofin in France.

Avalon, Aballo, a Town in Burgundy in France, upon the River Cousin, betwixt
Auxerre and Autu^, with a good Castle.

Avalon, Avalonia, Aveland, is an Island in Somersetshire, in which Glastenbury
stands: It gives the Title of a Viscount to the Family of the Mordants.

Avanches. See Wiflisbourg.

Avares, a Barbarian People of Scythia, who took part with the Huns, and
Ravaged the Empire on either side the Danube, in the sixth Century.

Avaux, a County in Champagne in France, in the Neighborhood of Rheims, giving
its Title to the House of Memes. Charlemaigne defeated the Normans here in 882.

Aubanne, Aubanca, Albinia, a Town and Barony in Provence in France.

Aube, Alba, a River of France, which rises in the Borders of Bnrgundy; and
flowing through the Province of Champagne, waters Bar; after which being
increased with some additional Rivers, it falls into the Seyne, (Sequana) at
Pont sur Seyne.

Aubenas, Albenacum, a Town in the Province of Vivarets in France, upon the
River Ardesche.

Aubrac, a famous Rich Hospital in the Diocese of Rodes, in Aquitain in France.

Auburne, a Market Town in Wiltshire, in the Hundred of Ramsbury.

Aubusson, a Town in the Province of Auvergne in France. The Ruins of the
Castle here show the Grandeur of the Family of this Name, who are the Lords of
the place.

Aude, Atax, a River of Languedoc in France. It takes its source from the
Pyranees in the County of Rosillon, and falls into the Mediterranean near
Narbonne.

Avein, Aveinum, a Village in Luxembourg; made famous by a great Victory
obtained by the French against the Spaniards, anno 1635. It is scarce 2 Leagues
distant from S Huberts, to the North.

Aveira, Lavara, a Town in Portugal near the Mouth of the River Vouga, in the
Province of Beira.

Aveiro, Averonius, a River in the Province of Rovergue in France. It rises in
the Territory of Sovorac; passes to Rhodez, St. Anthonin, Bourniquet,
Negrepelisse; and having entertained the streams of several Rivers in the way,
delivers itself into the Tarn at Point d'Aveiron.

Avella, a Town and Marquisate in the Terra di Lavoro in Italy, 4 Miles from
Nola, and 15 from Naples: not considerable.

Avellino, Abellinum, a City with the Title of a Principality, in the further
Principate in the Kingdom of Naples; it is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop
of Benevento.

Avenay, Avenoeum, a small Town in Champagne in France, 4 Leagues from Rheims,
near the River Marne.

Avenmore, Dabrona, the Broad Water, a River in the Province of Munster in
Ireland: it arises near the Earldom of Desmond, and running East, it takes in
several other Rivers; and having washed the Town of L^smore, it falls into the
Ocean at Youghal, where it makes a Haven, about 20 Miles West of Waterford
Haven.

Averno, Avernus, Aernus, a deep Lake, surrounded with Mountains and a Wood, in
the Terra di Lavoro, in the Kingdom of Naples, near to Baja and Cuma. The
Vapors it sends forth are very corrupt and noxious; which made the Poets
represent it as one of the Mouth of Hell. Nero attempted to make a Navigable
Canal from hence to the Disembogure of the Tiber; but the Mountains and Soil
rendered it impracticable. To the West of it there is a Cave struck out of a
Mountain, where they formerly consulted an Oracle; and its supposed the same
Cave was the Grotto of the Sibylla Cumana.

Aver^a, a City and a Bishops See, in the Terra di Lavoro, in the Kingdom of
Naples. Built in the Eleventh Century upon the Foundations, as some believe, of
the ancient Atella; and Fortified with a noble Castle. It carries the Title of
an Earldom too; together with this Episcopal See, they have united that of
Atella and Cuma.

Avesnes, Avennae, a Town of Haynaut; little, but famous, and well Fortified;
standing upon a small River which falls into the Sambre. This Town stands 4
Miles South of Maubeuge, 8 from Mons. It was yielded to the French by the
Pyrenean Treaty An. 1659.

Avesnes le Comte, a small French Town in the Province of Artois, in the
Borders of Picardy.

Augarras, Indians of Brasil in America, in the Province of Puerto Seguro.

Auge, a County in Normandy.

Augatow, Augustavia, a New Town in Poland, upon the River Brebetz, on the
Borders of Lithuania, betwixt Bielsko and Grodno.

Avigliano, Aviliana, a small Town in Piedmont, upon the River Duria, 20 Miles
from Turin to the West. (This River is called Grana in the late Maps) It stands
on a Hill, and has a ruined Castle.

Avignon, Avenio, a City of Provence in France, upon the Rhone: it is an
Archbishops See, a large well built Place, and very much famed for having been
the usual Residence of the Popes from 1306. (by the Grant of Joan Queen of
Naples, and Countess of Provence, to Clement V.) to 1378. In which time died
here, John II. in 1334. Benedict XII. in 1341. Clement VI. in 1352. Innocent
VI, in 1361. and Vrbanus V. in 1370. This City is an University, and had once a
Stone Bridge, which is now decayed. The Archbishopric was erected here by
Sixtus IV. in 1475. During the Difference betwixt the King of France and Pope
Innocent XI. about the Franchises, the former took this City into his own
Possession. It lies about 7 Leagues from Arles, on the Borders of the
Principality of Aurange.

Avila, Albula, a City of old Castile in Spain, famous for the Birth of S.
Teresia. It is wholly built upon a Hill, well fenced with Walls, seated amongst
many Rocks, and neighboring Mountains, yet has a pl^a^^^nt Situation near the
River Adaja. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Compostelle: it
stands in the midst between Salamanca and Madrid, 16 Leagues from either. There
is another Town of the same Name in Peru, upon the River Napo.

Avilis, Aulide, an ancient Town and Port in Baeotia, upon the Gulf of
Negropont.

Avilla, Avilles, a Town in Asturia in Spain, toward the Mouth of the River
Nalon, and the Bay of Biscay.

Avin, Avo, Avenna, is a small River in the County of Louthiane, which falls
into the Frith at Blackness, near Lithgow.

Aviquirina, an Island in the Pacifick Ocean, upon the Coast of the Kingdom of
Chili.

Avis, Avisum, a small, but Fortified Town in Portugal; to which there belongs
an Order of Knights of the same Name. It is 9 Miles from Ebora North, and a^
many from Port Alacri West.

Aukland, a Market Town in Durham, in the Hundred of W. Darlington. It has a
Bridge over the River Ware, and is pleasantly seated in a good Air upon the
side of a Hill. The Bishops of Durham have a noble Castle here.

Aulayas, a Lake in Peru, also called the Lake of Paria.

Aulcester, a Market Town in Warwickshire, in the Hundred of Barlich-way, upon
the Confluence of the Alne and the Arrow.

Aulerges, Aulerci, a People of the ancient Gaul, of Three Divisions: called
Aulerci Cenomani, Diablantes, and Eburovices: being those of (the now) Mars,
Perch, and the Diocese of Eureux.

Aumale. See Albermarle.

Auneau, a small Town in the Province of la Beausse in France, 14 Leagues from
Paris: memorable for the defeat of the Germans, Swisse and others, by the Duke
of Guise, in 1587.

Aunis, Alnensis Tractus, a small Territory of which Rochel is the Head. It is
taken out of Saintogne, and bound on the West with the Ocean, on the East and
South with Saintogne, and on the North with Poictou.

Avogasia, a Province of Asia, betwixt Georgia, Comania, and the Black Sea. The
chief Towns in it are S. Sophia, Ajazzo, Costa. This and Mingrelia answer to
the Colchis of the Ancients.

Avon, Alaunius, a River that separates part of Wiltshire, and all
Gloucestershire, from Somersetshire; and then passing under the Walls of
Bristol, falls into the Mouth of the Severn.

Avon the Less, a River of Northamptonshire; one Head of which rises in
Cherwelton, in the North part of that County, and the other out of Avon-Well by
Naesby. Also another small River of that name, in Merionethshire in Wales,
which passes by Dolgelhe to the Irish Sea. This Word in the British
signifies a River, as Mr. Camden acquaints us.

Aups, Aulps, Vrbs and Castrum de Alpibus, a Town in Provence in France; so
called, because the Alps begin to elevate themselves near it.

Aurach, Auracum or Vracum, a Town in the Circle of Schwaben in Germany, in the
Dukedom of VVirtenburgh, upon the River Rems, Remus, which 2 Miles lower falls
into the Neckher, (Nicrum.) It is built at the foot of the Mountains, 4 Miles
from Tubingen, to the East, and 7 Miles from Vlm. Lately strengthened with a
strong Castle, and is the Residence of the Younger Dukes of Wurtenburgh.

Avranches, Abrincae, Avrenchea, a City of Normandy, upon the Borders of
Bretagn: it is a Bishopric, under the Archbishop of Roan: it stands upon the
River See, 10 Leagues from Coutance South, and as many from S. Malo North: near
the Sea. In 1172. the Cardinals Albert and Theodinus, Legates from Pope
Alexander III. by his Order assembled a Council here, to examine into the
Murder of Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury.

Auray, Auriacum, a Town and Port in Bretagne upon the Bay of Morbihan, 3
Leagues North of Vannes, twenty three North of Nantes, and within 2 Leagues of
the Sea. This place is famous at present for a Chapel called S. Anns, from the
Mother of the Virgin Mary; and much frequented and adorned with Presents, by
the Votaries of Mother and Daughter: likewise in former times for a Battle here
fought between John de Monfort, and Charles Earl of Bloise, Sept. 29. 1364.
where the Title of Bretagne was determined by the Sword; the English, who sided
with the former, prevailing.

Aure, a River of Normandy in France. It rises near Caumout, and passes to the
Drome, by Vaux and Bajeux.

Aure or Eure, a River of France, rising in the Dukedom of Berri; and passing
to the Auron and Aurette by Bourges.

Aure, in La perch. See Eure.

Aurick, Auricum, a Town in East Friesland, with a Castle, in which the Count
of Embden, for the most part resides. It is seated in a barren Country, a
Plain, scarce 3 German Miles from Embden to the East: the Country about it is
called from the Town Aurickerland.

Auriege or Lauriege, Alburacis, Aurigera, a River of France; first appearing
in che County of Foix; then it salutes Foix, Pamiers, Saverdun, etc. admits the
Lers, the Arget, and the Leze into its Channel, so throws itself into the
Garonne 2 Leagues from Toulouse.

Aurillac or Orillac, Aureliacum, a very fine Town, well built, in high
Auvergne in France, upon the River Jordane. It suffered severely in 1562. by
the Wars.

Auron, Eura, a River of Bourdeaux in Aquitaine.

Ausbourg, Augusta Vindelicorum, Druso magus, Damasia. This City is called by
the Inhabitants, Auspurg, by the French, Ausbourg, by the Italians, Augusta. It
is a famed City of Germany, a place of great Trade, and the Capital City of the
Province of Schwaben. It stands near the Borders of the Dukedom of Bavaria,
upon the River Lech, (Lycus) near that place where the River Werdach falls into
the Lech about 6 Miles from the Danube, to the South; 9 Miles from Ratisbone,
and 10 from Constance: it is a Bishopric, under the Archbishop of Mentz, and
the City is an Hans Town, and has been honored with many German Diets; but is
especially remarkable for that held there in 1530. when the Lutheran Princes
and States did deliver in to Charles V. the Confession of their Faith, which
from this place is called the Augustane Confession. This City first obtained
their Charter of Liberty from Frederick I. An. 1162. and afterward in 1266.
they purchased their Freedom from the Duke of Schwaben. Jan. 24. 1689. Joseph
King of Hungary was here Elected, Sworn, and Proclaimed the King of the Romans,
and Crowned on the 26.

Ause, a River of Auvergne in France, joining with the Allier.

Auses, an ancient People of Africa mentioned by Herodotus.

S. Austel, a Market Town in Cornwall, in the Hundred of Powder. It returns two
Burgesses to the Parliament.

Austerlitz. See Slawkow.

Austrasie, Austracia, which the Germans called the Westrich; was a
considerable part of France during the first Race of Kings; and had the Title
of a Kingdom, which was afterward called the Kingdom of Mets, because that
City was the Capital of it. Under the second Race of Kings it was called the
Kingdom of Lothaire. The bounds of it were very various, sometimes bigger, and
at others less.

Austria, called by the Inhabitants Oesterreich, by the French. Autriche; by
the Turks, Beetstan or Weetzstan; by the Poles, Rakusy; is a Province of
Germany, bounded on the North by Bohemia and Moravia, on the East with Hungary,
on the South with the Dukedom of Stiria, and on the West with Bavaria and
Salsburgh: it is divided almost into two equal parts by the Danube. This
Province was first under Marquesses from 928. In 1156. they had the Title of
Duke given them: and Frederick, who was after Elected Emperor, had the Title of
Archduke conferred on him; which is the only Title of Archduke in the World.
From this Country it is that the House of Austria takes its Name, of which
Family the Emperors of Germany have been ever since 1438. and the Kings of
Spain since 1515. It is a very fertile Country, amply supplied with Mines and
Rivers. Vienna, the Capital. The Archduke has a particular power of creating
Counts and Barons over all the Empire by ancient Concession, with this
privilege besides, that he cannot be deprived of his Lands and Principalities
by the Emperor himself.

Authie, Attilia, a River of Picardy in France. It arises near a Castle of the
same name in Artois; glides by Dourlens and Auxi; then falls into the Sea at a
place called Pas d'Authie.

Autun, Angustodunum, Hedua, is a very ancient City in the Dukedom of Burgundy;
and a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Lions; seated upon the River
Arroux, Arotium, (which falls into the Loire,) 25 Miles West of Chalon, and
about the same distance South-West from Dijon.

Auva, a City and Kingdom of Japan.

Auvagdonne, or Achad, Achadia, a City in the County of Gallway in Connaught in
Ireland, which is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Tuam.

Auvergne, Alvernia, is a large Province almost in the midst of France; it has
the Dukedom of Bourbonne on the North, the Earldom of Forez on the East, the
March and Limosin on the West, and on the South Rouergue. The Southern part is
mountainous, the Northern is very well watered and fruitful. The chief Town is
Clermont. It had Earls which governed it till 1024. when Philip the August put
an end to this Earldom upon the Rebellion of Guido, the last Earl, and annexed
it to the Crown of France. In this Province there are thirteen Towns, which
send their Deputies to the Assembly of the States in France.

Aux, Auscii, an Archbishopric and a City in the County of Armagnac in France.
This City stands upon the River Sers, which runs not far before it falls into
the Garonne. It is distant from Toulouse almost 20 Miles to the North-West, and
the Archbishopric is esteemed one of the richest in France.

Auxerre Antissiodorum, is a City and an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of
Sens, upon the River Yonne, (Icauna,) which falls into the Seyne, ( Sequana.)
This City is large and beautiful, seated in a fruitful Plain, about 12 Leagues
from Sens.

Auxerrois, a small Territory in France, adjacent to Auxerre.

Auxois, Alexiensis tractus, a Bailiwick in Burgundy in France.

Auxone, Aussona, a small but very strong City of the Dukedom of Burgundy, upon
the River Sone, from whence it has its name. It is five Leagues from Dijon,
East, and four from Dole.

Auzone, Auzonum, a small City of Auvergne in France, in a mountainous Country,
near the River Allier ( Elaver) which falls into the Loire. It has an old
Castle, and is distant from Clermont ten Leagues North.

Axbridge, a Market Town in Somersetshire, in the Hundred of Winterstoke, upon
the River Axe.

Axel, Axella, a small, but strong Town in Flanders, under the Dominion of the
States of Holland, whose Surprisal was the first exploit of Count Maurice of
Nassau, Captain General of the United Provinces, after his entrance upon that
Employment in 1587. It stands 4 Leagues from Gant, and about 6 from Antwerp,
West.

Axholm, an Island made by the Rivers Trent and Dun in Lincolnshire: About 10
miles in breadth and 5 in length. The middle part, which is the more rising
ground, is very fruitful; and particularly of Flax. Alabaster is found in it.

Axmister, a Market Town in Devonshire upon the River Axe: the Capital of its
hundred.

Axum, Auxuma, a City, and heretofore the Capital of the Kingdom of Tigre, in
the Province of Sire in Aethiopia.

Air, a small Town upon Dunbritain Frith, in the South part of Scotland, with a
River of the same name in the Territory of Kile; in which Oliver Cromwell built
a strong Citadel or Fort, to keep the Scotch Nation in awe.

Air, Arola, a small River in France, which rises in the Dukedom of Barrois;
and running North, waters Clermont and Varenne; and at last falls into the
Aisne.

Aza, a Town in Cappadocia upon the Borders of Armenia betwixt Trebizonde and
Neo-Cesaraea.

Azack, Tanais, See Asoph.

Azamor, a Town in the Province of Duguela in the Kingdom of Marocco, at the
mouth of the River Ommirabi. The Portugueze took it in 1508 and in 1540 they
abandoned it. The Moors afterward repeopled it; but being all killed or taken
in a night by a surprise of the Portugueze, it has continued desert ever since.

Azaotan, Azaot, the vast Deserts of Libya in Africa.

Azeca, an ancient Town of the Amorites in Chanaan, where God Almighty rained
down Hailstones upon them from Heaven. Josh. 10. 11. Rehoboam repaired it. 2.
Chron. 11. 9. It was afterward ruined in the Wars by the King of Babylon.
Jerem. 34. 7.

Azem, a Kingdom in the Terra firma of the Indies, beyond Ganges, in one of the
most plentiful Countries of all Asia, for all things necessary to human life.
The Capital of it, is Kemmerouf, 21 days journey distant from the Town Azem.
The People live altogether at their ease. They esteem the flesh of dogs
particularly above other meats, selling great quantities thereof in their
Markets.

Azores, commonly called by Englishmen the Canary Islands, are 7 Islands in
the Atlantic Ocean, not unknown to the Ancients; and by Pliny, Solinus, and
others, mentioned under the name of the Fortunate Islands; and tho they differ
as to the number, yet all agree, Canaria was one of them; but which is most
wonderful, the knowledge of them was perfectly lost till 1330. when a Ship
being distressed by Weather, discovered them; and it is not agreed whether it
was an English, French, or Dutch Ship. In 1334. the Portuguese attempted to
conquer these Islands, and were beaten off. In 1417. Henry King of Castile
granted these Isles to one John Betancourt, upon condition he should hold them
under the Crown of Castile; and he accordingly subdued four of them. Ferdinando
conquered the rest in 1483. and under Spain they are at this day. They had this
name given them from the great number of Hawks the first Adventurers found in
them. See Canary Isles.

Azotus, an ancient City of Palestine. Taken heretofore by Joshua about the
year of the World 2586. Then it became one of the five Governments of the
Philistines, who detained the Ark in it. Since Christianity, it was made a
Bishops See under the Archbishop of Cesarea. Baldwin I. took it from the
Saracens in 1101. It had a Church built in it, and an Episcopal House in the
particular place (they say) where St. Philip left the Eunuch he baptized, when
he was rapt away by the Spirit. Sometimes called Azotus Paralia, to distinguish
it from Azotus Ippini, which was another Episcopal See heretofore in Palestine.
See Ashdod.

Azin-court, or Agincourt, a small Town in Artois in the Earldom of S. Paul,
from which it is distant somewhat above 3 Leagues to the West, as it is also
from Hesdin to the North. In 1415. Henry V. of England beat D'A^bret, Constable
of France, who came against him with a French Army consisting of 80000 Men,
near this small Town; which has given it a name amongst the most considerable
Places of the World. See. Trussel. Life and Reign of Hen. V.

Azuayes, a poor People of Barbary and Numidia in Africa upon the Coasts and
Mountains. They wear a Cross engraven upon their face or hands to distinguish
them from other Africans. A Custom first introduced amongst them in token of
their being Christians, according to a Law made, when the Gothish and Christian
Princes reigned in Barbary, that whereas all such Infidels as would embrace the
Gospel were excused Tribute, therefore those who became Christians in reality
should make themselves known to the public Officers of the revenue by a Cross
of that nature. They persevered in their Conversions till the Caliphs came in:
And tho they wear the Cross still, yet it serves them with other Figures more
for a pretended Ornament, than a token of Religion.

BAB.
BAalhasar, mentioned 2 Samuel 13. 23. A place beside Ephraim in Judaea, where
Absalom commanded his Servants to kill Amnon for forcing his Sister Thamar.

Baar, Vargiones, a County in Schwaben in Germany, near the Fountains of the
Danube, in the Possession of the Prince of Furstemberg. Die Baar are also the
Mountains of Schwaben, called Abnobi by the Romans.

Baaz, or the Isle de Baz, is an Island on the Coast of Bretagne in France.

Babelmandel, Diodori Insula, is a small Island in the Red Sea, belonging to
Aethiopia, mentioned by Pliny, Ptolemy, Arrian, and others: but the later
Geographers are not agreed whether this be it, or Primeira, which lies near it.
It lies in the very entrance of the Red Sea, or Arabic Gulf, and gives name
to that passage.

Babylon, one of the most famous Cities of the ancient World, celebrated both
in Sacred and Profane Story. It is seated upon the Euphrates, and was the
Capital of Chaldea, about 42 Miles from Bagdet to the South East, in 79. d. of
Long* and 35 of Nor. Lat. Generally believed to have been built by Nimrod, the
Grandchild of Noah, soon after the Deluge; and to have been a continuation of
Babel, so called, because the Lord did there confound the Language of all the
Earth, Genesis 11. 9. This City was anciently encompassed with Walls of Brick,
which made a Circuit of 385 Stadia's, or 48 English Miles. They were so broad
at the top, that two Chariots might meet, and pass, without any hindrance; and
they are said to be 100 Cubits high; so that this was one of the seven Wonders
that amazed the old World. This City was the Capital of the Assyrian Empire;
and tho Nabonassar ruined that Empire, yet he forsook it not; but his Son
Nebuchadnezzar very much increased and enlarged it, as appears Dan. 4. 30.
After this, it was taken by Cyrus the Persian. Anno Mund. 3516. before the
Birth of our Savior 537 years; and tho it changed its Master, yet it kept much
of its ancient Greatness under the Persian Empire: Seleucus Nicanor, one of the
Successors of Alexander the Great, (who dyed here,) building Seleucia upon the
Tigris, at about 40 Miles distance from it, as Strabo observes, it became
thereby deprived of its Wealth, its Honor, and Inhabitants; whence Pausanias
could say, that it had nothing in his time but its Wall: in the days of S.
Jerome it was only a Park, and in aftertimes it became an Habitation for
Scorpions and Serpents, so that no Man could safely pass through it. See
Bochart. Geogr. Sacr. lib. 4. c. 15. It is very hard now to know assuredly so
much as where it stood. For tho Bachad or Bagdat is often called by the same
name, and diverse have therefore been induced to accept it for the same place,
yet that this is a great mistake, see Bach^^.

Babylon in Egypt, stood over against Memphis, near the Nile. St. Peter wrote
his First Epistle, its thought, from this Babylon; because the other was
deserted before, as this since; yet forming Cairo out of its ruins.

Babolitza, Carethna, or Vallis Cariniana, a Town placed by Antiochus in the
Lower Pannonia, now part of the Lower Hungary.

Baboliza, or Babolza, a Town of the Lower Hungary, called by Antoninus,
Mansuetinum: it has now a Castle, and lies about five Hungarian Miles West of
Zigeth; in our latter Maps it is called Babolcha.

Babuco, Bauco, Bovillae, a Town of S. Peter's Patrimony, near the Confines of
Campania, and the Kingdom of Naples.

Babul, Pattala, or Patala, is one of the greatest Cities in the East Indies,
seated in an Island of the River- Indus, under the Dominion of the Great Mogul.

Bacalal, a Lake in the Northern America.

Bacar, Ituraea Trachonitis, a Region of Palestine, often mentioned in the New
Testament. It lies beyond Jordan between Samaria and Arabia, and belonged to
the Tribes of God and Reuben. The Inhabitants are famed in the Roman History
for good Archers; tho Cicero, [2. Phil.] calls them at the same time, Omnium
gentium maxim barbaros, the most barbarous of all Nations. They are mentioned
also by Virgil, Lucan, and Vopiscus, on the same account. There is another
Country in the East Indies, called by the same name.

Baccharuch or Bachruch, a small Town in the Lower Palatinate upon the Rhine,
in the greatest esteem for Wine of all the places in Germany: whence that
Etymology of its name, Bacchi ara, descanted by H. Stephanus.

Bachad, Seleucia, a City of Mesopotamia upon the River Tigris: in ancient
times called Coche, and afterward Alexandria from Alexandria the Great, who
rebuilt it; after which being re-edified by Antiochus King of Syria, (who
called it by his Father's name, Seleucia) and being again ruined, it was
rebuilt in 762. by Almanusor Abugiafar the 22d. Calif, first on the Western
Shore of Tigris, and after on the Eastern in Chaldea: in time it grew great,
rich, and populous, being the Seat of many of the Califs, and was called
Bagdad, or Bagdet; that part which lay on the Western side, being deserted by
degrees, is become a heap of Rubbish. This City lies in an oblong figure, is
great and well fortified; it has a Bridge of Boats over the Tigris, and a
strong Castle, in which the Turkish Bassa resides. It has been very often taken
and re-taken by the Turks and Persians. The former possessed themselves of it
in 1638. after a bloody Siege, in which they lost 40000 Men, and have kept it
ever since. It lies 79. 20. Long. 35. 40. Lat. and is by many Writers mistaken
for Babylon, tho it lies at the distance of forty Miles from it, and upon the
Tigris, whereas that lies upon the Euphrates.

Bach, Bachia, a small Episcopal City of the Lower Hungary, under the
Archbishop of Colocza, upon the Danube, where the River S^rwizz^ meets it. This
Bishopric is united for ever to the Metropolitan See; and it was in the hands
of the Turks, till 1686. when, by the taking of Quinque Ecclesiae, and the
deserting of Colooza by them, after Buda was taken, it returned under the
Obedience of the Emperor.

Bachian, Bachianum, called Bacham by the Portugals; one of the Molucco Islands
in the East Indies, and a distinct Kingdom; small but very fruitful; under the
Dominion of the King of Machian, from whence it lies about 30 Miles to the
South, and a little less from the Island of Gioli; almost exactly under the
Line. It has a Town of the same name, and a Fort belonging to the Dutch called
Barnewelt.

Bacha Serrail, or Bacie-Saray, the Capital City of the lesser Tartary upon the
River Kabarta, and the usual residence of the Cham of the Crims.

Bachu, a City of Albania upon the Caspian Sea; in the times of the Roman
Empire it is supposed to have been called Albana; but there is some
Controversy about it. From this City the Caspian Sea is called by some Mar di
Bachu. And there is also another City in Arabia Felix called by the same name
in Ptolemy.

Backow, Bachow, Baccovia, a City of Walachia (as others of Moldavia) upon the
River Alauta, which falls into the Danube a little above Nicopolis. This was
made a Bishops See by Pope Clement VIII. under the Archbishop of Colocza: it is
in the Northern Bounds of Walachia, about 25 Miles North, West of Targvisco,
the Capital City of that Province. By some called Braislow.

Bacras, one of the Branches of Mount Taurus, which rises in Cilicia, a
Province of Asia the less.

Bactriana, ( Batter in the modern Appellation) was an ancient Province of
Persia, answering in part now to Corasan in Persia, and in part to Vsbeck in
Tartary; divided by the River Geichon. Its Capital City was Bactra, hereafter
mentioned by the name of Bagdasan, which is of little consideration. The River
Bactrus of this Country has also changed its name to Buschian, falling into the
Geichon. The ancient Inhabitants had the repute of the best Soldiers in the
World: they were always in Arms upon the account of the Scythians their
Neighbors, who lived by Spoil. And much addicted to Astrology; Zoroaster their
King being the supposed Author of that Science, under the name of Magic.

Baeueen, Baduhennae Lucus, a famous Forest in Friesland, one of the United
Provinces mentionedby Tacitus: it is still the greatest Wood in all that
Province; by the Common People called Seven-Wolden, that is the Seven Woods. It
stands 3 Leagues from Groningen, to the Westward, toward Slote; others suppose
it to be meant of Coevorden, a strong Town in Trans-Issillane, near the River
Schwart-water, or Groeningen-Diep, (which falls near Groningen) called by the
Romans, Virus; but the most common and best supported Opinion is the first.

Badai, a People of Tartaria Deserta, adoring the Sun, and some say, a red
Clout elevated in the Air.

Badajox, Pax Augusta, a City of Estremadura, which heretofore belonged to
Portugal, (inthe Confines of which it stands) but is now the Capital of
Estremadura, a Province in the Kingdom of Leon in Spain: large, populous, and
well fortified, and seated on a Hill. The Portugals after they had driven out
the Spaniards very unfortunately, attempted the Recovery of this Place in 1658.
It lies 3 Leagues from Yelves to the East, and 25 from Sevil to the North-West.
It stands upon the River Guadiana, where the River Xevora falls into it on the
opposite side. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Compostella: has a
Bridge over the River, and was heretofore a Dukedom, erected by Henry IV. King
of Castile. Anne, the Wife of Philip II. King of Spain, died here in 1580. It
lies in 13. d. of Long. and 38. 45. of Lat.

Badara, a Town in the East Indies, in a Peninsula on this side of the River
Ganges, upon the Coast of Malabar, in the Kingdom of Calecut, 6 Leagues from
Calecut to the East.

Badascian, Maracanda, a City often mentioned in the Writers of the Life of
Alexander the Great. Tamerlane the Great was born here, and had his Palace in
it, who much beautified it, and erected here an University. It belongs now to
the Province Zagataja in Tartary, and lies about 100 Miles North of the River
Oxu. A famous place for Merchandile, very large, and the Capital of the Eastern
Tartars. Chalcocondylas calls it Samarachantan and the Tartars Samarcand.

Badelona, a Town of Catalonia in Spain, called by Mela, Baetulo: once famous,
now a Village, not far from Barcinone, and about a League from a River of the
same name heretofore, now called Besos, which falls into the Mediterranean Sea
between these two Places.

Baden, Ober Baden, Aquae, Castellum Aquarum, Thermae superiores, a Town in
Switzerland, between Zurich, (from which it is distant two Leagues) and Basil,
from which it stands six Leagues. As the Assemblies of the Cantons are usually
held here, this place is famed for a League treated amongst themselves in 1656.
There was a general meeting of the Deputies of the 13 Suisse Cantons held here,
October. 1690. wherein they resolved, in reference to the present War betwixt the
Confederate Princes and France, that they would maintain a Neutrality; but
withal secure the pass of Augst, and the Bishopric of Basle, with the four
Forest Towns, in which the French did pretend to take their Winter Quarters It
lies upon the River Limat, ( Limagus) which a little beneath falls into the Aar
( Arola) the greatest River in those Countries, which falls into the Rhine at
Waldhust, a Town of Schwaben.

Baden, Bada, Thermae Inferiores, a small City of Schwaben in Germany, the Head
of the Marquisate of that name; 5 Leagues from Strasburg to the South-East, 1
from the Rhine, and 8 from Spire: famous for its natural Baths, from whence it
has its name. The Marquisate is of no great extent, but very populous, and the
Villages so thick, lying along the Rhine, that the whole Principality is
compared to one continued City. Long. 28. 40. Lat. 82. 20. It is called by the
Germans, Margraven Baden, to distinguish it from other places called by the
name of Baden. The Original of the Noble Family now possessed of this Honor,
was from the Duke of Zering; for Bertholdus I. was the Father of Hermanaus, the
first Founder of this Family, which is now divided into two Branches, the one
professing the Protestant, and the other the Roman Catholic, Religion; of the
later Branch comes the present Prince Lewis, who, since the Death of the Duke
of Lorrain, has been honored by the Emperor with the general Command of all his
Forces in Hungary; and obtained great Victories.

Baden, Aquae Pannoniae, a Town in Austria, 3 Leagues from Vienna to the South,
seated at the foot of the Mountains.

Badenoch, in Latin Badenochia, is a County in the North of Scotland, of a
barren Soil, full of Mountains; divided in two by a great Lake, and bounded by
the Counties of Murray, Ross and Athol.

Badenweiler, a City in the Province of Brisgow in Germany, between Friburg and
Basil; yet a part of the Marquisate of Baden, and famous for Hot Baths.

Baeotia. See Boeotia.

Baern. See Berghen.

Baetica, one of the 3 ancient parts of Spain, taking its name from the River
Baetis which we now call Guadalquivir; See Spain. Its principal Cities were
Sevil and Corduba. From the time that Alphonsus King of Castile was defeated
here, by Aben Joseph K. of Morocco, in the Year 1195. the Saracens possessed it
unto the Reign of Ferdinand V.

Baeza, Biatia, a City of Andalusia. It was heretofore an Episcopal City, under
the Archbishop of Toledo; but in 1249. its Bishopric was united by Pope
Innocent IV. to that of Jaen or Gaen. [ Glenna] This City was recovered from
the Moors by Ferdinand King of Castile, in 1227. It was a Roman Colony, then
called Vrbs Baetica. Here is an University, erected in 1538. and the Town is
large, and stands upon a Hill one League from the River Guadalquivir.

Baffin's Bay, a Gulf extended from the 70th to the 80th degrees. of North Lat. in
the Terra Australis of America; discovered by an Englishman who gives his Name
to it.

Baffo, Paphos, a City in the Island of Cyprus, once famous, now ruined.

Bagaloag, a Town upon the Frontier of Bosnia in Dalmatia, under the Turks.

Bagamidri, a Kingdom in the upper Aethiopia, lying along the Nile to the West.
It is ordinarily divided into 17 Provinces, whereof some are large enough to be
Kingdoms.

Bagaudes, a People amongst the ancient Gauls. They revolted twice from the
Romans, at the end of the third and in the Fifth Century; and were each time
defeated.

Bagaya, Bagy, Vaga, a City of Numidia in Africa. The Emperor Justinian Walled
it, and newnam'd it Theodora from his Empress. In 394. the Donatist Bishops
celebrated a Council here, concerning the Cause of Primianus Bishop of Carthage.

Bagdat, or Bagdet. See Bachad.

Bagdasan, Bactra, a small City at the foot of Mount Caucasus, seated in a
fruitful Soil, much celebrated in ancient times; now of no Note.

Bagnabar. See Golconde.

Bagnarea, Balneum regis, Balneo regium, Novem populi, so called by the order
of Desiderius King of the Lombards, as Paulus Diaconus says. It is an
Episcopal City in S. Peter's Patrimony, built upon a Hill near the Lake Bolsena;
it stands almost in the middle between Mount Fiascone and Orvieto, from which
last it is not above 6 Miles distant to the South. In this Place S.
Bonaventure, who flourished in the twelfth Century, with the Title of the
Seraphical Doctor, was born.

Bagneres, a Town in the County of Bigorre in Gascony in France, famous for its
hot Baths till 1660. when that natural Fire which heated them, was extinguished
by an Earthquake, as Brietius says.

Bagni d'Abano, Fontes Aponi, Aquae Petavinae, a place that has Baths, in the
Territory of Padoua in Italy.

Bagni, di Salviati, a place not far from Cuma, where Caesar the Dictator had a
Country House.

Bagni di Tritolino, a place in Campania, where Cicero had a Country House, not
far from Puteolum. To these and diverse other places in Italy, they gave the
Pre-names of Bagni, from their Baths; wherein the ancient Romans delighted so,
that P. Victor reckons 800 of them in Rome only.

Bagrava, Galesus, a small River that springs from the Apennine Hills, near the
City Oria, in the County of Otranto in the Kingdom of Naples; and running
Westward, falls into the Bay of Taranto, not far from that City which gives its
Name. This River is now commonly called Galeso.

Bahama, an Island, and the most rapid Channel in all America, Eastward from
Florida; through which the Spanish Fleets pass to the Havana.

Baharen, Ichara, Tylus, an Island in the Persian Gulf. Others say it is
Carge, another Island in the same Gulf, over against the mouth of the River
Euphrates, that the Ancients meant by these Names. It is called by others
Elchadr.

Bahar-Eunil, one of the Branches of the Nile in Aethiopia.

Bahar-Zocoroph, the Persian Gulf.

Bahar-Rumi, the Mediterranean Sea.

Bahia de todos los Santos, the same with S. Salvador in Brasil.

Bahuys, Bahusium, a strong Castle situated in a small Island made by the River
Trolhetta, which falls a little lower into the Baltic Sea. It heretofore
belonged to the Kingdom of Denmark, but in 1658. was taken by the King of
Sweden, together with the County of the same Name. It stands two Danish Miles
from Gottenburg toward the North. This Castle was built by Hakin IV. King of
Norway in 1309. surrendered by Treaty to the Swedes in 1660 who before were in
Possession of it; attempted by the Danes in 1678. but without any good Success.
The Province in which it lies is bounded on the East with West Gotlandt, on the
West by the Baltic Sea, and by the County of Aggerhuis toward the North. It
lies 100 Miles in length from the North to the South, but it is not above 30
Miles broad, and in many places but 15. It has, besides the Castle I mentioned,
a Town called Malstrano. This Territory was yielded to the Swedes by the Treaty
of Roschild in 1658.

Baja, Baiae, a City of Campania in Italy, now ruined. It was the delight of
the ancient Romans. Separated from Pozzuoli by an Arm of the Tyrrhenian Sea,
about 2 Leagues over, which the Emperor Caligula covered with a famous Bridge,
passing and repassing the same in Triumph. The noble Rests yet extant discover
that it has been a very magnificent Place. Since the times of Christianity, an
Episcopal Chair was placed and settled in it, till its ruin was effected by
Earthquakes.

Bajaria, Eleutherus, a River of Sicily. It falls into the Mediterranean Sea, 8
Miles East of Palermo and the River Oreto, on the Western side of the Island.

Baicadul, Batancaesarea, a City of the East Indies within Ganges.

Baida, a Region of Tartary the Desert. See Badai.

Baieux, a City and Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Roan in Normandy in
France, upon the River Aure, which a little lower buries itself under ground.
It stands not above 2 Miles from the British Sea toward the South. The
College of Bajeux at Paris, was founded in 1308. by a Bishop of this place.

Bailleul, Baliola. See Belle.

Baionne. See Bayonne.

Bair, Barus, a River of the Low Countries.

Bais, Bacium, a Monastery in France, which lies between Corbie and Amiens upon
the Sum [ Sumina] over against Peronne.

Baise, Balisa, a River in Poictou in France.

Bakewell, a Market Town in Derbyshire in the Hundred of High-Peak.

Bala, a Market Town in the County of Merioneth in Wales, in the Hundred of
Penllyn.

Balagata, a Kingdom in the Peninsula of Malabar, in the hither East Indies,
extended among the Branches of the Mountains of Gare, making a part of the
great Kingdom of Decan. Its chief City, Doltabad, is a place of great Trade.

Balaguer, Ballegarium, a City of Catalonia, seated at the foot of a very steep
Hill, having a Stone Bridge over the River Segre: it was made famous by being
taken by the French in the Year 1645* after a Defeat of the Spanish Forces,
which should have covered it. It lies 3 Leagues from Lerida. [Ilerda] to the
South East.

Balambuan, a City in the Island of Java in the East Indies, with a Seaport
toward the East. This City gives its Name to a Bay of the Sea, which lies near
it.

Balassia, Audus, a River of Mauritania in Africa: it falls into the African
Sea, between the Towns of Jatath and Igilgilim, at the Promontory called Capo
di Gibramel.

Balaton, Volceae, a very great Lake in the Western part of the lower Hungary,
lying about thirty Miles in length from the North-West to the South-East, but
its breadth is not above six Miles: it has Vesprin on the South, Canisa on the
West, and Alba Regalis on the East: The Germans call it Platzee.

Balbastro, Barbastrum, a City of the Kingdom of Aragon in Spain, upon the
River Vero (Verum) where it falls into the Cinga about 8 Miles from Hu^scar (
Osca) to the West, and Ilerda, now Lerida, to the North East. It is a Bishops
See, under the Archbishop of Zaragoza, from which distant 14 Miles. This City
was recovered from the Moors in the Year 1102. Called by some, heretofore,
Bergidum; and by others, Belgida.

Balbec, Heliopolis, Caesarea Philippi, A City anciently of Coelesyria, at the
foot of Mount Libanus; which was at first a Bishops See, made afterward a
Metropolitan under the Patriarch of Antioch. It is encompassed with very high
Hills on all sides; and lies at the equal distance of about 32 Miles from
Damascus, Tripoli, and Abyla.

Baldino, Vfens, a River of Italy arising in St. Peter's Patrimony, at a place
called Casenove, 2 Miles from Setia; and falls into the Mare di Toscana near
Terradina a City of Campania. It is now commonly called il portatore.

Baldo^, a Market Town in Hartfordshire, in the Hundred of Broadwater.

Baleares, The Islands of Majorca and Minorca. See Majorca. It is remarkable,
that amongst the slain in the Noble Battle of Creci in 1344. the King of the
Baleares was one.

Balestra, Balista, a Branch of the Apennine in the Road to Parma, by the
Valley of Tari, between Liguria and Hetruria.

Ba^^, The most Easterly Kingdom in the Grand Empire of Abyssinia in Africa.

Balkan, a Mountain of Thrace called Haemus of old, dividing Thrace from
Bulgaria: so very high, that from the top of it the Euxine Sea may be seen. It
runs from the East to the West, and ends at the City of Mesembiria; out of it
spring the Rivers Hebrus, now Mariza, which waters Hadrianople; and Strymon,
now Stromona. The Sclavonians call it Cumoniza; the Italians, Costegnazzo, or
the Chain of the World; and the Turks Balkan.

Ballingacarrigy, a Ca^^le near Cavan in the County of Cavan in Ireland. It had
a Garrison of about 200 Men in it, when Colonel Wolseley with a Party of King
William's Forces came to attack it. And is naturally so strong, that none (as
the Account says) but Irish Men would have been beaten out of it without Canon.
After some Resistance, which however cost Colonel Wolseley dearer than he
expected; they agreed to surrender it on terms, May 13* 1690.

Ba^^a^, or Balza^, a Territory in the Dukedom of Angoumois in France, upon the
River Charen^e, giving its name to the Family of the Guez, which lately
produced the most eloquent Man of France, Monsieur Balsac, a perpetual honor
to his Country, and particularly this place. He died Feb. 28. 1654.. The like
in the Province of Auvergne, whence another ancient Family receives their Title.

Balsara, Balsera, Teredon, a City attributed by Ptolemy and Ae^ian to Babylon,
by others to Arabia. It belongs now to Arabia Deserta, and lies near the
Confines of Arabia Foelix, near the Borders of the Province of Hierach. A great
City, and of good Trade, and stands at the Conjunction of the Tigris and
Euphrates, where they fall into the Persian Gulf. After the King of Persia had
taken Ormus in the Year 1622, the English, Dutch, and Portuguese betook
themselves to this Place, and settled their Factories here. In times past it was
under the Kings of Persia, afterward taken by the Turks. The Haven is safe and
large, and stands about 12 miles above the Persian Gulf, on the Western shore;
and in the neighboring Villages many Christians of the Sabborites, or of St.
John, live.

Baltimore Bay, a Bay and Haven in the Province of Mounster in the Kingdom of
Ireland, and in the Earldom of Desmond, upon the Western Ocean.

The Baltic Sea, Sinus Co*danus, may justly be called the Northern
Mediterranean. It has no Communication with the Ocean, but by a narrow Straight
called the Sound* which parts Jutland from Gothland: from the Cape of Schagen
in Jutland, it bends to the South-East, as far as the Island of Zeland, which
restrains it to so narrow a breadth, that the Castles of Elsene^r and Elsenborg
command the Passage, and enable the King of Denmark to enforce a Tribute from
all Ships trading in or out of the Baltic Sea: from thence it runs South, and
washes the Dukedom of Mekelenburg and Pomerania, as far as Dantzick: from
thence it turns North again, and washes Curland and Livonia as far as Nargen,
where it is divided into two other great Bays; one of which is called the Bay
of Finland, and divides Finland from Livonia. In this Bay lies Narva, the
Capital of Livonia, heretofore the Storehouse of the North: a little more
North it receives the River Severi; into which run Ladoga and Onega, two vast
Lakes that part Megrina and Cornelia, and run up almost as far as the White
Sea, with which they seem also to have some Communication by their Rivers: from
hence the Baltic runs to the North, as far as Wybourg^; where it turns again
and runs South West as far as the Islands of Aland; and here begins the 2d,
Branch of the Baltic called the Finnisch or Bot^er Sea; which runs North and
South, leaving on the East Finland and Boddia, and on the West Sweden and
Finmarck: at the most Northern Point of it lies Tornia, a Seaport Town. The
various Countries which do border upon this Sea, and have little or no
Communication with the other Seas, make it much frequented by Merchants of all
Nations.

Baly, an Island of the East Indies, East of Java, about 12 Miles in compass,
very fruitful and well inhabited. It is thought to be the lesser Java, being
separated from the greater only by a Bay.

Bamba, a Province of the Kingdom of Congo in Africa, with a Town of the same
Name: it lies between Loanda to the South, and the River Zaire to the North, on
the Western Shore of Africa, beyond the Line. There is a Province in the South
America, in the Kingdom of Papaian, under the Spaniards; and a Village in
Castile in Spain, both of the same Name.

Bamberg, Gravionarium, Bamberga, a City of Germany in the Circle of Franconia,
upon the River Rednit, which a little lower falls into the Mayn. It is a
Bishops See, (under the Archbishop of Mayence, for some time) now immediately
dependent on the Pope. This City was made a Bishopric by Henry II. Emperor;
and had its Name from Baba, a Daughter of Otho the Emperor; and it signifies
in the German Tongue, the Hill of Baba. It is under the Civil Jurisdiction of
its own Bishop; and stands about six Miles from Wurtzburg, to the North-East,
and Nurenburg to the North-West. In this City died Henry II. in 1025. Conradus
III. in 1152. Philip I. in 1208. It was anciently a free Imperial City, but not
now: there belongs to it a small Territory or Diocese, which lies along the
Mayn and the Rednit, extending in length from North to South 25 German Miles,
but much restrained as to its breadth by the Marquisate of Culembach on the
East, and the Bishopric of W^^tsburg on the West: besides these, he has some
few Towns in Carinthia which were subjected to the Emperor by a Treaty in the
Year 1535. with Ferdinando I. Henry II. (called St. Henry) built here a very
magnificent Church for the Remission of his Sins in the Year 1007, and
subjugated this City, with all its Dependencies to the Popes of Rome; but it
was after redeemed by Henry V. who gave that See the City of Benevento in Italy
in Exchange for it. The ancient City of Prague in Bohemia, is a Fee belonging
to this Bishopric; and the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburg hold other
considerable Fees of it. There is another small Town of this Name in the
Kingdom of Bohemia. Bamberg lies in 32. 49. Long. 49. 51. Lat.

Bambycatii, an ancient People near the River Tigris in Asia; said to bury
their Gold, Silver, and all Metal that can be coined into Money, in the
deserts, to prevent the growth, thence issuing, of vice and corruption amongst
them.

Bampton, a Market Town in Devonshire, and another in Oxfordshire, both
Capitals of their Hundreds. The latter is situated near the River Isis, and
affords a liberal Maintenance to 3 Vicars besides the Parson.

Banea, a City and Island to the Eastern point of the great Island of Sumatra
in the East Indies; separated from Sumatra by the Streights of Banca, over
against Palimban.

Bancok, a regular and important Fortress in the Kingdom of Stam in the
East Indies.

Banda, an Island in the Indian Ocean to the South of the Island of Seran 20
Leagues, comprehending under the general name of Banda the 6 lesser Islands of
Nera, Gunapi, Lantor, Puloway, Pulorin, and Bassingen: These being considered
as parts of the Island of Banda. They drive a very great Spice trade, enjoy a
perpetual Spring, and it is ordinary with the Inhabitants to live to 120 years.
There is a good road to Banda, with two Forts to defend it, built by the
Hollanders. The Natives are Mahometans; but believe the dead will never come to
life again, unless they living pray for them.

Bandbury, or Banbury, a Corporation in the Northern part of the County of
Oxon, upon the West side of the River Cherwel, which here divides the County of
Northampton from that of Oxon. Near this place, Kimrick, King of the West
Saxons, overthrew the Britains in a set Battle, manfully fighting for their
Lives and Fortunes: and after this, Richard Nevil, Earl of Warwick, in the same
place overthrew Edward IV. and took him Prisoner, and restored Henry VI. to the
Crown. In the late Rebellion, this Place was taken, and garrisoned for Charles
I. in 164^. after Edgehill Fight; in 1644, under the Command of Sir William
Compton, it endured a sharp Siege, and several Storms, till it was relieved by
the Earl of Northampton: after which it continued unattempted till the Year
1646, when it endured another sharp Siege for ten Weeks together, under the
same Governor; who at last (after the King had put himself into the hands of
the Scots) when it was not possible the Place could be relieved, surrendered it
upon honorable Terms to the Rebels the 11th of May. The Family of the Knollys
have been Earls of this Place ever since the Year 1626.

Bander-Abassi, a City upon the Coast of the Province of Farsistan in Persia,
opposite to the Isle of Ormus; Surnamed Abassi from Cha-Abas King of Persia the
first Founder of its Commerce, which has rendered it the general place of resort
for Vessels from the Indies, as of an English and Dutch Factory, being esteemed
the best Region of all the Persian Gulf. Yet so intolerably hot in the Summer
Months, that the Air, the Arabians say, is poisonous, and causes sudden
suffocations. It is fortified with two opposite Forts.

Bander-Congo, A City of Persia two days sail from the precedent, where both
the Air and Water are commendable. But the dangerousness of the passage from
Ormus to it, amidst a number of Islets, deprives it of the benefit of Commerce.

Bando, A City and Kingdom in the States of the great Mogul in the East Indies,
betwixt the Kingdom of Delli and the Province of Agra.

Banghor, Bangor, Bonium, or Bovium (in the old British Language called
Bamornabyrig) an old Roman Town in Flintshire; but belonging to Cheshire;
mentioned by Antoninus: and much more famous after the Plantation of
Christianity in Britain, for a vast Monastery here, consisting of about 2000
Monks, qui omnes de labor manuum suarum vivere solebant, says Bid, who all
wrought hard for their Livings: 200 of these, Edilfred, a Pagan Saxon King of
Northumberland slew, because they implored Christ's Assistance in their Prayers
for their Countrymen against the Saxons. When Augustine the Monk came to
convert the Saxons, here was a numerous Monastery; but before the Norman
Conquest it was entirely ruined, as Camden acquaints us out of William of
Malmsbury; to which Augustine the Monk is said or suspected to have lent his
helping hand. Since that, those very Ruins are by time defaced: yet the Names
of two of its Gates remain, Port Hogan and Port Cleis, which stand a Mile
asunder; between which are found very often pieces of the Roman Money. This
place stands upon the River Dee, East of Wrexham.. Bangor the Bishopric, is a
different Place from the precedent, and stands in the County of Carnarvan in
Wales upon the River Menay; called by the Latin Authors, Bangorium and
Bangoria. This Bishopric is of so ancient a foundation, that we do not find
its Original. The Cathedral is dedicated by the name of S. Daniel, who was
Bishop here about the Year 516. From which time to the 11th. Century that
Hernaeus filled the Sea, we have no Account of the succession. In 1496. Henry
Deane, Bishop, repaired the Cathedral after it had been defaced by the Rebel
Owen Glendower. In 1541. Arthur Bulkeley Bishop, reduced the Bishopric to a
low Condition by unworthy sales and alienations. The Diocese contains the
County of Carnarvan, with parts of Denbigh, Merioneth and Montgomery, and the
whole Isle of Anglesey.

Banjaluth, Blandona, a large and well fortified Town in Bosnia near the
Mountains, under the Dominion of the Turks, upon the River Cetina.

Banjans, a People universally scattered over the Provinces of the Indies, but
most numerous in the Kingdom of Guzurate, and notorious for worshipping the
Devil (together with a God) as the author of all the Evils of this Life, under
a frightful Figure represented to them, to pacify him and engage him in their
Favor. In some things they are Mohammedan* like; in others, divided amongst
themselves into Sects, greater or less, almost innumerable, according as they
affect their particular Superstitions. The Europeans use them for Managers and
Interpreters in their Dealings with the Indians.

Banara, a City of the East Indies in the Kingdom of Bengala, upon the River
Ganges; under the Dominion of the Great Mogul, about 40 Miles from Gouro to the
North, and 100 from Halavassa toward the South. Probably the same with
Benares. See Benares.

Banny, or Ban, Argita, one of the largest Rivers of the Kingdom of Ireland. It
arises in the County of Down in the Province of Vlster; and having
entertained some other Rivers, it falls into the vast Lake of Neaugh;
afterward dividing the County of Colrane, on the West of it, from that of
Antrim on the East, it falls into the Caledonian Ocean, a little below Colrane
Castle. This River divides the Province of Vlster into two parts: but Mr.
Camden is rather of Opinion, that the Latin Name belongs to the Swilly, another
great River in the same Province, but a little more to the West than this.

Bantam, a very great City, and a famous Mart and Sea Port in the Island of
Java in the East Indies, and the Capital of a Kingdom of the same Name. This
City is seated at the foot of an Hill, 18 Leagues from the City of Batavia
toward the West, upon a narrow Passage called the Streights of Bantam, right
over against the Island of Sumatra. It has a very good Harbor belonging to it
called the Sound, and was much frequented by the European Merchants, especially
the English and Dutch. The Kingdom of Jacatra is subject to this Prince, and he
has often made War with the Dutch, with reasonable good Success, till about the
Year 1684. A Son of the King of Bantam rebelling against his Father, called the
Dutch to his Assistance, by which means the Dutch possessed themselves of
Bantam, seized the English Factory and their Effects, and made themselves sole
Masters of that Trade. The Controversy between them and the English not being
determined to this day. The old King in the mean time was kept a Prisoner,
first at Bantam, afterward in the Castle of Batavia; whither he was conducted
in November 1687, with a formal Solemnity, and there lodged with his Wife, and
some Slaves to attend him.

Bantry, a Bay in the Province of Munster in Ireland, where Admiral Herbert,
now Earl of Torrington, engaged the French Fleet, May 1* 1689* upon their
arrival with Succors for Ireland: which however were landed the day after.

Banya, Rivuli Puellarum, a Town of Transylvania, 6 Leagues from Bestercze to
the West, not far from the Confines of the Upper Hungary.

Banza. See S. Salvador in Africa.

Bapalme, Balma, a strong Town in Artois, seated upon a rising Ground in the
Borders of Picardy. This Town has been in the hands of the French ever since
the Year 1641. It was yielded to them by the Pyrenaean Treaty in 1659. It
stands at an equal distance from Peron, (a Town of Picardy) toward the South,
and Arras toward the North.

Bar, a strong Town in Podolia, having a Castle built upon an Hill, and
surrounded with Marshes, which contribute very much to its defense: It stands
upon the River Kow, 18 Polonian Miles from Caminieck to the East, and as many
from Barklow toward the West. This Town is under the Turks.

Bar, or Barrois, a Dukedom of France, betwixt Champagne and Loraine,
incorporated after diverse Revolutions, by the Concession of the Pyrenaean
Treaty (as the French interpret it) in 1659* with the Crown of that Kingdom.
Its Capital City is Barle Duc. It lies on each side the Meuse; which divided it
heretofore into the Royal and Ducal Barrois; both then belonging to the House
of Loraine, they doing Homage to the King of France for the same.

Bar sur Aube, a fine Town in Champagne in France, but ill paved; it has its
name from the River [ Albula] Aube, on which it stands; upon the foot of an
Hill in a very pleasant Country; about 8 Leagues from Ar^is toward the South,
and as many from Troys toward the South-West, and 7 from Chastillon toward
the North-East. This place is in much esteem for the delicious Wine the Country
yields.

Bar, sur Seyne, a small City in the Dukedom of Burgundy, in the Confines of
Champagne; seated in a Mountainous Country; about 5 Miles West of Bar sur Aube.

Bara. a Town in the Province of Gorga, in the Upper Aethiopia, near the Lake
of Zaflan.

Barampour, a City of the East Indies, under the Dominion of the Mogul, in the
Kingdom of Candis. It lies 100 Miles from Surat toward the East, upon the
River Tapi: this Place is called by others Barampore, and heretofore Baramatis,
as Herbert says.

Baranateta, the Name of a City and Kingdom in the Asian Tartary.

Barathrum, a deep Pit in Attica in Greece, contrived with Iron Spikes and
Tenters, for a place of Execution, throwing the Malefactors Headlong into it,
in ancient times.

Barbados, one of the most considerable Plantations which the English have
upon the Caribby Islands: it lies in 13. d. 20. m. Northern Lat. and 321. of
Long* about 8 Leagues in length, and 5 in breadth, and inhabited by 50000.
English, besides Negros, who are three times their number. This Island was
first discovered to the English by Sir William Curteen, in the Reign of James
I. but was then wholly desolate. The English soon after Planted it, and were
driven at first to great Extremities; because Ships came very rarely and slowly
thither from England; till having about the Year 1627. raised some Tobacco,
Indico, Cotton-Wool and Fustick-Wood, and after that falling into the Sugar
Trade, its Reputation and Wealth increased. And this Colony which for a long
time subsisted by the courtesy or negligence of the Spaniards, grew so strong
and numerous, that all their after Attempts signified nothing. Their Sugars,
which at first were coarse, and would quickly melt if not spent, are now
improved to a great Perfection. This Island is not well Watered with Rivers, or
fresh Springs; yet lying now, they want not that Element, being supplied by
Pools, Ponds, and Cisterns. It is very fruitful, and enjoys a perpetual Summer:
Hot, but cooled by the Briezes which rise with the Sun, and blow fresher as the
Sun gets higher. The chief Town of this Island is S. Michaels, situate at the
bottom of Carlisle Bay, in the Southern part of the Island, where Ships have a
very secure Harbor.

Barbara, a small Village in the Island of Sicily; but once a City of great
Fame, and much taken notice of by Greek and Latin Writers, under the several
names of Aegesta, Egesta, Acesta and Segesta, etc. It lies 22 Miles from the
Promontory and City of Drepanum, now called Trapano, to the North-West, and 40
from Palermo, upon the Western Shore of the Island; near it runs a small River
which now bears the name of S. Bartholomew.

Barbary, Barbaria, a large Country in the Western part of Africa; lying a
considerable length from East to West, but not of equal breadth: it is bounded
on the North by the Mediterranean Sea, on the East by Egypt, on the West by the
Atlantic Ocean, and on the South by the Atlantic Mountains, which separate it
from Biledulgeridia. In the times of the Roman Empire this vast Tract of Land
was divided into diverse Provinces, viz. Mauritania Tingitana, Casariensis, and
Sitifensis; Numidia, Africa propria, Byzacena, Tripolitana, Marmorica and
Cyreniaca: it is now divided into the Kingdoms of Fez, Morocco, Algiers,
Constantine (anciently Cirta), Tunis and Tripoly, with the Territory of
Barcana. This Country was in ancient times subject to the Commonwealth of
Carthage, and the great Kings of Mauritania and Numidia; after it fell into the
Romans Possession, I have showed how they divided it. Here was a most
flourishing Church till the 5 Century; in the beginning of which, the Vandals
then Arians, entered it, and brought in their Heresy with them: but that which
more effectually contributed to the ruin of Christianity here, was the Conquest
of it by the Moors in 647, when one Hucha a famous General (whom Osmen, the
Third Caliph of the Saracens, employed to that purpose) finally expelled the
Romans; and ever since the Moors have possessed it; who being the most enraged
Enemies of Christianity that ever professed the Mohammedan Law, have so far
extirpated Christianity, that there is very few, (if any) of the Inhabitants of
this vast Tract of Land, which profess it.

Barbela, a River in the Kingdom of Congo in Africa, which falls into the River
Zaire, which washes the Walls of S. Savior, or Banza, the Capital of this
Kingdom.

Barbenzon, Barbentio, a Principality in Hainaut.

Barberino, Barberinum, a small Town in Tuscany in Italy, from whence the Noble
Family of the Barberines receive their name; of which Family Pope Urban VIII.
was, who succeeded Gregory XV. and sat 21. Years, viz. from 1623. to 1644.
This small Town is built upon an Hill, in the Road between Florence and Siena,
16 Miles from the former toward the South.

Barbowyna, Berbis, a Village of the lower Hungary, where the Ruins of an
ancient Roman Town are yet seen upon the Drove: 3 German Miles from Quinque
Ecclesiae toward the South.

Barbuda or Barbada, one of the Caribby Islands in America, under the English;
but of no very great Account. It is in length 15 Miles, Lat. North 17. d. ^

Barca, Marmorica, a small Kingdom in Africa, on the West of Egypt, and the
Mediterranean Sea; under the Empire of the Turks. But there is no Town of any
note in it; there is adjoining to it a Desert called by the same name.

Barce^, Barcetum, a Castle in the Dukedom of Parma, between the Rivers of
Parma and Taro, and the Apennine: 22 Miles from Parma, toward the South, and 16
from Pentremoli. There was anciently a very famous Monastery built here by the
Kings of the Lombards.

Barcelona, Barcino, a City of Catalonia in Spain which is a Bishops See, under
the Archbishop of Tarragona; and an University: it has an excellent Port upon
the Mediterranean Sea, well Traded, and also a Castle. This City is the Capital
of that Province, and esteemed one of the best Cities of Spain. Built by
Hamilcar a Carthaginian, and called by his Punick Surname of Barca. In the Year
of our Lord 805. it was recovered out of the hands of the Moors, by S. Lewis,
King of France: it is seated between the outlet of the River Badelona [
Baetulo] which runs on the Eastern sides, and that of Lobregat [ Rubicatus]
which at the distance of 2 Miles on the Eastern side, falls into the
Mediterranean Sea. It stands 12 Leagues from Tarragona East, and 16 from ^^rona
toward the South, and 13 from Ossuna Taken by the French in 1640* but returned
under the Spaniard in 1652* after a very sharp Siege. This City was Honored
with the Title of an Earldom by Lewis the Good, after he had taken it from the
Saracens. Charles the Gross, gave this Earldom to Godfrey d'Arria, for his
Service against the Normans, and his Heirs: after the Death of Raimond the last
Earl, it was united to the Kingdom of Arragon in 1162. There were 3 small
Councils celebrated in this City; one in 540. one in 603. and the last in 1064.
James II. King of Arragon died here in 1327 Alfonsus IV. in 1336. and John II.
in 1479.

Barcelonette, a Town and Valley in Provence heretofore, now in the Dominions
of the Duke of Savoy. Built or rebuilt by Raimond V. Earl of Provence, in 1231*
who called it by this name, in memory that his Ancestors came into Provence
from Barcelona in Spain.

Barcelor, a City of the East Indies, under the Dominion of the King of
Bisnagar, upon the Sea Shore, between Goa and Canora. It lies in almost 15* d.
of Northern Lat. and Long. 105. This City was some time under the Portuguese,
but is now recovered bythe King of Bisnagnar, a potent Indian Prince. It was
also heretofore the Capital of a distinct Kingdom.

Barcelos, Celiobriga, a small Town in Portugal, Honored with the Title of a
Dukedom. It lies in the County of Enter Douro e minho, upon the River Cavado,
which not far from thence falls into the Atlantic Ocean; 6 Leagues North of
Porto, and 4 West of Braga.

Barcena, Coloe, a Marsh in Aethiopia, out of which arises the River of
Astapus, as Ptolomy says.

Bardewic, a most ancient City in Saxony within a Mile of Lunenburg, said to be
built 990 Years before the coming of our Savior.

Bardi, a People amongst the ancient Gauls, in very great Esteem with them for
Poetry and Music: supposed to dwell about Montbard, or Mont-Barri, in Latin
Mons Bardorum, a Mountain in the Territory of Auxois in Burgundy, which still
retains their Name.

Bardt, a small Town in Pomerania in Germany upon the Baltic Sea, which has
yet a large Haven, and a very fine Castle, and a Lordship belonging to it, near
the River Bart. This place was yielded to the Swedes by the Treaty of Munster,
in 1647. taken by the Elector of Brandenburgh, but restored to them again in
1679. it lies 3 German Miles from the Borders of the Dukedom of Mecklebourg,
and at the same distance from Damgarden toward the North-East, and about 8
from Berghen in the Isle of Rugia to the West.

Bareyt, a well built Town, very handsome, in Franconia in Germany. The ordinary
Residence of the Marquess of Brandenburg, who has a noble Castle here.

Bargemon, Bargemonum, a Town in Provence in France, 5 Leagues from the Sea, in
the Diocese of Freius, upon a fertile little Hill: heretofore one of the
Apannages belonging to the Cadets of the House of the Earls of Provence. It is
now observable for a miraculous Image of the B. Virgin, whose History is
written by Lewis Sylvacane.

Barwick. See Berwick.

Bari, Barium, a City in the Kingdom of Naples in a Province of the same name,
called Terra di Bari; which has been long Honored with the Title of a Duchy;
it is an Archbishops See, well fortified, and has an indifferent good Haven
upon the Adriatic, about 20 Miles distant from Poliano to the South-East, and
Trani to the North-West. It has its name, as Festus writes, from Bara, a small
Island near Brindisi, [ Brundusium] the Inhabitants thereof building this City.
The Body of S. Nicolas, Bishop of Myra in Lycia, one of the Fathers who opposed
Arius in the first Council of Nice, is preserved in this City. P. Urban II.
celebrated a Council here in 1098. in which Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury
disputed the cause of the procession of the Holy Ghost, and of the Union of the
Eastern Church with the Western, against the Greeks. The Terra di Bari is a
part of the ancient Apulia Peucetia, upon the gulf of Venice, betwixt the
Basilicate and Terra di Otranto.

Barilliana, an Island at the mouth of the Danube.

Barjols, Barjolum, a Town and Bailywick in Provence in France, in a very
fruitful soil, adorned with a Collegiat Church since the Year 1060. During the
Civil Wars of France, the Protestants took it in 1562. Those of the League
retook it in 1590.

Barking, a Market Town in the County of Essex in the hundred of Becontree.

Barkshire. See Berkshire.

Barkway, a Market Town in Hartfordshire in the hundred of Edwinstree.

Barle-Duc, a neat and beautiful City, the Capital of the Dukedom of Barrois,
built by Frederick I. Duke of Loraine in 951, upon the River Ornain, about 15
Miles from Nancy to the West, and thirteen from Chaalons: heretofore under the
Dukes of Loraine: but now incorporated into the Province of Champagne in France.

Barletta, Barolum, or Barulum, a City situate in or near the place of the old
Canusium in Apulia Peucetia in Italy; an Haven or Seaport, reckoned for one of
the four strong Holds of Italy in the middle Ages. It lies upon the Adriatic
Sea, about 24 Miles West of Bari, 4 South of the Outlets of the River of
Ofanto. A large and beautiful City, and the Seat of the titular Archbishop of
Nazareth.

Barlinguas, Erythiae, a knot of small Islands upon the Coast of Portugal,
called by various names. They lie between the C. de Rocca to the South, and the
C. de Mondego to the North; and not above 2 Leagues from the Shores of
Estremadura.

Barmach, an extraordinary high mountain in the Province of Schirvan in Persia.
The ruins of several Fortresses appear upon it, supposed to have been built by
Alexander M. and demolished by Tamerlane.

Barnagasso, one of the Kingdoms of Aethiopia, which pays yearly to the Turks
1000 Ounces of Gold. Its Capital City is Barva.

Barnavelt's Island in the Magellanique Sea, was discovered by the Hollanders
in 1616. It stands near Terra del fuego and the Streights of le Maire.

Barnet, a Town in Hartfordshire; memorable for a bloody engagement here
betwixt the Houses of Lancaster and York, wherein the latter carried the
Victory. It affords medicinal Waters.

Barnesley, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire in the hundred of
Staincross.

Barnstaple, a Market Town in Devonshire in the hundred of Branton, upon the
River Taw, over which it has a spacious Bridge. It sends 2 Burgesses to the
Parliament.

Baroche, a Town in the Kingdom of Guzerate in the Empire of the Great Mogul.
The English enjoy a good settlement in it.

Barra, a small Kingdom in Guinea in Africa: the King of which was engaged by
the Dutch in 1663. to fall upon the English Factory there. There is also a Town
in Palestine called by this name.

Barrant, a Marquisate in the Province of Guienne in France.. Also a Fort upon
the Frontiers of Dauphine and Savoy, one League from Montmelian: Stormed and
taken by the Duk. de Lesdignieres in 1528.

Barrois. See Bar.

Barrab. Arabia Petraea.

Barow, a River of the Province of Leinster in Ireland, which arises in Queens
County in the Mountains of Sliew Bloemy; and running Southward, washes the
Eastern Side of Caterlagh and Laighlin: after which it receives from the West,
another great River called Neure, which divides Kilkenny: a little further to
the South, it entertains the Sewer, which waters the Walls of Waterford; and
being thus augmented, it enters the British Sea about 20 Miles West of Cape
Carn, the South-Eastern Point of Ireland.

Bart, Alisus, Bardum. See Barde.

Bartas, a small Territory in the Province of Armaynac in France, near Aux.
William de Saluste, the famous du Bartas, a Huguenot born in Gascoigne in 1545.
and Author of the Poem of the Worlds Creation, received his title from hence.

Barton, a Market Town in Lincolnshire in the hundred of Yarborough, upon the
River Humber over against Hull.

Barva, a City of Abyssinia near the River Marabu. The Capital of the Kingdom
of Barnagasso.

Basil, Basilea, written in two of the Lives of Charles the Great, Basla; in
after times Basula and Basala; by Cluverius, Artalbinum. It was a Bishops See
under the Archbishop of Besanzon, after the ruin of Augusta Rauracorum, which
happened about the Year 800. Now the Principal City of Switzerland. It has its
name from Basiliana the Mother of Julian the Apostate: but Valesius thinks the
name rather taken from the River on which it stands, which he supposes was
then so called. It has a pleasant Situation, and is adorned with many
magnificent Structures, and Churches; watered by many sweet Fountains, blessed
with an healthful Air, a valiant People, and plenty of all things. Very
ancient; as being said to be ruined by the Almains in the Year 260. and
suffered much in aftertimes from the Huns. It was beloved by Henry I. and II.
In the Year 1368. much enlarged by Frederick Blackenheim, Bishop of Strasburg,
and Administrator of the Diocese of Basil, who first obtained a Charter of
Freedom for it: in the Year 1392. it was made an Hanse Town. One of the
greatest things of ancient Times which has made it famous, was the General
Council held here under Sigismond the Emperor, and by several sessions
continued from the Year 1431. to 1443. where it was decreed, that a General
Council was above the Pope. Therefore Eugenius IV. dissolved it and convocated
another at Ferrara. They refused to dissolve, deposed Eugenius, and elected
Faelix V. Pope. The same Council established the pragmatick Sanction, that the
Gallican Church received in 1438. in the presence of Charles VII. This City
taught the rest of the Cantons the way of Leaguing and Uniting: for the Pope
having excommunicated Lewis the Bavarian, Emperor of Germany, the City of Basil
persevered in the Service of that Prince, and was for it excommunicated too:
whereupon they threw the Popes Legate into the Rhine, and to secure themselves,
entered into a League with Zurich, and Bearn, and other of the Principal
Cities, in 1327. This City embraced the Reformation in 1529. It is one of the
most celebrated Universities in Christendom, which was opened here by Pius II.
Ann. Dom. 1459. The Art of making Paper was first found in this City, in 1470.
by Anthony and Michael Gallicion. This gave great encouragement to Printers:
the first of which was Bernard Richel, who began to Print here in 1478. This
City stands upon the Rhine, which runs through it: 6 Miles from Fribourg, 18
from Constance to the West, 12 from Zurich, 38 from Ausbourg, 14 from
Strasbourg. Long. 29. 15. Lat. 47. 25.

Basilicata, is a small County on the East of Campania, in the Kingdom of
Naples. Taken out of Campania by Alphonsus, King of Naples; 33 Miles in length,
and 10 in breadth; and was anciently the Seat of the Picentini, a Colony of the
Piceni, dwelling on the Adriatic Sea. It is bounded on the North by the
Territory of Bari, and part of Otranto; on the East by the Gulf of Taranto; on
the West by Principato, and on the South by Calabria. The chief City of this
Province is Cirenza, which stands near the Foot of the Apennine; it is a barren
and not well inhabited Country.

Basiligorod. See Vasiligorod.

Basingstoke, a Market Town, and a great Thorough-fair in the County of
Southampton. The chief of its Hundred. The Marquess of Winchester, now Duke of
Bolton, has a noble Seat hard by it.

Basques, or Pais de Basques, the French Biscaye, a Territory in the Province
of Gascoigne, comprehending the lower Navarre, Soul and Labor. It was the
Country of the ancient Vascones or Bascones, that came out of Spain, and
invaded it. Roger Hovedon calls them Basclos. It is certain, that they were a
distinct People, and spoke a different Language from the Gascones, according to
De Marca.

Basra, a Town in the Kingdom of Fez in Africa, near the River Lucus; 30 Miles
distant from Sala toward the east, and not far from the Province of Asgar.

Bassento, Bussento, Acheron, a River of Calabria, in the Kingdom of Naples; it
runs near Cosenza, the principal City of Calabria, near which it falls in the
River Grati, which falls into the Bay of Taranto. In the Bed of this River,
Alaricus king of the Goths was buried, as Jornandes writes.

Bass, a small Island not far from Edenburg, famous for the great quantity of
Geese, that frequent it at certain seasons. There is a Castle in it, standing
upon a Rock that is Iriaccessable.

Basianello, a small Town in S. Peter's Patrimony in Italy, toward the
Confluence of the Ner a and the Tiber, which is here covered with a
Stone-bridg. The Lake, anciently called Lacus Vadimonis, where P. Cornelius
Dolabella, Consul, gained a Victory over the Thuscans and Gauls, in the year of
Rome 471. lies in the Neighborhood of this place.

Bassano, a Town in the Marca Trevisana, in the States of Venice, upon the
River Brenta.

La Bassee, a Town in Flanders, upon the Frontiers of Artois, and the River
Deule: Yielded to the French by the Peace of Aix la Chapelle, in 1668.

Bassigni, a County in Champagne, toward the Sources of the Marne and the
Meuse: Its capital Town is Chaumont.

Bastia, the chief Town in Corsica, with a good Fortress and Haven to it. The
Genoiiese Governor ordinarily resides here.

Bastick, a small Town in Epirus, where they usually embark for Constantinople.

Bastillca, a Country in the Island of Corsica.

Le Bastion de France,, a City near Hippo, now Bonne, in Barbary in Africa;
deserted by the French in 1658.

Bastoigne, Belsonacum, is a Town in the Dukedom of Luxembourgh, near the
Forest of Ardenne; 3 Leagues from Neuf-Chateau, and from Luxembourg. It is
well so built and peopled, that those of the Country call it ordinarily Paris
in Ardenne.

Basure, a River of the South America, falling into the River of Amazons: in
the Country belonging to the Charibes, Indians.

Batavi. See Holland.

Batavia, a City in Java, an Island in the East Indies, built by the Dutch in
the Year 1619. It is very strongly Fortified, seated in a Fruitful Plain, and
well Traded; so that it is now thought one of the principal Cities of that part
of the World: It has a Castle with a good Garrison; and the General Governor
of the Affairs of the Dutch East India Company, for the most part resides here.
This City stands 18 Leagues from Bantam to the East, and 60 from Materan to the
West. The Kings of Bantam made War many years together against it, and in 1659.
besieged it, but without any success; which however much hindered the Growth and
Luster of this City. There is also a River in the Terra Australis, to which the
Dutch have given the same Name.

Batenbourg, a Town and Citadel in the Duchy of Gelderland in the Low
Countries, Two Leagues from Nimeguen. The cruel Duke D' Alva, Beheaded Two
Brothers, Barons of this Place, in 1598. saying, The Jole of one Salmon was
more valuable, than a number of little Fishes.

Bath, Aquae Solis, is a City of Somersetshire, situate upon the River Avon,
which is mentioned both by the Greek and Latin Geographers. It is seated in a
small low Plain, environed round about with Hills of almost an equal height,
out of which many Springs continually fall into the Valley, to the great
Benefit of the Inhabitants. Within this City are three Springs of Hot Water, of
a bluish Color, sending up from them some thin Vapors, and a strong Odor.
These Springs are very Medicinal, and cure many Diseases. They say, Minerva,
the Goddess of Baths and Fountains, had a Temple Consecrated to her in the
Roman times, where the Abbey stands now. Many Roman Inscriptions and Figures in
Ingravery, appear upon the Wells about the Town. It was taken from the Britains
by Cewalin, King of the West Saxons, in 577. In the Reign of William Rufus it
was sacked and burnt. John de Villula de Tours, Bishop of Wells, removed the
So to this place, in the Reign of Henry I. but retained also the Title of
Wells. The most Noble and Loyal John Greenvil, was created Earl of Bath, in
the 19th. of Charles I. Aug. 13. 1643. His Father, Sir Bevil Greenvil, having
been slain at Landsdown near this City, by the Rebels. It stands 15 Miles East
of Bristol. Long. 20. 16. Lat. 51. d. 21. m.

Bathon, a Valley in Macedonia, where the Ancients believed the Giants Combated
with the Gods. Pausanias says, they used to represent the manner of this Fight
in some Sacrifices.

Baticala, a small City of the East Indies, the Capital of a Kingdom of the
same Name; the Prince whereof is a Tributary to the King of Bisnagar: tho it is
very small, yet it has a capacious Haven. There is another of the same Name in
the Island Ceylan, which is the Capital of a Kingdom there; and lately fallen
into the Hands of the Hollanders.

Baticano, a Promontory in Calabria, in the Maps sometimes called Vaticano.

Battle, a Town in Sussex. Remarkable in the English History for the Victory of
William the Conqueror, here obtained, over King Harold, October. 14. 1066. In
memory whereof, he built an Abbey of the Name, called Battel-Abbey. It is a
Market Town in Hastings Rape.

Batter, a large Province in Asia, heretofore called Bactriana. which see

Batta, a Province of the Kingdom of Congo in Africa.

Batten, or Button, an Island in the Indian Ocean, to the West of the Island of
Macassar.

Los Batuecos, a People in the Kingdom of Leon in Spain inhabiting the
Mountains, betwixt Salamanca and Corica. They are believed to descend from the
Goths.

Bavais, Bagacum, Bagacum Nerviorum, a very ancient Town in Hainault in
Flanders, about 4 Leagues from Valenciennes, and 6 from Mons. It was twice
burnt in the last Age, and repaired again. The Cerque, Aqueduct, and
Inscriptions here, are sufficient marks of its Antiquity. It stands upon the
little River Osneau.

Bavari, Boij, Bojares, the first of the ancient Germans that passed the Alps,
and fixed their Standards upon the Banks of Tiber. They carried their
victorious Arms even into Greece, beyond the Hellespont. These were the ancient
Inhabitants of Bavaria. See Bavaria.

Baudisten, a Town in Lusatia, a Territory belonging to the Elector of Saxony;
between Misnia and Bohemia, where the Governor resides.

Bauge, a small Town in Anjou in France, where Charles VIII. then Dolphin,
obtained a signal Victory against the English, commanded by the Duke of
Clarence, who was there slain in 1420. It stands 3 Leagues from La Fleche, upon
the River Covesnon. Built by the old Earls of Anjou. Another in the Province of
Bresse in the same Kingdom, giving the Title of a Marquess, besides its Name to
a Family, who have been the Sovereigns of Bresse above 400 years. In Latin
Balgiacum, the other Balgium.

Baugenci, Balgentiacum, a Town upon the Loyre. In the Province of Orleans,
betwixt Blois and Orleans. In 1152. a Council here Assembled, to take
Cognizance of the degree of Parentage betwixt Lewis VII. King of France, and
Eleanor his Wife, Duchess of Guienne, Daughter to William X. the last Duke of
Aquitain: (which said Degree of Parentage, rendered their Marriage nulland void
from the beginning:) pronounced sentence of Divorce betwixt them; whereupon the
said Princess remarried to Henry Duke of Normandy, afterward Henry II. King of
England; and in her Right, Aquitane fell to the Crown of England. In 1428. the
English took Baugenci, under the Command of the Earl of Salisbury, but
abandoned it to the French the the Year after. For some time it continued under
particular Sovereigns, who bought and sold it till the Year 1543. by arrest of
Parliament, it was united to the Demains of the Crown of France.

Baulme, a Town in the higher Burgundy or Franche Comte; 2 small Leagues from
hence you see a natural deep and spacious Cave in the Earth, which furnishes
the Country with continual Ice in the Summer, and in the Winter flows with
Water.

Bauman, a vast Cave in the County of Regenstein in the lower Saxony, where
they find numbers of Bones of diverse Animals, and sometimes of Men as big as
Giants.

Bautrey, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of
Strafford.

Bautzen, Budisinum, the principal Town of Lusatia in Germany, seated upon the
River Sprew, 7 Leagues from Dresden East. This place being attacked by the Duke
of Saxony in the Year 1634, Goltz the Governor for the Emperor, firing the
Suburbs to give the Enemy a stop, the fire in the confusion seized the Town,
and burnt it all down, many Persons perishing in the Flames. This place was
thereupon left to the Elector of Saxony, who is still possessed of it, but
before it was a Free and Imperial City.

Bayonue, Baiona, Boiatum, a very large, rich, strong City; seated upon the
River Adour, about 2 Leagues from the Sea, in the Confines of the Kingdoms of
France, and Spain; honored with a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ausch;
and has a large Haven on the British Sea. It stands 6 Leagues from the
Confines of Spain, 7 from Dax to the West, and 30 from Bourdeaux to the South.
There was a famous Congress in this City between Charles IX. with Catharine de
Medices his Mother, and Elisabeth Sister of Charles, Wife to Philip II. King of
Spain: in which an Agreement was closely made between the two Crowns to ruin
the Protestant Religion, both in France and the Low Countries; which was
followed by Rivers of Human Blood, shed on that account: this was in the Year
1566 and mentioned by Thuanus and Grotius. Also a Town in the Kingdom of
Galicia in Spain, near the mouth of the River Minho, which falls into the
Atlantic Ocean, betwixt it and Lima.

Baux, a Town in Provence in France, giving the Title of a Marquess: it is
situated upon a Rock, with a good Castle thereto, near Arles. There is an
illustrious House of this Name in Provence, and it is uncertain whether that
has denominated the Castle of Baux, or the Castle it.

Babaria, called by the Germans Beyeren, a Dukedom in Germany; the second
Circle in the Empire; having its name from the Avares, a People of the Huns,
who possessed this Country. It is also called Bojaria, from the Boii of France,
who once dwelt here. And in the times of the Roman Empire, Noricum. Bounded on
the North by Franconia, on the West by Schwaben, on the South by the Italian
Alps, and on the the East by Austria and Bohemia, Before the Treaty and Peace
of Westphalia, it had lesser Bounds: but then it was not only raised in Honor,
the Duke of Bavaria being made the VIII. Elector, but enlarged as to its
Extent. This Country had Kings (after it was Conquered) from the Romans, to the
times of Arnolphus the Emperor; and S. Lewis is said to have declared his Son
Lewis King of Bavaria, in the Year 817. From those times to ours they have had
Dukes; the first was Arnolphus, slain by the Normans, about the Year 891. The
greatest part of this Country is Fruitful, and well cultivated, and has many
noble and stately Cities, the principal of which is Munchen, (Monachium) seated
on the Isar. The Family thereof gained the Upper Palatinate, by the Peace of
Munster. He is of the Communion of the Church of Rome, and the far greatest
part of his Subjects; by which and their new Grants and Dignities, they are
very firmly united to the House of Austria: which the present Emperor has
improved by Marrying his Daughter to the now Duke of Bavaria.

Baz, Ocite, a small Island on the West of Ireland, over against the Earldom of
Desmond in the Province of Munster, North of the Bay of Dingle; called by the
Irish Blasquo.

Baza, Basti, a City of the Kingdom of Granada in Spain. It was once a Bishops
See, under the Archbishop of Eluire, at which time it was well Fortified; but
now it is little inhabited, and every day decays; it stands upon the Borders of
the Kingdoms of New Castile, and Murcia, 6 Leagues from Guadix to the
South-East, 15 from Granato, and Gaen, or Jaen to the North-East, and 16 from
Almeria to the North; it is built at the Foot of an Hill, in a Valley called
from it Hoya de Baya, by an inconsiderable Brook.

Bazadois, Vasata, a small Territory in the Lower Guienne in France, which has
the River Garonne on the North and West, Agenois on the East, and Condomois on
the South. It has its name from Bazas, the principal City of it, and a Bishops
See, under the Archbishop of Ausch; this City stands searce 3 Miles from the
River Garonne toward the South, 7 from Bourdeaux to the North-East, 10 from
Condomois, and 17 from Ausch. It is mentioned by the Ancients under the name of
Cossium Vasatum, Civitas Vasatica, and Vasatae Arehosae. And likewise the
People of the Territory of Bazadois by the name of Vasates, who were the same
perhaps with the Cocosates of Pliny and Caesar.

Bazaim, [ Barace] a vast Tract of Land but very barren which lies between
Egypt, and the Kingdom of Tunis in Africa; the same which was called Marmarica,
as Bochart says. Also a Town in the Kingdom of Guzurate in the hither
East Indies: situated upon the Coast of the Gulf of Cambaia, 26 Leagues from
Daman to the South. It has been in the hands of the Portuguese ever since the
Year 1534. who have built a good Citadel with several stately Churches in it,
and made it a fine Town; therefore fuller of Gentry than Goa; insomuch that
Fidalgos de Bazaim, a Gentleman of Bazaim, is become a Proverb with the
Portuguese.

Bazano, a Mountain of Abruzzo, in the Kingdom of Naples in the Territory of
Aquila; of which mention is made in the Life of S. Justin.

Bazas. See Bazadois.

Bazois, a District in France in the Dukedom of Nivernois.

Beaconsfield, a Market Town in Buckinghamshire, in the Hundred of Burnham, on
a small Hill.

Beareford, was a small Monastery built by the Danes in Greenland about 300
Years since, but now a long time ago deserted and ruined.

Bearne, a fruitful and well Watered Territory in the South of France, advanced
to the Honor of a Principality. It lies at the foot of the Pyrenean Mountains,
which part it from the Kingdom of Aragon toward the South; upon the East it
has the County of Bigorre, and Armagnac le Noir; upon the North Gascogny, and
upon the West the Kingdom of Navarr. This Country had heretofore Princes of its
own, one of which by a Marriage with Elenora Queen of Navarr, united it to that
Kingdom. Henry IV. brought it to the Crown of France, and by a Decree it was
annexed for ever to that Kingdom in 1620.

Beaucaire, a small City in the Province of Languedoc in France; upon the River
Rhosne, right over against Tarascon; 4 Leagues from Avignon toward the South,
and 3 from Arles toward the North; most remarkable for its Fairs. It is called
in Latin, Belloquadra. This Town was taken and retaken in the Civil Wars of
France. It had a Castle in it built upon a Rock to the River side, which the
last King commanded to be demolished.

Beauce or Beausse, Belsia, a Province of France, that heretofore was of very
large extent, but is now much less, and the Bounds not well known. It lies
between the Loyre on the South, and the Seyn to the North; the principal Towns
in it are, Chartres, Chasteaudun, Montoir, Pluviers, Estampes, and Vendosme.
This Province lying so near to Paris, a considerable part of it has been taken
into the Isle of France. The Soil is dry, but very fruitful, and abounding in
all things, especially Corn; so that it is called totius Galliae Horreum, the
Storehouse or Granary of all France.

Beauchamp, a place near Calais in Picardy. The Duke of Somerset is Baron of
Beauchamp.

Beaufort, a Castle in the Dukedom of Anjou in France; which belonged
heretofore to the House of Lancaster, and was much beloved by John of Gaunt;
who caused all his Children that he had by Catharine Swinford to be called
Beauforts, who were afterward Dukes of Somerset and Exeter, and Earls of
Dorset. The most noble Henry Somerset late Marquess of Worcester being
descended from the ancient Dukes of Somerset, was December 2. 1682. by Charles
II. of most blessed Memory, created Duke of Beaufort This Castle lies about 3
Leagues East of Angiers, and 2 from the Loyre. And is now possessed by the
House of Beaumanoir-Lavardin, with the inferior Title of an Earl from the King
of France. There is another Beaufort in Champagne: this is a small Town, but
honored above the other with the Title of a Duchy by Henry le Grand, in the
year 1597. which Title has been granted by Lewis XIII. to the House of Vendosme.

Beaujalois, a small Country contained in the Lyonnois a Province in France
with the Title of a Barony. It takes its name from the Town Beaujeu. in Latin
Bdujovium or Beltiecum, upon the River Ardiere; the same does the House of
Beaujeu.

Beaumaris, a Town in the Island of Anglesey, with a Port to the River Menay.
It is called in Latin Bellomariscus; and Elects one Burgess for the Parliament.

Beaumont in Argonne, a Town in the little Country of Argonne near the Mense in
France. It suffered much in the Civil Wars of that Kingdom.

Beaumont sur Oyse, a Town upon the Oyse, at the foot of an Hill in the Isle of
France, about 8 Leagues from Paris toward the North.

Beaumont le Roger, a Town in the Dukedom of Normandy in France, upon the River
Rugle; Four Leagues from Eureux toward the West, and about 6 from Roan toward
the South; so called from Roger one of its Counts, who built or at least
enlarged it; it having the Honor to give that Title. There is another Town
called Beaumont also near the Sea Shore, in the District belonging to Coutance;
three Leagues West of Cherbourg.

Beaumont, a Town of Hainaut in the Netherlands, adorned with the Title of a
Dukedom, to which belongs a Castle; it stands 7 Leagues from Mons to the
South-East, and 4 from Chimay to the North, and about 2 from the Sambre.

Beaumont le Vicomte, a small City in the Dukedom of Maine, which has the Honor
to be a Dukedom; it lies in the middle between Mayenne and Alenzon, upon the
River Sarte: And having formerly been a Viscounty, for that reason retains this
name.

Beaune, a Town in Burgundy famous for the excellent Wines it yields. In Latin,
Belna; it stands upon the River Burgeoise, 4 Leagues from the Sone, betwixt
Dijon Autun and Chalon. Lewis XII. built it a Castle: there is a great number
of Churches and Monasteries in it, and particularly the Hospital is one of the
finest Structures in the Kingdom.

Beauty, was heretofore a Royal Castle upon the Maine near the Wood of
Vincennes, belonging to the Kings of France; and Honored with this name,
because it deserved it. Charles V. King of France, died here in 1380. Some
Ruins of it are yet to be seen.

Beauvais, Caesaromagus, a City of the Isle of France, which is a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Rheims; the Bishop is one of the 12 Peers of France: it
is well fortified, and the Capital of a Diocese of the same name; and stands
upon the River Terrain, 16 Leagues from Paris toward the North, 18 from
Abbeville, and 16 from Roan toward the East. In 1114. Conon Bishop of
Palestine the Popes Legate held a Council here, which Excommunicated the
Emperor Henry V. This Country of Beauvoisis was the Seat of the ancient
Bellovaci, so honorably mentioned by Julius Caesar.

Beauvois, Bilumnum, a Village in Savoy.

Bechir, Ligir, a River of Boetia, now called by the Turks, Seramulipa.

Bechires, an ancient People of Scythia, who came with Attila into Italy; and
further we have no account of them, but that of their hard drinking of the Wine
there.

Bechria, the Lower Egypt.

Beckles, a Market Town in Suffolk, in the Hundred of Wangford, upon the Banks
of the River Waveney. The Grammar School here is endowed with 10 Schollarships
for Emanuel College in Cambridge.

Becsangial, Bithynia, a Province of the Lesser Asia.

Bed, the Mountains of the Moon in Aethiopia.

Bedal, a Market Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Hang
East, upon the River Swale and a small Stream there falling into it.

Bedalac, Lethes, a River of Andalusia, commonly called Guadalete; it falls
into the Ocean at Cadis.

Bedford, Lactodurum, or Lactodorum, one of the most ancient Towns in England,
being mentioned by Antoninus. It stands on both sides of the River Ouse, which
is here covered with a Stone Bridge. This Town is more to be commended for its
pleasant Situation and Antiquity, than for the Beauty or Greatness of it,
though it has 5 Churches. It is the Principal or County Town; so it sends 2
Burgesses to Parliament. In the Year 572. the Saxons under Cuthwolf defeated
the Britains near this place. Afterward it gave the Title of Duke to John of
Lancaster, Son to Henry IV. and Brother to Henry V. who was the Regent of
France under Henry VI. The same Title was continued to Jaspar of Hatfield Uncle
to Henry VII. The Honorable William Russel and his Ancestors, have born the
Title of Earls of Bedford, ever since the third Year of Edward VI.

Bedfordshire, is bounded on the East and South by Cambridgeshire and
Hertfordshire; on the Westby Buckinghamshire, and on the North by
Northamtonshire and Huntingtonshire. The River Ouse divides it into 2 parts;
the North parts of it are most fruitful, and better Wooded; the Southern parts
tho leaner, yet are not altogether barren, but yield good Crops of Barley. Sir
John Russel Comptroller of the Household to Henry VIII. was created a Baron in
1538. and Earl of Bedford by Edw. VI. in 1548 whose descendent William the
fifth Earl of this Family, now enjoys it.

Bediford, a Market Town in Devonshire, in the Hundred of Shebbear: the Earl of
Bath has a Noble Seat here. It stands upon the River Towridge.

Bedovins, a wild People dwelling in the several quarters of the Deserts of
Arabia in Tents, (whence heretofore they got the name of Scenitae) and not to
be persuaded by any Invitations to settle in Towns. They divide themselves into
Tribes and Families, and take their quarters accordingly under their respective
Chiess: but their principal business is to rob the Caravans that go to Mecca,
for which attempts they are provided with Horse and Arms.

Befort, a strong Town in Alsatia, in the Territory of Suntgow, 4 Leagues from
Pfirt to the West, and about 7 from Basil to the West also. This was yielded to
the French by the Treaty of Munster: heretofore the head of an Earldom.

Behemerland, the Kingdom of Bohemia.

Behemerwald, a part of the Hercynian Forest lying in Bohemia.

Behenhauseu, a Town of Schwaben, in the Dukedom of Wirtemberg.

Beja, a City of Portugal, anciently called Pax Julia; it lies in the Province
of Entre-tejoe Guadiana, near the River Odiarca which falls into the Guadiana;
well built, fortified, and has the Title of a Dukedom; it stands 2 Leagues from
the Guadiana, toward the West; called Pacca by the Moors.

Bejar, a Village of the Kingdom of New Castile in Spain, upon the River
Madera, in the Borders of the Kingdom of Murcia; searce 2 Leagues from Alcaraz
to the East. This is most propably thought to be the Roman Bigerra.

Bejar de Melena, a ruined City of Andaluzia in Spain. Some take it to be the
Mellaria of the Ancients, which was the Birthplace of the excellent Geographer
Pomponius Mela.

Beila, or Beia, a Town in the Kingdom of Tunis in Africa, thought to be the
Bulla regia of the Ancients. It has the happiness to stand in a Soil that is so
exceeding fruitful, that the People say there, if they had two Beia's, there
would be as many Grains of Corn in Africa, as Grains of Sand in the Sea.

Beilstein, Bilistinum, a small Town in the Province of Weteraw in Germany,
bearing the Title of an Earldom. Its Situation is betwixt Marpurg, Nassau, and
Coblentz.

Bein Elnabarim, the Persian Gulf.

Beira, a very large Province upon the Seacoast of Portugal, accounted 130
Miles long and 95 broad, and divided into 6 Counties, the chief City whereof is
Coimbra. The same was the Seat of those ancient People of Spain, called
Transcedani, says Vasconcellos.

Belac, a Town in the Province of March in France, under the generality of
Limoges, upon the little River Vincon, which receives here below the Seve and
the Basile.

Belay, Belica, a City that heretofore belonged to the Duke of Savoy, but in
1601. was taken from him by Henry IV. It is the Head of the Territory of
Baugey, and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Besancon; it stands upon a
rising Ground near the River Rhosne, not above 12 Miles from Lions toward the
East, 10 from Grenoble to the North, and 12 from Geneva.

Beltingham, a Market Town in Northumberland in Tindale Ward.

Belvais, and Belbes, Pelusium, was a City seated upon the most Eastern Branch
of the Nile, toward Palestine. Though this City is entirely ruined, and
another called Damiata or Damietta is sprung out of it, which I shall mention
in its proper place; yet the State of the ancient Town ought here to be
described. This place in Scripture is called Sin; which (as the Greek name
which it afterward bore (...)) signifies Clay or Mire, because it was seated
in a deep Miry Marsh upon the Nile. And it was for many Ages the Key of Egypt;
that Country being of a very difficult Access on the side of Syria; accordingly
when Cambyses invaded Egypt, Polyoenus in his 7th. Book de Stratag. tells us,
that Cambyses vigorously attacked Pelusium, and the Egyptians as courageously
defended it, (...), Shutting up the Entrance of Egypt against him. Diodorus
Siculus tells us, the Kings of Egypt fortified this place on the same account,
with the utmost care and diligence; see M. Bochart in his Geographia Sacra.
lib. 4. cap. 27. The Grecian Race of Kings were no less careful of the keeping
this Place; and after the Romans had it they did not neglect it neither: Aelius
Hadrianus, one of their Emperors, encompassed it with 3 Walls, and called it by
his own name Aeliopolis. In the times of Christianity it was the Seat of an
Archbishop under the Patriarch of Alexandria. But when the Arabians and
Saracens prevailed, they, as their Custom is, entirely ruined this ancient and
most Noble City; and built another on the opposite Shore of the Nile, which
they called Damiata. Pelusium stands 150 Miles from Alexandria to the East, and
120 from Memphis or Grand Cairo, to the North-East, and not far from the
Mediterranean Sea: in Long. 63. 20. and Lat. 32. 20.

Beleguanza, This has passed with diverse for a Province of Abyssinia; but
Ludolfus informs us, there are 2 Kingdoms in Abyssinia, called Bali and Ganz;
and ^ hat Baleguanza, instead of a Province, is but a Composition of their 2
Names.

Belenas, a City of Palestine, called Dan in Ancient times,

Beles, Subi, a small River of Catalonia, which falls into the Mediterranean
Sea between Barcelona and Tarragona, at the Town of Siges.

Belesine, a Town in the Upper Perch in France, where the States of the
Province ordinarily assemble. It is honored with a Castle.

Belesta, a Fountain in the County of Foix in Aquttain in France; which is
particular for havinga flux and reflux, increasing and decreasing continually
every Hour, from the end of July to the beginning of December.

Belforte, there are 3 places thus called; one in Narbone in France, the Seat
of the old Vocontii, upon the Durance; another in Istria, and a third in
Calabria Vlterior.

Belgart, a Town in the Dukedom of Pomerania in the Territory of Cassuben;
which lies between the Baltic Sea, and Prusia upon the River Persante; 2 Miles
from the Baltic Sea, and 3 from Colberg.

Belgan, a vast Mountain in Tartary, called Imaus by the Latin Geographers;
which runs very near the whole length of Asia, from North to South. See Imaus.

Belgae, a Warlike and Hardy People of the ancient Gallia Belgica, mentioned
with Honor by Jul. Caesar. For their Boundaries, See Gallia. The name now of
Belgae and Belgium, all know, is given to the Low Countries.

Belgiojosa, a Village and Castle in the Dukedom of Milan, within 5 Miles of
Pavia near the Po, belonging to the Counts of Barbiano.

Fort Belgique, Arx Belgica, the name that the Hollanders have given to one of
their Forts in the Island of Nera belonging to Banda, amongst the Moluccaes.

Belgrade, Alba Graeca, called by the Germans, Griechisch Weissemburg, by the
Italians Belgrado, is a great and strong City belonging to the Kingdom of
Hungary, seated upon the South side of the Save, where it falls into the
Danube, in the Province of Rascia; this was a long time the Bulwark of
Christendom against the Turks, who lost several Armies before it. Amurath II.
lost here a Victorious Army in 1439. and when Mahomet II. his Son besieged this
City a second time, An. 1456. with an Army of 250000 Men, the brave Huniades
preserved it, and ruined that vast Army by a Stratagem; for he suffered a Party
of the Turks to enter the Town, and whilst they were Plundering the Houses,
made a Sally upon those without, took their Cannon and turned them upon
themselves; in the Confusion destroying 40000 of them, and possessed himself of
their Cannon, Camp, Baggage and Ammunition; so that the Turks were forced to an
inglorious Flight. Johannes Huniades died the same year of the Plague. But in
1521. Solomon the Magnificent took it after a Siege of two Months, Lewis then
King of Hungary a Child of 15 Years of Age not regarding it, and all the other
Christian Princes being engaged in mutual and destructive Wars. The
Imperialists won it again Sept. 6. 1688. by Storm: about 600 Christian Slaves
were happily released on the occasion; who being most of them chained together
and placed before a Party of Turks to screen them from the Fury of the
Soldiers, obtained Quarter for themselves and their Enemies. But the Turks
possessed themselves again of it, Oct. 8. 1690. a chance Bomb communicating a
Fire from one Magazine to another with so much fury, that a great number of the
Garrison were blown up with the Walls and Ramparts, the Ditch filled and so
large a passage made for the Enemy, that they entered by entire Squadrons, and
cut to pieces all they met. This City belongs properly to Servia; the Despot of
which Consigned it over to Sigismund King of Hungary, for Lands of a better
value; distant from Vienna 102 German Miles, 26 days Journey from
Constantinople. Leo X. made it a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Antivari
in Dalmatia. Long. 47. 00. Lat. 46. 50.

Beligrard, Hermonassa, a small Town or City of Bessarabia, toward the Mouth
of the River Moncastro, by the Moldavians called Bialogrod, and by the Turks
Beligrard. See Bialogrod.

Bella more. The White Sea.

Bellac, a small City in the County of La March in France, upon the River
Vnicou, 2 Leagues from Dorat to the South and seven from Limoges to the North.

Belle, or Bailleul, a Town in Flanders, three Leagues from Ipre.

Bellegarde, a small City in the Dukedom of Burgundy, upon the River Saone, [
Arar]. This City was once very well fortified; it stands 5 Leagues from Challon
to the North, and not far from the Borders of the Dukedom. In 1620. itself was
advanced to the Title of a Dukedom. Likewise the name of a strong place in the
County of Rousillon upon the Frontiers of Catalonia, betwixt Ceret and
Jonquera. The Spaniards made themselves Masters of it in 1674. and after they
had fortified it were obliged to surrender it to the French again, when they
attacked it under the Command of the late famous Marshall Schomberg.

Belle-Ifle, Calonesus, an Island upon the Southern Coast of Britany in France,
not far from the Port of Breast; 6 Leagues in Length and 2 in Breadth, called by
the Dutch Boelin. It is furnished with a good Road and Castles to secure it,
and carries the honor to be advanced to a Marquisate. Likewise an Island
belonging to China in the Eastern Ocean, having the Province of Fuquien to the
West, and the Philippins to the South. In Latin styled Formosa. The Hollanders
did their utmost endeavors to settle in it, but were expelled thence by the
Chinese. Its chief Towns are Toyoan, Gillira, Wankan, etc.

Belle-Perche, a Town in the Dukedom of Bourbonne in France upon the River
Allier.

Belluna, a City of the Marquisate of Trevigiana, which is the chief, and gives
name to a small Territory, under the Dominion of the Commonwealth of Venice. It
is little but fair, and a Bishops See, under the Patriarch of Aquileja. And
stands upon the River Piave, which falls into the Gulf of Venice, 13 Leagues
from Venice to the South-East; the City of Belluno lies 15 Leagues from Feltria
to the South-East.

Belvoir Castle, a noble Seat of the Earl of Rutland's in Lincolnshire, in the
Hundred of Grantham, yielding a most delightful and spacious Prospect. The
Astroites, a Stone irradiated with Beams like a Star, thought heretofore to be
an infallible signal of Victoctory to him that wore one, is found about this
Place.

Belz, a City of Black Russia in the Kingdom of Poland, 5 Leagues from the
River Bug, between Lembourg and Zamosky. This City is small, and built all of
Wood, but yet it is a Palatinate, and possessed at present by a Person of great
Worth.

Beltz, or Belts, the Name of the Baltic Sea, taken from two very narrow
Streights thereof so called, the one betwixt the Islands of Funen and Zeland,
the other betwixt Funen and the Terra firma of Jutland; which are rarely ever
passed by Vessels of great Burden, because the Sound is both a deeper Water
and larger than they. The March of Charles Gustavus King of Sweden with his
Army over this Passage upon the Ice, was certainly one of the most adventurous
and memorable Actions of the War the last Age, neither is there an Example like
it to be found in any other.

Belvedore, a Province in the Morea, heretofore called Elis, the Capital Place
is so called also; it lies in the Western Part over against Zant. In ancient
time, Pausanias says, the Silks of this Country were finer, and more esteemed
than those of Judea. It is a pleasant Country, and has its Name from its
beautiful Prospect. There is another place near Syracuse in Cicily, of the same
name, which was called by the Ancients Euryalus. As is also a part of the Popes
Palace at Rome.

Belus, a river of Phaenicia in Syria. It begins its course at the Lake of
Cendavia near Acra; and passes a valley, where the Sands that it amasses
together in vast Quantities, says Pliny, it changes into Glass: yet this is the
least of those Wonders, which that credulous noble Author reports of it.

Bemarin, a Province in Florida, under the command of the King of the
Apalechites, Indians, at the foot of the Mountains; where stands its Capital
Town Melitot.

Bemyster, A Market Town in Dorsetshire, and the chief of its Hundred.

Bena, a Kingdom in the Southern part of Guinea in Africa, with a small City of
that Name, seated on the South side of the River Forcados, about 20 Leagues
from the Ocean; in Lat. 8. d. Long. 31. 50. The People of it are called Sousos.

Benacus, The ancient Name of one of the greatest Lakes in Italy, otherwise now
called Lac de la guard. It extends it self in Length from East to West 30
Miles; in Breadth, about 10. in the Territory of Verona, within the States of
Venice. There was anciently a Town Benacus in these Quarters which gave name to
it. It discharges it self into the Lake of Mantua by the River Menzo, and
thence into the Po.

Benanarim, a Province in Mauritania Tingitana.

Benares, A famous City of Indostan (or the Empire of the great Mogul) upon the
Ganges, in a very good Country. It is the University of the Indies; the general
School for Philosophy, Physic, Astrology, and Pagan Divinity, that serves all
the Gentry and all the ingenious of these Parts. Here the Bramans and the
Pendets, that is, the great Doctors of Paganism, are attended, not as in
Europe indeed in Colleges, but in their Houses and Gardens, with multitudes of
Scholars that study with them many years. They learn first the Divine Language,
called Hanscrit in which they say the holy Books of the Law were written that
God gave to Brama their Prophet. Of this Language we have an Alphabet in
Kircher. It is quite different from the ordinary Indian, and much more ancient;
so that none understand it but their learned Men. Next, they read an
Abridgment, they call Purane, of the Books of their Law; and so pass to
Philosophy. In Philosophy, though they know nothing of the Learning of Greece,
they argue much to the same effect with Plato, Aristotle, Democritus and
Epicurus; and are divided in a manner into the same Sects as they, only with
more Confusion of Thought, with Fables. Astrology they are mightily inclined
to, had they but somemore lights into that Science. Their Physic is for the
most part Receipts: But for Anatomy, they are in no Condition to know it,
because they will not presume to cut up the body either of man or Beast. Some
years since the Doctors of this place held a famous Cabal, which made the more
noise upon the account that they gained the Son of the Great Mogul to their
Opinion. It seems they were fallen upon the Doctrine of an Anima mundi, An
universal Soul and Spirit diffused throughout the World, of which the Souls of
Men and Animals are as so many Portions. And this is also the prevailing
Opinion of the Sophies of Persia.

Benavari, a Town of Aragon in Spain, to which belongs a Castle. It is seated
in the Confines of Catalonia, 6 Leagues distant from Balbastro to the East;
this place is the Capital of the County of Ribagorza; a small ill Peopled place
between the Rivers of Cinea and Segre.

Benavente, a Town in the Kingdom of Portugal, in the Province of Estremadura,
1 League from the Tage or Tajo, 4 from Scalabi, and 9 from Lisbon, supposed to
be the ancient Aritium. There is another Town of the same name in the Kingdom
of Leon, upon the River Esta, which washes the Walls of Leon; It lies in a
Plain, and has a Castle, and is the Capital of the County of Pimentel, 7
Leagues from Sentica to the North, about 12 from Leon to the South, and 15 from
Palantia to the West: perhaps this is the old Vallata. Ferdinand II. King of
Leon, died in this Town in the Year 1118.

Benda, a City of Albania in Macedonia, which is a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Durazzo, [ Durrachium] It now lies in Ruins, under the slavery of
the Turks, and the Bishop resides at Mamoli; yet from this place the adjacent
Country is called Benda, under which Title is included also Sermenica, a small
District toward Croia, as I have heard (says M. Baudrand) from the Archbishop
of Durazzo.

Bendarmasin, a City and Kingdom in the Southern part of the Island of Borneo
in the East Indies, about 3 Degrees from the Line on the West.

Been, a small Town in Piedmont, sometime bearing the Title of an Earldom. The
Spaniards besieged it in 1553. unsuccesfully: its Fortifications have been
ruined since.

Benevento, Beneventum, a City of the Principatus Vlterior in the Kingdom of
Naples, which is an Archbishops See, belonging to the Pope, upon the River
Sabato, where it takes in the River Tamora: built by Diomedes, together with
Arpi, a City of Apulia, and called the Colony of Concordia by Frontinus. It
lies 28 Miles from Capua to the East, and 32 from Naples to the North-East.
This was the Country of those two ancient Grammarians, the Orbilii. Victor III.
and Gregorius VIII. Popes were born here. Not far from it Manfred King of
Sicily was slain in the Year 1266. by Charles Duke of Anjou. This City was
granted to Leo IX. by Henry IV. in exchange for Bamberg in the Year 1053. when
he came into Italy to be Crowned. It was one of the 18 Colonies which continued
faithful to the Romans against Hannibal: ruined afterward by Totila, and
rebuilt by the Lombards who made it a Dukedom. The Saracens became after this
Masters of it; from whom Lewis II. Emperor, took it in the Year 866, and
granted it to Aldegisus in the 871. Now annexed to the Papacy. A dreadful
Earthquake which happened in June 1688. did almost totally ruin it; scarce 600
of the Inhabitants out of as many thousand and upward being left alive; amongst
whom Cardinal Vrsini their Archbishop was taken out of the Ruins of his own
Palace. The Dukedom of Benevento was once a considerable part of the South of
Italy, in the times of the Lombards, and Charles the Great: instituted by
Autharius King of the Lombards, and ended in the Year 851. when the Saracens
conquered it. In 866. it was reconquered by the Germans: in 1053. it was
granted to the Pope, but much restrained as to its Bounds: yet then it took in
the greatest part of the Principatus Vlterior. Since which the Spaniards have
restrained it; so that it extends not above 3 or 4 Miles from the Walls of the
City.

Benfeild, once a Walled Town, or City of Alsatia* but dismantled by the Treaty
of Munster; under the Dominion of the Bishop of Strasburg; from which it lies
about 3 German Miles toward the South upon the River Ill, about 2 Miles from
Rhinaw toward the North-West.

Bengale, a Kingdom in the East Indies, on the River Ganges, under the Dominion
of the great Mogul for many past Ages, but which had before Kings of its own.
It is a very fruitful Country, and extends 220 Leagues from East to West, and
120 from North to South. Bounded on the East by India extra Gangem, on the
South by the Bay of Bengale, on the West and North by the Territories of the
Mogul. The City of Bengale lies in the bottom of the Bay, in the most
North-Eastern Angle of it, upon the River Cosmite. It is great, and drives a
vast Trade with the European Nations, as generally Authors say that have
written of Bengala; yet some modern Accounts will tell us, there is no Town or
City of this Name there.

Benges, a River which rises in the Lower Austria, and entering the Lower
Hungary, falls into the River Rab.

Benguola, a Country of the Lower Aethiopia, and a Town there with a good Port
to the Sea of Congo, which the Hollanders have been Masters of for some time.
This Country lies in the Kingdom of Angola.

Benibessera, a large Country in Libya in Africa, upon the Borders of the
Kingdom of Tremissen.

Beni-Gebara, a Mountain in the Province of Cuzt in the Kingdom of Fez in
Africa: so well inhabited that it is able to produce 7000 fighting Men; and so
fruitful, that they may endure a Siege of 10 Years without the fear of a
Famine. The Avenues of it are very difficult. Thence the Inhabitants preserve
their Liberty inviolate, paying a Tribute to the King of Fez.

Beni-Guazeval, a Mountain containing above 120 Villages, together with a good
large Town, in the Kingdom of Fez in Africa, in the Province of Errif: yet at
the very top, opens and casts forth Flames of Sulphur.

Benin, a Kingdom of Guiney in Africa with a Town of the name upon the River
Behin. It is the best Town belonging to the Negroes. The said River discharges
it self soon after into the Gulf of S. Thomas.

Ben-Oriegan, a Mountain in the Province of Errif, in the Kingdom of Fez in
Africa, toward the Coast of the Mediterranean: 3 Leagues in length, in breadth
about half that: curiously enriched with Vines, Olives, and the odoriferous
Cedars.

Beni-Suaid, a Town upon the Banks of Nile in Egypt, 2 Leagues from Cairo. It
stands in a large Plain, which abounds with Line and Hemp.

Beni-Tendi, a ruined Town in the Province of Habat, in the Kingdom of Fez,
upon the River Erguile. The Rests of stately Edifices, ^ombs, and Fountains do
incur here the Eye of the Spectator.

Beni-Usa, or Bervira, a fruitful and well Inhabited Mountain in the Province
of Errif in the Kingdom of Fez, near the Mountain of Gualida. The Inhabitants
of these 2 Mountains are almost continually at War.

Beni-Yasga, a Mountain in the Province of Cuzt in Africa, in the Kingdom of
Fez, inhabited by a Rich and Martial People. There is an abundance of Vines,
and Olives, and Cattle, and Corn upon it. The River Cebu or Suba glides near it.

Benthem, a Town and Castle of Westphalia, which stands upon the River Vidrus,
near Oldenzael, and is the Head of a small County in the West part of
Westphalia; called in the German Tongue das Grathrtchaft von Benthem: lies
between the Bishopric of Munster to the East, Over-Yssel and the Territory of
Tuvent to the West; and upon the North and South it is enclosed by the River
Vechta. The Castle or Town of Benthem lies 2 Miles from Oldenzael, a Town in
the South-East Angle of the Province of Over-Yssel; ten from Deventer to the
East.

Bentivolio, Pons Poledranus, a Castle in the Dominions of the Church, in the
Territory of Bononia; from which City it lies 10 Miles toward the North, in
the Road to Ferrara; heretofore a Noble Pile, but now half ruined: this gave
name to the Family of the Bentivolio's, who for many Years Principatum Bononiae
tenuere, were Princes of Bononia. And of later times this Family has afforded
some excellent Persons.

Bera, a City of the Kingdom of Granada, commonly called Vera.

Beraun, a small Town in Bohemia upon the River Mies: 3 German Miles from
Prague toward the West: called by the Germans Bern, in Latin Berauna and
Verona.

Berbero, Arbis, a River of Persia, in the Province of Send, [ Sinda] which
borders East upon India propria, and West upon Macran.

Berckel, Velicer, the same with the River Aa, in Westphalia.

Berdoa, a desert Country in Zaara in Africa, betwixt the Kingdom of Gaoga and
the Country of Lempta. There is a Town in it of the same name. Sands, Scorpions
and Monsters are almost the only things to be seen here.

Bear Regis, a Market Town in Dorsetshire. The chief of its Hundred.

Bereberes, an ancient People of Barbary in Africa, divided into 5 Tribes
called the Mazamudins, Zenetes, Haoares, Zinhagiens and Gomeres; from which the
Grandees of Africa derive their Original. They came hither out of Arabia Foelix
under Melech-Ifiriqui King of the said Arabia, and in time made themselves
Masters of a great part of Africa; often Usurping upon each other for the
Government, till they were all Conquered by the Turks.

Berecynthus, a Mountain of Phrygia in Asia Minor, famous heretofore for the
Worship of the Goddess Cybele, who thence is styled Berecynthia.

Berenice. See Bernish.

Berg, or Berghen, the Dutch and German names for Mons, a City of Hainault.
Also a Province of Westphalia in Germany, lying along the Rhine, betwixt the
County of Mark and the Bishopric of Cologne, called the Duchy of Berg, and in
Latin Bergensis Regio. Dusseldorp is its Capital Town.

Bergamo, Bergomum, a City of Italy, belonging to the Venetians, which was once
a part of the Dukedom of Milan: a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Milan;
built with others by the Orobii; called by Paulus Diaconus, Pergamum; and by
the Writers of the middle Ages Bergamum. This City is placed on the side of a
Mountain, the Foot of which is covered by large Suburbs: it is great and
Populous, and lies between the River Brembo, (which 8 Miles further falls into
the Adda) and the Serio, which falls also in the Adda. It has a Castle called
Capella, and it lies 30 Miles from Brixia, toward Milan to the West, and the
same distance from Como to the East; from hence the Family of the Bergoma's
take their name. The same is the Capital of the Country adjacent, called
Bergamasco.

Bergen, Bergos, or Berga, a City of Norway on the Northern Ocean, called by
the Natives Baern, by the Germans Berghen. It is a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Drontheim: a celebrated Mart, has a large and safe Harbor,
surrounded almost on all sides with high Mountains, and lies in a winding Bay,
called Jelta fiored, 12 Miles from the Ocean: it has a strong Castle called
Bergen-Hus, and lies in the small Territory of Nord Horland, which is Subject
to the King of Denmark, as King of Norway; 23 from Linde Noes, or the most
Southern Point of Norway, and 80 from the nearest Coast of Scotland; at this
day without dispute, the best and richest City of all Norway. But made more
famous by the Valor of the English, who in 1665. entered this Port, and fell
upon the Dutch East India Fleet, to their great damage; and had certainly
destroyed them all, if contrary Winds had not given them time to draw their
Canon ashore to their defense.

Bergen op Zoom, called by the French, Bergue sur le Zoom, is a small, but
strong City in the Dukedom of Brabant, upon the River Schelde. Erected into a
Dukedom in 1533. and revolting with the United Provinces, was attempted without
success, by the Marques^ Spinola, in 1622. So that it still belongs to the
Hollanders. It stands 7 Leagues from Antwerp toward the North, and 5 from
Breda to the South-West.

Bergen, the chief Town of the Island of Rugen on the Coast of Pomerania in the
Baltic Sea, which has belonged to the Swedes every since 1630.

Bergerac, a City of Perigord, upon the River Dordogne; 5 Miles from Pergueux
to the South, and about 9 from Sarlat; a rich and fine City. The English had it
heretofore in their possession. They Fortified it, and afterward lost it,
about the Year 1371. It revoked upon the score of Religion in 1562. and was
often taken and retaken. In 1621. it submitted itself to Lewis XIII.

Bergue S. Uinoth, a small City in Flanders, taken by the French in the year
1658. and yielded to them by the Pyrenaean Treaty, in 1659. Dignified with the
Title of a Viscounty, as likewise of a Chatelany, with diverse Villages under
its Jurisdiction. It has various Names, and is sometimes called Groenemberg, or
(Green-wich;) it lies 12 German miles East of Gravelinge, and about one League
and a half from Dunkirk. Al. VVinocksberg.

Berkeley, a Market Town in Gloucestershire; The chief of its Hundred, upon the
Banks of the Severn: where stands the Seat of the noble and ancient Family of
the Earls of Berkeley.

Berkhamsted, a Market Town in Hartfordshire, in the Hundred of Dacor. S.
Brithwald, Archbishop of Canterbury, held a Council here in 698. In Latin
Bergamstedum.

Beikshire, Bercheria, is separated on the North by the River Isis from
Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire; on the South by the River Kenet from
Hantshire; on the West it Bordereth upon Wiltshire, and on the East upon Surry;
generally fertile and rich, but especially the Vale of White Horse. The Right
Honorable Thomas Howard was created the first Earl of Berkshire, by Charles I.
in 1625. He was second Coronation Earl, as well as second Son to Thomas Earl of
Suffolk, in which Family it still is; the present Earl being the fourth in the
Succession.

Berlin, Berolinum, or Berlinum, is one of the Noblest Cities in Germany. It
belongs to the Upper Saxony, and stands in the middle Marquisate of
Brandenburgh, upon the River Sprew, which a little further to the North falls
into the Hamel. This City stands in a Marsh, very strongly Fortified, being the
capital of that Marquisate, and the Residence of the Marquisses of
Brandenburgh; divided by the River Sprew into two parts; that on the East side
is called Berlin; that on the West Coln, or the Colony. 17 German Miles from
Magdeburg to the South East, and 11 from Frankfort. Built by Albertus Vnsus,
Prince of Anhalt, In 1142.

Bermudas, or the Summer Islands, are a knot of Islands on the Coast of Florida
(supposed to be 400 in number) 1600 Leagues from England, 1000 from Madera, 400
from Hispaniola, and 300 from Carolina, which is the nearest Continent.
Accidentally discovered by John Bermudaz a Spaniard, about 1522. Sir George
Summers an English Man, being in 1609. sent by the Lord de la Ware to Virginia,
stumbled again upon them, and suffered Shipwreck here; who was so taken with
their verdure, plenty and delightfulness, that he neglected his return for
England; and with the Assistance of Sir Thomas Gates settled a a Plantation here
in 1612. and in 1616. Capt. Tucker was sent after the first Adventurers with
500 Men who established themselves so well, and fortified the Accesses so, that
it is now thought impregnable. It is one of the most healthful places in the
World; none dying here of almost any other Distemper but old Age: fruitful to a
wonder, abounding in all things needful for the Life of Man but fresh Water,
which is gotten with some difficulty from their Wells and Cisterns, for they
have neither Springs nor Rivers. This Colony filled so fast, that in 1623.
there were said to be 3000 English Inhabitants: called Bermudas from the
Spanish, and Summer Islands from the English Discoverer.

Bermet, a City of the hither East Indies, supposed by Castaldus, to be the
Barbari of Arrian.

Bern, Berna, a great and well built City of Switzerland, which has its name
from a Bear, and carries a Bear for its Arms. Built by Bertoldus Duke of
Zeringhen in 1191. upon the River Aar, which falls into the Rhine at Waldhust,
a Town of Schwaben: and adorned with a Library and an Arsenat that deserve to
be remembered. It is the chief City of the Canton of Bern, which is one of the
largest Cantons, and was added to the rest in 1353. To look a little back into
the ancient History of this City: it obtained the right of an Incorporated City
from the Emperors Henry IV. and Philip II. Confirmed by Frederick II. it
continued under the Empire till 1228. and then put themselves under the
Protection of the Duke of Savoy. In 1241. it had an unfortunate War with
Gothofredus Duke of Habspurg, whereupon in 1243. they made a League with
Freiburg, as also for ten Years with Wallisserlandt, in 1251. In 1287. this
City was besieged by Rodolphus of Habspurg. They suffered much also from
Albertus, who had a set Battle with them near their Walls in 1291. wherein they
lost many Men, but had better Success against the Earl of Savoy the same year.
In 1346. they renewed their League with Freiburg, after which followed the
Perpetual League in 1353. whereby it obtained the second place amongst the
Cantons. In 1528. it embraced the Reformation, and thereupon passed a Law
against mercenary Service in foreign Wars. It stands about 13 Miles from Bazil
to the South, 4 from Freiburg to the North, and about 20 from Geneva to the
North-East. This Canton is so well replenished with Gentry, handsome Towns, good
Castles and Villages, that you may compare it almost to one continued City: and
as for the Civil Government of it, it is managed by two Councils of Senators
under a Chief, whom they call in French an Avoyer, in German Schaltesch; which
last is an old Word in the Laws of the Lombards. See Doctor Burnett's Letters.

Bernards Castle, a Market Town in Durham, in Darlington Wapentake, upon the
River Tees; which takes its name from a Family that first came into England
with the Saxons.

Bernbourg, a small City in Germany, in the Upper Saxony, in the Principality
of Anhalt, upon the River Saaldar, [ Sala] 4 German Miles from Magdebourg
toward the South, and as many from Dessaw to the West. It is dignified with
the Title of an Earldom and the Seat of a Castle.

Bernich, Berenice, a City of Africa upon the Mediterranean Sea, mentioned by
Ptolemy and Pliny, but called Hesperia by Mela; one of the 5 Cities in
Pentapolis; between the Promontory Boreum, (now il Capo di Teiones) upon the
greater Syrtis, and the City of Arsinoe to the East. It had its ancient name
from Berenice the Queen of Ptolemy, the third King of Egypt, as Solinus says.

Bernstadt, Bernardi Vrbs, a Town in Silesia in the Duchy of Olss in Germany
upon the River Veid or Veida: 3 or 4 Leagues from Breslaw.

Beroa, Berrhaea, believed to be the modern Aleppo, was a famous City amongst
the Ancients, reedified by Seleucus Nicanor, and sometime an Archbishops See
under the Patriarch of Antioch. See Aleppo. Also an ancient Town in Macedonia,
near the River Lydius.

Berry, Bituricensis Provincia, Bituriges, a Dukedom in France, bounded on the
North by Sologne, on the East by Nivernois and Bourbone, on the West by
Poictou, and part of Tourein; and on the South by Limosin. The Principal City
of this Province is Bourges; divided into 2 parts by the River Chur: a rich,
fruitful and populous Province. The ancient Inhabitants are famous in History
for the 2 Colonies of Gauls they transmitted into Germany and Italy under the
Command of Segovesus and Bellovesus, both Nephews to Ambigatus King of Gallia
Celtiqua, in the time of Tarquinius V. King of Rome: for from the Conquests by
them made, proceeds the Division of Gallia Transalpina and Cisalpina. See
Gallia.

Bersheba, or Beerseba, an ancient City of Palestine, by the way of Gaza, to
which Abraham and Abimelech gave this name, because of the Covenant they there
mutually ratified by Oath with each other Genesis 21. 31. It fell afterward by
Lot to the Tribe of Simeon, Josh. 19. 2. and committed Idolatry with the
Apostate Tribes, as we collect from Amos 5. 5. and S. Jerome. in loc. Some take
it to be the same now with Gibel.

Bertinoro, Bretinorium, Petra Honorii, a City in the Province of Romagna in
Italy, with a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Ravenna hither removed from
Forlimpopoli. Its Situation is upon a little Hill in the Borders of Tuscany
near the River Renco.

S. Bertrand de Cominges, Convenae, seu Lugdunum Convenarum, a City of France,
at the foot of the Pyrenean Mountains; upon the River Garonne, in the Earldom
de Cominge; which was destroyed by the Franks under King Guntchramnus, in 584
but rebuilt by S. Bertrand, in 1100. and from him in after times it had its
present name. It is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Auch; 25 Leagues from
Thoulouse to the South, and 55 from Bourdeaux to the South-West.

Berwald, a Town beyond the River Oder in the New March, in the Marquisate of
Brandenburgh; remarkable for the Treaty celebrated here in 1631. betwixt the
Crowns of France and Sweden, and the Princes of Germany.

Berwick, Burcovicum, Bervicium, Teusis, a Town in Northumberland, situated
upon the North side of the River Twede; the most Northern Town in the Kingdom
of England, and (says Camden) the strongest hold in all Britain. It stands
upon a Promontory, so that it is almost totally encompassed with the Sea and
River. Delivered up to Henry II. by William King of Scotland, as a Pledge for
his Ransom, being then a Prisoner in England: restored again by King John upon
repayment of the Money. Edward I. in 1297. retook it. After this it was won and
lost diverse times; till in the Reign of Edward IV. Sir Thomas Stanley made a
final reducement of it to the Crown of England. The English Princes have
fortified it, but especially Queen Elizabeth, who Walled it anew within the old
Wall, and added Outworks after the later Modes, by which it was made
incredibly strong. Henry II. built the Castle, and other of our Princes the
outward Wall; so that all its Works are owing to the English. After a long
Peace, in 1639. this Town saw the English and Scotch Encamped under her Walls
again in opposition, till a Peace was concluded there Jane 17. However I find
before the end of the War they were possessed of it, and quitted it, Feb. 17.
1646. March 12. 1686. King James II, created Mr. James Fitz-James his Natural
Son, Duke of Berwick. Ehis Town lies in Long. 21. d. 43. m. Lat. 55. 48. and
sends 2 Burgesses to the English Parliament.

Berytis, or Barut, an ancient City of Phaenicia in Asia upon the Mediterranean
Sea, and sometime an Archbishopric under the Patriarch of Antioch. For in the
16th. Session of the great Council of Chalcedon we find the Bishop of Berytis
taking the Title of a Metropolitan. In the year 1110. Baldwin I. King of
Jerusalem, redeemed this City out of the hands of the Saracens, and settled
particular Governors over it, till it became united with the Crown of
Jerusalem, in whose ruin it received its own; and all the subsistence it now
enjoys depends upon an inconsiderable little Commerce. Ibas Bishop of Edessa,
was accused in a Council here in 448. of Arrianisme, and of treating S. Cyril
as an Heretic; but acquitted.

Besagno, Feritor, a small River which rises out of the Apennine Hills, and
falls by the Walls of Genoua into the Mediterranean Sea:

Besanzon, Bisontio, Vesintio, a City of Burgundy in France, which is an
Archbishops See, upon the River Doux, [ Dubis;] an University, and has a Castle
built of later times. Taken by the Spaniard in 1654 retaken by the French in
1668. and in 1674. and finally left to them by the Treaty of Nimeguen in 1678.
Once an Imperial free City, made so by Henry I. in 1651. exempted from the
Empire, and granted to the Spaniards. The Court of Parliament for the Duchy of
Burgundy sits here: it stands 15 Leagues from Montbelliard to the North-West,
20 from Dijon to the North-East. Joannes Chifletius wrote a particular
Description and History of this City. The old Roman names of Campus Martius,
Vicus Veneris, Vicus Castoris, Mons Jovis and the like, to several quarters
within and without it continue to this day in French, as le Champ Mars, Rue de
Venie, Rue de Chasteur, Mont Jouot etc. Abundance of Urns, Medals,
Inscriptions, Vessels and Instruments of Sacrifice, are daily found here. The
Ruins of the Triumphal Arch erected for the Emperor Aurelian in 274 are yet to
be seen; which are undeniable marks of its being Ancient, as now
notwithstanding all former Misfortunes, it is also a flourishing Place.

Besbre, Besbria, a small River in the Dukedom of Bourbone, which washes the
principal City, and then falls into the Loire.

Besecath, one of the Names of Africa.

Beses, Besos, Baetulo, a small River of Catalonia in Spain, which falls into
the Mediterranean Sea, between Badelona and Barcelona. There stands a small
Town called Beson by it, once Betulo from it.

Besiers, Bliterae, Buterae, a City of Languedoc in France upon the River Orb,
which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Narbone; a fine and well built
place, not above 2 Leagues from the Mediterranean Sea to the North, 11 from
Mompellier to the West, and 3 from Pezenas.

Bessarabia, is a small Territory between Podolia to the North, Moldavia to the
West, the Danube to the South, and the Black Sea to the East. Formerly a part
of Moldavia, but in 1485. Bajazet II. Conquered it, and annexed it to his
Empire, under which it has been ever since; the chief Town of it is Moncastrum,
a very strong Town, taken by the Turks then also. It is called Budziack by the
neighboring Tartars, and by that Name is best known to the present times.

Bestercze, or Bestricze, Bistricia, a City of Transylvania. It stands in a
very large Plain, upon a River of the same Name, which 2 Miles further takes in
the Saio: 5 German Miles North-East from Burgles, and 15 from Weissenburg to
the North-West. It is little and ill built.

Beta, a River of South America, in the Country of Paria, which falls into the
River Orenock.

Betanzos, Flavium Brigantium, a small City in Gallicia in Spain, seated upon
the North side of the River Mandeu, 11 Miles from Mondonnedo to the East.

Betawe, or Betau, a small Territory contained in the Duchy of Guelderland, in
the States of the United Provinces. It seems to retain the Name of the ancient
Batavi, who had their Habitations here. Nimeguen stands in it.

Betente, an Island near Naples, called by the ancients Parthenope.

Bethany, Bethania, an ancient Town and Castle of Palestine near Jerusalem; of
everlasting Fame for the Resurrection of Lazarus from his Grave at the Command
of our Savior here. John 11. There was another Bethany beyond Jordan.

Bethel, that is, in the Hebrew, The House of God, (according to the
Interpretation of Jacob's Dream, Genesis 28. 17. 19.) was a City of Samaria,
called Luz till the Patriarch changed its name. Here Jeroboam erected his
Idols: In derision whereof it was afterward called Bethaven, that is, The
House of Iniquity, says S. Jerome in Oseam. Chapter 4 and 5. Josias destroyed those
Idols.

Bethlehem, that is in the Hebrew, The House of Bread, the Place of the
Nativity of our Savior, and the capital of the Family of David; as likewise
the Birthplace of David: called Bethlehem of Judea in distinction from another
Bethlehem in the Tribe of Zabulon, was never but a small place; two Leagues
from Jerusalem to the South, and 32 from Nazareth. Now Inhabited by about 150
Houses of Turks, Moor's, Arabians, and some poor Christians, that make a Trade
of selling Chapelets and Crucifixes to Pilgrims. Yet St. Mary's Church, built
by Helena, is entire still; and in the particular part of it where our Savior
first entered into this World, within a Circle illustrated with a Glory like the
Rays of the Sun, there are these words Engraved, Hic ex Virgin Maria Jesus
Christus natus est. The Greeks, Armenians, and Latin Cordeliers, have their
several Quarters in this Church. It is a very noble Pile, envied by the Turks,
who therefore have robbed it of some Ornaments to carry to their Mosques. S.
Jerome says, the Pagans heretofore erected the Idols of Adonis and Venus in it
to profane it. In 1110. after the Christians had gained the Holy Land, they
constituted Bethlehem a Bishops See under the Patriarch of Jerusalem. It stands
upon a small Hill, and nothing can be pleasanter than the Valleys about it.
When the Christians were expelled the Holy Land again, in 1223. Raynaud Bishop
of Bethlehem attended Guy Earl of Nevers into France, who conferred upon him
the Administration of an Hospital at Clameci, a small Town in the Diocese of
Auxerre in the Province of Nivernois; which was afterward augmented in Honor
with the Title of Bishop of Bethlehem, to continue to the Successors of the
said Rainaud for ever, in the nomination of the Earls and Dukes of Nevers:
hence there is at this day a Bishop of Bethlehem in France without any Lands or
Diocese.

Bethshan, an ancient Town in Palestine in the Tribe of Menasseh, called
Scythopolis by Josephus and Stephanus. The Philistines fixed the Body of King
Saul to the Walls of this place. 1. Sam. 31. 10.

Bethshemesh, Bethsama, at first called Abel, (1 Samuel 6. 18.) was a Town in
Palestine belonging to the Levites Josh. 21. 16. whither the Ark came, when
dismissed by the Philistines, 1. Sam. 6. 14. and 50000 Bethshemites were
immediately struck with death for presuming to look into it, according to the
common Translations: whereas Josephus, S. Jerome, Isidore, Lyra, Tostatus, and
Bochartus maintain the number of the slain was no more than 70. There was
another Bethlehem in the Tribe of Naphthali, remarked because the old
Inhabitants (the Canaanites) were not driven thence as God had commanded. Jud.
1. 33. And a third in the Tribe of Issachar at the foot of Mountain Carmel.

Bethulia, an ancient, strong and great City in the Tribe of Zabulon in
Galilee; famous for the Siege laid to it by Holofernes, and the Victory of
Judith over his Army and him at one fatal blow. Together with a Fortress
formerly built by the Christians near Bethlehem.

Bethune, a strong well built Town in Artois, upon the River Biette, 8 Leagues
from Arras [ Atrebatum] toward the North, and 5 from Air. It has been under
the French ever since 1645. when it was taken by them; being ceded to them by
the Pyrenean Treaty in 1659. This Town is raised to the Honor of a Marquisate.

Betley, a Market Town in Staffordshire in the Hundred of Pirehill.

Betlis, a City of Armenia, 10 days Journey from Diarbeker, belonging to a
Sovereign Bey or Prince, who neither acknowledges the Grand Seignior nor the
King of Persia; but courted by both as being Master of a Country: so situated
betwixt Mountains and Rivers, that he is able with 10 Men to defend the Passes
against 1000, and intercept the Correspondence of Aleppo and Tunis at pleasure:
he can send into the Field above 20000 Horse and very good Infantry.

Bethsaida, an ancient Town of Palestine in Galilee in the Tribe of Zabulon,
near the the Lake of Genezareth. S. Andrew and S. Philip the Apostles were born
here.

Beveland, an Island of Zeland in the United Netherlands; rent asunder by a
Tempest in 1532. from East to West, and since divided into North and South
Beveland. Goes stands in this Island.

Beverly, a Town in the East Riding of Yorkshire, seated upon the West side of
the River Hull, about a Mile from it: about 5 Miles North of Hull. Camden
supposes it to be the old Petvaria Parisiorum, though there be no signs of a
great Antiquity now to be found. One John Surnamed de Beverly, Archbishop of
York, a Pious and Learned Man in the esteem of Bid, in his old Age resigned
his Bishopric, and retired hither, and in holy Meditations here died in 721.
For the sake of this Holy Person, the Saxon Kings gave great Privileges to this
place, particularly Athelstan by a Grant in these Words, A is Free make I thee,
as Heart may think or Eye may see. They had also a Sanctuary endowed with the
largest Privileges; so that the Town grew great, rich, and populous; governed
at first by Wardens; but Queen Elizabeth made it a Major Town. It sends 2
Burgesses to the Parliament.

Beuray, or Beureet, a Town in the Territory of Autun in Burgundy in France;
supposed to be the Bibracte of Caesar, where he once assembled the Deputies of
all Gallia under him, and oftentimes Wintered his Troops: imparting his own
name Julia to it.

Bewdley, a Market Town in Worcestershire in the Hundred of Doddington, which
sends one Burgess to the Parliament. It stands upon the Severn near the Forest
of Wire; of particular Esteem in the Reign of Henry VII. he building a House
here for Prince Arthur, called Ticken Hall.

Beux, a Village near to Seignelay in the Province of Burgundy in France; made
lately remarkable by one Couallier, surnamed the Phisician of Beux; a Man born
and educated amongst the meanest Employs of the Country; yet he attained to so
singular a Knowledge of all the Species of Diseases and Remedies, without
studying the Faculty in Books or Schools, that not only Monsieur Colbert laid
his obligations upon him to recide at Seignelay, but from all parts they came
to consult him, so that he left to his Son at his Death an Estate of above
100000 Crowns.

Beziers, Biterra, Beterensis Civitas, a great and ancient City in the Province
of Languedoc in France, with the Dignity of a Viscounty and of an Episcopal See
under the Archbishop of Narbonne. It was a Roman Colony in the times of Julius
Caesar and Tiberius; having afterward 2 Temples built in it to the Honor of
Julius and Augustus. In the year 356. the Arians held a Council here against S.
Hilary, which occasioned his Banishment by the Emperor Constantius. The Goths
and Saracens successively ruined it. In 1209. the Croisade cut off 10000 of its
Inhabitants. In 1233. a Council was assembled against the Albigenses at this
place. About the year 1247. it became united to the Crown of France, whereas
before it had been governed by its own Viscounts. It stands upon the River Orb,
2 Leagues from the Sea, and 3 from Agde: and had a Citadel which was
demolished in 1633.

Biafara, a Town and Kingdom in Guiney in Africa: the former stands upon the
River dos Camaornes; the other (that receives its name from it) extends itself
betwixt the Kingdom of Benni, the Niger, and the States of Congo.

Bialacerkiow, Bialaceria, a Town in the Palatinate of Kiovia in the Kingdom of
Poland, upon the River Ros, ill built.

Bialogrod, Arvis, Hermonassa, the principal Town of Bessarabia, seated upon
the Shoars of the Euxine, or Black Sea; 30 Miles from the North outlet of the
River Danube, called Moncastrum, by the later Latin Writers; Bialogrod, by the
Moldavians, and Beligrad by the Turks; under whom it is, being taken by Bajazet
II. in 1485. It lies 60 German Miles from Arhianople, and 63 from
Constantinople to the North.

Biaur, Biaurus, a River in Rovergne in France.

Bibiena, a Town in the Principality of Piedmont in Italy; by some Authors
esteemed to the be Forum Vibii of the Ancients.

Bibrach, Bibacum, Bibracum, a City in Schwaben, in Germany, seated upon a
small River which a very little farther falls into the Riss, which last falls
into the Danube, 2 German Miles above Vlm; this City stands about 5 German
Miles from Vlm to the North-West. This is an Imperial City, and takes its name
from a Castor or Beaver. Under Pepin King of France, about 751. it was a
Village, but Frederick II. walled it. For some signal Services performed under
Maximilian I. the public Arms of it were changed from a Crowned Castor or
Beaver, to a Crowned Lion: it obtained also from Maximilian II. the right of
Sealing with Red Wax. Long. 31. 51. Lat. 48. 00. Written sometimes Biberach;
and famous for the Mineral Waters, they call the Waters of Jordan, within its
Territory.

Bicaner, a Town in the County of Bacar in the East Indies, in the States of
the Great Mogul, understood by some to be the Bardeatis of the Ancients.

Bicestre, an ancient Castle below the Village of Gentilly near Paris. The name
Bicestre is confessed to be but a Corruption of Winchester: for from the time
that John Bishop of Winchester made it his residence, when the English had
Conquered France, it took the name of Winchester Castle from him, and kept it
through the whole course of its Fortunes. Of late, since its total Consumption
and Ruin, Lewis XIII. built an Hospital in the place of it for maimed Soldiers.

Bicester, a Market Town in Oxfordshire in the Hundred of Ploughley.

Bicoqua, a small Town in the Milanese in Italy, 3 Miles from Milan. The French
were here defeated by the Swisse in 1522.

Bidache, a Town upon the River Bidouse in the Territory of Bearne in France; 5
or 6 Leagues from Bayonne. It sustains the Title of a Principality, and has a
Castle which Charles V. never could Conquer.

Bidassoa, Bidasso, and Vidasso, a small River which rises out of the Pyrenean
Hills, in the Confines of Navarr, 7 Miles from S. John's; and presently crossing
the Pyrenean Mountains, it runs between the Territories of Labor in France,
and Guipuscoa in Spain; and falls into the Cantabrian Ocean at Fontarabia,
where it divides France from Spain. Famous for the Pyrenean Treaty here made in
an Island of this River, between the Kings of France and Spain, Nov. 7. 1659.
and also for an interview between those two Princes in 1660. in the same
Island, called the Island of Pheasants.

Bidlyn, the present name of Indus, one of the most famous Rivers of the
East Indies.

Bidumi, Idumaea, a part of Palestine.

Biela, Bugella, Gaumellum, and Laumellum, a Town in the District of Vercellois
in Piedmont under the Duke of Savoy, and the Capital of a small Territory
called Le Biallese. It is rich, handsome, and populous. Francis II. Duke of
Modena died here in 1658.

Biela Osero, that is, in the Muscovian Language, the White Lake, is a Province
of Muscovy, which is honored with the Title of a Dukedom; between the Province
of Wologda to the East and North, and that of Novigrod (which is also a
Dukedom) to the South and West. The chief City of it is Biela, seated upon a
River of the same name; almost in the middle between Novigrod to the East, and
Wologda to the West, and about 62 German Miles North-West of Moskow, the
Capital of this Kingdom: written sometimes Bela. The Grand Duke of Muscovy
shuts up a part of his Treasures in this City; because its Situation in the
midst of many Marshes, renders it almost impregnable.

Bielba, a City of Muscovy, toward the Confines of Lithuania, about 30 German
Miles North of Smolasko, and 59 North-West from Moscow; there is a Province
annexed to this City called Bielki. This City is written Bielha, and Bielska,
and the Province Bielski. It is one of the Titles in the Style of the Grand
Duke of Muscovy.

Bielski. See Bielba.

Bielsko, Bielco, a City in the Province of Smolaske in Poland, between Grodno
to the South, and Bressici to the North. This place was by Treaty surrendered to
the Muscovites in 1634. together with Smolensko, Novograd, and other strong
places, and the Territories belonging to them. It stands upon the River Biala,
with a strong Fortress, betwixt Brescici and Warsaw.

Bienne, Bienna, called by the Germans, Biel, is a small City in Switzerland,
seated upon a Lake of the same name, between Neufchastel to the South, and
Solothurn or Soleurre to the East under the Bishop of Basil; but from 1547. it
has been in the League with the Cantons and so in a manner almost free. It was
once also an Imperial City, though now no part of the Empire.

Bientina, a Town in the Province of Tuscany in Italy, under the Great Duke of
Florence, taking its name from the Lake di Bientina.

Biescid, a part of the Carpathian Fountains.

Bietala, or Biutala, a strong Fortress upon the furthermost Borders of the
Kingdom of Barantola in Tartary. It is the ordinary place of Residence for the
Grand Lama, that is, the High Priest of their Law.

Bievre, a small River in the Isle of France, which after a short course, falls
into the Seyne a little above Paris. The Water of this River is accounted
excellent for dying of Scarlet. In the years 1526. and 1579. it overflowed up
to the second Story of the Houses in the Suburbs of S. Marcell at Paris.

Bigenis, Abacena, Abacenum, a Town in the Island of Sicily near Messina, upon
the River called Fieume di Castro Reale, in the Valley of Demona.

Bigleswade, a Market Town in Bedfordshire. The Capital of its Hundred:
pleasantly seated on the River Ivel.

Bigorre, Bigerrones, Bigerrensis Comitatus, a Province or County of France, so
called from the principal Town: in length 10 Leagues, and in breadth 3: bounded
on the west with Bearn, on the East with Toulouse, on the North with Armagnac
and Estrac, and on the South with the Pyrenean Hills. This was once, an Earldom
of a larger extent as Peter de Marca says in his History of Bern. Tarbes is
its Capital City.

Biguba, a Kingdom of Nigritia in Africa.

Bilbao the chief City of Biscay in Spain, called by the Romans Flaviobriga;
seated upon the River Nervio, 2 Leagues from the Cantabrian Ocean; a large,
beautiful, well traded City; from S. Andreo 13 Miles to the North-East, and 24
from Bayonne to the South. Joannes Mariana is of opinion, that Bilbao is of a
later Origin, and says it was built by Didacus Lupus de Haro, Lord of Biscay,
in 1298. which is true; but then it stands in the same place; the old Name of
Flaviobriga was given it in Honor of Vespasian. This City stands in a Plain, in
a wet Ground upon a small River and is encompassed with very high Hills.

Bilbilis, the Birthplace of the Poet Martial, was an ancient City in Hispama
Tarraconensis, belonging to the Celtiberi, upon the River Xalon, famous for
excellent Iron and Steel: some believe the modern Calatayud, others Xiloca to
be the same with it.. Bilbilis is also the ancient name of a River in that
Country, said to have a particular Virtue for tempering of Iron and Steel: they
now call it Xiloca. See Xiloca.

Biledulgerid, a City and Province in Africa, which lies a great length from
East to West, but is not of equal breadth. It is bounded on the North by
Barbary, on the East by Egypt, on the South by Zahara or the Desert; and on the
West by the Atlantic Ocean: a vast, but barren Country, nor has it any Cities
of great Note in it: Tarudante and Caphesa are the most considerable. This
Province was a part of the Country of the ancient Getuli: about 980 Miles long
from East to West, and 220 broad. The name signifies a Country fruitful of
Dates.

Bilefeld, a Hanse Town in the Province of Westphalia in Germany toward
Munster, with a good Castle.

Bildeston, a Market Town in Suffolk in the Hundred of Cosford.

Bille, Billena, a River of Germany. It rises in the Province of Wageren,
separates Holstein from the lower Circle of Saxony, and falls into the Elb at
Hamburgh.

Billericay, a Market Town in Essex in the Hundred of Barnstaple.

Billesdon, a Market Town in Leicestershire in the Hundred of Gartrey.

Billingham, a Market Town in Northumberland in Tindale Ward.

Binbroke, a Market Town in Lincolnshire in the Hundred of Walshcroft.

Billom, a Town in the Province of Auvergne in France, 5 or 6 Leagues from
Clermont. It is a very trading Place, in a fruitful Soil.

Bimini, a small Island East of Florida in America. It is one of the Luccaye's,
to the South of the Island of Bahama.

Binche, Bink or Bins, Binchium, a Town in Hainault, near the River Haisne; 3
Leagues from Mons to the Eastward, and 4 from Maubeuge to the North; is now
decaying: it was taken by the French in 1667. and restored back to the
Spaniards in 1678. by the Treaty of Nimeguen. Mary Queen of Hungary, Sister to
the Emperor Charles V. built herself a Noble Palace here, to enjoy the good Air
of the Place, which is still called Marimont.

Bingen, a fine Town belonging to the Elector of Mayence, upon the River Rhine,
where it entertains the River Nar, which here is covered with a stone Bridge;
once a Free Imperial City, but now exempted from the Empire. The ancient
Geographers and Historians make mention of it. It has a Castle seated on a
Hill, and stands 4 German Miles from Mayence toward the West, and 2 from
Greitznack to the North: near it in an Island in the Rhine, is a Castle called
Mauszthurn: wherein the Report goes, that Hatto the second Archbishop of
Mayence was eaten alive by Rats; it is now almost wholly ruined.

Bingham, a Market Town in the County of Nottingham, the Capital of its Hundred.

Bendimir, Bagrada, a River of Persia, which rises in the Deserts of Carmania,
about 20 German Miles South of Hispahan; and watering the Province of Fars, it
washes Astachar; after which having received another small River from the
West, it falls into the Persian Gulf 25 German Miles West of Ormus.

Biolizero, a Fortress built in a Lake, where the Duke of Muscovy keeps his
Treasures. See Biela Osero.

Biorneburg, a small City belonging to the Swedes in North Finland, where the
River ( Cumus) Rauto^', falls into the Bay of Botner in almost 62 degrees. of Lat.
It is a poor place, and consists of a few Houses.

Biobio, a River of South America, in the Kingdom of Chili; which springs
from the Andes, and running Westward, falls into the Pacifick Ocean, near S.
Conception a City of Chili and the Island of Aviquirina.

Bir, Birtha, a small but Ancient City of Arabia Deserta, upon the Euphrates,
130 Miles East of Aleppo, in the Consines of Mesopotamia, 10 German Miles West
of Vrpha. The usual place of Embarking upon the Euphrates for Bagdet. This City
is under the Turks; and formerly was a Bishops See under the Archbishop of
Edessa. Some write it Biro. Ptolemy mentions it.

Birka, or Birkopin Birca, the Capital Town of the Province of Ostregothia in
Sweden: heretofore considerable, but almost ruined now.

Birkenfield, a Town in the Palatinate of the Rhine in Germany. Honored with
the Title of a Principality. It stands near the River Nab, 5 or 6 Leagues from
Treves.

Birmingham, a Market Town in warwickshire in the Hundred of Hemlingford.

Biron, a Town in the Province of Perigord in France, and one of the most
ancient Baronies of the same. Erected into a Dukedom by King Henry IV. It at
present bears the Title of a Marquisate.

Birs, and Biersick are 2 small Rivers in the Canton of Basil.

Bisaccia, a small City in the Principate, in the Kingdom of Naples, near the
Apennine, 2 Leagues from Cedogna, and 7 from Monte-Verde. It consists of a
very small number of Inhabitants; yet a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Conza; and illustrated with the Title of a Dukedom.

Bisagno, See Besagno.

Biscay, Cantabria, called by the Spaniards Vizcaja, by the French Biscay; has
on the North-West the Cantabrian Ocean, or the Bay of Biscay; on the East the
Kingdom of Navarre, on the South the Kingdom of Castile, and on the West
Asturia. It enjoys the Title of a Principality, because heretosore it had
Princes of its own, of the Family de Haro; the last of which dying in the Siege
of Algezira, this Principality fell to King John of Castile, and from
thenceforward became a part of that Kingdom. It is about 26 Spanish Leagues
from East to West, but not so broad. Bilbao is its principal City; it is a
fruitful and a populous Country, and full of Sea Ports. Reduced heretofore
under the Roman Yoke with great difficulty. The same name is also given to a
part of New Spain in America. They call it New Biscay. It is bounded on the
North with the Kingdom of Mexico, the Province of Panuco to the East, Zacatecas
to the South, and Culiacan to the West; there are 2 Mines of Silver in it. The
French Biscay, see Basques.

Bisegli, Vigiliae, a City in the Province of Bari in the Kingdom of Naples,
with an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Trani, upon the Adriatic Ocean;
between Trani, Molfetta, and Bari.

Biserta Vtica, a City of Africa. Immortally honored by giving a Sirmane to
Cato Vticensis. It stands in the Kingdom of Tunis upon the Mediterranean Sea,
between Carthage and Tabarqua: and is now become a Retreat of ^yrates.

Bishops Castle, a Market Town in the County of Salop in the Hundred of
Purslow, not far from the River Chun. It Elects 2 Members of Parliament.

Bisignano, Besidia, a little City in the hither Calabria, in the Kingdom of
Naples, which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Rossano, but exempted
from his Jurisdiction: also honored with the Title of a Principality which
belongs to the Family of San Severini; seated on a Hill, and has a strong
Castle, upon the River ( Cotilum) Cochilo, which a little farther falls into
the River Crate. It is a fine City of about 2 Miles compass, surrounded with
high Hills: called Vrbs Brutiorum by Livy.

Bisnagar, the Kingdom that bears this Name, is a considerable Country in the
East Indies; bounded on the North with the Kingdoms of Decan and Cuncam; on the
East, with the Gulf of Bengale; on the West with the Indian Sea, and on the
South with the Kingdom of Malabar, and Singa; it is sometimes also called the
Kingdom of Narsinga. This Kingdom is subject to a Prince of its own; but then
it is also divided into several petty Kingdoms, which have Princes that are
Tributary Homagers to the King of Narsinga. The City that gives Name to it lies
almost exactly in 15 d. of Northern Lat. and 107 of Long. on the Eastern side
of a long chain of Mountains that divide this vast Promontory from North to
South. It lies 45 Leagues West from the Shoars of the Bay of Bengale, and 35
from Narsinga to the West.

Bisneghe, Hesperium Cornu, commonly called Capo-verde, is a Promontory in
Nigritia in Africa, upon the Western Shore, in 14 degrees. of Northern Lat.

Bisnow, the Name of a Sect amongst the Banjans, in the East Indies. In this,
different from the Sect of Zamarath, That the Women live Widows after their
Husbands death, and do not burn themselves in the same funeral Pile with them.

Bitche, a County in Lorrain, upon the Frontiers of Germany.

Bitetto, a City in the Province of Bari, in the Kingdom of Naples; with an
Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Bari. It is but small, and indifferently
Peopled. Betwixt Bari and Bitonto.

Bithynia, a celebrated Province of Asia Minor, where stood the famous Cities
of Nice and Chalcedon, Heraclea, and Apamea, etc. Heretofore a Kingdom; which
ended in the Person of Nicomedes IV. when dying without Issue he nominated the
Romans his Heirs, in the Year 679. that is, 75 years before the Birth of our
Savior. It lies toward the Euxine Sea, and the Archipelago: And now called
Chintale.

Bito, one of the Kingdoms of Nigritia in Africa: separated from the Kingdom of
Benin by the Mountains; with a capital City of the same name.

Bitonto, Butuntum, a City of the Territory di Bari in Apulia in Italy, which
is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bari: 5 miles from the Shoars of the
Adriatic Sea toward the South, and 8 from Bari to the West; it lies in a very
fruitful Plain, in pretty good esteem, and indifferently well Peopled. Also
adorned with the Title of a Marquisate.

Bitsin, Bitisinum, a Town in Silesia, where Sigismund, King of Poland,
besieged and took Maximilian Archduke of Austria, his Competitor in the
Kingdom of Poland, Prisoner, in the Year 1578. and after, upon the Intercession
of Rodolphus II. and his renouncing of his pretense to Poland, released him.

Bivar, a Town of Hungary, upon the Save.

Bivoras, Salsum, a River of Andalusia.

Bizano, a Kingdom of Ethiopia, divided from the Kingdom of Gojame, in the same
Region, by the River Nile.

Blackburn, a Market Town in Lancashire near the River Derwent; the capital of
its Hundred.

Black Sea. See Euxine Sea.

Blandiac, a Town in the Diocese of Vsez in the Province of Languedoc in France.

Blanford, a Market Town in Dorsetshire, in the Hundred of Pimpern, upon the
River Stower.

Blankeberghe, a Town and Port, with a Castle, in Flanders; 2 Leagues from
Bruges, and thereabouts from Ostend.

Blanmont, or Blamont, Blamontium, a Town in the Dukedom of Lorain upon the
River Voiziere; giving the Title of an Earl. Formerly Fortified. At present in
a low condition.

Blansac, a Town in the Province of Angoumois in France upon the River Nai,
situated in a fruitful Soil; betwixt Valette, Bonteville, and Angouleme.

Blavet, a River of Bretagne in France, giving Name to the Town Blavet, (see
Porto Louis); and passing Pontivi and Hennebont, falling into the Ocean at
Porto Louis.

Blaye, Blavium, Blavutum, a well fortified Town of great importance in the
Province of Guyenne in France, upon the River Gironde, 6 Leagues from
Bourdeaux. (The Gironde is a name they give the Garonne after its reception of
the Dordogne). Since the year 1475. by the order of Lewis XI. the Foreign
Vessels going up to Bourdeaux, use to leave their Artillery here. In the Civil
Wars of France, This Town was first taken by the Huguenots; then by the
Leaguers, who held it out against a Siege in 1593. tho the Spanish Fleet coming
to their assistance, was defeated by the Marshal de Matignon.

Bleking, a Province in Sweden, yielded to them by the Danes in 1658. at the
Treaty of Roskill. It lies upon the Baltic Sea, and was heretofore remarked
with the Title of a Dukedom.

Blemyes, Blemiae, an ancient People of Aethiopia, reduced under the Roman
Empire in the time of the Emperor Marcian. Fabulously reported to have their
Eyes in their Breasts from nothing but an ill custom of holding down their
Heads too low.

Blene, a fruitful Country in the ancient Kingdom of Pontus, in Asia Minor,
watered by the River Amnias. Mithridates, King of Pontus, defeated Nicomedes
King of Bethynia here; who thereupon retired into Italy.

Bletterans, a Town in Franche Comte, upon the Borders of the Duchy of
Burgundy, and the River Seile, about 9 Leagues from Dole and Chalon. Heretofore
Fortified, now without Walls

Bliburg, or Blithborough, a small Town in the County of Suffolk, upon the
South side of the River Blithe, which a little farther falls into Southwold
Bay. In this Town, Anna, a Christian King of the East Angles lies buried, who
was slain by Penda, King of Mercia, in a set Battle, together with Ferminus,
his eldest Son, in the year 654. Henry I. King of England founded afterward a
Priory of Black Canons. But that being demolished, the Town fell to ruin, and
is now a very small Place.

Blithe, a Market Town in the County of Nottingham in the Hundred of Bassetlaw.

Blois, Blesae, a Town in France, and Capital of a County called Le Blois; it
is well built and populous, upon the Loire, which is here passable by a Bridge
of Stone; it has also a Castle, lately repaired by Gaston, Duke of Orleans. The
Kings of France have frequently retired hither to enjoy themselves, by reason
of the pleasantness of the situation of it, and the Magnificence and Elegance
of the Buildings. Lewis XII. was born here, in the Year 1461. Ann his Queen
died here in 1514. also Claude the Queen of Francis I. in 1524. and Catharine
de Medices, the Relict of Henry II. in 1589. Here was also that famous Assembly
of the States of France, in which, by the order of Henry III. Henry Duke of
Guise was Assassined, together with the Cardinal his Brother; which caused the
Murdering of that Prince soon after, by James Clement a Dominican Friar, in
revenge of it. This place lies between Tours and Orleans: The County de le
Blois is bounded on the East by the Dukedom of Orleans, on the West by Tours,
on the South by Berry, and on the North by Beausse.

Blonicz, Blonicum, a City or very great Town of the Kingdom of Poland, in the
Confines of the Province of Mazowski, 7 Polish Miles from Warsaw toward the
West; built all of Timber.

Bobio, Bobi, Bobium, a City in the Duchy of Milan in Italy, with an Episcopal
See, under the Archbishop of Genoua. It takes its situation upon the River
Trabia, and its Original from an Abbey founded here in former times by S.
Columbanus.

Bocchara, a River of Bactria.

Bochir, Canopus, a City of Egypt, upon the Western Branch of the Nile, where
Claudian the Poet was born; 25 Miles East of Alexandria.

Bochar, or Buchar, Bochora and Buchara, an ancient and a stately City of Asia,
in the Province of Mawaralnahra, called by the Romans Trans Oxiana Regio, a
days Journey beyond the River Oxus; this City was the Birthplace of Avicenna,
the famous Arabian Physician and Philosopher, who flourished in Spain, in the
X. Century. He is said to have been the first that settled the true method of
Physic by the many Books published by him; he was born in 992. and died in
1050.

Bodegrave, a Town in Holland upon the Rhine, 3 Leagues from Vtrecht: Made
remarkable by a Battle here fought betwixt the French and Dutch, in the Year
1672.

Bodmin, Voliba or Voluba, a Market Town in Cornwall, in the Hundred of Trigg,
which returns Two Burgesses to the Parliament. It is situated near the River
Alan, and was heretofore the Seat of a Bishop.

Bodrogh, a City of the Upper Hungary on the River Danube, which was heretofore
the Capital of an Earldom. This place lies 7 German Miles South of Segedin, 16
East of Buda, and about 4 Miles North of Esseck; it is now in the hands of the
Emperor, by the Conquest of Buda and Segedin in 1686.

Bodrog, a River of the Upper Hungary, which rises in the Carpathian Hills,
and falls into the Tibiscus at Tokay.

Boeotja, an ancient Province of Greece, now called Stramulipa: Plutarch, and
Pausanias, and Epaminondas were Natives thereof: the famous Helicon and
Aganippe stand in it: the Rivers Asopus and Cephisus watered it: and in all the
former Wars of Greece, this Province bore a considerable Share, See Stramulipa.

Bogazin, the Straight between Constantinople and Asia, anciently called
Bosphorus Thracicus.

Bogdiana, the same with Moldavia.

Bohemia, a great Kingdom in Germany belonging to the House of Austria; which
though it is almost encompassed by the German Territories, yet is properly no
part of Germany. It has a distinct and different Language, and been a separate
Kingdom ever since the year 1086. Bounded on the North and West by the Dukedom
of Saxony, on the East by Hungary, and on the South by Bavaria and Austria:
containing almost 40 Towns and Cities in it that they call Royal, whereof
Prague is the Capital. This Kingdom maintained great Wars with the Caroline
Race of Kings, till about the year 894. Borzivoius Duke of Moravia, becoming
Prince also of Bohemia, procured their embracing the Christian Faith
universally. When in the year 1196. Petrus Capuanus, one of the Cardinals of
Rome, would have brought in Celibacy amongst their Clergy, he met with great
opposition, and ran the hazard of being slain by the Bohemian Priests. They
received the Waldenses, who fled hither about the year 1230. John Hus's, and
Jerome of Prague about the year 1414. had great success in their Preaching, and
George Podi^bach King of Bohemia became his Convert. In 1454. there was another
Accession of the Waldenses; insomuch that in 1467. there was 200 Churches of
this Persuasion in Bohemia and Moravia. In the year 1536, they embraced
Luther's Reformation: 1564, they obtained from Maximilian that Liberty which
Ferdinand I. had denied them; which lasted but one Year. In 1575. they obtained
their Liberty again, which was confirmed in the Year 1611. by Rodolphus II.
Matthias the next Emperor not maintaining these Grants, they chose Frederick
Elector Palatine King of Bohemia, and Crowned him at Prague in 1619. This
caused a War with the House of Austria: The Elector being ejected by force of
Arms in the Year 1620, for 30 Years following, Germany became an Acheldama, a
Field of Blood; and the Reformation was ruined by an Edict made in 1630. And
the House of Austria in Germany was in almost equal danger. Albertus Duke of
Austria obtained this Crown by Election in the Year 1437. And in the Year 1526,
Ferdinand Archduke of Austria was freely elected after the former Branch had
been discontinu'd; since which time there has been no Interruption but that
unfortunate one made by Frederick Elector Palatine; so that it is become, by
the Strength of the House of Austria and the Weakness of the Bohemians, an
Hereditary Kingdom to the House of Austria. The King of Bohemia is the first
secular Elector of the Emperor of Germany, though it be no part of the Empire.

Boiana, a River that divides Dalmatia from Macedonia; this River is commonly
call'ed il Drino; and in its proper place I shall speak more of it.

Boiano, a Colony and City of the Samnites in the County of Molise upon the
River Biferno, which falls into the Adriatic Sea: It stands at the foot of the
Apennine in the borders of Campania* 18 Miles from Trivento toward the North,
and 22 from Capua toward the East; and though it is a Bishop's See, under the
Archbishop of Benevento, yet it is little, and ill built, and ill inhabited.

Boii, an ancient People* 1. of Gallia Celtiqua, possessing the Provinces now
called Auvergne and Bourbonnois in France. 2. of Bavaria in Germany; otherwise
mentioned by the Names of Bojares and Bavari. See Bavari. 3 Of Gallia Cispadana
in Italy, where are now the Dutchies of Modena and Parma. See Gallia.

Bois^clle or Enrichemont, Boscabellum, a Town in the Dukedom of Berry in
France, with a Castle, and the Title of a Principality; betwixt Bourges and
Sancerre.

Bois-de-Trahison, or Bois-de-Gamelon, a Forest upon the Banks of the Seine
betwixt Paris and Pontoise in France. One Gamelon in the time of Charles the
Great, using to ambuscade Men here, has left his Name to the Place.

Boisy, a Seigniory in the Country of Chablais in Savoy, near the Lake of
Geneva.

Bolena, Bolina, Bolaenae, an ancient City of the Morea, mentioned by Pausanias
and Stephanus, near to Patras and the River Glaueus; and sometime an Episcopal
See under the Archbishop of Patras.

Bolene, a Town in the County of Venaisin in Provence in France; upon the
Ascent of a little Hill with the River Letz gliding at its foot. It shows the
ruins of a Castle.

Boleslaw, Boleslavia, a small City in Bohemia, upon the River Gizera, which
falls into the River Albus: This City stands eight Miles from Prague toward
the North-East. There is another called Irung-Bunczel, which stands within two
Miles of Prague, where the Gizera falls into Albus; which last was built in
935. They are distinguished from each other by the Names of the Old and the
Younger Boleslaw.

Bollerbrun, a Lake near the Village of Altembeck in the Province of Westphalia
in Germany; having a remarkable strong Flux and Reflux daily.

Bolli, Paphlagonia, a Province of the ^esser Asia

Bologna, in Italy. See Bononia.

Bologne a la mer, the Icius Portus of Caesar, Gessoriacus Portus, and
Gessoriacum, a City of Picardy, a Province of France; it is a Bishop's See
under the Archbishop of Rhemes, and stands upon the River [ Liana] Lenart,
which there falling into the British Sea on the South of this City, makes a
convenient H^ven. This City is distant from Calis about seven Leagues to the
South, and five from Estaples to the North. It gives name to a small County
which from it is called le Bonlenois. The Town is divided into two parts, the
Upper and the Lower, both which are well fortified. This place seems to have
been the usual place of passing into Britain during the Roman Empire; and both
Claudius and Caligula came to it on that account: And Pliny says, it was the
shortest and most convenient Passage. It began to be called Bononia about the
time of Constantine the Great, who took it in his Passage to his Father then
dying at York. Henry the VII. of England in 1487. reduced this City to a very
low condition, when he entered France for the Protection of the Duchy of
Britain; but then Charles the VIII. of France bought his Peace, and preserved
it. His Son Henry the VIII. took it afterward in 1544. and kept it all his
Life: Edward the VI. in the Disorders of his Minority sold or surrendered it to
the French again, for a much less sum of Money than it cost the Crown of
England to gain it. The Bishop's See was translated hither from Tournay when
the English took that City. It lies in Longitude 22. 42. Latitude 50. 30.. Also
a small Town in the Province of Gascoigne, near the River Gers, upon the
borders of Bigorre.

Le Boulenois, or the County belonging to Bologne, lies in the North part of
the Province of Picardy; bounded on the West by the British Sea, on the North
by the County of Guisnes, on the East by Artois, and on the South by the County
of Ponthieu; from which last it is separated by the River Canche. This County
was once an Earldom of it self; during which time it gave one King to England,
and another to Jerusalem, Godfrey III. was the latter, and King Stephen of
England the other; it continued so till Bertrand de la Tour (the last Earl of
it) in 1477. sold it to Lewis XI. of France, who with mighty Ceremony did
homage to the Virgin Mary, and made her some Promises which his Successors
never thought of keeping; as may be seen in Dr. Heyli's Cosmography.

The Bolognese, a Territory adjacent to the City of Bologna in Italy, generally
epitheted la Grassa, from its Fruitfulness: Dove si legano le vigne con
sals^ccie, where the Vines are tied up with Sausages, says the Proverb.

Bolsena, Volsinium, a City of S. Peter's Patrimony in Italy, which was the
seat of a Bishop until the Translation thereof to Orvieto. It gives Name to
the Lake Bolsena, in which the Island of Matana stands, where the Queen
Amalazonte was put to death by the ungrateful Theodatus*

Bolsover, a Market Town in Derbyshire in the Hundred of Scarsdale. The Duke of
Newcastle has a Seat here.

Bolswert, or Boleswart, a Town in West-Fri^sland, in the Earldom of Holland,
about 3 Leagues from Leeu Warden.

Bolton, a Market Town in Lancashire in the Hundred of Salford; with the Title
of a Duke of late to the Lord Marquess of Winchester.

Bolzano, a small Town in the Vicentine in Italy, under the Republic of
Venice, upon the River Adige. Others place it in the Trentine, and say it is a
very Trading Place.

Bombon, a Province of Peru in the West Indies, toward the River Xauxa.

Bommel, Bommelia, an Island beautified with a fair Town in the Duchy of
Guelderland. The Town stands upon the River Maes, two German Miles from
Boisl^duc toward Vtrecht, and belongs properly as a Fee to the Duchy of
Brabant, in the Confines of which it is; but it is under the United Provinces.
In 1672* it was taken by the French, and deserted the next year, after they had
dismantled it: The Island in which it stands is about thirteen Miles in length,
and lies between the Wael to the North, and the Maes to the South: called, by
the Dutch, Bommelweert. Some take it for the Insula Batavorum of Caesar.

Bon, Bonna, Ara Vbiorum, and Verona, Bonne, is one of the principal Cities of
the Bisho* rick of Cologne, and the usual Seat of that Elector, upon the Rhine,
four German Miles from Cologne. It was first a Roman Colony, called Colonia
Julia Bonna, and frequently mentioned in the ancient Historians on that
Account: In the middle Ages it became a Free Imperial City; Frederick of
Austria was here elected and Crowned in 1314. against Lewis of Bavaria. In 942.
here was a Synod held. In 1588. the Duke of Parma took it by Famine. In 1673.
the Prince of Orange took it from the French, (who had surprised it the year
before) and restored it to the Empire; it has for a long time been exempted
from the Empire, and possessed by the Electors of Cologne. Accordingly the
Cardinal of Furstemburg, in pursuance of his Election to the Archbishopric of
Cologne, Jul. 19. 1688. took possession of it; whose Pretenses, on the one side
being justified by the King of France, and on the other being opposed both by
the Emperor and the Pope, produced the general War that now flames among the
European Princes. And though Bonne in this Conjuncture was strongly enforced
for its Security with a French Garrison; yet, after about a Months Siege by the
Elector of Brandenburg, with the Forces of the Allies under his Command, it was
obliged to surrender to them, October. 12. 1689. This Town lies in Long. 28. 40.
Lat. 50. 42. Bonne, Hippo, a City of the Province of Constantine in the Kingdom
of Tunis in Africa, upon the Mediterranean; famous for it is being an Episcopal
See heretofore, in the Person of the Great S. Austin. Hippo was quite destroyed
by the Caliphr in 651. This of Bonne was built near its Ruins, and called by
the Arabians Beled-el-Vgneb; by the Christians Bonne, as being the best and
fruitfulest Country in Barbary. The K. of Tunis built it a Castle in the year
1500. Charles V. Emperor destroyed all its Fortifications in 1535. The Turks
have since repaired it, and it is provided with a little Port.. Also a Town in
the Province of Fossigni in the Dukedom of Savoy, upon the Rivulet of Menoy or
Monole, 3 or 4 Leagues from Geneva; supposed to be the ancient Banta.

Bonaire, one of the Leeward Islands of America, which has its name from the
Goodness of the Air. Taken from the Dutch by the Buccaniers in 1686. in 12 d.
of Lat.

Bonconvento, a small Town in the Province of Tuscano in Italy upon the River
Ombrone, near Siena. It was here, that the Emperor Henry VII. was poisoned in
1313.

Boncourt, a Village upon the River Eure, in the Diocese of Eureux, in the
Province of Normandy in France: Strangely consumed by an unaccountable
Wildfire in the 4 years preceding 1670.

Boni, a Town upon the Loire between Nevers and Orleans; the ancient residence
of the Knights of S. Lazarus, an Order now abolished in France and incorporated
with that of S. Maurice in Savoy.

Bonifacio, a City in the Island of Corsica, which has a Port belonging to it.
Thought to be the Palla of Ptolemy. It is well built and traded; and secured by
one of the best Fortresses in Europe. The Streights betwixt the Islands of
Corsica and Sardinia receive the Name of le Bocche di Bonifacio from hence;
which Geographers conclude to be the same with the Fretum Taphros of Pliny, the
Fretum Etruscum of Ptolemy, and the Sinus Sardonius of Eustatius. They are
sometimes also called le bocche di Beixonnere.

Bonneval, a Town in the Province of Beauce, upon the Loyre in France, 6
Leagues from Chartres, and 3 from Chasteau dun. Both its Name and Rise is come
from a great Abbey of the Benedictines here.

Bonneville, Bonopolis, the Capital Town of the Province of Fossigni in Savoy;
about 5 Leagues from Annecy and Geneva, upon the River Arve, at the Foot of the
Mountains; and at present but little considerable.

Bononia, in Italian Bologna, is a City of Romandiola in Italy, an Archbishop's
See erected by Pope Gregory XIII. a Bolognese of the Family of BonCompagno, who
in 1582. brought also the University here into great Fame. It has been under
the Popes ever since Julius II. who extorted it from the Bentivolio's; it is
beautiful and a populous City and thought one of the principal Cities of Italy;
the second at least in the States of the Church: 25 Miles from Ferrara toward
the South, at the Foot of the Apennine Mountains, near the little River Reno:
extraordinarily full of Gentry. It was heretofore a Roman Colony, till it
submitted to the Lombards in the 8th Century. And being afterward a Republic,
it maintained a War 3 years with the Republic of Venice; and another with the
Emperor Frederick II. whose Natural Son Euzelin became its Prisoner. Honoriuus
II. Lucius II. Gregory XIII. Innocent IX and Gregory XV. were all born here,
and Alexander V. died here. Lewis the Son of Lotharius, deprived this City of
its Walls in 844. They chose the Bentivolio's for their Princes in 1308. who
were conquered by John Galeacio in 1308. Here was a Council held in 1310. In
1529. The Emperor Charles V. was Crowned in the most Noble Church of S.
Petronio here by Pope Clement VII. And the Council of Trent was removed hither
in 1547. holding their 9th. and 10th. Sessions under Pope Paul III. It lies in
Long. 33. 35. Lat. 44. 15. About 6 Miles in Compass, and indifferently well
fortified. Governed under the Pope by a Legate a Latere, with the privilege of
keeping an Ambassador for its Service at Rome, where it is treated more like a
Sister than a Subject. The University carries the greatest Name of any now in
Europe for the Canon and Civil Laws; whence, Bononia docet, they say to a
Proverb. The Streets are furnished with arched Galleries, for Preservation
against Heat, in the Nature somewhat of the Rows at Chester. The Body of S.
Dominique Founder of the Dominican Order lies interred in a stately Convent of
that Order here. The Metropolitan Church of S. Peter's is built according to the
same Plat with that of S. Peter's at Rome. An Academy of the Otiosi is erected
in this City: And for the learned Authors produced by the University, see the
Bibliotheca of Joh. Antonius Bumaldi. The adjacent Country has the Name of the
Bolognese from hence. See Bolognese.

Boot, an Island of Scotland in the Streights betwixt the Isle of Arran and the
Province of Argyle.

Bopart, Bopartium, Bodobriga, a Town in the Archbishopric of Treves upon the
Rhine in Germany, betwixt Coblentz and S. Goar.

Boquerano, a litte Island of Asia in the Indian Ocean about 8 Leagues from
Borneo.

Borcholm, a Fortress in the Island of Oeland near Gothia in the Baltic Sea,
not above two Miles from Calmar East, in Lat. 56. 50. and Long. 34. 17.

Borcholt, a small Town upon the River Aa in the Province of Westphalia in
Germany, under the Bishop of Munster.

Bordelong, Bordelona, a Town beyond the Ganges belonging to the Kingdom of
Siam. It has a Port upon the Gulf of Siam, betwixt Lingor and Singora.

Borgo, a Town in the Province of Finland in the Kingdom of Sweden, upon the
Gulf of Finland, betwixt Vibourg and Revel.

Borgo S. Donnino, a City in the Duchy of Parma in Italy, with a Bishops See
erected by Pope Clement VIII. and placed under the Archbishop of Bologna by
Pope Paul V. Heretofore called Fidentia and Julia. Its ancient Abbey was
destroyed by the Emperor Frederick II.

Borgosan Sepulchro, Biturgia, a City in the States of the Great Duke of
Tuscany in Italy, with an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Florence. Some
Synodical Constitutions were made here in 1641.

Borgo di Sessia, a Town properly in the Milanese in Italy, but belonging to
the States of the Duke of Savoy, upon the River Sessia from whence it receives
this Name.

Borgo-Ual-Di-Taro, a Town and Fortress in the States of the Duke of Parma in
Italy, upon the Borders of the States of Genoua.

Boria, Belsinum, a City of the Kingdom of Arragon in Spain, 11 Miles from
Zaragosa to the East.

Boriquen, one of the greatest Leeward Islands upon the Western Coast of
America; betwixt S. Croix and Porto rico, under the Spaniards. The Natives of
this Island in the beginning believed the Spaniards were Immortal, till one
Salsedo they saw happened to be drowned in the River of Guarabo.

Borysthenes. See Nieper.

Bormes, Bormanico, a Town and Barony in Provence in France, betwixt Thoulon
and S. Tropes, near the Sea.

Bormia, a River within the States of the Republic of Genoua in Italy; formed
by 2 Rivulets of this Name, that rise in Piedmont and unite at Sessana. Thence
Bormia passes by Acqui, receives some other small Rivers, and is received
itself by the Tanaro near Alexandria della Paglia.

Bormio, the Italian Name for Worms in Germany. See Worms. Also a small Town
and County in the Country of the Grisons upon the River Adda near the Valteline.

Borneo, one of the greatest Islands in the East Indies; between Sumatra to the
West, Java to the South, Celebes to the East, and the Philippine Islands to the
North. It is of a round shape, and the Line cuts the Southern part of it.
Reported to be 1800 Miles in Compass, and to contain several Kingdoms; but the
truth is the Eastern parts of this Island were never well discovered by the
Europeans yet. Borneo the principal City, lies on the North-Western Shore in a
Bay. It is a rich, populous place, well Traded, built in a low ground, not much
unlike Venice, and has belonging to it a capacious Haven.

Bornheim, a Territory and its Capital Town with a Castle in the Earldom of
Flanders: being a part of the demeans properly belonging to the said Earldom.

Bornholm, Boringia, an Island in the Baltic Sea, taken by the Swedes in 1644.
from the Danes, and afterward ceded to them in 1658. by the Treaty of
Roschill; but restored again in consideration of an Equivalent of Royal Demeans
in Schonen. This Island affords excellent Pasturage and Cattle. It lies toward
the furthest parts of Bleking, and has a goodly Town called Nex, and a Castle
named Sandhamer.

Borno, a Kingdom, a Town, a Desert, and a Lake in the Division of Nigritia in
Africa, being the Country of the ancient Garamantes. The Kingdom stands bounded
with Nubia to the East, Berdoa and Gaoga to the North, Gangara to the West, and
the Niger to the South.

Bosa, Bosi, Bossa, an ancient City in the Island of Sardinia, with a Bishops
See under the Archbishop of Sassari, betwixt Oristagni to the South and Sassari
to the North.

Boscasle, a Market Town in Cornwall in the Hundred of Lesnewth, which Elects 2
Members of Parliament.

Boscobell, a Name deservedly given to the Royal Oak which served as an Asylum
to King Charles II. for some days after the Battle of Worcester in Sep. 1651.
about 4 Miles from VVolverhampton in Staffordshire.

Bosleduc, Boscum Ducis, now called by the French Bolduc, and by the Flandrians
S. Shertogenbosch, a City in the Dukedom of Brabant, which is a Bishops See
under the Archbishop of Mechlen, seated upon the River Disa, Dios, which a
little farther to the North falls into the Maze. It is a large new City,
environed with Rivers and Marshes, very well fortified, and only one League
from the Maze: taken by the Dutch in 1629. who are still possessed of it.
Geofry Duke of Brabant made a Town of it out of a Wood, in the year expressed
in this Chronogram,

GodefrIdVs dVX e sILVa feCIt oppIdVM. The Sea was founded by Pope Paul IV. in
1559. And the Country called the Mayorality of Bosleduc, containing above 100
Villages, has this City for its Capital.

Bosnia, called by the French Bossen, by the Germans Wossen, is a Province of
Europe, bounded on the North by Sclavonia, on the West by Croatia, on the East
by Servia, and on the South by Dalmatia; it takes its name from the River
Bosna, which rises in Servia, thence entering Bosnia, waters Bosna-Sarai and
falls into the Save. It had Kings of its own from 1357. till 1465. having been
before a part of the Kingdom of Hungary. The Turks under Mahomet II. Conquered
it in 1465. and are still possessed of a great part of it. The same Mahomet
caused Stephen the last King of Bosnia to be flayed alive.

Bosphorus Cimmerius, that famous Straight or passage at which the Euxine Sea
communicates with the Paulus Maeotis or the Sea of Tana. They now call it the
Streights of Caffa and Kerci from two Towns in the Peninsula of Taurica
Chersonesus which are situated upon the Banks of it. Heretofore there was a
Town called Bosphorus in those parts, which gave Name both to the Streights and
to the ancient People the Bosphori mentioned by Pliny, Strabo, etc. It
afterward changed its name to Panticapaeum, which some believe to be the same
with the modern Vospero, a late Bishops See under the Patriarch of
Constantinople. Bosphorus Thracius, otherwise known by the Name of the Canal of
the Black Sea and the Streights of Constantinople, is so narrow a passage
betwixt Thrace and Asia Minor, that in some Streets at Constantinople they can
hear the Cocks crowing upon the Shoars of Asia. Upon this Bosphorus stands
Gallipoli, the Dardanells, and the Seven Towers where Prisoners of State are
secured. It is now called Bogazin.

Bosra, or Bostra. See Bussereth. Strabo speaks of another Bosra in Phaenicia.

Bossu, a Town in Hainault near Valencienne, dignified with the Title of an
Earldom.

Boston, a Corporation in Lincolnshire, seated on both sides of the River
Witham, which is covered by a Timber Bridge; the Town stands within 3 Miles of
the Sea, and has a very convenient Haven, which in Mr. Camden's time was well
Traded; it sends 2 Burgesses to the Parliament. Also a place in New England of
the same name; well built and peopled. It is indeed the Capital Town of that
Plantation.

Bosworth, an ancient Market Town in Leicestershire, upon the River Sense,
which a little farther falls into the Anchor at Atherston. Near this place Henry
Earl of Richmond, Aug. 22. 1485. overthrew in Battle Richard III. and put an
end to those long and bloody Wars between the Houses of Lancaster and York. And
March 12. 1686. King James II. did this Town the honor to constitute Mr. James
Fitz-James his Natural Son, amongst many other great Honors, Baron of Bosworth.

Bothnia, a Province of Sweden upon the Baltic Sea, which gives Name to the
Botner Sea or that Branch of the Baltic which lies most West; between which
and Lapland this Province lies. Torn is its Capital City.

Bova, a City in the further Calabria in the Kingdom of Naples, with an
Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Reggio, near the Ocean; betwixt the Cape
de Spartivento and Reggio.

Bouchain, Bochonium, Buceinium, a small but strong Town, well fortified, in
the Province of Hainault in the Low Countries upon the River Escaut betwixt
Valenciennes and Cambray. It is the Capital of the County of Ostervand, which
formerly belonged mmediately to the eldest Sons of the Earls of Hainault. Taken
by the French in 1676. and ever since by them retained.

Boufflers, a Territory contained in the Diocese of Amiens in Picardy in
France, upon the River Authie: Remarkable for giving Name to an Ancient and
Eminent Family in that Province.

Bouhin, an Island of France between the Coasts of the Provinces of Poictou and
Bretaigne, below the Mouth of the Loyre.. Also a Town in the County of Foretz
in the same Kingdom near the River Lignon, which is one of the best Places in
Foretz.

Bovines, Boviniacum, a small Town upon the River Maze, in the County of Namur;
made famous by a bloody Battle given here by Philip the August, King of France,
to Ferdinand Earl of Flanders, who was here taken Prisoner in the Year 1214:
Whereupon Philip founded the Abbey of our Lady de la Victoire near Senlis in
Commemoration of his Victory. This Town lies 4 Leagues from Namur to the South.

Bovino, Bovinum, is a small City in the Kingdom of Naples in the Capitanata,
which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Benevento; it stands at the foot
of the Apennine near the River Cervaro, six Leagues from Troja to the South,
and twelve from Ariano to the South-East.

Bouillon, Bullonium, a small Town and Castle in the Bishopric of Liege, four
Leagues from Masiers to the North, and ten from Namur. The Capital of an
ancient Dukedom, which lies between the Dukedom of Luxemburg to the West, and
Champagne to the South. This Dukedom was mortgaged to Otb^rt Bishop of Liege,
in 1096, by Godfery then Duke of it, after the famous King of Jerusalem; and
ever since the Bishops of this Diocese have claimed a Right to it. But by the
Treaty of Nimeguen in 1679, it was agreed, that the Dukes of Bovillon, who are
in possession of it, should peaceably enjoy the same; all Differences being
referred to honorary Arbitrators; and that the Bishops should in the mean time
use no Force against the said Dukes; and so it remains to this day in their
Possession.

Boulogne. See Bologne, Bolognese, and Bononia.

Bourbone, Borbonium, a small City of France, the Capital of the Dukedom of
Bourbone; bounded on the North with the Province of Niverne, on the East by the
Dukedom of Burgundy, on the West with the Province of Berry and March, and on
the South with Auvergne. The River Allier ( Ellaver) cuts this Dukedom into two
Parts; and it lies in length from the North-East to the South-West twenty eight
Leagues between the Rivers of Loire and Cher. Robert, the fourth Son of Lewis
the Ninth King of France, had this Duchy in Marriage with Agnes of Bourbone,
whose descendent after 300 years in the Person of Henry IV. came to the Crown
of France in 1590, and his Grandchild Lewis XIV. now enjoys that Throne. The
principal City called Bourbonne l' Archambault lies 4 Leagues from Moulins, 56
from Paris to the South* near the River Allier. This City was erected from a
Barony into a Dukedom, by Charles le bell in 1327. And its Castle is reputed a
place of great Strength.. The Island of Bourbon, otherwise called Mascarenhi,
is an Island under the French ever since the Portugueze lost it to them; in the
Aethiopick Ocean to the East of Madagascar, about 25 Leagues in Length and 14
in Breadth. They say there is a Volcano in some part of it; the rest is very
fruitful.

Bourbon l' Ancy, a Town and Castle in the Province of Burgogne in France, 7
Leagues from Moulins, and one quarter of a League from the Loyre. It is much in
Esteem for Mineral Waters, which are here covered with a Noble Structure of the
Ancient Roman Work. This Town was never taken in the Civil Wars. It gives Name
to a Territory in the Diocese of Autun, that is parted from the Province of
Bourbonnois by the River Loyre.

Boyne, Bouinda, a River in the Province of Leinster in Ireland, which runs
hard by Drogheda. where K. James II. and his Army, being about 25000 men
encamped on the South side of this River, received the Defeat of Jul. 1. 1690.
by K. William in Person: The Duke of Schomberg was killed in the Action.

Burbourg, Burburgus, a Town in the East of Flanders, not above one Mile from
Graveling, which was taken by the French in 1657. and has remained ever since
in their Hands.

Bourdeaux, [ Burdegala,] the Capital of the Province of Guienne, and an
Archbishops See; the Seat of one of the Parliaments of France; rich, well
built, and populous. It has a noble Haven at the Mouth of the River Garonne,
much frequented by the Dutch and English, and all other Northern Nations for
Wine, Salt, etc. So that this City is deservedly accounted one of the best in
France. It is also built in a very fruitful Soil, and rarely improved by Art
and Industry. It gave Birth to Ausonius the Poet, and to Richard II. King of
England. It has also a very strong Castle called le Chateau Trompette: And was
an University in the times of the Romans, which Honor has been reconferred upon
it by Charles VII. Eugenius IV. and Lewis XI. since which times it has produced
many very learned Men* First built by the Galls, improved by the Romans, made
the Capital of a Kingdom by the Goths. It fell into the hands of lesser Lords,
with the Title of Counts or Earls, after the times of Charles the Great: United
with the Dukedom of Guienne in the times of Charles the Bald. Alenora the
Daughter and Heir of Lewis VII. of that House, being married first to the King
of France, and after to Henry I. of England; this Dukedom was annexed to the
Crown of England, and continued so till wrested from them by Charles VII. of
France, in the Reign of Henry VI. The French had indeed usurped it before upon
King John; but the English were not without hope* of recovering it till this
last mentioned time* It has given some disturbances to the Reigns of Lewis IX.
and XIV. but is now finally brought under, having in 1650. been reduced by
force of Arms, and a Siege. There has been many National Councils held here,
and some Provincial Synods; it stands about 12 Leagues from the shoars of the
Ocean upon the South side of the Garonne, in the most Southern Part of France,
in Long* 20. 10. and Lat. 44. 50. The ancient Inhabitants, by Pliny and Strabo
have the Title given them of Bituriges Vivisci, to distinguish them from those
of Bourges called Bituriges Cubi.

Borganeuf, a Town in the Province of la March in France, upon the little
River Taurion; three Leagues from S. Leonard and 5 from Limoges. Some are
pleased to include it in Poictou.

Bourgen Bresse, Forum Sebusianorum, Tamnum, Burgus, a City in the County of
Bresse in France, upon the River Resousse, 5 Leagues distant from Mascon to the
East, and 9 from Lions to the North: It has been under the Crown of France ever
since 1601, when this whole County which before pertained to the Dukedom of
Snvoy, was taken in. It had a strong Citadel erected in 1569, which was
demolished in 1611. The City is seated in Marshes, and called by some, by
mistake, Tanus; adorned with a Bishops See by Pope Leo X in 1521. but this See
was suppressed again by Pope Paul III.

Bourg sur Mer, a Town in Guienne, built upon the mouth of the Dordogne [
Duranium] where it unites with the Garone, which heretofore was well fortified;
it stands 5 Leagues from Bourdeaux to the North.

Le Bourg de Viviers, or the Bourg de S. Andeol, Burgus S. Andeoli; is the most
populous Town in the County of Viviers, seated in a Plain upon the River
Rhosne, 25 Leagues lower than Lions; anciently called de Gentibus. Here S.
Andeolus a Subdeacon suffered Martyrdom, under Severus the Emperor and from
him the Town has its name, as appears by the Registers of this Church.

Bourges, Bituricae, Biturix, Biturgium and Avaricum; is a very great City, and
an Archbishops See, the Head of the Dukedom of Berry; seated as it were in the
center of France upon the River Eure, which falls into the Seine above Roan,
and naturally a strong Place. It has a noble Cathedral, and an University,
famous for the Canon and Civil Laws. The Archbishops enjoyed the Title of
Primates of Aquitain from the IX. Century to the time of Pope Clement V. who
having been Archbishop of Bourdeaux transferred the Primacy from Bourges
thither. Several Councils and Synods have been held here; particularly in 1438.
one under Charles VII. recognized the famous Council of Basil, and the
Pragmatique Sanction, which continued thence in force, till suppressed by the
Concordate betwixt Pope Leo X. and Francis* I. in the year 1516. It is 7
Leagues from la Charity to the West, 22 from Orleans to the North. Lewis XI.
King of France was born here.

Bourgogne, or Burgundy, Burgundia, a very large Province in France, divided
into 2 parts, the one of which is called the Dukedom, and the other the County
of Burgundy. The Dukedom of Burgundy has on the East the Franche County, and
Savoy; on the West Bourbonnois, on the North Champagne, and on the South la
Bresse, Lionois, and some part of Baujolois. A Country not fruitful in any
thing but Wines and fine Rivers. This Dukedom was seized by Lewis II. upon
pretense of want of Heirs Males, upon the Slaughter of Charles the Hardy by the
Switzers, in 1467 and ever since it has been in the possession of the Crown of
France. The County of Burgundy has on the East the Mountain Jour* which parts
it from Switzerland; on the West the Dutch* of Burgundy; from which it is
divided by the S^a^ne on the North, and a Branch of the Mountain Vauge, which
divides it from la Bresse: it is reckoned to be 90 Miles in length, and about
60 in breadth: for the most part Mountainous, but fruitful of Wines* and
intermixed with pleasant Valleys. The principal City of it is Besanson. The old
Inhabitants were the Sequani, a potent Nation* In 1674 this County was taken
from the Spaniards by the present King of France; and by the Treaty of Nimeguen
confirmed to him. See Franche Comte.

Bourgouin, a small Town in the County of Vi^nnois in the Province of Dauphine
in France. A dependent formerly of the Barony of Tour du Pin, and famous for
driving a Trade of Hemp.

Bourn, a Market Town in Lincolnshire in the Hundred of Aveland, upon a Spring
called B^rn^^^head. King Edmund was Crowned here. It also shows the Ruins of a
good Castle.

Bouro, an Island of Asia (by some placed among the Moluccaes) in the Indian
Ocean, near the Islands of Cambello and Manipe: under the King of Ternate.

Bouron, Bistonia, a Town in the Province of Romania in the Morea near the
Archipelago, with a Lake of the same Appellation, on this side the Mountain
Argentaro. This place has sometime been the Seat of a Bishop and is often
mentioned by our ancient Historians.

Boutan, a Kingdom in the Terra firma of the Indies or according to others in
the Great Tartary, toward the Empire of the Grand Mogul, and believed to be
the same with Barantola.

Boutonne, V^^tonna, a River in France, arising in Poictou; and flowing through
Saintonge, (where it divides the Town of S. Jean d' Angel^,) it ends in the
River Charente, which conveys it into the Ocean 2 Leagues from Brouage to the
North* right over against the Island of Oleron.

Bow, a Market Town in Devonshire in the Hundred of New Tauton.

Bozagar, Exopolis, a City of Tartary in Asia, a little more East than the
Outlets of the River Tanais.

Bozolo, a Principality belonging to the Duke of Mantua, with a small Town
betwixt Mantua and Cremona.

Brabant, Brabantia, Ambavariti populi, is one of the most considerable
Provinces of the Spanish Netherlands; bounded on the East with Luyekland, or
the Bishopric of Liege; on the West with the River Scheld, and a part of
Flanders; on the North with the Maze, which parts it from Holland and
Guelderland; and on the South with Hainault, Namur, and a part of L^yckland.
This Country is generally fruitful, and the Air good, 22 German Miles long, and
20 broad; and in these narrow Limits it had 26 walled Towns and Cities.
Governed by Dukes of its own, from the year 1004, till the year 1430, when it
fell to Philip II. Duke of Burgundy; by whose Grandchild, Margaret, (married to
Maximilian Emperor of Germany,) it fell to Charles V. King of Spain, and in
that House it remains to this day.

Bracciano, Arcennum, Bracennum, Brygianum, Sabata, a City of Italy, in the
Dominions of the Church, upon the Lake of Sabato; honored with the Title of a
Dukedom; now in the possession of the ancient Family of the Vrsini. It is a
small, but fine City, about 20 Miles from Rome to the West.

Brachmanes, Bramins or Bramans, a famous Sect of Philosophers amongst the
Indians, consulted by the greatest Wits of Greece; its thought Pythagoras
received his Doctrine of the Transmigration of Souls amongst them. They
professed the study of Nature and Astronomy and Morality; and placed their
Happiness in the Contempt of Wealth. The Bramans, who are the Priests of the
modern Banjans, inherit their Esteem with the People: For they teach their
Schools, live austerely, are considered as Oracles in the Affairs of Religion;
and as to the Pointof a Metampsyhosis, they are equally Pythagoreans with their
Ancestors.

Brackley, a Market Town in Nottinghamshire in the Hundred of Sutton, which
returns 2 Members to the Parliament. It stands near the Spring of the River
Ouse, and formerly had a College, which is since become a School.

Braclaw, Braclavia, a Town in the Province of Podolia in the Kingdom of Poland
upon the River Bug, and toward the Confines of Volhinia. It is also written
Bratzlaw.

Bradano, Brada, a River in the Basilicata, in the Kingdom of Naples, which
arises from the Apennine, and falls into the Gulf of Tarento, eighteen Miles
from Tarento to the West.

Bradfield Magna, a Market Town in Essex in the Hundred of Freshwell.

Bradford, a Market Town in Wiltshire. The Capital of its Hundred, upon the
Avon.

Bradforth, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire in the Hundred of
Morley near the fall of a small Stream into the Are.

Brading, a Market Town in the Isle of Wight, in the Hundred of E. Medine.

Bradninch, a Market Town in Devonshire in the Hundred of Heyrudge.

Braga, Augusta Bracarum, Bracara, Braecara, a City and Archbishopric of
Portugal, called Bragues by the French, in the Province of Antredoureo Minho;
it stands upon the South Side of the River Morillo, four Leagues from the
Ocean, eight Miles from Porto to the North, and almost fifty from Lisbon to the
same quarter. The Archbishop of this City pretends, no less than the Archbishop
of Toledo, to the Primacy of all Spain. This was the Seat of the Kings of the
Sueves for an hundred and seventy Years, and is now of great Circumference, but
not equally populous.

Braganza, Bragantia, Caeliobrigia, Tuntebriga, a City in the Kingdom of
Portugal, which is honored with the Title of a Dukedom: It lies in the Confines
of the Kingdom of Leon and Portugal, in the Province of Sera de Rebodaos; 7
Miles from Miranda to the North, and 25 from Braga to the East. John Duke of
Braganza surnamed the Fortunate being descended from the Kings of Portugal, in
1640, recovered that Kingdom out of the Hands of the Spaniards, and his Son now
enjoys it.

Braintry, a Market Town in Essex in the hundred of Hinckford.

Brampour, a large Town in the Province of Candis in the Empire of the Grand
Mogul; and the second Government of Quality in that Empire. Adorned with a
magnificent Castle, where the Governor of the Province resides. It is a place
also of extraordinary Trade.

Brampton, a Market Town in Cumberland in Eskdale Ward.

Brandenburg, Brandeburgum, Brennoburgum, is a very ancient City in the Upper
Saxony in Germany: It stands in the middle March upon the North side of the
River Havel, which falls into the Albis. This is a Bishop's See under the
Archbishop of Meydburg: the Sea was erected by Otho the Great, Emperor of
Germany, in 946. The City embraced the Augustane Confession in 1563. It lies in
Long. 35. 00. and Lat. 52. 39. The Marquisate of Brandenburg is bounded on the
East by the Kingdom of Poland, on the West with the Dukedom of Saxony, on the
North with Pomerania, and part of Mecklenburg, and on the South with Misnia,
Lusatia, and Silesia: In Length from East to West sixty German Miles, and of a
proportionable Breadth: In it there are fifty five Cities and Walled Towns; the
chief of which are Brandenburg and Berlin. But it is neither very populous, nor
very fruitful, except in Corn. The Prince is a Calvinist, and his Subjects
Lutherans. He is one of the Electors, created in 1415. by Sigismund the
Emperor. Brandenburg Brunsberg; see Brunsberg. Brandenburg Island, or the
Island of Vulcan, Insula Vulcani, so called because it sometimes burns and
vomits Fire like Aetna, is an Island in the Indian Ocean, toward the Eastern
Coast of New-Guiney.

Brandon, a Market Town in the County of Suffolk, upon the lesser Ouse, 5 Miles
West of Thetford, and ten North of Bury. Charles Gorard Earl of Macclesfield in
Cheshire was created Viscount of this Place, July 23. 1679. by Charles II.

Brantosme, Brantosma, an Abbey and Town in the County of Perigord in France,
upon the River Droune, which there receives the Colle. Supposed to be founded
by Charles M.

Braskow, Brascovia, a City and Bishops See in the Province of VValachia in the
Kingdom of Hungary, toward the Frontiers of Moldavia and Transylvania.

Brasil, Brasilia, is a vast Country of the Southern America, bounded on the
East with the Atlantic Ocean; on the West with some undiscovered Countries
lying between it and the Andes; on the North with Guiana, and on the South with
Paraguay. It reaches from 29. to 39 Degrees. of Southern Latitude, and it is 500
Miles in Breadth; under the Dominion of the Portugueses, ever since the Year
1503. though the Spaniards claim it.

Brassaw, a Town in the Province of Lithuania in the Kingdom of Poland, with a
good Castle: It stands below the River Wilna toward the Frontiers of Curland
and Livonia. It is the Capital of a Palatinate.

Brassaw, the same with Cronstat.

Brava, a City upon the Coast of Ajan in Africa; well built and fortified:
Governed by the Laws of 12 Xeques or (Princes) in the Nature of a Republic,
being the only Government of that sort in this Quarter of the World. The Xeques
are elected out of the Descendents of the 9 Brothers, who fled hither out of
Arabia Felix, from the Persecution of the King of Lacah.

Bray sur Seine, a small Town in the Province of Champagne in France, betwixt
Nogent and Montereau fant-Yonne: remarked with the Title of a Dukedom.. Bray
sur Sum, a Town in Picardy in France betwixt Perone and Amiens. Bought of the
Chatelain of Ponthieu, by Philip the August, in 1210.

Brain, a Town in Champagne in France, upon the River Vesle, betwixt Soisons
and Fisines. Some pretend it is the Bibrax of Caesar.

Brazza, Labraza, or Baac, Brattia, is an Island of the Adriatic Sea, upon the
Coast of Dalmatia, under the Venetians. It is near the Island of Lesina, and
takes its Name from a Town that stands in it.

Brechin, a City in the County of Angus in Scotland; adorned with a Bishops See
under the Archbishop of S. Andrews. About 5 or 6 Leagues from the Ocean. In
Latin called Brechinium.. Also a Town and Fortress in the Kingdom of Bohemia in
Germany, upon the River Laucntz, near Tabor.

Brecknock, Brechinia, is one of the twelve Shires in the Principality of
Wales: On the East it is bounded with Herefordshire, on the South with Monmouth
and Glamorganshire; on the West with Caermarthenshire, and on the North with
Radnorshire. The chief Town is Brecknock, seated upon the North side of the
Vsk, where the River Honthy or Hodney from the North, and two other small
Brooks from the South augment its Streams. It stands twelve Miles West of
Abergevenny; and elects one Member of Parliament. This County is thick set with
high Mountains, but fruitful Valleys lie between them. Bernard Newmarch, who
conquered this small Shire, built at Brecknock a Castle, which the Bohuns
afterward repaired. The most Loyal and Noble James Butler, Duke of Ormond, was
created Earl of Brecknock, July 20. 1660. by Charles II.

Breda, [ Breda,] a City in the United Provinces in the Dukedom of Brabant,
upon the River Merca, Merck, under the Prince of Orange. A little, but a strong
Place, and the Capital of a small Barony; taken from the Hollanders by the
Marquess of Spinola in 1625. after a Siege of 10 Months: taken from the
Spaniards in 1637. and though it has been twice besieged by them, yet they
never could retake it. At this place K. Charles II. continued some time in
1660. and received the welcome News of his Restitution. And in 1667. after a
bloody War of three Years continuance, here was a Peace concluded between the
English and Dutch. It lies eight Leagues from Antwerp to the North.

Brederode, a Castle near Harlem in Holland, giving its Name to an ancient
Family.

Bregentz, a Town in the Circle of Schwaben in Germany upon a River so named.
It sustains the Title of an Earldom.

Brefort, Bredefort, or Bredervoerde, a Town in the County of Zutphen in
Guelderland, in a marshy Place, strengthened with a Castle, near a Canal which
joins the Issel, two Leagues from Grol and Aanholt. The Prince of Orange took
it by Storm in 1597.

Brema, a City and Kingdom beyond the Ganges in the East Indies toward the
States of Pegu. It is a rich Country and makes a puissant Prince, who resides
either at Brema or Carpa.

Brembo, a River in the Bergamasco in Italy, giving Name to the Valley of
Brembo. It springs about the Frontiers of the Valtoline, and embraces the Adda
a little below Bergamo.

Bremefurde, a Town in the Duchy of Bremen in the lower Circle of Saxony. The
ordinary Residence of the Governor of that Duchy under the King of Sweden.

Bremen, Brema, is a very potent City in the lower Circle of Saxony in Germany;
made more renowned by an Archbishops See, instead of Hamburg. It stands upon
the River Wiser, [ Visurgis;] a Free Town, and under no Prince; with a small
Territory about it, called Stift van Bremen. Tho the Swedes have many Pretenses
upon this Place, on the Account of the Dukedom of Bremen, yet they still
maintain their Freedom. The Archbishops have embraced the Augustane Confession
ever since 1585. This City was declared an Imperial Free City by Ferdinando
III. Anno 1646. It stands 12 German Miles from Hamburg to the South-West. In
Long. 40. 17. and Lat. 53. 25. First Walled in 1309. The Archbishop never had
any Sovereignty here. This Town was besieged by the Swedes in 1666. forty six
Days, and at last rescued by the Interposition of the German Princes. The
Dukedom of Bremen, which belonged heretofore to the Archbishop, was in 1648.
yielded to the Swedes. It has the River Albis or the Elb, to the North, the
Weser to the South, the Dukedom of Lunenburg to the East, and on the West the
Dukedom of Oldenburg.

Bremgarten, Bremocartum, a Bailywick in Switzerland, belonging to eight of the
ancient Cantons. Bullinger the Apocalyptick Minister was born here.

Brene, or Breine-Aleu, a small Town in Brabant in the Low Countries, with a
Castle; 2 or 3 Leagues from Brussels.

Brene-le-Comte, a little Town in Hainault near Mons.

Brene sur le Vesle. See Brain.. Also a District within the Province of
Touraine in France in the Diocese of Bourges. Gregory of Tours was accused in a
Council here in 581. or 83. for saying, that Queen Fredegonde had secret
commerce with the Archbishop of Bourdeaux: but he was acquitted.

Brenta, Brentesia, a River in the Dominion of the States of Venice in Italy.

Brent, a Market Town in Devonshire in the Hundred of Stanborough.

Brentford the New, a Market Town in Middle-sex in the Hundred of Elthorn, so
called from the River Brent, which falls into the Thames betwixt Henden and
Hampsted Hills. King Edgar assembled a Council here in 960. In 1016. King
Edmund Ironfide obtained a Victory over the Danes at this Place, which obliged
them to raise the Siege of London. And 1644. It was advanced to the Honor of
an Earldom in the Person of Patrick Ruthen Earl of Forth in Scotland, by King
Charles I.

Brescia, Brixia, called by the French Bresse, by the Spaniards Brexa, is a
City in the Venetian Territories in Italy, which is a Bishop's See under the
Archbishop of Milan, aggrandized with the Title of a Duke, Marquess, and Earl.
The Capital of the County of Bresciano, a large well fortified Place, and has a
very strong Castle upon a near Hill. It lies between the Rivers of Gorza and
Mela, in a Plain 15 Miles from the Lake of Benaco to the West, and 50 from
Milan to the South-East; built by the Senones, and was once under the Dukes of
Milan, before it sell into the hands of the Venetians. The County of Brescio
has Verona to the East, Bergamo to the West, Cremona to the South, and the
Valtoline and the County of Tirol to the North. It is a great and fruitful
Country.

Breslaw, Budorgis, Vratislavia Budorigum, called by the Poles wroclaw, is the
Capital City of Silesia, and of the Dukedom of Breslaw. A Bishop's See under
the Archbishop of Gnisen in Poland; great and well built, and once a Free and
Imperial City; but it was afterward exempted from the Empire, and is now a
kind of Free State: It stands on the River Oder, toward the Confines of
Poland. Made a Bishop's See in 1033. About the Year 1000. it was built by
Miceslaus, Duke of Poland; the Cathedral Church was built by Casimirus King of
Poland, in 1041. Near this place Boleslaus King of Poland was overthrown by
Henry V. and forced to take an Oath of Allegiance. This City lies 35 Miles from
Cracow, and 40 from Berlin.

Bresle, a small River near Calais in France.

Bresne, a small River near Tours in France.

Bresse, Bressia, Sebusiani Populi, is a Province of France, bounded on the
East by Savoy on the West, with Lionois, on the North with Charolois in the
Duchy of Burgundy and some part of the Franche County, and on the South with
Dauphine. It is a pleasant and fruitful Country, and lies between the Soasne
and the Rhone. Bellay and Bourg are its chief Towns. It belonged from the Year
1285. to the Dukes of Savoy, till 1600. when it was surrendered to Henry IV. of
France, in lieu of Saluzzes, a Marquisate in Italy.

Breast, Brivates, a very good Seaport in the Dukedom of Bretagne in France,
which as Scaliger says, was called Gesocribate by Ptolomy. It lies on the most
Western Coast of Bretagne, about 50 Leagues from Nantes to the North-West. This
is the Magazine of the Admiralty of France; situated upon the Ascent of a Hill,
and secured with New and Noble Fortifications both to the Sea and Land. The Sea
enters into the Gulf of Breast by 4 Ways, and the Vessels there are always
afloat.. Also a Town in the Province of Cujavia in the Kingdom of Poland with a
Castle well built in a Marshy Place near Vlaldislaw and the Vistula. Here, in
the Years 1595. and 1620. two Councils were assembled for the Union of the
Greek Church of Lithuania with the Latin.. The same Name is given to a French
Colony in New-France in America.

Brescici, Bressicia, called by the French Briescio, is a small City in
Lithuania, the Capital of a Palatinate of the same Name: It lies between
Lithuania, Russia, and Polachia, upon the Bug; and has a tolerable good Castle.

Bresuire, a small City in France, in Poictou; 3 Leagues from Parthenay, and as
many from Thuray.

Bretagne, Armorica, Britannia Minor, is a Province of France, 70 Leagues long,
and betwixt 35 and 40 broad; containing 9 Bishoprics who are all Suffragans to
the Archbishop of Tours. In three of these, that is, Cornouaille, S. Paul de
Leon, and Figuier, the Inhabitants entirely speak Briton, a Language the same
in abundance of words with the Welsh: in the other three (to wit) Nantes,
Vennes, and S. Brieux, they speak Briton and French mixed; yet the most
ordinary Sort, only Briton: in the rest, they speak all French. It is bounded
on the East with Normandy, and the County of Maine; on all other sides with the
English Seas; upon the South side it has the Loire, which divides it from
Anjou; but yet the County of Raiz, which belongs to Bretagne; lies on the South
side of that River, between it and Poictou. The Britains were first brought
hither from England by Maximus, in 389. To which a great Accession was made by
the driving out the Britains by the Saxons. They erected a Kingdom here in 485.
(I suppose after the coming of the second Saxon Colonies) which lasted till
874. when a lesser Title was taken up with the same Power; which continued till
1498. under 28 Dukes; when Lewis XII. married Anne the Daughter of Francis II.
the last Duke of Bretagne, who, in 1484. had been married to Charles VIII, K.
of France before. Francis I. of France, succeeded in the Right of Claude his
Wife; whose Issue failing, the Right fell to the Duke of Savoy, but the French
kept the Possession.. New Bretagne, a Province of New-France in America, upon
the Gulf of S. Lawrence: Its Settlements are called Breast, Belle Isle, etc.

Brewood, a Market Town in Staffordshire, in the Hundred of Cudleston. The
Bishops of this Diocese had their Palace here before the Conquest.

Bretevil, a Town in High Normandy in France upon the River Iton.

Brianzon, a City in the Dalphinate, supposed to be one of the highest in the
World. It is the Capital of the Bailywick of Brainzonnois; in Ptolomy called
(...), in Antoninus Brigantium, in Am. Marcellinus Virgantia. The Dure and the
Ance (the two Sources of the Durance) unite below it. The Castle stands upon
the top of a Rock, and is very strong. Yet taken from the Leaguers by the Duke
de Lesdiguieres in 1590.. Likewise a Village in Provence, in the Diocese of
Glandeves, where they find Numbers of Medals with Inscriptions.. And a Castle
in the Territory of Tarantaise in Savoy, upon the River Isere; about 1 League
below Moutiers; with a Village of the same Name. These two last mentioned
Brianzon's are also called in Diminution Brianzonnet.

Briare, a Town in the Duchy of Orleans, upon the River Loire, where the
Channel is cut for the Communication of the Loire and the River Seine. In 1652.
a Battle was fought here betwixt the Army of the King of France, and that of
the Princes. The New Channel takes the same Name: in Latin, Brivodurum, and
Breviodurus.

Bricquia, a Province in the lesser Asia, formerly called Licia.

Bridgend, a Market Town in Glamorganshire in Wales, in the Hundred of
New Castle.

Bridge-North, a Market Town in Shropshire in the Hundred of Stottesdon upon
the Severn. Heretofore fortified; since demolished.

Bridlingtou, or Burlington, a small Town in the County of York, where Mary
Queen of England Landing from Holland, February, 22. 1642. was most barbarously
treated by 4 Parliament Ships, which a great while played with their Cannon on
the Town, and especially on that House in which the Queen was entertained.

Bridge-Water, a Corporation in Somersetshire, upon the South side of the River
Parret, which about five Miles further falls into the Irish Sea; 13 Miles from
Wells to the West, and 23 from Bristol to the South-West. It was a great and a
populous Town, as Mr. Camden says; but suffered very much in the old Rebellion
by the Scots, July, 23. 1645. And on Sunday, July 5. 1685. the late Duke of
Monmouth, Natural Son to Charles II. of ever blessed Memory, was entirely
defeated (being then in Rebellion against K. James II.) upon a Moor near this
place, by the Providence of God, and the Courage of the Earl of Feversham; who
the same day marched to Bridge-Water, the Rebels having before his coming
deserted it, and dispersed themselves. The greatest Honor this Town has, is to
give the Title of an Earl to the Right Honorable John Egerton, whose Father
was created Earl of Bridge-VVater, May 17. 1617. in the 5th. Year of James I.
being the Son and Heir of Thomas Egerton, Lord Chancellor of England, who was
created Baron of Ellesmere in 1603, and Viscount Brackley in 1616.

Bridport, a Market Town in Dorsetshire. The Capital of its Hundred; 2 Miles
from the Sea, to which it had formerly a very good Haven. This Town was famous
in the time of K. Edward the Confessor. It sends 2 Burgesses to the Parliament.

Brie, a Country, part within the Government of the Isle of France, and part in
the Province of Champagne, betwixt the Rivers Seine and Marne. Meaux sur Marne
is the Capital Town of it. It is very fruitful. In Latin called Bria, Brigeium,
and Brigiensis saltus.

Brie-Compte-Robert, a Town in the Country precedent, upon the River Iere; four
or five Leagues from Paris.

Brieg, Brega, a Town upon the Oder in Silesia in Germany, betwixt Oppelen and
Breslaw. The same is the Capital of the Duchy of Brieg.

Brienne, a small Town in Champagne in France, upon the River Aube; with the
Title of an Earldom; near Troyes, between Bar-sur-Aube and Planci. This Place
gives Name to the ancient House of Brienne.

Brighthelmston, a Market Town in Sussex in Lewis-Rape by the Sea Side.

Brignoville, Brinnonia, Brinnola, a Town and Bailywick in Provence in France,
near the River Caramie: Understood by some, to be the Forum Veconii; by others,
the Matavonium of the Ancients. Charles V. the Emperor, took it in 1536. The
Leaguers surprised it in 1589.

Brille, or Briel, a Town and Port of Holland, in a good Soil, but a gross Air,
at the Confluence of the Rhine and the Meuse, in a small Island of this Name.
It was surprised by the Dutch, in 1572. by the help of the Succors obtained
from Queen Elizabeth: And this Action was as the first Foundation of the
Commonwealth of Holland.

Brin, Eburum, Arsicua, Brinum, Brina, a City of Moravia, seated upon the River
Zwitta, where it falls into that of Swarta, 7 German Miles South of Olmitz.
This was the only place which in 1645. and 1646. held out for the Emperor
against the Swedes in all Moravia, when being besieged it broke the Swedish
Army, and forced them to rise: called by some Bruna; written Brenne also.

Brindisi, Brundusium, is an Archiepiscopal City in the Kingdom of Naples,
which has a strong Castle, and a safe Harbor at the mouth of the Gulf of
Venice: 36 Miles from Tarento to the East. Pompey retired hither after his
overthrow, in the Year of Rome 705. and was obliged to leave the place again,
because Caesar pursued him. In the Year 735. the incomparable Virgil died here;
that is, about 19 years before the coming of our Savior. It has been several
times ruined and repaired.

Brioude, Brivas, Vicus Briatensis, a great and ancient Town in the Province of
Auvergne in France, upon the Allier. The Emperor Avitus was buried in the
Church of S. Julianus here: The Chapter takes the Title of Earls of Brioude,
being in the first institution Knights Confederated to make War against the
Normans in the Year 898. 2 Leagues from this place, stands Brioude la Vieille,
upon the same River; where there is a Bridge to cover it, composed of one Arch,
so extraordinary long and high, as scarce to have its parallel in Europe.

Briqueras or Briquerasco, Briquerascum, a considerable Town in the
Principality of Piedmont, 4 or 5 Leagues from Pignerol, with a Castle. Taken by
the Sieur de Lesdiguieres in 1592. and retaken by Charles Emanuel Duke of
Savoy, in 1594. Also famous in the Wars of Piedmont in the years 1629. 30. and
31.

Brisach, Brisacus Mons, a City with a very strong Castle, in the Territory of
Brisgow in Alsatia, with a Stone Bridge upon the Rhine; 6 German Miles from
Basil to the North, and 7 from Strasburg, and a from Colmar. It was a Free
Imperial City till 1330. when it was exempted, and given to the House of
Austria; called therefore the Key of Germany, the Citadel of Alsatia, and the
Pillow on which the House of Austria slept with security. In 1633. Gustavus
Horn, a Swede, besieged it vain: but in 1638. it was taken by the French,
under the command of the Duke of Weimar; who are still in Possession of it;
their Title being confirmed by the Treaty of Westphalia, or Munster, in 1648.
and afterward by the Treaty of the Pirenees, in 1659.

Brisag, or Brisiaco, a Town under the Grisons, upon the Lake Majour in Italy;
between Locarna, Canobia, and Domo.

Brisgow, Brisgovia, is a Province of Germany, lying on the East of the Rhine,
and the West of Wirtenburg, and on the South closed with the Canton of Basil.
The principal place is Friburg. This Province is in part under the House of
Austria, and in part under the French; Brisach (which was once its Capital)
being under the latter; but the greatest part under the former. The Prince of
Conde obtained a Victory here in 1644. when General Merci was killed.

Brissach, a Town in the Province of Anjou in France, upon the River Aubance,
below Saumur. It gives the Title of a Duke.

Bristoll, Bristolium, Venta Belgarum, Venta Silurum, is a noble City in the
County of Somerset, upon the River Avon, which runs through the midst of it;
and so part of it stands in Glocestershire; but then it is a County of itself,
and belongs to neither of them. It is a neat, strong, clean, populous, rich,
well traded City; and after London and York* the Third principal Place of
England; the Inhabitants of this City Trading into all parts of America, and
most other parts of the World: tho no where named before the Year 1063. Robert
Bishop of Constance, a Seditious Man, first Walled it, in the Reign of William
Rufus against that King. It has a Stone Bridge, with Houses built on both sides
of it over the River. And also a Castle, in which King Stephen was kept a
Prisoner some time, after he had in vain besieged it. The Bishops See was
Founded by Henry VIII. and made Suffragan to the Archbishop of Canterbury. In
the beginning of the Rebellions against Charles I. it sided with the
Parliament, and was on that account besieged by Prince Rupert, July 24. 1643.
who took it in two days; under whom it continued till September 10. 1645. when
it was surrendered to Fairfax the Parliaments General. It was preserved from
falling into the hands of the late Duke of Monmouth, by the Vigilance of the
Duke of Beaufort, who was Lord Lieutenant of this City and its County.

Britain. See England.

New Britain, a Country in the Northern America, between Hudson's Bay and New
France; discovered, named, and possessed, by the English. Formerly called
Estoiteland. See Estoiteland.

British Sea, Mare Britannicum, by the French called la Manche, is the known
Sea betwixt England and France: Extending, according to Pomponius Mela, to the
Islands of Sain and Osismiens; that is, to the Diocese of Treguier in Bretagne.

Brive-la-Gaillarde, Briva Curretia, a Town in the Province of Limosin in
France, upon the River Coureze: 2 or 3 Leagues from Tulles. Gombaud Ballomer,
natural Son to Clotaire I. King of France, was here Crowned, after the death of
Chilperick I. Not a large Place, but situated to its commendation.

Brixen, Brixinio, an Episcopal City in the County of Tirol in Germany, under
the Archbishop of Saltzburg. Heretofore a Free Imperial City; but now exempted.
It lies at the Foot of the Mountain Bruneck* upon the River Eysach, where it
receives another River called the Riencz, not far from Siben, a ruined City,
out of which it sprang. It lies not above 2 Miles from the Confines of the
Dominions of the State of Venice, and 13 from Trent. In the year 1080. the
Emperor Henry IV. presided over a Council here of 30 Bishops of his Party; who
all subscribing to his resentments, of the Excommunication and Degradation
pronounced against him by Pope Gregory VII. deposed the said Pope, elected
Guibert Archbishop of Ravenna (who took the Name of Clement III.) to succeed
him in the Chair of Rome, and Voted that the Emperor should carry his Arms
into Italy to put their Decrees in execution.

Brocalo, a Kingdom of Nigritia in Africa.

Brockersberg, a Mountain between Thuringen and Franconia.

Brockmerlandt, a Territory in Friseland.

Brod, a small Town in Bosnia upon the Save; famous for the Victory which
Prince Louis of Baden obtained near it over the Bassa of Bosnia, Sept. 5. 1688.
whereby the Turks, pro illa vice, lost that whole Country.

Broitzchia, a Town in the Kingdom of Guzurate in the hither East Indies, 12
Leagues from Surate: under the great Mogul.

Bromley, a Market Town in Kent, in Sutton Lath, upon the River Ravensburn.
Here there is a College for 20 Clergymen's poor Widows, founded by Dr. Warner.
The Seat of the Bishop of Rochester stands by it.

Bromley Abbots, a Market Town in Staffordshire in the Hundred of Pirehill.

Bromes-Grove, a Market Town in Worcestershire in the Hundred of Halfshire upon
the Banks of the River Salwarp.

Bromyard, a Market Town in Herefordshire in the Hundred of Brocash.

Bronchorst, a Town in the Province of Guelderland upon the Issel, very near
Zutphen. It gives the Title of an Earl.

Bronsbroo, Bronsbroa, a Town of the Kingdom of Sweden, in the Province of
Ostrogothia: where the Crowns of Sweden and Denmark held a Treaty of Peace in
the Year 1645.

Brough, a Market Town in Westmorland, in East Ward.

Broughton, a Market Town in Lancashire in the Hundred of Loynsdale.

Brouage, one of the fairest and strongest Forts in all France, in Xaintonge,
not far from Bordeaux.

Brower, a Name given by Brower a Dutchman to the Streights discovered by him
in 1643. toward the Island of Statenland in the Sea of Magellan in America.

Browershaven, a Town and Port in the Island of Schowen in Zeland, ^ Leagues
from Ziriczee. Rich and Populous.

Bruca, Pantagia, a River of Sicily.

Brucomat, Brucomagus, a Town in Alsatia

Bruges, Bruga, a City in Flanders, called by the Dutch Brugg, which was made a
Bishops See by Paul IV. under the Archbishop of Mechlin; a large, beautiful,
well traded Town, and has its name from the multitude of Bridges in it; being
seated on a knot of Dikes, 8 Miles from Gant to the West, and 3 from Ostend to
the East. This is under the Spaniards, and is one of the best they have left:
being 4 Miles in Circuit, wonderfully well Peopled, and once exceeding rich.
They reckon 60 handsome Churches in it.

Brugneto, Brunetum, a City in the State of Genoua, which is a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Genoua, at the Foot of the Apennine, 50 Miles from
Genoua to the East; of little compass, thinly inhabited, and ill built.

Bruno, Prilis, a Lake and small River in the Territories belonging to Siena,
once a Commonwealth in Italy, now a part of the Dukedom of Florence; 8 Miles
from the City of Grosseto to the South-West.

Brunsberg, Brunsberga, is a Royal City belonging to the Kingdom of Poland in
Prusia, but some years since mortgaged to the Duke of Brandenburg: seated upon
the great Bay called Frish Haff, on the West side of the River Passerg, 8 Miles
from Margenberg to the East, and the same distance from Koningsperg to the West.

Brunsbuttel, a small Town in the Dukedom of Holstein in Germany, toward the
Mouth of the Elb, under the King of Denmark; 2 or 3 Leagues from Glukstat.

Brunswick, Brunopolis, Brunonis Vicus, is a City and Dukedom in Germany: the
Dukedom is a part of the Dukedom of Saxony, bounded on the East with the
Earldom of Mansfield, on the West with Westphalia, on the North with
Lunenburgh, and on the South with Hassia. This Dukedom takes its name from
Brunswick, the principal City in it, which lies upon the River Onacra and was a
Free Imperial City or Hanse Town, the Metropolis of the ancient Saxony: a rich,
strong, populous City, or rather five Cities under one Law, and within one
Wall, which is 8 English Miles in compass: built by Bruno Duke of Saxony, in
861. and from him it had its name. It fell into the hands of the Duke in 1671.
and is now under their Dominion; it has a Castle lately built, and well
fortified, since which time it is much decayed. This City embraced the
Reformation in 1522. and Professes the Augustan Confession, as all the rest of
that Dukedom does. It lies 20 Miles from Hamburg to the North, upon the River
Oker.

Brussel, Bruxella, the chief City and Seat of the ancient Dukes of Brabant,
and after that of the Dukes of Burgundy, as it is at this day the Residence of
the Spanish Governor of Flanders: seated upon the Sin, and other Springs and
Rivers, which make it one of the sweetest Situations in Europe; 8 Leagues from
Antwerp to the South, and 4 from Lovaine; being partly in a Plain, and partly
on a Hill. In the Cathedral Church of S. Gedulle they pretend to have an Host,
stabbed sometime by a Jew in indignation at the supposed presence of the Body
of Christ, which shed Blood out of the Wound; and the Jew (they say)
immediately was struck with death: Whereas the Life and Conversion of the Man
had been a greater Proof of the miracle. In Long. 25. 6. and Lat. 50. 50. There
is another small City of the same name in Germany, in the Bishopric of Spire.

Brutij, an ancient People of Italy, descended originally from the
Lacedaemonians. They were distinguished into Cismontani and Tramontani,
possessing that part of Italy which we now call the further Calabria. In the
second Punick War they ran over to Hannibal; whereby they lost their Reputation
to that degree amongst the Romans, that they could never afterward get to be
employed but in servilities, and even their name became a Proverb for a
despicable Generation of People, living continually in meanness and shame.

Bruton, a Market* Town in Somersetshire, the capital of its Hundred, upon the
River Brue. The Lord Fitzharding has a noble Seat here.

Bua, otherwise called Chiovo, is an Island of Dalmatia near Spalatro, under
the Venetians. It is very near to the Island of Troghir.

Bucephala, Alexandria Bucephalos, a Town in the Indies, built by Alexander M.
in honor of his Horse. It is mentioned by Q. Curtius. The Moderns suppose that
it is the same with Lahor now. See Lahor.

Buchs, a small Principality within the Territory of Burgundy in France, near
Medoc; belonging to the House of Foix and Candale.

Buckenham the New, a Market Town in Norfolk in the Hundred of Shropham.

Buckenburgh, a small Town in Westphalia in Germany, where the Counts of
Lippe-Buckenburgh (taking their Style from hence) have a Palace.

Buckinghamshire, Buckinghamia, is divided on the South from Berkshire by the
Thames, on the North it has Northamptonshire and Bedfordshire; on the West
Oxfordshire; and on the East Hertfordshire and Middlesex; a County very
Fruitful, and chiefly employed in Grazing. The first Earl of this County was
Walter Giffard, a great Man amongst the Normans, whose Son Walter died in 1164.
In 1377. Richard II. conferred this Title upon his Uncle Thomas of Woodstock.
Humfry Earl of Stafford was the first created Duke of Buckingham in 1444.
Edward, the last of this Race, was Beheaded in the Reign of Henry VIII. in
1521. After which this Title lay vacant till 1623. when James I. created George
Viscount Villiers, Duke of Buckingham; his Son George succeeded him, who died
April 16. 1687. without Issue, and left the Title vacant. On the North of the
River Ouse, in the North-west part of the County, stands the Town of
Buckingham, which gives Name to the whole County. It was Walled before the
Conquest in 915. by Edward the Elder, to secure it against the Danes: in after
times there was a Castle built here, which is now entirely ruined; the Town
stands upon a low ground, very commodious for Mills, and incircled by the River
on all sides but the North. And it is a Corporation, and sends Two Burgesses to
the Parliament.

Bnckor, a Town and Kingdom in the States of the Great Mogul in the
East Indies. The former stands upon the River Indus; the other is bounded by
the Kingdoms of Tattan to the South, Multan to the North, Hajacen and Persia to
the West, and Jesselmere to the East.

Buda, Buda Heraclia, Aquinum, is the Capital of the Kingdom of Hungary: called
by the Turks Budun, by the Germans Offen, by the French Bude, and by the
Italians Buda. Heretofore a very great and rich City, till it fell into the
hands of the Turks, who ruined most of its stately Houses and Palaces: it lies
on the West side of the Danube, over against Pest, which is joined to it by a
Bridge of Boats: and is divided into two parts, the Upper and Lower; between
which there is the distance of a Mile: the Lower Town is weak; but the upper
Town is by Nature one of the strongest Forts in the World, and has a very
strong Castle on the West side: said to be built by one Buda, the Brother of
Attila King of the Huns, and from him to have its Name. In 1279. there was a
Council held here under Pope Nicolas III. and Ladislaus III. King of Hungary.
It was much improved by Sigismund King of Hungary about the Year 1387. and
adorned with many stately Buildings; amongst the rest with a Castle, where at
first the Kings and afterward the Turkish Visiers resided; which was so
strong, that it was thought Impregnable. The Successors of this Prince
augmented this City, and strengthened it with new Fortisications. Solomon II.
Emperor of the Turks took it first in 1526. Ferdinand the Archduke of Austria,
retook it the next Year after. In 1529 Solomon retook it again, after the
Garrison had stood eleven Aslaults; and restored it to the Weywood of
Transylvania, who had lost it before. Ferdinando in 1540. or 1541. attacked it
again, when Solomon coming the third time to relieve it, raised the Siege, and
made himself Master of the place by a Stratagem and Surprise. In 1598. Matthias
the Archduke again besieged it, and after in 1601. again, but with no Success.
In 1684. the Duke of Lorrain sat before it from July 14. to November 1. but was
forced to rise and leave it: this brave General in 1686. reinvested it June 15.
and after a bloody defense made by the Governor, took it by storm September 2.
following; though the Grand Vizier stood and looked on with an Army of 50000
Men, and was no way able to help him. In the lower Town there is a Hot and a
Cold Bath, both adorned very much by the Turks, who are great lovers of Baths:
it lies 49 German Miles from Belgrade to the North, 54 from Vienna to the
South. Long. 42. 15. Lat. 47. 7. The Imperialists found in it 400 Pieces of
Artillery, a Treasure of above 300000 Ducats, and the ancient Library of the
Kings of Hungary, augmented by Matthias Corvinus, entire; which last was
ordered to be transported to Vienna.

Buddesdalc, a Market Town in Suffolk in the Hundred of Hartesmere. Here there
is a Grammar School endowed with certain Scholarships assigned to Cambridge.

Budoa, Butua, a City of Dalmatia, upon the shoars of the Adriatic Sea, which
is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Antivari: well Fortified, under the
Dominion of the Venetians, but it is small; and has been severely handled by
the Turks, who took it in 1571. and were obliged soon after to return it to the
Venetians again. In 1667. it was almost ruined by an Earthquake. This City lies
ten Miles from Antivary to the West, between the Gulf of Cattaro, and that of
Lodrin, in Long. 43. 30. Lat. 42. 23.

Budziack, more anciently called Bessarabia, which see.

Buhiera, Arapotes, Maria, Marcotis, a Lake in Egypt.

Buenos Aytes, or Civitad de la Trinidad, a City and an Episcopal See in the
Province of Paraguay upon the River Plata in the West Indies, whither the King
of Spain was persuaded to bring his Silver from Potosi; but found it not
convenient, by reason of the Vicinity of the Portugals in Brasil.

Bugen, a Town and Kingdom in the Island of Ximo, belonging to Japan.

Bugey, a small Country in France, betwixt the Rhosne and the Ains. The former
separates it from Savoy and Dauphine, the other from Bresse and Burgundy. In
length 16 Leagues, and about 10 in breadth: the Capital Town of it is Belley.
This Country belonged to the Sovereigns of Bresse, till the Year 1621. that it
submitted to the Crown of France.

Bugia, a City and Province in Barbary in the old Kingdom of Algiers. The
latter extends itself along the Sea Coast, betwixt the River Sufegmar to the
East, the River Major to the West, and the Mountains to the South: the other
stands upon the Mouth of the Major with a good Port, and was heretofore a
Bishops See; they now reckon about 8000 Houses in it. It is the Salda or Saldae
of the Ancients. In 1508* the Spaniards took it, but the Turks soon after
removed them. Also a Town upon the Nile in Nubia in Africa toward the
Frontiers of Egypt, betwixt Jalac and Assuana: written sometime Bugiha

Bugna, Abugana, a Kingdom in Aethiopia, Mountainous and small.

Built, a Market Town in the County of Brecknock in Wales, the chief of its
Hundred*

Bulgaria, pars Moesiae inferioris, is a County which is bounded on the East
with the Euxine Sea; on the West with Servia; on the North with the Danube, by
which it is parted from Moldavia and Walachia; and on the South with Thrace. It
has this name from the Bulgares, a Scythian People, who in 566. possessed
themselves of it. This Nation first received the Christian Faith about 700. but
were not totally gained over to Christianity till about 860. since which time
they have been subject to the Jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Constantinople:
first under Kings of their own, till 1310. when they were Conquered by Charles
King of Hungary, having been before extremely weakened by their Wars against
the Eastern Emperors. They were finally subjugated by Amurath II. Emperor of
the Turks about 1427. ever since which time they have been subject to that
Empire. The Country for the most part is full of sharp rugged Hills, Branches
of the great Mountain Haemus, which divides it from Thrace; so that it is the
most unpleasant and worst peopled part of Dacia; the People are accordingly
patient of all Toil and Labor* and brutishly Valiant.

Bullerborn, Fons Tumultuarius, a Fountain near the Village of Oldenbeck in the
Province of Westphalia in Germany. It is remarked for using to yield its Water
with extraordinary noise and unequal Intermissions.

Bullingbrooli, an ancient Market Town in Lincolnshire. The Capital of its
Hundred; upon the spring of a River, which falls into the Witham. This was the
Birthplace of Henry IV, thence surnamed of Bullingbrook. Made an Earldom first
in the Person of S. Oliver S. John's, descended from the Grandmother of Henry
VII. which Title is now enjoyed by the Right Honorable Pawles S. John,

Bungay, a Market Town in Suffolk in the Hundred of VVangford, upon the Banks
of the River VVave nay.

Bungo, a Town and Kingdom in the Island of Ximo belonging to Japan in the
East Indies: this is in the Eastern part of the Island. The King and a number
of his Subjects had once embraced the Christian Religion, but the terrible
Persecution that followed, reduced them to their old again.

Buntingford, a Market Town in Hartfordshire, in the Hundred of Edwinstree.

Buqhan, or Buchan, a County of Stotland, bounded on the North and East with
the German Ocean; on the West and South with Murray and Mar. The Castles of
Stanes and Fendracht are the most considerable places in it. It affords good
Pasturage.

Bura, an ancient Town of Achaia in the Morea, upon the Gulf of Corinth:
famous heretofore for an Oracle of Hercules, whose Statue was Adored in a
neighboring Cavern. This Town had the fortune to be over-turn'd by an
Earthquake. The remaining ruins have taken since the name of Pernitea; betwixt
Patras and Vasilica.

Buragrag, a River in the Kingdom of Fez in Africa, separating the Provinces of
Fez and Thesmena. It falls into the Altantick at Cap de Sola, having at the
Mouth of it a Town standing of the same Name.

Buren, a small Town with the Title of an Earldom, in the Province of
Guelderland, 3 Leagues from Bosleduc and Vtrecht, near the River Slingh.

Burford, a Market Town in Oxfordshire, in the Hundred of Bampton, near the
River Windrush. About the Year 750. Cuthbert King of the West Saxons overthrew
Ethelbald King of the Mercians here, and won his Banner, wherein was depicted a
golden Dragon. Whence came the Custom of this Town of making every year a
Dragon in Jolity. It gives the Title of an Earl to the Duke of S. Albans.

Burgaw, Burgavia, a Country and Marquisate in the Circle of Schwaben in
Germany, lying along the Danube. It receives this name from Burgaw upon the
River Mindel, which is the capital Town of it. This Country is about 10 Leagues
broad and long; and has been possessed by the House of Austria ever since the
year 1282.

Burgh, a Market Town in Lincolnshire in the Hundred of Candleshow.

Burglave, is an ancient Diocese in the North Iutland, where now is the Diocese
of Alborch, called by the Latin writers Alburgensis.

Burnham Market, a Town in Norfolk in the Hundred of Brother Cross. So called
in distinction from other Burnhams which are not Market Towns.

Burgos, Masburgi, Bravum, Burgi, called by the French Bourgues, is the Capital
of old Castile. Formerly a Regal City, and grew up out of the Ruins of Occa:
made an Archbishops See by Gregory XIII. in 1571. having been a Bishops See
from 1075. It stands on the North side of the River Arlanzon, which falls into
the Duero below Valladolid; amongst the Mountains, upon the descent of an Hill,
and declines itself also apace, being Inhabited but by a few People. Anciently
called Bravum, and Masburgi: 37 Spanish Miles North of Madrid. In Long. 16. 32.
and Lat. 43. 10.

Burick, or Budrick, Budrichium, a strong Town in the Duchy of Cleves in
Germany, upon the Rhine, 2 or 3 Leagues from Gueldres: under the Hollanders.
This was one of the Four Towns which the French besieged at the same time at
the opening of the Campaign of the year 1672. The Marshall de Turenne
commanded the Siege.

Burnley, a Market Town in Lancashire in the Hundred of Blackburn.

Burntwood, a Market Town in Essex in the Hundred of Chelmsford.

Burrowbridg, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire in the Hundred of
Claro.

Burton, a Market Town in Lincolnshire in the Hundred of Manlake, upon the
River Trent, near its fall into the Humber. Another in Westmorland in Loynsdale
Wapentake, near the great Hill called Farleton-knot-hill. A Third in
Staffordshire in the Hundred of Offlow, upon the River Trent.

Bursa, Prusa, called by the Turks Bruss, by the Italians Bursa and Bourse, by
the French Brusse, is a City of the lesser Asia, in the Province of Chintale,
anciently Bithynia: built by Prusius King of Bithynia, in the year of the World
3179. and gave Name to that Part of that Kingdom in which it stood. Taken by
Orchanes the Turk, in 1325. after which it was the Seat of their Empire, till
they took Adrianople and removed it thither in 1402. In ancient time a Bishop's
See under the Archbishop of Nicomedia; but afterward it became a Metropolitan
See of it self. It is two Miles in length, well built and peopled, and one of
the richest Cities in Asia; and to this day ennobled with the Sepulture of the
Princes of the Ottoman Race, except the Emperors themselves: 5 Miles from the
Propontis, 30 East from Constantinople. In Long. 57. 30. Lat. 41. 49.

Bury Saint Edmonds, Villa Regia, Villa Faustini, is a delicate sweet Town in
the County of Suffolk, upon the River Lark, (as may seem by the Town of
Larkford, a little more North) which falls into the great Ouse, between Ely and
Little-Port-Edmund surnamed Ironside, one of the Saxon Kings, founded here a
Church in the beginning of Christianity, and called it the Royal Town; but
after that Prince was brought hither from Hoxon in the same County, it was
called St. Edmonds Bury. King Kanutus the Dane, to expiate the sin of his
Father Swain or Sueno, who murdered this Prince, built here a new Church and
an Abbey; and brought in the Black Friars, about 1020. to whom he gave the Town
of Bury, and many noble Manors thereabout; so that at the suppression it was
valued at 2336 l. the year; a vast Revenue then. They governed the Town by a
Seneschal or Steward; and when it was allowed to be a Corporation, the Alderman
was not permitted to exercise any Authority till he had taken his Oath of
Obedience to the Abbot. Afterward Herveie the Sacrist, compassed the Town with
a Wall, whereof there remain still some few Relics; and Abbot Newport Walled
the Abbey, and the Pope granted it great Immunities. Edward VI. founded here a
Grammar School. Charles I. of Pious memory, Created Henry Jermin Baron of S.
Edmonds Bury, Sept. 8. 1643. The delightfulness of its Situation, and the
goodness of its Air, have ever procured it the residence of a great many of the
Gentry, who living here enrich the Inhabitants, and support the Town, which
would otherwise fall to decay. Henry II. overthrew Robert Earl of Leicester and
his Flemings, (taking the Earl and his Wife prisoners), in a Battle not far
from hence.

Busiris, an ancient City in Egypt in the middle of the Delta, where was
formerly a vast Temple consecrated to Isis, whose Festivals they observed with
the greatest Solemnity.

Bussereth, Bostra, a City of Arabia the Stony, the Native place of Marcus
Julius Philippus, Emperor of the Romans, and called from him Philippopolis. It
is an Archbishops See, under the Patriarch of Jerusalem, being taken out of the
Patriarchat of Antioch; and lies sixty Miles East from the Sea of Tiberias, in
Long. 69. 45. Lat. 31. 30. Called in some Moneys of the Emperor Severus, and
his Mother Mamaea, Colonia Alexandrina; now under the Turks.

Butera, a Town in the Island of Sicily, with the Title of a Principality in
the Province called Valle di Noto; about 4 Leagues from the Sea.

Butow, a small Town in Pomerania upon the River Stolp, toward the Frontiers
of the Royal Prussia. Under the Duke of Brandenburg.

Butrino, a place upon the Consines of Epirus, belonging to the Venetians. It
was heretofore a considerable City, and the Seat of a Bishop. Called by the
Ancients Buthrotum. The Turks ruined it about 120 years ago; and the Venetians
have not yet restored it to it is pristine Dignity. It stands over against the
Island of Corfou, upon a Gulf of its own Name: being many times written
Butrinto, or Botrinto.

Button's Bay, the same with Hudson's Bay in the North of America.

Butua, a City of the Lower Aethiopia in Africa, under the Empire of Monotopia,
the Head of a Kingdom of the same Name, toward the River Zambre.

Buyil Mancy, a River of Aethiopia.

Le Buys, a small Town in the Province of Dauphine in France, in the Country
called the Baronies, upon the River Oveze and the Borders of Provence.
Surpised by the Huguenots in 1568.

Buzanich, Pausinus, a River of Dalmatia.

Buzenzais, a Town in the Dukedom of Berri in France, upon the River Indre, and
the Borders of Touraine.

Bychow, Bychovia, a Town belonging to the Kingdom of Poland, in Lithuania,
upon the Borysthenes, between Mohilow and Rohuczo, two Cities, ill handled by
the Moscovites, some few Years since.

Byrsa, the Name of an ancient Citadel at Carthage in Africa, built by Queen
Dido; which had upon the top of it a Temple dedicated to Aesculapius. In the
Phaenician Language, introduced by Dido into Africa, it is written Botzra or
Bosra, signifying a Tower: Whereof the Word Bursa, with the Fable of the Hide
thereon grounded, was but a Grecian Corruption alluding to the little Morsels
of Leather stamped for Money in ancient times; with which she purchased the
Ground for the Building of this Castle and the City of Carthage.

Byzacena, an ancient City and Province of Africa within the Kingdom of Tunis.
The City has sometime been a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Carthage. In
the Year 646. a Council of 42 Prelates was assembled at it against the
Monothelites; besides others of less Note, in 602. 541. and 522.

CAB.
CAbe, or Cheyles, or Queiles, Chalybs, a River of Spain, rising in the Kingdom
of Aragon, which waters Taracona, and falls into the Ebro. The Waters of this
River have been ever famous for the tempering of Steel.

Cabeston, a Town in the Province of Languedoc in France near Nismes.

Cabo d' Istria, a City of Istria in Italy, under the Dominion of the
Venetians, upon the Adriatic Gulf; heretofore called Justinopolis, from
Justinian the Emperor, who rebuilt it. This is the Capital of Istria, and a
Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Aquileia. It is a small Place in an Island
three Bow shoots from the Continent, to which there is a Passage by Bridges;
and in the midst of it is an ancient Castle: 30 Italian Miles from Aquileia to
the South-East, and 75 from Venice to the East: Long. 36. 26. Lat. 45. 31.

Cabrieres, a Town in the County of Venaissin in Provence in France.

Cabul, a Province or Kingdom in the East Indies, under the Great Mogul, near
the Fountains of the River Indus; it has a City of the same Name, standing upon
a small River which falls into the Indus. The whole Country is full of
Mountains, but very fruitful, and reasonably well traded. The Rivers Nilab and
Behat, falling into the Indus, have their Sources therein. Long. 305. and Lat.
31. In this City their Kings resided heretofore. There are two Fortresses
standing in it.

Cabusco, a Mountain in the Kingdom of Persia.

Cacagioni, Charox, a City of the Lesser or Crim Tartary.

Cacari, a River and Town of Mongrelia.

Cacceres, Caceres de Camarhina, a City in the principal Philippine Island of
Lusson or Manilha upon the Streights of Manilha, with a good Port to the same;
and a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Manilha.

Cacelina, a City of Bithynia, anciently called Chalcedon.

Cachan, a large City in the Province of Hyrach in Persia; 22 Leagues from
Ispahan. Above a thousand Families of Jews (said to be of the Tribe of Juda)
dwell in it. It is a famous Place for Brocards.

Cachar, the Indus or great River of the East Indies.

Caco, Cacus, Caunus, a Mountain in the Kingdom of Aragon, in the Confines of
the Kingdom of Old Castile; now called also Moncaio.

Cadenac, a small Town in the County of Quercy in France, upon the River Lot
and the Borders of Rovergue; 8 or 9 Leagues from Cahors. Some take it to be the
Vxellodunum of the ancient Gaul:, which stood out the last of all their Towns
against Caesar.

Cadillac, a small Town in the Province of Guienne in France, near the Garrone;
in a fertile Soil, and adorned with one of the best Castles in this Province.

Cachieu, or Sierra Liona, a Sea Port Town on the Coast of Guiney, much
frequented by the Europeans, toward the Promontory of Leaena. This Place was
first discovered by the Portugals in 1452.

Cadiz, Gades, is an Island and City on the Coast of Spain, in the Atlantic
Ocean; called Cadis and Cales by the English, and Cadice by the Italians: But
small, as being only 4 Leagues in length; whereas it was once much greater, as
Pliny and Strabo both affirm. It lies on the Coast of the Kingdom of Andalusia,
to which it is now joined by a Bridge between the Outlet of the River
Guadalquivir or Baetis, and the Streights of Gibraltar. On the Western Shore of
this Island lies CADIS, which gives Name to the Island, built by the
Phenicians, and is perhaps the oldest Town in Spain. In the times of the Romans
it was made a Municipal City, and one of the Juridical Resorts for the Province
of Baetica; in which time it was thought one of the Noblest and Richest Cities
in all Spain; scarce yiedling to any in the Empire for Greatness, Magnificence,
or the Number and Quality of the Inhabitants; here living at one time five
hundred Roman Knights, which Number was not equalled in any other Place but
Padua only; beside the great Concourse of Merchants from all places of the
World; which occasioned Cornelius Balba, a Native of it, to build a New Town to
the old one. By the Moors at the Conquest of Spain, it was utterly ruined, and
so contitinued till it was recovered from them by the Spaniards, who rebuilt
and fortified it, and made it the Magazine for their Navies: Yet it was taken
by the English in one Day, under Robert Earl of Essex, and Sir Walter Rawleigh,
in which they burnt the Indian Fleet, consisting of forty Sail of Ships, whose
Lading was worth eight Millions of Crowns; overcame the Spanish Navy, which
consisted of fifty seven Men of War; took the S. Michael and S. Andrew, two
great Gallions, with their Lading, and carried away more Martial Furniture than
could be again supplied in many Years; forced the Town, in which they slew and
took Prisoners 4000 Foot, and 600 Horse, and brought thence a considerable
Booty in 1596. This City is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Sevil. Long.
14. 10. Lat. 36. 28. Juno had a Temple formerly in her Honor in this Island,
thence called Junonis Insula; and also Hercules another, in which Caesar wept
to reflect upon the Actions of Alexander the Great at the Age of thirty three.
After the Reduction of Spain by Caesar, he left a Roman Colony at Cadis with
the Name of Julia Gaditana. The Ancients believed it to be the utmost boundary
of Navigation; calling the two Mountains near it, at the Mouth of the
Streights, the Pillars of Hercules. Here the Spanish Gallions rendezvouse. It
is one of the Keys of Spain, and of so very great Importance, that Charles V.
recommended it particularly, together with Flushing in the Low Countries, and
Goulet in Africa, to the Care of his Son King Philip II. as absolutely
necessary for the Conservation of his Empire. Columella was a Native hereof,
with Canius a Poet mentioned by Martial.

Il Cadoriue, the most Northern Country of all Italy toward the County of
Tyrol and the Alps; contained within the Marcha Trevisana, in the States of
the Republic of Venice. Its Capital Town is Pieve di Cadore.

Cadouin, a famous Abbey of the Order of the Cistercians in the Province of
Perigord in France; where they pretend to preserve a Handkerchief of our
Savior's, brought out of Jerusalem in 1105. and since visited by S. Lewis K.
of France, in 1269. by Charles VI. and Lewis XI. as a most extraordinary Relick.

Caen, Cadomus, famous for a Bishop's See and an University, on the River Orne,
about 4 Leagues from the British Sea, 28 from Roan to the South. In the year
1063. the Archbishop of Roan held a Council here in the Presence of William the
Conqueror King of England; who died in 1087. in the 74th year of his Age at
Roan: and being deserted after his Death by all his Friends and Servants, was
after a long time interred by the Monks here with small Pomp, in the Abbey of
St. Stephen which he him self had Founded, as his Queen had done that of the
Holy Trinity. The University was Founded by Henry V. K. of England, who took
this City from the French, after a sharp resistance, by Storm in 1417. Its
Long. is 22. 20. Lat. 49. 40. The learned Bochartus was none of the least
Ornaments of this Place. They bear three Fleur de Lysses in their Arms, as a
Token of their Fidelity to the Crown.

Caer-Cadon, the Welsh Name of the City of Bath.

Caerdif, See Landaff.

Caerick-Fergus. See Knock-Fergus.

Caer-Leon, Chester.

Caer-Leon, Isca Legionis, Legio Secunda, an ancient Roman Town upon the Vsk in
the County of Monmouth, which was once one of the Metropolitan Seats of
Britain, and an University, till the Sea was removed to S. David's. The City was
ruined in the Reign of Henry II. but there are still many very honorable Marks
of its Antiquity and Splendour dug up here, for which the Reader may consult
Mr. Camden. The Romans quartered the Second Legion, called Augusta, in it, to
bridle the Silures. King Arthur kept his Court here. It stands 9 Miles East
from Landaf, 21 from Brecknock South-East, and 26 from Hereford South-West.
Newport has sprung out of its Ruins, and stands a little beneath it on the
Severn.

Caer-Lud, London.

Caermarthenshire, is one of the Twelve Counties in Wales; bounded on the East
by Glamorganshire and Brecknock, on the West by Pembroke, on the North by
Cardigan, from which it is separated by the River Tivy; and on the South by the
Irish Sea. This County is said by Mr. Camden to be very fruitful, and in some
places to have plenty of Coal Mines, and to abound in Cattle. It takes its Name
from the principal City, which stands upon the River Tiny, about 5 Miles from
the Sea: called by Ptolomy, Maridunum; by Antonius, Muridunum. It was Walled
with Brick in the times of Giraldus Cambrensis, but was then decaying:
Pleasantly seated between Woods and Meadows, and very venerable for its great
Antiquity: taken from the Welsh in the Reign of William the Conqueror, after
this by them retaken and burnt twice; till being first strengthened with a
Castle by Henry Turbervil, an English Man, and after that walled about by
Gilbert de Clare, it recovered something of its former Glory. The Princes of
Wales settling here the Chancery and Exchequer for South Wales.

Caernarvanshire, has on the North and West the Irish Sea, on the South
Merioneth, and on the East Denbighshire; parted from the Isle of Anglesey by
the River Menay. All the middle parts of it are covered and filled with
Mountains; so that Mr. Camden calls these Hills Alps Britannicas, the British
Alps; and says they afforded the greatest Security to the Welsh in times of
War: and so abounded with Grass, that they seemed sufficient alone to have fed
all the Cattle of Wales. The Western parts are more level, and yield plenty of
Barley. The chief Town or City, is seated in this part of the County, upon the
River Menay; and was built by Edward I. King of England, about 1283. Small and
almost round, but strong, and defended by a beautiful Castle. Edward II. was
born here, and Surnamed from this Town, who was the first of the English
Princes that bore the Title of Prince of Wales. In after times these Princes
settled here the Chancery for North-VVales. Robert Dormer Baron of VVing was
created Viscount and Earl of Carnarvan in the sourth Year of the Reign of King
Charles I. who afterward lost his Life valiantly for that Prince at Newberry,
in 1643. to whom succeeded Charles his Son.

Caerphilly, a Market Town in the County of Glamorgan in Wales, where the Earl
of Pembroke has a Noble Castle. It is the Capital of its Hundred.

Caerwis, a Market Town in Flintshire, in the Hundred of Coleshill.

Caeron, a Country in Assyria, where Josephus says the Relics of Noah's Ark
were to be seen in his time. It produces your odoriferous Wood.

Caesarea, Palestina, was anciently called the Tower of Straton: But Herod the
Great, rebuilding it, called it Caesarea, in honor of Augustus: It is now
called Caisar. It lies on the shoars of the Mediterranean Sea, in the Holy
Land; 30 Miles to the South from Ptolemais, and 45 from Jerusalem. After the
Ruin of Jerusalem, it became the Metropolis of Palestine, and the Seat of the
Prefect or Governor; the Bishop of Caesarea gained thereby the Authority of a
Primate over the Bishop of Jerusalem, and for some Ages maintained it; but in
after Councils the Bishop of Jerusalem was exempted and made a Patriarch;
several great Councils have been held here. Eusebius Pamphilus the Church
Historian was in his time Bishop of it. Cornelius, the first converted Gentile,
was baptized here by S. Peter. S. Paul was a Prisoner here. And Origin taught
here. But in 653. after a Siege of 7 years, Muhavia a Saracen took it from the
Christians. In the Holy War it was several times taken and retaken; till at
last entirely ruined by Barsus a Saracen. Long 66. 15. Lat. 32. 20.. Caesarea
Magna in Cappadocia, the Episcopal Seat heretofore of S. Basil. See Caisar..
Caesarea Philippi. See Balbec.. Caesarea in Africa, an ancient City mentioned
with Honor in the Roman History, upon the Coast of the Mediterranean; believed
to be the same with the Iol of Ptolemy, Pliny, and Mela. It became a Bishop's
See since Christianity, and likewise an University that produced diverse Poets
and Philosophers of Note, in the time that the Arabians were Victorious in
Africa. In the Year 959. the Caliphs ruined it. The Remains of its Walls make
it appear to have been above 3 Leagues in Circuit: called by the Africans
Tiguident.

Caffa, a considerable City and Seaport in Crim Tartary, upon the Eastern side
of the Peninsula East of the City of Crim; supposed to be the Cavum of the
Ancients. It is a flourishing Mart, and furnished with a large and capacious
Haven: Heretofore possessed by the Genoese, who (says Dr. Heylin) by the Help
of this Port and the Plantation they had in Pera, on the North Side of
Constantinople, engrossed all the Trade of the Euxine Sea into their own hands.
In 1475. it was taken by Mahomet the Great; ever since it has been in the hands
of the Turks, and though by them much ruined, is still the principal Place in
that Demy-Island. The Turks govern it by a Bashaw they send thither; and
although the Tartars can possess themselves of it when they please, yet they
choose rather to leave it in his hands than to take it into their own. The
Venetians have often solicited a free Commerce with it for the Benefit of its
Commodities: but the Port has constantly refused to suffer their Vessels to
pass into the Black Sea for Reasons of State. They reckon about 4000 Houses of
Mahometans, Tartars, and Christians; whereof some Latins, Greeks, and some
Armenians, to the Number of about 800, who are obliged to wear a Distinction
from the rest in their Bonnets.

Caffreria, a Country of Africa of large extent. It lies from the Kingdom of
Angola on the North to the Cape of Good Hope, and is bounded East, West, and
South with the Ocean; the South-Eastern part is very fruitful, and well
peopled; the rest barren, Mountainous, and little peopled. The Inhabitants are
so barbarous, that they are called by this Name from their rude way of living,
which signifies the Lawless People; they were all heretofore Man-eaters, and
many of them continue such to this day. They call themselves Hottentots. Mr.
Herbert an English Man, who was in these Parts, will scarce allow them to be
perfect Men; and says they sell Man's Flesh in the Shambles. They acknowledge a
Sovereign Being under the Name of Humma, which they adore when he sends good
Weather: But in cold and rainy, or very hot Seasons, they change their Praises
of him, into Complaints against him.

Cagliari, Caralis, Calaris, a City of Sardinia, an Island in the Mediterranean
Sea, which is the Capital, and the Seat of the Governor, on the South side of
the Island upon an Hill: Also an Archbishop's See, and an University. When the
Moors were Masters of this Island they ruined this City; but James II. King of
Aragon recovering it Anno Christi 1330. the Pisans rebuilt the Town, which is
now become great and rich under the Spaniards. It has three large Suburbs, a
Castle and a very capacious Haven. The famous Lucifer was Archbishop of this
See in the Reign of Constantine M. Pope Hillary was born here, and Martin King
of Sicily died here in 1409. Long. 32. 12. Lat. 37. 30. The Cape Cagliari
derives its Name from hence.

Cagli or Caglio, Callium, Cale, Call, a small City in the Dukedom of Vrbino,
which is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Vrbino; seated upon the River
Metro, at the foot of the Apennine, 14 Leagues from Vrbino to the South-West,
and the same Distance from Eugubio to the North-East. It was under the Dominion
of the Pope in 1289.

Caiors or Cahors, Doveona, Divona, Cadurcum, the principal City of Quercy in
Guienne in France upon the River Loath, over which it has three Bridges. It is a
large, fine, and strong City, and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Alby
ever since 1678. before which time it was under the Archbishop of Berry: ten
Leagues from Alby to the North, and 45 from Bourdeaux to the East. Pope John
XXII. being born here, founded an University in it in 1331. The Bishops take
the Title of Earls of Cahors. Henry IV. King of Navarre, besieged it in 1580.
and reduced it in three Days; since which time its Castle and Fortifications
have been demolished.

Cajania, a Province of Sweden which is often also called East-Bothinia;
between the Botner Sea, Lapland, and Finland.

Cajan^burg, the principal Town within the former Territory, which gives Name
to it: it lies toward Lapland upon the Lake Vla; with a Castle for its Defense
and Honor.

Cajazzo, Calatia, a City in the Province of Lavoro in the Kingdom of Naples,
about 7 Miles East of Capua; near the River Voltorno, and a Bishop's See under
the Archbishop of Capoiia. It was considerable in the times of the Caesar's; a
Colony having been settled there by Julius Caesar, as Apianus Alexandrinus
says, which on that account joined with Augustus. But now very small and in a
declining Condition.

Cajenne, an Island to the South of the Mouth of the River Cajenne (which gives
Name to it) in the Province of Guyana in America, under the French; 18 Leagues
in Circuit. The River Cajenne springs from the Mountains, near the Lake of
Parima, and continues its Course about 100 Leagues through the Country of the
Galibes, before it falls into the Ocean with this Island in its Embraces. The
Hollanders settled themselves here in 1656. and again in 1676. but were both
times expelled by the French, who were the prior Occupants.

Caj^tta. See Gajetta.

Caifum, or Caifung, one of the principal Cities in China, seated on the South
of the River Croceus, in the Province of Honan, in Long. 142. 35. It was
heretofore the ordinary Residence of the Emperors of China, till the Year 1642.
that the Usurper Lyncungh besieged it: To drown whose Army, the People piercing
the Banks of the River Croceus (which lies higher than the Town) brought the
Water upon themselves more than on the Enemy, with so great an Impetuosity,
that the Houses were all overturned, three hundred thousand Inhabitants
drowned, and the whole Town changed into a Lake from that Day.

Caiman, a greater, and Lesser Island, North of Cuba, in the Gulf of Mexico;
known by the Tortoise-Fishing-Trade there.

Caiphas, a City of Phoenicia, at the foot of Mount Carmel, and heretofore an
Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Tire: Understood by some to be the
Porphyrcum of Polybius and Stephanus. The Lords hereof were of high renown in
the time that the Christians were Masters of the Holy land.

Cairo, Babylon, Memphis, Cairus, the Capital of Egypt, and indeed the greatest
City in all Africa: by the Arabians called Alchair; seated on the East side of
the River Nile, about 1 Mile from it; there is a Passage from the River into
it, which divides the Town in the middle. This City sprang out of the ruins of
Memphis and Babylon, which stood not far from it on the Western Shore of the
Nile, and was built by the Saracens, or Moors, after they became Masters of
Egypt; the Califfs of which Nation for a long time resided here, as did
afterward the Sultans. In 1517. it was Conquered by Selim the Turk, and it has
ever since been in their hands; but is now sensibly declined from what it was.
The Patriarch of Alexandria resides here, who has six ancient Greek Churches in
the place; there are many more belonging to the Cophtites; for whose Conviction
in the business of Nestorianisme, a Council was held here in 1582. by the order
of Pope Gregory XIII. but without effect, tho the Patriarch of the Cophtites
had been first gained over to the Persuasion of the Latens. They have an
Aqueduct of 350 Arches, which brings the water from the River to the Town. Its
chiefest Manufacture is Tapestry. Three Leagues lower, the Nile is divided into
two Branches, which make the Delta. It is 8 Miles in compass, and has at the
South end of it a stately Castle, the Palace of the Mamaluck Sultans, built
upon a Mountain which overlooks the City and a great part of the Country: When
the Turks took it, it was very strong, but Selim ruined a great part of it; and
that which remains, serves for the residence of the Turkish Bassa, who has the
Government of this Kingdom. About 10 Miles from this City stand those famous
Pyramids which have in all Ages been so much admired, and are certainly the
most ancient Buildings in the whole World, and may in all probability not
perish before the general Conflagration. Long. 38. 48. Lat. 36 40.

Cairoan, Cyrene, an ancient and once very noble City in Africa, mentioned in
the Acts of the Apostles; and now almost ruined and depopulated by the Turks,
in whose hands it is: seated right overagainst Matapan, the most Southern Cape
of the Morea; an Archbishops See under the Patriarch of Alexandria, and once
famous not only for its Antiquity, (being built in the year of the World 3560.
143 years after Rome;) but also for Learning, it having produced many noble
Greek Writers; and particularly Aristippus, the founder of the Sect of the
Cyrenaick Philosophers, with the ingenious Areta his Daughter, who succeeded
him in his School. The Country anciently called Libya Cyrenaica, comprehending
the Five Cities of Berenice, Teuchire, Ptolomais, Apollonia, and Cyrene,
derived its name from hence. It had sometime the honor to bear the Title of a
Kingdom. For in the Year of Rome 658. we read of a Ptolomy surnamed Apion, King
of Cyrene, nominating the Romans to be his Heirs. The Libya Cyrenaica was
afterward called Pentapolis from these its Cities, and now Mestrata. Long. 50.
00. Lat. 31. 20. Also a Town upon the River Capullia in the Kingdom of Tunis,
about 14 Leagues from the Sea. Built in 652. by the Caliphs of Syria, and
adorned with a sumptuous Mosque, where you see the Sepulchers of the Kings of
Tunis. For want of Fountains in so dry and barren a Soil as this Town stands
in, they drink altogether of the Water of the Cistern. There has been formerly
an University here, frequented from all the parts of Africa. It is the Thysdrus
of the Ancients. The Arabians call it Cairavan: And a chief Pontiff of the
Mohammedan Law resides in it.

Caisar, Caesarea Magna, a City of Cappadocia upon the River Haly, which was
made a Colony by Tibenius Claudius; called before this Archelais, 60 Miles from
Iconium to the North. Till the time of Valens the Roman Emperor, it was the
Metropolis of Cappadocia. The Great S. Basil was a Bishop here. Long. 64. 40.
Lat. 41. 40.

Caket, a Kingdom and City of Georgia in Asia toward the Mountain Caucasus:
Conquered by the King of Persia, and Governed under him by a Viceroy. The ruins
that are to be seen in the City are suffient evidences of its former
magnificence. This Country is properly the ancient Iberia.

Calabria, Magna Graecia, Brutii Populi. This is the Name of an ancient
Province in the Kingdom of Naples in Italy; but now applied to another, which
is no part of that which had heretofore the name of Calabria. The ancient
Calabria was bounded on the North and East by the Adriatic Sea; on the South
by the Salentins; and on the West by Apulia Pucetia, taking up that part of the
Kingdom of Naples, which makes now the North of the Province of Otranto. The
present Calabria, is a very large, and the most Southern Province of that
Kingdom; itself a Dukedom, the Title of which was given to the Eldest Son of
the King of Naples, whilst it remained a separate Kingdom. This is bounded on
the North by the Basilicata, on the East by the Ionian Sea, on the West by the
Tyrrhenian, and on the South by the Sicilian Streights. Its greatest length is
from North to South; and it is one of the four principal Provinces of the
Kingdom of Naples. Divided commonly into the Hither or Upper (which is the more
Northern), and the Further or Lower Calabria. The Saracens became Masters of it
about the year 827. and were expelled in the 11th. Century by the valor of the
Celebrated Robert Guichard, a Norman; who from a Soldier of Fortune, made
himself Duke of Puglia and Calabria about the year 1059. being the head of a
Line, which soon after in the Person of Roger II. attained the Crowns of Naples
and Sicily. Calabria is very subject to Earthquakes. There is an Historical
relation of one particularly which continued more or less from 1638. to 1641.

Calahorra, Calaguris, Clunia, a City of the Old Castile in the Kingdom of
Spain, upon the River Ebro, where it entertains the River Cidacos di Castella;
built upon an Hill in the limits of the Kingdom of Navarr, and was first made a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tarragon, by Pope Alexander VI. in 1498.
but afterward Subjected to the Archbishop of Burgos. The Bishopric of Calzada
was united to this See in 1236. It lies 23 Leagues from Bajona to the South, in
Long. 18. 50. Lat. 43. 26. Quintilian and Prudentius were both of this City.
The ancient Inhabitants of it, called Caliguritani, sustained a Siege against
Pompey with so much obstinacy, as at last to kill their very Wifes and
Children, and salt them like Pork, and Eat them for Provisions. Pliny mentions
two Towns of this Name; Caligurris Nascica, and Caligurris Fibularia: the first
was amongst the People of Husca: the other in the Country of the Gascons, as
some interpret him.

Calais, Caletum, Portus Iccius, a strong Town of Picardy in France, at the
entrance of the English Channel, right over against Dover. Taken by Edward III.
in 1347. after a siege of a 11 Months, and lost again by Q. Mary in less than a
Fortnight, in 1557. till when for 210 years together, we had the Keys of France
at our Girdles; and that Princess accordingly resented the loss, dying soon
after of Grief, as it was thought, for it; saying not long before her death,
that if she were opened they should find Calais at her Heart. Cardinal Albert
took this Town from the French in 1596. but it was soon after by them
recovered, according to the Peace of Vervin in 1598. The Country adjacent had
heretofore the Name of Caletes. The Long. is 23. 00. Lat. 51. 00.

Calama, Thyamus, a River of Epirus: it falls into the Ionian Sea, over against
the Island of Ericusa, now Alicur; between Corfu to the North, and Cefalonia to
the South.

Calama, or Calamata, an inland City of Africa, between Hippo to the East, and
Cirta to the West. Often mentioned in the Writings of S. Austin. It was
formerly an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Carthage.

Calamata, Thuria, a Fort, and an unwalled, but well Peopled Town on the South
of the Morea in the Province of Belvedore; opposite to Coron, from whence, it
is distant 40 English Miles by Sea. This Castle or Fort was taken by surprise
in 1659. and deserted, but retaken in 1685. and is now Garrisoned by the
Venetians. Another in the Kingdom of Algiers in Africa, near the River Major.

Calamianes, an Island of the East Indies, which lies between Borneo and the
Philippine Islands; and is subject to a Prince of its own.

Calarauega, or Calaroga, a small Town in Old Castile in Spain, where S.
Dominique de Guzman, the founder of the Order of the Preachers, was born.

Calatagirone, an inconsiderable small Town in the Island of Sicily, amongst
the Mountains: built upon the ruins of the ancient Calata: some speak of
another of this Name in the same Island.

Calata^ud, a Town of Aragon in Spain. Built, as is supposed, by an Arab, who
left his own Name to it. In Latin called Bilbilis Nova, from its situation near
the ruins of the ancient Bilbilis, between Saragossa and Medina Caeli. It
stands in a Plain, but at the foot of a high Mountain, upon the River Zalon,
which there receives the River Baubula. A large and handsome Town, in a fruitful
Country, with a Castle to command and defend it.

Calatrava, Oretum, a City of New Castile in Spain, upon the River Guadiana, 15
Leagues South of Toledo. Taken from the Moors by Sanctius III. in 1158. who
granting it to the Templars, they distrusting the strength of the place,
resigned it up again to him. Whereupon two Cistercian Monks undertook to
fortify it, as they did in a short time; and upon a new Grant of it to their
Order, they Instituted the Order of the Knights of Calatrava, for the defense
of it, which was confirmed by Pope Alexander III. This Order of Knights was
begun in 1185. under Alphonsus the Noble: at first they had Masters of their
Order, but in 1489 that Dignity was annexed to the Crown Paul III. granted them
leave to Marry once. The Order has 24 Manors in Spain belonging to it. Their
Habit was at first the same with that of the Cistercians, till Pope Benedict
XIII. dispensed with it.

Calavar, a Village of the Province of Balagate, which is the last Province and
Town the Mogul has toward the Kingdom of Orixia, of Golconda. In this place
unreasonable Tolls are forced from Travelers. Thevenot.

Calcot, Calchutum, mentioned in the 7th. Tome of the Councils, for a Council
here assembled in 787. under Gregory Bishop of Ostia, and Theophylact Bishop of
Tali, the Legates of Pope Adrian I. But whether this be Calcot in Oxfordshire,
or Calcot in Berkshire, or another, our Author is not express

Calder, a River in Yorkshire falling into the Ouse below York.

Calderino, a famous Bath, 10 Miles from Verona in Italy; ordinarily called the
Bath of Verona.

Calecut, or Calicut, Calecutium, a Kingdom in the Promontory of Malabar in the
East Indies, taking its Name from a City seated on the Western Shoars. Long.
105. dog. Long. and Lat. 11. 22. It is under a Prince of its own, who has some
other Kings Tributary to him. And inhabited by Pagans, Mahometans, Arabians,
the Christians of S. Thomas, with the Converts of the Mission, as to the
several Religions of the People. Not the King's Sons, but the King's Sisters
Sons succeed to the Crown. The City is very great, and has no Walls; the
European Merchants drive here a plentiful Trade. This was the first place in
the East Indies the Portuguese discovered in 1498. Where at first they were
kindly received by the King; but afterward he would have destroyed them at the
instigation of some Arabian Merchants, which necessitated them to join with the
King of Cochin against him. The English also have a good settlement here.

Calemberg, a Country in the Duchy of Brunswick in the lower circle of Saxony,
lying along the Weser: it is a part of the Style of the Duke of Brunswick. a
Mountain in Austria, extended from the Danube to the Save, and divided into
diverse parts under as many different names: in Latin, Caesius, Mons,
understands the whole Mountain.

Calepio, Calepium, a Town near Bergamo in Italy upon the River Oglio, with a
Valley to which it imparts its name. Ambrosius Calepinus was a Native of this
Town.

Cales, Gadis. See Cadiz.

California, a vast Island of North America, in the South Sea near New Mexico,
from which it is parted by the Purple Sea: 300 Spanish Leagues in length, and
60 in breadth. First discovered by Cortesius in 1535. In 1587. Captain
Cavendish, an English Man, took near the South Cape of this Island a very rich
Ship. In 1620. it was found to be an Island, which was thought before to be a
part of the Continent: Sir Francis Drake in 1577. wintered in this Island, and
took possession of it for his Mistress, calling it Nova Albion. Tho said to be
exceeding fruitful, full of People, of a good and quiet humor and disposition,
yet the Spaniards never attempted to settle here, till within about 7 years
since. It is a dry and unfruitful Country: they fish for Pearl upon the Eastern
Coast of it.

Calingae, an ancient People of the East Indies, mentioned by Pliny.

Calixine, Taniticum, one of the Mouths of the Nile.

Calear, a small but fine City in the Duchy of Cleve in Germany, under the
Dominion of the Duke of Brandenburg, upon the River Men, within one German Mile
of the Rhine, 2 from the City of Cleve; a little further from Emeri^, and 4
from Wesel to the North.

Callao: or Callao de Lima, Callaum, a small Island upon the Coast of Peru over
against the Port of Lima, with a Town in it and a Castle.

Callirh^e, a Fountain of Judea beyond Jordan mentioned by Josephus: its Waters
are Medicinal, and yet very pleasant to drink; falling into the Lake
Asphaltites. Another in Attica, particularly taken notice of for flowing with 9
several Streams. Plin^ and Pausanias mention diverse others.

Callo, a Fort in Flanders, where the States Army received a sharp check in
1638.

Calmar, Calmaria, a very strong City of the Province of Smaland, upon the
Baltic Sea over against the Isle of Oeland: strangely ruined by Fire in 1647.
Thenarrow passage between it and Oeland is called, Calmarsund; it lies in Lat.
57. 00. Long. 37. 30. This City was taken by Christian IV. King of Denmark,
with the slaughter of all the Inhabitants, saving those who fled into the
Castle, in 1611.: but was recovered by a Treaty in 1613. by Gustavus Adolphus,
King of Sweden. It has a good Port, where the Swedes ordinarily Embark for
Germany: And the Citadel carries the greatest Name of any in the North.

Calne, a Market Town in Wilsthire, which is the capital of its Hundred, upon
a River of the same name, running from East to West into the Bristol Avon.
There was a Synod held here in 977. where they say the Clergy presented
complaints against St. Dunstan for his partiality to the Monks: but whilst the
Cause was in debate, the Roof of the House fell, and St. Dunstan alone escaped
unhurt. This Corporation returns two Burgesses to the Parliament.

Caloieron Oros, Olympius, Maesinus, a Mountain now called the Monks Mount by
the Greeks, and Geschidag by the Turks, as Leunclavius says; it stands in the
Confines of Bithynia, directly South of the famous City of Nice, and not far
from it.

Calojero, Atalantia, a small Island lying near Negropont.

Calopinica, Taurocinium, a River of Calabria, which falls into the Straits of
Sicily, between the Promontory of Armi, and the City of Regio.

Calore, Calor, a River of the Principate in the Kingdom of Naples, which
rises from the Apennine, washes Benevento, and then falls into the Sabbato.

Calpe, one of the Pillars of Hercules; being a high Mountain in the Kingdom of
Andalusia in Spain, opposite to the ancient Abila upon the Coast of Africa.

Calpurt, Colchis, a City of Armenia.

Calsery, a small Town in the Kingdom of Iamba in the East Indies, under the
Great Mogul; about 25 Leagues from the Ganges: understood by some to be the
Batan Caesara of Ptolomy.

Calvary, Golgotha, the holy Mount near the Walls of Jerusalem to the South, on
which our Savior dyed. It is believed by diverse of the Greek and Latin
Fathers, that Adam was buried, and that Abraham offered to Sacrifice his Son
Isaac here. Adrian the Emperor, in derision of Christianity, caused the Idols
of Jupiter and Venus to be Erected upon it; which Constantine the Great and
Helena his Mother demolished, in the same place building a Church (called
Martyrion at first, now S. Sepulcher) not inferior to the most beautiful one
in the World. The Christian Princes have many times bestowed great Benefactions
upon this Church. The Emperor Heraclius reedified it in 628. after it had been
ruined by Chosroes King of Persia in 615, at his taking of Jerusalem. The
renowned Godfrey of Bouillon made large Additions to it in 1099. There are
distinct Apartments in it for the Latin, the Greek, the Armenian, the Syrian,
the Cophtite, and the Abyssine Christians: who show you a Chapel, where the
Cross stood that bore the Sacrifice of our Saviors Body, called the Chapel of
the Crucifixion: the place where he was Embalmed, according to the custom of
the Jews; the place where he is said first to appear to the Blessed Virgin
after his Resurrection, called the Chapel of the Apparition; the Rock out of
which his Sepulcher was hewn, and the Tomb itself illuminated with 62 Lamps
that burn continually. Here are the Tombs of Godfrey of Bouillon the first King
of Jerusalem, and Baldwin I. his Brother, who succeeded him in that Crown.

Calvi, Cales, a small City in the Terra di Lavoro, in the Kingdom of Naples, 6
Miles North of Capoua; which tho it has not much above 20 Houses, is a Bishops
See under the Archbishop of Capoua. It withstood a Siege against the French and
Turks in 1555. the Ancients called it Cales. a Town in the Island of Corsica
with a Port and a considerable Fortress to the Gulf of the same name, under
the Genouese.

Calydon, an ancient City of Aetolia in Greece; sometime adorned with an
Episcopal See, and the Title of the Capital of the Country; giving Name to a
Forest therein. Also the ancient Appellation of a part of Scotland toward the
County of Perth, in which Dunkeld stands: see Dunkeld. The same continuing to
the Northern Sea to this Day.

Calydoni, a little Castle in the Vicentine in Italy, whence a Noble Family of
Vicenza derives their Name.

Calzada, Calciata, a small City in old Castile in Spain; once a Bishops See,
which is now removed to Calahorra, from whence it lies 12 Spanish Leagues to
the West. It is sometimes called S. Domingo de la Calzada, from the great
Devotion of People to S. Dominick there. Henry II. King of Castile, dyed here
in the year 1379.

Calzan, Calzun, the Arabian Gulf.

Camala, Emisa. See Hama.

Camarina, an ancient Town of the Island of Sicily, built in the year of Rome
150. according to Eusebius, and long since ruined; leaving only its name to a
River in the same Island. Its situation near the purulent Lake of Camerina
obliging the Inhabitants to drain that Lake up, whereby the Enemy obtained a
Passage to take the Town, occasioned the known Proverb Camarinam movere.

Camb or Kamp, Cambus, a River of the Upper Austria in Germany, springing
toward the Frontiers of Bohemia, and ending in the Danube.

Cambaia, the Capital of the Kingdom of Guzurat; and a noble Port, lying in a
very great Bay of the same Name; now subject to the great Mogul; the City lies
in Long 105. Lat. 22. 30. and is one of the greatest, the richest, the best
traded Cities in the East Indies; seated in a fruitful Soil, and full of
People: commonly called the Cairo of the Indies; whence the Kingdom of Guzerate
is often named the Kingdom of Cambaia. It is walled with a fair Wall of
Freestone, has very large Houses, straight and broad Streets; greater than
Surat, being ten Leagues in compass; and has 3 Basars or Market places, and 4
noble Tanks or Cisterns, able to find the Inhabitants Water all the year: tho
there is 7 fathom Water in the Haven at high water, yet at low water the Ships
lie dry in the Sand and Mud, which cover the bottom of it. The Inhabitants are
partly Heathens, partly Mahometans. And in 1638. the English had here a
Factory, as Mandelslo acquaints us; from whom the latter part of this
Description is taken.

Cambala, a City in China. See Peking: some represent it to be 24 Italian Miles
in compass. Cambalu is the Mascovian and Saracen Name for it, Peking the Indian.

Cambaya, Camboya or Camboge, a Kingdom in the East Indies, over against the
Isle of Borneo; bounded on the West with the Kingdom of Siam, and on the East
with that of Cochin. It is Tributary to the King of Siam. This Kingdom is
almost equally divided by a vast River, which in July and August overflows all
the Country, as the Nile does Egypt. The King of it is a great Friend to the
Portuguese, as he of Siam is to the Dutch. Upon the most Eastern Branch (for
there are 3) of the River mentioned before, stands Cambodia the principal City,
built upon a rising Ground to prevent the yearly Deluges. This Kingdom is
extreme fruitful, but not potent, the King not being able to bring above 25 or
30000 Men into the Field: first discoverd by Alphonso d'Albuquerque in 1511. as
Mandelslo says. Cambodia lies in Long. 135. 00. Lat. 10, 35.

Cambray, Cameracum, called by the Flandrians Camerick, a City of Hainault upon
the Schold; Guicciardin says it is a great, fair, strong City, and has a
strong Castle built by Charles V. That it abounds in excellent public
Buildings, especially the Cathedral is very great and beautiful: that it is
populous and rich, and was a very ancient Bishopric, under the Archbishop of
Rhemes; but in 1559. exempted by Pope Paul IV. and erected into an
Archbishopric. The first place the French possessed themselves of, after they
came out of Germany, in 1445. After this it became an Imperial City and
continued so till Charles V. in 1543. built a Citadel in it, and annexed it to
his own Dominions. The French, who all along pretended a Right to it, at last
in 1677. took it by force after a sharp defense. The Archbishops are honored
with the style of Dukes of Cambray, Earls of Cambresis, and Princes of the
Empire. Cambresis is a considerable Territory betwixt Picardy, Flanders,
Artois, and Hainault: extremely fruitful, and adorned with a Castle of its own
Name, in which Henry II. of France and the King of Spain Celebrated that Treaty
of Peace in 1559. which the French say was most disadvantageous to them. It
lies 4 Leagues from Doway South, in Long. 26. 06. Lat. 49 45.

Cambria, the ancient Name of the Principality of Wales: more especially of the
Western part thereof toward Ireland.

Cambridgeshire, has on the East Suffolk and Norfolk, on the West Huntington
and Bedford, on the South Hartford, and on the North Lincolnshire; the River
Ouse divides it almost in the midst. Toward the South end of the County lies
the Town which gives it its Name. Mr. Camden says it is called Camboritum,
being seated upon the East Bank of the River Came, which is here passed by a
Bridge. This is one of the antientest and noblest Universities in Christendom;
having 16 Colleges and Halls endowed, or Nurseries in it of Piety and Learning;
the most ancient of which is Peter House, founded in 1257. by Hugh Balsham, a
Sub-Prior; before which time there was only Hostels, wherein the Scholars
maintained themselves. This place sends 4 Burgesses to the Parliament, 2 for
the Town, and 2 for the University. It has been dignified with the Title of an
Earldom in several eminent Persons; and lately of a Dukedom in 4 Sons of King
James II. when Duke of York, who all dyed very young. Long. 21. 49. Lat. 52.
30. The English have given the Name of Cambridge to a Town in New England also,
situated upon the River Merrimick, and beautified with several fair Streets,
besides 2 Colleges, in which they aim at the Figure of an University.

Camelford, a Market Town in the County of Cornwall in the Hundred of Lesnewth.

Camerino, Camerinum, an Episcopal City in the Marca Anconitana, in the
Dominions of the Church. Seated at the foot of the Apennine, upon the River
Chiento, which enters the Adriatic Sea, 25 Miles South of Ancona. This was a
considerable place in the time of the ancient Romans; and has sometime since
born the Title of a Dukedom. Leander gives it a strong Situation and plenty of
People, which last is rarely found in these Italian inland Cities. He says
also, there was another Town of this Name in Campagnia di Roma, which they call
now Camerota. It lies 24 Miles East of Spoleto. Long. 36. 43. Lat. 42. 47.

Camin, Caminum, a small City in the further Pomerania, which is a Bishops See
under the Archbishop of Gnisen, whereas heretofore it belonged to Magdeburg. It
stands on the Eastern Shore of the River Diwenow [ Odera] over against the
Island of Wolinsche, not above a Mile from the Baltic Sea, and about 7 from
Stetin to the North. This belongs to the Duke of Brandenburgh, by the Treaty of
Westphalia, and has embraced the Augustan Confession. Long. 39. 30. Lat. 54 12.

Caminiec. See Kaminieck.

Campagnano, Campaniano, Acheron, a River of the Province of Calabria, flowing
from the Apennine and falling into the Tyrrhenian Sea, about 8 Miles South of
Amantea, over against Stromboli; a flaming Mountain in an Island of that Name.

Campagna, a City of the Kingdom of Naples, in the Principato, which is a
Bishops See under the Archbishop of Conza; with the Title of a Marquisate. It
stands between the Rivers of Atro and Tuza, 16 Miles from Salerno to the East,
and 11 from the Shoars of the Mediterranean Sea to the East also.

Campagnia di Roma, a Province of Italy, under the Dominion of the Pope; on the
West it has S. Peter's Patrimony, on the North Sabina, on the South the
Mediterranean Sea, and on the East the Kingdom of Naples; Rome itself stands in
this Province, and it contains the far greatest part of the ancient Latium; the
inland parts are fruitful and populous; those toward the Sea are little
inhabited, by reason of the unwholsomness of the Air, tho otherwise the Country
is plain and fruitful enough.

Campanir, Astacapra, a City of the hither East Indies.

Campden, a Market Town in Gloucestershire in the Hundred of Kistgate: the Earl
of Gainesborough, Viscount Campden has a Seat here.

Campen, Campania, a Town in Stiria. There is another of the same Name in
Over-Yssel in the Low Countries, upon the Western Banks of the Yssel, near the
Zuider Zee, 5 Miles from Daventer to the North-East. It was heretofore an
Imperial free City, but long since exempted, and under the States General. In
1672. taken by the French, and the year following deserted. It is a great,
lovely, and important place; and was the Birthplace of Albertus Pighius, a very
learned Man. Long. 27. 14. Lat. 52. 42.

Campiano, a small Town in the State of the Valley of Taro in Italy, near the
River Taro. It is an important Pass, and therefore carefully fortified by the
Duke of Parma.

Campeach, a City belonging to the Spaniards, in the West Indies, taken by
Captain Mynnes an English Man in 1662, being deserted by the Inhabitants. The
English took here 50 pieces of Canon, 14 Ships, and the Governor Prisoner.

Campus Piorum, a celebrated place in the Island of Sicily, near Catania: so
called from the 2 Brothers Amphinomus and Anapus, that carried their Father and
Mother upon their Shoulders hither out of the flames of Aetna. Val. Max.

Cana, a Town in the Tribe of Zabulon in Galilee in the Holy Land: heretofore
famous for the first Miracle of our Saviors operation on Earth, at the
Marriage of Simon Zelotes according to N^cephorus Calixtus, or of S. John the
Evangelist, according to others. Now a poor Village inhabited by none but
Turks. For the Church which Helena the Mother of Constantine, built in the
place of that House where our Savior celebrated the Marriage, has been long
since converted into a Mosque. Nathanael was an Inhabitant of this Town.

Canada, New France, a large Country in the North America, discovered first by
the French, and by them inhabited. It lies North of New England. Quebec is the
chief Colony of it. The Savages speak different Languages: and here, as in
other parts of America, they have a custom to eat their Enemies taken in War; a
fate that particularly befell John Verrazan a Florentine, who first took
possession of this Country in the name of Francis I. King of France in 1525.
There is a very great River of the same Country, already known to run 500
Leagues, full of large Islands, and about 30 Leagues broad at the mouth, called
Canada by the Natives, by the French S. Lawrence, from their entrance into it
upon that day. The Saguenay and the Three Rivers fall into its Channel from the
North.

Cananor, a Kingdom in the Promontory of Malabar, on this side the Ganges in
the East Indies; abutting upon the River Gangerocora; 25 Leagues in length
along the Coast, with a City of the same Name sometime since taken by the
Hollanders. The Islands of Divandurou and Malicut amongst the Maldives are
subject to this King.

Canara, a Kingdom on this side the Gulf of Bengala in the East Indies in the
Promontory of Malabar, separated from the Kingdom of Malabar to the South by
the River Gangerocora, and from that of Cuncan to the North by the River Aliga.
It is Tributary to the Great Mogul: by some called Tulamar, and at perpetual
Enmity with the Kingdom of Malabar.

Canary Isles, Canariae, are 7 Islands over against the Coast of Lybia
Interior, so called from Canaria, the principal of the number, in which the
Spanish Governor resides; being about 20 Leagues in circuit, and ennobled with
a large, handsome, populous City of the same Name, which is an Episcopal See.
These were called by the Ancients the Fortunate Islands, in general: but their
particular Names are Canaria, Teneriff, the Isle of Palms, the Isle of Iron,
Fuerte-Ventura, Gomera, and Lancelote; and because a great number of Dogs was
found in them in ancient times, therefore says Pliny, they had all the Name of
the Canaries. In one of these the first Meridian is usually fixed, viz.
Teneriff. They are are much frequented for their excellent Wines, and
Merchandises, by the English and other Nations. After the knowledge of them had
been lost for many Ages, they were first discovered again in 1330. Vid. Azores.
About the year 1344. Lewis de la Cerda, Grandson to Alphonsus X. King of
Castile and Earl of Clermont, undertaking the Conquest of them, thereby to
introduce the Christian Faith, was Crowned King of the Canaries by Pope Clement
VI. He in his design failing, they were afterward granted to John Betancourt,
according as it is already remarked under the Word Azores.

Canathus, a Fountain in the Morea, in the Province of Napoli di Romania,
celebrated by the ancient Poets for a Fiction of Juno's washing herself every
year therein to restore her Virginity. Also a City in Caelosyria in Asia, which
has sometime been a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Bastro, mentioned by
Ptolomy.

Canavese, a Country in the principality of Piedmont, betwixt the City Juraea
and the River Po: yielded to the Duke of Savoy by the Treaty of Querasque in
1631.

Canche, Cantius, Quentia, a River of Picardy, springing near Blavincour in
Artois, passing by Ligny sur Canche, receiving the Ternois at Hesdin, and
falling into the Ocean at Montreuil and Estaples.

Cancheu, a great City in the Province of Kiangsi in China, with a Territory of
the same Name that is honored with the Government of a Viceroy, (distinct from
the Viceroy of Kiangsi) who resides in this City, and commands also some Towns
in the Provinces adjacent of Fokien, Quantung and Huquang. It is a place of
extraordinary Trade and concourse.

Candahar, Candahara, the Capital of the Province of that Name, belonging to
the Kingdom of Persia, and one of the greatest inland Cities of Asia; seated on
the Eastern Shore of the River Balcan, which running Northward, falls into the
Oboengir, which last by Oxus or Gehun is conveyed in the Caspian Sea. On the
East it is defended by a strong Wall, on the West by an high Mountain; in the
middle of it is a Rock, on which is built a Castle. The Suburbs are greater
than the City, and much frequented by the Persian and Indian Merchants, who
pass to and fro through it. It lies in Long. 110. Lat. 34. 40. This City has
been often taken and retaken between the Mogul and the King of Persia, till at
l^st the latter possessed himself of it and still keeps it.

Cande, or Candes, Candensis Vicus, a Town in the Province of Touraine in
France, upon the Loyre; where S. Martin the Bishop, so much extolled by
Sulpitius Severus who writes his Life, dyed Nov. 11. An. Dom. 400. Likewise a
River in Languedoc falling into the Aveirou.

Candea or Candi, the most considerable Kingdom in the Island of Ceylan in the
East Indies; and a great and populous City, the capital thereof, upon the River
Trinquilemale.

Candei, an ancient People of the Gulf of Arabia, called heretofore
Ophiomages, from their eating of Serpents.

Candelaro, a River of the Kingdom of Naples, springing out of the Apennine
Mountains in the Capitanata, and ending in the Adriatic near Manfredonia;

Candelona, or Candelora, a Town and principality in the Province of Caramania
in the lesser Asia. The Town stands upon the Bay of Laiazzo, between the lesser
Asia and Syria, eight Miles from Antioch to the North, and 5 from Scanderoon to
the South.

Candia, Creta, Jovis Insula in Virgil (being heretofore consecrated to him) is
one of the noblest Islands in the Mediterranean Sea, lying opposite to the
Mouth of the Archipelago. In Length from East to West two hundred and fifty
Miles, in Breadth sixty, in Circuit five hundred and forty. Heretofore it was
full of a hundred potent Cities, and thence called Hecatompolis, most of which
are now ruined. To omit the more ancient Story of this Island; it was granted
by Baldwin Earl of Flanders to the Earl of Montisferat, who in 1194. sold it to
the Venetians. Others say, that when the Latins in 1204 took Constantinople,
this and the other Islands in the Aegean Sea fell to the Venetians for their
share. In 1645. the Turks invaded it, and in 1669. by taking of Candia
possessed themselves of all but two or three Forts upon the Sea. The inland
Parts are very mountainous, yet fruitful, especially of Wines and other such
Fruits; but it wants Corn. Whilst it was under the Venetians, it was so
populous, that they might raise in it 60000 Men. The Language there then used
was the vulgar Greek, and they were accordingly of the Greek Church, though
with a mixture of the Latin Service in some places. Now divided into four
Territories or jurisdictions, called Candia, Canea, Rettina, and Sittia, from
the four Principal Cities in it of those Names. Long. 51. Lat. 34.. Candia, the
chief City of the Isle of Crete, called by the Greeks Castro, and Candax, was
an Archbishop's See, great, rich and populous, as long as it continued in the
Hands of the Venetians. And stood the longest Siege against the Turks of any
place in the World, but was at last forced to submit, September 27. 1669. upon
Conditions very honorable, after a Blockade of 22 Years, from 1645. to 1667.
and a Siege of two more; from 1667. to 1669. In which space the Turks are
thought to have lost about 600000 Men before it. It lies on the Northern shore
of that Island, something nearer to the Western End. The Labyrinth of Minos in
a Grott cut out of a Rock is yet to be seen here.

Canea, an Episcopal City in the Island of Candia, and the Capital of an
adjacent Territory denominated from it. Taken by the Turks, Aug. 26. 1645.
which loss was an Introduction to the long Blockade and Siege of Candia.

Canesham, a Market Town in Somersetshire, seated at the fall of the River
Chire into the Avon, near Bristol.

Cangria. See Gangra.

Canisa. See Kanisa.

Cannares, Savages of Peru, in the Province of Quito.

Cannae, Cannata des^rutta in Italian, is a ruined small Town in the Province
of Apulia in Italy; where Hannibal engaging the Romans in a bloody Battle, slew
40000 of them upon the Place in the Year of Rome 558. with Paulus Aemilius
Consul, and so many Gentlemen, that he sent to Carthage three Bushels of Rings
as a Token of his vast Victory.

Cannes, a Town in Provence in France, to the Sea, over against the Lerin
Islands; misunderstood by Cluverius to be the Oxibius Portus of Strabo, because
it has no Port.

Cannibals, the Savages of the Caribby Islands, notorious for eating their
Enemies, whether taken alive or slain in the Field.

Cano, or Ghana, a Kingdom in Nigritia in Africa, bounded by the River Niger to
the South, the Kingdom of Cassena to the East, the Agades to the West, and the
Desert to the North. The Capital City bears the same Name with it and stands
upon a Lake.

Canopus, an ancient City of Egypt, toward that Mouth of the Nile which is
distinguished by the same Name. It has been an Episcopal See formerly; and in
the opinion of some Authors, the Country of the Poet Claudian. The modern
Bochira, near Alexandria, is supposed to be this ancient Place under a new Name.

Canosa, Canusium, an ancient City in the Terra di Bari in the Kingdom of
Naples, with an Episcopal See that is united to the Archbishopric of Bari;
five Miles from the Ruins of Cannae, upon the Ascent of a Hill with the River
Ofanto at the Foot of it. Horace gives the Character of Bilingues to its
Inhabitants in the old Roman Times, because the Language they spoke was an ill
mixture of Latin and Greek. It was a famous place for fine Russet colored
Cloth; whence the Word Canusinati in Martial for such as wore of it. In this
City the Emperor Henry IV. having been excommunicated by Pope Gregory VII.
rendered himself to the Pope's Discretion, and thereupon received Absolution in
the Year 1077.. This is also the name of a County in the Modenese in Italy,
near Parmesan.

Canstat, a small City in the Dukedom of Wirtemburg, upon the River Necker,
within one Mile of Stuttgard, and five of Pfortzhaim to the East.

Cantabri, an ancient Valiant People of Spain, being those properly of the
Provinces of Guipuscoa and Biscay, who withstood Augustus in several
Rencounters, and at last killed themselves rather than to submit to Servitude.

Canterbury, Cantuaria, Darvernum, Dorovernia, is the principal City in the
County of Kent; very ancient, and without doubt (says Mr. Camden) famous in
the times of the Roman Empire. It stands on the Eastern Shore of the River
Stour, called by the British ^uvwhern; from whence it had its ancient Names.
Being the Royal Seat of the Kings of Kent, when Augustine the Monk came over to
convert them, it by that Means became the Metropolitan See of England. The
Bodies of eight Kings lie interred in the Cathedral as likewise the Body of
Thomas Becke^ the famous Roman Catholic Saint, once Archbishop of this See.
There has been several Provincial Councils celebrated here. The Coronation of
King John and Queen Isabel his Wife, the Marriages of Henry II. and Edward I.
were all performed here. Augustine the first Archbishop was consecrated in 568.
Dr. William Sancroft the LXXVII. in this Succession, was consecrated Jan, 27.
1677. It lies in Long. 24. 51. Lat. 51. 16. Two Burgesses are elected for the
Parliament by the Corporation.

Canton, a Province and City in the East of China, supposed to be the Cattigara
of Ptolemy; which, tho the least of their Metropolitan Cities, is yet
beautified with many triumphant Arches, large Streets, and goodly Bridges over
a Navigable River running on the South side of it; also fortified with deep
Ditches, eight Bulwarks, and seated in a rich and plentiful Soil. The Portugals
drive here (says Dr. Heylin) a wealthy Trade, being permitted in the day time
to come into the City, but at night excluded and forced to find Lodgings in the
Suburbs. This City lies in Alvares Samodo's Map about Long. 125. and about 26.
Lat. According to others, in Long. 170.00. Lat. 24.00. See Quancheu.

The Switz Cantons, See Switzerland.

Capace, or Capaccio, Caput Aqueum, a City of the Principatus Citerior in the
Kingdom of Naples; and a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Salerno, in the
place of Pesti, which was ruined by Frederick the Emperor in 1249. though since
rebuilt again. This City lies 22 Miles from Salerno to the South, in Long. 38
52. Lat. 40. 28.

Caparra, Capara, a City of Extremadura in the Kingdom of Leon in Spain, which
stands in the middle between Emerita, now Merida, and Placentia.

Cap-D-Aguer, the same with Santa Cruz in Africa.

Capelan, a Mountain in the Kingdom of Pegu beyond the Gulf of Bengala in the
East Indies. A Quarry of Precious Stones of diverse Colors is found within it.

La Capelle, a Fortress in the Territory of Tierache within the Province of
Picardy, toward the Frontiers of Hainault; built in the last Age to oppose the
Incursions of the Low Countries; about a League from the River Oyse. It has
been many times taken and retaken.

Capernaum, or Capharnaum, the Metropolitan City heretofore of Galilee, in the
Tribe of Naphtali, toward the Borders of Zabulon, near the Mouth of Jordan,
and upon the Coast of the Sea of Tiberias; where our Savior first began to
preach. S. Matthew was a Publican here, when called to be an Apostle. Since
Solomon reduced this City into Ashes, it has only been inhabited by a few
Moors, who ask Money of the Pilgrims that go to visit the holy Places.

Capes, a River of the Kingdom of Tunis in Africa, springing from Mount Atlas,
and discharging it self into the Mediterranean near a Town called Capes, where
it makes a Gulf of the same Name.

Caphareus, a famous Promontory on the East point of the Isle of Negropont,
otherwise now called Capo del oro and Capo Figera, very dangerous to navigate.
The Grecian Navy, seduced by N^upl^^s King of Eubaea by a false Light in
revenge of the Death of his Son Palimedes by Ulysses, being all said to have
been shipwrack'd upon these Rocks.

Capitanata, a Province of the Kingdom of Naples, which in the more ancient
times was called Apulia Daunia: bounded on the North and East with the
Adriatic Sea, on the West with the County of Molise, and on the South with the
Principatus Vlterior, the Basilicata, and the Bariano: a very fruitful well
watered Country; the chief City is Manfredonia.

The Capitol, Capitolium, a famous Fortress* of Old Rome, founded by Tarquinius
Prisous in the year of Rome 139. Perfected by Tarquinius Superbus in the year
221. Burnt in the Reign of Vitellius. Rebuilt by Vespasian. Burnt again by
Lightning under Titus, and reedified with very great pomp by Domitian, who
constituted a Quinquennial Celebration of Games, (which became an Era) by the
Name of Agones Capitolini, after the manner of the Olympiads. Jupiter had a
Temple here in his honor, whence they denominated him Capitolinus. In this
place the Christians have built a Church called Ara Caeli, dedicated to the B.
Virgin Mary.

Capo D' Istria, Caput Istriae, Aegida, the capital City of the Province of
Histria in Italy. See Cabo d'Istria.

Capo, Cabo, cap, Cape de -- Aden, Ammonium, a Promontory in Arabia Foelix,
next to Africa, in Long. 76. 30.

-- de Alguer, Atlantis, in Mauritania Tingittana.

-- de Bona Speranza, of Good Hope. Is a famous Promontory upon the most
Southern Part of Africa: first discovered by Bartholomew Diaz, a Portuguese, in
1487. in 32 of Southern Lat. 50 of Long. It had this name given it by Emanuel
then King of Portugal, because he hoped by the doubling it, a passage would be
open by Sea to the East Indies, as it came to pass to the great enriching of
his Kingdom. The Hollanders near this Cape have a settlement of about 100
Houses with a strong Fort. The Natives are divided into several distinct
Nations.

-- of Cornwall, or the Lands End; the most Western Point of England.

-- di Corso, a Promontory in Corsica.

-- di Faro, Pelorum, the most Northern Cape of Sicily.

-- of Farewell, in Greenland.

-- di Formoso, in Guinea.

-- de Sierra Liona, Hesperium Cornu, supposed to be the most Western Point of
Africa known to the Ancients; 70 Spanish Leagues beyond the most Southern Mouth
of the River Niger.

-- de Verde, the most, Western Point of Africa in the Division of Nigritia,
South to the Mouth of the River Senega, in 14 degrees. of Lat. There is an
innumerable number of other Capes, which the Brevity of this Work will not
admit. The Islands of Capo de Verde are a knot of small Islands, (by some taken
for the Hesperides, by some for the Gorgades of the Ancients,) lying
demicircularly with the Points to the Sea, 150 Leagues off of Cape Verde: under
the Portuguese, but not all inhabited.

Capoua, Capua, a City and Archbishopric in the Kingdom of Naples, in the
Province Di Lavoro, at the foot of Mount Tifata: 16 Miles North of Naples, and
12 from the Tyrrhenian Sea, in Long. 38. 04. Lat. 41. 00. A City that was never
fortunate, and is now declining into ruins. It was built by the Lombards upon
the River Voltorno, and advanced to a Bishopric by P. John XIV, in 968. Two
Leagues from the Ruins of the famous ancient Capoua, that delicious City, as
they called it, which compared itself with Rome and Carthage, and so debauched
the Army of Hannibal with its pleasures, in one Winter that they quartered
there after the Battle of Cannae, that they were not capable of beating the
Romans any more. In 1118* Pope Gelasius II. held a Council here, in which the
Emperor Henry V. was Excommunicated, together with Gregory VIII. an Antipope.

Cappadocia, a Province of Asia Minor, bounded to the East by the Lesser
Armenia, to the South Cilicia, to the West Pamphylia and Galatia, and to the
North by the Euxine Sea. It has been twice a Kingdom. The first time for 470
years successively, till the Romans overcame and changed it into a Province.
The second, from the 12th* Century to the year 1461. by the Title of the
Kingdom of Trebisonde from the City Trebisonda, till Mahomet II. Emperor of
the Turks took and carried the King prisoner into Greece. It is now known by
the name of Tocat. See Tocat.

Capraia, Capraria, Aegilium, is a small Island in the Tyrrhenian Sea, on the
Confines of the States of Genoua, between the Coast of Italy to the East, and
the Island of Corsica to the West: to which last it belongs, and is therefore
subject to the State of Genoua: it is 18 Miles in compass, and has a Castle for
its security against Pirates: full of Mountains, but yet not barren nor
unpeopled; and chiefly abounds in Goats, (from whence it has its Name,) and
excellent Wines: 36 Miles South from the States of Genoua, and 24 from Corsica.
There is another Island of the same Name in the Adriatic Sea upon the Coast of
Apulia; and La Palma, one of the Canary Islands, was anciently called Capraria.

Caprarola, a stately and magnificent Palace in S. Peter's Patrimony in Italy,
25 miles from Rome, near Viterbo, belonging to the D. of Parma and built in the
last Age by Cardinal Alexander Farnese. It is particularly remarked for a
whispering Room in it, where four Persons at several Corners shall understand
the lowest whispers of one to another, whilst those in the middle of the Room
cannot here a word that is said. It is one of the noblest structures in all
Italy.

Capri, Caprea, an Island belonging to the Kingdom of Naples, famous for the
Secession of Tiberius Caesar, who lived here in great privacy in the latter
part of his Reign, spending his time in Debauchery and Villainy. It lies in the
Tyrrhenian Sea, at the Mouth of the Bay of Naples, about 3 miles from the Cape
of Campanella, and is about 12 in compass. The chief Town of it is called by
the same Name, and is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Amalfi; seated at
the South End of the Island. The Bishops best revenue comes from Quails, which
twice in the year resort in vast numbers to this Island; whence some have
called him the Bishop of Quails. This Island is much mentioned in the Writers
of the Life of Tiberius, and other Roman Historians.

Capsa, an ancient Town in Libya Interior, defended by the Sands and Serpents
of the Deserts that environ it on all sides better than any Walls and Ramparts
could do, say Salust and Florus.

Carabes, Pelusium, the most Eastern Mouth of the Nile.

Carabogaana, one of the Names of Moldavia.

Caragoza, Caesar Augusta. See Saragoza.

Caraman, Caramania, a Province of the Lesser Asia, extended from East to West
upon the Mediterranean Sea, opposite to the Isle of Cyprus; this Country had
heretofore Princes of its own, but has now for many Ages been subject to the
Turks; it includes the ancient Provinces of Cilicia, Pamphylia, and a part of
Caria. One of the potentest Viceroys or Beglerbegs of the Turkish Empire, takes
his Title from this Province, tho his Jurisdiction is somewhat larger. The
principle Cities in it are Cogni, Antiochia, and Satulia. There is another
Caramania or Carnania, a large Country in Persia, bounded on the East with
Gedrosia or Circan, on the West with Farsi, Sublestan to the North, and the
Gulf of Ormus with the Indian Ocean to the South: Containing the Provinces of
Guadel, Dulcinda, and Ormus. It is now called Kherman, after its capital City,
which stands upon the River Bessiry. The Northern part is rather barren; but
the middle is blessed with fruitful Vales.

Caramit, Amida, Ammaea, the capital City of Mesopotamia, which is an
Archbishops See upon the River Tigris. Heretofore called Constantia, from
Constantius the Emperor. The Romans in this place received a great defeat by
the Parthians. Long. 75. 00. Lat. 39. 30. according to the latest Maps. It is
secured with good Walls, and 360 Towers.

Caragues, Salvages of Peru in the Province of Quito, toward the Coasts of the
South Sea.

Caratcholi, or Karakioles, a People about the Mountain Caucasus in Asia,
descended from the Hunns, and speaking the Turkish Language.

Caravacca, or Crux de Caravacca, (so called from a miraculous Crucifix there
preserved, which they pretend was brought from Heaven by an Angel) is a Village
amongst the Mountains in the Kingdom of Murcia in Spain, near the River Segura,
upon the Borders of Old Castile.

Caravaggio, a Town in the Duchy of Milan in Italy upon the Borders of the
Bergamasco: Where Francis Sforza, Duke of Milan, gained a signal Victory over
the Venetians in 1446.

Carbury, a Town and Barony in the County of Kildare in Ireland: and another
Town in the County of Cork.

Carcanossi, a fruitful and well cultivated Country in the South of the Isle of
Madagascar, where the French have established some Colonies not long since.

Carcassonne, Carcassum, Volcarum, Tectosagum, a City and Bishopric under the
Archbishop of Narbonne, upon the River* Atax, l' Aude, a little above its
confluence with the Fresquel. Famous for Clothing, and other mechanic Trades.
It stands 5 Leagues South of Aleth, having a Castle. Long. 23. 05. Lat. 42. 40.
The Diocese belonging to this City is called Le Comte de Carcassonne, the
Earldom of Carcassone. The ancient Earls whereof were great protectors and
favorers of the Albigenses: Whence One came to be Massacred in the Church at
Besiers in 1167. and a Second had his Estate confiscated to the Earl of
Monfert, by a Decree of the Synod of Mountpellier in 1214. and afterward of
the grand Council of Lateran in 1215.

Carcinatus, or Carentus, the Western Bay of the Euxine Sea, which shuts the
passage into the Crim Tartary, in that Neck of Land which makes it a Peninsula;
and is defended by the Fort Pericop, that gives name to the whole Nation there.

Cardaillac, a Town and very ancient Barony in the County of Quercy in France
near Figeac, upon the Borders of Auvergne. Adanced afterward to the honor of
a Marquisate.

Cardiff, a fine Town in the County of Glamorgan in Wales, upon the South Side
of the River Taf, 2 Miles from the Sea; to which belongs a very commodious
Haven. This Town was fortified with a Wall and a Castle, by one Fitz-Haimon, a
great Man in these parts. Here Robert, eldest Son to William the Conqueror,
died after a long Imprisonment. It returns one Burgess to the Parliament. The
Earl of Pembrook has a Seat here.

Cardiganshire, or Caerdiganshire, is a County in Wales lying along the Coast
of the Irish Sea, and taking its Name from Cardigan, the Capital of it, which
returns one Burgess to the English Parliament. A Town pleasantly situated,
within 2 Miles of the River Tivy; which divides the County from
Caermarthenshire and Pembrokeshire on the South, as the Rivers Torvi and Dovi
divide it from Merionethshire and Brecknockshire to the East. The Tivy is well
stored with Salmon.

Cardona, a Castle in Catalonia in Spain, built upon a River called the
Cardoner, where there are several Mines of Salt, and which gives the Title of a
Duke to the Family de Folch. It stands 3 Leagues from Solsona to the South.

Carelia, or Karelen, a Province of the Kingdom of Sweden in Finland, extended
upon the Gulf of Finland. Heretofore in part under the Muscovites, but now
entirely under the Swedes. Vibourg is the capital City of it.

Caremboule, a Country on the South of the Island of Madagascar, lying betwixt
the Divisions of the Ampatres and the Mahafales. It is very good Pasturage.

Carencia, a Town of the ancient Rugij, upon the Coast of the Baltic Sea, in
Pomerania. Heretofore notorious for Three Temples dedicated to Three of the
most monstrous and horrible Idols, that ever were invented amongst the Heathens.

Carentan, a Town of Normandy, upon a River of the same Name, 3 Leagues from
the British Sea, and 4 from Constance to the North; which has a very strong
Castle. It gives the Title of a Viscount. And was both taken and retaken in the
Civil Wars of that Kingdom.

Carfagniana, Carferoniana, Grafiniana, a Valley in the States of the Duke of
Florence in Italy amongst the Apennine Mountains; betwixt the States of Lucca,
Regio, and Modena.

Cargapol, a City of Russia upon the River Onega, or Poroga, almost 200 Russian
Miles from Archangel to the South-West. This City gives name to a Province on
the White Sea.

Caridia, a small Town and Gulf in the Province of Romania in the Morea, about
10 Leagues from Gallipoli, upon the Archipelago. Heretofore a more considerable
place, and known to the Ancients under the Name Cardiopolis.

Caria. See Aidinelli. It may be remembered, that a Council of 34 Bishops
assembled in this Province in the year 366. rejected the Doctrine of the
Consubstantiality of Christ with the Father, to approve of the Confessions of
Faith made at the Councils of Antioch and Seleucia. Also an ancient City of the
Morea, whose Inhabitants uniting with the Persians in a War once against
Greece, rendered themselves so odious to their Country, that their City was
rased, their Men put to the Sword and their Women treated with all manner of
ignominy.

Carry, Incarus, a small Port in Provence in France, 3 Miles from Marseille to
the West; famous for nothing but its Antiquity.

Cariati, Cariatum, a City of Calabria Citerior in the Kingdom of Naples, upon
the Gulf of Tarento, which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Santa
Sa^erina, from which it lies 20 Miles from the North, in Long. 41. 36. Lat. 39.
30. It is small, yet gives the Title of a Principality to the Family di
Spinella.

Caribes, or the Cariby Islands, are a knot of small Islands, whose numbers are
not certainly known: they lie extended like a Bow from the Coast of Paria in
America, to the Isle of Rico Porto.

Carignan, a Principality and City in Piedmont, situated upon the Po, which is
here covered with a good Bridge, betwixt Turin and Carmagnole: In a fruitful
Soil, and defended with a Castle.

Carin, Cyrrhus, a City of Syria, which had its ancient Name from Cyrus the
Founder of it: first a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Hierapolis;
afterward a Metropolis under the Patriarch of Antioch; seated upon the River
Marsyas, now Quars, which falls into the Euphrates at Samosat; 45 Miles from
Zeugma to the North-East, and as many from the Euphrates to the West, and 25
from Aleppo to the North. Long. 70. 10. Lat. 36. 00.

Carinola, Calenum, a small City in the Province di Lavoro in the Kingdom of
Naples, which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Capua but the City is
almost desolate, by reason of the unhealthfulness of its situation. It stands
at the foot of Mount Massico, 4 Miles from the Shoars of the Tyrrheman Sea, and
25 North of Naples; giving the Title of an Earldom.

Carinthia, called by the Germans Karnten, a Province of Germany, bounded on
the East by Stiermark, and the River Lavand: on the West with Saltzburg and the
River Saltzach; on the North with Austria; and on the South with Carniola, and
the River Dravus. The ancient Inhabitants of this Country were the first in
Germany that embraced the Christian Religion. It is subject to the Dukes of
Austria, and being seated in the Alps, is generally barren and mountainous: It
lies along the Dravus an 100 english Miles, and is 47 in breadth. Advanced to
the honor of a Duchy. Its capital Town is Claghenfutt.

Carizath, a Province of Asia, called anciently Hyrcania.

Carlisse, Carleolum, a City and Bishopric under the Archbishop of York;
seated upon the Rivers Eden, Poteril, and Caud, in the County of Cumberland;
besides which it is defended by a good strong Stone Wall, and on the West side
by a large Castle, and on the East a Citadel built by Henry VIII. A
considerable place in the times of the Romans. William Rufus finding it ruined
by the Danes, rebuilt the Castle and placed a Colony here, which in after times
became one of the principal Bulwarks against the Scots. June 28. 1645, it was
yieided to the invading People, by Sir Thomas Glemham upon honorrable Terms. In
1648. retaken for the King by Sir Philip Musgrave, who kept it not long, the
Rebels overpowering all. Long. 21. 31. Lat. 54. 55. Henry I. made it an
Episcopal See. In the year 1661. King Charles II. dignified this City with the
Title of an Earldom in the Person of Charles Howard, whose Son Edward enjoys
the same at this day, It returns two Burgesses to the Parliament.

Carlingford, a Seaport in the County of Louth, in the Province of Vlster in
Ireland; about 30 English Miles East of Armagh, and 5 North of Dundalk.

Carlsbourg, Caroloburgum, a small Town in the lower Circle of Saxony upon the
Weser in the Duchy of Bremen: built by the Swedes, who at the same time gave
it the Name of their King Charles X. The Danes took it in 1676. but they
yielded it to the Swedes again in 1679. according to the Treaty of
Fointainebleau.

Catmagnole, a strong Town in the Marquisate of Saluces in Piedmont, about 2
Miles from the Po, and 9 from Turin, in the Dominions of the Duke of Savoy ever
since Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy during the Civil Wars of France, made
himself Master both of the Marquisate and it in 1588. and that the same were
ceded to him by a Treaty of Peace in 1601. This Town has been taken by the
French, and retaken by the Confederates in this present War.

Carmarthenshire. See Carmarthen.

Carmel, Carmelus, a Mountain in the Holy Land (or Palestine) upon the
Mediterranean Sea, 50 Miles North of Jerusalem; betwixt Galilee and Samaria, in
the Tribe of Issachar; about 30 Miles in Circuit, deliciously covered and
adorned with Trees, Plantations, Springs, Villages, Valleys, and Caverns, which
have been the retreats of the solitary in all Ages. Now inhabited by the
Dr^sians, a Warlike People, who are supposed to be the Relics of the European
Pilgrims, and accordingly pay as little deference to the Port as they can.
There is a Monastery belonging to the Carmelites here, whose whole Order
derives their Name from the place. These carmelites regard the Prophets Elias
and Elisha as their Patriarchs, whose 2 Grots, with the Fountain that sprung
miraculously up at the Prayers of Elias, now under the keeping of a Mohammedan
Anchorite, are much honored as well by Turks, Moors, and Arabs, as the Jews and
Christians. The Prophet Agabus, they say, built a Chapel upon this Mountain in
the year 83. a small part thereof being yet extant. In the time of the Emperor
Vespasian there was a Temple of an Oracle here, so famous, that Vespasian came
in Person to consult it. Possibly it was some remains of the Idol of Baal or
Beelzebub, that they used heretofore to adore in Acre, a Town below at the foot
of the Mountain. The Prince of it pays yearly to the Turks for Tribute 12
Horses.

Carnarvan. See Caernarvanshire.

Curnia, Acarnania, a Province in Epirus, overagainst the ^sle of Corfu or
Cephalonia.

Carniola, called by the Dutch Krain, has Slavonia on the East, Friuli on the
West, Carinthia and part of S^eirmark North, and Istria South: fruitful in Corn
and Wine; this and Carinthia both belong to the House of Austria by descent; to
which they give the Title of a Duke. The Inhabitants are part Sclavonians and
part Germans: its Capital City, Laubach. This Country was a Branch of the
ancient Carnia.

Carolina, a Plantation of the English Quakers, upon the Continent of North
America: which has its Name from Charles II. It lies between the Lat. of 29.
and 36. degrees. being the most Northern part of Florida. Tho the English began to
plant it only since 1663. yet being extremely fruitful and temperate, the
Inhabitants are already very numerous, and have built 2 considerable Town,
Charles Town, and Albermarle. This Country is bounded to the South by Florida,
to the North by Virginia, to the West by the Apulathean Hills, which are
exceeding steep and high, and to the East by the Atlantic Ocean. The Colonies
are endeavoring to improve it to Wine and Oil, which the English chiefly want.

Carolstadt, Carolostadium, a Town in Croatia, built by Charles* Archduke of
Austria, and well fortified against the Turks; seated at the confluence of the
Kulp and the Mereswiz, 2 German Miles from Meteling to the North-East; the
Governor of Croatia always resides here* There is another of the same Name in
the Bishopric of Wurtzburg upon the Maine, 3 German Miles North of Wurtzburg.
And a Third in Sweden, in the Province of Westrogrothia, built by Charles IX.
upon the Lake Wever, which suffered much by the Danes in 1644.

Carpathus. See Scarpanto. Hence the Carpathian Sea, now called the Sea of
Scarpanto, betwixt the Islands of Rhodes and Candia, derived its Name.

Carpenterland, a vast Country in the Terra Australis of America, lately
discovered by one Carpenter, a Dutchman, who has left it his Name.

Carpentras, Carpentoracte, a City in Provence in France, which is a Bishops
See under the Archbishop of Avignon; and the Capital of the County of Venacin,
under the Dominion of the Pope: 4 Leagues from Avignon to the North-East. It
stands upon a very well watered Soil. Caesarius Bishop of Arles presided at a
Council here in 527. in the Papacy of Foelix IV. Long* 25. 49. Lat. 43. 18.

Carpi, Carpum, a small City in Lombardy in Italy, with a Castle and
Principality, belonging to the Duke of Modena. It has a large Territory to it,
and a Collegiate Church, built first by Aistulphus, one of the Kings of the
Lombards, who died about 750. Rebuilt by Albertus Pius, who was then Prince of
Carpi, with greater magnificence; and is exempted from the Jurisdiction of all
the Neighbor Bishops, who have any Pretensions to it, by the Decrees of Julius
II. and Leo X. This City lies 4 Leagues from Modena to the North.

Carrara, a small Town in the Province of Tuscany in Italy between Massa and
Sarsina, belonging to the Prince of Massa, with the Title of a Principality.

Carrhae, an ancient City of Mesopotamia upon the River Charra, remarkable in
History for the Defeat of Crassus by the Parthians in the year of Rome 701. It
has had the honor to be a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Edessa. This is
the Charan mentioned in the Story of the Patriarch Abraham.

Carriek-Fergus, See Knock-Fergus.

Carrict, Carricta, a small Bailywick or Earldom in the West of Scotland, which
has Dumbritain-Fryth to the West and North, Nithisdale to the East, and
Galloway to the South. It is fruitful, and supplied both by Sea and Land with
all the necessaries of Life. The Earldom belongs now to the Prince of Scotland.

Cars. See Chars.

Carthago, Carthage, called by the Grecians (...), was once the most famous and
potent City in Africa, and the Rival of Rome; generally supposed to be built by
Queen Dido, a Tyrian Princess, An. Mundi, 3725. 72 years after Rome, 874 years
before the Birth of our Savior. But then Justin makes it to be built before
Rome, and Appian before the Ruin of Troy, and this is now thought the more
probable Opinion. The Learned Vossius in his Book de Magnitudine Vrbium, is
confident that it was not only built before the Trojan War, but in its greatest
Dignity, Extent and Power before that time; and that Dido was only the Repairer
of it, and that it was much older than Tire itself. But however certain it is,
that it was a Phaenician Colony. It subjected by degrees, not only all Lybia,
but a great part of the adjacent Islands, and the greatest part of Spain and
Sicily. It sustained 3 sharp Wars with Rome, the first lasted 24 years, the
second 18, and had ended in the Ruin of Rome, if the Carihaginians had but
supplied their General effectually, and in time. The third lasted 3 years, and
ended in the total subversion of this City, An. Mundi 3803. Yet it was made a
Roman Colony, and rebuilt under the Gracchi, 25 years after the Ruin of it; and
was, as Vell. Paterculus affirms, the first Colony the Romans sent out of
Italy. After this it flourished greatly, and the Primate of it had 125
Suffragan Bishops under him. A Council held here in the year 348. condemned the
Rebaptization of such as were baptized by Heretics. And diverse others were
here assembled in the Primitive Ages, sometimes by the Catholic* Prelates,
sometimes by the Schismatics and Heretics, as they are called in the
Languages of their respective Communities. An. Christi 432, it was taken by
Gensericus King of the Vandals. In the year 533, under the Reign of Justinian,
it was recovered back to the Roman Empire. About the year 632, it fell into the
hands of the Saracens, who made it Tributary only; before the year 684, they
took it again, and treated the Inhabitants with great cruelty. About 690,
Justinian II. recovered it again from them. About the year 703, the Saracens
returned the third time, and made a third Conquest of it, ever since which time
they have enjoyed it to the total ruin of Christianity, and when in 1269. it
was again retaken by Lewis IX. the Saracens soon recovered it, and totally
ruined it* This City lies 15 Miles West from Tunis; Long. 34. 50. Lat. 32. 20.
The Spaniards have given the Name of Carthage to a Town also of New-Spain in
America in the Province of Costa ricca: which stands in the middle of the
Country betwixt the 2 Seas.

Carthagnea, Carthago Nova, a City of Murcia in Spain, built by Asdrubal one of
the Carthaginian Generals in that Kingdom. It was afterward brought under the
Dominion of the Romans by Scipio. Polybius gives an accurate Description of
this City in his X Book: and Livy in his XXIV. The Moors becoming Masters of
it, totally ruined that ancient Pile; and it lay buried almost 600 years in
Rubbish, when in 1570. Philip II. King of Spain rebuilt it. It is a Bishops See
under the Archbishop of Toledo: three Leagues from Murcia to the South, and
about 84. from Gibraltar to the North-East. Long. 20. 35* Lat. 38. 02.

Carthagenia Nueva, Carthago Nova, a City of New Granata in South America,
which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Santa Fe de Bogota. Also a safe
and very large Port, defended by 2 Forts, and washed by the River of S.
Magdalen, where the Spanish Fleet ordinarily rendezvous. Yet was this important
place taken by our famous Drake, in 1585. This was also the first place the
Spaniards Walled in the West Indies. It lies in Long. 299. 30. Lat. 3. 10. 22
Leagues from S. Jago de Arma, in the Province of Quimbaia, otherwise now called
the Province of Carthagena from hence, which has the Government of S. Martha to
the East, Popayon to the South, and the Ocean to the North.

Carththuel, Carduelia, a Province of Georgia in Asia, in which is Teflis, the
greatest City in that Kingdom.

Cartmell, a Market Town in Lancashire in the Hundred of Loynsdale.

Casale, Bodincomagus, a strong City, the Capital of the Dukedom of Montferat
in Italy. It was raised to the honor of a Bishopric under the Archbishop of
Milan, by Pope Sixtus IV. in 1474. seated on the South side of the Po, with a
very strong Castle built of late years; and was made famous by a Defeat of the
Spaniards in 1640. when the French took this City; but in 1652. lost it again.
It stands 4 Miles from Trino to the East: now under the Dominion of the Duke of
Mantua* who is himself under the protection of the French. But the ill Air it
stands in, and the Contests of Princes, has made it very thinly inhabited.
Casal or Casal Maggiore, a small Town in the Duchy of Milan in Italy, and in
the Territory of Lodi near the Po. Casal Pustrulengo, a small Town betwixt Lodi
and Piacenza in the same Country.

Casalmach, Iris, a vast River in Cappadocia, in the lesser Asia; which rises
out of Mount Argius, in the Borders of Armenia Minor, above Sebastia, now
Savastia; and having increased its Streams by the addition of several Rivers,
it passes on the East of Tochat and Amasia, to the Euxine Sea; between Limania
to the East, and Simisio to the West.

Casan, Casana, a very considerable City in Muscovy, upon the River Casanka; in
a pleasant Plain, about 10* German Miles from the Northern Shore of the Wolga
in Long. 99. 00. Lat. 55. 38. Of a considerable bigness, but the Houses are all
of Wood, as also the Towers and Ramparts; only the Castle and its
Fortifications are all of Stone, which are well furnished with Cannon, and a
good Garrison. The River Casanka serves it instead of a Ditch, by all which it
is made a very considerable Fortress* The Town is inhabited by Muscovites and
Tartars, but the latter are forbidden entering the Castle upon pain of Death.
This City, as Olearius acquaints us, was taken by John Basilovits, Duke of
Muscovy, from Sapgery a Tartarian Prince, July 9. 1552. There is a Province
belonging to it of the same Name, which of itself is very fertile and good, but
in a manner desolate, by reason of the Incursions of the Cossacks. This was the
State of things here in 1636.

Casbin, or Caswin, Casbinum, Arsacia, one of the greatest Cities of the
Kingdom of Persia, in the Province of Ayrach, or Parthia, toward the Caspian
Sea. Long. 85. 00. Lat. 36. 15. Heretofore called Arsacia, and is seated in a
great Sandy Plain, which is half a days Journey off Mount Elwend, which runs to
the South-West as far as Bagdat. The City is a German Mile in compass, having
neither Walls nor Garrison, but is inhabited by 100000 People. Heretofore the
usual Residence of the Kings of Persia. It stands 65 German Miles North of
Hispahan and the same distance from Tauirs to the South-East.

Caschaw, Cassovia, a City of the Upper Hungary, and Capital of the Province
Abanvivar, seated upon the rapid River of Hewath, or Kunnert, which soon after
falls into that of Tarcza, which enters the Tibiscus by Dob. This City is under
the Emperor as King of Hungary; but was lately in a manner free, till setting
up Count Teckely as their King, it was retaken by the Imperialists in 1685. who
have since bridled them with a very strong Garrison. It is very well fortified,
and has* the best Arsenal in all Hungary* about 4 German Miles from Esperies to
the South, and 11 from Agria to the North-East, Long. 43 32. Lat. 48. 32.

Cascar, or Kasghar, by others called Chazalg, a City and Kingdom in
Turquestan, in Tartary. The Kingdom of Thibet stands South of it.

Caserta, [ Caserta] a small City in the Terra di Lavoro, in the Kingdom of
Naples, near the River Volturno; which is a Principality, and a Bishops See
under the Archbishop of Capoua: from whence it stands 4 Miles to the East: Not
much inhabited:

Casilimar, Halys, a River of Paphlagonia in Asia the Less, This falls into the
Euxine Sea, 20 Miles West of Amisum, now Simiso.

Cashel, Cassilia, Cassellia, a City of the Province of Munster, and County of
Tipperary, not far from the River Sewer; built upon a Hill, and made an
Archbishops See by Pope Eugenius III. but now meanly Peopled, having suffered
much from the English. It stands 23 Miles North of Waterford. In 1650. it was
almost wholly burnt down. There was a Council held in this City in the year
1171.

Casimambous, a People of the Isle of Madagascar of the race of those Arabians
which the Calif of Mecca dispatched thither about 200 years ago to instruct the
Natives in the Arabic Language.

Casius, see Lison, a Mountain of Egypt; at the foot whereof stood heretofore a
Town called Casium, famous for the Sepulcher of Pompey and a Temple of Jupiter.

Castona, Castulo, a City in the Kingdom of Andaluzia in Spain, upon the River
Guadalimar, which has sometime been a Bishops See under the Archbishop of
Toledo. Famous for the Defeat of the Moors in the year 1202. in the Reign of
Alphonsus King of Castile; the Christians killing 200000 of them upon the spot
near this place.

The Caspian Sea, was named at first the Sea of Chosar, from a great Granchild
of Noah: Nubius in his Geography styles it the Sea of Thavisthan. The Moors
call it and the Gulf of Arabia, Bohar Corsuin; the Persians call both Kulsum;
the Greek and Latin Writers, the Caspian and Hyrcanian Sea; the Muscovites,
Gualenskoy-more. The Ancients generally thought it a Bay of the Great Indian
Ocean, or that it had some Communication with the Euxine Sea. Though a vast
number of Rivers fall into this Sea, yet it is not perceived any way to
increase. It is in length from North to South 120 Miles, in breadth 90. Some
represent it 800 Miles long and 650 broad. In the Winter for the most part
frozen. It is in effect no other than a great Lake. The Waters of it are as
salt as any other; yet it neither Ebs nor flows, nor has any Islands. This Sea
has the Kingdom of Astracan on the North, Persia on the South, Circassia on the
West, and Caratansca on the East.

Casriae Portae, are certain difficult Passes through the Rocks and Mountains
near the Caspian Sea, in the Province of Schirvan in Persia; only large enough
for a single Chariot 8000 paces together, leading to the Cities of Teflis and
Derbent; whence they are sometimes called the Gates of Teflis; and Derbent
amongst the Turks Temir Capi, that is, the Iron Gate: see Derbent. The Caspian
Mountains are a Chain of Mountains extended from North to South in Asia,
betwixt Armenia and the Caspian Sea. The Caspii were an ancient People amongst
the Scythians upon the Borders of the same Sea.

Cassandt, a small Island upon the Coast of Flanders over against l' Ecluse,
with a Village in it and a Fortress under the Hollanders.

Cassano, a City in the Hither Calabria in the Kingdom of Naples, and a Bishops
See under the Archbishop of Cosenza, with the Title of a Principality: situate
near a small River called Lione. Also a great Town in the Milanese upon the
River Adda, between Crema and Bergamo.

Cassel, a City in the Marquisate of Hessen, upon the River Fuld, which is well
fortified. It stands 13 German Miles from Marpurg, in the Confines of the
Dukedom of Brunswick; the usual Residence of the Landgraves of Hessen:
anciently called Castellum Cattorum. It is a large City, well built and
fortified and the Capital of the said Landgravate. Cassel or Mont-Cassel,
Castellum Morinorum, a small Town in Flanders, 4 Leagues from Bergue S. Vinoch,
and at an equal distance from Air; in a good Soil, and well fortified, with a
considerable Jurisdiction belonging to it. It has been taken and retaken upon
diverse Occasions; but most memorable for the Battle here fought Apr. 11. 1677.
betwixt the French commanded by the Duke of Orleans, and the Dutch and Spanish
Armies commanded by the Prince of Orange, who proposing to relieve S. Omers
(then besieged by the Duke) was repulsed in this Battle: so that the Town
yielded to the French within a few days after.

Cassemir, or Chismeer, a Province of the Empire of the Great Mogul, in the
hither East Indies toward Tartary.

Casseneuil, a small Town in the County of Agenois in Guyenne in France, upon
the River Lot, 5 Leagues from Again. Formerly adorned with a Palace Royal, in
which the Emperor Charles the Great took particular Delight, and Lewis the
Debonnaire his Son was bornin 778.

Casseuil, a Town upon the Garonne in the Diocese of Bazas, in Guyenne in
France. Heretofore adorned with a Palace-Royal, which disputes the Honor of
being the Birthplace of Lewis the Debonnaire with the precedent Casseneuil.

Cassian, or Caschan, a large, handsome, populous and trading City in the
Province of Hyerach in Persia, in a Plain; 3 Days journey from Hispahan in the
Way to the Caspian Sea; only it wants good Water, and the people are infested
with Scorpions.

Cassin, or Mont-Cassin, a celebrated Abbey in the Terra di Lavoro in the
Kingdom of Naples; built by S. Benedict the Patriarch of the Occidental Monks,
and inhabited by him. There was heretofore a City of the same Name at the Foot
of the Hill upon which this Abbey stands. It was an Episcopal See under the
Pope; but falling into Ruins, the Sea became united with that of S. Germain, a
City that has sprung out of those Ruins of Cassin.

Cassiopeia, an ancient City and Territory in the Kingdom of Epirus in Greece,
upon the Frontiers of Macedonia. It has had the Honor of an Episcopal See, and
is a different Place from the Cassiope of Pliny and Ptolemy, which stands to
the Sea in the same Kingdom, and is now called Joannina.

Cassiterides, the ancient Name of two Islands upon the Northern Coast of
Galaecia in Spain, given them by the Greeks from the White Lead they found in
them. Now called Zigarga, and S. Cyprian. They lie opposite to the Cap
d'Orteguere.

Cassopo, a Town in the North of the Island of Corfou, heretofore called
Cassiopeia, and famous for a Temple dedicated to Jupiter. It is now nothing
more than a ruined Fortress, besides a Church under the Care of some religious
Greeks; where they have a Figure of the B. Virgin that is famed for doing of
Miracles.

Cassovia. Vide supra Caschaw. This City was granted to Bethlehem Gabor, by
Ferdinand II. in 1620.

Cassubia, or Cassuben, a Duchy in the Province of Pomerania in Germany, under
the Elector of Brandenburg, between the Baltic Sea, Prussia, and Stetin.
Colberg is one of its Principal Towns.

Castabala, Perasia, an ancient City of Cilicia in Asia Minor, upon the
Confines of Syria and the Gulf of Lajazzo, between Anazarbe and Adana. Diana
had formerly a famous Temple in her Honor here.

Castalius, a Fountain of Phocis in Greece, dedicated by the ancient Poets to
Apollo and the Muses.

Castanovitza, a Castle on the River Vnna, which divides Croatia from Bosnia;
surrendered to Prince Louis of Baden, Aug. 14. 1688.

Castle- Aragonese, a strong Town in the Isle of Sardignia.

Castel-Bolognese, a Town in the Province of Romagna in Italy under the Pope,
betwixt Imola and Faiensa.

Castel-Durante, a Town in the Duchy of Vrbino in the States of the Church, in
Italy: famous for curious Earthen-ware.

Castel-Gandolphe, a Town in the Campagna di Roma in Italy, 12 Miles from Rome,
where the Pope has a Mansion of pleasure. A Lake of the same Name, formerly
called Albano, stands on one side of it.

Castel-Geloux, a Town and Bailywick in the Province of Guienne in France upon
the River Avance: Honored with a Collegiate Church, in which the Dukes of
Albret lie interred.

Castle A Mare, or Casell a Mere di stabia, Stabiae, a City in the Terra di
Lavoro in the Kingdom of Naples, with an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of
Sorrento. It has a commodious Port upon the Gulf of Naples. The French took it
in 1654.

Castle A Mare della Brucca, an ancient City in the Hither Principate in the
Kingdom of Naples, betwixt St. Severino and the Gulf of Salerno. It has been
an Episcopal See, but not now so considerable as formerly. The Ancients call it
Helia, Elea, and Hielea.

Castel-Tornese, a small Town built upon a high Ground in the Province of
Belvedore in the Morea, about 3 Miles from the Sea, and not far from Cap
Tornese. After the taking of Patras, and Lepanto, this Town surrendered upon the
first Summons to the Venetians in 1687. It had 29 Pieces of Cannon in it, and
commands 200 Villages or Forts in the Country thereabouts.

Castle dell Volturno, a City in the Terra di Lavoro in the Kingdom of Naples,
lately made a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Capoua. It stands to the
Ocean, and is believed to be the Relics of the ancient Volturnum.

Castellana, or Civita Castellana, a City of St. Peter's Patrimony in Italy,
with a Bishops See consolidated to that of Otri, immediately dependent of the
Pope.

Castellane, a Town and Barony in Provence upon the River Verdon amongst the
Mountains. Since the year 1260. the Inhabitants have rebuilt it nearer to the
River, because before it stood upon a Rock.

Castellanetta, a City in the Terra di Otranto in the Kingdom of Naples:
advanced to the Dignity of a Principality, besides an Episcopal See under the
Archbishop of Taranto. Situate upon the little River Talvo about 7 Miles from
the Gulf of Taranto, between the Cities Matera and Motula.

Castelnau, a small Town in the Tract of Medoc in the Province of Guyenne in
France, upon a little River which falls into the Garonne, over against Blaye.
Castelnau de Bretenous, a Town and Barony in the County of Quercy in France,
near the Dordogne. Castelnau de Cernes, a Town near Podensac in Guyenne.
Castelnau de Manes, a Town near Bazas in the same. Castelnau de Montratier, a
Town in Quercy near Cahors upon a little River falling into the Tarn.

Castelnau- Darry, a Town in Languedoc, near to which was deseated and taken,
the Duke of Montmorency, in 1632. not long after beheaded at Toulouse. It is
the Capital of the County of Lauragais, betwixt Toulouse and Carcassone. In
Latin Castellum Arianorum, or Castellavium Auracium.

Castel-Sarazin, a low but strong Town upon the Frontiers of Languedoc and
Quercy in France, a little below the Confluence of the Tarn and the Garonne. Of
great Fame in the Wars of Charles Martell with the Sarazens, and thence comes
its adjunct Name of Sarazin.

Castiglione, a Town in the the Province of Carfagnana in Italy, in the States
of the Republic of Lucca. A second in the Hither Calabria, dignified with a
Principality. Castiglione Mantuano, a Town in the Mantuan toward Verona.
Castiglione delle Stivere, the Principal Town of a little Territory, upon the
Frontiers of the Mantuan, advanced to the Dignity of a Principality. It is a
strong place, betwixt Mantoua and Brescia, belonging to the Duke of Mantoua.

Castile, Castella, a Kingdom in Spain, which when largely taken is the
greatest of all the Kingdoms in that Country; as containing under it the
Kingdoms of Leon, Gallicia, Andalusia, Navarre, Murcia, Biscay, Granada, and
Extremadura: It being the most prevailing Kingdom in that Continent; to which
the rest are united by Marriages, or Conquests: Yet was it at first but an
Earldom belonging to the Kingdom of Leon, and was made a Kingdom in 1016, under
Ferdinando. Bounded on the East with Navarre; on the West with Portugal; on the
North with Biscay, Guipiscoa, and the Asturias; and on the South with
Andalusia, Extremadura, and Granada. It is divided into the Old and the New
Castile; whereof the Old Castile lies more North, the New more South, arising
out of the New Conquest of the Kingdom of Toledo, and other Accessions gained
from the Moors; which is also more fruitful than the Old Castile. Burgos is the
Capital of the Old; Madrid and Toledo the chief of the New. Long. 12. Lat. 39.

Castile D'Or, or New Castile, a large and fruitful Country in the Southern
America, containing the Noble Provinces of Panama, Carthagena, Vraba,
Venezuela, Comana, New Andaluzia, and New Granada. Bounded on the East with
Guyana and the Caribes Country, on the West with the Pacifick Ocean, on the
South Peru and the Kingdom of the Amazons, and on the North with the Northern
Ocean. It was first discovered in Columbus's third Voyage to America by some of
Castile, who therefore called it Castile Nuevo; and finding Mines of Gold in
it, particularly in the Province of Vraba, they added the Name of Castile d'Or.
The great Rivers Orenoque and Darien water it, besides others. The Spaniards
have not been able to reduce the Natives entirely to this Day. Pearl also is
found upon the Coasts.

Castillon, a Town in Perigord in the South of France near the Dordogne, where
the English were defeated and their General slain, in 1451. by which Victory
Charles VII. recovered the County of Guienne.

Castle-Carey, a Market Town in Somersetshire in the Hundred of Cattesash.

Castlenovo, or Castel-Novo, a Maritime Town in Albania, upon the Gulf of
Cattaro, surrendered to the Venetians after a Months Siege, October 1. 1687. in
whose possession it had been reposed in ancient times. The Spaniards enjoyed it
in the Reign of Charles V. till it was taken from a Garrison of 4000 of them
Anno 1539, by Barberoasse, that great Admiral, who from being a Pirate, and the
Son of a poor Renegade Greek of Lesbos, became the most esteemed Sea Commander
that the Ottoman Empire ever employed. The Turks having been Masters of this
Place for 148 Years last past, had long infested the Adriatic Sea with
Piracies from it. There are diverse Towns of small Note in Italy that carry this
Name. As Castelnovo Tortonese in the Milanese. Castelnovo di Carfagnana, under
the Duke of Mantua etc.

Castle Rising, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk in the Hundred of
Frebridge, which Elects two Burgesses for the Parliament. The Haven here being
many years since choked up with Sands, has brought this Town into decay.

Caston, a Market Town in Norfolk, in the Hundred of S. Erpingham.

Castor, a Market Town in the Division of Lindsey in Lincolnshire, and in the
Hundred of Bradley.

Castres, or Chartreux, Castrum Albiensium, a City and a Bishop's See upon the
North side of the River Gout, in the County of Albigeois in Languedoc in
France. This Bishopric was first instituted by P. John XXII. in 1317. under
the Archbishop of Berry; but in 1678. it was put under the Archbishop of Alby,
from which place itstands 7 Leagues to the South, and 10 from Toulouse to the
East. The Huguenots took and Pillaged it in 1567. It also honored with the
Title of an Earldom.

Castro, a Duchy and Town belonging to the House of Farneze, the Dukes of
Parma; but likewise challenged by the Ecclesiastical State: For in the Wars
betwixt Edward Duke of Parma and Pope Urban VIII. this Town, amongst others,
was seized for the Pope in consideration of the Arrears of a certain Rent
reserved to the Apostolic Chamber from the Duchy, as held to be a Fief of the
Church. Innocent X. razed it entirely to the ground; and in the place thereof
erected a Pillar with this Inscription, [ Here was Castro;] and annexed the
Duchy to his See. But the said Annexation was conditionally revoked by the
Treaty of Pisa, in 1664. The admirable Palace of Caprarola stands in this
Duchy. The Duchy is bounded on the East by S. Peter's Patrimony, the Siennese
to the West, the Mediterranean to the South, and the Territory of Orvieto to
the North. The City had the Honor to be a Bishop's See immediately under the
Pope, till the Year 1646, that Innocent X. transferred the Sea to Acqua
pendente, and quite destroyed Castro (as we said), in revenge because the
inhabitants happened to kill the Bishop that he sent thither to reside and
govern. It stood about 11 Miles from the Sea near Toscanella and Corneto;
environed with such Precipices as rendered the access to it very Difficult. A
City in the Terra di Otranto in the Kingdom of Naples, being a Bishops See
under the Archbishop of Otranto, upon the Shoars of the Ionian Sea. Ravaged by
the Turks in 1537. who carried away a great Number of the Inhabitants into
Slavery. Some suppose it to be the Castrum Minervae of the Ancients. There are
others of inferior Note. One in the Hither Calabria near Cassano. A second in
the Province of Abruzzo, called Castro Novo. A third in the Campagnia di Roma.
A fourth in the Basilicate. Another in the Island of Meleos, etc.

Catadupi, a People of Aethiopia about the Cataracts of the Nile, deafned (says
Tully, in Somnio Scip.) by the Noise of them.

Catalognia, a Province and Principality in Spain; bounded on the West by the
Kingdoms of Arragon and Valentia, on the East and South by the Mediterranean
Sea, and on the North it has the Pyrenean Hills, which separate it from France.
Heretofore it had Earls of its own, who were under the Protection of the Crown
of France; but in 1137. it was annexed to the Kingdom of Arragon; a mountainous
but fertile Country, and well watered with Rivers. The Inhabitants are great
Lovers of their Civil Liberties; and being ill used by some Irish Soldiers
which were quartered upon them in 1640. they revolted from Spain, and called in
the French; but during the Civil Wars of France, about 1652. they returned to
their old Master the King of Spain again. By the Treaty of Peace in 1659, the
Pyrenees are made to divide the two Kingdoms of France and Spain. Barcelona is
the Capital City of this Country.

Catania, one of the principal Cities of Sicily, on the Eastern shore of that
Island, about forty Miles North of Syracuse. It has a Port made of late Years
and is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Montreale. On the South of it
runs a small River called Judicello. This City was built by the Chalcidian
Greeks, as Eusebius says. Charles V. walled and fortified it against the Turks
and Moors, by which Securities it grew Great and Rich; but in 1669. it suffered
very much by a dreadful Irruption of Mount Aetna, which stands about 20 Miles
North from it: four Rivers with Fire, or melted Rocks and Earth making their
Way through the Territories of this City, and bearing down all before them,
passed a Mile into the Sea before those Waters were able to conquer this
outrageous Fire; so that it was then thought the whole Island of Sicily would
have perished. Aetna is observed to overflow with Torrents of Fire every 15
Years. K. Hiero died in this City. The Remains of an Amphitheatre with diverse
Inscriptions and Marks of its Antiquity are yet to be seen. Long. 39. 40. Lat.
37. 00. Our English Sandys says, That the Bay upon which it stands is but
shallow, and not capable of Ships. The Country fruitful; and the City being an
University and not having much Trade, is the more inhabited by Gentlemen.

Catanzaro, Catacium, a City in the further Calabria in the Kingdom of Naples,
with a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Regio; 2 or 3 Miles from the Ocean,
between Squillaci and Nicastro.

Cataonia, an ancient City and Country in Asia Minor between Cilicia and
Cappadocia, in Strabo's time subject to the King of Cappadocia. Bellona had a
sumptuous Temple in her honor in this City, to whose service above 6000 Men
and Women were Consecrated under the direction of a Sovereign Priest who here
resided.

Cateau, or Catteau-Cambresis, Castrum Cameracense, a small Town in the
district of Cambresis, 5 Leagues from Cambray, and 2 from Landreci. The Treaty
of Peace in 1559. by the French, said to be so disadvantageous to them, was
celebrated here.

Ce Catelet, a Town in Picardy upon the River Escaut, and the Frontiers of
Hainault and Cambresis. Taken by the Spaniards in 1557. and once again in this
Age, but restored to the French by the Treaty of the Pyrenees in 1659. A
considerably strong place.

Caterlagh, Catherlogh, Carlough, Caterlogum; a City in the Province of
Leinster in Ireland on the West side of the River Barrow, 30 Miles South-West
of Dublin; which Lionel Duke of Clarence began to Wall; and Bellingham, Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, fortified with a Castle. This is also the head of a
County of the same Name.

Cathness, Catnesia, Cathanesia, is the most Northern County in the Kingdom of
Scotland: on the North and East, washed by the Caledonian Ocean; on the West it
has the same Ocean, and the County of Strathnavern in part; and on the South
it has Sutherland: Generally barren, little inhabited, yet it is a Bishopric,
and an Earldom.

Catolica, a Town in the Province of Romagna in Italy, between Pesaro and
Rimini; so called in the third Century from the Catholics of the Council of
Rimini, who separating themselves from the Arians (who in the number of 400
Bishops convocated by Pope Liberius to this Council carried the Majority by a
great many) came hither to say their Masses.

Cattay, or Catio, a Region of Asia, supposed by learned Men to be China, or
some part of it toward the North, comprehending the Provinces of Peking,
Xantung, Honan, Suchuen, Xensi, and Xansi; whereof Peking is the Capital City.
Being under the K. of Tartary, it is likewise called Tartary de Kan.

Cattaro, Cattara, a City in Dalmatia, which has been under the Venetians ever
since 1420. It is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Bari; and is a strong
Place, well seated on a Hill, having a Castle belonging to it, and 17 Villages.
It lies 40 Miles South of Ragusa, and 35 North-West of Scutari, upon a Bay of
the Adriatic Sea, called Cattaro, which takes its name from this Place. The
Turks have often attempted to take it in Vain.

Catti, an ancient People of Hassia and Thuringia, in Germany, who sometime
passing into Holland, have left the Names of Catwick Opzee to a Town upon the
Sea Coast, and Catwick op den Rhein to another upon the Rhine. In the Reign of
Tiberius, the Hermanduri gave them a terrible Defeat, wherein they destroyed
both Man and Beast, upon a pretense of having Consecrated the Spoils to Mars
and Mercury.

Catzenelbogen, Catti Meliboci, a Country in the Province of Weteraw in Germany
under the Landgrave of Hesse Cassel. The ancient Catti its Inhabitants have
left it this Name. In the Year 1548. the Emperor Charles V. adjudged this
Country to William Earl of Nassau who made pretensions to it: But the Arrest
was afterward cassated by the Treaty of Paslaw.

Cava, a great and populous City and a Bishop's See in the hither Calabria in
the Kingdom of Naples; seated partly upon a Hill, and partly in a Valley,
within four Miles of Salerno, and about 20 from Naples to the South. This
Bishop was heretofore a Suffragan to the Archbishop of Salerno; but now
exempted; and is immediately under the Pope; which Honor was obtained from
Boniface IX, in 1394. yet is the Bishop's Jurisdiction limited with the Walls
of the City. There is also a Abbey in it.

Cavado, Cavadus, a River of Portugal, which arises in Gallicia, and watering
the City of Braga, falls into the Ocean.

Cavaillon, Cabellio, Vrbs Cavallicorum, a small and ill built City in the
County of Venaissin in Provence in France, in an Isle made by the River
Durance, within 4 Leagues of Avignon to the South-East. This is a Bishop's See
under the Archbishop of Avignon; and under the Dominion of the Pope.

Cavan, a Town and County in the Province of Vlster in Ireland. The Duke of
Berwick in an Action before this Town, against K. William's Forces, Feb. 11.
1689. had his Horse shot under him. It is not without a strong Fort.

Caucasus, a Part of the great Mountain of Taurus in Asia, toward Georgia,
beginning about the Mouth of the River Phasis: It is very fruitful, and well
inhabited by Christians, for the most part, of the Georgian Church. Full of
Rocks and Precipices, and showing the Ruins of several Castles and Churches:
Yet covered at the Top with Snow perpetually.

Cauda, a River of Cumberland, which running through Westward Forest, by
Dauston, on the West of Carlisle, falls into the River Eden.

Caudebec, Calidobeccum, a considerable Town in Normandy, upon the Northern
shore of the River Seine, in the Pais de Caux; about 5 Miles West of Rouen, 7
from le Haure East; much Celebrated for Weaving. This is one of the Principal
Towns of the Pais de Caux, which is bounded by the British Sea to the North and
West; by Picardy to the East, and by the Seine to the South; and lies from East
to West 25 Leagues. The Caudebec Hats come from hence.

The Caves in Wiltshire between Luckington and great Badminton upon the Edge of
the County, nine in Number, of a Row, of several Dimensions; the least 4 Foot
broad, and 9 or 10 Foot long, are credibly supposed to be the Tombs of some
Heroic Men among the ancient Romans, Saxons, or Danes; because Spurs and
Pieces of Armor have been dug out of them.

Cavita de Manilha, Manilhanus Sinus, a Gulf of the Philippine Islands.

Cavours, a Town 5 Leagues from Pignerol in Piedmont under the French, near the
River Peles, fortified with two Castles. It was taken by Lesdiguieres in 1594.
and retaken by the Duke of Savoy the Year after. Now made a Dependant of
Pignerol.

Caurestan, a great Village in the Province of Farsistan in Persia, betwixt Lar
and the Isle of Ormus.

Caux, or Pais de Caux, a District contained within the Province of Normandy in
France betwixt the Seine and the Sea; in which Diepe* Haure de Grace, Caudebec,
Aumale, S. Vallery, etc. are comprehended. There is also of the same Name with
it a Town and a Promontory.

Cawood, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, and the Hundred of
Barkston.

Caxamalca, a Country within the Province of Lima in Peru; adorned heretofore
with Diverse Royal Palaces of the Inca's of that Kingdom. Thirty Leagues from
the Pacifick Sea, but near the River Vagna. It was here that the Noble
Atabalipa King of Peru was defeated and taken Prisoner by Francis Pizarro, who
basely and barbarously afterward murdered him in 1533.

Caxton, a Market Town in Cambridgeshire in the Hundred of Stow.

Caxume, the Capital City of the Kingdom of Tigremahon in Abyssinia, thought to
be the same with the Tenesis of Strabo, where the Queen of Sheba dwelt that
visited Solomon.

Cayenne, an Island under the French in the North Sea, upon the Coast of
Guyana; about 20 Leagues in Circuit; 4 Degrees from the Equinoctial Northward,
and South of the Disembogure of the River Cayenne which glides betwixt the
Countries of the Caribes and the Galibes. Its principal Commodity is Tobacco.
The French have built themselves a Fort at Bourg, (their chiefest Settlement of
about 200 Houses) and besides they guard the Harbor with Canon.

Cayernittes, some small Islands frequented by the Fishers for Tortoises, which
here are to be found of the largest Size, near the Western shore of Hispaniola
in America.

Cayphas, an ancient Town, so called from Caiphas High Priest of the Jews, who
formerly re edified it, at the Foot of Mount Carmel in the Holy Land upon the
shoars of the Mediterranean; 2 Leagues by Water from S. Jean d' Acre. Since
Saladine demolished it in 1191. it has never been fortified again; and
therefore now become a Village inhabited by some Moors, Jews, and Greeks.

Cazan. See Casan.

Cazares, an ancient People who took part with the Hunns and the Avares in
their Incursions to ravage the Empire.

Cea, Ceos, or Zee, Zie, and anciently among the Greeks called Hydrusca, is one
of the Cyclades Islands in the Aegean Sea; whereof Julide (Julis) is the
Capital City, in which Simonides and Bacchylides, the two famous Lyrique Poets,
with the Philosopher Ariston, are said to be born.

Cebarsussi, a Town near Carthage in Africa, where the Donatist Bishops in 394.
held a Council, and deposed Primianus Bishop of Carthage.

Cedar, or Kedar, the Hebrew name of Arabia Deserta, taken from Kedar the Son
of Ismael, Genesis 25. 13.

Cedes, a great and strong Town heretofore of Judea in the Tribe of Napthali in
Galilee, 4 Miles from Cephet and Capernaum: given by Joshua, after he had
killed the King thereof, to the Priests and Levites. It had an Asylum in it for
such as committed accidental Murder, (that is, in the Phrase of the English
Law, chance Medley) pursuant to the Laws of Moses provided in that behalf.

Cedogna, Laquedoniae, an Episcopal City of the Further Principate in the
Kingdom of Naples, suffragan to the Archbishop of Conza: believed by some to be
the Aquilenia of Livy.

Cedron, or Kedron, a small Brook in the midst of the Valley of Jehosaphat in
the Holy land near Jerusalem, passed by our Savior a little before his Death,
John. 18. 1. and frequently in Scripture mentioned upon other Occasions.

Cefalu, or Cifalu, Cephalaedis, a fair City with a good Port and a Castle in
the Island of Sicily, being a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Messina, upon
a Cape; whence some conjecture that its name is derived from the Greek Word
(...). It stands near Termini.

Celena, the Capital City formerly of all Phrygia, which being once repeopled
by Antiochus Soter, he caused it to be called Apamea. See Haman.

Celtae, the ancient Greek Authors give this name indifferently to the Gauls
and the Germans, as some do to the Spaniards, upon the account of the Alliances
of the Celtae with the Iberi. See Celtiberi. But it more particularly
understands the Original Gauls, whose Empire in a part of Gallia, (from them
called Celtica, the Boundaries whereof you see described under the Word Gallia)
flourished in the time of Tarquinius Priscus, when Segovesus and Bellovesus
Sons or Nephews to Ambigatus King of the Celtae, conducted those 2 Colonies
into Italy and Germany, we mentioned speaking of the Province of Berry, whereof
these People were the ancient Inhabitants.

Celtiberi, a mixed People, as the name itself imports, of the Celtae aforesaid
and the Iberi, or the ancient Spaniards of Arragon and Castile: Recorded in
History with great Honor, for their Courage and Fidelity. Florus calls them the
Force of Spain. The Celtae passing out of Gallia into Spain, and there
alliancing themselves with the Natives, was the Occasion of this Denomination.

Cemele, an ancient City near Nice, in Provence, amongst the Maritime Alps; of
great Esteem heretofore with the Romans, and yet showing the Ruins of an
Amphitheatre, a Temple of Apollo, Inscriptions, Tombs, and Canals, which were
the Works of their curious Hands. Since Christianity, it became a Bishop's See,
and bore the Honor thereof till either the Goths and Vandals in the sixth, or
the Saracens in the seventh and eighth Centuries ruined it so, that the Sea was
translated to Nice.

Cenchrea, the Port over against Corinth, in the Peloponesus or Morea.

Ceneda, Ceneta, a small but well peopled City, and a Bishop's See in the Marca
Trivigliana, seated at the Foot of the Mountains; about 13 Miles South from
Belluno, and 15 from Trevigi North-East. The Bishop is Sovereign of the City,
but a Suffragan of the Patriarch of Aquileia.

Cenis, or Mont-Cenis, Alps Cottiae, the Name of that famous Passage over the
Alps, which parts Savoy from Piedmont.

Centobrica, an ancient City of the Celtiberi in Spain; which when besieged by
the Romans under Metellus, placed the little Infants of Rethogenes, who had run
over to Metellus, in the Breach where the Besiegers played their Battery. And
though the Breach was of that Largeness as to render the Conquest of the Town
indubitable, and Rethogenes himself offered his Family to be a Sacrifice to
Metellus's Glory; Yet rather than so Generous a Father should see the Massacre
of his own Children, Metellus raised the Siege: And the Town ravished with his
Humanity and Clemency therein, voluntarily afterward opened the Gates to him.
Val. Max.

Centum Celles, an ancient Town of the Province of Toscana in Italy, in which
Pope Cornelius during the Persecution of Gallus was confined and put to diverse
Torments. It is mentioned by Pliny and Procopius. Leander Alberti calls it
Ferolle or Forcelle. Others believe it is the same with that which we now call
Civita Vecchia.

Ceperano, or Ciperano, a Town in the Campagna di Roma in Italy, upon the River
Garigliano. P. Paschal II. held a Council here in 1114. in which William
Guichard, Grandson to Robert Guichard the Valiant Norman that drove the
Saracens out of Italy, was created Duke of Apulia and Calabria.

Cephalonia, Cephalenia, called by the Italians Cefalonia, is an Island of the
Ionian Sea, just opposite to the Mouth of the Gulf of Lepanto. The Inhabitants
are of the Greek Church; but with the Island, which is not above 90 Miles in
Compass, subject to the Venetians. It is fruitful in Wines, excellent Oil, and
in those Grapes, whereof Currants are made. The Town wherein the Proveditor or
Governor resides is Argostoli; a small Place, with a tolerable good Port on the
East side of the Island. There is no other Town of any Note there; but only the
Villages of Liscuri, Finea, Erisso, Pillaro, Samo, and Lucato, after whose
Names, together with Argostoli, the whole Island is divided into seven Parts
that are accordingly so notified. In the twelfth Century a Bishopric was
founded here, to which the Church of the Isle of Zante is annexed. In 1224. the
Venetians received this Island by a Donation from Gaio the Lord of it at that
time. In 1479. the Turks took it. In 1499. the Venetians retook it and
repeopled it, and have since secured it with a strong Fortress called Asso,
that stands upon a high Rock, surrounded with the Sea, excepting the Reserve
only of a Point of Land about 20 Paces broad to join the Castle and the Island.
The Proveditor's Commission is made to continue 32 Months. The Antiens called
this, no less than that other Island in the Archipelago, Samos.

Cephisus, a River of Phocis in Achaia, first springing up in the ancient
Country of Doris there, and passing by the Mountain of Parnassus, it continues
its Course through Boeotia, where it receives the Rivers Asopus and Ismene:
Then traversing the Lake Copae, now known by the Name of Lago Stivo, it falls
into the Euripus or the Streights of Negropont. And with a little Variation
from Cephisus, is now called Cefisso. The Oracle of Themis said to be consulted
by Deucalion and Pyrrha stood upon the Banks thereof. Some other Rivers of this
Name in Greece are remembered by ancient Authors; as likewise a Fountain at
Apollonia, mentioned by Strabo and Ptolemy.

Cepuz, Cepusiensis Comitatus, a small County in the most Northern part of the
Upper Hungary, toward the Carpathian Hills, and the Confines of Poland; the
greatest part of which is under the Crown of Poland; though the chief Town (
Leutsch) with the Southern part of the County is subject to the Emperor, as
King of Hungary. John de Zapol, Earl of this County, was crowned King of
Hungary in 1526.

Ceram, or Ceiram, a pretty large and well inhabited Island in the Indian
Ocean, betwixt Terra des Papaous, Gilolo, etc. and the Moluccaes. Affording
Spices, and the like Indian Commodities.

Ceramici, the Tuilleries of old Athens.

Cerasus, an ancient Town of Cappadocia upon the Coast of the Euxine Sea, now
called Chirissonda and otherwise Emid o^ Omidie. In Pomponius Mela's Time, we
find it was as considerable a Place as Trebizonde; assuming this name from the
abundance of Cherries that grew in it, which Lucullus first brought into Italy
from hence, says Athenaeus and S. Jerome, in his Return from the Conquest of
Pontus and Armenia. It is very little inhabited now, and under the Turks, as
all the rest of Anatolia.

Ceraunii, Acroceraunii Montes: The Greeks are used to call by this Name diverse
Chains of Mountains, whose Height exposes them to be struck with Lightning and
Thunder: But it more especially understands those upon the Confines of Epirus,
running a vast length from East to West between that Kingdom and Albania; about
50 Miles distant from the Island of Corfou: Now known by the Name of Monti di
Chimaera in Chaonia, and Chimarioti.

Cerdanna, Cerdagne, Cerretania, is a County annexed to Catalaunia, and belongs
to the Crown of Spain, though it lies on the North side of the Pyrenean Hills.
It has Languedoc on the North, the County of Rousillon on the East, from which
it is separated by the Pyrenean Hills, and on the North and South Catalaunia;
divided into two parts by the River Segre [ Sicoris]: the Eastern part of it
has been under the French ever since the Year 1660. according to the Regulation
of the general Peace in the Year precedent. The ancient Cerretani were of this
Country. The Capital Town whereof is Puicerda.

Ceremissi. See Czeremissi.

Cerenza, or Cirenza. See Acerenza

Cerigo, Cytherea, an Island upon the Coast of the Morea, belonging to the
Venetians, between Cape Matapan to the West, and Cape Anzolo to the East. The
first Island of the Archipelago toward Europe, at the Distance of 40 or 45
Miles from Candia, about 60 in Circuit; and anciently dedicated to Venus, whom
the Poets represent as born at Cithera which was a Town here of so much Note as
to give Name to the whole Island. The Lacedemonian Vessels from Egypt and Libya
made this Island their Retreat: Sometimes styled the Lanthorn of the
Archipelago, because it is from hence that you may see the Countenance of the
Turks: and sometimes Porphyris by the Ancients, from the abundance of Porphyry
found in it. It is now adorned with a City standing upon a Rock, having a
Castle and a convenient Port to it very strong by Nature and Art of the same
Name with it self; which is also an Episcopal See, and full of People. Great
Veneration is paid to the Monastery of San Giovanni della grotta here above all
others belonging to the religious Greeks, because the People have been
persuaded that S. John began the Book of the Revelations in the Place where it
stands.

Cerisoles, a small Town in Piedmont, near Carmagnole; famous for the Victory
obtained by the French, under the Conduct of the Duke d' Enguien, at 22 Years
of Age, over the Marquess du Guast, in 1544. twelve thousand being killed upon
the Place.

Cerne, a Market Town in Dorsetshire, in the Hundred of Totcombe, standing in a
Champaign Country, and watered with a fine Rivulet; considerable for its being
heretofore an Abbey-Town.

Cervetere, a great and flourishing Place in the Times of the Old Romans, under
the Name of Caere Vetus; the Capital of Hetruria: Now a small Town in S.
Peter's Patrimony in Italy, 8 Miles from Bracciano, and 3 from the Thuscan Sea.
The Tabulae Caerites in which the Censors set down the Names of Persons who for
Misdemeanors were deprived of the Right of Suffrage, received that Appellation
from hence. For when the Gauls took Rome, this Town entertained the Refugee
Romans with so much Kindness, that they had the Honor afterward the first of
any People, as a Reward for the same, to be made a free City of Rome,
nevertheless without the Right of Suffrage.

Cervia, otherwise called Ficocle, is a City in the Province of Romandiola in
Italy upon the Adriatic, with a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Ravenna.
A Synod was held in it in 1634.

Cesena, Curva Cesena in Antoninus, is a City in the Province of Romandiola in
Italy, upon the River Savio, with a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of
Ravenna. It has sometime belonged to the Bolognese, sometime to particular
Families, till at last remitted to the Church. You see in it the Ruins of a
Castle which the Emperor Ferdinand II. is said to have built. Pope Alexander
VI. gave it to Caesar Borgia. But he did not enjoy it long. It has been many
times near the being entirely ruined by Factions.

Cesse, a River in the Duchy of Luxemburg in the Low Countries, passing by Ham
sur Less, near Rochfort; then by the Mouth of a hideous Cavern throwing it
self entirely under Ground for the space of a League, and at its Rise again
appearing with the same Freshness as it has at its Descent. Attempts are made
to search into the subterraneous Abyss in vain; for the Frightfulness of the
Danger frustrates all.

Ceva, Ceba, a Town in Piedmont upon the River Tanaro, in the Borders of the
Marquisate of Montisferat, toward the Apennine, and the Dictrict called the
Langhe. This had heretofore Marquesses of its own, but is now subject to the
Duke of Savoy. It lies seven Miles from Mondui to the South, eighteen from
Savona to the North, and the same Distance from Alba to the West; being the
Capital of the said District of le Langhe; with a Castle. In 1558 the French
took it.

Cevennes, a Territory at the Foot of the Mount of Cevennes in Languedoc. See
Sevennes. This Country was for a long time the Theater of the Civil Wars of
Religion, toward the End of the last, and the Beginning of this Age; till
Lewis XIII. brought the Rebels under Subjection.

Ceurawalth, the Name of an austere Sect amongst the Banjans in the
East Indies. They so superstitiously believe the Metampsychosis, as to be
afraid of killing the least Insect; and for the Mortifications of Life, they
may be compared with the most Religious Votaries of any Profession whatsoever.

Ceuta, a Town and Castle in the Province of Habat in the Kingdom of Fez in
Barbary, upon the Streights of Gibraltar, belonging to the King of Portugal;
the Capital in former times of Mauritania Tingitana, called by the Romans,
Civitas; by Mela, Septa; by Ortelius thought to be the Exilissa of Ptolomy.
From the Romans, the Goths; from the Goths, the Arabs; from them, John I. King
of Portugal took it in 1415. It has a Collegiate, with the Rights of a
Cathedral Church in it: composing in conjunction with Tangier a Bishopric
under the Archbishop of Lisbonne.

Ceylan, see Zeilan.

Chablais, a small Province of Savoy, North of the Lake of Geneva, with the
Province of Velay to the the East, Fousigny to the South, and Genevois to the
West: being part of the Country of the ancient Andates or Nandates, and the
Veragrii mentioned by Caesar. The Romans called it Provincia Equestris and
Caballica, from their breeding up of Horses in it; whence Chablais comes to be
formed by a Corruption. The famous St. Francis de Sales, taking great pains to
reduce the Calvinists here to their old Religion again, carries therefore the
Name of the Apostle of Chablais.

Chabli, a Town in the Tract of Senonnois in France toward Auxerre and
Tonnere: made remarkable in 841. by a bloody Battle fought at Fontenay near it,
betwixt the Children of Lewis the Debonnaire. Now, for good Wine.

Chabria, or Cilabro, Chiabrius, a River of Macedonia, falling into the
Thermaicus Sinus, or the Gulf of Salonichi, betwixt Cassandria and Salonichi.

Chaeronea, is a City of Boeotia, upon the River Cephissus, on the Eastern side
of Mount Helicon, North-West of Athens; memorable for the Ruin of the Grecian
Liberty, in the Defeat of the Athenian Forces, by Philip of Macedonia, A. M.
3612. and also for the Birth of Plutarch. Now not inhabited, but the Ruins are
known by the former name.

Chagford, a Market Town in Devonshire in the Hundred of Wonford.

Chagra, a River between the South and North of America, upon which the
Merchandises bound for Panama and Peru do pass; The Mouth of it on the North
Sea being guarded by a Spanish Fort. It is thought, a communication might
easily be made between the two Seas by the means of this, especially with other
Rivers that fall into the Pacifick. A Town of the same Name with it stands upon
its Banks. In 1670. the English Bucaniers went up it in their Canoes to plunder
Panama.

Chaibar, a River in Arabia, which arises twenty five German Miles West of
Jamama, the Capital of Arabia; and passing by Chaibar and Tajef, falls into
Eda. According to some judgments, this is the Chobar of the Prophet Ezekiel.

Chalcedon, a City of the Lesser Asia in Bithynia, which was a Bishop's See,
under the Patriarch of Constantinople; and of great Antiquity, much celebrated
in ancient History: but now reduced to the meanness of a poor Village, called
by the Turks Calcitin^ it stands on the Mouth of the Propontis, over against
Constantinople. Some believe that Scutaret is grown out of the Ruins of this
City. This City is particularly remarkable on the account of the fourth General
Council here celebrated in 451. In which it had the honor to be advanced to
the Title of a Metropolitan Church. According to Strabo and Eusebius, this City
was built in the sixty ninth year of Rome, that is, 685. before Christ.
Longitude 56. 15. Lat. 43. 15.

Chalcis, the ancient Name of the Island and Town of Negropont. Also a Town in
Aetolia in Greece, with another in Syria, occurring in the Writings of the
Ancients: but now unknown.

Chaldaea and Chaldei: See Curdistan.

Chalons sur Marne, Civitas Catalaunorum, a City and Bishopric under the
Archbishop of Rheimes, in the middle of Champagne, upon the River Marne; seven
Miles from Rheimes to the South-East, and twelve from Troyes to the North-West.
It is well fortified and built, standing in a large Plain, in which Attila lost
200000. men in a Battle with Aetius the General of the Romans, Meroveus King of
France, and Theodorick, in the year 451. The Bishops are Earls and Peers of
France.

Chalons sur Sone, Cabillonum, Cabillo Aeduorum, a City and Bishopric upon the
Sone, in Burgundy in France, 15 Leagues from Dijon to the South, and the same
distance from Thoulon to the West. The Bishopric is a Suffragan to the
Archbishop of Lions. There are numbers of Inscriptions, Vessels, Statues, and
the Relics of ancient public Buildings to be seen here. In 1562. the
Huguenots made themselves Masters of it. It has been new fortified since; gives
the Title of an Earl; and is the Capital of a little Territory called
Chalonnois or la Bresse Chalonnois.

Chalus or Chaslus, Castrum Lucis, a Town in the Province of Limosin in France
toward the Borders of Perigord, betwixt S. Hirier and Limoges. Richard I. King
of England dyed of the Wound of an Arrow that he received at the Siege of the
Castle of this place, then belonging to Widomare Viscount of Limoges, in 1199.
The occasion of which Siege, see in Daniel's Life of Richard I.

Chamb, Chambum, a small Town and Territory in the Upper Palatinate, upon the
River Regen, seven Miles East of Regenspurgh; something more than five Miles
North of Straubing. This Town with the Territory annexed makes an Earldom,
which belonged heretofore to the Count Palatine of the Rhine; but by the Treaty
of Westphalia was given to the Duke of Bavaria, who to this day enjoys it.

Chambery, Civaro, Chamberiacum, the Capital City of the Dukedom of Savoy, and
the Seat of the Parliament of that Dukedom; It stands upon the River Laise, in
a Plain ten Miles from Grenoble to the North-East: well built and beautified,
and defended with a good Castle.

Chambray, see Cambray.

Chamen, Vrbs Chamavorum, a City of Westphalia.

Champagne, Campagnia, a great rich, fruitful, populous Province in France;
bounded by Lorain to the East, the Low Countries to the North; Picardy, la
Brie, and the Isle of France to the West; and Burgundy to the South. The Earl
of this County, being an Earl Palatine, was always one of the twelve ancient
Peers of France. It is watered, or bounded, by six of the greater Rivers of
France, viz. the Seine, the Aulde, the Marne, the Vere, the Meuse, and the
Vannes. The Principal Cities are Chaumont Rheimes, etc. Amongst which there are
four Episcopal and two Archiepiscopal See.

Champ Arrein, a small Town near Bourdeaux, where Charles the Great defeated
the Goths.

Chanad, a City of Hungary. See Gyngisch.

Changcheu, two populous and Large Cities in China, with Territories of the
same name belonging to them; having Jurisdiction, the one in the Province of
Fokien near the Sea, ove^ Nine; the other in the Province of Nanking, over Four
Cities. The first is watered by the River Chan^s, the latter by the Kiang, and
adorned with diverse triumphant Arches.

Changte, two great Cities and Territories adjacent in China, having under
their Resort, the one in the Province of Honan, six; the second in the Province
of Huquang, three Cities. This last excels the fertility of the other.

Chang^a, a great City and Territory, having Jurisdiction over ten Cities, in
the Province of Huquang in China: watered with diverse Rivers and Lakes. The
Mountain called Jumo, yielding great quanties of Isinglass, stands here.

Chanry, or Chanonry, a fine Town and Port, on the Eastern Shore of Scotland,
in the County of Ross, on the North of Murray Fyrth.

Chantilly, a beautiful and ancient Seat belonging to the Prince of Conde,
eight Leagues from Paris, two from Senlis, and near a Forest called Chantilly.
It is one of the most delightful Castles in the Kingdom of France.

Chaocheu, A great City and Territory, having Jurisdiction over nine Cities, in
the Province of Quangtung in China. The City is adorned with two stately
Temples, a large Bridge over a Navigable River, and is a very trading place.

Chaoking, the Capital City of a Territory of the same Name in the Province of
Quangtung in China: having ten other Cities under its Jurisdiction. It is the
Seat of a Viceroy, and full of Noble Buildings.

La Chapelle, a Town in the Province of Limosin in France.

Chapel in the Frith, a Market Town in Devonshire in the Hundred of High Peak.

Los Chare^s, sometimes also called la Plata from its Capital City, is a
Province of the Southern America toward the Pacifick Ocean, below the Tropic,
to the South of Peru.

Chard, A Market Town in Somersetshire in the Hundred of Kingsbury.

Charente, Carentelus, Caranthenus, a River of France, which arises in
Limosin; and running Westward, enters the Province of Poictou; from which it
passes to Angolesine, and Saints; and enters the Aquitane Sea, right over
against the Isle of Oleron, between the Garonne and the Loire.

Charenton, Carentonium, a Town in the Isle of France, about two Miles from
Paris to the East, upon the River Marne, where it enters the Seine. This Place
was allowed for the Exercise of the Reformed Religion, which together with its
nearness to Paris, made it very famous, till the demolishing of that Religion
there.

La Charity, A large Town upon the Loire in the Province of Nivernois upon the
ascent of a Hill betwixt Nevers and Cosne in France. Often taken and retaken in
the Civil Wars of that Kingdom. Here the Loyre is covered with a good Bridge.

Charkliqueu, A Town in Cappadocia in the Lesser Ajia, two Leagues from Tocat,
standing in a fruitful Country for Wine. There is the Rock not far from it,
which served in the Exile of S. Chrysostom for the place of his retreat, much
frequented by the devout Christians.

Charlemont, Carolomontium, a small but very strong Town, in the most Southern
Border of the County of Namur, upon the River Mose, about four Miles South of
Dinant, and nine from Namur. It belonged formerly to the Bishopric of Liege;
but was taken into this County, and fortified by Charles V. in 1555. by the
consent of that Bishop.

Charlemont, an old Castle in the Province of Vlster in Ireland, in the County
of Armagh, surrendered May 14. 1690. to the D. of Schomberg, upon Articles, for
want of Provisions; having defended it self for about six Months, in the midst
of all the Garrisons belonging to the said General, to admiration.

Charleville, Carolopolis, a new and strong City in Champagne, in France, upon
the Mose, in the Territory de Retel; between Mezieres and Rocr^y; built by
Charles Duke of Nevers and Mantoua in 1609. five Miles from Sedan, For which
reason it not only bears his Name, but also is substituted in part under the
Duke of Mantoua, and part the King of France.

Charleroy, a new built strong Town in Namur, where the Village of Charnoy
stood; built by the Spaniards in 1666. and so called from the present King of
Spain. In 1667. it was taken by the French, and in 1679. restored by the Treaty
of Nimmeghen to the Spaniards. It lies five Leagues from Mons to the East, upon
the River Sambre.

Charley, a Market Town in Lancashire in the Hundred of Leyland.

Charlestown, the Principal Town in the Island of Barbados, built by the
English, and so called from Charles II. of England, of blessed Memory. A
considerable Settlement in New England has received the same Name, from the
same Excellent Prince: it is adorned with a large well built Church, and
several fair Buildings.

Charlieu, A Town in the County of Charolois in Burgundy, which has risen from
an Abbey called Carilocus or Carus locus in the Diocese of Mascon. A Council was
here celebrated in 926. for the rebuilding of Churches, and repairing of the
Ruins of the Holy Places in Palestine.

Chars, or Chirsi, Chorsa, a strong City of Armenia Major, mentioned by Pliny,
as standing near the Fountains of Euphrates. It is a Bishop's See, and the
Residence of the Turkish Bassa, who keeps it with a strong Garrison against the
Persians. It is well fortified, and has a fine Castle.

Charolles, Carolia, Quadrigellae, one of the chief Towns in the County so
called, in Burgundy, upon the River Reconse, six Leagues from Cluny and the
Loyre. It is honored with a Collegiate Church, and some Religious Houses.

Charroux, Karrofium, an ancient Abbey in the Province of Poictou, not far from
Berry. Du Chesne, a French Antiquary, says, it took this Name, according to the
vulgar opinion, from Chair-rouge, meaning the Prepuce of Jes* Chapter that was cut
from him at his Circumcision, and was heretofore preserved as a Relick in this
place.

Chartres, Carnutum, a City, and Bishopric of the County of Blois in France,
upon the River Eure, eighteen Leagues from Paris to the South-West, and sixteen
from Orleans to the North. This Bishop was heretofore subject to the Archbishop
of Sens, but in 1621. was put under the Archbishop of Paris. The City is the
Capital of the County of Blois; and more particularly of a little Territory
called Chartrain from it self; and has a noble Cathedral, dedicated to the
Virgin Mary, whose Smock is kept here. In 1528. it was advanced to the honor
of a Dukedom. Diverse Synods of inferior Note have been held here. It is
likewise of good Antiquity, and one of the most agreeable Cities of France, by
the general contribution of all things for that purpose.

Charybdis, the notorious Gulf upon the Coast of the Island of Sicily to the
South, opposite to Scylla a Rock upon the Coast of Italy to the North, made
equally known by the common Proverb. Bochartus, derives the Name from
Char-Obdan, in the Phoenician Language, signifying the hole of destruction.
They now call it Capo di Faro.

Chaslus, see Chalus.

Chasteau-Briant, a small Town in Brittany, nine or ten Leagues from Nantes
toward the Confines of the Province of Anjou: Some esteem it as the Country of
the ancient Cadates in Caesar's Commentaries. There is an old Castle standing
in it.

Chasteau-Dun, Castelodunum, the Principal Town in Dunois, in la Beausse in
France; upon the River Lo^re, nine Leagues from Blois to the North-West. The
Ancients gave it the name of Vrbs clara. And indeed we find in the fifth
Century, that it was a City with the Seat of a Bishop. But being a dependant
upon the Bishopric of Chartres, a Council soon after deprived it of this
honor.

Chasteau-Gontier, a Town upon the River Mayenne in the Province of Anjou in
France, and the Diocese of Angers. Diverse small Councils have been assembled at
it.

Chasteau-Landon, a small Town in the Territory of Gastinois in the Isle of
France upon the River Loing, between Nemours and Montargis.

Chasteau-du-Loyre, A Town upon the Loyre in the Province of Maine, five or six
Leagues from Man's, with the Title of a Barony. It belongs to the Demesnes of
the Crown.

Chasteau-Meliand, a small Town and Chatellany in the Province of Berry in
France, remarked particularly for its Castle and a Tower said to be built in
the time of the Romans.

Chasteau-Neuf, A Town in the small Territory of Timerais within the Province
of Perch in France; with others of the same Name in Anjou, Berry, Bresse, etc.
whereof nothing particular.

Chasteau-Pelerin, a Fortress ten Miles from Caesarea upon the Sea Coast in the
Holy Land: built for the security of the Christian Pilgrims that traveled to
Jerusalem; and in the year 1217. enobled with a Palace which the Templars
erected for the service of their Grand Master. It has been since neglected and
nigh ruined.

Chasteau-Porcien, A Town and Principality upon the River Aisne in the
Territory de Retel in Champagne, below Rhetel. It was advanced to the Dignity
of a Principality by Charles IX. in 1561.

Chasteau-Regnard, a small Town in the Territory of Gastinois in France upon
the River Ouaine, two Leagues from Montargis.

Chasteau-Regnaud, a little Sovereignty upon the Meuse in Champagne, in the
Territory of Retelois, two Leagues from Charleville. The Town is fortified: and
the Title now born by Monsieur Chasteau-Regnaud, the French Admiral, who
engaged Admiral Herbert at the Bantry in 1689. May 1.

Chasteau-Rous, a Town in Berry, upon the River Indre, between Bourges and
Blanc. Lewis XIII. advanced it to the quality of a Dukedom and Peerdom in 1616.
It is a considerable large Town, with a good Castle and diverse public
Buildings. In Latin, Castrum Rufum and Castrum Rodulphium. Also a City and an
Episcopal See in the Island of Negropont, by the Ancients called Carystus, by
the Italians, Castle rosso. The famous Carystium Marmor comes from hence.

Chasteau-Thierry, Castrum Theodorici, a City in the Isle of France, four
Leagues South of Chastres: It stands upon the Marne, in the Confines of
Champagne; and is a heat City, and a Dukedom; beautified with a Castle, and
diverse Churches. Baudrand places it in Brie, twenty Leagues from Paris to the
South.

Chastel-Chinon, a small Town in the Province of Niverhois in France near the
River Jonne, toward the Confines of Burgundy.

Chastellet; Castelletum, a Town in Namur, upon the River Sambre, six Miles
West of Namur. There is another Town of the same Name in Picardy, at the head
of the Scheld, three Leagues from St. Quintin North. This latter has been
fortified being a Frontier Town: but in 1674. it was dismantled.

Chastel-herault, a Town upon the River Vienne, in the most Eastern Border of
Poictou, seven Miles from Poictiers to the North-East. Francis I* dignified
this Town in 1514. with the Title of a Dukedom and Peerdom. It was often taken
and retaken in the French Civil Wars.

Chastillon sur Indre, a small Town in the Province of Touraine, some say
Berry, in France upon the said River.. Chastillen sur Loing, a handsome small
Town in the Territory of Gustinois in France, about 4 Leagues from Montargis
upon the River Loing.. Chastillon sur Loyre, a Town in the Province of Berry
below Cosne upon the Loyre.. Chastillon sur Cher, is in the same Province
toward the Confluence of the Sandre and the Cher.. Chastillon sur Marne, A
handsome small Town in Champagne, with a Chatellany thereunto belonging between
Espernay and Chasteau-Thierry. There is a noble and ancient Family deriving
their Name from it.. Chastillon sur Seyne, a pretty Town in Burgundy between
Alseile-Duc and Bar-sur-Seyne, divided in two by the River that distinguishes
it from all the foregoing.

La Chastre, A great Town upon the River Indre in the Province of Berry in
France, between S. Severe and Chateau-Roux: imparting its Name to a
considerable Family of that Kingdom.

Chatham, a long thoroughfare Town in Kent in Aylesford Lath, upon the Bank of
the Medway, and near Rochester. It is the principal Station of the Royal Navy
of England: and therefore well provided with Storehouses, and a Dock for the
building and equipping of the same.

Chatzan, a Town in the Kingdom of Hajacan in the East Indies within the
Dominions of the Grand Mogul, not far from the conjunction of the Rivers Behat
and Nilab.

Chaumont en Uexin, Calvomontium, a Town in that part of the Isle of France,
called Vexin, upon a small River, about five Miles West of Beauvais, which has
a ruined Castle.

Chaumont sur Marne, called Vexin-Francois, a very fine Town in Champagne, five
Leagues South-West of Joinville, and about the same distance from Grand to the
West. This was first walled in 1500. and has received its growth from the hands
of three Kings, Lewis XII. Francis I. and Henry II.

Chauni, Calniacum, a small Town and Chatellany in the Government of the Isle
of France upon the River Oise, between Noyon and la Fere. It belongs to the
Crown.

Chaxan, a City in the Territory of Chingyang within the Province of Huquang in
China. The Mountain Nuiqua, famous for a Temple that is built upon it in honor
of a Woman a pretended Prophetess amongst the Chinese, stands near it.

Cheadle, a Market Town in Staffordshire in the Hundred of Totmonslow.

Checkley, a Market Town in the same County and Hundred preceding, upon the
River Teane.

Chekiam, a Province of China, which has Nankim on the North, and the River
Kiam; Kiamsi on the West, Fokien on the South, and the Chinian Ocean on the
East; the principal City is Hamcheu: it contains eleven Cities, sixty three
walled Towns, and 1242135. Families. It lies between 27. and 32. degrees. of Lat.

Chelles, a Town in the Isle of France near the Marne; famous for a Nunnery
founded in 662. by the Queen Bathilde. It had heretofore a Royal Mansion also
standing in it.

Chelmer, a River in Essex on which Maldon is situated.

Chelmesford, Caesaromagus, a Town in Essex, twenty five Miles North of London.

Chelo, A Fort in the Province of Junnan in China.

Chelsey, a place deserving particularly to be remarked for the Magnificent and
most Delightful Hospital, begun by King Charles II. continued by King James II.
and now perfected, for the refuge and maintenance of disabled, poor, and
Veterane Soldiers here. This being such a stately Pile, as to surpass by
confession in diverse respects, the famous Hotel des Invalide at Paris. Its
situation near London is better known, than that we should need to mention more.

Cheltenham, a Market Town in Glocestershire, and the Capital City of its
Hundred.

Chemnis, an Island of Egypt mentioned by Herodotus. Apollo had heretofore a
Temple in it. The people used to believe that it floated. We find mention made
in Herodotus of a great City also of this Name, near to Nea, in the Country of
Thebes.

Chepstow, a fine Market Town on the River Wye, on the Eastern Border of the
County of Monmouth in Wales. It is fortified with a Wall, and has a spacious
Castle on the other side of the River; supposed to have risen first out of the
Ruins of Venta Silurum (the Capital City of the ancient Silures) four Miles
distant from it.

Cher, Caris, a River which rises in Auvergne, near Clermont; and running
North-West through Berry, and on the South side of Tours, a little below this
last, it falls into the Loyre.

Cherazoul, a Town in the Province of Curdistan in Asia, in the Road from
Ninive to Hispahan, of very difficult access from the manner of its
construction within a steep and cleted Rock.

Cherbourg, Caroburgus, a Seaport in Normandy in France, which has a tolerable
good Harbor: ten Leagues West of Constance. This Town was lost by the English
in 1453. Honfleur and Beaumont stand near it.

Chersonesus Aurea. See Malaca. Some believe this to be the Land of Ophir of
King Solomon's time.

Cherry-Issand, an Island on the Coast of Greenland, in the most Northern part
of the World; discovered to us, and denominated accordingly, by Sir Francis
Cherry. There are many Mines of Lead growing in it.

Chertsey, A Market Town in Surrey; the Capital of its Hundred, not far from
the River Thames, over which it enjoys a Bridge. The unfortunate King Henry VI.
was first interred without Pomp here, and afterward removed to Windsor.

Cherusci, an Ancient and Valiant People of Germany, that dwelled between the
Elbe and the Weser; having the Catti and the Hermonduri their Neighbors to the
South, East and West. Their General, Arminius, is often mentioned with honor
by Tacitus.

Cherwell, a River in Oxfordshire, at the confluence of which with the Isis
stands the most famous University of Oxford.

Chesee, Povillux, a Town in Champagne, the Inhabitants whereof claim the
privilege to assist at the Coronation of the Kings of France; and to convey the
Holy Ampoulle or Oil (pretended to be brought by an Angel at the Consecration
of the first Christian King of that Kingdom) from St. Rheimes to our Ladies
Church in Rheimes.

Chesham, a Market Town in Buckinghamshire in the Hundred of Burnham.

Chester, Civitas Legionum, Cestria, is a City and Bishopric, on the River
Dee, in the Westernpart of Cheshire; whence often called West-Chester; with a
fair Stone Bridge over that River. In this City it was that 7 Kings of the
Scots and Britains by way of Homage, rowed King Edgar in his Barge from S.
John's Church to his Palace, himself as Sovereign holding the Helm. The
Eastgate is accounted one of the stateliest in England; and the Rows or
Galleries made along the chief Streets, for preservation against the Rain, are
very particular. It was an ancient Roman Town, called by Ptolemy Devana: made a
Bishops See by Henry VIII. who put it under the Archbishop of York. The ancient
Earls of Chester fortified it both with Walls and a Castle. It is now at this
day a fine Place with 10 Parishes in it, a County Palatine, and the usual
passage from England to Ireland. Its Long. 20. 23. Lat. 53. 11. Cheshire,
Cestria, has on the South Shropshire, on the East Stafford and Darby, on the
North Lancashire, and on the West Denbigh and Flintshire; toward the
North-West it has a Promontory that runs a great way into the Sea. It abounds
more in good Pasturage than Corn, well stored with Parks, and watered by the
Rivers Dee, Weever, and Mersey; and the Cheese of this County, is thought the
best of England. The Earldom of it belongs to the Prince of Wales.

Chesterfield, a Market Town in Derbyshire in the Hundred of Scarsdale,
pleasantly seated between two small Rivers in a very good Soil. King John made
it a free Borough, King Henry III. and his Barons fought that Battle hard by
it, in which Robert de Ferrers Earl of Derby was taken Prisoner, and lost his
Estate and Dignity. King Charles I. advanced it to the Style and Title of an
Earldom in the Person of Philip Lord Stanhop Anno 1628. whose Grandson at
present possesses that Dignity.

Cheuxan, an Island upon the Coast of the Province of Chekiang in China,
planted by above 70 small Towns and Villages of the Chinese.

Chewton, a Market Town in Somersetshire, the Capital of its Hundred: also
written Chewton-Mendip.

Chiampana, Ciampa, a Kingdom of the further East Indies, between
Couchin-China, Cambaja, and the Mare Sinicum. Pulocacien is the principal City
of it.

Chiamsi, a Province toward the South of China.

Chiangare. See Galatia, a Province of the Lesser Asia.

Chiapa, a Province of New Spain in America, watered by the Rivers Gryalva and
rio blanco; and for many Ages past inhabited by 4 different Nations of Indians.
Its Capital City is Civdad Real.

Chiarenza, a Town in the Morea, fifty five English Miles from Patras to the
South. It is a Sea-Port-Town.

Chiaromonti, Claromons, a considerable Town in the South-East part of Sicily,
in the Valley of Netina amongst the Mountains, about forty Miles from Pachino
to the West.

Chiavari, Clavarum, Claverinum, a small but well inhabited Town upon the Coast
of Genoua, near Rapello in Italy, toward the fall of the River Layagna. The
Genouese are said to build it in 1167. and after it had been ruined, to rebuild
it.

Chiavenne, vide Claven.

Chichester, Cicestria, a City and Bishopric in Sussex, founded by Cissa II.
King of the South Saxons. After the Conquest it became a Bishops See, the Chair
being removed from Selsey a small Village, not much above sive Miles to the
Southward. This City is seated on a River called the Lavant, which encompasseth
it on the West and South, about six Miles from the Sea, and almost in the
Western Border of that County. The Honorable Charles Fitz-Roy Duke of
Southampton was created Earl of Chichester, September 10. 1675 by Charles II.
his Father. It is a fair City, with five or six Parish Churches, and a
Cathedral, first erected by Radulph the third Bishop, afterward rebuilt and
beautified by Bishop Seffrid the second of the Name, when it had been almost
consumed twice by Fire. The Corporation elects two Burgesses for Parliament,
and would enjoy a better Trade, were not the Haven choked up that is next
adjoining to ^it.

Chidley, a Market Town in Devonshire on the River Tinge.

Chiemzee, or Chiempsee, Chiemium, a City and Bishopric under the Archbishop
of Saltzburgh in the Dukedom of Bavaria, about ten Leagues from Munich and
Saltzburgh each. It is no very considerable place. An Archdeacon of Saltzburgh
founded the Bishopric in the year 1214.

Chieri, a Town in Piedmont, where the French obtained a signal Victory against
the Spaniards in 1639. It lies three Miles to the Eastward of Turino, and was
heretofore a Potent City, and a Commonwealth; but is now in Subjection to the
Duke of Savoy.

Chifale, an Island in the Gulf of Arabia.

Chilafa, or Chielefa, is a Fortress on the South of the Morea, thirty eight
English Miles North-West of Cape Matapan, a Place of great Importance, both as
to its natural and artificial Fortifications; and surrendered to the Venetians
in 1686.

Chilca, a fruitful Valley in the Kingdom of Peru, ten Leagues from Lima and
six from Pachacama. The Salvages manure it with Sardines.

Chili, one of the most Potent Kingdoms of the South America. When the
Spaniards entered the New World, it was first discovered by them in 1535. It
lies four hundred Leagues in length from North to South, but its breadth is not
great: bounded on the North by Peru, on the West by the Pacifick Ocean, or the
Mar del Zur; on the South by Magellanica, and on the East by the Andes. A part
of the Inhabitants of this Country retiring into these Andes, have defended
their Lives and Liberties against the Spaniards ever since; and have sometimes
given them great Overthrows. S. Jago is the Capital City of it. Many Mines of
Gold and Quarries of Marble grow within its bowels. Yet a very cold Country,
governed by a Viceroy in subordination to the Vice. Roy of Peru.

Chiloe or Chilue, an Island and Town belonging to the Kingdom of Chili; South
of the extreme parts of that Country, in the West Indies: giving Name to a
neighboring Gulf, called the Archipelago of Chiloe, because of the number of
the Islands therein.

Chimarioti, Ceraunii, are a Ridge of very high Mountains in Albania or Epirus;
which run from the North-East to the South-West, and lie not above fifty Miles
North of Corfu. See Ceraunii.

Chimay, Chimacum, a Town and Castle in Hainault, in the Confines of Champagne,
upon the River Alby, which falls into the Mase, three German Miles from
Mariebourg to the South-West. This Town was made a Principality by the Emperor
Maximilian I. in 1486.

Chimera, a City in the Confines of Macedonia, between the Mountains of
Chimarioti, upon the shoars of the Gulf of Venice, which has a strong
Seaport. It lies about 30 Miles North of Corfu, upon a Rock which has
Precipices on all Sides; whither all the Country People retire when need
requires; by which they have preserved themselves from the Turks, and will pay
him no Tribute. They are stout Men and good Soldiers; but infamous for Theft
and Robbery, preying equally upon the Turks and Christians. Yet they are
Christians by Profession, and subject to the Bishop of Janina in Thessaly. Vide
Wheeler's Travels. There is a flaming Mountain, mentioned by Pliny, Strabo,
Ovid, etc. in Lycia of this Name; from whence the Poets, and after those the
Philosophers derive the Fiction of a Chimaera, whereby they understand a mere
Creature of the Imagination composed of such Contradictions and absurdities in
Relation to one another, as cannot possibly be any where united into a being,
only in Thought: But what Occasion our Mountain gives for such a Whimsey, the
Mythologists are put to others to invent.

Chi^tu, one of the Principal Cities in China, the Capital of the Province of
Suchyen, on the Borders of West Tartary, between the Mountains and the River
Kiam, in Long. 131. 40. Lat. 30. 40.

Chin, A famous Lake in the Province of Junnan in China, occasioned by the
total swallowing up of a great City which formerly stood in the place by an
Earthquake.

China, is a vast Kingdom in the East of Asia, bounded on the North by the
Kingdoms of Tangut and Niathan, (or Cambalu,) from which it is separated in
part by Mountains, and in part by a Wall 500. Leagues long: on the West it has
India extra Gangem, from which it is parted by the Lake of Cincujay, and a long
Ridge of Mountains; on the South and East, it is surrounded by the Chinese and
Indian Ocean. Since the year 1630. the Tartars have conquered this once most
Potent Kingdom. This is a vast, populous, civil, fruitful Country; and for
Learning and Mechanic Arts to be preferred before all the Pagan People in the
World. They are very ingenious at Geometry, Arithmetic, Astronomy, and
Physic; and since Confusius (the Socrates of China) brought that Faculty into
repute with them, in Moral Philosophy also. Some maintain, the Arts of
Printing, Gunnery, and the Magnet, were first invented here. Their Language for
the most part consists of Monosyllables, written downwards in Characters
expressing entire words and things, like the Egyptian Hieroglyphics, without
Letters; the Rules by which they are understood may be seen in the China
illustrata of Kircher. Ptolomy calls this Kingdom Sinarum regio. It is watered
by the great Rivers Kiang and Hoan. And stands divided into fifteen Provinces;
six under the Division of Catay, and nine under the Division of Mangin; which
are incredibly populous and rich, with Mines of Gold, Silver, and precious
Stones. In every great Town there is a College for to teach the Philosophy of
Confusius. And you have a perfect Catalogue of their Emperors from the year
2952. before Christ, to the present Lord of the Universe and Son of Heaven, as
they call him.

Chinca, a large and beautiful Valley in the Diocese of Lima in Peru,
discovered by Pizarro, whose Government by Order from the King of Spain, was
limited by the River S. Jago to the North, and this Valley to the South. It
yields plenty of Corn and Wine.

Chinkiang, a well built and populous City of the Province of Nanking in China,
with a Territory of the same Name, whereof it is the Capital: having
Jurisdiction over two other Cities. The Physicians of this place have the
reputation of the best of that Faculty in all China.

Chinon, a Town upon the Vienne in Touraine in France, above four Leagues from
the fall of that River into the Loyre, and ten from Tours to the South-West. It
was here that the famous Maid of Orleans first came and offered her service to
Charles VII. of France in 1429. And for the Situation of it, it is thought to
be of that importance, as to deserve a Garrison in the Castle.

Chintin, a City in the Province of Pekin, in the North of China; having a
Command over one and thirty Cities.

Chintu, a great City and Territory, comprehending nine and twenty other Cities
in the Province of Suchuen in China. See Chimtu.

Chinyven, a Town in the Province of Junnan in China, situated in a Country
that is rich in Silver Mines. The Fort called Loko belongs to the Government of
this Town. A second in the Province of Quiechen in the same Kingdom, with a
Territory called also Chinyven, having Jurisdiction over five Cities.

Chio, an Island of the Archipelago, over against Smyrna, not above twelve
Leagues from the nearest Coast of Asia; called by the Turks Sakisadasi, that
is, the Isle of Mastick. It belonged to the Family of the Justiniani of Genoua
heretofore; but in 1566. conquered by the Turks, under whom it now is. It is
about eighty Miles in Circuit, very fruitful and populous, and inhabited for
the most part by Christians, who live here with greater liberty, and kinder
usage, than in any other part of Turkey. The Men are proud, ignorant, lazy and
ugly, but the Women are beautiful; Thevenot. In the Eastern part of the Isle
stands the City Chio, which has had the honor in former times to be first an
Episcopal See under Rhodes, and afterward an Archiepiscopal one. Now inhabited
by Turks, Jews, Latin and Greek Christians, with the free exercise of their
respective Religions. It enjoys the advantage of a good Port and Castle to
enrich and desend it: and they reckon about fifteen Villages in the Island
besides.

Chioza, Clodia Fossa, Chioggia, a small City which is a Bishops See in a small
Island of the Adriatic, about fifteen Miles from Venice South; made famous by
the Valor of the Genoese, who in 1380. took it; but it returned under the
Dominion of the Venetians again. The Bishop is a Suffragan to the Patriarch of
Venice.

Chiorlick, a Town in Romandiola, near to which Bajazet defeated his Son Selim,
who was then in Rebellion against him.

Chippenham, a Market Town in Wiltshire. The Capital of the Hundred; upon the
River Avon. It returns two Burgesses to the Parliament.

Chipping-Norton, a Market Town in Oxfordshire in the Hundred of Chadlington.

Chipping-Ongar, a Market Town in the County of Essex in the Hundred of Ongar.

Chisary, the only Town of Turcomania, the ancient Seat of the Turks in Asia;
seated upon the River Euphrates, near its Head or Spring; forty five German
Miles West of Testis.

Chiton, a Province of the Empire of the Great Mogul in the Terra firma of the
Indies, betwixt the Provinces of Malva and Guzurate; having a City of its own
Name for the Capital, in which you see the Remains of diverse Magnificent Pagods
or Pagan Temples; together with a Castle which serves for a Prison of State.

Chnin or Knin. The same with Clin.

Chobar, see Chaibar.

Chocolococa, or Castro Virreyna, as the Spaniards call it, a Town in the
Kingdom of Peru, sixty Leagues from Lima to the South, and two from the Silver
Mines of a Mountain that is perpetually covered with Snow. The Silver is fine,
but the Veins not being very full of it, they pay no more than the Tenths to
the King of Spain.

Chogaco, a Castle in the Lower Hungary, surrendered to the Imperialists October.
18. 1687.

Chogan, a Town in the Province of Xansi in China near the River Fie: remarkable
for a Flying Bridge (as the Chinese call it, because it is elevated fifty
Perches high in the Air)* which communicates a passage betwixt two Mountains on
each side the River at the distance of forty Perches from one another, yet
consists but of a single Arch.

Cholm-Kill, Insula Sancti Columbani, Rana, an Island in the West of Scotland,
famous for a Monastery there built by Columbanus the Apostle of the Scotch
Nation: it lies opposite to Knapdale: thirteen Miles North of Yea, and about
fifty from New Castle in Ireland. This is one of the five Islands called
Hebudes or Hebrides. The ancient City Sodore stands in it.

Chonad, Canadum, Genadum, a City in the Upper Hungary, upon the River Merish;
which falls into the Tibiscus at Segedin, about three German Miles East of
Segedin. This is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Colocza, and the
Capital of the County of Chonad; which lies between the Rivers of Merish and
Temez.

Chorasan. See Corasan.

Chotezim, Chotimia. See Cotzchin.

Christ-Church, A Market Town in Hampshire, situated betwixt the Rivers Avon
and Stower at their fall into the Sea. It is the Capital of its Hundred, and
has the Privilege of Electing two Burgesses for the Parliament.

Christianstad, Christianopolis, a Town of Denmark in the Confines of Sweden,
adorned by Christian IV. King of Denmark. It lies in the County of Bleckling;
taken by the Swedes, and burnt in 1611. which was the occasion of rebuilding
it. There is a good Port to the Baltic Sea there.

Christina, a Town in New Sweden in the Northern America, built by the Swedes
in the year 1640. and so called from Christina their Queen of famous Memory.
The Dutch and English have since taken it from the Swedes, and the latter again
from former.

Chthonia, a very ancient Name of the Island of Crete.

Chucheu, a great City and Territory, extending its Jurisdiction over nine
other Cities in the Province of Chekiang in China; set about with Mountains,
but the Valleys thereof are fruitful enough.

Chunking, the Capital City of the Territory of this Name in the Province of
Suchuen in China, having nineteen old Cities under its Command. It is one of
the most Magnificent Places in China.

Chudleigh, a Market Town in Devonshire in the Hundred of Exmister. The Lord
Clifford has a Noble Seat here, to whom it gives the Title of a Baron.

Chulmleigh, a Market Town in Devonshire in the Hundred of Witheridge.

Church-Stretton, a Market Town in the County of Salop in the Hundred of
Munslow.

Churnet, a River of Staffordshire.

Chusistan, Susiana, a Province of the Kingdom of Persia, bounded by the Gulf
of Balsera to the South, the Provinces of Eatz to the East and Hyrach West: The
Capital City, Sauster: whence some of the Moderns call the Province Schouster.

Chu^ei, a People of the ancient Province called Chuta in Persia, who being
transplanted to Samaria (whence afterward called Samaritans) and there adoring
the Idols that they brought with them of the Gentile invention, were infested
with Lions out of the Desert, till they gat a Jewish Priest to instruct them in
the manner of the God of the Land. And then they served their Idols, and the
God of Israel together. This transplantation happened upon the carrying away of
the Jews Captives to Assyria. 2 Kings 17. The men of Cuth, v. 30. meaning these
Chutes.

Cibola or Civola, a Province of the Southern America, the same with what the
Spaniards call New Granada, from a City of that Name of their building.

Cicones, an ancient People of Thrace, near the River Hebrus. Ovid mentions
them upon the occasion of a River in their Country, that would petrisie the
Bowels of such as drunk of it.

Flumen habent Cicones, quod potum Saxea reddit Viscera, quod tactis inducit
marmora rebus. Cicules or Zeckels, a People in the North of Transylvania
toward the Confines of Poland, thought to be a remainder of the Huns under
another Name, or else derived from Tartary. In Religion they are generally
Calvinists or Socinians. They possess seven several quarters thereabouts,
whereof the Capital Town is Neumark.

Cilicia, a Province of Asia the Less, lying along the Coast of the
Mediterranean, with Cappadocia and a part of Armenia to the North. Now
contained in the Province of Caraman, and sometimes called Finichia. Tharsus,
Pompeiopolis, Lajazzo, are the principal Cities of it.

Cillei, Cilleja, Celia, a Town in Stiria, upon the River Saana, which soon
after falls into the Drove. The Capital of a County of the same Name; about
five Miles from the Borders of Carniola Northward.

Cimbri, the Origin of this ancient People lies under dispute; as whether
descended from the Scythians, or the Saxons, or the Danes; or whether the same
with the Cimmerii. Cluverius supposes that they did anciently possess the
Cimbrica Chersonesus. It is certain, that about the year of Rome 639. these
People marched with an Army of 300000. fighting Men, besides Women and
Children, in search of a New Country to live in. And being joined by the
Teutones, the Ambrones, the Tigurii, and others in the way, they ravaged
Germany, Istria, Sclavonia, the Grisons, Switzerland; till met and overcome by
Marius in a very bloody Battle in the Field, called Campus Marii, between Aix
and S. Maximin near the little River Arc in Province, Anno Romae 652.

Cimmerii, the ancient Name of a People in Italy, that dwelt in subterraneous
Caverns near the Lake Averno; and of another toward the Euxine Sea, from whom
the Bosphorus Cimmerius derives its denomination. Whether of these two
occasioned the Proverb Cimmeriae Tenebrae, from the darkness of their
habitations, the Learned make a difference not worth the determining.

Cinaloa, a Province of New Mexico in the South America, bounded by Guadalajara
to the South, and to the North by the Vermiglian Ocean.

Cinan, a great City in China, in the Province of Xantum, in the North-East of
that Kingdom, in Long. 145. Lat. 36. It is adorned with diverse stately Palaces
and Pagods. The Jesuits have also a Church here: and nine and twenty other
Cities lie under the Jurisdiction of this.

Cinca or Cinga, a River of the Kingdom of Aragon in Spain, springing from the
Pyrenees below Bielsa; afterward joining the Segre about Fraga, and ending
with the Ebro. Lucan styles it Cinga rapax.

Ciucheu, see Quancheu.

Cingary, a People of Africa.

Cingcheu, a great City in the Province of Xantung in China, with a Territory
containing thirteen Cities more. The Territory is full of Hills, yet not
defective in the Necessaries of Life.

Ciolfa or Zulpha, a Town of Armenia upon the River Aras; desolated by
Scha-Abas King of Persia, and all the Inhabitants carried away into Persia and
settled in Gilan and Hispahan there, for to promote the Trade of Silks.

Cioutat, a fair Town and a secure Port in Provence in France, betwixt
Marseilles and Thoulon; adorned with diverse Churches and Religious Houses.
Particularly, at a Monastery of the Services hard by it, there is a remarkable
Fountain ebbing and flowing with the Sea. The Name is but a Corruption of
Civitas.

Ciradio, a River of Corsica.

Circassia, is a vast space of ground extended from the Cimmerian Bosphorus and
the Fens of Maeotis on the Eastern Shoars of the Euxine Sea, for the space of
five hundred Miles; reaching two hundred toward the North. A Country fitly
seated for Trade, but possessed by most Barbarous Tartars who delight only in
War and roving: they pretend to something of Christianity, having been
converted in the eighth Century; but then they never enter the Church till they
are old, serving the Devil in their Youth and God in their Age, when they can
neither Rob nor Murder any longer. Olearius places them upon the Western Shore
of the Caspian Sea. They are subject for the most part to the Grand Czar.

Cirencester, Corinium, Durocornovium, Cornovium, an old Roman City in
Glocestershire, upon the River Churne, about twelve Miles South-East of
Gloucester. Here the four Proconsular ways made by the Romans, crossed each
other; and vast numbers of Roman Coins, Inscriptions, etc. have been dug up.
But this City was so ruined by the Saxons and Danes, that what is walled in, is
not a fourth part of it inhabited; the rest being Fields and Orchards: the
Inhabitants subsist mostly by Clothing. It was taken by Prince Rupert by Storm,
Feb. 2. 1643.

Cirenza. See Acerenza.

Cirrha, an ancient Town in Phocis upon the Gulf of Corinth near the City
Delphes, to which it served as a Port; giving the Name of Cirrhaeus Sinus to a
Part of the same Gulf.

Cirte, or Cirtha, an ancient City of Numidia in Africa; called afterward
Constantine, being the Capital of the Province of Constantine in the Kingdom of
Algier. In this City, we read in Salust that Jugurtha killed Adherbal the Son
of Micipsa King of Numidia. It became an Episcopal See in the Primitive Ages of
Christianity. A Council was assembled at it in 303. by Secundus Primate of
Numidia, wherein almost all the Bishops of that Province were convicted of the
Crime of Traditores, that is, delivering up their Bibles to the Infidels in
Persecution A Second in 412. whereat S. Austin assisted.

Cithaeron, a Mountain of Boeotia consecrated amongst the ancient Poets to
Bacchus.

Citta di Castello, Tifernum, Tiberinum, a Town in the Dukedom de Vrbino, in
the Ecclesiastical State, upon the River Tiber, 10 Miles from S. Sepulcher. It
has a small Territory annexed to it, called il Contado di Castello, under the
Popes Dominion; of which this City is the Capital.

Citta di Chieti, Teatea, a City in the hither Abruzzo in the Kingdom of
Naples, near the River Pescara, 7 or 8 Miles from the Adriatic. Whence the
Order of the Religious Theatines derives their Appellation; one of their
Founders having sometime been Bishop hereof.

Citta-Ducale or Reale, a City in the further Abruzzo in the Kingdom of Naples,
being a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Chieti. It stands upon the River
Velino, 15 Miles from Aquila, within the States of the Church.

Citta Nova, a City of Histria in Italy, with a Bishop's See under the
Archbishop of Aquileia, at the fall of the River Quieto into the Adriatic: In
a bad Air and consequently little inhabited. Called Nova because built since,
and a little below the Ruins of the ancient Aemonia.

Citta della Pieve, Civitas Plebis, a small Town in the Perugine in Italy
belonging to the Ecclesiastical State.

Citta di Sole, a well fortified Town in the Province of Romagna in Italy upon
the little River Fagnone, belonging to the Grand Duke of Tuscany.

Citta Vecchia, Medina, or Melita, a City in the Island of Maltha, with a
Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Palermo, situated upon a Hill in the
middle of the Island, having formerly been the Capital thereof.

Cittadelli, Cittadella, the Capital Town with a Port and some Fortifications
of the Island of Minorca.

Civdad Real, a City in the Province of Chiapa (thence* commonly it self called
Chiapa) in the South America, being a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of
Mexico; whereof the famous Bartholomeo della Casa was Bishop in the last Age.
There is of this Name a Town in New Castile in Spain, upon the River Guadiana,
between Calatroua and Almagra. The same is a large Town in a fruitful Plain,
but not very well peopled.

Civdad- Rodrigo, a City of the Kingdom of Leon in Spain upon the River Agujar
and the Frontiers of Portugal. It is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of
Compostella. Supposed to have been built by Ferdinand II. in the Year 1200. for
a Rampart against the Portugueze.

Civencheu, a great City in the Province of Fokien in China, with a Territory
of the same Name annexed to it, commanding six old Cities. This City is
extraordinarily traded; and in its Temples, Palaces, triumphant Arches and
Houses, appears an admirable and magnificent Place. A little West of it is to
be seen the Bridge of Loyang over the River Loyang, 360 Perches long, about one
and an half broad, so curiously contrived with great Pillars instead of Arches,
and so finely imbellished with Sculptures, as no where to find a Parallel in
the World.

Cividad del Roy Philippo, a Colony of Spaniards planted in Magellanica, at the
Mouth of the Streights of Magellan; but dissipated by Famine again, it being
far remote from their Countries and seldom visited.

Civita Nova, a small Town in the Marcha Anconitana in Italy 5 or 6 Miles from
Loretto, and near the Adriatic, upon a Hill; dignified with the Title of a
Dukedom.

Civita Busella, Bucellum, a Town in the hither Abruzzo in the Kingdom of
Naples upon the River Sangro.

Civita Vecchia, a famous Port in S. Peter's Patrimony in Italy; believed by
some to be the Centum Cellae of the Ancients.

Civitella, a Town in the farther Abruzzo in the Kingdom of Naples, upon a
Rock, with the River Librata at the Foot of it. Besieged by the French in 1557.
under the Duke of Guise in vain.

Clagenfurt, Clagenfurtum, Claudia, the Capital Town of the Duchy of Carinthia
in Germany, ^ Leagues from the River Drove, and the same Distance from S. Veir.
There is a great Lake near it. It is a fortified Town. See Klagenfurt.

Clain, Clanis, Clitis, a River of the Province of Poictou in France, which
having received the Vonne, the Clou^ere, etc. passes by Poictiers, and loses
its Name at length in the Vienne below Chasteleraud.

Clairvaux, Clarevallum, a famous Abbey of Champaigne, upon the River Aube, in
the Diocese of Langres, 5 or 6 Leagues from the said City: Founded in the Year
1115. by the Great S. Bernard: Himself being the first Abbot: Who left above
^00 Religious in it at his Death. Hence the Title of Abbas Clarevallensis given
that very Divine Person.

Clare, Clarence, Clarentia, a Country-Village in the County of Suffolk, upon
the River Stour which divides Essex from Suffolk; about 6 Miles West of
Sudbury. It had once a Castle, but now ruined; yet famous for the great Men who
have born the Titles of Earls or Duke of it: The last of which was George Duke
of Clarence, Brother to Edward IV. King of England, who in 1421. was drowned in
a Butt of Malmesey. The second King at Arms retains the Surname of Clarencieux,
as appertaining formerly to the Dukes of Clarence. At present the Title of Earl
of Clare, is in the Family of Hollis. There is also a Town and County in the
Province of Connaught in Ireland, of this Name; the former standing near the
Fall of the River Fergus into the Shannon.

Clarendon, or Clarindon, is a Noble Country House and Park, belonging
heretofore to the Kings of England, about 2 Miles North of Salisbury in
Wiltshire. Famous of old, for a Parliament here held in 1164. where were made
the Constitutions of Clarindon. Charles II. of blessed Memory added a new and
lasting Honor to this Place, when April 20. 1661. three Days before his
Coronation, he created the Loyal Edward Hide (late Lord Chancellor) Earl of
Clar^ndon, Viscount Cornbury, etc. who dying at Rouen in Normandy in 1674. was
succeeded by Henry his eldest Son, a Person of great Virtue and Goodness.

Clarentia, or Clarenza, a Country in the Morea, described to contain the
ancient Achaia, (properly so called) Sicyonia and Corinth. Heretofore renowned
under particular Dukes of its own. The capital City bears the same Name of
Clarenza.

Claros, a mountainous Island of the Aegean Sea, consecrated in ancient times
to Apollo. Called at present Calamo. The Name of Claros is likewise born by a
Town, now unknown; but mentioned we find amongst the Ancients, as belonging to
the Colophonii in Ionia: Apollo having had an Oracle in it, and his Attribute
thence derived of Clarius Deus.

Claven, Cleven, Clavenna, a small City in the Valtoline, with an Earldom
called by the Germans the Graffschaft von Cleven. This City stands 5 Leagues
from the Lake that bears its Name, to the North, upon the River Maiera; called
by the French, Chiavenne.

Clausenbourg, Claudipolis, called by the Inhabitants Coloswar, is the
principal Town in Transylvania; great* populous, and ennobled with an ancient
Castle. All the Public Affairs of that Principality are transacted, and
Justice administered here. It stands upon the River Samosch, nine German Miles
from A'ba Julia North, and fifteen from Waradin East. The Duke of Lorrain put
into it an Imperial Garrison, Oct. 19. 1687. upon Articles agreed in a
peaceable manner by the Magistrates and Governor for the late Prince Abafti.

Clay, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk and the Hundred of Holt.

Clazomenae, the Birthplace of the Philosopher Anaxagoras; an ancient City of
Ionia in Asia Minor, built in the Year of Rome 98. upon the Aegeun Sea, betwixt
Smyrna and Chio.

Clebu^g Mortimer, a Market Town in Shropshire, in the Hundred of Stottesden.

Clerac, or Clairac, a Town in the County of Agennois, in Guyenne in France; 4
Leagues from Again, and the same Distance from Nerac. It stands upon the River
Lot which a little below falls into the Garonne. And has a famous Abbey in it.

Clermont en Argene, a Town in the Dukedom of Bar, upon the River Air, four
Leagues from Verdun West, and seven from Barleduc North-East. This belongs to
the Duke of Lorrain, but in 1654. was taken from him, and annexed to the Crown
of France. It is honored with the Title of an Earldom.

Clermont en Auvergne, Arvernae, Claromons, Claromontium; the principal City of
the Province of Auvergne, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bourges.
It stands upon a declining ground in a Territory called Limaigne, which is very
fruitful, upon the River Tiretaine; twenty Leagues South of Moulins, and twenty
five East of Limoges. Here was a General Council celebrated in 1095. under Pope
Urban II. in which the Croisade for the recovery of the Holy Land was
concluded, and Godfrey of Bouillon declared General of the same. Also Philip I.
King of France was excommunicated, until his repentance, for Adultery. This is
thought to have arisen out of the Ruins of Gergovia, an old Roman Town. It is
honored with the Title of an Earldom belonging to the Crown ever since the
Union of Auvergne with the Crown.

Clermont on Beauvais, a Town in the Isle of France, five Leagues South of
Beauvais* in the North-East Border of that County. The Earldom of this place is
famous for giving a beginning to the Royal House of Bourbon, in the Person of
Robert of France, Earl of Clormont en Beavais, the Son of St. Lewis.

Clermont de Lodeve. a Town in Languedoc upon the River Lorgue, four and twenty
Leagues from Avignon West. So distinguished, because standing in the Diocese of
Lodeve. It gives Name to an Honorable Family, and is beautified with a
Collegiate Church, a Cattle, and some Monasteries. There are other Clermonts in
this Kingdom: One in Danphine in the Territory of Viennois, giving the Title of
an Earldom, and its Name to an Honorable Family. Another in the Province of
Ansou, from which there is also a House of Quality denominated.

Cleri, Clariacum, a small Town near Orleans upon the Borders of the Province
of Sologne in France; where Lewis XI. lies interred in a Church dedicated to
the Virgin, of his own establishment; pretending to Miracles.

Cleveland, a Tract in the North Riding of Yorkshire of good extent, taking its
Name (says Mr. Cambden) from the Cliffs running along the side of it, at whose
feet the Country spreads it self into a fine fruitful Plain. King Charles I.
did this place the honor to make it give the Title of an Earl to Thomas Lord
We^^^^orth: who dying without issue, King Charles II. created Barbara Villiers
Daughter to the Lord Viscount Grandison (who was slain in the Civil Wars) and
Wife to the present Earl of Castlemain, Duchess of Cleveland.

Cleves, Clivia, Castra Vlpia, Calonis, a City and Dukedom in Germany; called
by the Inhabitants Cleef; by the French, Cleves; and seated upon a small River
about three Miles from the Rhine. Heretofore much greater, as appears by the
Ruins about it; and thought to have been built by Caesar. The last Duke dying
in 1609. a War happened, in which the Duke of Brandenburg seized one part of
this Dukedom, and the Duke of Newburgh another: the Hollanders in the mean time
by Mauritius their General in 1628. seized the City of Cleves. But in 1672. the
French having taken this and all the other Towns possessed by the Hollanders,
and in 1673. being no longer able to keep them, he put them into the hands of
the Duke of Brandenburgh. The Dukedom of Cleves is bounded on the North and
West with the Dukedom of Guelderland; on the East by the Bishopric of Munster,
and the Earldom of Marck; on the South with the Dukedom of Berghe, and the
Bishopric of Cologne. The Rhine divides it into two equal parts.

Clichy, Clipiacum, a small Village near Paris, which the former Kings of
France delighted in as a place of Pleasure. King John instituted the Order of
the Knights of the Star in it. Dagobert I. was here married to Commentrude or
Gomatrude his first Wife, from whom he was afterward divorced, because she
proved barren. A Synod was also held here in 659.

Cliff Kings, a Market Town in Northamptonshire in the Hundred of Willibrook.

Climeno, a Port in the Island of Sancta Maura, on the Coast of Epirus, thirty
English Miles North of Samo. Here the Venetian Fleet rendezvoused in the year
1687. See Mr. Wheeler, page 36.

Clin, an important Fortress in Dalmatia not far from Scardona; surrendered to
the Venetian Forces, commanded by General Cornaro, Sep. 12. 1688. after a
fortnights Siege; whereupon 150 Christian Slaves received their Liberty.

Clissa, a Fortress in Dalmatia, taken by the Venetians in 1648.

Clitheroe, A Market Town in Lancashire in the Hundred of Blackburn, which
returns two Members of Parliament.

Clitumno, Clitumnus, is a small River in the State of the Church in Italy; it
arises in a place called Le Vene, from three Springs beneath the Village
Campello, two Miles from Trevi; and running Westward, waters Fuligne; then
falls into the Topino, which enters the Tiber five Miles beneath Perugia.

Clogher, Cloceria, a small City and Bishopric under the Archbishop of Armagh
in the County of Tyrone, in the Province of Vlster, upon the River Black
Water: fifteen Miles East of the Lake of Earne, and twenty five West of Armagh.

Cloucy, Clona, an old ruined City in the County of Cork in the Province of
Munster, fifteen Miles from Lismore South, and twenty five from Cork
South-East. Heretofore a Bishopric under the Archbishop of T^am, but now a
Village.

Clonefert, Clonefertia, a small ruined Irish City in the County of Gallway, in
the Province of Connaught, upon the Shannon; fifteen Miles from Gallway East,
and twelve from Athlone South. This was a Bishopric under the same Archbishop
with the former.

Clonmel, the Assize-Town for the County Palatine of Tipperary in the Province
of Munster in Ireland, upon the River Shower; considerably strong, handsome,
and rich.

Cluid or Clyd, Glota, Cluda, is one of the principal Rivers in Scotland; it
rises in Craufurdmuir, not far from the head of Twede; and running North-West
by Lanrick, passes by Glasquo; fifteen Miles beneath which, it falls into
Dunbrittainfyrth: it gives Name to Cluisdale, Cluesdalia, Glottiana, or the
Valley of Cluid. Cluid, a River in Denbighshire, which passes on the West of
Ruthin and S. Asaph, through the delightful, fruitful and healthful Valley of
Cluid, to the Irish Sea; which it enters five Miles beneath S. Asaph,
carrying with it the Streams of ten other small Rivers.

Cluny, Cluniacum, a famous Abbey of the Benedictines in the Territory of
Masconnois within the Dukedom of Burgundy, founded in the year 910. It gives
Name to a small Town upon the Grosne, four Leagues from Mascon. The Popes,
Gregory VII. Urban II. and Paschal II. with a great number of Cardinals and
Bishops have been given to the Roman Church by this Abbey; which is so very
large a Foundation, that we find it lodged at once, S. Lewis King of France,
Baldwin Emperor of Constantinople, Pope Innocent IV. the two Patriarchs of
Antioch and Constantinople, twelve Cardinals, three Archbishops, and abundance
of Secular and Ecclesiastical Nobility of their Relations and Attendants,
without obliging the Religious to quit any of their ordinary Apartments, in the
year 1245 after the Celebration of the first General Council of Lions.

Clusium, or Chiusi, a City in the Dukedom of Florence in Italy, with a Bishops
See under the Archbishop of Sienna, upon the Borders of the Ecclesiastical
States. It stands in a Valley called Chiana near a Lake of the same Name, and
heretofore was the Capital of Hetruria under King Porsenna; called likewise
Camers, says Livy. This is a different place from Chiusi novo in the same
Dukedom, which stands toward the Sources of the Tiber.

Cnidus, see Gnido.

Coa, Cuda, a River of Portugal which rises East of Guarda, and falls into the
Douro at Almendra, a Village about ten Spanish Miles East of Lamego.

Coanza, a River in the South part of the Kingdom of Congo in Africa; springing
from the Lake of Zaire, and thence running to throw it self into the Aethiopick
Ocean near the Isle of Loanda.

Coblentz, Cobolentz, Confluentes, a strong and populous City, seated where the
Moselle and the Rhine meet, twelve Miles North-East of Trier, and ten from
Cologne to the South. Heretofore an Imperial Free Town, but in 1312. by Henry
VII. exempt, and now subject to the Elector of Tri^r^* A^^u^phus one of these
Electors in 1250. first walled it. Gaspar a Petra, another of later times, much
improved its Fortifications by drawing a Line from one River to the other, with
Fortifications after the most regular Modern way. The situation hereof is very
pleasant, having a Stone Bridge over the Moselle, and another of Boats over the
Rhine; and on the opposite Shore of the Rhine, a very Noble Palace of the
Electors; two large Wings of which, and the Front, with five Pavilions, stand
toward the River. In the German Wars, the Spaniards put a Garrison into this
Town, which was beaten out by the S^edes: and when the French had in later
times wheedled the Elector out of his strong Castle, the Emperor's Forces
seized upon the Elector ( Philippus Christoph^rus) and carried him away to
Vienna. In ^60. ^^nder Charles the Bald, here was a Council, or Diet held ^ and
in 922. another under Henry II. The Marquis de Bous^^er^ came before it in
November 1688. with seven or eight thousand French; but retired with the
satisfaction only of having shot into it ^^ great ^^ any Bombs.

Coblentz, a Village in Switzerland upon the Rhine, where the Arola [ A^r]
fall^ into it, in the Borders of Schu^^^^n, seven Miles from Basll to the West.

Cobourg, Melocatus, a small Town in Fra^co^^a upon the River Itsch, in the
County of Henneberg, and in the Borders of Thi^^ingen, under the Dukes of
Saxony; which has also a fine Castle. It stands 8 Miles from Smaleald to the
South-East, and 5 from Bamberg to the North.

Cocas, Cochias, Caucasus, a Mountain in Asia.

Cocco, Laus, a River of Calabria.

Cochin, Cochinum, a City of the East Indies, near the Promontory of Malabar;
called by the Portuguese Cochim, by the Italians Cochino; the Capital of a
Kingdom of that Name, and a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Goa. It has a
large Haven and Fort called S. James's Fort, built by the Portuguese in 1503.
The Country is very well watered and fruitful; anciently called Colchi as some
think; but however the Portuguese were Masters of it ever since they built that
Fort, till 1663; when the Hollunders took it from them. The Kings of this City
have always born a great Kindness for the Portuguese: And when at first the
King of Calecut would have destroyed them, he took part with them against him,
and protected them; and when the Hollanders had beaten them out, the present
King refused to be Crowned in the usual Place, till the Portuguese were
restored to it. This City stands 36 Leagues from Calecut to the South, and is
watered by a fine River. The Country about it yields much Pepper. Those they
call the Christians of S. Thomas have the Liberty of their Religion here; using
an Office of the Chaldean Language. Long. 105. 00. Lat. 10 00. There is another
Town of the same Name in the Island of Lemnia, but now ruined.

Cochin-China, called by the Inhabitants Cachucyna, and by the Portuguese
Cauchin-China, or Couchin-China, is the most Easterly Kingdom in the
East Indies, on the Continent; bounded on the North by the Kingdom of Tungking,
on the West by a People called Kemis and its own Deserts, on the South by
Tsiompa or Ciampa, and on the East it has a vast Bay of the Ocean, called after
its own Name, the Gulf or Bay of Cochin-China, opposite to the Isle of Hainan.
Alexander de Rhodes, a French ^esuit, has lately given a large Account of this
Country, which is subject to a King of its own; and stands divided into si^
Provinces, each under a subordinate Governor.

Cockermouth, a Market Town in the County of Cumberland, situated upon the
River Cocker, near its fall into the Derwent; by which two Rivers it is almost
surrounded. About 8 Miles from the Sea, with a Castle upon one of the Hills
adjoining to it.

Cocytus, the ancient Name of two Rivers; the one in the Kingdom of Epirus, the
other near the Lake of Averno in Italy. The Poets call one of their four
fictitious Rivers of Hell by this Name.

Coclosyria, the Region betwixt the Mountains Libanus and Antilibanus in Asia,
in which the River Orontes springs.

Coesfield, a small but strong City of Westphalia, upon the River Berkel; about
5 German Miles from Munster to the North. The Bishop of Munster does often
relide in this Place.

Coetquen, or Coesquen, a Town and Castle in Brittany, near Dinan^, which gives
name to a Family of Honor. Henry III. advanced it to the Dignity of a
Marqinsate in 1575.

Coeworden, Coevorden, Baduhennae Luc^s, Covordia, is a very strong and
fortified Town in the Prov^^^e of Overyssel in the Low Countries* the principal
Town of Dren^e, standing in the Marshes near the Borders of the Bishopric of
Munster, who has formerly possessed it; but it is now in the Hands of the
Du^oh; it lies about a Mile from the River Ve^^t, ( Vidru^,) and two from
Hardenberg to the South-East. It was often taken and retaken in the Civil Wars
of the Low Countries.

Coggeshal, a Market Town in Essex in the Hundred of Lexden.

Cognac, Con^cuin, Campiniac^m; a Town in the Dukedom of Angoumo^s in France,
upon the River Chara^te, betwixt Jarna^ and X^^ntes. It stands in a fine
fruitful Soil, for Wine especially. Francis I. King of France, being born here,
built it a Fortress. In the Year 1238. there was a Council held at it. In the
Civil Wars of France it was taken and retaken: Nevertheless accounted a place
of Strength.

Cogni, Iconium, a City of Cappadocia, in the Lesser Asia. which is now great
and well peopled; the Sea of an Archbishop, under the Patriarch of
Constantinople; the Capital of Carmania, and the Seat of a Turkish Bassa. Still
made more famous in 1658. by a Victory obtained against a Bassa Rebel. It lies
over against the Western Cape of Cyprus, about 30 German Miles from the shoars
of the Mediterranean Sea. In the Year 256. a famous Council of the Bishops of
Cappadocia, Galatia, Cilicia, and the neighboring Provinces was held here,
declaring the Baptism of Heretics null; an Opinion which occasioned great and
long Dissentions afterward amongst Christians.

Cogoreto, a small Town upon the Coast of Genoua, where Christopher Columbo the
Discoverer of the New World was born. It lies 10 Miles East of Savona, and is
under the Republic of Genoua.

Cohan, Albanus, a River of Albania.

Coimbra, Commbrica, a City of Portugal, mentioned by Antoninus, but now
destroyed. There is another called by that Name in the Province of Beira, which
sprung out of the Ruins of the former. It is built upon a Rock, and therefore
sometimes called Aeminium; upon the River Munda (now Mendego;) 32 Leagues from
Lisbon to the North, and is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Braga. In
1550. John III. King of Portugal removed hither the University, which had been
settled before at Lisbon. Seven Kings of Portugal were born and three died
here. It has the Honor also to bear the Title of a Dukedom.

Coire, Chur, Choira, the capital City of the Country of the Grisons, upon the
River Plessur, a little below the Rhine; between Chiavenne, Glaris, and
Appenzel. The Grisons ordinarily hold their Diets at it. Though the inhabitants
profess the Opinions of Zuinglius; yet they allow a Toleration to a few Roman
Catholics under a Bishop residing at Marsoila, but taking his Title from
hence; who is a Suffragan to the Archbishop of Mentz, and has the Honor to be a
Prince of the Empire.

Coisnon, Coetus, a River of France.

Colachz, Araxes, a River of Armenia.

Colalto, a Town and Castle in the Marcha Trevisana in Italy, dignified with
the Title of an Earldom.

Colan. See Coulan.

Colberg, a Town or small City in the Dukedom of Pomerania, upon the shoars of
the Baltic Sea, having a strong Castle at the Mouth of the River Persant; six
German Miles from Coslin to the West, and three from Treptow to the East. This
Town was taken from the Swedes in 1641. by the Duke of Brandenburg after a
tedious Siege; and confirmed to him since by the Treaty of Westphalia. The
making of Salt here has rendered it considerable. Long. 38. 12. Lat. 54. 20.

Colchester, Colonia, Colcestria, a considerable Town or City in Essex,
mentioned by Antoninus by the Name of Colonia: Seated on the Ascent of a steep
Hill, upon the Southern Bank of the River Colne, from whence it takes its Name.
It has had fifteen Churches within the Wall, and one without, which Eudo Sewer
to Henry I. built in 1105. There is also a Castle built by Edward Son of
Alfred. The Inhabitants pretend that Helen the Mother of Constantine the Great
was born and brought up here; and that she was the Daughter of an imaginary
King Coel, who lent his Name to their Town. Being fallen into great Poverty and
Decay in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, She settled the Bays-Trade here, which
has infinitely enriched and peopled it. It was first seized by the Royal Party,
June 13. 1648. then besieged by the Parliaments Forces till Aug. 28. following,
and forced to surrender by Famine; when, not contented to sine the Inhabitants
14000. l. (to which the Factious contributed nothing;) they shot Sir Charles
Lucas, and Sir George Lisle to death under the Castle, who were the Chief
Commanders. Many of the Churches also were ruined in the Siege, which now stand
as sad Monuments of Fanatic Fury, and Rebellious Rage. The Right Honorable
Thomas Savage, Earl of Rivers, is Vicount of Colchester. There is another Town
called Colchester in Northumberland.

Coldingham, Coldana, a small Town in Merch or Mers in Scotland, in the
South-East Part of that Nation; famous for the Chastity of its Nuns, in the
times of the Danish Wars, mentioned by Bid; if the same with Cold-stream. And
no less famous for the Encampment of the late Duke of Albemarle there, when
with the Forces of Scotland, he marched for the Redemption of England from
Anarchy and Slavery.

Colebrook, a Market Town in Buckinghamshire in the Hundred of Stock upon the
River Coln.

Coleshill, a Market Town in Warwickshire in the Hundred of Hemlingford upon
the River Cole. The Lord Digby has a Seat near this place.

Colford, a Market Town in Glocestershire in the Hundred of Briavells.

Coligni, a Town in the Franche Comte, adorned with the Title of an Earldom,
and giving name to a Family of Honor there. It is epitheted Coligni the Old,
to distinguish it from Coligni the New, in the Province of Bresse. Some believe
it was one of the Colonies that the Romans established amongst the ancient
Gauls.

Colla^, a rich and trafficking Town of the Kingdom of Peru in the South
America, two Leagues from Lima, to which it serves as a Port properly, wherein
a large Fleet rides in safety.

Colli, a small City in the Dukedom of Florence in Italy, with a Bishop's See
under the Archbishop of Florence. So called from its Situation upon a little
Hill about fifteen Miles from Sienna.

Collo, Ampsaga, Alcol, a great River in Mauritania, (now the Kingdom of
Algier,) the Mouth of which is at Culhu in Africa.

Collorede, a Gastle in the Province of Friuli in Italy, giving its Name to an
honorable Family.

Colmar, Colmaria, a City of Alsatia Superior, which is the Capital of that
Country: It sprung out of the Ruins of an old Roman Town called Colonia
Argentuaria; and stands upon the Rivers Lauch, Durus, Fetched, and Illa, two
German Miles from Brisach to the West. Once an Imperial Free City, fine and
strong; but now in the Hands of the French, who in 1673. dismantled it: It is
situate in a fruitful Plain.

Colmars, Colmartium, a strong Town in Provence, upon the River Verdon, eight
Leagues from Digne to the East, and as many from Sens to the North-East. This
Town suffered very much by Fire in 1672.

Colme, a River of Flanders, which runs by St. Vinox.

Colne, a Market Town in Lancashire in the Hundred of Blackburn; upon a little
Hill. Also a River of Buckinghamshire, which severs part of that County from
Middlesex.

Colochina, a Sea-Port-Town on the South of the Morea; about ten Italian Miles
South of Misiera, or Sparta: which gives Name to the Eastern Bay, next Cape
Matapan.

Colocza, Colocia, ad Statuas Colossas, a City and Archbishopric in the
Kingdom of Hungary, upon the Danube, about ten Miles from Buda, eighteen from
Segedin. This Town has been in a ruinous condition; but being recovered by the
Emperor from the Turks in 1686. it is hoped it may in time return into its
ancient Prosperity.

Cologne, Colonia Agrippina, Colonia Vbiorum, called by the Inhabitants Coln,
is an Archbishop's See in the Empire of Germany, whose Bishop is an Elector;
yet the City an Hanse Town, and one of the biggest in Germany, sixteen Miles
South of Maestricht. The Name of Agrippina comes from the Mother of Nero, who
being born here sent a Colony to it, as a Testimony of her Greatness. It is not
only a great and strong, but a rich and populous City, and lies in the Form of
an Half Moon, upon the Rhine. Therefore sometimes entitled the Rome of
Germany. They reckon 365 Churches, great and small, in it; amongst which you
see the Tombs of the three pretended Kings that vifited our Savior in his
Cradle by the Guidance of a Star: Commonly called the three Kings of Cologne,
because of these their Relics brought hither from Miban and to Milan from
Constantinople, as they tell you. The famous S. Brunb, the Carthusian, was born
here. Diverse small Councils have been assembed at it. Pope Urban VI. in 1388.
erected here an University. It was under the French from the Expulsion of the
Romans, to the Reign of Otho I. since when it has been under its Archbishops*
Of very ancient times it was a great Favourer of the Reformation. And in the
last Age two of its Archbishops embraced that Church. The Learned Dr. Edward
Brown has given it a noble Description in his Travels, page 113. and to him I
must refer the Reader. Of the Election of the Cardinal of Furstemburgh to this
See, vide Bonne. Long. 28. 31. Lat. 50. 55.

Colomey, Coloma, a City of the Black Russia, in the Province of Pokutiae, upon
the River Prat, toward the Confines of Moldavia, nine Leagues from Halitz to
the South. Having suffered very much from the Rebellious Cossacks, it is now
become a Village remarkable for nothing but its making Salt.

Colomiers, or Columiers, Colomeria, a small Town in the Province of Brie in
France, upon the River Morine, five or six Leagues from Mea^x.

Colophon, an ancient City of Ionia in Asia the Less; now called Altobosco, and
Belvedore; which has sometime been a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of
Edessa. It pretends with others to the Honor of giving Birth to Homer. And in
the Days of Antiquity was particularly renowned for excellent Cavalry.

Colossis, or Colosse, an ancient City of Phrygia in Asia the Less, upon the
Confines of Caria and the River Licho. Now called Chonos by the Greeks. It has
been an Episcopal, and afterward an Archiepiscopal See. Made universally known
by S. Paul's Epistle to the Primitive Christians that were here.

Coloswar. See Clansenburgh.

Columb Magna, a Market Town in Cornwall, in the Hundred of Pider.

Columbo, a City in the Isle of Ceylan, in the East Indies, built by the
Portuguese, on the West Side of that Island; but taken from them some years
since by the Hollanders.

Columpton, a Market Town in Devonshire in the Hundred of Hayrudge.

Coluri, an Island in the Gulf of Engia, called formerly Salamine or Salamis;
which pretends to the Honor of being the Birthplace of Homer; and is famous
in ancient History for the Defeat of Xerxes's vast Fleet.

Colzim, a Mountain of the Desert of Gebel in the Kingdom of Egypt, a days
Journey from the Red Sea. There is a Monastery of Religions standing upon it,
called S. Anthony's.

Com. See ^om.

Coma, Como, Comum, and Novo Comum, a City in the Du^ohy of Milan, upon a Lake
of the same Name, (a hundred Miles in Circuit, in Latin called Lar^^s Lacus)
seventeen Miles North of Milan. It is a rich, large, and handsome City; and gave
Birth to the ancient Poet Caecil^^s mentioned in Ca^ullus, to the younger
Pliny, to the Historian Paulus Jovius, and to the late Pope Innocent XI* who
was chosen Pope Sept. 21. 1676. and died Aug. 12. 1689. in his seventy eighth
year.

Comachio, Comacula, a City of Romandiola, a Province of Italy, in the Dukedom
of Fer^ard, which is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Ravenna* and under
the Dominion of the Pope. It is little, and not well inhabited, by Reason of
the badness of the Air; being seated in a Marsh amidst the Lakes that are made
by the Po, three or four Miles from the Adriatic: giving Name to the Valley of
Coma^chio. It lies twenty Miles from Ravenna to the North, and forty from
Bologna to the East; and belongs to the Sea of Rome. The Venetians in 932.
almost ruined it.

Comagena, the ancient Name of a Country in Syria; which, as we find in
Josephus, was a Kingdom in the Time of Mar^ Anthony, who overcame (he says)
Antiochus King of Comagena. Afterward made by the Romans a Province: Its chief
City being Samosata; a place famous for giving Birth to Lucian, and Paulus
Sam^sa^e^^^^ the Patriarch of An^ioch.

Comana, an ancient City of the Kingdom of Pontus in Asia the Less, upon the
River Iris, having been a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Neocaesarea. And
famous in the Times preceding Christianity, for a Temple dedicated to Bellona.
Another of Cappadocia upon the River Sarus, with a Bishop's See under the
Archbishop of Melitene.

Comania, a Country of Asia betwixt Georgia to the North, and the Tannais to
the South; for the most part under the Turks and Moscovites. It enjoys a
fertile Soil* but ill cultivated; the People choosing rather to live by Robbery
than their honest Industry*

Comb-Martin, a Market Town in Devonshire, in the Hundred of Branton.

Comenolitari, Thessalia, a part of Maoedonia.

Comine, Cuminum, a small Island in the Sicilian Sea, belonging to the Order of
the Knights of Malta, who have built a Castle in it. It lies betwixt Maltha and
Gozo.

Cominges. See S. Ber^^ and de Cominges.

Commetcy, Commeroium, a small City in the Dukedom de Barrois, in Champaigne,
six Leagues from Clermon^ to the South. It is seated on the West Side of the
Moselle or Meuse.

Comm^ites, a Town and Castle in Flanders; upon the River Lis, near Messines,
giving Name to an Honorable Family.

Como. See Coma.

Compiegne, Compendium, a City in the Isle of France, of good Esteem; in the
County of Senlis, upon the River Oise, which a little lower falls into the
Aisne; seventeen Leagues from Paris to the North, and five from Soissons to the
West. In the year 833. King Lewis the Debonnaire, by the Conspiracy of his
three Sons and the Sentence of a Council of Bishops here, was deposed*
Clotharius the ^^^st King of France, and Lewis the Bald Emperor and King of
France, died both here: the latter in 879. who built here also a Monastery, and
adorned the City with so many magificer* Edi^^ces, that it was for some time
called Carolopolis, or Charles ^^wn, from him.

Complutum. See Aleala. The Biblia Complutensia have that Name after the old
one of this.

Compostella, Brigantium, Janasum, Compostella, the Capital City of Galaecia in
Spain, upon the River Sar or Sardela; which in 1124. was by Pope Calixtus II.
made an Archbishops See, instead of Merida, then in the Hands of the Moors. The
Bones of S. James the Apostle are said to rest here in a celebrated Church,
thence called S. Jago di Compostella; the Steeple of which was built by Lewis
XI. King of France, in 1483. But Alphonsus the Chaste, King of Gallaecia, had
erected the Body long before upon an Hill in 835. out of the Ruins of Ira
Flavia, an old Roman Town. There is a small Castle and an University here:
Alphonsus I. King of Castile was also here born: it stands thirteen Leagues
from Cape Finisterre, the most Western Promontory of this part of Spain. Long.
^1. 00. Lat. 43. 00. by the Maps 8. 19. 43. 00.

Compostella Nueba, is a City of America in New-Spain, in the Province of
Xalisco, not far from the South Sea, an hundred Miles from Guadalaxara to the
West. It was for some time a Bishops See; but being in a bad Air and barren
Soil, the Sea was translated thence to Guadalaxara in 1570. They formerly
called it Villa de Spiritu Santo.

Cona, Conos, see Colosse: a City of Phrygia, much celebrated of old; now
ruined by the Turks.

Conca, Crustuminum, a small River of Vmbria in Italy, which rises in the
Dukedom of Vrbino from the Appenine near Leopoli, and falls into the Venetian
Gulf, six Miles South-East of Rimino. There was heretofore a City of the same
Name; now eaten up by the Sea.

Concarneau, Concarneum, a strong Town and Port in Britany in France, four
Leagues from Quimperley to the East, says Baudrand.

La Conception, a small City in America, in Paraguaia, at the fall of the River
Vrvaig into Rio de la Plata: with another of the same Name in Chili, which is
the most considerable place there, and the ordinary Residence of the Governor
of the Province: walled and secured with a strong Citadel, upon the Pacifick
Ocean, over against the Island of S. Vincent. The Spaniards have given this
Name to a Town by them built in the Province of Mechoacan in the Kingdom of
Mexico, which secures the Road of Mechoacan to the Silver Mines of Zacateca;
besides to diverse others in Califernia, Hispaniola, etc.

Conches, a small Town in Normandy, three or four Leagues from Eureux, in a
Territory called Ouche. There is an Abbey standing in it.

Concord, a Country in the Terra Australis, beyond the Indian Ocean, called
t'landt van Eendracht by the Hollanders, who discovered it in 1618. as they
were searching a passage to go to the Moluccae's. luca's.

Concordia, a ruined City of the Province of Friuli in Italy, the Bishop
whereof resides at Porto di Gruaro, and is a Suffragan to the Archbishop of
Aquileia. They write, it became abandoned in Attila's time.

Condapoli, a City in the Kingdom of Golconde in the Hither East Indies, with a
strong Fort upon a Mountain, betwixt the Cities Golconda and Candavera.

Conde, Condate, an ancient Roman Town in Hainault, upon the River Haisne,
where it enters the River Escault, two German Miles North of Valenciennes.
This, though a strong Town, was taken by the French in 1655. and lost in 1656.
But Lewis XIV. retaking it in 1676. is still possessed of it. The Title of it
has been, and is still, born by many of the Princes of the Blood Royal of
France: there is a small Village of the Name also, seated about a Mile West
from this fortified Town.

Conde sur Nereau, Condaeum ad Norallum, a Town in the Territory of Veuxin in
Normandy upon the River Nereau, which soon after falls into the Orne, betwixt
Vire, Falaise and Argentan.

Condom, Condomum, a small City, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Bourdeaux. It stands upon the small River Baise two Leagues from Nerac, four
from the Guaronne, and six from Aux; in the Province of Guyenne: the Capital of
the Territory of Condomois, and first made a Bishops See by Pope John XXII. in
1327. It was taken and much abused by the Huguenots in 1569. This is the
Condomium Visconum of the Ancients. The late Bishop of Condom, now of Meaux,
has made this City as remarkable and as much spoken of, by his Writings, as the
greatest Town in Europe.

Condore, Condora, a Province in Russia, toward Tartaria deserta, in the
North-East part of that Kingdom; bordering North upon the White Sea, East upon
Obdora and Sibiria, South upon Permia, and West upon the Province of
Archangel: extremely cold, and but thinly inhabited, without Town or City of
Note in it. The best and chiefest is called Wergaturia.

Condrieu, Condriacum, a pleasant Town at the foot of an Hill in Lionnois in
France, upon the Western Shore of the Rhosne; two Leagues from Vienne to the
South, and seven from Lion to the same Quarter; famous for excellent Wines.
Baudrand observes, that some write this Name Coindrieu, though improperly.

Congleton, a Market Town in Cheshire in the Hundred of Northwich upon the
River Dane.

Conflent, a part of the County of Rousillon, near the Pyrenean Hills and
Cretania; the chief Town of which is Villa Franca. Once a part of the Kingdom
of Spain, but now under the Crown of France.

Congedo, Cogedus, a River of the Kingdom of Arragon, which falls into the
Xalon near Baubula.

Congo, Congum, a Kingdom on the Western Shore of Africa in the Lower
Aethiopia; which by the Portuguese is comprehended in the Lower Guinea, and was
once very great; containing Congo, Angola, Metamba, Cunda, Lulla, Anunda, and
the Kingdom of Loangh in trust; which Countries are yet in some Maps ascribed
to Congo, though it is above one hundred and fifty years since they revolted
from it. Congo properly so called, is a small, but fruitful, well cultivated
spot of Ground: on the West it has the Atlantic Ocean, on the South the
Kingdom of Angola and Bengala; on the North the Kingdom of Loangh, and on the
East the Kingdoms of Cangela and Metamba: watered with the Rivers Zaire,
Coanza, and Lelunde. The principal City is S. Salvador, where the King resides.
He and the greatest part of his Subjects are Christians, under one Bishop. They
have suffered very much from the Portuguese, and by Wars; as Bandrand acquaints
us from Jacinthi a Vetralla, a Capuchin, who lived many years amongst them.

Coningsberg, Regi^mons, called by the Poles Krolowice, is a great City, the
Capital of Prusia Ducalis, and a Hanse Town, at the Mouth of the River Pregel,
twenty Miles East of Elbing. It has a Castle and a fine Haven, and came into
the hands of the Duke of Brandenburg in 1525. having before that time belonged
to the Teutonick Order, who built it in 1260. Here was also an University
opened in 1544. by Albert Duke of Prusia.

Coni, Cuneum, a City in Piedmont, called by the Inhabitants Cuno. It is seated
at the conjunction of the Rivers Stura and Grez, thirty six Miles from the Port
of Vintimilia upon the Mediterranean Sea Northward, and the same distance from
Turino to the South, built in 1150: And in 1641. taken by the French, under the
Duke de Hartcourt. But since in the Possession of the Duke of Savoy. The French
have besieged it in the present War under Monsieur Cattinat, but were forced to
rise again, and leave it in the possession of its Duke.

Connaught, Connacia, is one of the four great Provinces of Ireland; bounded on
the North by Vlster, on the East by Leinster, on the South by Mounster, and on
the West by the great Western Ocean. It contains seven Counties, Slego, Mayo,
Roscommon, Letrim, Longford, Gallway and Clare, or Tomound. Ptolomy calls its
ancient Inhabitants, Gangani and Concani. Strabo, Coniaci and Conisci. When the
Parliamentarians had fully subdued the Irish about 1655. they took up a
resolution to transport all the Heritors of the Romish Religion into this
Province; which is separated from the rest of Ireland by the River Shannon, and
the Mountain of Curlewe; reserving to the English the Forts, Cities, and
fortified Towns, the Passes, and the Sea Shoars for Garrisons; to secure them
from any further Attempts of that Nation; a Design which had been proposed
before by Spencer, and thought easy; but it proved otherwise. Elench. Motuum,
Part 2.

Connor, Coneria, a small City in the Province of Vlster, in the County of
Down, upon the Lake Cone, toward the North-West Corner of the said Lake: the
Bishopric is united to that of Down, under the Archbishop of Armagh; sometime
ago possessed by the Eloquent Dr. Jeremiah Tailor, who died Bishop of this
Diocese.

Conquet, Conquestus, a fine Port in Britany in France, fourteen Leagues South
of Breast. The Town though small, is neat, rich, and well built: taken by the
English in 1416.

Conserans, Consorans, a Territory in the Upper Gascogny, on the Borders of
Languedoc, which bounds it to the East, as Cominges and de Foix does to the
West; having Catalonia on the South, which is divided from it by the Pyrenean
Hills; and on the North, the Bishopric of Pamiers. Its greatest extent is from
North to South along the River Salatum. Conserans, or S. Lizier de Conserans,
Civitas Consorannorum, and fanum Sancti Licerii, the principal City lies upon
the said River, about twelve Miles from Toulouse to the South. This City
(though small) is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Aux, called by late
Writers S. Lizier; but the People maintain the old Name of Conserans.

Constance, Constantia, Constantz, Constanza, is a famous City of Germany, upon
the Boden Sea, or Lake of Constance, where the Rhine falls out of that Lake,
seventeen Miles from Vlm to the South-West. A free Imperial City, though under
the Protection of the House of Austria. It has its Name from Constantius
Clorus, the Father of Constantine the Great, and is a strong and populous City.
There was a Council held here in 1094. But that which has made it so very well
known, and often spoken of, is the great Council in 1414. procured by Sigismund
the Emperor, which deposed three Popes at once, and elected a fourth, Pope
Martin V. who owned the Papacy to be subject to a Council. In the fifteenth
Session of this Council, the Errors of Wickliff were severally recited and
condemned. Also Sentence of Fire passed upon John Huss, non obstante his Grant
of Safe Conduct from the Emperor, which said Sentence was executed July 6.
1415. In the 21 Session they passed the like upon his Disciple, Jerome of
Prague; and that also was accordingly executed May 30. 1416. The House of
Austria got a footing in this City in 1558. and when the Swedes in 1634.
attempted to drive them out by force of Arms, they miscarried. It is a Bishops
See under the Archbishop of Mentz. The Bishop is a Prince of the Empire. Long.
31. 30. Lat. 47. 30.

Constances, a City of Normandy. See Coutance.

Constantia Tomi, a City of Mysia Inferior, now Bulgaria, which lies upon the
Sea.

Constantine, the Capital City of the Province of Constantine in the Kingdom of
Algier, rich and well built, standing in a Soil that is exceeding fruitful of
Corn. Some remains of the Works of the old Romans are yet extant here.

Constantinople, Constantinopolis, Byzantium, a City of Thrace, now called by
the Turks Stamboul, by the Georgians Isthambouls, is the Capital of Romania (or
Thrace)* and of the Turkish Empire. Of old called Byzantium; built by Pausanias
King of Sparta 3469. Tho in truth, he was rather the Repairer of it, than the
Founder. Besieged by Philip the Macedonian; but relieved by the Persians and
Athenians in 3610. Severus the Emperor having ruined it in 197, Constantine
the Great rebuilt it about 331. and called it by its own Name; making it the
Eastern Seat of the Empire, the Key or Bridge of Europe and Asia; and giving it
the same Honors with Rome it self; upon which it grew quickly to an equality
for Extent, Wealth, and People, with Rome. It continued the Seat of the Greek
Empire to 1453. when being subdued by Mahomet II. in the Reign of the last
Grecian Emperor, Constantine XV. the Son of another Helena (he bravely dying
in the defense thereof), the Turks left Hadrianople, to settle here, and built
the Dardanels for its Defense, on the Hellespont. Vid. Dardanelles. This City
is of a Triangular form, walled with Brick and Stone, intermixed orderly; about
nineteen Miles in Circumference; full of lofty Cypress Trees, so intermixed
with the Buildings, that they contribute much to its Beauty, if seen from the
Sea, or adjoining Mountains. Heretofore it abounded with the noblest Buildings
in the World; but since it came into the hands of the Turks, all the private
ones are sunk beneath their ancient Splendour; whilst the Public retain
something of it, after the violence this Pile has suffered from Fire, Time, War
and Tyrants. The Haven is (says Mr. Sandys) the fairest, safest, and most
profitable throughout the World; so conveniently deep, that the greatest Ships
may lay their sides to the sides thereof, for the more easy receipt or
discharge of their Burden; so seated that no wind can blow, which brings not
in some Ships or other to the furnishing of the City. The Bishop is a
Patriarch, and by two General Councils, (the second of Constantinople, and that
of Chalcedon), decreed to be Second in Order, but equal in Power and Honor to
the Bishop of Rome; and acknowledged for such by the three other Patriarchs,
Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem. Many and great Contests, not to be repeated
here, have been agitated, and still continue betwixt the Sea of Rome and this:
and a great number of Councils held by it, as well of general as particular
concern. It lies in Long. 56. 00. Let. 40. 56.

Constantinow, Constantinova, a small Town in Volhinia in Poland, upon the
River Horin, twenty five Polish Miles from Caminieck to the North-East. Near
this place the Poles were beaten by the Revolted Cossacks in 1648. who
possessed themselves of it, and committed great disorders: But in 1651. the
Tide of Fortune turned, and the Poles beat the Cossacks in the same place.

Contessa, a considerable Sea-Port-Town on the Archipelago in Macedonia,
sixty-five English Miles from Thessalonica to the East.

Conty, Contejum, seu Contiacum, a Borough in Picardy in France, upon the River
Alce, which falls in the Sum, four Leagues from Amiens to the North-East, and
five from Baupalme to the South-West. This place is honored with the Title of
a Principality, and worn by a Branch of the House of Conde.

Conversano, Cupersanum, vel Conversanum, a City in Bari, a Province in the
East of the Kingdom of Naples, which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of
Bari; distant fifteen Miles to the South from thence, as it is thirty from
Taranto to the North. This City stands amongst the Mountains, and is of no
great Circuit; but gives the Title of Earl to the Family of the Aquaviva's.

Conway, a Market Town and Castle Royal in the County of Carnarvan in Wales, in
the Hundred of Lechwed Issaph.

Conza, Consa, Compsaconsa, a small City in the Principatus Vlterior, in the
Kingdom of Naples, which is an Archbishops See: it stands at the foot of the
Appennine upon the River Ofanto; very small, twenty six Miles from Salerno
East, and twenty five from Benevento to the South-East. The Archbishop resides
not in it (it consisting not of above two hundred and twenty Souls), but at S.
Menna. This was the Country of the ancient Hirpini.

Coos, Cos, see Lango.

Copa, a Town upon a River so called of Asia, near the Lake Maeotis.

Copeland, the South part of the County of Cumberland, lying betwixt the Rivers
Duddon and Derwent in the Archdeaconry of Richmond and the Diocese of Chester.

Copenhagen, Codania, Hafnia, Haphnia, called by the Inhabitants Klovenhaven,
by the Germans Coppenhagen, by the Hollanders Kopenhaven, is the principal City
of Denmark, the Capital of the Island of Zealand, great and well fortified. It
stands on a Plain, with a new strong Castle, and a large Haven, upon the
North-East Shore of the Island, over against the County of Schonen. This City
was of old called Stagelbourg, and afterward Axelhus; and by the People had
its present Name given it, which signifies the Merchants-Haven: in 1161. here
was an University erected, to which, by Pope Sixtus IV. the same Privileges
were granted with those of the University of Bologna in Italy. In 1535. it
received the Reformed Religion: in 1659. the Swedes besieged it in vain: in
1660. it was made an Archbishops See. It lies four Danish Leagues from Rotshilt
to the East, and four from Elsenore to the South, in Long. 35. 20. Lat. 56. 28.

Cophtites, Coptae, a separate Church of Christians in the Kingdom of Egypt
under a Patriarch of their own; following the Opinions of Eutyches and
Dioscorus to this day, notwithstanding the repeated endeavors of the Roman See
to diswade them from that belief. The Patriarch takes the Title of Patriarch of
Alexandria, and keeps his Residence at a Monastery of S. Macarius about twenty
Leagues from Cairo. The Abyssinians are in part submitted to this Church. They
have many Monasteries in Egypt, and one particularly in the house whither
Joseph and the Virgin with our Savior retired, to fly the Persecution of
Herod. They use the Trine Immersion in Baptism. Yet at Jerusalem, there is an
Apartment in the great Church of S. Sepulcher allotted for their use.

Copranitz or Caproncea, Copranitza, a strong Town in Sclavonia, which is one
of the Bulwarks of the House of Austria against the Turks. It stands two
Leagues from the Drove, four or five from Canisa, and the same distance from
Waradin.

Corasan, Bactria, a Province of the Kingdom of Persia near upon the Caspian
Sea, which is one of the greatest in that vast Kingdom, the most sertile and
best for Trading. This Province has also several of the greatest Cities of
Persia in it; as Mesched or Thus, encompassed with a Wall of three hundred
Towers, at Musket shot distance each from other, famed for the Sepulture of
Iman Risa, one of the twelve Saints of Persia. Also Herat, a famous Mart, the
Pass into the East Indies is in this Province.

Corasmines, a People of Persia descended from the ancient Parthians, who fell
upon Palestine in the twelfth Century (by permission from the Sultan of Egypt)
with Fire and Sword, took Jerusalem, destroyed above six thousand Christians,
and likewise defeated the Army of the three Military Orders of Jerusalem in a
Battle before Gaza (which held two days successively) in the year 1244. Yet
this Race being driven out of Palestine by the Sultan of Egypt again, came to
perish miserably by the hands of the Sarazens.

Corax, two Mountains of this Name are mentioned, the one in Aetolia, the other
in Sarmatia, by the ancient Geographers. There is a Lake so called in the
Province of Mongul in Tartary.

Corbach, Corbachium, a Town in Hessen in Germany, called by the Inhabitants
Cuirbach; six Miles from Cassel to the East, and three from Waldec to the
South-East, in the County of Waldeck. This was once a free Imperial City: but
in 1396. the Count Waldeck seized it, and has it still in possession: in Long.
30. 31. Lat. 51. 20.

Corbeil, Corbelium, Josedum, a small Town upon the Sein, in the Government of
the Isle of France, seven Miles from Paris to the South; and only observable on
the account of the Bridge over the Seine; except that it sustains the Title of
an Earldom; and that Ingeburde Wife to Philip the August King of France died
here in 1236. The Huguenots attacqued this Town in vain in 1562.

Corbie, Corbeia, a little City in Picardy, upon the River Sum, which was
heretofore well fortified, being then a Frontier Town. This has a Monastery
founded by Bathilda Queen to Clovis II. King of France in 660. In 1637. it was
taken by the Spaniards, but soon after recovered by the French; it stands sour
Leagues from Amiens to the East; being dignified with the Title of an Earldom.
There is another place in Westphalia called Corbie by the French, but Corwey by
the Germans. See Corwey: which is therefore called Corbeia nova, and the former
Vetus for distinction in Latin Writers: or the one Gallica, the other Saxonica.

Corck, a County, City and Haven in Mounster in Ireland. The City is a Bishops
See, under the Archbishop of Cashell, from which it lies thirty five Miles
South, and about ten from Kingsale to the North. There are two other
Bishoprics united to it for ever. The Wall and Castle of this City are
considerably strong. Yet a Garrison of about 5000 Irish surrendered it to the
English under the Earl of Marleborough, Sept. 28. 1690. after two or three days
Siege, and were all made Prisoners of War.

Corcu, Eleusia, an Island near Cyprus.

Cordilleras, a Chain of Mountains near 1000 Leagues long to the East of the
Kingdom of Chili in America, reaching from Peru as far as to the Streights of
Magellan* and having diverse considerable Mines in the Bowels of them, but
extremely cold upward*

La Tour de Cordovan, a famous and celebrated Light-House in Aquitain in
France, at the Mouth of the Guaronne; built upon a small Rock, and encompassed
with the Ocean; which was rebuilt with great Magnificence by the present King
of France, in 1665.

Corduba, an ancient Roman Town in Andalusia in Spain, upon the River
Quadalquivir ( Baetis), twenty Leagues from Sevil to the East. This City being
then the Capital of one of the Kingdoms of the Moors, was recovered by the
Spaniards from them in 1236. It is now a great walled City, seated in a
fruitful Plain, with a delicate Stone Bridge over the River. This was the
Country of the two Seneca's, Lucan, and Averroes, some of the greatest Men for
Learning the World has known; yet more famous for Hosius the President of the
first Nicene Council, (as afterward of the Council of Sardica) and Bishop of
Corduba. The Cathedral was a Mosch, built by the Moors; it has 365 Columns or
Pillars of Black Marble, and twenty four Doors. This City suffered very much by
an Earthquake in the year 1589. The Bishop is a Suffragan to the Archbishop of
Sevil. Long. 15. 40. Lat. 38. 00.

Corea, a Peninsula of the Kingdom of China, East of the Provinces of Xantung
and Leaotung, and joined Northwards by the Kingdom of Ni^che in Tartary. It is
of a very fruitful Soil for Corn and Rice. There are Mines of Gold and Silver
discovered amongst the Mountains of it, and Pearl upon the Coasts. The
Inhabitants use the like Customs and Religion with the Chinese. The Chinese
call it Chaosien, the Japaneze Corea. And it stands divided into eight
Provinces.

Corene, Cyrene: See Cairoan.

Corfu, Corcyra, Phaeacia, Drepano, an Island in the Ioman Sea, or Gulf of
Venice, upon the Coast of Epirus; about one hundred and twenty Miles in
Circuit, and reckoned to contain ten thousand Souls, who are a rich and polite
people; seventy Italian Miles from Cape S. Mary, the most South-Eastern Point
of Italy, to the South-East. It is under the Dominion of the States of Venice,
and has one City seated on the Eastern Shore called by the same Name: which
about one hundred years since (says Mr. Wheeler) was nothing but an old
Castle, and the present Suburbs of the Castati. But now it is a good large
City, and an Archbishops See; well fortified with Walls on the South, and two
Castles at the East and West Ends; the side toward the Harbor is not so well
fortified, nor needs it. This Town would be almost impregnable, were it not for
a Rock that stands toward the the West, and commands the adjoining Fort, with
a great part of the Town. Here resides the chief Govour of the Venetian Islands
both in Civil and Military concerns. The Inhabitants are of the Greek Church,
but much Latinized. The Soil not so fruitful of Corn, as to supply the
Inhabitants; but then it produces Wine, Oil, and all sorts of good Fruit. In
the year 1537. Solomon II. Emperor of the Turks sent his famous General
Barberoasse with an Army of five and twenty thousand Men to make a Descent upon
this Island, as they accordingly did: but were forced by the Venetians to an
Inglorious Retreat thence again.

Cory, one of the chief Towns in Georgia, called Hermastis and Armactica, by
the Latins. There is another of the same Name in Dalmatia, mentioned by Pliny
and Ptolomy under the Name of Corinium; five or six Miles from Novigrod, upon a
Hill: and a third in the Ecclesiastical State in Italy.

Coria, Caurium, Caurita, a City upon the River Alagnon in Old Castile, five or
six Leagues from the Frontiers of Portugal. The Bishop of it is a Suffragan to
the Archbishop of Compostella.

Corinth, Corinthus, Heliopolis, a City of the Morea, which is an
Archbishopric under the Patriarch of Constantinople, built in the year of the
World 3066. near the Isthmus, between the Ionian and Aegaean Seas. At first
subject to Kings, but growing powerful and rich by Commerce, it became a
Commonwealth. Its situation affording it two Noble Havens to the East and West,
it was the first City of Greece that set out Trireines, or great Galleys to
Sea; by which it became the richest, and one of the most powerful Cities in all
Greece: it treated the Roman Ambassadors with that Insolence, that they decreed
the total ruin of it; which was effected by L. Mummius Achaius, 146. years
before the Birth of our Savior. Julius Caesar rebuilt it: S. Paul converted
it to Christianity, and honored it with two Epistles: and Clemens Romanus with
a third, of the next immediate antiquity and value. Thus it became the
Metropolis of Achaia: in aftertimes it had Despots, or Princes of its own,
from whom it passed to the Venetians by their Grant. But in 1458. Mahomet II.
dispossed that Republic of this Noble City; and they have since treated it
with so much Tarkish cruelty, that there are not many Houses in it, inhabited
by poor Men, rather out of necessity, than choice. It is hoped the Venetians
may give it another resurrection out of its desolation and ruins, they having
recovered it in Aug. 1687. without opposition. They now call it vulgarly,
Corantho. The old Acrocorinthus, a strong Citadel built upon the top of a very
high Hill, and the proud Curtezans here of higher prizes than for every one to
give, it is supposed, severally or together, occasioned the Proverb, Non licet
omnibus adire Corinthum. Long. 49. 15. Lat. 38. 11. Apollodorus writes of three
Corinths more: the first in Thessalia, the second in Epirus, the third in Elis.

Corlin, Corlinum, a City in Pomerania, subject the Duke of Brandenburg ever
since 1648. upon the River Persant, three German Miles from the Baltic Sea,
and five from Treptow to the East. It has a Castle, and was before subject to
the Bishop of Camin.

Corneto, Cornuetum, a Bishops See in union with that of Monte Fiascone,
subject only to the Pope, in the State of the Church; upon the River Marta,
four Miles from the Tyrrhenian Sea, and forty six from Rome to the West; very
little inhabited, being unhealthfully seated.

Cornovaile, or Cornoaille, a Territory in Britany in France, called
Corisopitum by the Latin Writers: the Capital of which, is Quimper-Corantine.

Cornwall, Cornubia, Cornavii, Damnonii, is the most Western County of England.
It has Devonshire on the East, from which the River Tamer parts it; and on all
the other sides is surrounded with the Sea: For a long time the Storehouse of
Tin to the whole World, till in 1240. there were other Mines of this found in
Misnia and Bohemia by a Cornishman. The Soil of this County is tolerably
fruitful, but Mountainous. In some Rocks they find a sort of a Precious Stone,
called the Cornish Diamond, shaped and polished by Nature, and many times as
big as a Walnut: only not so hard as a Diamond of the right kind. The
Inhabitants are the Relics of the old Britains, and still retain their
Language. It was by Edward II. in 1336. made a Dukedom, and given to his Son
Edward; and has ever since belonged to the Eldest Son of the King of England,
who is born Duke of Cornwall.

Coro, a City of South America, near the Sea, in the Province of Venezuela,
under the Spaniards. It is built after the manner of Venice, upon a Lake,
amongst a number of little Islets. Thence often it self called Venezuela, or
Little Venice.

Coromandel, a Kingdom on the East side of the Promontory of Malabar in the
East Indies: divided from the Malabars by the Mountains of Balagatta, which run
from North to South to the Cape of Comori: it lies along the Eastern Shore an
hundred Leagues in length. St. Thomas, a Town in 32. degrees* of Latitude, is in
this Kingdom; in which the Portuguese found Christians of the Greek Church,
when they came first hither, who put the City into their Hands, and they enjoy
it still: it has many good Harbors, much frequented by the Europeans,
especially in Winter. The Natives are yet for the most part stupid Pagan
Idolaters, as Mr. Herbert says, and and of a Dusky Complexion. This Country
was divided amongst many Princes; but at present is subject to one, (says
Mendelslo) who resides some times at Bisnagar and some times at Narsinga.

Coron, Corona, a Maritime City in the Morea, on the Southern Shore, opposite
to the Coast of Barbary: it is situate on the richest and most fruitful
Province of this Country, called Belvedora, ten Miles by Land and twenty by Sea
from Modon. The Venetian's built here in 1463. a great Tower for a Magazine;
but they enjoyed it not long: for Bajazet II. took it after a Siege in 1498. It
was attempted in 1533. by the famous Johni Doria Admiral of Spain, and taken;
but could not be long kept. It was taken again by the Venetians after a sharp
Siege in 1685. and may they long enjoy it. It is a very strong City, with a
safe and large Haven; and in former times was a Bishops See under the
Archbishop of Patras.

Coronea, an ancient City of Boeotia in Greece, near Leuctra to the East and
the River Cephisus North. It was here, that Agesilaus the Athenian General
defeated the Boeotians in the year of Rome 359. In the third Century it became
a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Athens. Now a Miserable Village,
inhabited by none but Turks.

Coropa, a Province in Guiana in South America, between the River of Amazons
and the Lake of Parymaea, near the River of Coropatuba; but not inhabited by
any of our European Colonies.

Coronna, Varonnum, Adrobicum, and vulgarly the Groyne, a famous Sea-Port-Town
on the North-West Shore of Spain, in Gallicia; strong, rich, and full of
people, ten Miles from Compostella to the North, and six from the Isle of
Sisarga; in Long. 8. 40. Lat. 44. 20. The Town stands upon a Peninsula, and is
almost surrounded by the Sea. The Country affords excellent Iron, Steel, and
several other Metals, which cause the Port to be the more frequented.

Corozaim, or Chorazim, mentioned Matthew. 11. 21. an ancient Town of Galilee in
Palestine, which was one of the ten that composed the Country of Decapolis. It
stood over against Capernaum upon the Banks of the River Jordan and near the
Sea of Tiberias.

Corregio, Corregium, a great and populous Town in the Dukedom of Modena, which
had heretofore Princes of its own; but in 1635. it came into the hands of the
Duke of Modena: it stands thirteen Miles from Regio to the North-East, and
twelve from Modena to the North, between the Rivers of Navila West, and Fossa
Rossa East: and has the honor of a good Castle.

Corsica, called la Crose by the French, and Corsega by the Spaniards; is a
considerable Island in the Mediterranean Sea: in length from North to South 110
Miles, in breadth 50, and its Circuit 280; 100 Miles South from Genoua, and 8
from Sardinia. This Island has ever been ill inhabited by reason of the
Asperity of a great part of it, and the great difficulty of approaching it. The
Tusci, or old Italians, were the first Inhabiters of this Island; who were
conquered by the Carthaginians: the Carthaginians yielded to the Tomans: the
Saracens followed these, who finally in 1144. were subdued by the Genouese. The
Pisans, and the Kings of Arragon, have since contested with the Genouese; but
however that Republic has desended the place against all pretenders to this
day. There are five Episcopal Sees in it; to wit, Ajazzo, Aleria, Sagona,
Mariana and Nebio: the three first, under the Archbishop of Pisa; the other, of
Genoua. It is watered by the Rivers Liamon and Tavignan, which both spring out
of the Lake of Crena. Bonifacio is its best Port, and Basta the Capital Town.
There is a Cape called Corso, which is the same with the Sacrum Promontorium of
the Ancients.

Corschi, the Name of a Numerous people in Persia, living in Tents, and
descended from the Turks, out of which the Sophy always composes his first
Troops.

Corthestan, Taurus.

Cortona, Cortonium, Corto, a small but very ancient City in the Dukedom of
Florence in Italy: it lies on the Borders of the Estate of the Church, and is a
Bishops See (made by Pope John XXII.) under the Archbishop of Florence: four
Miles from the Lake di Perugia to the North, and fourteen from Arezzo to the
South.

Corwey, Corbeja Saxonica or Nova, called by the French Corbie, is a small City
in West phalia, which has an Abbey founded by S. Lewis King of France, in 815.
It lies upon the Weser, nine Miles from Paderborne to the West.

Cosa, Cosas, a small River in the State of the Church, which falls into
Garigliano, ( Liris) by Feretino and Veroli.

Cosano, Cossano, Cosa, Cosanum, a City of Calalabria in the Kingdom of Naples:
six Miles from the Gulf of Taranto, and one and twenty from Rosano to the
North. It is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Cosenza.

Cosenza, Consentia, the principal City of Calabria, and one of the greatest in
the Kingdom of Naples; an Archbishops See, seated in a fruitful Plain, upon the
River Crate; which has belonging to it a strong Castle upon a Hill. Alaricus
XII. King of the Goths died in this City. In 1638. it suffered much by an
Earthquake: fourteen Miles from the Tyrrhenian Sea, and thirty from Rossano to
the West, in Long. 40. 20. Lat. 39. 11.

Cosir, a City of Egypt upon the Red Sea: written also Cossir.

Coslin, Coslinum, a Town in the Dukedom of Pomerania, under the Dominion of
the Duke of Brandenburgh; upon a small River; three German Miles from the
Baltic Sea, and six from Treptow to the East. Heretofore the Seat of the
Archbishop of Casmires, but given from him by the Treaty of Westphalia, to the
present Possessor.

Cosmopolis, a Town in the Isle of Elbe, in the Mediterranean Sea, belonging to
the Duke of Florence, which has a convenient and safe Port: it lies over
against Piombino, twenty five Miles to the West.

Cosne, Conoda, Conium, a small Town, some place it in the Province of Beausse,
some in Nivernois, upon the Loyre in France betwixt Nevers and Orleans: often
taken and retaken in the Civil Wars of the last Age there.

Cossa, a ruined City on the Coast of the Tyrrbenian Sea, six Miles from
Orbitello to the East, and seventy from Rome to the North: destroyed by Charles
the Great. Ansidonia sprung out of its ruins; which last is now in the
Possession of the Duke of Florence.

Cossaques, a Martial People, inhabitants of the Province of Vkraine in Red
Russia; renowned for their great services done as well to Christendom in
general, as to the Crown of Poland, in guarding the Frontiers of that Kingdom
against the Tartars: Nevertheless in some times guilty of great Revolts too,
which have occasioned diverse Treaties of Peace betwixt them and Poland. They
speak a Dialect of the Polonian Language; and for Religion, are a mixture of
the Greek, the Roman, and the Protestant Churches.

Cosse, a Seigniory in the Province of Maine in France near St. Susanne, giving
Name to a Family of Quality.

Cossaei, an ancient People dwelling about a Mountain of Media, whom Alexander
the Great sacrificed to the Manes of his dear Ephaestion, in a transport of
Grief for his Death, say Polybins and Diodorus.

Cossovia, Campus Merul^^, a Plain in Bulgaria, not very much exceeding
Lincoln-Heath, yet the Stage of great Actions. Here the greatest Christian Army
that was ever brought into the Field in Europe, consisting of 500000 Men, under
Lazarus Despot of Servia, fought with the Forces of Amurath I. and lost the
day; in which Battle Lazarus was slain: and Amurath, viewing the dead bodies,
was stabbed by Michael Cobloivitz, a Christian Soldier, left for dead in the
field. Amurath has here a Funeral Monument to this day. This happened in 1390.
In the same Field was also fought that remarkable Battle between Huniades and
Mahomet, for three days together; in which Huniades his Forces were beaten,
being very unequal in number. This Plain is bounded by the Mountains of Negri
to the South, by the River Nesaus to the East, by Nissa to the North, and by
Ibar to the West: one hundred and thirty English Miles from Thessalonica to the
North-West, upon the Borders of Macedonia and Albania. See Dr. Brown's Travels.

Cossir. See Cosir.

Costagnazo, Haemus, a Mountain in Thrace.

Coustantz, See Constance.

Costa-Ricca, A Province of New Spain in the South America, lying betwixt the
two Seas, and Westward of Veragua. The Capital whereof is the City Carthage.
There are some Gold and Silver Mines in it, and a Soil which makes it worthy of
its Name.

Cost des dents, or Cost de l' Ivoire, the Ivory Coast, is a part of the
Coast of Guiny in Africa, betwixt the Cape of Palms and the Cape of three
Points; whither the English, French, Hollanders, etc. traffic for Elephants
Teeth. It is said to be well inhabited, and to lie very conveniently.

Cost d'Or, or the Golden Coast, another part of the Coast of the same
Country, so called from the quantity of Gold that they find upon it. It is
about one hundred and thirty Leagues long, reaching from the Cape of three
Points (where the former ends) as far as to the River Volta, and the Kingdom of
Benin. The English, Danes and Dutch have diverse Settlements upon it. The latter
having dispossessed all the Portugueze.

Cothon, the ancient Name of the Port of Carthage in Africa.

Cotatis, the principal City of Imiretta, (a Kingdom or Province of Georgia)
built at the Foot of an Hill, by the River Phasi^, consisting of about two
hundred Houses: those of the Grandees, and the Kings Palace, stand at a
distance. The Town has neither Fortifications nor Walls nor any Defense, except
where it is enclosed by the River and the Mountains. On the other side of the
River, upon the top of an Hill, higher than that under which the City is built,
stands the Fortress of Cotatis; which appears very strong: As Sir John Chardin
describes this City in his Travels.

Cotbus, Cotbutium, a Town in Lusatia in Germany, upon the River Havel, which
also passes by Berlin; from which it lies thirteen Miles to the South, and ten
from Franckford to the South-West. This Town came into the Hands of the Duke of
Brandenburgh in 1645. and is sometimes called Cotwitz.

Cotrone, Croton, a City of the further Calabri^ in the Kingdom of Naples,
which of old was twelve Miles in Compass, as Livy says, and built eighty years
after Rome: but now very small, and thinly inhabited: yet it is a Bishops See
under the Archbishop of Regio, and has a Castle built by Charles V. It stands
on the South-East side of Italy, fifteen Miles South-East of Severina.

The Cottian-Alpes, Alps Cottiae, a part of the Alps, heretofore under the
Dominion of King Cottius mentioned in Suetonius (as an Ally with the People of
Rome, in the Reign of Augustus) and therefore by the Ancients called Cottiae
from him. They begin at the Fountains of the River Var, and reach to Susa: that
is, from Mount Viso, to Mount Cenis; dividing the Dauphinate from Piedmont.

Cotzchin, or Chotozin, or Kotym, a Castle in Moldavia upon the Niester; four
Polish, or twenty English Miles from Caminieck to the South-West: where in
1673. an Army of the Turks, consisting of two and thirty thousand Men, under
the Command of Solomon Aga, designed for the ruin of Lemburgh, were encamped;
having the Neister behind them, a Range of Rocks and Precipices on one side,
the Castle of Cotzchin on the other, a Trench before them defended by
Half-Moons, a Bridge over the Nieper, and another over the Castle: yet
Zobietsky, then Marshal, but now King of Poland, with much lesser Forces coming
up October 9. battered down their Brest-Work with his Cannon; and the next day
dismounting his Cavalry to second the Lithuanian Foot, (which had been beaten
off) in Person at the head of his Men stormed their Camp; took it, slew or took
Prisoners thirty one thousand five hundred Turks, (and the rest hardly escaped)
Solomon their General being slain. In 1621. Vladislaus Prince of Poland, Son of
Sigismund King of Poland, in the same Field, defeated the Forces of Osman I.
and slew the greatest part of them; amongst the rest Vssain le Borgne, who was
esteemed the best Commander the Turks had in those times.

Couco, Coucum, a Kingdom in Barbary, in Africa, with a City of the same Name;
sixty Miles from the Shoars of the African Sea, between the Kingdoms of Algiers
and Bugia.

Coucy, a Seigniory in Picardy, giving Name to a Family of Honor.

Coventry, Conventria, a City in the County of Warwick upon the West Side of
the River Sherborne, which is of no very great Antiquity; but neat, strong,
rich and populous, by reason of the Clothing Trade: Also a Bishop's See in
Conjunction with Litchfield, under the Archbishop of Canterbury. It has three
Churches; the Priory or Convent (whence the Name Coventry) was the most ancient
Foundation of the City, being built by Canutus the Dane. And the Cross may be
reckoned amongst the finest in England. The Noble George Villiers, late Duke of
Buckingham, was created Earl of Coventry, in the twenty first of James I. A
Title that had lain buried ever since the Death of Edwin a Saxon, whom William
the Conqueror created Earl of Coventry in the first Year of his Reign. Henry
VI* annexing the adjacent Towns and Villages to this City made it with them a
County Corporate, distinct from that of Warwickshire.

Coulan, a City and small Kingdom in the East Indies, in the great Promontory
of Malabar, on the Western Shore; thirty five Leagues North of the Cape of
Com^ry, and about seventeen South of Cochin. The Country is well watered, and
fruitful; not above twenty Leagues long from North to South, and eight or ten
broad from East to West. Bounded by the Kingdoms of Cochin and Travancor. There
are many Christians in it, by the means of the Portuguese. The City has a
Castle, and a safe Haven, with the Character of a rich and flourishing Place.
The Portuguese were driven out of it by the Hollanders in 1663.

Color, a Town of the Hither East Indies in the Kingdom of Golconde in
Malabar; seven days Journey from the City of Golconde. There is a Mine or
Quarry of Diamonds very near it.

Courreze, Curretia, a River in Limosin in France, which rises two Miles above
Tulle; and having watered both it and Brive, falls into the Vesere, two Miles
above Condat.

Courtenay, Cortenaeum, Corteniacum, Curtiniacum, a small Town in the Isle of
France, six Miles distance from Sens West. The Princes who have born the Title
of this small Place, are frequently mentioned by the French Historians; and
some of the Emperors of Greece are derived from their Family.

Courtray, Corteriacum, by the Natives called Cortrick, a Town in Flanders upon
the River Lys, five Leagues from Tournay to the North, and four from Lille to
the West. Made famous by the Defeat of the French in 1302. This Town was taken
by the French in 1646. and fortified; and again in 1667: But in the Treaty of
1679. it returned under the Obedience of the King of Spain, who is still
possessed of it.

C^urzola, an Island under the Venetians upon the Coast of Dalmatia, full of
Wood. There is, besides five Villages in it, a City of the same Name which is a
Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Ragusa. The Houses, built all generally of
Marble.

Coutances, Constantia Castra, a City and Bishopric in Normandy in France,
under the Archbishop of Rouen. It stands upon the River Barde, two Leagues from
the British Sea, five from Auranches to North, and twelve from Caen to the
West. This City has a large County belonging to it, called by the same Name, le
Coutantin; which lies extended from North to South, in the form of a Peninsula;
on the North and West it has the British Sea, on the East the River Viere,
which parts it from Bessin; and on the South le Auranchin, divided from it by
another small River. The Isles of Jersey and Guernsey heretofore belonged to
this County; which being in the hands of the English, are not now esteemed a
part of it, but annexed to England.

Coutras, Curtracum, a Town in Guienne in Perigord, seated on the Confluence of
Lille and Dr^ma, twelve Miles from Bourdeaux to the North-West: Made famous by
a Battle here sought in the Civil Wars of France in 1587.

Couverden. See Coeworden.

Cowbridge, a Market Town in the County of Glamorgan in Wales. The Capital of
its Hundred.

Cowes, a noted Harbor at the Entrance of the Creek that goes to Newport in
the Isle of Wight; fortified with a Castle.

Cracow, Cracovia, called by the Inhabitants Krakow, by the Germans Cra^aw, by
the Italians, French, and Spaniards, Cracovia, is the Capital of the Kingdom of
Poland, and stands on the River Weya, ( Vistula) about fifty Polish Miles from
Presburg to the North-East, 85 Miles from Dantzick South. It is a Bishop's See
under the Archbishop of Gnezna; there belongs to it a strong Castle built upon
a Rock, with vast Suburbs; and an University opened in 1401. by Vladislaus K.
of Poland. The Palatinate of Cracovia, which belongs to this City (and is one
of the three which make up the lesser Poland), has Silesia on the West, Hungary
on the South, Sandomiria on the East, and the Palatinate of Siradia on the
North. This Bishopric was founded by Mieczislao, who received the Christian
Faith in 965. The City was burnt by the Tartars in 1241. The Custody of it was
after this committed to the Germans, in 1428. A Disputation being had here with
the Hussites, in 1431. the King sent for some Preachers out of Bohemia, who
preached many Years in the Sclavonian Tongue Helvigis the Queen caused the
Bible to be translated into the Polish Tongue; and when the Pope in 1448. sent
a Legate to this Nation, the University showed him no Respect, but stuck to the
Council of Basil. In 1591. they burnt the Protestants Church there, as they did
in 1635* by the procurement of the Jesuits; who the next year were banished for
it out of that University. This City was also taken by the Swedes, in the Wars
under Charles II. King of Sweden, in 1655. It is styled the Rome of Poland, for
its Excellency. They tolerate the Jews, wearing a distinctive Habit. There are
betwixt fifty and sixty Churches in it.

Cragno. See Carniola.

Crambourn, a Market Town in Dorseishire; the Capital of its Hundred; seated
near the Spring of a River that runs into the Stower; it is a Town of good
Antiquity.

Cranbrook, a Market Town in Kent in Scray Lath, seated at the Head of the
River Medway.

Cranganoor, Cranganora, a Kingdom and a City in the Promontory of Malabar, in
the East Indies. The City lies upon the River Aicot, two Leagues from the
Ocean, and seven from Cochin to the North; being a Bishop's See, whilst it was
in the Hands of the Portuguese; but in 1663. the Dutch took it from them, and
put it into the Hands of the King of Calecut, together with the small Kingdom
belonging to it.

Cranostaw, Krasnostaw, Cranostovia, a small but well fortified Town in Black
Russia, in Poland, upon the River Wieprez, and a Lake made by the said River;
five Leagues from Chelm to the South-West, and as many from Lublin to the
South-East. Now the usual Residence of the Bishop of Chelm.

Craon, a small Town in the Province of Anjou in France, upon the River Oudon,
toward the Frontiers of Maine in Brittany; giving Name to an honorable Family.

Crapack, the Carpathian Mountains, which divide Hungary, Moravia, and
Transylvania from Poland. This ridge of Mountains, called by the Ancients
Carpates, and Mons Carpathus, runs from East to West, under various Names given
by the Nations which border upon it.

Crapone, a Canal in Provence, made in the last Age by the ingenious Adam de
Crapone from the River Durance to the Arles, beginning at Roque a Village six
Leagues below the Fall of the said River into the Rhine.

La Crau, a large Heath of seven or eight Leagues length in Provence; filled
with a prodigious Quantity of Stones, whereof diverse of the Ancients have
conjectured, but none give, a satisfactory Cause.

Craven, a Part of the West Riding of Yorkshire; hilly and rough, in which
Shipton stands. It gives the Title of an Earl to the Right Honorable William
Craven, created by King Charles II. Anno 1664.

Cray S. Mary's, a Market Town in Kent, in Sutton Lath.

Creci, Cressy, Creciasensis, Cressiacum, a Town in Picardy, upon the River
Serre, in the most Eastern Borders of that Province; three Miles from la Far
to the East, and the same Distance from Guise to the South. This small Place,
by the English Valor under Edward III. and his Son the Black Prince, in 1346.
August 26. received a Name that will last for ever: Philip de Valois being here
beaten in a set Battle, in which the Kings of Bohemia and Majorca, Charles Duke
of Alensone Brother to the King of France, the Duke of Lorraine, Lewis Earl of
Flanders, and in all 11 Princes, 80 Barons, 1200 Knights, and 30000 common
Soldiers were slain; and King Philip himself escaped with great Difficulty,
being scarcely admitted into one of his own Castles, upon his Reply to the
Question, Who is here? The Fortune of France.. There is another Creci in
Picardy, upon the River Serre, near Laon, in the Tract of Tierache,. And a
third in the Province of Brie, upon the River Morin, two or three Leagues from
Meaux, within the Government of Champaigne.

Crediton, a Market Town in Devonshire, upon the Rivers Credit and Forton: The
Capital of its Hundred; and formerly a Bishop's See, till King Edward the
Confessor translated the same to Exon. It is adorned with a fair Church, built
Cathedral-wise; well inhabited, in a rich Soil, and drives a good Trade of
Serges. Both the aforesaid Rivers fall into the Ex.

Creil, ^reolium, a small City or great Town in the Isle of France, upon the
River Oesia, ( Oise,) over which it has a Bridge, between Clermont to the North
three Miles, and Senlis to the South two.

Crekelade, a Market Town in Wiltshire in the Hundred of Highworth; which
returns two Burgesses to the Parliament.

Crema, [ Crema,] Forum Diuguntorum, a City in the State of Venice, called by
the French Creme; which is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Bo^oma;
seated upon the River Serium, Serio, sixty Miles from Verona to the West, and
twenty from Milan to the East. This City was once a part of the Dukedom of
Milan, and is very strongly fortified: Made a Bishopric in 1579. by Pope
Gregory XIII. being the Capital of the Territory adjacent, called Cremasco.

Cremera, a small River in the Dukedom of Thuscany in Italy, falling into the
Tiber five Miles below Rome. The 300 Fabii were cut to pieces by an Ambuscade
of the Enemy upon the Banks of it: A Misfortune so lamented by the Romans that,
they cursed the very City-Gate, by which they marched, with the Title of
Scelerata, and placed the Day of their overthrow in the Catalogue of black and
dismal Days.

Cremona, Colonia and Vrbs Crenomanorum, a City of the Dukedom of Milan, which
is a Bishop's See under that Archbishop and stands upon the Po, in the Borders
of the Dukedom of Parma, forty Miles from Mantua to the East, and the same
distance from Milan to the South-East. This City was built 445 Years after
Rome, and made afterward a Roman Colony; it has been often ruined, and
rebuilt; at present a strong, great, rich, populous City; and has a strong
Castle to the East, with an University granted by Sigismund the Emperor. The
Territory belonging to it is a fruitful delicious Plain, having on the North
and East the River Ollio, on the South the Po, (where there are several
Districts beyond that River belonging to it,) and on the West the River Abdua.
The French and Modenese besieged this City in 1648. but were not able to take
it.

Crempen, Crempa, a small but fortified City in the Dukedom of Holsatia, in the
County of Stormaren, upon the River of that Name; not above one Mile from the
River Elb to the North, about ten Danish Miles from Lubec to the West, and
fifteen from Embden to the East. This belongs to the King of Denmark.

Crequi, a Seigniory in Artois, upon the Confines of Picardy, giving Name to an
honorable Family which has been famous for diverse illustrious Persons.

Cressy, See Creci.

Crespi, Crepiacum, the chief Town of the Dukedom de Valois, in the Isle of
France; built in a fine Plain; seven Miles from Meaux to the North, and three
from la Ferte. Francis I. and the Emperor Charles V. held a Treaty of Peace
here in 1544.

Crest, Crestidium, and Crista Arnaldi, a City in the Dauphinate in France,
upon a River of the same Name, two Miles from the Some to the East, and twenty
two from Avignon to the North. Fortified with a Castle and a Tower.

Creta. See Candia.

Crevant, Crevantium, a Town in Burgundy in France, upon the North Side of the
River Sure, in the North-West Border of that Duchy, two Miles from Auxerre to
the North, and twenty three from Dijon to the North-West. In 1423. there was a
sharp Fight here between the English and the French, with the Victory, by
Confession, to the English. There is a Stone-Bride over the Sure here.

Creuse, Crosa, a River in France, which rises in la March; and running to
the North West, enters Berry, and passes through the Town of Black in the
Borders of Berry; then entering Touraine, it falls (having in this Course
received the Little Creuse and some other Rivers) into the Loyre, at ^^ndes
above Saumur.

Crewkern, a Market Town in Somersetshire; the Capital of its Hundred: Seated
on the Banks of the River Parret. Written also Crokehorn.

Crickhowel, a Market Town in the County of Brecknock in Wales; the Capital of
its Hundred. The Marquess of Worcester has a Castle here.

Crim Tartary, or the Precopensian Tartars, is a vast Tract of Land, bounded on
the North by Russia, (from which it is parted by the River Donetz in great
part, and also by Ockraina and Dikoia,) on the East by Pervolock, on the South
by the Kingdom of Astarcan, the Petigori, Cabardia, the Palus Meotis, and
Euxine Sea; and on the West by the Boristhenes, which parts it from Wolynia.
Extended vastly from East to West, but not so broad. The chief Force of it lies
in the Peninsula in the Black Sea. These Tartars have been heretofore
Christians, but now Mahometans, and the inseparable Allies of the Turks, in
hopes to succeed upon the failure of the Ottoman House; otherwise they live
under a Prince of their own. See Krim.

Crincon, Crientio, a River of Artois, near Arras.

Crinisus, a River in the West of the Island of Sicily, springing in the Valley
of Mazara, twenty five Miles from Palermo; and afterward falling into the Sea
of Tunis. Now called Il Belicidestro.

Crismato, Phaenus, a Mountain in Normandy.

Croatia, Liburnia, a Dukedom belonging to the Emperor of Germany, called by
the Germans Crabaten, and is a part of the Kingdom of Hungary Bounded on the
North by Sclavonia, on the East by Bosnia, on the South by Dalmatia and the
Adriatic Sea, and on the West by Carniola a Province of Germany. The Turks
were heretofore possessed of all the Southern Parts of it; but the Emperor has
lately recovered them. The Inhabitants are excellent Horsemen, and have of late
done great Service against the Turks.

Crocodilon, an ancient City in the Kingdom of Egypt, upon the Banks of the
Nile, in the Country called Thebais. They adored the Crocodiles as Gods (in the
vulgar Opinion) at this Place, and therefore it came to take their Name.

Croia, the principal City of Albania; a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of
Durazzo, Dyrrhachium, upon the River Lisana; within ten English Miles of the
Adriatic, thirty from Durazzo to the North, about a hundred and ten South of
Ragusa. It was heretofore very strong. George Castriot, commonly called
Scanderbeg, often broke the Fury of the Ottoman Forces here; but after his
Death it fell into their Hands.

Cromer, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk, in the Hundred of North
Erpingham, lying to the Sea.

Croncarty, a Sea-Port-Town in Ross in Scotland, upon the Eastern Sea, at the
North Point of Murray Fyrth.

Cronenburg, Coronaeburgum, a strong Castle in Zealand, belonging to the King
of Denmark: taken by the Swedes in 1658. but since restored again. At this
place (which was built by Frederick II. King of Denmark for the purpose, in
1577.) all Ships are forced to pay their Toll, which pass the Sound.

Cronstat, Corona, a City of Transylvania, often called Brassovia, by the
Inhabitants Brassaw; in the middle of the Eastern Borders of that Duchy,
toward Walachia; at the foot of the Carpathian Mountains, upon the River
Burzazgh. It is a strong Place, and has three great Suburbs, inhabited by three
several Nations: forced to receive an Imperial Garrison, in May 1688. General
Heusler in a Fight near this place, Aug. 21. 1690. suffered a great Defeat,
wherein himself was taken Prisoner by the Tartars; who not knowing him, sold
him to Count Teckeley, (who commanded the Action) for seventy Rix Dollars.

Crosno, Crosna, a small City in the Black Russia in the Kingdom of Poland, in
the Palatinate of Primyslie, near the Carpathian Hills and the Rivers Visloc
and Jasiolde.

Crossen, Crossa, a City in the Province of Silesia, and Kingdom of Bohemia,
upon the River Oder; where it entertains the River Borber from the South; about
ten Miles above Franckfort. This is the Capital of a small Dukedom, which being
many Ages ago mortgaged to the Duke of Brandenburg, and not redeemed in due
time, has ever since been in his Possession.

Crotona, an ancient City in the Further Calabria in Italy, which is now a
Bishops See under the Archbishop of Regio. Milo and several other famous
Athletae were Natives of this place: in whose times it was no less than twelve
Miles in circuit.

Croty, a Seaport on the North side of the Sum in Picardy, two French Miles
from Asselane to the South, and the same distance from Caen in Normandy to the
North.

Crouch, one of the little Rivers of the County of Essex.

Crow, or le Crou, Crodoldus, sometimes called Gonnesse, is a River in the Isle
of France; which arising above a Village called Louvre, five Miles East from
St. Dennis, falls into the Seine, at S. Dennis.

Crowland, a Market Town in Lincolnshire in the Hundred of Ellow upon the River
Weeland, in a very fenny low ground. The best Streets of it are severed from
each other (not unlike Venice) by interjacent Watercourse; and the Causeys
leading to it, so narrow, that no Carts can possibly pass: which may justify
the Proverb, saying, All the Carts which come to Crowland are shod with Silver.

Croy, a Village in Picardy, two or three Leagues from Amiens, giving its Name
to a Family of Honor in the Low Countries.

Croydon, or Croyden, Neomagus, a Market Town in Surrey, the Capital of its
Hundred; seated near the Spring head of the River Wandle, nine Miles from
London, where the Archbishop of Canterbury has a Country House: it has an
Hospital for the Poor, and a Free School for Children, founded by Archbishop
Whitgift.

Crumaw or Crumeaw, Crumaviae, a Town in the Province of Moravia in Germany,
betwixt Brin and Znaim: adorned with the Title of a Dukedom, and a fine Castle.

Crussol, a Seigniory in the Province of Vivaretz in France, near the Rhosne,
giving its Name and the Title of Earl to an Honorable Family.

Cresiphon, an ancient Town of the Kingdom of Assyria, near the Tygris, said to
be built by the Parthians.

Cuama or Coama, a River of the Kingdom of Sofala in Africa, said to derive its
Source from the Lake of Sachaf (where it has the Name of Zamber) toward the
Mountains of the Moon: the same Lake, that the Moderns take to be the Head of
the Nile.

Cuba, an Island in the Bay of Mexico in America, to the South of Florida;
which is one of the greatest that belongs to that part of the World. It has on
the East Hispaniola, (divided from it by a Bay of the breadth of fourteen
Spanish Leagues,) on the West the firm Land of America, on the South Jamaica at
the distance of nineteen Leagues. In length two hundred Spanish Leagues, in
breadth not above thirty five. The greatest part of it is Mountainous, but well
watered. Infinitely peopled, when the Spaniards discovered it; but they
destroyed all the Inhabitants, and have not been able yet to people it
themselves, so that the greatest part is desolate. This and Jamaica were the
first Places of America which Columbus discovered in 1492. There are six Cities
in this Island; the principal of which is St. Jago, on the South side; and
Havana, a noble and well fortified Seaport on the North side; under the
Tropic of Cancer.

Cuckfield or Cuxfield, a Market Town in Sussex in Lewis Rape.

Cuco, a strong City by Situation (upon a high Hill) in the Kingdom of Algiers
in Africa, toward the River Major. The Soil it stands in affords plenty of all
things necessary for humane life.

Cucusa, an ancient City of Armenia the Less upon the Frontiers of Cilioia and
Cappadocia, having formerly born the honor of an Episcopal See: and the more
remarked in History, for being the place whither S. John Chrysostom was
banished by the order of the Empress Eudoxa.

Cuenca, Conc^a, a City of New Castile in Spain, which is a Bishops See, under
the Archbishop of Toledo; the Capital of La Sierra. It stands in a Rocky and
Mountainous Country, upon the River Xucar, twenty five Leagues East from
Toledo, and thirty four West from Valencia. Built by the Goths out of the
Ruins of a Roman City called Valeria, not far distant. The Moors became next
Masters of it, and kept it till 1177. when the Spaniards recovered it again.

Cueva, a Town in the Kingdom of Castile in Spain, giving its Name there to a
Family of Honor.

Cufa, a City of Chaldaea or Yerach in Asia, upon the West side of Euphrates;
sixty Miles South from Bagdet, or Babylon, on the Borders of Arabia Deserta,
and heretofore the Residence of the Califfs: after that it was under the
Persians; and at present under the Turks, being much declined from its ancient
Splendour, Wealth and Greatness. Long. 79. 10. and Lat. 32. 00. forty five
German Miles above Balsera North.

Cuhiung, a City and Territory of the Province of Junnan in China, having
Jurisdiction over six other old Cities, and standing in a fruitful and pleasant
Country that is provided with Mines of Silver and Precious Stones.

Cujavio, Cujavia, a Province of the Kingdom of Poland, bounded on all sides by
the greater Poland; but the North, where it has Prussia. The chief Town is
Brestia, Brezestie, ten Miles from Thorn to the South, and thirty from Damzick.

Culhu, Cullus, a Town and Port upon the Mediterranean in the Kingdom of Tunis
in Africa, where the River Collo or Culhu is discharged into the Sea; betwixt
Hipone and Bugia.

Culliton, a Market Town in Devonshire; the Capital of its Hundred.

Culm, a City of Poland, upon the Vistula, in Prussia, built upon a Hill. This
is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Gnesa, though heretofore under the
Archbishop of Riga: built in 1223. by the Knights of the Teutonick Order; but
having suffered much in the Swedish Wars, it is now almost desolate, and the
Bishop has removed his Palace to Colme, three Miles more to the East. Culm
stands twenty Miles South of Dantzick, and ten North from Waldislaw; and is the
Capital of a little Country adjacent, called by the Inhabitants Colmischland.

Culembach, Culembachium, a small Town in Franconia, upon the River Mayn, near
the Rise of it; six Miles from Bamberg East, and as many from Coberg
South-East; the Capital of a Marquisate belonging to the Duke of Brandenburg;
and part of the Burgravate of Noremburg; between the Territory of Bamberg to
the West, Misnia to the North, Bohemia and Bavaria to the East, and Norimburg
to the South: belonging also to the Duke of Brandenburg.

Culembourg, Culemburgum, a Town and Castle in Guelderland, belonging to the
United Provinces; yet as to the Revenue possessed by its own Count: it stands
on the River Rhine, above two German Miles from Vtrecht to the South-East, and
six from Nimeguen to the West. Taken by the French in 1672. and dismantled in
1674.

Culiacan, a Province in New Spain in America, within the Jurisdiction of the
Governor of Guadalaxara; between New Mexico to the North, New Biscay to the
East, and the Purple Sea to the South and West. It has a City of the same Name.

Cuma, Cumae, once a Colony and famous City of Italy, in the Kingdom of Naples;
which in 1207. was utterly ruined by the Saracens. The Ruins of it are yet
visible, upon an Hill, on the Tyrrheman Sea, twelve Miles from Naples to the
North-West. In the latter times of the Roman Empire, this City was wonderfully
fortified; so that Narses the General of Justinian could not take it without a
tedious Siege: and at this day the Ruins of it are wonderful: many Noble
Antiquities are to be seen amongst them. The Bishops See, that was fixed here,
is united with that of Aver^a. Virgil speaks of an admirable Temple of Apollo
and a Fortress that adorned this City in Ancient Times. Neither must it be
forgotten, that the Sibylla Cumana, her Grott being in the neighborhood, took
her Title from hence: whose Verses prophesied so favorably of our Savior,
that Julian the Apostate thought fit to order them to be burnt. The Ancients
mention other places of the same Name. One, upon the Gulf of Smyrna in Asia
Minor, now called Foya Nova, betwixt Smyrna and Pergamus; accommodated with a
Port and Fortress. Near to which, the Venetian Fleet obtained a Victory over
the Turks in the year 1650. Of the rest, nothing said.

Cumberland, is the most North-Western County of England; on the North bounded
by Scotland; on the South and West it has the Irish Sea; and on the East
Lancaster, Westmorland, the Bishopric of Durham and Northumberland. It took
its Name from the Inhabitants who being of the old British Race, called
themselves Kumbri or Kambri. The Country though cold and uneven, is yet not
unpleasant to the Traveller. And it affords great plenty of Corn, Cattle,
Fish, Fowl and Metals: nor is it destitute of many Roman Antiquities, the
Relics of the Roman Garrisons who lay here to defend Britain from the
devouring Picts. The principal City is Carlisle. Prince Rupert whilst he lived
was Duke of Cumberland by the Creation of King Charles I. his Uncle, 1643. He
dying without Issue November 30. 1682. that Honor is now in the Person of his
Royal Highness Prince George of Denmark. It became a Dukedom from an Earldom.
For in the year 1525. H. VIII. conferred the Title of Earl of Cumberland upon
Henry Lord Clifford, in whose Family it continued from thence to 1642. The Eden
is the principal River of this County.

Cuneo, Cuneus: See Coni.

Cuningham, a County of Scotland, on the Western Shore over against the Isle of
Arran; on the West it has the Irish Sea, on the North Dunbritoun Fyrth, (which
parts it from Lentieth), on the East Cluydsdale, and on the South Kile. The
chief Town is Largis on the Irish Sea, seventeen Scotch Miles from Glasco to
the West.

Cunsar, one of the Names of the Hyrcanian Sea.

Curacao or Curassaw, one of the Islands known by the Name of Sottovento in the
South America, over against the Province of Venezuela, betwixt Oraba and
Bonnaire. Taken from the Spaniards by the Dutch in 1632.

Curdistan, Chaldaea, a vast Province in Asia, under the Dominion of the Turks,
but upon the Borders of the Kingdom of Persia; containing Chaldaea, part of
Assyria toward Media, and a great part of Armenia Major. The Western Bounds
are closed by the River Euphrates, and the Eastern by the Tigris; having
Tarcomania to the North, and Alidulia to the South. The Curdes, a People partly
Mahometans, Heathens, and Christians, take their Name from, and dwell in this
Province. The ancient Chaldaea was divided into two parts; the one, North of
Mesopotamia, in which Vr stood the Country of Abraham: the other, South of
Babylon, near Arabia Deserta; a large Champion Country in which the
Philosophers lived and flourished, whose same became extended over all the
East; and whose enquiries gave the first birth to Astronomy, Astrology, Magic,
Philosophy and Theology. Babylon was the Capital of the ancient Chaldaea.

La Cure, Cora, Chora, a River of France, arising in the Dukedom of Burgundy,
and flowing through Nivernois, Vezelay or Verzelet and Clamessy, at Vermenton,
just opposite to Crevant in the Duchy of Burgoigne, falls into the Sure.

Cures, an ancient Town of the Sabines in Italy; from whence the Name of
Quirites became derived to the Romans; and remarkable also for being the
Birthplace of Numa Pompilius. It is thought Vescovio was afterward built upon
the Ruins of this Town.

Curetes, a Name of the ancient People of the Island of Crete.

Curiale, Dianae Oraculum, a small Town on the Coast of Arabia Foelix, toward
the Persian Gulf; about twenty seven Miles to the North-West of Cape Raz, the
most Eastern Point of that Country, and and eight from Mascate a City.

Curland, Curlandia, a Province of Livonia, called by the Germans Kureland, by
the Dutch Coerlandt, by the French Courlande, is bounded on the East by
Semigalen, on the South by Samogithia, and on the North and West by the Baltic
Sea. This Country belonged anciently to the Teutonick Order; but Sigismund
Augustus King of Poland, in 1587. forced Gothardus Ketler Master of that Order,
to renounce their Right; and hold it, together with Semigalen, as a Fee of the
Crown of Poland. So that ever since it has been separated from Livonia, and
annexed to that Crown; and is still in the Possession of the Family of Ketlers,
as Dukes of Curland, and Subjects to the Crown of Poland. The Capital City of
it is Goldingen.

Curresi, Avens, a River of Italy, in the State of the Church, in the Diocese
of Sabina; between Campania to the South, and Vmbria to the North. It waters
S. Lorenzo and the Abbey di Farfa; and then falls into the Tyber, fifteen Miles
North of Rome.

Curta, a Village of Hungary upon the Danube, between Comora and Gran. It is a
Roman Town ruined.

Curzola, Corcyra Nigra, an Island of the Adriatic Sea, on the Coast of
Dalmatia, under the Dominion of the State of Venice; which is twenty five Miles
in length from North to South, and five in breadth. It has a small City or Town
of the same Name, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Raguza: and
there are five other small Villages in it. It lies only five Miles from Cape
Cabiccello, a Promontory of Dalmatia.

Le Curzolari, Echinades, Echinae, five small Islands over against the Mouth of
the Gulf of Lepanto. Near to which, the Christians gained that Signal Naval
Victory over Selim II. his Fleet in 1571. in the Battle, called the Battle of
Lepanto.

Cusa, an ancient City of Nubia in Africa. And a River of the same Name in the
Kingdom of Morocco.

Cusco, Cuscum, a great City of Peru in the South America, one hundred and
twenty Miles East from Lima. It was the Royal City of the Kings of Peru,
adorned with a stately Temple dedicated to the Sun, and diverse noble Palaces
and an admirable Fortress, when the Spaniards conquered it; but now dispeopled
and ruined. Yet it is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Lima.

Cussit, a Province in Aethiopia.

Custrin, Custrinum, a City in the Marquisate of Brandenburg, on the East side
of the River Oder, where it receives the Warta; four Miles North from
Franckfort: a very strong Place.

Cuzagne, a small Territory or District in Aquitaine in France.

Cuzt, a large Province of the Kingdom of Fez in Africa, lying eighty Leagues
along the River Gureygure as far as to the River Esaha, East of the Province of
Temesen; and containing all the courses of the Mountain Atlas betwixt those two
Rivers.

Cyclades, a Circle of little Islands in the Archipelago, surrounding the
Island of Delos: called Paros, Andros, Zea, Micoli, Naxia, Quiniminio, etc.

Cyclopes, the original Inhabitants of the Island of Sicily, living about Mount
Aetna; whose extraordinary height mixed with fierceness, occasioned many
Fictions amongst the Poets.

Cydnus, a River of Cilicia in Asia the Less, passing by Cogni and Tharsus.
Alexander the Great took a desperate Sickness by bathing in it; and some say,
the Emperor Frederick Barberaosse died of the coldness of its Water, as he
returned from the East in the year 1100.

Cydonia, the same with Canea in Candia.

Cylley, Celia, a City of Stiria in Germany, upon the River Saana, which a
little lower falls into the Save; it stands ten Miles from Lambach to the East,
and as many from Draburgh to the South-East. The Capital of a County of the
same Name, and belongs to the Emperor of Germany: there is in it two very
strong Castles, and many Roman Antiquities are thereabouts discovered.

Cynopolis, an ancient City of the Kingdom of Egypt upon the Western part of
the Nile; remarked heretofore for the Worship of the God, called Anubis, in it.

Cynthus, a Mountain in the Island of Delos, upon which the ancient Pagans
built a celebrated Temple in the honor of Apollo; who together with Diana was
supposed to be born here of L^tona.

Cyparissa, an ancient Town of the Morea, that did belong to the Government of
Messene; and imparted its Name to the Cape and Gulf adjacent.

Cyprus, an Island of the Mediterranean Sea, called by the Turks and Arabians,
Kubros: about sixty Miles North from the Shoars of Syria, and Anatolia; and
extended in length from East to West two hundred and twenty; its Circuit about
five hundred and fifty. This Island is so very fruitful, the Air so pleasant,
and the Hills abounding so with Metals, that it was by all the Ancients called
The Happy Island. Ammianus Marcellinus says, it could build a Ship and freight
her out to Sea, out of what grew here, without the help of any other place. The
first Inhabitants were the Cilicians, who yielded to the Phenicians, as these
did to the Greeks: Ptolomy the last King of this Island, knowing that Cato was
sent against him by the Romans, put an end to his own Life. It continued in the
hands of the Greek Emperors till 656. when it was conquered by the Saracens. In
807. the Emperors recovered it; but Richard I. King of England, going to the
Holy War, in 1191. and being ill used by the Inhabitants, made a Conquest of it
for England; and gave it to Guy de Lusignan, whose Successors were dispossessed
by the Templars in 1306. In 1472. the Venetians possessed themselves of it; in
1560. Selim the Grand Seignor gained it from them, whose Successor at this day
enjoys it, not without some Confusion and, as occasion serves, Insurrection of
the Inhabitants against the Turks. There are three considerable places in it;
Merovige at the West end, Colosso on the South side, and Famagusta on the same
side more to the East; and about eight hundred and fifty Villages.

Cypsella, See Ipsala.

Cyr, Ciropolis, Cyrus, the same with Carin.

Cyrene, See Cairoan.

Cythera, See Cerigo.

Cyziqua, an ancient City of Asia, built in the twenty fourth Olympiad upon the
Propontis and honored in the Primitive Ages of Christianity with a
Metropolitan See under the Patriarch of Constantinople. Over against the Ruins
of it, stands a little Island, famous for the Marble that they call the Marble
of Cyziqua.

Czaslaw, Czaslavia, a very small City in Bohemia, upon the River Crudimka,
nine Miles from Prague to the East, with a considerable Prefecture belonging to
it. John Zisca, the famous Captain of the Hussites, who so sharply revenged the
deaths of John Hus and Jerome of Prague, was here buried.

Czeben, See Hermanstat.

Czenstokow or Czeschow, Chestocovia, a Town in Poland, upon the River Warta;
twenty five Miles East of Breslaw, ten North-West of Cracovia. It is strong as
well by Situation, as its Fortifications.

Czeremissi, a Province, or rather a People of Moscovy: reduced under the
Empire of the Grand Duke in the year 1552. Lying on both sides of the River
Wolga, betwixt the Cities Novogorod-Nisi, and Casan. They are partly Mahometans
and partly Pagans, of the Race of the Tartars.

Czeremicz, Sulonia, a Town in Dalmatia.

Czernikow or Czernishaw, Czernihovia, a City and Duchy in Poland, upon the
River Deszna, which falls into the Nieper at Kiovia, twenty eight Miles
South-West of Szernikow, or Czernihow. This City is now in the hands of the
Russ, as also the Dukedom thereunto belonging, called by the same name. They
belonged originally to the Russ; and together with Novogrod, were conquered by
Vladislaus IV. King of Poland; so that the Russ has only recovered what was his
own.

Czernobel, a Town in the Palatinate of Volhinia in Poland upon the River Vsz;
two or three Leagues from the Borysthenes, of little consideration.

Czersk, a Palatinate; and Czesko, a City upon the Vistula, seven Polish Miles
above Warzovia or Warshaw.

Czyrkassi, Czyrcassia, a strong Town in the Vkraine upon the Nieper, twenty
seven Polish Miles beneath Kiovia, toward the Euxine Sea: it has suffered
great Extremities of late years from the Cossacks and Tartars, being a Frontier
to both those People.

Czyrknizerzee or Zirichnitz, Lugeum, a great Lake in the Province of Carniola
in Germany; extended the space of four Miles betwixt the Woods and Mountains,
toward Italy; full of Fish, ebbing and flowing extraordinarily, and begetting
a fruitful Soil.

D A
DAbir or Debir, an ancient City of the Anakims in Palestine near Hebron. It
had been formerly called Kirjah-Sepher, i. e. the City of Learning, as we read
Judge. 1. 11. And was first taken by Joshua, Josh. 11. 21. afterward by
Othniel, Judges 1. 13. with a reward of the General Caleb's Daughter given him
to Wife for his Victory.

Dabul, Dabulum, Dunga, a strong Maritime City with a large Port and a Castle,
at the Mouth of the River Helevacho, in the Confines of the Kingdom of
Guzarate; but under the King of Decan: between Daman to the North, and Goa to
the South, in 20. degrees. of Lat.

Dacia, the ancient Appellation and Division of a large Country of Europe:
bounded on the North by the Carpathian Mountains, and the River Preuth; on the
East and South by the same River, together with the Danube; and by the Theysse
on the West. It was divided into 1. Dacia Ripensis, which contained a part of
the present Hungary and Walachia. 2. Dacia Alpestris, answering to another part
of Walachia and to Moldavia. 3. Dacia Mediterranea or Gepida, in which was
comprehended the present Transylvania. The Albocensii, Sinsi, Taurissi,
Piephigi, Biepti, etc. were the then Inhabitants of this Country, under the
Government of Kings of their own; till Trajan, conquering Decebalus, reduced
them into a Roman Province in the year of Rome 98. and affixed the Name of
Colonia Vlpia Trajana to their Capital City, otherwise called Varhel or
Zarmisogethusa. The Greeks called this people, Getae: It was the Romans that
derived the Title of Daci and Dacae upon them. Dacia also in the Monastic
Writers is put abusively for Dania, Daci for Dani, and Dacicum for Danicum. In
the University of Paris the Danish College is called Collegium Dacorum. The
Marish and the Olt were the principal Rivers of Dacia.

Dacha, Paropanisus, a Province in the Greater Asia.

Dada, an ancient City of Pisidia in the Lesser Asia: otherwise by Ptolomy and
Strabo written Adata and Adadata.

Dadastana, an ancient City of Bithynia in Asia the Less, upon the Confines of
Galatia: remarkable for the death of the Emperor Jovian here.

Dadivan, a delightful Plain four or five Leagues in Circuit in the Province of
Farsistan in Persia, between Schiras and Lar: richly planted with Orange,
Lemon, and Pomgranate Trees; and traversed by a River that affords plenty of
Fish. The English and Dutch, residing at Ormus, are wont to pass the end of the
Summer here for pleasure.

Dafar, the Seat of the ancient Homeritae in Arabia Foelix, upon the Arabian
Sea.

Daghestan or Dachestan, a Province between the Kingdom of Astracan to the
North, and the Province of Schirwan in Persia to the South: Inhabited by
Tartars, under a Prince of their own, in security against Invasions by the
means of inaccessible Mountains. The principal City here is Tarku.

Dagho, Daghoa, a small Island upon the Coast of Livonia, to the North of the
Island of Oesel, in the Baltic Sea, at the mouth of the Bay of Riga, which has
two Castles; and is under the King of Sweden.

Dagno, Thermidava, a City of Dalmatia or Albania, upon the River Drino.

Dai or Daae, an ancient People of Scythia Asiatica upon the Caspian Sea,
adjoining to the Massagetae.

Dalanguer, Imaus.

Dalecarle, Dalecarlia or Dalarne, a great Province in the Kingdom of Sweden,
toward the Mountains of Savona and Norway, which bounds it on the West; on the
North it has Helsinga; Gestricia on the East, and Vermelandia on the South: a
vast Country, but it has never a City or good Town in it. Taking this Name from
the River Dalecarle, which is one of the most considerable of all the Rivers of
the Kingdom of Sweden. It is a Mountainous Country.

Dalem, Dalemum, a small Town of the Duchy of Limburg in the Low Countries,
under the Hollanders. It stands upon a Stream two Leagues from Liege, and three
from Aix la Chapelle: fortified with a strong Castle, and adorned with the
Title of an Earldom, and likewise enjoying a Jurisdiction over a Territory of
many Villages beyond the Meuse.

Dalia, a Province contained within Westrogothia in the Kingdom of Sweden,
between the Lake of of Vener and the Prefecture of Bahuys. Dalebourg is the
most considerable Town in it.

Dallendorf, a Village and Castle in Eyfel, in the Duchy of Juliers, which was
the Seat of the ancient Taliates: sometimes called Tallenford.

Dalmatia, the Eastern part of the ancient Illyricum, called by the Ancients
Delmio or Dalmatia, from a City of that Name, its Capital. The Inhabitants of
which revolting with about twenty Towns from the Kingdom of Epirus, called this
small District by the Name of Dalmatia. Afterward it was conquered by the
Romans, and after this by the Sclavonians: called by the Turks Bosnaeli, by the
Poles Slowienska, by the Italians Schiavonia, by the French Dalmatie. That
Country which now goes by the Name, is but a small part of the ancient
Dalmatia; lying upon the Adriatic Sea, and bounded on the North by Croatia and
Bosnia, on the East by Servia, on the South by Albania, and on the West by the
Adriatic; in which Bounds Morlachia is included. In the year 1076. Pope
Gregory VII. in a Council held at Salona, actually erected this Country into a
Kingdom, by the Investiture of Demetrius, then Duke of Dalmatia, with all the
Ensigns of Royalty. Now the greatest part is under the Turks, but the
Seacoasts and Islands are in the hands of the Venetians, who have taken
several Forts from the Turks in this present War. The Commonwealth of Ragusa
lies in Dalmatia also; which is not subject either to the Turks or Venetians,
though it pays a voluntary Tribute to the former; but in 1686. they were very
earnest with the Emperor of Germany by their Ambassador, to undertake their
Protection against the Turks. The Sclavonian Language is spoken by the Natives
of Dalmatia.

Dalton, a Market Town in Lancashire in the Hundred of Loynsdale; seated in a
Champaign Country, not far from the Sea.

Dam, a strong Town in Flanders, built of late years to secure Bruges against
the Hollanders, from which it stands but one League toward the North. This is
still in the hands of the Spaniard. Dam, a strong Town in the Dukedom of
Pomerania, upon the River Oder, right over against Stetin, which is in the
Possession of the King of Sweden. Dam, a Town in Gronningen, three Miles from
the chief City of that Province to the East, and one from Delfziil to the West,
seated upon Damsterdiep.

Damala, Troezeu, once a City, now a small Town or Village on the Eastern Shore
of the Morea; twenty seven Miles from Napoli to the North-East, and fourteen
from Corinth to the South-East.

Daman or Damaon, a celebrated Port on the West of Malabar in the Kingdom of
Guzurate, upon the Coast of the Gulf of Cambaia, twenty Leagues from Surate,
in 20. degrees. of Northern Latitude: in the hands of the Portuguese; who built it,
and have so strongly fortified it, that the Great Mogul in vain of late
besieged it with forty thousand men.

Damascus, is the principal and the most ancient Town in Syria: seated in a
Plain upon the Chrysorrhoas, or a River called the Golden Stream by the
Ancients; surrounded with Mountains, one hundred and forty Miles from Jerusalem
to the South, and Antioch to the North. This City is so ancient, that it is not
known when or by whom it was built; but it is mentioned by Abraham. In the
succeeding Ages of the World, it followed the Fate of Syria, successively
subject to all the four great Empires, and famous under all. But then the
Conversion of S. Paul, which happened in part near and in part within this
City, is one of the greatest things that has in the Course of so many Ages
befallen it. This was also one of the first great Cities the Saracens took from
the Romans, after a Siege of six Months, in 636. by Omar the Successor of
Abubecher. In 813. it was made the Seat of one of their Califs. Babylon being
the second, and Grand Cairo the third. Conradus III. Emperor of Germany
attempted in 1147. to reduce it, without any good Success, by reason of the
Divisions amongst the Christians in the Holy Land. In 1298. it was taken by
Cassan the Turk, and 30000 Saracens slain; but the Saracens soon after
recovered it. About 1395. it became a Prey to that Flagellum Dei, ( Tamerlane)
the great Scythian Conqueror: After this it was subject to the Sultans of
Egypt, till Selim I. about 1514. subjected it to the Ottoman Empire, under
which it still is. This City is an Archbishop's See under the Patriarch of
Antioch; the Seat of one of the Turkish Visiers; in a fruitful Valley, so
extremely pleasant withal, as amongst many Writers to gain the Title of the
Paradise of the World. Yet not mightily inhabited of later times; being more
visited by Pilgrims of the Turkish and Christian Religions, than by Merchants.
The Current of the Trade running by Aleppo, fifty Miles more North. It is now
called by the Turks Scham. Long. 69. 00. Lat. 33. 00.

Dambea, a City and Kingdom in Aethiopia in Africa, near the Fountains of the
Nile; which has a Lake in it of the same Name, (twenty five French Leagues in
Length, and fifteen in Breadth) encompassed on all sides by Mountains, out of
which arise a vast Number of Rivers to form this Lake, called Bar-Dambea, the
Sea of Dambea, in the Aethiopick Language: And out of these Waters, thus
united; the Nile springs, at some Distance from the Mounains. See Nile. There
are twenty one Islands standing in this Lake; the chiefest of which is Dek.

Damiata, a City of Egypt, upon one of the more Eastern Mouths of the Nile:
Anciently called Tamiatis or Damiata, and now by the Arabians Damiat. This City
stands on the opposite Shore to Pelusium, and grew out of the Ruins of it.
Taken by the Christians in 1218. But in 1221. they were forced to restore it,
being involved in such Miseries by the Waters that were let loose upon them,
that they must otherwise have perished. After this it was retaken by Lewis IX.
in 1249. who being afterward taken Prisoner by the Sultan, was forced to
restore it as his Ransom; after which the Saracens burnt it. This is an
Archbishops See under the Patriarch of Alexandria; and now a great, well
peopled City, and one of the Keys of that Country. Long. 63. 20. Lat. 31. 10.

Dammartin, or Dampmartin, Domnum Martinum, a Town in the Province of the Isle
of France near Paris. Adorned with a Collegiate Church; and famous in French
History for the Earls of the House that derive their Name from it.

Damor, Leon, a River in Phoenicia, which arises from Mount Lebanon, and falls
into the Mediterranean Sea, between Sydon and Bayrut.

Damut, Damot, or Damout, a Kingdom of the higher Aethiopia, heretofore under
the Abissins; but now torn from them by the Gala's. Its Situation is toward
the Lake of Zaire. There are many Golden Mines in it; and a City, the Capital,
of the same Name.

Dampierre, a Barony in the Territory of Aunis in France, upon the River
Boutonne or Voltunna.

Damvillers, Damvillerum, or Danvilliers, Danvillerium, a strong Town in
Luxemburgh, upon the River Maes, seated upon a Hill, five Leagues from Verdun
to the North, and about eight German Miles from Thionville to the West. Taken
by the French in 1637. and annexed to the Duchy of Lorrain; but in 1673.
dismantled.

Danambre. See the Nieper.

Danby, an ancient Castle in the Tract of Cleveland in the North Riding of
Yorkshire; seated near a large Park and Chase of the same Name. First advanced
to the Dignity of an Earldom by King Charles I. in the Person of Henry Danvers
of the Line of the Lord Latimer, to whom this Castle did anciently belong: and
afterward upon the Default of Issue from the said Henry, in the Person of
Thomas Osborn, created by King Charles II. Baron of Kineton and Viscount
Latimer in 1673. and Earl of Danby the year after: The now Marquess of
Caermarthen, from King William.

Dandalii, an ancient People of Germany, of great Power in the twelfth Century;
and so addicted to their Paganism, that VValdemar King of Denmark with the
Princes of Pomerania and Saxony were obliged to force them by Sea and Land to
hear Christianity preached amongst them.

Dangala, or Dancala, a City of the Upper Aethiopia, upon the Nile, in the
Tract of Nubia, (whereof it is the Capital) and in the Kingdom of Gorhani,
toward the North. Long. 52. Lat. 10.

Danneberg, or Daneberg, a Town and County in the Dukedom of Lunenburgh, upon
the River Tetza, four Miles from the Elb, and seven from Lunenburgh to the
South-East. The Town has a Castle belonging to it. The County belongs to the
Duke of Zell, and is extended from East to West upon the Elb, between the
Dukedom of Mecklenburgh to the North, the Marquisate of Brandenburg to the
South and East, and the Dukedom of Lunenburgh to the West. It had heretofore
Earls of its own; but Nicolas, the last of them, in 1303. sold it to Otto Duke
of Brunswick: Of latter Times it was under the Duke of VVolfembuttel, and by
him was granted in 1671. to the Duke of Zell.

Dantsick, Dantzik, Dantiscum, Gedanum, called by the Inhabitants and Poles
Danske, and Danzig by the Germans; is a vast well fortified City of Poland; the
Capital of Prussia, in the little Pomerania, with a noble Haven and Castle upon
the Vistula which a League below discharges it self into the Bay of Dantzick,
a Part of the Baltic Sea. So watered by two other Rivers, the Rodaun and the
Motlau; toward the South and West it has some Hills, which in 1656. were first
fortified against the Swedes. This City is Imperial and Free, belonging
originally to the Empire. Primislaus King of Poland, in 1295. first walled it
against the Knights of the Teutonick Order, as Cromerus says, lib. 11. After
this it was betrayed to the Marquess of Brandenburgh by one Peter Chancellor of
Pomerania, who being in wrath with Vladislaus Lochicus his Master, King of
Poland, and the Castle thereupon surprised by the Teutonick Order, (who
pretended to assist Vladislaus) they demanded a vast Sum of Money, which the
Citizens refusing to pay, they proceeded to take the City, to plunder and slay
great Numbers of the Inhabitants. In 1310. Sigismundus Augustus took away half
the Customs upon their Disrespect to his Ambassador, who was sent to quiet
them, then in Tumult and Disorder: He reserved also the greater Causes to the
Determination of the Diet of Poland, contrary to the Privilege granted by
Casimirus his Predecessor. In 1569. Stephanus King of Poland, proscribed them,
for taking part with the House of Austria against him; which Quarrel was ended
by the Mediation of the Neighboring Princes. In 1597. Vladislaus IV. had also
some Controversies with this City about their Imposts. The Protestant Religion
is embraced here, the Roman Catholic tolerated. No Man is admitted into the
Senate, except he be a Luthoran. In 1596. the Senate granted the Jesuits the
Monastery of S. Bridget, and S. Mary's Church; but the City opposed it so
vigorously, that three Days after they were forced to recall their Edict. In
1657. this City was forced to burn her own Suburbs to prevent their being taken
by the Swedes. It lies in Long 41. 30. Lat. 54. 20.

Danube, Danubius, Ister, is one of the greatest Rivers in Europe, and no less
celebrated both in Ancient and Modern Story: Called Danubius and Ister, whence
Ovid. lib. 1. de Pont. Stat vetus Vrbs ripae vicina Binominis Istri. The upper
part next the Fountains, was for the most part called the Danube; and the lower
from Illyricus or Sclavonia, the Ister, as Pliny says; by the Germans Donaw,
by the French Danube, by the Italians Danubio, by the Poles Dunay, by the Turks
Tunay. It arises in the County of Bar in Suabia, sour German Miles from
Freiburgh to the East, and nine from Basil to the North-East; running
North-East, it passes by Vlm, having received a great many smaller Rivers on
both Sides, which for Brevity I must omit. At Leucy it enters Bavaria, and a
little further from the South receives the Leck, which passes by Ausprugh;
and still continuing its Course as far as Regensburgh, it then turns and runs
more Easterly to the Confines of Austria, where at Passaw it entertains the
vast River Inn, which comes from Inspruck, and brings many other with it; from
hence it goes to Vienna, where it makes an Island; then washes the Walls of
Presburgh the Capital of the Upper Hungary, where it divides and makes the
Island of Schut: at Comora it unites again, and goes on to Gran, bending its
Course more Southerly; from whence it passes to Buda the Capital of all
Hungary, where it makes two other Islands, one above Buda, and another a little
below Colocza. The Sarawitz, which comes from Alba-Regalis, falls into it from
the West; then the Drove at Esseck; then the Tibiscus a vast River of Upper
Hungary from the East; and the Save again on the West by Belgrade, which is the
first Town of Servia: from hence its Course is more East, having Moldavia,
VValachia, and Bialogrod on the North, Servia and Bulgaria on the South; where
it makes many Isles, and then enters the Euxine or Black Sea by three great
Outlets; the two more Northerly, being as it were reunited in the very Entry of
them into the Sea. Dr. Edward Brown, in his Travels, says; That at
Crainburgh, not far distant from the Head, it appeared a considerable Stream; a
little after from the City Vlm in Suevia, where it begins to be Navigable,
it continues a long Course; passing by Ingolstad, Ratisbone, Straubing, Passaw,
Lintz and Vienna, unto Presburgh; from whence through Hungary it makes a Course
of above three hundred Miles, before it passes by Belgrade. It drinks in above
sixty considerable Rivers; and in a sober Account performs a Course of above
1500 Miles, from its Rise to its Fall. This River has had many Naval Fights
upon it between the Turks and Christians. At one time there were twenty
Galliots, eighty small Pinnaces, and little less than a hundred Ships of
Burden employed upon it, in a Siege of Buda. At the Siege of Belgrade, Mahomet
the Great brought two hundred Ships and Galleys up the Stream; the Hungarians
sent so many from Buda down the Stream, that after a sharp Encounter, the
Hungarians took twenty, and forced the rest on shore near the Camp; so that
Mahomet was forced to burn them to prevent their being taken by the Christians.
This perhaps is more than can be said of any other River in the World. It
abounds in good Fish, as Trouts, Perches, large and delicious Carps, exceeding
(says Dr. Brown) any I have seen, etc. some of which is every Year salted,
and sent into other Parts. This River, to conclude, was for many Ages the
Boundary on this Side of the Roman Empire, and against the barbarous Nations;
accordingly the Roman Legions had their Stations upon its Banks: they were the
Founders of many of the Cities; and many memorable Actions in those early Days
happened near it, sometimes between the Romans themselves, and sometimes
between them and the Barbarians.

Danvilliers. See Damvilliers.

Daphne, a delightful Village of old in Syria, upon the Banks of the River
Orontes, five Miles from Antioch the Great. Where was a large famous
Cypress*Wood consecrated to Apollo, with a Temple to his Honor also, and
another to Diana; and a Spring called the Fountain of Daphne. The Romans for
some time kept a Legion here, till they found their Men effeminated by the
Pleasures of the Place. Pompey the Great, charmed with its Beauty, became a
Benefactor to it. Constantine M. built a House of Pleasure in it in the Year
326. Gallus caused the Body of the Martyr Babylas, the Patriarch of Antioch, to
be transported hither; whereupon it is said Apollo surceased his Oracle. Julian
the Apostate commanded the said Body to be removed in 362. After which the
Temple of Apollo was so consumed in a Storm of Thunder and Lightning, that in
S. Chrysostom's time only one Pillar, now nothing is remaining thereof. And the
Christian Emperors succeeding Julian erected Churches in its Room.

Darbon, Alpheus, a River in the middle of the Morea, which falls into the
Ladon (which falls into the Orfea,) and divides at Pilus: one Branch called
Illiaco, runs West, and enters the Ocean over against Zant; the other (
Alpheo) runs South, and enters the Gulf of Arcadia, over against the Town of
Stroffhad, 20 Miles North-West of Arcadia.

Darby, Derby, Derbia, is both a City and a County in England. The County has
Nottinghamshire on the East, Leicestershire on the South, Staffordshire on the
West, and Yorkshire on the North. The River Derwent divides it into two Parts,
running North and South, and at last falls into Trent, which is its Southern
Boundary. That Part which lies East of Derwent is plain and fruitful; the
Western Parts are more mountainous and barren, but abound in Mines of Lead,
Iron, Coals, and afford good Pasture for Sheep. In the South-East Part of this
County upon the River Derwent, lies the City of Derby, which first takes its
Name from the River, and then lends it to the County: A fine, rich, welltraded
City. On the East Side it has Derwent, covered by a Stone Bridge; on the South
it has a clear Rivolet called Mertenbrook: and within it five Parish-Churches.
Thomas Lord Stanley was created Earl of Darby in 1486. by Henry VII. in the
first Year of his Reign. The present William Stanley, who is the ninth Earl of
this Family (and the fourth of England) succeeded Charles his Father in 1672. A
Title heretofore enjoyed, first by the Earls of Ferrers and Darby, and
afterward by several Princes of the Royal Family.

Darda, a strong Fort at the North end of the Bridge of Esseck, built by the
Turks in 1686. and taken by the Germans when they burnt the Bridge: Retaken by
the Duke of Lorrain in 1687. and designed to be fortified, but soon after
deserted rather, that the Turks might have a free Passage to their ruin, as
came to pass Aug. 12. 1687. when they received the greatest Overthrow near this
Place, which has befallen them in this last Century. See Mohatz.

The Dardanelles, Dardanium, Dardania, are two Castles built by Mahomet II. The
one in Europe, where anciently stood Cestos; the other in Asia, in the place of
Abidos, upon the streightest part of the Helespont. They stand two hundred
Miles South of Constantinople, as being the Keys of that City. The famous
Monsieur Thevenot, who saw them in 1655. thus describes them (as he is
translated). That which is in Romania, on the Side of Europe, is built in a
triangular Form, at the Foot of an Hill, which commands and covers it; where
there is a little Town. This Castle has three Towers covered with Lead,
whereof two are toward the Land, and the third which is the biggest, upon the
Harbor. It has (said he) as I could discern with a Perspective-Glass, about
twenty Port-holes* level with the Water; in which, besides what I could observe
by my Glasses, I was assured that a Man might easily creep into some of the
Guns, they were of such a prodigious Bore. The other on the Asia Side is in a
Plain, and seemed to me to be almost square. It has three Towers on each Side,
and a Dungeon or Platform in the Middle, but not so many Port-holes as the
other. These Castles are of no Strength to Landward, being only designed
against Ships, as Mr. Sandys and all observe; but they were kept by strong
Garrisons. This Place is famous for the Loves of Hero and Leander, the Passage
of Xerxes by a Bridge of Boats, the Passage of the Turks a little above these
Castles; and of later times for three Naval Victories obtained here by the
Venetians, in 1655, 1656, and 1657. Since that the Turks have built two other
Castles, which bear just upon the entrance of the Hellespont, about three Miles
more South than the old Dardanelles. That on Asia Side lies not above two
Miles from Troas upon a flat Ground. That on Europe, on the side of a Hill,
with round Towers, and several Ascents after the old Fashion, as Mr. Wheeler
observes; which, he says, were built since Mr. Sandys's time, and in all
probability since 1655. upon the Occasion of those Venetian Victories. The
Turks call Lepanto and Patras, at the entrance of the Bay or Gulf of Lepanto,
the Dardanelles, by way of Allusion. There are two other such Castles called
the Dardanelles of the Gulf of Larta in Epirus, eighty English Miles
North-West from Lepanto.

Dardania, the ancient Name of a Country in the upper Maesia, which became
afterward a part of Dacia, and now makes properly the South Quarter of the
Province of Servia, wherein Nizza and Vscopia stand. Also an ancient Town and
Province of Troas in Asia the Less, mentioned by Mela, Pliny, etc.

Darha, a Country, City, and River in the Division of Biledulgeridia in Africa.
The River is subject to an annual Inundation, which beginning in April (if a
great one) makes a fruitful Year. Toward this River stands the City Darha in
Darha properly so called, which is one of the three Parts this Country is
divided into: the others being Itata and the Kingdom of Teslete. This Country
lies between the Kingdom of Morocco, Tesset, and Segellomessa; under the
Obedience of the King of Teslete, who is a Tributary to the Emperor of Morocco.
It abounds particularly with excellent Palm Trees.

Daria, an ancient Episcopal City of Mesopotamia, fifteen Miles from Nisibin.
It has also been called Anastasiopolis, and Anastasia, from its Founder, the
Emperor Anastasius.

Darien, a City upon the Gulf of Vrraba with a great River in the Province of
Terra Firma in the South America. The Sea of this City has been transferred
thence to Panama, being not so considerable a Place as formerly. The River is
otherwise called the River of S. John, and El Rio Darien.

Darking, a Market Town in Surrey, the Capital of its Hundred, upon a Branch of
the River Mole; which at a Place, called the Swallow, by the Foot of a Hill
here falls under Ground and rises again the Distance of a Mile thence, near
Norbury.

Darlington, a Market Town in the Bishopric of Durham; the Capital of its
Wapentake; with a fair Bridge over the River Skerne, where there runs another
small Rivulet into it.

Darmstad, Darmstadium, a Town and Landgravate in the County of Gerawer in
Franconia, upon the River Darmstad, which has a fine Castle; where the
Landgrave of Gerawer or Darmstad resides. It stands two Miles from the Rhine,
and three from Francfort on the Mayn toward the South. And belongs to a Branch
of the House of the Landgraves of Hesse, thence entitled, the Princes of
Hesse-Darmstad.

Daroca, a Town in the Kingdom of Arragon in Spain, upon the River Xiloca, four
or five Leagues from Calatajud, and about ten from Saragossa.

Dartford, a large Market Town in Kent in Sutton Lath upon the River Darent,
not far from the Influx thereof into the Thames. The Rebellion of John Tyler
(alias Jack Straw,) in the Reign of Richard II. in 1381. began here.

Darwent, a River in Darbyshire; another in Cumberland; and a third in
Yorkshire. Sir Francis Ratcliff of Dilston in the County of Cumberland, was
made Earl of Darwent-VVater, by K. James II. August 24. 1687. Baron of Tindale,
and Viscount Ratcliff and Langley. See Derwent.

Daventry, a Market and great Road-Town in Northamptonshire, in the Hundred of
Fauseley, upon a Rivulet that falls into the Nen.

Daulia, Daulis, an ancient City of Phocis in Achaia, not far from Delphi to
the South. It has sometime been a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Athens;
now ruined. A second in Macedonia, whose modern Name is Eladasagni.

Dauphine, Allobroges, Delphinatus, a great Province in the South-East part of
France; bounded on the East by Piedmont, on the North by Savoy and La Bresse,
from which it is separated by the River Rhosne; on the West by Lion and
Vivarais, from which the same River divides it; and on the South by Provence.
It had heretofore Princes of its own, called the Daulphines; but Humbartus II.
their last Prince, in 1343. gave this Principality to Philip de Valois King of
France, upon Condition that the eldest Son of the King of France should bear
this Title, which has been ever since observed. The principal City is Grenoble.

Dax* See Acqs.

The Dead-Sea. See Asphaltites.

Deal, a Member of the Town and Port of Sandwich in Kent; of Note for the
Harboring of Fleets from time to time here, in Order to sail East or West.

Dean. See the Forest of Dean.

Dean-Magna, a Market Town in Glocestershire, in the Hundred of S. Briavells

Deben, a River in Suffolk, upon which VVoodbridge and Debenham stand. It
discharges it self into the Sea twelve Miles below the latter.

Debenhan, a Market Town in Suffolk, in the Hundred of Thedwastree, upon the
River Deben.

Debir. See Dabir.

Decan, or Decam, is a very great Kingdom in the Promontory of Malabar in the
East Indies; bounded on the West by the Indian or Arabian Ocean, on the North
by the Kingdom of Guzarat, on the East by that of Golconda, and on the South by
the Kingdom of Bisnagar. The Capital of it is Visapar; and the greatest part
has been subdued by the Moguls, or divided into petty Kingdoms; of which see
Mr. Thevenot's Travels. The Portuguese overcame Goa, (a Member of this Kindom)
in 1510. and have ever since retained it.

Decize, Dececia, a Town in the Province of Nivernois in France, seven or eight
Leagues from Nevers; standing in an Islet of the Loyre, where the River Airon
beds with the Loyre. It is a Pass of some Consequence, belonging to the* Dukes
of Nevers who have a Castle here. And the Roman Medals that have been found at
it, demonstrate the Antiquity of it.

Deddington, a Market Town in Oxfordshire, in the Hundred of Wotton.

Dedham, a Market Town in Essex, in the Hundred of Lexden.

Dee, Deva, a River called by the Welsh, Fridwy, arises in Merionethshire,
from the Lake of Llyntegid; and running North-West, takes in the River of Alwen
in the same County; then passes into Denbighshire, and becomes a Boundary
between that and Shropshire, admitting (another of its boundaries) the River
Keriog; and passing by Bangor the famous old Welsh Monastery, it enters
Cheshire at Shocklidge. At Alford it takes in another small River, and in
Flintshire the River Allen; so having divided Cheshire from Flintshire at
VVest-Chester, it falls into the Irish Sea, making a great Haven, called by the
Welsh Eee, Etu, by the English Dee-Mouth. Dee, Dea, a River in Galloway in
Scotland, which rises in the Borders of Coila; and running South takes in many
other small Rivers, and at last buries it self in Solway Fyrth; which parts
Scotland from the North-West of England at Kirkubrig, a famous Town of Galloway.

Deeping, a Market Town in Lincolnshire in the Hundred of Nesse.

Deistan, Oxus. See Geichon.

Deizer, Dordomana, a City of Persia.

Delbrugk, Delbrugia, a small Town in the Circle of Westphalia in Germany,
between the Rivers Ems and Lip. Its ancient Inhabitants were the Brucleri
whom Germa^^cus overthrew.

Dele, or Dyle, Dila, a River rising near the Village Thile in Brabant in the
Low Countries; running by Louvain, and after the Reception of the Demer,
falling into the Scheld at Rupel-Monde.

Delft, Delphi, a City of the Province of Holland, which gives name to a
District; one of the principal Cities of that State; very populous and well
built. Here is the Monument of William of Nassaw, the Founder of the
Low Country Liberty, who was here assassinated by the Spaniards, in 1584 And
likewise another of Admiral Trump. It is not above one League from the Hague,
three from Roterdam, and as many from Leiden, in a Plain. In the year 1536. a
Fire almost entirely destroyed it. The Town Delfs-Haven, within a quarter of a
League of Rotterdam, is under the Jurisdiction of this City

Delli, Crateres, two little deep Lakes, mentioned by the Ancients, in the
Island of Sicily near Catania. They were consecrated by the Natives to the D^i
Palisci.

Delly or Delhi, a great City and Kingdom under the Mogul in the East Indies,
upon the River Gemna, a hundred Miles from Agria to the N. toward Labor:
length of time had much wasted it: whereupon Chah Jehan, the Father of Auran
Zeb Emperor of that Country, in 1625. built up another vast one by it, called
Chah Jehan-Abad, or shorter Jehan-Abad, that it might be the Capital of his
Empire: since which it has flourished, and increased above any City in the
Indies, as Bernerius (cited by Baubrand) says, who had often seen it. This
City was the Seat of Porus the Indian King, who made himself famous by his Wars
with Alexander the Great. Near it stands a Pyramid or Obelisk of Stone, which
by its unknown Characters seems to be of great Antiquity; thought in the Indies
to have been erected by Alexander the Great after the Defeat of Porus. The
River Gemna on which this City stands, runs East, and falls into the Ganges.
The Fortress of it is half a League in compass, with round Towers at the
distance of every ten Battlements: the Ditches are full of Water, Wharfed with
Stone; and it has lovely Gardens round about it. In this Citadel is the Royal
Palace. The Town has no Ditches, but Walls filled up with Earth behind, and
Towers.

Delmenhorst, Delmenhorstium, a small Town in the Principality of Oldembourg in
Germany upon the River Delmen, which denominates it and soon after falls into
the Weser. It has the honor of the Title of an Earldom; three Leagues from
Bremen, and a little more from Oldembourg. Under the King of Denmark ever since
1667.

Delos, Ortygia, Lagia, Asteria, Midia, Cynthon, a famous Island of the
Archipelago, the chief of the Cyclades, toward Europe: called by the Modern
Grecks plurally (...), as comprehending the other Island Rhene or Rhenis with
it, because these two at a distance seem to make but one Island. And by
Mariners Sdille, by a corruption of (...). Apollo and Diana were supposed to be
born here. The former had here his Temple and his Oracle; some Ruins whereof,
with others of a Theater, a School, etc. are yet visible at Sdilles, that is,
the ancient City Delos, called afterward Athenae Adrianae, which is little
inhabited now. In the middle of the Island stands the Mountain Cynthus, which
gave the Epithet of Cynthia to Diana; not above one hundred and twenty five
foot high, and therefore short of shadowing the Island, as it was represented
to do in the ancient account. It is a Rock of Marble. The whole Island is
covered with heaps of the same. Besides which, it yields Mastick, and Hares in
the like abundance as formerly when it received the Name of Lagia from them.
Called Delos, says Aristotle, because it showed it self of a sudden in a place
where no Island was before: which might be the reason of the Ancients sancying
that it sometime floated.

Delphi, Delphos, a City of Phocis in Achaia, at the foot of Mount Parnassus,
which in ancient times was very great, though not walled otherwise than by the
steep Rocks that encompassed it: it had a Castle which stood on the top of a
Rock, now called La Castri. This Place once so famous for the most admired and
rich Temple of Apollo Pythius and the Oracle which the Gauls under Brennus
attempted in vain to spoil, in Christian times became a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Athens: but since it fell into the hands of the devouring Turks,
it is become a poor small Village twenty Miles West from Leucadia, forty from
Lepanto to the East, and about seven, says Baudrand, from the Bay of Corinth.
It is observed by Suidas, Cedrenus, Nicephorus, and diverse others, that about
the time of the Nativity of our Savior, this Pythian Oracle became dumb. And
Augustus, being astonished at its silence, received for answer, Me Puer
Hebraeus, divos Deus ipse gubernans, Cedere sede jubet tristemque redire sub
orcum; Aris ergo dehinc tacitis abscedito nostris. Nero afterward plundered it
of five hundred Statues of Brass, with all its Wealth, broke down its
Buildings, and distributed the Lands belonging to it amongst his Soldiers.

Delta, an Island made by the Nile in Egypt, of the fashion of the Letter D in
the Greek, in the way as that River flows from Cairo. Ptolomy mentions two, a
greater and a less of this sort. The ancient City Busiris did stand in the
midst of this Island.

Demer, Tabuda, a River in Brabant.

Demetriade, Dimnitrado, Demetrias, an ancient City of Magnesia in the Province
of Thessalia in Macedonia, upon the Gulf dell' Armiro, or the Pelasgicus sinus
of the Classicks. It has been heretofore a Bishops See under the Archbishop of
Larissa, from which it stands twenty Miles to the East.

Denbigh, Denbiga, one of the twelve Shires in wales, has the Irish Sea on the
North; Flintshire on the East: Merinoth on the South, and Caernarvan on the
West. The principal Rivers are Cluyd, Elway, and Conwey; which last separates
this Shire from Carnarvan. The West part is barren; the middle, where the Cluyd
runs, is plain and very fruitful; the last part (except what lies upon the
D(...) is less fertile. Denbigh, the principal Town, stands upon a declining
Rock. H. Lacy Earl of Lincoln obtaining a Grant of this Place from Edward I.
walled it, and set up a Castle on the South side; but wanting Water and being
of difficult Access, the Inhabitants have by degrees removed their Dwellings
nearer the River; and in Mr. Cambden's time were building a second Church, the
former not being able to contain the Inhabitants. This Town has the River Aled
or Elwy on the West, and the Cluyd on the East, which meet beneath it to the
North: it has a Bridge over both of them; the later Maps place the Elwy on the
South of the Town. It stands fifteen Miles from Chester to the West, and four
from S. Asaph to the South. The Right Honorable William Fielding is Earl of
Denbigh, and the fourth Earl of his Family.

Dendermonde, Teneramunda, is a strong Town in Flanders upon the River Schelde,
where the Tenera from Alost falls into it; lying in the middle between Gant and
Antwerp, about five Leagues from either.

Denmark, Denemarck, Dania, Cimbrius Chersonesus, called by the Italians and
Spaniards Danimarca, by the Poles Dunska. Is one of the most ancient Kingdoms
of Europe, yet of no great Extent. Part of a vast Peninsula, (called of old
Cimbricus Chersonesus, in middle time Jutland) and some Islands in the Eastern
and Baltic Sea, make the body of this Kingdom; except that the Kingdom of
Norway, together with Greenland, Island, and Feroe is now annexed to it. It was
once a part of the Kingdom of the Goths, but now a separate Kingdom, consisting
of two parts, Jutland and the Isles. The North of Jutland only is under the
King of Denmark. viz. Nort Jutland, and the Northern parts of Suder Jutland. Of
the Islands, Zeeland, Fuynen and Bornholm in the Baltic Sea, and Island in the
Virgivian Ocean are the chief. Coppenhague in the Isle of Zeeland is the
Capital of the whole. There were also three Counties on the Norway side;
Blecklen, Schania and Haland, which belonged originally to Denmark: but in
1645. by the Treaty of Brooms-Boa, these and some other Islands were
surrendered by Christian IV. to the Swedes for ever; and again in 1658. and
1660. confirmed to the Swedes. This Kingdom had heretofore the Isles of
Shetland on the North of Scotland, which were granted to James VI. as a part of
his Queens Dowry. The King of Denmark possesses also in Germany, 1. Half the
Dukedom of Holsatia. 2. The Counties of Oldenburgh, and that of Delmenhorst;
which two fell to him by Inheritance from the last Count of Oldenburgh. Till
1660 the Crown was Elective, but then made Hereditary by Frederick III. The
Danes have also enlarged their Princes Bounds by planting a New Denmark in the
North of America. This Kingdom once was one of the most Powerful in Europe; (as
may be remembered more particularly to us, by their Incursions into England,
Scotland and Ireland; where they maintained War with our Ancestors above three
hundred years together): But by the Fate of Time, War, and other humane
Calamities, reduced to the state in which it now is. The Danish Writers derive
its Name, and pretend to give a Catalogue of their Kings, from Dan the Son of
Jacob. It is a cold Climate, but fruitful enough in Corn, Cattle and Fish; and
the greatest Revenue of the Crown comes from the Toll that is paid for passing
the Sound.

Denia, a Seaport in the Kingdom of Valentia in Spain, over against the Isle
of Yvica, on the Mediterranean Sea, eleven Miles from Valentia to the South.

Denin, a celebrated Nunnery in the Low Countries, upon the Road from
Valenciennes to Doway: where the Chapter is composed of 18 Chanonesses, who are
all Ladies of Quality, taking the Title of Countesses of Ostrevan, from their
Founder S. Aldebert, an Earl of Ostrevan, who left both his Estate and Dignity
to them. They enter into no Vows Marry at their pleasure, leaving only their
thanks to the Chapter for the honor they have enjoyed by it.

St Dennis en Uaux, ad Sanctum Dionysium in Vallibus, a Town in the Dukedom of
Orleans in France.

St. Dennis Carriere, a Town and a famous Monastery in the Isle of France, two
Leagues from Paris to the South; one of the richest Monasteries in that
Kingdom, upon the River Crou, which a little lower falls into the Scin. The
Abbey was founded in 636. by Dagobert King of France in honor of S. Dennis,
whose Bones sleep here. But the Church was rebuilt since by Suggerus one of
their Abbots, in three Years and three Months, ending in 1144. Here are the
Tombs of the Kings of France. Some of which have died here too.

St. Dennis, a Town in Normandy in the Forest of Lions, on the Borders of
Beauvois, in which Henry I. King of England died.

Deptford, a large Town in Kent in Sutton Lath; situated at the fall of the
River Ravensburn into the Thames amongst rich and low Meadows, and provided
with a Dock and Storehouse for the Navy Royal. It is divided into the Upper
and Lower Town.

Derbent, Caucasie Portae, Porta ferrea, Alexandria, a City of Persia upon the
Caspian Sea, between the Foot of Mount Caucasus and that Sea; on the Borders of
Georgia, near the River Korr: called by Turks Demir, or Temir Capi; that is,
the Iron Gate: not that there is any Iron Gate, but by reason of the Strength
and Fortifications of this City; which are such as may resist the fury of
almost any Enemy, the Passage being but three hundred Paces. It has a sine
Haven and a strong Castle, in the hands of the King of Persia; but it is
declining, the lower part next the Sea, being little or nothing inhabited. It
is said Alexander the Great built this City, to shut up that Passage against
the Scythians, who were always the Terror of the civilized World, and have been
often the Scourges of it. Long. 80. 00. Lat. 49. 00.

Derbices, an ancient People about the Mountain Caucasus in Persia, toward the
Caspian Sea, and the Confines of Scythia; said to be very Cruel and Barbarous
in many Customs.

Derby, See Darby.

Dereham East, a Market Town in Norfolk in the Hundred of Milford.

Dernis, a Town and Fortress in Dalmatia upon an Hill near the River Cicola.
Taken and burnt by the Forces of the Republic of Venice in 1684.

Derote, Latone, a famous City in the Egyptian Delta, which is still extant,
and of some consideration; but without any Walls, as Zeiglerus says.

Derpt, Torpatum, a City of Livonia, called Juriogrod by the Russ. A small City
belonging to the Poles, in the Province of Odenpoa, upon the River Embeck, near
the Lake of Peibas on the West side, twenty one Miles from Ruel to the
South-East, and fourteen from Pleskow to the West. Anciently a Bishops See
under the Archbishop of Riga, from 1230. but the Bishopric is now extinct.
Taken by the Swedes in 1625. under the Command of James de la Gardie. And in
1632. there was an University opened in it by Gustavns Adolphus King of Sweden.

Derry, Roboretum, Derra, Deria, commonly called Londonderry, is both a City
and a County in the Province of Vlster in the Kingdom of Ireland. The County is
bounded on the North by the Ocean, on the East by Antrim, on the South by
Tyrone, and on the West by Dunglass; and was heretofore called Colrane. The
City is a Colony from London, sent about an hundred years since into these
parts; and in 1664. the Bishops See was removed from Rapoe hither. In the great
Massacre it preserved it self, and afforded shelter to as many as fled to it;
the Irish being neither able to surprise, nor Master it: seated on the Western
Shore of the Lake of L. Foil, twelve Miles from the Sea. Several thousands of
this place perished through Sickness and Famine in the time they held it out
for King William. At last they were relieved by Major General Kirk, July, 19.
1689. whereupon King James II. his Men decamped, leaving little appearance of a
Siege behind them by the damage done to the Houses or Walls. For after King
James's own presence and all the inviting means that could be used by him,
proved ineffectual to alter the resolutions of the People by Persuasion, they
thought to have reduced it by Famine.

Dertinouth, a fine Town and Haven in the South-West part of Devonshire, upon
the River Dert, from whence it is so called; twenty four Miles South of Exeter.
The Haven is much frequented by Merchants, and for that cause secured by two
Castles or Forts. The Town has also a Mayor by the Grant of Edward III. And has
often defended it self stoutly against the French; but especially in 1404. when
de Castle a French Man, (who by his Men of War and Pyracies had stopped all
Commerce in these parts, and burnt Plymouth), upon his attempting this Place,
was by the Women and Country people intercepted, and slain with all his
Company. The Loyal Colonel George Leg, was by Charles II. created Baron of
Dertmouth, November. 2. 1682. and by James II. Earl of Dertmouth. The River Dert
rises in the same County West of Chegforde; and running South, takes in a
small Rivolet which comes from Ashburton, giving its Name on the West to a
place called Dertmore; at Dean Prior on the West, it takes in another; and a
little further, one called Harborne on the same side; from whence it passes to
its Outlet or Mouth, having performed a course of about twenty Miles.

Derwent, a River of Derbishire, which rises in the Confines of the County of
York; and running South, divides that whole County into two parts; at Bromford
it takes in the New River; about five Miles further to the South, the Wye; then
on the East side, the Amber at Danfield, another from the West; and at Derby,
one called Merton-Brook; then having reached the other extremity of this
County, the Trent, there and in that noble River it ends.

Derwent-Water, a Tract in the East Riding of Yorkshire, betwixt the Rivers
Ouse and Derwent: Honored with the Title of an Earldom. See Darwent.

Dess, Disa, Dios, a River arising in the Bishopric of Liege in the
Low Countries, thence passing to Bosleduc, and a little further to the North
losing it self in the Maes.

La Desiderada, a little and fruitful Island in the South America amongst the
Antilles, under the French; ten or twelve Leagues from Guadaloupe: First
discovered by Columbus, and so named by him, in signification, that he had
attained his desires.

Desize, See Decize.

Desmond, Desmonia, by the Irish Deswown, is a County of the Province of
Munster, in the South-West part of Ireland, upon the Rivers Mare and Bantry;
having Kerry on the North, the Ocean on the West, and Cork on the South and
East. It has two small Towns, Doneyne on the North, and Ardey on the South of
Mare. William Fielding, Earl of Denbigh, is Earl of Desmond also.

Il Despotato, Despotatus, a Province of Greece, the same with the Aetolia, or
according to others, with the Acarnania of the Ancients, or rather both;
including also the Isles adjacent: being in the time of the Grecian Empire, the
Government of the second Despote in quality (after the Despote of Peloponnesus)
of all Greece.

Dessaw, Desavia, a strong Town in the Upper Saxony upon the River Elb, six
Miles from Mecydburg to the East, and five from wittenberg to the West; the
usual Residence of the Prince of Anhault: at this Town the River Multa enters
the Elb from the South. Also famous for a Victory obtained by Albert
Wallenstein over Count Mansfield, in 1625.

Dethgle, Tigris.

Deva, a Town of Guipuscoa in Spain, upon the Bay of Biscay, upon a River of
the same Name; ten Miles from Valenzia to the East, and the same Distance from
S. Sebastian to the West; having a very convenient Haven. The River rises in
the Mountains of Segura, and running North, falls here into the Bay of Biscay,
after a Course of about twenty Miles; in the middle of which it salutes the
City of Placentia.

Develtus, Develto, called by the Bulgarians Zagoria, or Zagora, is a City of
Bulgaria, at the Foot of the Mountains, upon the River Panize; ten German Miles
from the Euxine Sea, eighteen from Adrianople to the North-East; in the very
Confines of Romania and Bulgaria: Heretofore a Bishop's See under the
Archbishop of Adrianople; but now raised to an Archbishopric it self.

Deventer, Deventria, a City in the Province of Over-Yssel, which is the
Capital of that Province. It stands upon the Yssel, four Miles from Zwol to the
West, and seven from Nimeguen to the North-West. Made a Bishop's See by Pope
Paul IV. in 1559. under the Archbishop of Vtrecht. Betrayed to the Spaniards in
1587. Subdued and brought under the United Provinces again in 1591. Taken by
the French in 1672. and deserted in 1674. It is surrounded on all Sides with
Water, and very strongly fortified.

Deveril, a little Stream in Wilsthire, which runs under ground a Mile.

Devizes, a Market and Borough-Town in Wilsthire in the Hundred of Swanborn,
near the Head of a Stream of the same Name with it self, which joins the Avon.
It returns two Burgesses to the Parliament.

Devonshire, Devonia, is one of the Southern Counties of England, which takes
its Name from the Danmonii, the ancient British Inhabitants. On the North it is
bounded by the Irish Sea, on the West by Cornwall, (from which it is divided by
the River Tamar;) on the South by the British Sea, and on the East by
Somersetshire and Dorsetshire. It has on both these Seas many good Harbors;
and is rich in Mines, especially the Western Parts. It abounds in pleasant
Meadows, fine Woods, rich Towns: In other Places where the Soil is more barren,
it is yet improveable, and rewards the Tillers Industry. Its chiefest Rivers
are the Tam^r, the Turridge, the Taw, Ex, and Dert. The chief City is Exeter,
next to which is Plymouth. The Honorable William Cavendish is Earl of this
County, whose Grandfather William obtained this Honor from James I. Aug. 20.
1618. and has enjoyed it ever since 1628.

Deux-Ponts. See Zweybrucken.

Dewsberg. See Hensterberg.

Diablintres, Diablindi, or Diablitae, an ancient People of Gallia Celtiqua;
supposed to dwell in the (now) Province of la Perch; with Noviodunum, or
Nogent le Rotrou, for their Capital. Others say, in the Lesser Brittany, near
Neodunum or Doll, where there are some Lands still bearing the Name of les
Diableres, and Families of les Diables.

Le Diamond, a great Rock upon the Coast of the Island Martinique in the South
America, at the Distance of a League. Observed to swarm with Fowl.

Diarbech, Mesopotamia, a Country in Asia, between the Euphrates and the
Tygris; which is now in the hands of the Turks.

Diarbekir, a great and populous City of Mesopotamia upon the Banks of the
Tygris; the Seat of a Potent Bassa, who is generally one of the Viziers of the
Ottoman Empire, and has nineteen Sangiacs under him in the Compass of his
Province. It is surrounded with a double Wall of sixty two Towers, and adorned
with a stately Mosque which heretofore belonged to the Christians; whereof they
reckon no less then 20000 still living in it, of the Armenian, Nestorian or
Jacobite Churches, together with some Capuchines. It stands upon an Eminence,
affords plenty of Provisions, and is able to bring into the Field 20000 Horse.

Diargument, Hyrcania, a Province in the North-East Part of the Kingdom of
Persia.

Dibres, a Town of the Kingdom of Epirus in Greece, taken by the Turks in 1442.

Dichling, a Market Town in the County of Sussex, in Lewis Rape.

Dictamo, Dictamne, a Town in the Territory of Canea in the Island of Crete,
whence comes the medicinal Herb Dittany.

Die, Dia Vocontiorum, Dea, a City in the Dauphinate in France; heretofore a
Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Vienne; but in 1275. by Pope Gregory IX.
united to that of Valence. This City stands on the North Side of the River
Drome, which falls into the Rhosne, eight Miles from Valence to the East, and
eleven from Grenoble to the South-West. It is a Roman Town, called by Antoninus
Dea Augusta, and in the Councils Dia. The Huguenots, in the Years 1577. and
1585. took and used it severely, and rased its Citadel. An Inscription not
long since was found in it, Matri Deum Magnae Idaeae. For the Vocontii (its
ancient Inhabitants) were great Worshippers of that Goddess; whence the Name
Dia came to be derived to this place.

Diemens, Diemini Regio, a Part of the Terra Australis, discovered in 1642. by
a Dutchman of this Name. Yet we know not, whether it be an Island or a
Continent.

Diepholt, a small Town in the Circle of Westphalia in Germany, belonging to
the Duke of Brunswick. It stands upon a Stream betwixt Bremen and Osnaburgh;
with the Honor to bear the Title of an Earldom.

Dieppe, Deppa, a strong Sea-Port-Town, which has a noble Haven, in Normandy in
France, upon the River Arques, fourteen Miles from Roan to the North, right
over against Lewis in Sussex. This Town is remarkable for its Loyalty to Henry
the Great, of France; who retiring hither, and not long after receiving a
supply from Queen Elizabeth of 22000 l. in Gold and 4000 Men under the Lord
Willoughby, beat the Duke of Main, the General of the Leaguers, after all his
Confidence, that he should either take this Prince Prisoner or drive him out of
France. Which great Victory was unexpectedly gained in 1589.

Die, a Town and Barony in the Dukedom of Brabant in the Low Countries, upon
the River Demere, two Leagues from Dalen and three from Tillemon. There are two
Collegiate Churches in it.

Dietmarsh, or Dithmarsh, a part of Jutland in the Dukedom of Holsatia, at the
Mouth of the Elbe; having the Ocean on the West, Holsatia on the East, the Elbe
on the South, and the Dukedom of Sleswick on the North. It is so full of
Marshes as to take its Name from them. The Inhabitants Rebelling against the
Kings of Holsatia in 1500. obtained a great Victory; but in 1559. Adolph, Duke
of Holsatia, being employed by Frederick II. King of Denmark, conquered them,
and deprived them of a barbarous Liberty which they had maintained four Hundred
Years. The South part of this Territory is under the King of Denmark, whose
Eldest Son is to reside here; and the North part under the Duke of Holsatia,
which is separated from the Dukedom of Sleswick by the River Eyder.

Dietz, or VVietz, a small Town in the Principality of Nassaw in Germany upon
the River Lhone: Fortified with a Castle on each of the two Hills within the
Walls.

Digne, Dinia, Dina, Civitas Diniensium, a City in Provence, which is a
Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Embrun; it stands upon the River Bleonne,
ten Miles from Embrun to the South, and thirty two from Avignon to the
North-East. It is a very fine City and particularly esteemed for its hot Baths.

Dijon, Divionum, Divio, the Capital City of the Dukedom of Burgundy, and the
Seat of the Parliament, upon the River Ousche; sixteen Leagues from Langres to
the South, thirty six from Lion to the North. It is a great and well built
City, and has an old Castle and a small Territory belonging to it. Long. 26.
02. Lat. 46. 50. Aurelian the Emperor walled it. The Children of Hugh Capet,
who made this the Capital of the Kingdom of Burgundy, much enlarged and
beautified it. Under the Dukes of Burgundy it had Counts: And Lewis XI. who got
the possession of it, after the Death of the Duke of Burgundy, by the means of
the then Prince of Orange, built the Castle to keep the Inhabitants in
Subjection. The Reformed Religion, in 1562. beginning to spread here, was
extinguished by an Edict; those that embraced it being disarmed, and some of
them banished. Near this City S. Bernard was born. There was a French Council
held here in 1075. And another in 1199. under Pope Innocent III. at the
Instance of Canutus King of Denmark, in the behalf of his Sister Isemburge,
Wife of Philip the August King of France who had divorced her and remarried.
Whereupon the whole Kingdom was interdicted by the Pope's Legate in this
Council, and continued so seven Months, till King Philip vacated the said
Divorce and received the Lady for his Wife again. By a Stone with an old Roman
Inscription here found, it appears that this City was in those times called
Dibione. The Mayor of it is honored with the Title of a Viscount.

Dilinghen, Dilinga, a City in the Circle of Schwaben in Germany, upon the
Danube, in the Diocese of Auspurgh, seven Miles East of Vlm, and the same
Distance North-West from Auspurgh. An University here was founded by Cardinal
Otto Trucio, Bishop of Auspurgh under Pope Julius III. in 1549. This City and
the County belonging to it, were united for ever to the Bishopric of Auspurg,
by Hermanus, the last Count, Bishop of this Diocese, who died about the Year
1260. The Jesuits of Dilinghen gave great Provocations to the Swedish War in
Germany, by persuading Ferdinand II. that the Protestants of his times were not
the same with those of 1530. tolerated by Charles V. and therefore the Emperor
who was then victorious, was not obliged to keep the Peace with them. By which
Insinuation, in 1629. they put that Prince on those Actions, which brought on a
War that had like to have ended in the Ruin of the House of Austria, the German
Liberty, the Empire, and the Roman Catholic Religion there.

Dillemburgh, a Town and County in the Circle of the Rhine in VVesterwalt. The
Town stands on the River Dilla, five German Miles from Marpurgh to the West,
and eleven from Francfort, upon a Hill; and has a strong Castle, in which the
Counts reside. The County is called by the Germans, Das Graffschaft von
Dillemburgh; bounded on the East by Hassia, on the North by Westphalia, on the
West by the Rhine, and on the South by Solmis. This is under the Dominion of
its own Prince, who is of the Family of Nassau. There is in it, besides
Dillemburgh, a Town called Herborn, which is an University.

Dimel, Dimola, Dilla, a River of Germany, which divides Hassia from
Westphalia, and falls into the Weser at Helmerstrusen, seven Miles East of
Paderborn.

Dimitrado See Demetriade.

Dimotuc, Didymotyches, a City of Thrace, upon the River Hebrus, (which almost
surrounds it) about seven Miles from Adrianople to the South: Formerly a
Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Adrianople, but now an Archbishop's.
Bajazet, one of the Turkish Emperors, was born here; who resigned the Empire
and retired hither again.

Dinant, Dinantium, a Town in the Bishopric of Liege, upon the River Maes,
over which it has a Stone Bridge that has been ruined often, but now repaired;
ten German Miles from Brussels to the North-East. Taken by the French in the
Reign of Henry II. in 1554. and almost ruined and its Citadel demolished. But
all very well rebuilt again, and its Citadel is now standing upon a steep
Rock. There is another Town of the same Name in the Duchy of Britain in France
upon the River Rance, five Miles South of S. Malo, which was heretofore a
strong Place; and gave the Title of Earl to the younger Sons of the Dukes of
Brittany.

Dingle, Dinglae, a small Town, and a convenient Port, in the County of Kerry,
in the Province of Mounster in the South-West Part of Ireland; which stands
upon a large Bay of the same Name, seventy English Miles West of Cork. There is
a Marsh in the County of Suffolk of the same Name, which signifies, salt Water
washes, as Mr. Camden seems to intimate.

Dingolving, or Dingelfing, Dingolvinga, a small Town in the Dukedom of
Bavaria; where there was a Council held in 772.

Dinkesipiel, Dinchespila, a small Imperial City, in the Borders of Franconia,
upon the River Warnaw; twelve Miles from Vlm to the North-East, and ten from
Nuremberg to the South-West. It belongs to the Circle of Schwaben; and has been
often taken by the Swedes and French in the Wars of Germany.

Dionysia, a figurative Name of the Island Naxia in the Archipelago; given it
by the Ancients in Allusion to Dionysius (or Bacchus) upon the Account of its
abounding with excellent Wines.

Dionysiopolis; diverse ancient Cities occur under this Name. One in Bulgaria;
see Varna. One upon the River Indus in Asia, in the Country where stood the
Pillars called Dionysii Columnae: This the Ancients report to have been built
by Dionysius (or Bacchus;) being the same with the Nagara, Nysse, or Nerus of
the modern Geographers. One in Phrygia, mentioned by Pliny. And another in
Africa, by Stephanus.

Dioscoros, Dioscori, or Dioscoride, an Island of Magna Graecia, in the
Calabrian Ocean, over against Capo delle Colonne, at a few Leagues distance.
Another of Africa. See Zocotera.

Diospolis, an ancient City in the Thebais in the Kingdom of Egypt; surnamed
Hecatompylos from its having an hundred Gates, or rather so many Princely
Palaces in it, when the Kings of Egypt, called Diospolites after its Name,
made this place their Residence and Capital of their Kingdom. Also an ancient
City of the Holy Land, which was made a Bishop's See under the Patriarch of
Jerusalem: Called otherwise Lydda, Rama, and S. George; and remarked in
Ecclesiastical History for a Council assembled at it in 415. against Pelagius,
wherein he was acquitted of the Accusations of his Adversaries.

Dirgh, a Lake in the County of Dungal in the Province of Vlster in Ireland;
out of which the River Leffye springs. In an Island thereof you see the Cave
the People call S. Patrick's Purgatory, near the Ruins of a Monastery that was
dedicated to S. Patrick. The Noise of some subterraneous Winds or Waters heard
by the People has occasioned this conceited Name amongst them.

Disne. See Aisne.

Disse, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk upon the River Wavenay. The
Capital of its Hundred.

Ditmarsen. See Dietmarsh.

Diu, Diou, or Dive, a small Island, with a Fort upon it, in the Mouth of the
River Indus, belonging to the Portuguese. It has also a small but very strong
City belonging to it, which the Turks, in the Years 1538. and 1548. besieged in
vain. This Island is a part of the Kingdom of Guzarate, and lies fifty Leagues
from Surata to the West, at the Entrance of the Bay of Cambaya. It has been in
the Hands of the Portuguese ever since 1535.

Divan Du Rou, Insulae Divandurae, a Knot of five or six small Islands in the
Archipelago de Maldivas in the East Indies, under the King of Cananor. About
twenty seven Leagues distant from the Island of Malicut. They are reputed
extremely healthful.

Dive, in Latin Diva, and Deva, a River in Normandy, which rises near the Town
of Dive; and running North-West, takes in the Ante at Morteaux, the Leison and
Vie at Hervetot; the Mauch, the Beverrone, and some others; and falls into the
British Sea below Cabour, five Miles and a half West of Honfleure. There is a
River in the Province of Poictou of this Name which takes its Rise at the Town
Grimaudiere, receives the Gron at Moncontour, and continuing its Course to
Londun takes in the Matrevil and the Briaude; till below S. Just it self is
received by the Thouay, which soon after falls into the Loyre.

Divertigi, Selucia ad Belum, a City of Asia, which was a Bishops See under the
Archbishop of Apamea; lying in Syria, thirty Miles from Antioch to the East. It
may be supposed to be now ruined; being hardly to be found in the later Maps.

Divice, a famous Fountain at Bourdeaux.

Diul, Indus.

Dixmuyde, or Dixmude, Dixmuda, a very strong Town in Flanders, in the
Possession of the Spaniards; though it has been often taken by the French. This
Town stands upon the River Ipre, three Miles from New-Port to the South; and is
now a Frontier Town against the French.

Doblin, Dublinum, a City in Curland, upon the River Terwa, in the Confines of
Samogitia, six German Miles from Mittaw to the West, and fourteen from VVomic,
or Mednici, to the East. Under the Duke of Curland.

Dobroncha, Epidaurus, a Maritime City of Dalmatia.

Dobrzin, Dobrinum, Debricinium, Dobriznum, a Town in Poland, which is the
Capital of a Palatinate upon the Vistula, between Ploczko to the South, and
Wladislaw to the North, a few Leagues above Culm. The Palatinate is usually
taken for a part of that of Ploczko, on which it borders to the North, as it
does on the Vistula to the West, and Prussia to the North.

Docastelli, Lycastum, a Town of Cappadocia in the Borders of Paphligonia upon
the Shoars of the Euxine Sea, near the Bay of Amisenum, between Halis and Iris,
( Irio): distant from Amiso to the East thirty six Miles.

Docum, Dockum or Dorkum, Doccumum, Docomium, one of the principal Towns in
West-Friesland, four Leagues from Leeuwarden toward the North-West, and five
from Groningen; upon a Canal near the Sea.

Dodbrook, a Market Town in Devonshire in the Hundred of Colrudge.

Dodona, an ancient City of the Kingdom of Epirus in Greece, in the Country
then called Molossia: famous for the neighboring Grove of Dodona, in which
Jupiter had his Temple and his Oracle, with the Title of Dodonaeus thence. It
stood near a River of the same Name that joined it self with the Achelous.

Doesbourg or Doesborck, Doesburgus, Drusiburgus, Arx Drusiana, a strong, rich
and populous Town in the Province of Guelderland in the Low Countries, upon the
Issel, at the Mouth of the old Canal of Drusus, one German Mile from Zutphen.
Taken by the French in 1672. It is no very great Town.

Doffrini, the Mountains of Scandinavia.

Doggers bank, the Name of some Sands in the German Ocean.

Doira and Doria, a double River of Piedmont. The Greater, which is called
Doria Balta, springs from the Grecian Alps in the Borders of Le Vallais; and
leaving Aosta, Pont de S. Martino, and Inurea to the East, at the latter it
divides; sends one Branch to Vercelli, called the Naulio; then continuing its
course, it receives from the West the Cuisella, and ends in the Po at
Verolengo or S. Giovan, thirty two Miles from Alexandria to the North-West. The
Lesser Doria rises in the Cottian Alps, from the Mountains called the Genebre
in the Dauphinate; and running East, it washes Susa, Bozolengo and Aviglana;
and falls into the Po not above half a Mile beneath Turino.

Dol, Dolum, Neodunum, Tollium, a City in the Lesser Britainy in France, which
is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tours; called by the Ancients
NEODVNVM: stands in a Marshy Ground, and of no great Circumference; not above
two Leagues from the British Sea, and four from S. Maloe's, with a Castle.
There was a Council here assembled by Pope Urban II. in 1094. The Bishops of
this See have formerly made strong Pretensions to the Metropolitanship of
Bretagne.

Dolcigno. See Dulcigno.

Dole, Dola ad Dubim, a City in the Dukedom of Burgundy, strongly fortified,
being the Capital of that Dukedom, the Seat of the Parliament, and an
University founded in the year 1426. by Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy. It
stands upon the River Dou ( Dubis), nine Miles from Dyon to the East, and from
Verdun to the North. This Town was sacked by Lewis XI. in 1479. Fortified by
the Emperor Charles V. in 1530. Besieged by the French without their taking of
it in 1636. Taken by the French from the Spaniards in 1668. Retaken in 1674.
and by the Treaty of Nimeguen annexed to the Crown of France for ever. The
Country about is called the Bailage de Dole, which together with the Town, was
then resigned to the French King.

Dollert, a vast Lake or Bay at the Mouth of the River Amasus, between
Groningen and Emden; which in 1277. was made by an Inundation of the Sea; in
which thirty three Villages were swallowed up, and irrecoverably lost: It is
otherwise called the Gulf of Emden. The South part of Groningen suffered not
much less by such another raging Overflow from Groningen diep in the year 1686.

Dolomieu, A Village in Dauphine, betwixt Moresel and La Tour du Pin. Much
spoken of in France in the year 1680. for a feigned Story of the killing of a
Flying Dragon there, and of a Carbuncle in his head of extraordinary value.

Dombes, Tractus Dombensis, a small Territory of France, encompassed on all
sides by le Bresse, except on the West, where it is bounded by the River Saone,
which parts it from Baujolois. It lies between Mascon to the North, and Lion to
the South; and though small, is yet very fruitful; honored with the Title of a
Principality under its own Princes of the House of Bourbon. The Capital of it
is Trevoux, four Miles above Lion to the North. This Principality was given to
Lewis II. Duke of Bourbon, by Edward the last Duke of the Race de Baujolois in
1400.

Domburg, a Town of good Antiquity and pleasantly situated in the Isle of
Walcheren in Zealand, about two Dutch Miles from Middleburg in the same Island
to the West.

Domezopoli, Domitiopolis, once a famous City of Isauria, in the Lesser Asia,
and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Seleucia; now a poor Village.

Dominico, one of the Caribby Islands in North America, twenty Leagues in
compass; discovered by the Spaniards on a Sunday, and thence so called: Long.
322. 00. Lat. 14. 35. North-West of Barbados.

S. Domingo, the principal City in the Island of Hispaniola, built by
Bartholomew Columbus in 1494. on the East Bank of the River Ozama; and after in
1502. removed by Nicholas de Obando, then Governor of the Island, to the
opposite Shore. It is situate in a pleasant Country amongst rich Pastures, and
has near it a safe and a large Haven; enriched with the Residence of the
Governor, the Courts of Justice, an Archbishops See, many Religious Houses,
and an Hospital to which belongs a Revenue of twenty thousand Ducats by the
year. The Houses are neatly built, most of Stone; the Town is walled, and has a
Castle at the West End of the Peer to defend the Haven. It was much greater
before Mexico was taken; but has now not above six hundred Families of
Spaniards; the rest, Negroes. Sir Francis Drake in 1586. took it by force, and
kept it a Month, burning a great part of the Houses, and forcing the Spaniards
to redeem the rest with money. Long. 305. 40. Lat. 14. 00.

Domitz, Domitium, a strong Town not very large, but well fortified in the
Dukedom of Mecklenburgh, on the North side of the Elbe, where it receives the
Elde, in the Jurisdiction of the Duke of Swerine: eight Miles above Lavenburgh
to the West, and ten from Lunenburgh to the East:

Dommele, a River of Brabant, which rises near Peer; and running North,
passes by Eyndhoven or Eindoven; then turning to the West, it falls into the
River Run, about half a Mile above Shertogenbosch, through which they both
pass into the Maes. I find it by the Maps called De Dormale, but corruptly, as
appears by L. Guicciardin; and a Town a Mile above Eindoven on this River,
called Dommelen.

Domochi, Domonichus, a small Village in Thessalia, once a Bishops See under
the Archbishop of Larissa. It lies South-West of Larissa and Volo, and is
mentioned in Mr. Morden's Map.

Don, Tanais.

Donato, Isaurus, a River of Calabria Vlterior; it falls by Cerenza and Neto
into the Mediterranean Sea, between Cotrone and Strongoli, one Mile beneath S.
Severina.

Donaw. See Danube.

Donawert, Donaverda, Donavertia, Vertia, a City in Schwaben in Germany upon
the Danube, over which it has a Bridge; it lies in the Confines of the Dukedoms
of Newburgh and Bavaria, seven German Miles from Auspurgh to the North, and
from Ingolstad to the West. This City was in 1420. made a Free Imperial City by
Sigismund the Emperor; but in 1607. it lost this Privilege, and is now subject
to the Duke of Bavaria.

Doncaster or Dimcaster, a Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire on the River
Done or Dune, called by Antoninus DANVM: in 759. burnt with Lightning; but
being by degrees rebuilt with a fair Church and Castle, and becoming a Town of
good Accommodations and Trade, it has had the Honor of giving the Title of an
Earl to James, late Duke of Monmouth, and some others. The River Done rises
near Denbye; and running South-East, waters Sheafield; then turning
North-East, goes by Rotheram, where it takes in from the North another
considerable River, called (as I suppose) Dar or Dare: then passing by
Doncaster a little more East, it takes in the River Went; and soon after ends
in the River Are at Tunbridge; and both the Are and Done enter the Ouse about
three Miles further, thirteen Miles beneath York, from which great City,
Doncaster stands two and twenty Miles to the South.

Doncheri, a Town in the Territory of Retelois in Champagne, toward the
Frontiers of Luxembourg, upon the Meuse; betwixt Charleville and Sedan. It is a
fortified Town.

Done, a River. See Doncaster.

Donetz, a vast River which rises in Dikoia, near Borissagorda; and running
Eastward, turns and falls into the Tanais, now called Donon Donitz too, of
which I shall give a further account in Tanais. There is another River Donitz,
which rises more East, and falls into the Tanais more to the North, at Gilocha.

Dongo, a Town in Japan.

Donostein, Menlascus, a River of Guipiscoa in Spain, commonly called Rio Orio.

Donoy, Dinia. See Digne.

Donussa, Donysa, a small Island in the Archipelago, remarkable for nothing but
the green Marble brought from thence.

Donzy, a Town of the Duchy of Nevers in France, upon a small River near the
Cosne. The Capital of the Territory of Donziois.

La Dorat, oratorium, a City of France in La-Marche, fourteen Miles from
Poictiers to the South-East, and Limoges to the North, upon the little River
Seve.

Dorvie, a River which falls into the Taen, a River of Languedoc in France;
which last falls into the Garonne, five Leagues above Again.

Dorchester, Duronovaria, a City of England, in the County of Dorset, upon the
River From or Fraw, about five Miles from the Sea, and upon the Via Fossa, a
Causey of the Romans; many Pieces of whose Coins have been found here. It is
the Capital of that Shire, yet says Mr. Camben, neither great nor beautiful;
but certainly a Roman Town, of great Antiquity, which was ruined both by the
Danes and Normans: and once of a large compass, as the Tract of the Walls and
Trenches yet show. Fortified also in former times with a Castle, which upon its
decaying was converted into a Monastery, and the Monastery afterward
demolished. In the year 1645. King Charles I. created Henry Lord Pierrepont
Marquess of this Place. At present it gives the Title of Countess to the Lady
Catharine Sidley, advanced to that Dignity by King James II. It still sends two
Burgesses to Parliament, and is adorned with three Parish Churches. There is
another old Roman Town called Dorchester ( Dorcestria) in Oxfordshire, at the
meeting of Them and Isis, nine Miles South of Oxford; where the Bishopric of
Lincoln was at first settled for four hundred and sixty years before it was
removed to Lincoln. This last is called by Bid, Civitas Dorcina; by Leland,
Hydropolis, i. e. (as the word Dorchester it self also signifies) the
Water-Town; Dor in the British Language, being Water. It was yielded to the
Earl of Carnarvan, Aug. 2. 1643.

Dordogne, Duranius, Dordonia, one of the principal Rivers of France. It
arises in the Province of Auvergne from two Fountains (says Baudrand); one of
which is called Dor, the other Done: running Westward, between Limosin to the
North and Auvergne to the South, it takes in Chavanoy, Rue, Auze and Serre;
then entering Limosin, Quercy and Perigort successively, it meets Vezere and
Cozere; waters Scarlat, Limiel and Bergerac; and so passes to Libourne,
where it receives from the North the Lille, which comes from Montignac; and
not far from Bourdeaux, it unites with the Garronne; and they send their united
Streams to the Bay of Biscay, or Sea of Gascogne, called by the Romans Mare
Aquitanicum, at the Tour de Cordovan.

Dordrecht. See Dort.

Dergwyn. See Derwent.

Doria. See Doira.

Doris, an ancient Country of Achaia in Greece, now known by the Name of the
Valley of Livadia, as all Achaia is now called Livadia. The Cities Lilaea,
Erineus, etc. in those times stood in it. It was particularly famous for one of
the four Dialects of the Greek Tongue, called the Dorick after its own Name; in
which Archimedes, Theocritus and Pindar write; and which was in use in the
several Countries and Kingdoms of Lacedaemonia, Argos, Epirus, Lydia, Sicily,
Rhodes and Crete. There was another Doris in Caria in the Lesser Asia, which
received its Name from this.

Dorisques, Drosica, Doriscum, a Tract in the Province of Romania (or Thrace)
in Greece, mentioned in ancient History to be the place in which Xerxes
numbered his vast Army in the Gross, by the quantity of the Ground they stood
upon.

Dormans, a Town in Champagne in France upon the River Marne, betwixt Epernay
and Chateau-Tierry; giving Name to an ancient Family of that Province.

Dorn. See Tornaw.

Dornick. See Tournay.

Dornock, Dorno, Durnodunum, a Town in Sutherland, on the East of Scotland,
North of the Fyrth of Murray, and Terbat-Ness. The head City of this County,
and the common Residence of the Bishop of Cathnesse, who is under the
Archbishop of S. Andrews: it has also a large and a safe Haven, upon a Gulf
called the Fyrth of Dornock. Long. 15. 10. Lat. 58. 10.

Doro, Oboca, a River in Ireland. It takes its Origin in the County of Dublin,
and passing thence through that of Catherlogh, receives into its Bed some small
Rivers, with which it falls into the Irish Sea near the Port of Arcklow.

Dorsetshire, Durotriges, is bounded on the North with Somersetshire and
Wiltshire; on the West with Devonshire, and some part of Somersetshire; on the
East, with Hamp^shire; and on the South, which is the longest side, by the
British Sea: generally fruitful; the North parts full of Woods; from whence it
descends by fruitful Hills and pleasant Meadows, intermixed one with another,
to the very Shoars of the Ocean. The principal City in it is Dorchester. The
principal Rivers, the Stower and the From. The Honorable Charles Sackvill is
the Sixth of this Family, that has born the Title of Earl of Dorset: he
succeeded his Father in 1667. The Beauforts and the Greys had enjoyed the Title
of Marquesses of Dorset before. The last of which was Henry Gray Duke of
Suffolk, beheaded in 1553.

Dorsten, Dorsta, a City of Westphalia in Germany, upon the River Lype, which
falls into the Wesel at Ducat: this City is under the Elector of Cologne, well
fortified; but yet it has of late been often taken and retaken. It stands ten
Miles from Cologne to the North, and a little less from Munster to the
South-West.

Dort, Dordracum, sometime called Dordrecht, is the principal Town in the
County or Earldom of Holland; seated at the Mouth of the Maes in South-Holland,
seven Leagues from Leyden to the South, five from Breda to the North, and three
from Rotterdam to the South-East. This was the Seat of the Counts of Holland in
ancient times, and then of great consideration. In 1421. by a violent
Inundation of the Sea, the Vahal, and the Maes, (in which sixty two good Towns
were irrecoverably lost) this City, which was before a Continent, was turned
into an Island. There perished then one hundred thousand persons, Con tuti li
loro beni, with all their Wealth and Goods: and only some little part of the
Land, has been since recovered. The City is great, beautiful, rich, potent, and
has many gentile Buildings, both public and private; but the great Church
which is dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and was founded in 1363. is exceedingly
magnificent. In ancient times it was the Staple of the Rhinish Wines; and of
the Corn that came from Guelderland, Cleves and Juliers, which contributed much
to the Wealth and Populousness of it; thus far Guicciardin. Also famous for the
Synod here holden against the Remonstrants or Arminians in 1618. and 1619. When
Philip II. King of Spain made his Royal Entry in 1549. they thus expressed the
site and glory of this Place; Me Mosa and Vvalis cum Linga Meruaque cingunt,
Aeternam Batavae Virginis ecce Fidem. by which is shown, that she stands upon
four Rivers (the Meuse, the Merwe, the Rhine and the Linghe) and was never
taken by any Enemy.

Dortmund, Termonia, Dormania, a City in the Circle of Westphalia in the County
of Mark, or Markischlandt, upon the River Emser; five German Miles from Dorsten
to the South-East, and seven from Munster to the South-West. This City is
small, but rich and populous, a Free and Imperial City, one of the Hanse-Towns,
notwithstanding the Pretenses of the Duke of Brandenburgh, who is Master of the
Mark, in which it stands. There was a Council celebrated here in the year 1005.
by the order of the Emperor St. Henry.

Dotecom, a small Town in the Duchy of Guelderland in the Low-Countrys, two
Miles from Doesborck, upon the Issel. It surrendered to the French in 1672.
being a place of no Strength.

Dou, Doux, Dubis, and Alduadubis, a River of France: it arises in
Switzerland, from the Mountain of Jura, near Mortay in the Franche County; and
running North-East, it waters Franchimon and Montbeliart; where it turns and
runs South-West by Lisle, Clerval, Besanzon and Dole; beneath which it
receives the Louve, a considerable River from the South; and at Verdun it ends
in the Saone, Araris. It is called in the Maps Le Doule.

Douay, Duacum, a City of Flanders, upon the River Scarpe, which falls into the
Schelde, about one Mile lower; in the Borders of Artois and Flanders, five
Leagues from Cambray to the South-West, four from Arras to the North. At first
only a Castle; which being almost ruined, Amatus a Bishop repaired it in 665.
But now a great and a fortified City, and has a fine Magazin well furnished. In
1572. Philip II. King of Spain made it an University; and opened those Colleges
for the English Roman Catholics, which have rendered it more known to this
Nation, than any other thing. Taken by the King of France in 1667. and by the
Treaty of Aquisgrane confirmed to him, so that it is still in his Possession.

Dove, Dovaeum, Duaeum, a Town in the Dukedom of Anjou in France, beyond the
Loyre, upon the River Layon, four Leagues from Saumur to the South-West, and
seven from Angers to the South-East. Though this is now a small Village, yet it
deserves to be taken notice of for an Amphitheatre built here in the times of
the Roman Empire, which is still standing, and almost perfect: it contains only
sixteen hundred Foot in Compass, and yet is so contrived, that above fifteen
thousand persons might see their Exercises without incommoding each other:
there are here also Vaults and Sewers built under the Earth, and Arched with
wonderful Art and Expense. Dove, a River in Staffordshire, upon which Tudbury
stands.

Dover, Dorovernum, Darvernum, DVBRIS, is a very ancient strong Town, seated in
the middle of the Eastern part or Shore of Kent, upon high Cliffs; twelve Miles
from Canterbury to the South-East, and fifty five from London, and seven
Leagues distant by Sea from Calais in France. That part of the Town next the
Sea had anciently a Wall, some of which is still standing. On the top of a
rugged high Cliff or Rock, is a stately and very strong Castle, which may be
supposed to have been built by the Romans: however this place was certainly a
Station of theirs, and has ever since been reputed one of the Keys of England,
at all times carefully guarded: besides it is one of the Cinque Ports, and in
times past was to set out to the Wars one and twenty Ships. Therefore Philip
King of France said, that Lewis his Son (when called in hither against King
John by the Barons) had not one foot of Land in England, if he were not Master
of Dover-Castle. It had formerly seven Parish Churches, now two; and it is now
(as heretofore) most frequented upon the account of its being the shortest
passage into France. The Honorable Henry Lord Jarmin was created Baron of Dover
in the first year of King James II. But before in Anno 1627. Henry Carey,
Viscount Rochford and Baron Hunsden, enjoyed the Title from King Charles I. of
Earl of Dover.

Dour or Adour, Aturus, a River of Aquitaine, the Southern part of France, or
rather three Rivers called by the same Name: the principal of these rises in
Bigorre, out of the Pyrenean Hills, near Baretge; and running North, waters
Tarbe; then turning Westward, it passes on the North of Air, St. Sever, and
Dax or Acqs; so falls into the Bay of Biscay at Bayonne, having entertained
Gave de Oleron, Gave de Pau, and several other Rivers. The Outlet was anciently
at le Bocau, six Leagues beneath Bayonne; but by the Industry of Lewis de Foix,
an excellent Ingineer and Architect of France, in 1579. its course was altered,
as Thuanus says. The same Gentleman was the Contriver of the Palace in Spain,
and the Light-House at the Mouth of the Garronne, called Tour de Cordovan.

Dourdan a small Town in the District of Hurepois in the Isle of France, upon
the River Orge, toward the Frontiers of la Beauce, thirteen Leagues from
Paris, and two or three from Estampes. The Huguenots took and almost ruined it
in the years 1562, 1567. It had been often mortgaged, sold, and remitted from
one to another, before Lewis XIII. redeemed and reunited it to the Crown in
1610.

Dourlens, Doulendium, a Town in Picardy in France, very strongly fortified; on
the Borders of Artois, upon the River Asselane, which falls into the British
Sea between Crotoy and Estaple; six Leagues from Amiens to the North, and seven
from Arras to the South. This Town did heretofore belong to the Earls of
Pontieu, and became united to the Crown of France in 1559.

Doustre, Dostra, a River of France in the Vicomte de Turene, in Limosin.

Le Doux. See Dou.

Douzi, Duziacum, Duodeciacum, a Castle in the Diocese of Rheims in France,
upon the River Cher, betwixt Ivoy and Sedan. Remarkable for two Councils
celebrated at it in the years 871. 874. The first of which deposed and
imprisoned Hin^mar Bishop of Laon (for adhering to the Papal Interest contrary
to the Usage and Liberties of the Gallican Church), who some time after had his
Eyes put out.

Dowglass, a Castle in Cuysdale, in the middle of the Southern part of
Scotland, which takes its Name from the River Dowglass, as does also the Dale
or Valley in which it stands. This Castle is seated about six Scotch Miles West
of Lanrick, where Dowglass River unites with the Cluyd; fifteen from Glasguo to
the South, and thirty five from Edinburgh to the South-West. It is only
memorable for its Earls sometimes so very powerful, they were a terror to the
Kings of Scotland themselves; there being at one time six Earls of this Family;
that is, Douglas, Angus, Ormond, Wigton, Murray and Morton, as Mr. Cambden
reckons them. There is a Castle of this Name in the Isle of Man.

Down, Dunum, a City and Bishopric in the Province of Vlster in Ireland, the
Bishop of which is under the Archbishop of Armagh. The Bishopric of Connor has
been united to it ever since 1442. The City stands upon the Irish Sea, upon a
Peninsula made by the Sea and the Lake of Cone, which affords it an excellent
Haven, twenty Miles from Dormore to the East, thirty two from Carrick fergus to
the South. The County of Down is bounded on the East by the Irish Sea; on the
North by the County of Antrim, and the Lake of Neaugh; on the West by Armagh;
and on the South by the County of Louth, from which it is severed by the River
Newry. This County, says Mr. Cambden, is generally very fruitful, where it is
not overspread with Woods, and has several safe Harbors upon the Seas Down is
one of the most ancient Towns in Ireland; made more famous by keeping the Bones
of S. Patrick, S. Bridget and S. Columbus, than by the mention which Ptolomy
has made of it, by the Name of Dunum; though not in its right place.

Downham, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk, in the Hundred of Clackcloss,
upon the River Ouse, over which it has a Bridge.

Downton or Duncton, a Market Town in Wiltshire; the Capital of its Hundred,
situated upon the Salisbury Avon. It returns two Burgesses to the Parliament.

Drac, Dracus, a River in the Dauphinate in France, which rises about four
Leagues North of Embrun; and running Northward falls into the Isere at
Grenoble; bringing with it another small River which comes from La Grace, and
falls into the Drac at Viville, four Miles South of Grenoble.

Draco or Drago, Acragas or Agragas, a River of Sicily; called Biagio, di
Gergenti, di Naro also; and falls into the African Sea, three Miles beneath
Gergentum to the East, thirty five West of Terra Nova.

Dragone, Draco, a small River in Campagnia in Italy, which rises in Mount
Vesuvius; and washing the City of Nocera, falls into Sarno, a River which
divides the Principatus Citerior, from the Terra di Lavoro; and ends in the
Bay of Naples, eleven Miles South of Naples.

Dragonara, once a Bishops See, now a small Village, 7 Miles from S. Severina
in Naples, to the West.

Dracone. See Orontes.

Dragonera, Colubraria, or Moncolibre, a small desert Rock or Island between
Majorca and Valentia, which has its Names from the Snakes and Serpents that
only inhabit it.

Draguignan, Draguinianum, Dracenae, one of the best situated Towns in Provence
in France, in the Diocese of Frejus; adorned with a Collegiate Church, and
diverse Religious Houses. Its Arms are observable; being a Dragon with this
Motto, Alios nutrio, meos devoro.

Drangiana regio, an ancient Province of the Kingdom of Persia, in the most
Eastern part thereof, now called Sigistan or Sitsistan. Its principal Cities
were Ariaspe and Propthasia.

Dravaniza. See the Vistula.

The Drove or Dravus, called by the Germans Draw and Trave, by the Hungarians
Trab, has its Rise from the Alps in Tyrol: and running Eastward through
Carinthia and Stiria, enters Hungaria at Serinwar, where it receives the
Muer out of Stiria, and another from the Lake of Balatan in Hungary; so
dividing the Lower Hungary from Sclavonia, it passes to the Bridge of Esseck;
where a little lower it falls into the Danube by two Mouths. Dr. Brown says,
it arises in Saltzburglant, and falls into the Danube near Erdoed, the old
Tentobrigum, after it has passed from its Head, about three hundred Miles.
About its entrance into Hungary, it receives the Mur, and far above this I
found it a considerable River, having passed it between Clagenfort and Mount
Leubell in Carinthia by two long Wooden Bridges, and an Island in the middle
between them

Dravenna. See Trave.

Draun, Drachonis, Duras, a River and Town of Austria; the River falls into the
Danube from the South a little beneath Lintz, twenty six Miles West of Vienna;
and brings with it several other smaller Rivers.

Draunsee, a Lake out of which this River rises.

Drausen, a Lake in Prussia in Poland, near Elbing and Dantzick, made by the
Vistula.

Draw. See the Drove.

Drayton, a Market Town in the County of Salop in the Hundred of North Bradford
upon the River Terne, where it divides this County from Staffordshire. The
Houses of York and Lancaster fought a Battle here.

Drazzi. See Durazzo.

Drente, Drentia, one of the three parts of Over-Yssel, a Province of the
United States of Holland, lying Northward, and almost all covered with Marshes:
the chief Town of which is Coevorden or Coeworden. The French possessed
themselves of this Territory in 1672. and two years after abandoned it to the
Hollanders.

Dresden or Dresen, Dresda, the principal Town of Misnia in the Upper Saxony,
seated on both sides of the Elbe, five Miles from the Borders of Bohemia, and
three above Meissen. This City being in a pleasant and delightful place, was in
800. fortified with Walls and Dikes against the Bohemians by Charles the Great.
The succeeding Princes have not been less careful of it. So that it is for the
strength and magnificence of the Buildings, the best Town in Misnia. The Elbe
is here covered with a wonderful Bridge of Stone. The Electors of Saxony have
also made this City the place of their Residence, and built here a strong
Castle, and a noble Magazine.

Dreux, Drocum, Durocasses, Druidensis Pagus, a Town in the Territory of
Blasois in Normandy upon the River Blaise, sixteen Miles from Paris to the
West. It is seated at the foot of an Hill; a very ancient City and Earldom,
having an old decaying Castle. Here in 1562. was a sharp Fight between the
Hugonots and the Roman Catholics, in which the Prince of Conde was taken, and
nine thousand men of both sides slain. In 1593. Henry le Grand besieged and
took this Town in eighteen days. The ancient Druides are supposed to have dwelt
in it.

Drillae, an ancient people of Cappadocia in the Lesser Asia, toward the
Euxine Sea, betwixt Trebisonda and Cerasus in Xenophon's relation, or Colchos
in Arian's. They had the reputation of good Soldiers.

Drillo, Achates, a River of Sicily; it falls into the African Sea, six Miles
East of Terra Nova; and has a Town upon it, called by the same Name.

Drinawar. See Drino.

Drino, a River of Servia, which rises from the Mountains, that part Servia
from Albania; and running Northward from Novomont by Prisen, a little above
Drinawahr, ( Drinopolis a Town seated in an Island made by this River) it
receives the Lim, and passes into the Save, five German Miles above Al^, the
old Sirmium. Drino Bianco, the White Drin, is a River of Albania, which arises
from the same Mountains with the former, but more East, near Scopia or Vschup
in Servia; and running Westward, takes in Drino Niero, the Black Drin, which
arises from two Lakes in Albania; being thus united with the former, and two
others from the North, they pass Alessio, and fall into the Bay of Drin ( Sinus
Drinolius) over against Manfredona in Italy.

Drista, Silistria, the principal City in Bulgaria.

Drivasto, Triastum, Drivastum, an Episcopal City of Albania, upon the Lake of
Scutari, under the Turk. This See was a Suffragan to the Archbishop of Antivari.

Droan or Dron, Drahonas, a River in the Bishopric of Treves.

Drobafaf, Chromium, the Scythian or Frozen Sea, North-East of Russia, and Nova
Zemla.

Drogheda, a City in the County of Louth, in the Province of Leinster in
Ireland, called by the Irish Drogadagh and Treda; upon the River Boyne, twenty
two Miles North of Dublin. It has an excellent and safe Haven: in Mr. Cambden's
time well peopled, and much frequented. This Town falling into the hands of the
Duke of Ormond in 1649. and stormed soon after by Oliver Cromwell September 11.
of the same year; he put all the Garrison (which was about four thousand) to
the Sword; and as to the Inhabitants, spared neither Sex, Age, Poor or Rich,
but entirely ruined all before him; not regarding the good Service this City
had done in the beginning of the War, by preserving the Relics of the English
Nation from the cruelty and rage of the Rebellious Irish. Sir Arthur Aston, the
Governor, perished with the Garrison. It being the first place the Tyrant took
in Ireland, this cruelty was intended to strike a terror into the others, that
he might with the greater facility reduce the Kingdom under his Dominion; and
accordingly he had incredible success in all his future attempts. It surrendered
to King William in two days after the Fight at the Boyne.

Droinholm, a Royal House of Pleasure of the Kings of Sweden, one League from
Stockholm.

Droitwich, a Borough Town in Worcestershire in the Hundred of Halfshire, upon
the Banks of the Salwarp. It returns two Members to the House of Commons, and
is a noted place for its Salt Pits.

La Drome, Druna, Druma, a River which arises in the Confines of Gapencois in
Dauphine in France, and having watered Die and Crest, falls into the Rhosne,
three Leagues below Valence.

Dronfield, a Market Town in Derbyshire in the hundred of Scarsdale.

Drontheim, or Druntheim, Nidrosia, called also Trondhem, was heretofore the
Capital of the Kingdom of Norway; made an Archbishops See, and a Metropolis by
Pope Eugenius III. It stands on the Western Shoars of Norway, seventy five
German Miles from Bergen to the North, and one hundred and ten from Stock-Holm
to the North-West, in Long. 28. 02. Lat. 64. 10. Its Latin name comes from the
River Nider, upon which it stands. This City is now a very great Mart, and has
a large and a safe Harbor, yet lies open without any Fortifications, being in
this, more like a great Village than a City: Heretofore much greater; the many
fires which have happened in it have lessened it; and besides the Church of S.
Olao, which was once the most beautiful Church in all the North, is now buried
in its Ashes: it has also a Castle, taken by the Swedes and granted them by a
Treaty in 1658. but in 1660. the Danes again recovered it. The Country about,
is called the Government or Prefecture of Drontheim; granted to the Swedes with
the City, but since recovered with it too. This is the largest Prefecture in
Norway, reaching from North to South five hundred Miles, and from West to East
one hundred.

Droses, Jernus, a River of Conaught, in the County of Clare, which falls into
the Bay of Shannon at Dinghanbeg, Dinga, East of Clare two Miles.

Le Drot, Drotius, a River in Aquitaine in France, which arises at Montpasier,
ten Miles North-West of Cahors; and running West falls into the Garrone, over
against Bazas, nine Miles East of Bourdeaux.

Druidae, Druides, the Priests of the ancient Gauls, compared by Laertius with
the Magi, Gymnosophistae, and Philosophers, of Persia, India and Greece, for
their pretensions to Learning and Piety and Authority over the people: of whose
Superstitions they were the Authors, as of their affairs, public or private,
the Arbitrators. The Eugabes of Ammianus Marcellinus, the Saronides of Di^d.
Siculus, and the Semnotheoi of others, were several Orders of these Priests,
according as they applied themselves either to the services of the Altar, or to
the Contemplation of the Works of Nature. In the former, they made Sacrifices
of Men, till the Emperors Angustus, Tiberius and Claudius, by repeated
Interdicts at last broke them of that barbarity. Their other they delivered to
the public in thousands of Verses unwritten, only committed to Memory, and
passing the course of Ages by Tradition. Their name of Druides some derive from
(...), because of a particular esteem they had for an Oak. Some from Deru in
the Celtick Language, of the same signification. They had a Chief Priest over
them, in the nature of a Sovereign Pontiff. And we read, the Gauls were so
possessed by them with the belief of the immortality of the soul, that they
would lend money in this world upon condition to be paid in the next. Valor.
Max. The Town Dreux in Normandy is supposed to be so called from these Druides.

Drummore, Drummoria, a City in the County of Lowth in the Province of Vlster
in Ireland, upon the River Lagang; with a Bishops See under the Archbishop of
Armagh.

Druses, Druzes, Drusi, a people living in Grots and Caverns about the Mountain
Libanus in Asia, and onwards, as far as to the Dead Sea: following in Religion
the Institutions of one Isman or Ismael, a Prophet pretended, which allow them
to marry with their own Children, or Sisters, or Brothers, and to live in
perfect liberty from all such like precepts and ties, as are in use amongst the
Jews, Christians; and Mahometans. They Traffic with the French Merchants for
Silks: and say, they are descended from the French that went to the Conquest of
the Holy Land with Godfrey of Bouillon; being after the loss of Jerusalem in
1187. forced for safety to retire hither, under the command of one of the House
of Dreux.

Drut, Dara, a River of Carmania in Persia. It falls into the Persian Gulf
over against the City of Ormus, having passed between Fafa and Chabon.

Duare, a strong Fortress of Dalmatia, upon a Hill, not far from Almissa. Taken
from the Turks by the Venetians in 1646. and soon after lost again. In 1652.
retaken and demolished. Whereupon the Turks, to hinder the Incursions of the
Morlaques out of Croatia, rebuilt it: yet in 1684. the Morlaques forced it and
there is now a Venetian Garrison in it.

Dublin, Dublinum; in Irish, Balacleigh, the Capital City of the Kingdom of
Ireland in the Province of Leinster, in a County of the same Name, upon the
River Leffy, which is the noblest River in all this Kingdom, and makes a
Capacious Haven here, at about twenty Leagues distance from Holyhead in Wales.
This City is called EBLANA by Ptolemy. When or by whom it was first built, is
not known; but old it must needs be, by its being mentioned by him. Saxo
Grammaticus acquaints us, how much it suffered by the Danes; it was afterward
under Edgar King of England, and Harald Harfager King of Norway. In the year
1151. P. Eugenius III. made it an Archbishops See, with the Title and
Jurisdiction of a Primacy. Henry II. having Conquered Ireland, sent hither from
Bristol a Colony: whereby it began to Flourish more and more, and became the
Capital of the Kingdom, the Seat of the Lieutenant, the Courts of Justice, and
their Parliaments: strengthened with a Castle on the East side, built by Henry
Loundres a Bishop in 1220. and near it there was a Royal Palace built by Henry
II. King of England. It has a College for Students, which is an University of
it self, founded by Q. Elizabeth in in 1591. This was attempted before by
Alexander Bicknor Archbishop of Dublin, who in 1320. obtained from the Pope a
Bull for it; but the troublesome times that followed, defeated that good design
then; at the North Gate is a Bridge of hewn Stone, built by King John. It has
a Cathedral of great antiquity, Dedicated to S. Patrick, the Apostle of the
Irish Nation, and built at several times; in which are a Dean, two Archdeacons,
and twenty two Prebendaries: there is another fair Collegiate Church in the
City, called Christ's Church, built in 1012. and about thirteen Parochial ones.
In more ancient times this City was Governed by a Provost; but in 1409. Henry
IV. granted them License to choose every year a Mayor, and two Bailiffs,
changed into Sheriffs by Edward IV. thus far Cambden. King Charles II. honored
them with a Lord Mayor. This City escaping the fury of the Massacre, was
besieged by the Parliament Forces; and by the Duke of Ormond, by the Kings
Order, delivered to the English, rather than the Irish Rebels; for they were
now united against their King: and when afterward June 21. 1649. he
endeavored to recover it, his Army was broken by a Sally, and totally
defeated; and this City continued in their Hands till 1660. It has been
extraordinarily enlarged in its Buildings in the twenty years last past.

The County of Dublin is bounded on the East by the Irish Sea; on the West with
the County of Kildare; on the South by the little Territories of O* Tools, and
O. Brians; on the North by the County of Mead, and a small River called Nanny.
The Soil is fruitful, as to every thing but Wood; so that they use Sea-Coal,
and Turf for their Fuel. It is well Inhabited, Rich, full of excellent
Seaport Towns.

Ducey, a Town of Normandy upon the River Ardee, in the Diocese of Auranches.

Ducy, a Town of Normandy betwixt Caen and S. Lo, in the Diocese of Bayeux.

Duderstad, Duderstadium, a Town in the Dukedom of Brunswick, upon the River
Wipper, eight Miles from Cassel to the North-East. This Town, though in the
Duchy of Thuringia, has belonged to the Elector of Mentz ever since 1365; and
is the Capital of the Territory of Eichfeld.

Dudley, a Market Town in Worcestershire, in the hundred of Halfshire.

Duero, or Douro, Durius, Doria, a River of Spain, called Douro by the
Portuguese: one of the greatest Rivers in that Kingdom, most frequently
mentioned by ancient Greek and Latin Writers. The Head of it is in Old Castile,
from Mount Idubeda, about five Miles South of Tarragona; running South, it
waters Soria, and Almasun; there bending West, it passes by Osina, Aranda de
Duero, and Rosa; beneath which last it takes in Duratonio, or Stranda de Duero,
and Piznerga from the North; which with several others fall into the Duero, two
Miles beneath Valladolid; then passing by Toro and Camora, and taking in, from
the North, Esla, (which brings the Orbego), so to Miranda de Duero, it
entertains Tormes from Salamanca; soon after which it enters Portugal, a
little above Olivenca to the South, and Eluas to the North; where the Rivers
that fall into it on both sides, are so small, and many, that it is not worth
the mentioning them: turning Westward, this great River passes by Lemego on
the South, to Porta on the North, where he pays his last Tribute to the
Atlantic Ocean; and after a Course of ninety Leagues from his rise, as his
last benefit, he forms a large, deep, and safe Harbor at Porta. Silius
Italicus mentions it in the number of the Golden sanded Rivers.

Duerstede, Batavodurum, Durostadium, a Town in Guelderland, upon the Rhine
commonly called VVyck; three German Miles from Vtrecht to the South East. It
belongs now to the Province of Vtrecht, and is a part of the Dominions of the
United Provinces.

Duesme, a Town in the Dukedom of Burgundy in France, upon the River Seine. It
gives Name to the Territory of Duesmois, lying toward the Source of the same
River.

Duisbourgh, Duisburgum, Duysburgh, is a small City in the Dukedom of Cleves;
upon the River Roer, which a little lower falls into the Rhine; eight Miles
from Cologne North, and three from VVesel South. There was a Council held here
in 927. Heretofore an Imperial Free City; but now under the Dominion of the
Elector of Brandenburgh, who October. 14. 1655. opened here an University.
Gerardus Mercator the great Geographer of his time died here in 1594.

Dulcigno, Dolcigno, Olchinum, Olcinum, Vlcinum, a City of Albania, which is a
Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Antivari; with a safe Port on the
Venetian Gulf, between Budoa to the North, and Lodrin to the South; twenty
four French Miles from Scutari to the West. This City is under the Dominion of
the Turks, and reduced to a mean Condition.

Dulcinde, a Part of Carmania Deserta, upon the Entrance of the Persian Gulf;
one hundred twenty five German Miles South of Ormus. There is a City, River,
and Province of this Name.

Dulverton, a Market Town in Somersetshire in the Hundred of VVilliton, upon
the River Ex.

Dummer-Zee, Dummeria, a great Lake in Germany, between Mounster to the West,
Osnaburgh to the South, and Diepholt to the North. The River Hunt runs through
it, which falls into the VVesel a little below Bremen.

Dun, or Done, a River of Yorkshire. See Doncaster. A Town also in the Dukedom
of Barrois in Lorrain in France, near the Meuse, betwixt Stenay and
Damvilliers. Another in the Province of la March.

Duna. See Dwina.

Dunawert. See Donawert.

Dunbar, Dumbarum, or the Castle of Bar, is a Town in the County of Lothain in
Scotland, upon the Eastern Shoars; twenty Scotch Miles North of Berwick, and
the same distance East of Edinburgh. Heretofore it had a Castle on a Hill; as
it has still a Haven to the Sea. But this Town is chiefly memorable for a
Defeat given to the Covenanters of Scotland, by Oliver Cromwell, September. 23.
1650. when an End was put to that Perjurious, Rebellious, Bloody Faction, who
here began the Payment of that Debt they owed to the Divine Justice, for having
sold the best and most Holy of all Princes, ( Charles the Martyr,) to the
English Rebels. For from that Day, Presbytery has been in Bondage, and truckled
under the Weight of that horrid Crime; and may she never more lift up her Head
to embroil Kingdoms, and persecute the Church.

Dunblane, Dumblanum, a City of Scotland, in the County of Menteith, which is a
Bishop's See under the Archbishop of S. Andrews. It stands on the River Teith,
which a little beneath this and Sterling, falls into the Fyrth of Edinburgh;
six Miles North of Sterling, and thirty six West of Edinburgh.

Dunbritoun, Britannodunum, Castrum Britonum, a Town in the County of Lenox in
Scotland, upon a Fyrth or Bay of the same Name, with a strong Castle; where the
River Levin falls into the Fyrth; eight Miles from Glasco to the North-West:
Also called Dunbarton; because the Britans held it the longest of any Town in
Scotland, against the Picts and Scots. The strongest of all the Castles in
Scotland, by Nature; being built on a high, craggy, double-headed Rock, both
fortified; and between these two it has only one Passage on the North, hardly
passable without Labor and difficulty by a single Person: on the West of it
lies the Levin, on the South the Cluyd, on the East a boggy Marsh, which at
every Tide is covered with Water. The Britans made this good against the Scots,
till in the Year 756. Eadbert King of Northumberland, and Oeng King of the
Picts, forced it to surrender on a Composition. But it was taken on easier
Terms, Jan. 5. 1651. by the English Rebels; Sir Charles Erskin surrendering it
to them.

Dunbritoun Fyrth, a great Bay in the South-West part of Scotland, upon the
Irish Seas, so called from this Castle: it begins at Dunskay, and on the South
has Galloway, Carrick, Kile, and Cunningham; on the North Menteith, Lenox,
Argile, Kilmore, and Cantry: (besides several smaller,) it has in it the Island
of Arran: many of the biggest Rivers of Scotland fall into it; just against it
to the West, it has the North-East parts of Ireland, at a small distance; which
are extreme fruitful, and peopled by Scots for the most part: there are many
safe Havens, and populous Towns upon it; and lastly it lies convenient for
Trade with the Western Plantations, and all the Southern World.

Dundalk, Dunkeranum, a small City in the Province of Vlster, in Ireland, which
is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Armagh, twenty six Miles from Armagh
to the East, in the County of Louth, and sixteen North from Drogheda; surprised
by the Rebels in 1641. Retaken the same year by Sir Henry Tichburn by Storm,
(after their Forces had been beaten off from the Siege of Drogheda, upon Sir
Simon Harcourts arrival with supplies of Men and Money) but in 1649. they got it
again. The Duke of Schomberg continued with his Army here from Sept. 12. 1689,
to November. 8. that he retired into Winter Quarters. There was a Battle in the
mean time presented by King James II; but that General thought not fit to
accept it. For he strengthened himself in his Trenches, the more his Army was
weakened by the Mortality; which in many Circumstances appeared so strange, as
not to find in History its parallel; since an Angel destroyed so many thousand
in the Camp of Sennacherib.

Dundee, or Dundy, Alectum, Deidonium Allectum, a City in the North of
Scotland, in the County of Angus, upon the North side of the Fyrth of Tay,
which is a frequented Harbor, and of great safety, ten Miles North of S.
Andrews. This is a very strong Town; and in 1651. when almost all Scotland had
yielded after the defeat of Dunbar, presumed still to hold out: General Monk,
afterward Duke of Albemarle, coming up and summoning it, upon their refusal to
yield, took it by Storm September 1. of that year, though there were in it
eight hundred Soldiers, besides Inhabitants: He put all in Arms to the Sword;
and Plundered the Town of its Wealth; which amounted in Silver, Gold, and rich
Goods, to a vast sum of money; being then the richest Town in Scotland, and
made yet richer by the Neighborhood, who sent what ever they had that was
valuable thither, as to a place of security. Sixty Sail of Ships, which lay
then in the Harbor, yielded too: after which Aberdeen, and S. Andrews, which
only remained to the Covenanters, yielded upon the first Summons.

Dunfermeling, Dunfirmeling, is a Town on the North Shore of the Fyrth of
Edinb^row, seventeen Miles from it to the North-West. Once a famous Monastery,
the building and the burial place of Malcolm, King of the Scots; afterward
advanced to an Earldom in the behalf of Sir Alexander Seton, who being a wise
and a great Statesman, was raised by K. James I. from Baron of Tiv^, to be Earl
of Dunfermeling, and Lord Chancellor of Scotland. But much more famous for the
birth of Charles I. (the blessed Martyr for the English Church and Nation) who
was born here November 19. 1600.

Dunfreis, Dunfreia, a Town in the County of Nithesdale in the South of
Scotland, upon the River Nith or Nid, near Solway Fyrth.

Dungall, dungalia, a Sea-Port-Town and Castle, and a County in the North-West
part of Ireland, in the Province of Vlster, on the South side of the River Esk.
The County of Dungall has the Ocean on the West; Lagh Gormely, on the South;
and Tome Lagh on the North; a Barbarous and Wild place, as Mr. Cambden
describes it: See Tirconnel.

Dungannon, Dunganum, the chief Town of the Upper Tyrone, in the Province of
Vlster in Ireland, near Armagh.

Dungarvan, a strong well fortified Town, with a Castle, and Haven, situate on
the Southern Shore of Ireland, in the County of Waterford, in the Province of
Mounster, thirteen Miles from Waterford to the West. First granted by Henry VI.
to Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury; and afterward, for convenience, annexed to the
Crown of England by Act of Parliament.

Dungesby Head, Veruvium Promontorium, the most Northern Cape of all Scotland,
which lies in 59. degrees. of Latitude; whereas Novantum, the Mule of Galloway, the
most Southern, lies in 55. 10.

Dunkeld, or Dunkelden, Castrum Caledonium, Dulcheldinum, a City on the Tau, in
the County of Perth, ten Miles North of Perth; which was adorned by King David
of Scotland, with a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of S. Andrews; supposed
to have been the City of the ancient Caledonians.

Dunkeran, Donequine, or Doneyne, Juernis, a small Town and Port upon the Gulf
of the River Maine, in the County of Desmond in Mounster, in Ireland.

Dunkirk, Dunquerque, Dunquerca, called by the Flemmings, Duynskerke; and by
the Italians and Spaniards, Doncherca; is a large, strong, well fortified Town,
and Seaport in Flanders, which has a very noble and strong Castle, lately
built: 3 Leagues from Graveline, 5 from Newport, and 6 from Calais. This Town
was first fortified by Charles V. It stands on the River Colme, upon the Shoars
of the German Ocean. Taken by the French in 1646. but during their Civil Wars,
the Spaniards recovered it again. In 1658. it was retaken by the English and
French united; chiefly by the valor of the English. Don John of Austria, and
all the Spanish Forces, who came to relieve it, being totally routed and
defeated, the Town was surrendered to the French; but by them according to
Articles put into the Hands of the English: and so it continued till 1662. when
it was sold to the French. The present King of France, Lewis XIV. has bestowed
incredible cost in fortifying it, in enlarging and securing the Haven by Mounds
and Forts.

Dun-le-Roy, Regiodunum, a Town in Berry, in France, upon the River Auronne:
five Miles from Bourges to the South, and nine from la Charity to the
South-West. Another in the Dukedom of Burgundy near Beaujolois.

Dunmour, or Dunmore, a Market Town in the County of Essex. The Capital of its
Hundred.

Dunois, a Territory within the Province of Beauce in France; the Capital
whereof is Chateau Dun. It was advanced to the dignity of a Peerdom and Dukedom
in 1525.

Dunnington, a Market Town in Lincolnshire in the Hundred of Kirton, and the
Division of Holland: situated in a waterish Flat.

Dunnington-Castle, a Market Town in Leicestershire, in the Hundred of Goscote:
honored with a noble Seat belonging to the Earl of Huntingdon.

Dunstable, a Market Town in Bedfordshire, in the Hundred of Manshead, upon a
Chalky dry Hill. Built by K. Henry I. out of the ruins of the ancient
Magsovinium. K. Edward I. caused a noble Column or Cross to be here erected in
memory of Eleanor his Queen, whose Corpse rested in this place in their journey
from Lincolnshire to Westminster Abbey.

Dunstaburge, Bebba, a Castle in Northumberland, on the Sea Shore, eighteen
Miles South of Berwick, and twenty five North of Newcastle; which belongs to
the Duchy of Lancaster: Bid reports that this Castle was taken, and burnt by
Penda, King of the Mercians. Roger Hoveden thus describes it; Bebba is a strong
City, not very great, but containing two or three fields; having one hollow
entrance into it, and that raised on high by Stairs after a wonderful manner;
on the pitch of an Hill is a very fair Church; and Westward on the top, a
pleasant clear Fountain, adorned with excellent Workmanship. In our times
(says Mr. Cambden) it is rather a Castle, than a Town, yet so big as that it
might contain a small City; nor was it esteemed otherwise, when King William
Rufus besieged the Rebellious Moubray, who lurked in it. In the Wars between
the House of Lancaster and York, it was ruined again. And last of all, the
Winds and Seas have exercised their rage upon it, endeavoring to level it, by
driving up the Sea Sand into the hollow parts, and fetching down its once
haughty Battlements.

Dunstafag, Evonium, a small ruined City in the West of Scotland, in the County
of Lorne; which has an Haven over against the Island of Maly, fifty five Miles
from Dunblane to the West. This was the Seat of the ancient Kings of the Picts,
but now a Village, and yet perhaps in a better state, than when it was a Royal
City.

Dunster, a Market Town in Somersetshire in the Hundred of Scarhampton, by the
Sea side.

Dunwich, an ancient Corporation, once a potent City, on the Coast of Suffolk.
Foelix the Burgundian, who established the East Angles (then wavering) in the
Christian Faith, in 630. placed here a Bishops See; which continued till Bisus
the fourth Bishop after him removed to North Elmham; leaving a suffragan Bishop
only at Dunwich; in which times it was very populous, and so strong, that it
curbed Robert Earl of Leicester, in his Rebellion against his Prince. In the
Reign of Henry II. it had a Mint: William of Newbery calls it Vicus insignis,
variis opibus refertus, a Town of good note, well stored with all sorts of
Riches. But it is now a poor small Corporation, which bating the honor of
sending two Burgesses to the Parliament, has nothing to Consolate it self
withal. Time, the Sea, and Men as bad as either, have by degrees ruined not
only the Town, but the greatest part of the ground it stood upon; and instead
of its ancient variety of Riches, there is now an uniform Poverty, and
desolation.

Durance, Druentius, Durantius, a very rapid River in Provence in France, which
infesteth the Country with frequent Inundations. It arises from Mount Genebra,
one of the Cottian Alps, not far from Pignerol in Piedmont; or as others, in
the Dauphinate near Brianzon; and passing on, waters Embrun, and Gap; and
entering Provence, takes in the Hubaye, the Buech, the Suse; then passing
Sisteron, and Manosque, it entertains the Verdon; and a little beneath
Cavaillon and Avignon, unites with the Rhosne. It will neither endure Boats nor
Bridges, by reason of its great rapidity and swiftness, especially beneath
Sisteron.

Durango, Durangum, a City of North America, in the Province of New Biscay; but
near the Confines of New Spain, toward the Zacatecas; built at the foot of an
Hill; which was made a Bishopric by the Archbishop of Mexico, in 1620.. There
is a small Town of this name also in the Principality of Biscay in the Kingdom
of Old Spain.

Durazzo, Durracium, Dyrrachium, Epidamnus, called by the Turks, Drazzi, by the
French, Duras; is a very ancient and much celebrated City of Macedonia, in the
Kingdom of Albania. It has now a strong Castle, and a large Haven; seated on
the Eastern Shore of the Adriatic Sea, upon the River Argentaro or Arzento,
North-East of Brindisi or Brundusium in the Kingdom of Naples, from which it is
distant one hundred and twenty Miles. Built by the Corcyreans (now called
Corfu) in the Year of the World 3327. One hundred and thirty years after Rome,
and six hundred twenty one before the Birth of our Savior. In the Year of the
World 3512. being much straightened by its Fugitives, it had recourse to the
Assistance of the Corinthians: but the Corcyreans taking part with those
Exiles, the Corinthians were beaten; which drew on an Athenian War, and that
the Peloponnesian. This City fell first with the rest of Greece under the Power
of the Kings of Macedonia; and together with Macedonia was subject to the
Romans, who made it a Roman Colony. In the times of the Civil War between
Caesar and Pompey, it was the Seat of great Actions: for Pompey chose it, and
it was the only prosperous Scene of that Party; and had proved the ruin of
Caesar, if Pompey had pursued his first successes with vigor. Not long before,
it had given entertainment to Cicero in his Exile; and appears every where
favorable to the Republicans. It was also a Roman Colony, but when settled I
cannot now find. In the times of Christianity it became an Archbishops See
under the Patriarch of Constantinople, as it is still; in the later times of
the Greek Empire it had Princes of the Caroline Line of France, from whom it
passed to the Venetians; and from them it was taken by Mahomet III. But the
Venetians Sacked it in 1554. by their Fleet. Long. 44. 20. Lat. 41. 42.

Duren, Dura, Duria, Marcodurum, a City in the Dukedom of Juliers in Germany,
upon the River Roer, not two Miles from Gulick to the South, and five from
Cologne to the West. This was the ancient Marcodurum, in the opinion of
Cluverius, and all the other Geographers; made a Free Imperial City by Charles
IV. Emperor of Germany. Charles V. being incensed against John Duke of Cleves,
(who had married Mary, the Daughter of William* the last Duke of Juliers; and
Leagued* with the French King Francis I. against him) in 1545. entered the
Dukedom of Juliers, and after a sharp Siege took this City and burnt it: it has
been reduced into subjection again, and is now under the Duke of Newbourg, by
the Treaty of Faisans in 1659. Three Councils were Celebrated here in the years
761. 775. 779.

Durgat, Phrygia, a part of Anatolia or Asia the Less.

Durham, Dunehelmum, a City and County Palatine in the North of England. The
City is seated upon the River Ware, in a Peninsula made by this River, which
washes three sides of it, and gives passage into it by three Bridges. The
ground of it is a natural Hill, which contributes no less than the River to the
strength and pleasantness of its situation: also secured by a Wall, and a
Castle in the midst of it; the Cathedral (being a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of York) is toward the South side of the City, and of great beauty.
This City is yet of no great Antiquity, being built or rather begun by the
Monks of Dindisfarn, in 995. before which it was a Wood, and then not cleared
without difficulty. In the times of William the Conqueror it was employed by
the Saxons, as a place of Refuge against him; but they were soon forced to
betake themselves to Scotland for their greater security. William the
Conqueror being possessed of it, built the Castle for a Curb to these Northern
parts, and a security against the Scots. The present Cathedral was began about
the same time by William de Careleph then Bishop of Durham, and finished by
his Successor. This City gave great Protection to the English in 1346, when
David Bruce, King of Scotland, harrassed the Nothern parts, whilst Edward III.
besieged Calais: but the said Bruce was soon after overthrown in Battle, and
taken Prisoner at Nevills Cross. In the times of Edward VI. the Bishopric was
dissolved by Act of Parliament, and given to that Prince; but Q. Mary dissolved
that Statute, and restored the Bishopric with all its Franchises. In 1640. in
the beginning of the Rebellion, it fell after Newbury Fight into the hands of
the Scots; and being left by them the year following, it followed the fate of
the War, as the Parties prevailed upon each other. Long. 22. 00. Lat. 54. 57.

The County or Bishopric of Durham, is bounded on the North and West by the
River Derwent, which separates it from Northumberland; on the South by the
River Tees, which parts it from Westmorland West, and York to the South; and on
the East it has the Sea. The West is full of Mines of Iron; the Valleys are
fruitful here also, and on the Eastern side the Country is very fruitful of
Grass, Corn and Sea-Coal. Though all the English Kings were liberal to this
Church upon the account of S. Cuthbert; yet Guthrun the Dane was the first that
granted this Bishopric o^ County to the Church of Durham; which was afterward
confirmed by Canutus, another Danish Prince, and by William the Conqueror; ever
since which time, it has been accounted a County Palatine. Dr. Nathaniel Crew,
the present Bishop of this Diocese, (being the LXX. in number from S. Aidanus)
was translated from Oxford hither in the year 1674.

Duringen. See Thuringia.

Durlach, or Dourlach, Durlachum, Budoris, a City in the Marquisate of Baden in
Schwaben in Germany, scarce two Miles from the Rhine, to the East, and four
from Baden. This is the Capital of the Marquisate of Durlach, and the lower
part of the Marquisate of Baden, which bounds it on the South; the Rhine lies
on the West; the Dukedom of Wirtemberg on the East; and the Palatinate of the
Rhine on the North. It is subject to its Marquess of the House of Baden, who
has some other Territories and Honors in these Parts.

Durseley, a Market Town in Gloucestershire in the Hundred of Wotton.

Dusseldorp, Dusseldorpium, the chief Town of the Duchy of Bergh upon the
Rhine, five Miles beneath Cologne. This Town was fortified against the Duke of
Brandenburg by the Duke of Newburg in 1613. who has since had his Residence
here.

Duvelandt, the same with Beveland.

Duysburg. See Duisburg.

Dwina, Duna, Dzwina, a vast River in Muscovy or Russia, which rises in the
Province of Megrina, from two several Heads that unite at VVologda, one of the
principal Cities of Russia; and running North-East, passes by the Lake of
Soeclina, beneath which, it receives from the East the River Juga; and a
little lower the River VVuyma; then turning North-East, it falls into the
White Sea by three Mouths; upon the most Eastern of which, stands Archangel,
the only frequented Port of Russia. The heads of this River were called before
their union, Jagel and Sachana; and after it Dwina. There is another River of
the same Name, which rises out of a Lake of the same Name, ten Leagues from
the Lake of Fronowo, and the Sources of the Nieper; and falls into the Baltic
Sea below Riga, says Olearius. I suppose this is it which the latter* Maps
call Duna. This River rises in a Province of Russia called Novogard, near the
Lake VVolga, and the Fountains of the River of that Name; and turning Westward,
being augmented by some smaller Rivers, it enters Lithuania at VVitepks; then
passing Poloczko, Drima, Duneberg, Kakenheusen, and separating Livonia from
Semigallia, it falls into the Gulf or Bay of Livonia (a part of the Baltic
Sea) on the South of Riga, by Dunemund, a Castle seated on the Mouth of it. The
Muscovites call it Dzwina, says Baudrand. The Province of Dwina is the
greatest and most Northern of all Russia; heretofore subject to the Duke of
Novogard; one hundred Russian Miles in length. It had formerly but one City,
called by the same Name, which stands in the middle of it; but since the
Passage to Archangel has been discovered, it is become one of the most
considerable Provinces in Russia; Archangel being seated in this Province, and
the greatest Trade driven on the Dwina.

Dyfy. See Dee, a River in Wales.

Dynas-Mouthwye, a Market Town in the County of Merioneth in Wales. The
Capital of its Hundred.

Dyrne. See Tyrnaw.

EA.
EAdmont or Eamont, a River in the County of Westmorland, which joins with the
Lowther by Whinfeld Forest.

Earne or Lough-Earne, Erno, Erdinus, a Lake in Vlster; which passing into the
Lake of Devenish, a little more West, they both together fall into the
Virgivian or Western Ocean, by the Bay of Walley; between Dungal to the North,
and Slego to the South.

Easingwold, a Market Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of
Bulmer.

East-Born, a Market Town in the County of Sussex, in Bevensey Rape.

East-Breane, Brenia, a Tract in the County of Cavan, in the Province of Vlster
in Ireland, near the Lough-Earne.

Easton-ness, a Promontory on the Coast of Suffolk, which makes the Northern
Point of Southwold* Bay: the most Eastern Cape of the whole Kingdom of England.

Eaton, Aetonia, Etona, a Town in Buckinghamshire, in the Hundred of Stock,
upon the River Thames, over against Windsor: made famous by a College of the
Foundation of King Henry VI. in which there is a Grammar School of great esteem
for the education of the English youth.

Eaune, Heldona, Elna, a River of France, commonly called Liane. It arises in
the Confines of Artois; and running through the County of Bologne, falls into
the British Sea at Bologne.

Eause, Elusa or Elusaberis, a ruined City of France, commonly called Euse and
Eusan, in a Territory of the same Name, upon the River Gelize; often mentioned
by Sulpitius Severus, Ammianus and Sidonius. It was once an Archbishops See,
and the Metropolis of Novempopulonia: but now an obscure Village in Armagnac in
Gascogny; five Miles from Condom West. Civtat is built of late toward the
Rumes of it. The Archbishops See was translated to Aux hence.

Ebersdorp, Eberstorfium, a Town in the Lower Austria in Germany. It stands
upon the Danube, two Miles below Vienna; adorned with a Castle, to which the
Emperors delight to retire.

Eberstein, a County the Circle of Schwaben in Germany, taking its Name from
the Castle Eberstein toward the Dukedom of Wirtemberg: They both belong to the
Marquess of Baden.

Eberwyck, York.

Eblaba, Alabanda, an Inland City of Caria (now Aidinelli) in the Lesser Asia,
on the South of the River Madre. Long. 52. 28. Lat. 38. 46. It is a Bishops See
under the Archbishop of Staurople or Sancta Croce.

Ebro, Iberus, one of the greatest Rivers of Spain, called by the FrenchEbre It
arises from the Mountains of the Asturia's in old Castile, near the Village
and Castle of Mantillas, from two Springs; and watering the North part of Old
Castile, the Towns of Frias, Miranda, Logrono and Tudela, (where it takes in
the River Arga from the South, and from thence becomes capable to carry a Boat)
it soon after enters into, and divides the Kingdom of Arragon; then takes in
Biel from the North* and Xalon from the South, a little below Alagon; then
saluting Saragoza; it admits Rio de la Guerva from the South, and Gallego from
the North; Aguas, Marcia and Guadalupe come in from the South, as it passes
Burgo and Fuentes; and at Mequinenca, Segre, (of old Sicoris) with a number of
smaller Rivers in its retinue. Algas on the South, and a knot of small Rivolets
on the North also come in to pay their Tributes; so watering the Southern part
of Catalonia, a little beneath Tortosa he falls into the Mediterranean Sea,
between three small Islands made by his own Sands. This River gave the Name
anciently of Iberia to all Spain. Festus Avienus mentions another River Iberus,
which is apprehended to be the same with that the Moderns call Rio Tinto.

Ebudae, Hebudes, Hebrides, Aebudae, five small Islands to the West of the
Kingdom of Scotland, now more commonly thence called the VVestern Isles. They
have the honor to constitute a Bishopric under the Archbishopric of Glascow.

Eburones, Eburonices Aulerici, Eburiaci and Eburovices, an ancient People of
Gallia Celtica, dwelling at and about the modern Eureux in Normandy, and the
Diocese of Liege taken in its former Latitude.

Ebusus. See Ivica.

Ecbatana, the Capital City of the Kingdom of the ancient Medes, apprehended to
be the same with the Modern Casbin, or else Tauris of Persia: See Casbin, Hani
and Tauris. King Cambyses died here in the year of the World 3532. Parmenion,
by the order of Alexander Magnus, was killed in 3725. and the alter Alexander,
Hephaestion, buried here in 3728. with so much Funeral Pomp as amounted to
twelve thousand Talents. There was another ancient Ecbatana in Phoenicia,
toward Mount Carmel.

Eccleshal, a Market Town in Staffordshire, in the Hundred of Pirehill.

Ecija, Astigi, Astygi, a City of the Kingdom of Andalusia in Spain; called by
Pliny, Augusta Firma; upon the River Xenil, over which it has a Bridge; eight
Miles from Cordova to the South, and fourteen from Sevil to the North. This was
anciently a Bishops See but now a part of the Diocese of Sevil; and at this
time one of the best Cities in Andaluzia: recovered from the Moors in 1239.

L'Ecluse. See Sluys.

Eda, Baetius, a River in Arabia Foelix, which springing out of the Mountains
of Ghazuan [ Bengebres] waters Harsan; and a little below Tajef, takes in the
River Chaibar: then by passing by Badid, Almortasse, Baisat and Mecca, it falls
into the Red Sea at Ziden or Giodda, over against Suaquem in Africa.

Edel, Rha. See Wolgha.

Eden, the Garden of Paradise, described Genesis 2. and 3. to be planted by the
Divine hand at the head of a River, which afterward breaking into four
Currents produces the Rivers Pison, Geichon, Hiddekel and Euphrates: from
whence they conjecture this Garden to have had its place in the Country about
Mesopotamia in Asia. Not but that the circumstances of the Guardian Cherubims,
and a Flaming Sword invisible, the Fruit Trees of Life and Knowledge, the
Serpents talking with Humane Voice, and by an easy fallacy trepanning of his
Lord into a condition of entailing Curses upon posterity unborn, etc. have
administered apprehensions to the Curious of this History's being either an
Hypothesis of the Writer, or an Allegory. Eden, Ituna, a River of England,
which arises from Huseat Movel-Hill in Yorkshire. It passes Pendragon Castle,
Kirby, Steven, Appleby; and at Hornbey takes in the River Eimot; and enters
Cumberland out of VVestm^rland: running Northward, it passes Corby Castle and
Warwick; then turning West, it waters Carlisse; taking in Petterel and
Canda, one above, the other beneath that City; also the Irthing, which falls
by Brampton; and Kirksop, the Boundary of England and Scotland; so falls by
the Bay of Itune or Eden, into the Irish Sea, between Anand Castle in Scotland,
and Boulnesse in England.

Eder, Adrana, Aeder, a River of Germany, which arises in the Upper Hassia;
and flowing through the Earldom of VValdeck, waters Franekenberg, VValdeck;
and two Miles above Cassel to the North, falls into the River Fuld.

Edernay, Hadrianopolis. See Adrianople.

Edessa. See Rhoa.

Edgware, a small Market Town in the County of Middlesex, in the Hundred of
Gore.

Edinburgh, Agneda, Edenburgum, is the Capital City of the Kingdom of Scotland,
and Seat of the Kings of that Nation. It stands in the South part of Scotland,
in the County of Lothaine; anciently called CASTRVM ALATVM; and Edenburroth
signifies the same thing; for Aidan in the Welsh is Wing: it stands on a high
Ground in an healthful Air, a fruitful Soil, watered by many excellent Springs;
in length from East to West a Mile, the breadth something less: the Walls,
strong; the public and private Buildings, Magnificent: full of People, and has
a competent Trade by the advantage of the Port of Leith, not far from it. At
the East end is the Royal Palace; by it, a fine Park; and not far off, a strong
Castle upon a Rock. As the variety of the Fortune of War changed, this City
fell sometimes into the hands of the English, and at others of the Scots, till
960. when the last prevailed by the means of the Danish Irruptions. September
14. 1650. after the Battle of Dunbar, the Castle was delivered into hands of
the English, who kept it till the Restitution of Charles II. And June 13. 1689.
the Duke of Gourdon surrendered the same to K. William's Forces under Sir John
Lanier, upon Conditions for the Garrison only. For as to his own Interest, he
submitted himself to K. William's discretion. It lies in Long. 16. 00. Lat. 56.
15. The Fyrth of Edinburgh, is one of the greatest Bays in Scotland: on the
North it has Fife, on the South Sterling and Lothaine: and several of the
principal Cities of this Kingdom stand about it, or near to it.

Edgehill, a place in Warwickshire near Kyneneton, seven Miles South of
Warwick; where on Sunday October 23. 1642. was fought the first Battle between
Charles I. and the Parliamentarians under the Earl of Essex. The Earl of
Lindsey Commander of the King's Battalia, and General of the Field, was slain,
and the Standard taken; but retaken by Sir John Smyth, who after the Fight was
made a Knight Banneret. The King had in this first Battle clearly the
advantage, and opened his way to Oxford and London, and the next day took
Banbury: whereas Essex retreated first to Warwick, then to Coventry, and left
both the Field and the Passes.

Edom. See Idumaea.

Efeso. See Ephesus.

Ega, a River in Spain: it arises in Aalva in Biscay, and flowing through the
Kingdom of Navarr, waters Stella, and Villa Tuercta; and between Calahorra
and Villafranca, falls on the North into the Ebro.

Egates or Aegates, a knot of Islands in the Sicilian Sea, over against the
Promontory of Drepanum in Sicily, to the West. They are memorable for the Naval
Victory obtained here by C. Lutatius Catulus, the Roman Consul, over the
Carthaginians: wherein seventy of their Vessels being taken and fifty sunk, a
Peace (by them desired) was concluded, upon condition, they should quit all
their pretensions to the Islands betwixt Italy and Africa: with which the first
Punick War ended in the year of Rome 513. i. e. 241. before Christ. See Gotham.

Egaean Sea. See Archipelago.

Eger and Etlaw. See Agria.

Eger, Egra and Oegra, a strong Town in the Kingdom of Bohemia, upon a River of
its own Name, toward the Frontiers of Franconia in Germany. It was the Seat of
the ancient Narisci, according to Thuanus; and became first a dependent of the
Crown of Bohemia by Mortgage in 1315. In the German Wars, often besieged. Those
of the Country call it Heb, or Cheb.

Egers, Aegiricius, Egericius, commonly called Gers, a River of France in the
Upper Gascony; it arises in Armagnac, and running Northward, waters Aux and
Lectoure; so falls into the Garonne over against Again, twenty five Miles above
Bourdeaux.

Egesta, or Aegesta and Segesta, an ancient City of the Island of Sicily, near
the Promontory of Lilybaeum: the inhabitants whereof are called Segestani in
Pliny.

Eggiaford. See Aland.

Eghmont, a Town in the Northern parts of Holland, which has the honor of the
Title of an Earldom: two Leagues from Berverwick, and within half a League of
the same distance from Al^maer. An Abbey of the Benedictines rendered it
heretofore very considerable. It gives Name to one of the principal Families in
Holland.

Egli, Thelis, a River of Roussillon in Spain, which rises from the Pyrenean
Hills, and falls after a short Course into the Mediterranean Sea, three French
Miles North of Perpignan.

Egremont, a Market Town in the County of Cumberland in the Hundred of
Allerdale, upon the Banks of a River, not far from the Sea, over which it has
two Bridges.

Cgrez, Aegritia, a River belonging to the Territory of the City of Basil,
called in the Maps Aegertz: it arises from the Hills of Buchisgow, and running
North waters Liechstall, and falls into the Rhine three Miles above Basil:
many smaller Rivers fall into it, before it reaches Leichstall, and one after;
but I cannot find their Names.

Egypt, Aegyptus, called by the Inhabitants Chibili, by the Arabians,
Bardamasser; by the Turks, Misir, (which is very near the Hebrew, Misraim); by
the Italians and Spaniards l' Egitto; by the Germans, Egypten; Is the first,
the most fruitful, most ancient, most celebrated Kingdom of all Africa: on the
North it has the Mediterranean Sea; on the East Arabia Deserta, and the Red
Sea; on the South Aethiopia; on the West Cyrene, and the Deserts of Lybia. The
River Nile running the whole length of it, and toward the Mediterranean Sea
dividing it self into many Branches, is the only cause of its Fertility, by
overflowing it every year in the Month of June. It is, says Cluverius, from
the City of Pelusium, to the Cataracts of the Nile, one hundred and fifty
Miles: from the same place to Conza in the West, it is one hundred Miles broad;
in some places toward the South (as Mr. Sandys says) above Grand Cairo, it is
for a long Tract consined between barren Mountains, in many scarce four, in few
above eight Miles broad. But then he extends it from North to South five
hundred and sixty Miles, and in breadth one hundred and forty English Miles at
the North end. Long. from 60. d. to 67. South Lat. from 22. to 31. This Country
was peopled by Misraim the Son of Chus, the Grandchild of Noah by Ham; and
maintained its Liberty under Princes of its own, till God gave them into the
hands of Nebuchadonosor in the year of the World 3365. five years after the
ruin of Jerusalem by the same Prince. Yet that Empire lying far off, and being
much shaken by intestine Divisions, they recovered their Liberty again.
Cambyses reduced them the second time in the year of the World 3425. Xerxes
conquered them about the year 3473. And yet Artaxerxes Ochus was necessitated
to reduce them again; for they set up Princes of their own, and beat his
Generals: so he went in Person; and having driven their King into Aethiopia, he
levelled their strongest Fortifications, and made them so weak and helpless,
that they have been in Servitude ever since. This Prince began his Reign in
3587. Reigned twenty three years, and conquered them in 3602. Alexander the
Great became their Master next in 3620. to whom they most willingly submitted,
out of a detestation of the Persian Government. Ptolomy the Son of Lagus began
his Reign over them in 3626. and Cleopatra the last of his Posterity, destroyed
her self to avoid Captivity, in the year of the World 3920. eighteen years
before the Birth of our Savior. From thence forward they were under the
Romans. This wretched Nation called in at length Haymaria III. of the Saracen
Califfs, and by his help cast out the Greek Garrisons about 862. In 1163.
another Race succeeded, called the Turkish Kings, or Califfs; which ended in
1245. when the Mamalucks (or Slaves of that Race) deposed their Masters, and
erected an Elective Kingdom out of their own Body: the Prince whereof was for
many Ages chosen out of a number of Men, who began in Slavery, and whose
Profession was War; they were in some sort the Janissaries of that Age.
Tonombeius II. the last of them in 1517. was forced to submit to the prevailing
Valor and Fortune of Selymus, one of the Ottoman Princes, under whom that
Nation still groans. And now let any man compare the ancient and present Maps
of Egypt, and his Eyes will show him in one minute, the difference between the
ancient and the later Government. The fruitful and populous Land of Egypt,
styled by the Romans the Granary of their Empire, that was of old overspred
with Cities and Towns, being now almost desolate, and all its ancient Glory,
Magnificence, Riches and People, buried in Rubbish and Ruins: Names of Places
that have no Inhabitants, or Pictures of Beasts and Antiquities, is almost all
that is to be found here. Grandcairo, Alexandria, Rossetta and Damiata, are the
only considerable places left of three thousand Towns that Strabo says there
were in his time; and of the eighteen thousand that Antiquity beheld in the
Ages before. Christianity is almost totally extirpated here, as it is in
Barbary: and whereas the ancient Egyptians acquired a mighty reputation over
all the East, by their good Literature, which drew the Philosophers of Greece
to travel to them; and particularly Plato and Eudoxus, to live amongst them
thirteen years; the Egyptians being the famed Inventors of most of the
Sciences, expressed after an admirable manner in Hieroglyphieks, which with
their Lunar years, their Deities, the long Dynasties of their Kings, their
Customs of Polygamy, Government, and Worship, so charming to the Israelites,
have been the subjects of the Pens of the Learned in diverse Ages; Now an
universal Ignorance and Barbarity possesses their Country. But I must not be
long in so short a Work.

Ehenheim, Enheimium, a small City in the Upper Alsatia upon the River Ergel,
which falls by Strasburgh into the Rhine; a little above three Dutch Miles from
Strasburgh to the South-West. The Name of the River in the Maps, is Ergers, and
of the City, Ober-Hehenheim. This was once an Imperial Free City, but now under
the Dominion of the French, who are repairing the Ruins they made in it, in
its Acquisition.

Eiala, Helicon.

Eichfield, or Eischfelt, Eischfeldia, a District in the Province of Thuringia
in Germany, to the South of the Dukedom of Brunsivick, under the Jurisdiction
of the Elector of Mentz. The Capital of it is Duderstad.

Eichtelberg, a Mountain in the Marquisate of Culemback in Franconia; famous
for giving Source to four Rivers in Germany, comprehended by their initial
Letters in the Word MEN'S; that is, the Mayn, the Eger, the Nab, and the Saal.
It divides into diverse Portions, some reaching Eastward toward Bohemia, some
toward Franconia to the West, the Palatinate and Bavaria to the South, and the
Provinces of Thuringen and Voigtlandt to the North. It abounds particularly
with Pine-Trees, as its Name signifies in the High-German Language.

Eye Eifel, a small Territory or District in the Dukedom of Juliers.

Eigues, or Aigues, Icarus, Aigarus, Eigarus, a River arising amongst the
Mountains of the Dauphinate in France, toward the Territory of Gapansois;
thence passing by Nions and S. Tronquet, discharging it self into the Rhone,
about the Borders of the Principality of Orange.

Eisleben, Eislebia, a small City in the Upper Saxony, in the County of
Mansfield, upon a small River which falls into the Lake of Susse See; one Mile
East of Mansfield, twenty two North-West of Dresden. Luther was born here in
1483. and here died in 1546.

Ekelenford, Ekelenfordia, a Town belonging to Denmark, in the Dukedom of
Sleswick: It stands five Danish Miles from Flensborg to the South-East, upon a
Bay of the Baltic Sea, called Ekrenforder hafen. This Town took its Name from
an old ruined Castle near it, and is under the Duke of Holstein Gottorp.

Ekesio, Ekesium, a Town in the County of Smaland in Sweden, four or five
Leagues from the Lake Weler, toward Ostrogothland.

Eladasagni, Elbassan, Dassar, Daulia, a City in the West of Macedonia, on the
Borders of Albania, upon the River Spirnasse, South of Scampi, (which River
falls into the Ioman Sea, between Durazzo to the North, and Purgo to the
South:) Elbassan stands sixty English Miles from Durazzo.

Elandia, Lampia, a small River in the Morea, not taken notice of in the
ancient or later Maps; but it arises from a Mountain of the same Name in
Arcadia.

Elba, Aethalia, Ilva, the Isle of Elbe, an Island in the Mediterranean Sea,
between Piombino, in the Dukedom of Florence, and the Isle of Corsica;
belonging to the Prince of Piombino, but under the Protection of a Spanish
Garrison at Porto Longone; besides which the Grand Duke is possessed of a
strong Town in it, called Porto Ferrajo, the Argoiis Portus of the Ancients,
but in the Maps Cosmopolis; whereas indeed (says Baudrand) there is no such
Place as Cosmopolis in that Island. It is forty Miles in Circuit, inhabited by
five or six Parishes; and by Virgil applauded for Mines of Steel.

Elbe, Albis, is one of the greatest Rivers of Germany; called by the Bohemians
Labe, by the Italians Albi. It arises in Bohemia, out of the Mountain Das
Risenbirge, that is, the Mount of Giants; in the Borders of Silesia, in the
North-East part of that Kingdom, and runs South: First taking in Vpawa and
Metueze above, and Olitz at Conig; then turning Westward from the North, it
takes in Czidlina; a little further, Gizera; at Melnick, Multaw (which waters
Prague the Capital of Bohemia) and Egers above Letomeritz, where it runs
Northwards into Misnia, and passes by Dresden, and Meissen; then entering
Saxony, a little above Wittenberg, it entertains the Elster from the North,
and at Dessaw, the Muldau; a little further, the Sala, a great River from the
South; then it waters Magdeburgh, Borgh, and Sandow; and at Werben in the
Dukedom of Brandenburgh, takes in the Havel, a great River which waters
Berlin and Brandenburgh, the principal Cities of that Dukedom: At Domitz it has
another vast Supply out of Mecklenburgh; so leaving Danneberg on the South, and
Thomdam on the North, it enters Holstein at Ludesborgh, and runs on the South
of Hamburgh to Gluckstad, about twelve German Miles; beneath which it falls
into the German Ocean. This was the fatal Boundary of the Roman Empire; to
which they seldom came, and beyond which they could never fix.

Elber, Libya Deserta, a Part of Africa.

Elbeuf, Elbovium, Elbodum, a Town in Normandy, upon the Seine, three or four
Leagues below Rouen; adorned with the Title of a Duchy in 1581.

Elbing, Elbinga, Aelveopolis, a City of Prussia, upon the Eastern Mouth of the
Vistula, over against Dantsick, near the Lake of Drawsen; ten Polish Miles from
Dantsick to the East. This is a very strong, beautiful, rich City; divided into
two Parts, the Old and the New. First built in 1239. by the Knights of the
Teutonick Order. In 1454. it withdrew from their Subjection, and put it self
under the Protection of the King of Poland. In 1492. there was an University
opened here by Albertus Duke of Brandenburgh, the first of that House that was
Duke of Prussia. In 1629. it was taken by the Swedes, and again in 1655. but
since recovered to the Crown of Poland. The first Occasion of its Trade and
Wealth, was the Besieging the Town of Dantsick by Stephen King of Poland; which
necessitated the Merchants to remove the Trade to Elbing. Gustavus Adolphus
designed to improve it by the same Method; but the best Trade they have at
present, is on the Account of its being the Staple for the English Cloth. This
City is the Capital of the Territory of Hockerland; and diverse English Families
have settled themselves at it.

Elbogen. See Malmugen.

Elcatif, Leanita, a City and Province in Arabia Foelix, upon the Gulf of
Persia, over against the Island of Babarim; from which the Gulf of Persia is
by the Arabians called the Sea of Elcatife.

Elcur, Cyrrus, Cyrus, a River of Albania in Asia; which arises in the
Confines of Armenia Major, from the Mountains of Mosch, and flowing through
Iberia, takes in the River Iber; then buries it self in the Caspian Sea.

Elephantina, Elephantis, a pleasant Island of the River Nile in Egypt, below
the last of its Catarracts, not very far from Aethiopia; the Egyptians and
Aethiopians trading with each other here. It enjoys a perpetual Spring; and
according to Tacitus, is observable for being the utmost Boundary on that Side
of the Roman Empire.

Elesa, Elusa, an Island upon the Coast of Cilicia.

Eleusis, an ancient City of Attica, betwixt Megara and the Portus Pyraeus. One
of the most celebrated in all Greece for the Temple, and the Mysteries of the
Goddess Ceres performed here, together with other particular Mysteries, in
Honor of Proserpine and Hercules; some of which it was Death to discover; some
they exposed, yet at several times, and by Parts: Whence Seneca's Proverb,
Eleusina servat quod ostendat: Admittingno Persons to the Exercise of the
greater ones, under a Noviciatship of five years, with the Title of Mystae; and
then advancing them to the Degree of (...), with a Ceremony of Consecration.
The Grand Secret of these Mysteries is thus discovered by Tertullian; Tota in
Aditis divinitas, etc. Simulachrum membri virilis revelatur. Thus by Theodoret;
Naturae muliebris imago.

Eleutherns, the River, now called Bajaria or Habes, according to Cluverius:
Others apply it to the Admirati, of the Island of Sicily. See those modern
Names. Also a River of Phoenicia in Syria, arising from the Mountain Libanus,
thence passing by Ituraea and Galilaea, to fall into the Tyrian Sea two Miles
from Sarepta, and three from Tire. The modern Name of this is Valonia.

Eleutheropolis, an ancient City of the Tribe of Juda, in Palestine; eight
Miles from Hebron to the West, and twenty from Jerusalem by the Way of Gaza. S.
Jerome takes the Distances of diverse Places from this, as from one of particular
Note.

Elgin, a small City in the County of Murray in Scotland, upon the River
Lossie; three Miles from the Coasts of the German Ocean. It is a Bishops See
under the Archbishop of S. Andrews.

Elham, or Eltham, a Market Town in Kent, in Shepway Lath: Honored heretofore
with a Palace Royal; now well inhabited, being pleasantly seated amongst Woods
on the Side of a Hill.

Elis, A Country of the ancient Peloponnesus, betwixt Achaia, Messene and
Arcadia; so particularly consecrated in those times to Jupiter, whose Temple
and Statue here were numbered amongst the Wonders of the World, that it was
looked upon as Sacrilege to attack it: Only, the Lacedaemonians, Arcadians and
Romans were not so scrupulous to observe the Conceit. Before this Country
submitted to the Romans, or was governed by a Magistracy of its own, it had the
Honor to be a Kingdom. The Rivers Alpheus and Acheron, the Mountain Peneus,
the Olympic Games in Honor of Jupiter and Juno, the Cities Elis, Pisa or
Olympia, Cyllene, etc. contributed to spread its Fame in ancient History. Its
modern Name is Belvedore. See Belvedore.

Ell, or Elle, Elcebus, a Town of Germany, in the lower Alsatia, upon the River
Ill; three Leagues from Schlestad, and something more than one from Strasbourgh.

Ellesmere, a Market Town in the County of Salop, in the Hundred of Pimhill,
near the Borders of Wales. The Earl of Bridgwater is Baron of this Place.

Elna, Helena, a small City in Catalonia, in the County of Roussillon,
heretofore a Bishop's See; upon a small River, two Miles South of Perpignan,
and the same from the Mediterranean. The Bishopric was removed to Perpignan in
1604. by Clement VIII. The Town was taken by the French from the Spaniard in
1640. Very small; called anciently Illiberis; in which was Hellen Castle, where
those of Magnentius his Party slew Constans, the Eldest Son of Constantine. The
River that falls by it is Tech.

Elsass. See Alsatia.

Elsenore, Elsenora, by the Danes Helsignor, is a Town in the Island of
Zeeland; five German Miles from Copenhagen to the West. It has a large and a
safe Haven, near the Mouth of the Sound; and a Castle to command the Streights
of the Sound.

Elsingbourgh, Elsingborch, a Town on the opposite Shore, over against
Cronenburgh in Scania; which heretofore was under the Crown of Denmark, but by
the Treaty of Roschild, in 1658. resigned to the King of Sweden. It stands
three German Miles from Landskroon to the West. Christopher of Bavaria, King of
Denmark, died here in 1448. The Danes took it in 1676. but they returned it to
the Swedes again the year after.

Eltor, Eilan, or Heilan, Aelana, Aila, Sur, Taurus, a City of Arabia Petraea,
upon the Red Sea, North of Madian, and over against Dacata in Egypt. It has a
Castle on a Rock by it, which always keeps a Turkish Garrison against the
Arabians.

Elvas, Helva, a City of Portugal, in the Province of Alentejo, called Yelves
by them of Castile; it stands upon the River Guadiana, fourteen Miles from
Merida to the West, and twenty nine from Sevil to the North. This is a Bishop's
See under the Archbishop of Evora; well fortified, and has belonging to it a
strong Castle. The Spaniards, in 1659. besieged it to their great loss, being
here routed by the Portuguese. Paul IV. in 1555. raised it to the Honor of a
Bishopric. The Cathedral Church was built by the Moors for a Mosque.

Elvino, a Fountain near Aquino, a City of the Terra di Lavoro, in the Kindom
of Naples.

Elvira, Eliberis, an ancient City of the Kingdom of Granada in Spain; ruined,
and its Episcopal See transferred to Granada, the Nova Illiberis, which has
risen by its fall. This City is famous in Ecclesiastical History, for a Council
assembled at it about the year 305. Two of the Canons thereof being much
insisted on in Disputes; the one, forbidding Images; the other, the Marriage of
the Clergy.

Elwang, Elwanga, Elephaniacum, a small City in the Circle of Schwaben in
Germany, upon the River Jagst; in the Confines of Franconia, near the Territory
of Onold; five German Miles from Rotenburgh, upon the Tubar, to the South, and
nine from Vlm to to the North. The Capital of a Noble Government; the Governor
being one of the Princes of the Empire; and it has a Castle near the City, in
which he resides. This Territory is called by the Germans, Stife Elwang.

Elway, a small River which rises in Denbighshire in Wales, and falls into
the Cluyd, a little beneath S. Asaph.

Ely, Helia, a City and Bishoprck in Cambridgeshire, in an Island of the Name,
surrounded on all sides by Fens and Marshes; yet here was anciently one of the
richest Monasteries of England. The Sea was taken out of that of Lincoln, and
constituted by Henry I. in 1109. Hervey, Bishop of Bangor, being the first
Bishop of it. The Monastery out of which the Bishopric sprung, was Founded by
Etheldreda, Wife to Egfred King of Northumberland, and was at first a Nunnery.
The Danes having ruined this Foundation, Ethelwold, Bishop of Winchester,
refounded it, and stocked it with Monks. The Cathedral was a Work of Time,
built by Parts, great and beautiful; though the Town of Ely is not great, nor
the Air healthful. The Bishop of this See had heretofore Palatine Rights, which
were taken off by 27. H. 8. c. 25. But yet the Revenue is great, and the
Bishops of it have been in great Esteem, and much employed. The present, is the
forty third Bishop of this Diocese.

Elymi, an ancient People, that dwelt about the Mountains and high Grounds of
the Island of Sicily; remembered in History, upon the Account of their being the
Allies of the Carthaginians.

Elysii Campi, Elysium, the Poets Paradise; a large and delicious Plain of
Baeotia in Greece, covered with Flowers, and every way agreeable to the
Pleasures of the Senses.

Elysii, Helisii, Lysii, the ancient People of the Province of Silesia, in
Bohemia; mentioned by Tacitus.

Embden, Amasia, Emda, a German City in the Circle of Westphalia; anciently
called Amasia, or Amisia, as Cluverius says, from the River Ems, (Amasius,)
upon which it stands, with a large deep Port defended by a Castle. It is the
Capital of East-Friesland, which is from this City often called the
Principality of Embden; not great, but strong and well fortified. The Trade or
People here are neither of them considerable; the Hollanders having sometime
since possessed themselves of it. It stands fifteen Miles from Bremen to the
South-West, and seven from Groningen to the North.

Emboli, Empoli, Amphipolis, Christopolis, an Archiepiscopal City, in
Macedonia, under the Patriarch of Constantinople, upon the Confines of
Macedonia and Thrace: Seated upon the Bay and River of Strimon, which did
almost surround it; standing in the Confines of these two Countries or
Kingdoms; and sometimes ascribed to the one, sometimes to the other. It lies
thirty Miles from Philippos to the East, and seventy five from Thessalonica to
the East. Now under Bondage to the Turks. Long. 50. 00. Lat. 41. 30.

Emeley, Auna, Emelia, a small City in the County of Tipperary, in the Province
of Mounster in Ireland; in the Confines of the County of Limerick; upon the
River Eslason, which falls into the River More or Broadwater: Heretofore great,
populous, and a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Cashel in the same County.
This City lies twenty four Miles from Limerick to the East.

Emenia, an ancient Name of Thessalia.

Emilia, a Province of the ancient Italy, lying along the Emiliana via, which
denominated it, from Ariminum to Placentia; and comprehending a part of the
present Estates of the Pope, the Dukes of Parma, Modena, Mantoua, and
Mirandola. Called also Flaminia.

Emmaus, a Village in the Tribe of Juda, in Palestine, distant from Jerusalem
about sixty Furlongs. Luc. 24. 13. At which our Savior after his Resurrection
discovered his Person to two of his Disciples by sitting down to eat with them,
and then vanished out of their Sight. It is mentioned by Pliny, upon the
Account of some remarkable Fountains there. The Devotion of Christians had
advanced it to the Dignity of an Episcopal See, and built it a Monastery;
before the Turks converted it into a Village again, much more desolate than
before, inhabited by the Arabians only.

Emmen, Amma, a River of Switzerland, deriving its beginning from the Valley of
Lemmethal, and after the reception of some Rivulets, falling into the Aar below
Soleurre.

Emmerick, or Embrick, Embrica, Emmerica, a large, fair and rich Town in the
Duchy of Cleves, in Germany, upon the Eastern Banks of the Rhine, betwixt
Cleves and the Fort of Skein; adorned with a Collegiate Church ever since the
year 700. It is in the Possession of the Duke of Brandenburgh. The Hollanders
took it from the Spaniards in the year 1600. The French from the Hollanders in
1672. who the year after put it into the Duke of Brandenburgh's Hands.

Empurias, Emporiae, Castrum Aragonense, Tibulae, a strong City in the Western
Quarter of the Island of Sardinia, upon the River Termo or Termi, or Aragonese;
with a good Port, and a Citadel, and a Bishop's See, in Conjunction with that
of Terra Nova in the same Island. It is more vulgarly now called Castle
Aragonese, because it was the first Town the Spaniards of Aragon possessed
themselves of, after the grant of Sardinia by Pope Boniface VIII. to James II.
King of Aragon, about the Year 1296.

Ems, Eems, Amasius, Amisius, Amasia, Amasis, a River of Germany, which rises
in the Diocese of Paderborne, near Wrle, in a very deep Valley, from a slow but
plentiful Spring, two Miles and an half from Paderborne to the North; then
running Westward, and taking in the VVrle, the Dalke, and the Luter, three
small Rivers, it enters the Bishopric of Munster; (having first passed by
Retburgh, the Capital of a small Country,) and waters VVidenbrug, or
VVarendorp, and receives the Hessel from Ravensberg on the South; so passing
Eme and Tillegt, it receives from the North the VVerse; and a little lower the
Aa, which waters the City of Munster; then turning North it passes the
Rhine, and takes in another Aa on the East; so by Linge he proceeds to Meppen,
where it admits the Hase a considerable River on the East too; then passing by
Landegge on the West, and Nienhus on the East, it enters East-Friesland at
the Fort of Oort; takes in Soste from the East, and by Oldersum and Nendorp,
passes by Emden, (which takes its present, as well as ancient Name from it,)
and the Bay of Dullart, into the German Ocean.

Enchuysen, Enckuysen, Ancusanum, Enchusa, is a small City belonging to the
United Provinces, in Holland, in that Part called West-Friesland; which has a
large and safe Haven upon the Zuyder Sea, and affords excellent Pilots; not
above three Miles from Horn to the East, and eight from Amsterdam to the North:
It stands on the Western shore, at the Entrance of the Zuyder Zee, and was one
of the first Towns that revolted and turned out the Spaniards in 1572. It had
been burnt in 1279. But rebuilt and qualified with the Privileges of a City by
William Earl of Holland in 1355.

Encre, Incra, a River in Picardy in France; with a Fort of the same Name upon
it, which falls into the Some at Corvie.

Enderen. See Adrianople.

Endromit, Adramyttium, a City of the Lesser Asia, in Phrygia; and a Seaport
upon the Archipelago, over against the Island of Metellino, ( Mitilene:) called
by Europeans Andramiti, by the Turks Edromit, (as Leunclavius affirms;) and by
others S. Dimitri. It is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Ephesus; and I
suppose is that which is called Landimetri in the later Maps; seventeen German
Miles North of Smyrna. The Bay is called by the same Name; and sometimes
extended to all the Sea between this Town and the Island of Metellino;
sometimes contracted to that only, which enters the Shoars of Asia. Hofman
confirms my Conjecture; and shows that this City has a Phoenician Name from
Bochart: it stands in a rich and fruitful Soil; mentioned by Livy, lib. 37. by
Strabo, lib. 13. by S. Paul, Acts xxvii. 2. Long. 55. 00. Lat. 40. 40.

Engaddi, or Engedi, an ancient City of the Tribe of Judah, in Palestine,
situated in a fruitful Soil for Wine; as the Comparison intimates, Cant. 1. 14.
King David had an Opportunity to kill Saul in a Cavern of a Mountain near this
Place. Ptolemy and Stephanus mention it.

Engern, Angria, the seat of the ancient Angrivarii, a Town in the Earldom of
Ravensberg, in the Province of Westphalia in Germany, seven or eight Leagues
from Munster: Famous for the Tomb of Witichindus, a Duke of the Saxons, of high
Renown in the time of Carolus M. The Elector of Cologne styles himself Duke of
this Place.

Engers, a fair Town and Castle, with a noble Bridge over the Rhine, in the
Archbishopric of Trier in Germany, betwixt Coblentz and Andernach.

Engia, or Egina, an Island of the Archipelago toward Europe, at the Mouth of
the Gulf of its own Name, (which was the Sinus Saronicus of the Ancients,) to
the East of the Province of Sacania in the Morea; and near Athens. The
Inhabitants whereof, in former Ages, were in a Condition to dispute with the
Athenians for the Sovereignty of the Sea. It is about thirty six Miles in
Circuit. The Capital City, Engia; which has been the Seat of a Bishop under
the Archbishop of Athens, since Christianity; but now no more than a Village,
and the whole Island unprovided of a good Port. In 1537. the Turkish Admiral,
Barberousse, took this Island from the Venetians; who retaking it in 1654.
ruined all its Fortifications, and abandoned it to the Plunder of their
Soldiers. The Relicts of two Famous Temples, the one dedicated to Jupiter, the
other to Venus heretofore, are yet visible upon it.

England, Anglia, called by the French Angleterre, by the Italians Inghilterra,
by the Germans Engellandt, by the Spaniards Inglaterra, is the greatest, the
most Southern, and the best Part of the Island of Great Britain; called
heretofore Albion, Britannica, and Britannia: Which noble Island is divided
into three Parts, England, Wales, and Scotland. England has Scotland on the
North, the Irish Sea in part, and Wales in part, and then the Irish Sea again
on the West; the British Sea on the South, and the German Sea on the East:
Between 17. and 22. Degrees. of Long. between 50. and 57. of N. Lat. It lies
together with Wales in the Form of a great Triangle, whereof the Southern Shore
is the Base, and Berwick the opposite Angle; from whence to the Lands End, it
is accounted three hundred eighty six Miles Long, and two hundred seventy nine
Broad; containing in that Compass, about thirty Millions of Acres of Land. It
was divided by the Romans into five Parts, by the Saxons into seven Kingdoms,
and now into forty one Shires or Counties: In which the Parishes amount to
about ten thousand. The Air is very Temperate, both in Winter and Summer, being
warmed in the one, and cooled in the other by the Sea-Vapors; the Soil for the
most part very fruitful; watered with three hundred twenty five Rivers. The
Inhabitants, Valiant and Industrious. And as Nature has given it whatever is
absolutely necessary to the Life of Man; so the Natives by their Trade and
Commerce, bring in from abroad, what may be had throughout the World, for
Convenience, Delight, Magnificence, and Ornament. It has also the best
Government, and the best constituted Religion, of any Nation in the World; and
as much Learning, Civility, Arts and Trade as any other. Our Fleets excel at
Sea, our Foot at Land, those of all other Nations. In short, we want nothing to
make us happy, but Gratitude to God, and Union amongst our selves. This Island
became first known to the Romans, about fifty years before the Birth of Christ.
Julius Caesar entered it with a Fleet in the Year of the World 3895. and
renewed his Attempt the year following; but the Civil Wars breaking out between
him and Pomper, the Romans made little Progress here, (though they kept their
Ground) till the Reign of Claudius; who entered Britain in Person, and staying
not long, his General, Aulus Plautius, carried on the War; so that he took in
the greatest part of this Island, now called England, and under him Vespasian
learned the Art of War. Didius Avitus succeeded as General, and Nero as
Emperor; under whom the Romans were in great Danger of an utter Extirpation
from the Britains: But this Storm blowing over, they conquered all they cared
for, as far the Fyrths of Galloway and Edinburgh in Scotland; only their
ordinary and standing Bounds were between Newcastle and Carlisle. They
continued their Possession till the year of Christ 433. and then withdrew to
desend their nearer Dominions on the Continent, against the prevailing
barbarous Northern Nations. In 449. the Saxons were called in to help the
Britains against the Picts, (those Nations that had never been subject to the
Romans, in the North of Britain.) In 455. Hengist, their General, set up the
Kingdom of Kent, and began the Conquest of the British. By the year 819. the
Heptarchy, or seven Kingdoms of the Saxons, united in one, under Egbert King of
the West Saxons; which Union received its utmost Perfection under Alfrid, about
873. The Danes, who had given Occasion to this Union, pursuing their
Depredations, at last conquered the Saxons in 1018. and set up Sweno, a Prince
of their own. In 1042. Edward the Confessor restored the Saxon Line, which was
broken by William the Conqueror in 1066. But the Blood was again restored by
Henry II. in 1155. Edward I. united Wales, in 1246. K. Henry II. began, and K.
John finished the Conquest of Ireland, about the Year 1184. in the Reign of
Richard I. his Brother. In the year 1602. James I. K. of Scotland, succeeding
Qu Elizabeth, of Blessed Memory, united Scotland to England. And the great
Rebellion in 1640. ended in 1660. by the Restitution of Charles, the Merciful
and Just. Yet the Miseries that brought it in, the Calamities that attended it,
and the Judgments that have followed it, may be eternal Monitors to English
Men, to be Loyal to the King, and steadfast to the Church.

Engur, Astelfus, a River of Asia, which springs from Mount Caucasus; and
watering Mengrelia, falls into the Euxine, or Black Sea, between Charus and
Hippus. Twenty Miles North of Chobus, another River of the same Country.

Engury, Ancyra, a City of Galatia, in the Lesser Asia, upon the River
Parthenius, (now Sangari,) which falls into the Black Sea at Cangary. This was
the Metropolis of Galatia; yet seated in the Confines of Paphlagonia, on an
advanced Ground: And made Famous by a Council here held in 314. and another in
357. Called by the Turks, Enguri, Engouri, Angouri, or Anguri; fifty Miles to
the East from Scutari, and sixty from Smyrna to the N. East. It is now
considerable, and the Capital of one of the Turkish Provinces in Asia.
Mithridates, the Famous King of Pontus, was overthrown by Pompey near this
City-Bajazet the Turk, in the year 1403. was in the same Place taken Prisoner
by Tamerlane, the Scythian Conqueror. Long. 62. 10. Lat. 42. 30.

Enham, Aenhamum, a Town in the County of Southampton, in the Hundred of
Andover: Of Note, for a Council here congregated of the Bishops of both the
Provinces in the Year 1009. under the Reign of King Ethelred.

Enkoping, Enecopia, a Town in the Province of Vplandia, in the Kingdom of
Sweden; near the Lake Meler; five or six Leagues from Vpsal.

Enna, an ancient City, standing heretofore in the Center of the Island of
Sicily; and Famous, both for a Temple dedicated to the Goddess Ceres Ennea, and
for the excellentest Springs in all the Island* which are applauded by Cicero
and Diodorus. The Bellum Servile of Sicily was raised by Syrus Ennus of this
Place, and ended with the Reduction of this Place also, under the Conduct of
Pimperna.

Eno, Aenos, a City of Thrace, called by the Turks, Ygnos; by the Greeks, Eno.
It stands on the Archipelago, at the Mouth of the River Hebrus, now Mariza;
which runs a little South of Adrianople, and here falls into the Sea over
against the Isle of Samandrachi; forty Miles from the new Dardanels to the
North, and sixty five English Miles from Adrianople South: Is now a Bishop's
See, under the Patriarch of Constantinople,

Enrichemont. See Boisbelle.

Ens, Claudivium, Claudionum, Anisus, is both a River and a City of Austria:
the River rises in the Bishopric of Saluburgh near Rachstad; and running
North-East as far as Newmarckt, it takes in that of Celstal; North-West it
meets the Steyr, at Steyr Castle; and there it turns to the North, and washes
the East Side of the City of Ens; half a German Mile beneath which, it falls
into the Danube. Near the City there is a Bridge over the Danube, on the
North-West Side.

Ensisheim, Ensihemium, a small City in Alsatia, upon the River Ill, two Miles
West of Newenburgh, five Miles North-West from Basil. Once the Capital of the
Higher Alsatia, and the Seat of the Parliament, or Chamber of that Province;
but now in the hands of the French.

Entre-Douro-e-Minho, a Province, the best peopled, and the most delightful of
all the Kingdom of Spain: containing in the space of eighteen Leagues in
length, and twelve in breadth, six good Port-Towns, above one hundred and
thirty Monasteries, and fourteen hundred Parishes. It has this Appellation
given it from its Situation betwixt the Rivers Douero to the South, and Minho
to the North: the Western Ocean binding it to the West, and the Province of
Tras-los-Monies to the East. Its Capital is the City Braga.

Entrevaux, Intervallium* a Town in Provence, upon the River Var and the
Frontiers of the County of Nice, about the Mountains; which the Bishop of
Gl^ndev^s makes the Seat of his Residence.

Epaune or Epone, Epaunense, Ponense, Eponense, a Town or Parish in the old
Kingdom of Burgandy in France; where there was a Council held in 51^ under the
Reign of Sigismund, King of Burgundy, after his abjuration of Arrianism. The
French Writers cannot agree, where to place it more particularly.

Ephesus, E^^so* one of the most ancient and noble Cities of the Lesser Asia;
seated upon the River Causter, ( Ca^strus,) in the Province of Ionia; on the
Shoars of the Archipelago, North of the Isle of Samos; one of the greatest and
most celebrated Cities of Asia, before it fell into the hands of the
depopulating Sar^o^ns and Tur^^* who seem to have been designed by Heaven for
the Scourges and Destroyers of ancient Cities, or rather of Mankind, there is
so much Desolation where ever they have long ruled. This City is so ancient,
that it is generally believed to have been built by the Amazons. It stood at
first on too low a Ground; and therefore suffering much by Inundations,
Lysimachus, one of the Successors of Alexander the Great, removed it into that
place where it now is, and called it Arsinoe, by the Name of his Wife; but
after his Death, it reassumed its ancient Name. Pliny calls the Temple of Diana
here built, Admirationem Graecae Magnificentiae, The Wonder of the Grecian
Magnificence: and reckons it amongst the Wonders of the World: this was burnt
by Erostratus, to perpetuate the Memory of his Name, that night Alexander the
Great was born, in the one hundred and sixth Olympiad, and the three hundred
ninety eighth year of Rome, i. e. three hundred fifty six years before Christ.
Two hundred and twenty years more afterward were spent in rebuilding it, with
the utmost Magnificence, at the charges of all the Provinces of Asia Minor.
Xerxes, though he ruined many of the Asiatick Temples, spared this. The Romans
conquered this City under Antiochus King of Syria, an hundred and eighty years
before the Birth of our Savior, and in their first Asiatick War. Nero
plundered it; the Goths under Galienus destroyed it. S. Paul first planted the
Christian Faith (residing in person three years) here, and wrote one of his
Epistles to this Church afterward, whilst he was at Rome. S. John, the beloved
Apostle, lived, and wrote, and in probability died here: to him the great
Church was dedicated, that is now a Turkish Mosque. S. Timothy was its first
Bishop after S. Paul. The third General Council, consisting of two hundred
Prelates, was held here in the year 431. under Theodosius junior, against
Nestorius and Pelagius. There was a smaller Council here in 198 concerning the
Celebration of Easter; in which the Bishops resolving to adhere to the Asiatick
Custom, Pope Victor declared to break his Communion with them. Another in 400.
held by S. Chrysostom, for the quieting the Disturbances of Asia. Another in
449 by Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria, for the confirming the Opinions of
Euryches, in which Pop^ Leo's Legates were rejected: and some others. When this
City came first into the hands of the Turks, I cannot assign; but it is certain
they call it A^^salouc; and that it is a poor desolate Village though with a
fine Haven, and an old ruined Castle. This City lies forty Miles from Smyrna to
the South; full of the deplorable Ruins of its pristine Glory. Long. 55. 45.
L^at. 39. 00. All the Inhabitants of this City now are about forty or fifty
Families of Turks, without one Christian amongst them: living in a knot at the
South Side of the Castle, called Asia Sabuck. The Grott of the seven famous
Sleepers is shown in this City.

Epidamnus* See Dura^^o.

Epi^a^rus. See Malvasia and Ragusa. An ancient City besides, of Argia, in the
Peloponnesus, where there was a Temple dedicated to Aesculapius.

Epideno, Apidanus, a River of Thessalia, called sometimes Epedonia; it arises
from Mount Bormio; and washing Pharsalia, (famous for the overthrow of Pompey
the Great, by Caesar) falls into the River Onocoro, ( Peneus) above Larissa,
with a very swift Current.

Epirus, a Kingdom in Greece, which was anciently much celebrated; and had
first Kings of its own, till the Macedonians subjected it: it is bounded on the
North by Macedonia, now Albania; on the East by Thessalia, on the South by
Achaia, (now Livadia;) and on the West by the Ionian Sea, or Gulf of Venice.
This Province is now sometimes called the Lower Albany. It is most famous for
its ancient King Pyrrhus, who invaded Italy, and beat the Romans in the year of
the World 3669. two hundred seventy nine years before the Birth of our Savior.
See Florus, lib. 1. cap. 18. This Kingdom was reduced to the Macedonian
Subjection, by Philip and Alexander the Great; but Pyrrhus not only recovered
it, but conquered, and for some time kept Macedonia. The Romans subdued it
next, and Paulus Aemilius laid it desolate: sacking in one day seventy Cities,
and captivating an hundred and fifty thousand Epirots, without any Provocation.
In the Division of the Empire, this Country fell to the Eastern; and continued
so till the taking of Constantinople; after which it had Princes of its own
again, till the year 1466. when by the death of George Castriot, commonly
called Scanderberg, it was reduced under the Dominion of the Turks, under whom
it still is; excepting Corfu, and some other small Islands, which are under the
Venetians.

Episcopia, Curium, once a City of the Isle of Cyprus, now a great Village,
which is yet a Bishops See amongst the Greeks: it lies on the South Side of the
Island, East of Paphos, and not far from the South-West Cape, in a Bay, called
heretofore Curia.

Epomeus or Epopeus, a Vulcanoe-Mountain in the midst of the Island of Ischia,
in the Thuscan Ocean; so terrible in its Eruptions, accompanied with
Inundations and Earthquakes, that we find the Inhabitants have diverse times
abandoned the Island for safety. It is recorded particularly to have raged
under the Consulship of Lucius Marcius and Sextus Julius, under the Reigns of
Augustus, Titus and Dioclesian, and in the year 1300.

Epping, a Market Town in the County of Essex, in the Hundred of Waltham. The
Lord Gray of W^rk has a Seat here.

Epsham or Epsom, a Market Town in the County of Surrey, in the Hundred of
Copehorn: pleasantly situated, and much resorted to, for its Medicinal Waters.

Epte, Illa, a River in the Beauvaisis, in the Isle of France.

Erasino or Rasino, a small River of the Morea, in ^^carnania, the most
North-Eastern Province, near Napoli di Romania: it arises out of a Lake,
anciently called Stymphalis; and having buried it self under the Earth, arises
again; and falls at last into the Golfo di Napoli.

L'Eraut or l'Erraud, Araurius, Rhauraris, a River of the Province of Languedoc
in France, arising from the Mountains of Sevennes, and passing by Castelnau de
Guers, Florensac, etc. to discharge its Tribute to the Mediterranean, having
first received into its own Bed some Streams by the way.

Erdelia, Erdeliana provincia, Erdely. See Transylvania.

Eresby, a Town in the Division of Lindsey in Lincolnshire, not far from
Bullingbrook, giving the Title of Baron to the Earl of Lindsey.

Eresma, Areva, a River of Old Castile in Spain* it arises from Mount Fonfria,
in the Borders of New Castile; and passing by Segovia, receives the small
Rivolet of Clamores, and another at Coca, called the Valtaia; and a little
lower the Cega; then falls into the Duero, over against Tordesillas. Baudrand.
This River seems to be called Zarpardiel; and another that falls into it from
the West, here called Cega, to be the Areva, or Eresma; but in the ancient
Maps, that which falls by Segovia, is called Areva.

Eretria, an ancient Episcopal City of the Island of Negropont, now called
Rocco. A second, in the Province of Thessalia.

Erfurdt, Erfurt, Erford, Bi^urgium, Erphordium, Hercinophordia, a City in
Thuringia in Germany, the Capital of that Province. It stands upon the River
Iera, three Miles from Weimar West, fifteen from Franckfort to the South-West,
Long. 31. 00. Lat. 51. 00. Of old called Mervigisburg, from Meroveus the first
Christian King of France. There was a Mona^tery built here by Dagobert, another
King of France, in the year 637. (after which it was called Petersberg;) and
there is now a famed University* founded in 1392. There was a Council held here
in 932. for the keeping the Festivals of the Apostles: in 1074. for the
promoting Celibacy and Chastity, and the forbidding Concubinage amongst the
Clergy, which had no good success. In 1163. it was walled. Rudolphus I*
extinguished here a great Sedition in 1289. The Church of our Lady here was
built in 1351. A Fire almost totally ruined this City in 1417. Since which it
has been so nobly rebuilt and improved, that the people ordinarily say, Erford
is not a City, but a Country. In 1514. Luther found here Jerome of Prague his
Works, and published them. The Castle stands upon a Hill, where there was
heretofore a Religious House. Gustavus King of Sweden took it at his coming
into Germany: but in 1648. it returned into the obedience of the Bishop of
Mentz, by the Treaty of Osnabruck. And because the inhabitants refused to
submit to the said Bishop, the French assisted him to make himself Master of it
in 1664. first having taken it from the Duke of Saxony; who had yet seventeen
of ninety Villages (which did belong to it) assigned to him by the Treaty of
Leipsick in 1665. in lieu of his Right and Pretenses.

Ergel, Heraclea, a ruined City of Caria in the Lesser Asia, between Mount
Cadmas to the South, the River Lycus to the East, and the Meander to the West;
directly East of Ephesus. Ptolemy places it about an hundred English Miles
from it.

Eridanus, the Po.

Erin. Ireland, in Irish.

Erissi, Erissus, a Town in the Isle of Lesbia.

Erivan or Irivan, a noble City of Armenia, upon the Frontiers of Persia. It is
built upon a Rock, at whose foot the River Zenguey glides to the North-West,
and the Que^rk boutak, or River of forty fountains, to the South-West; the
former being here passed by a fine Stone Bridge. In a good Air and a fruitful
Soil, for Wine especially; adorned with diverse Churches, a magnificent Palace
for the Governor, and very commodious Caravanseras for Travelers; about one
hundred paces from the Old Erivan (which was ruined in the Wars of the Turks
and Persians), and kept garrisoned with two thousand men. The Armenians have a
Tradition amongst them, that this was the Seat of Paradise, and the habitation
of Noah before and after the Deluge. In the year 1584 the Turks took it, and
built it that stately For^re^s we now see there. The Persians recovered it in
1604. The Turks retook it in 1629. The Persians recovered it again in 1635. It
is the Capital of a large adjacent Territory.

Erlaph, Erlape, a River of the Lower Austria, which falls into the Danube.

Erma. See Herma.

Erne, Ravius, a Lake and River in the West of Ireland.

Erneo. See Irneo.

Erpach, Erpachum, a Town and County in Franconia in Germany, under its own
Count, between the Rhine, the Main and the Necker; having the Territory of
Geraw or Grawer on the West. This Count has the privilege of a Seat in the
general Diets of the Empire.

Erquico, Arquico or Ercoco, Er(...) Adulis, a considerable Town and Port upon
the Red Sea, in the Kingdom of Barnagasso in Africa, under the Turks; being a
dependent of the Beglerbegship of Sua^^en.

Errif, Errifis, a Province in the Kingdom of Fez in Barbary* lying along the
Mediterranean Coast, between the Provinces of Habat to the West, and Garet to
the East. And a Mountain called of old Atlas Minor.

Erythaea, a small Island, of fame amongst the ancient Greek and Latin Poets,
for the Story of King Geryon. But the Geographers have not agreed upon the
place of it, whether betwixt Cadis and Spain, as Pliny; or upon the Coast of
Portugal amongst the Barlinguas, as Mela and others would have it.

Erythraea, an ancient City of Ionia in Asia Minor, to the Sea: adorned since
the times of Christianity with the Seat of a Bishop under the Archbishop of
Ephesus. And famous in the Ages before, for the Sibylla of its Name; whose
Verses not only condemn the multiplicity of Gods, (saying there is but One
only, the Creator of all) but moreover speak so advantageously of the first and
second coming of Christ, that some of them, repeated by Eusebius, make an
Acrostick upon his name and quality under these words, (...).

Erythraeum Mare. See the Red Sea.

Erzerum, a City of the Greater Armenia, upon the Euphrates. It is the Seat of
a Beglerbeg, and the most considerable place of Turcomania; supposed to be the
Theodosopolis of the ancients, and otherwise called by Writers Aziris, Arzir^^,
Sinera, Senebra, etc.

Esaro, Ezaro, a River of Calabria.

Eschan^on, Scando, a River of Tourains.

Eschwege, a Town in the Marquisate of Hassia in Germany, upon the River Werra,
near the Confines of Thuringen: supposed to have been built by the Emperor
Carolus Magnus, and after the ruining of it by the Hunns, to have been rebuilt
by* the Emperor Henry II.

Escualt, See Schelde.

Escure, a Province of the Kingdom of Morrocco in Barbary; betwixt the River
Hued-la-Abid to the East, the Mountain Verte to the North and West, and the
River Tensift, with some parts of the Atlas, to the South. Fruitful in Corn and
Pasturage.

Escurial, a Village in New Castile, upon the River Guadarna, seven Leagues
from Madrid to the West, and twenty four from Toledo to the North; in which
Philip II. King of Spain, built a Palace Royal, together with a most
Magnificent Monastery, and a Stately Church in honor of S. Laurence, as a
grateful Memorial of the Victory obtained against Henry II. King of France, at
the Battle of S. Quintin in Picardy, In 1557. in which he spared no Expense
that might contribute to the Magnificence and Ornament of it; insomuch as he is
said to have spent twenty Millions of Gold on this Structure. And since that
time, the Kings of Spain have been buried in a Noble Chapel here, called the
Pantheon, from its being built in imitation of the Pantheon at Rome. The
Emperor Charles V. lies interred in it. This Magnificent Fabric suffered much
by Fire in 1671. in which a vast Library perished.

Esfagues, Ruspae, a small City in the Kingdom of Tunis; it was a Bishops See,
but now ruined.

Esino, Aesis, Esis, a River in the Marca Anconitana in Italy. It arises from
the Appennine, and running East, washes Jesi; then falls into the Adriatic
Sea, one Mile North of Ancona. This was once the Northern Boundary of Italy.

Eskedale, Eskia, a County in Scotland, bounded by Cumberland on the South,
Annandale on the West, Twedale on the North, and Tivedale on the East: it takes
its Name from the River Esk, which runs through it, and falls into the Tees.

Eskihissar, Laodicea, a City of the Lesser Asia, upon the River Lycus, near
its fall into the Meander: built by Antio^bus the Son of Stratonica, whose Wife
being called Laodicea, gave this Name to the City: now totally ruined, and not
inhabited; though once an Archbishops See, who had sixteen Suffragan Bishops
under him. The Turkish Name it has, signifies the Old Castle. The Ruins of it
show it to have been a very great City, situate upon six or seven Hills,
encompassing a large space of Ground, twenty Miles distant from Coloss to the
North-East, and five from Hierapolis. It has three Theaters of White Marble,
as beautiful and entire, as if they were lately built; and a Circus as stately.
But then the Town is totally desolate; inhabited by nothing but Wolves, Foxes
and Chacals, a Den of Dragons, Snakes and Vipers: neither has it the Title of
an Archbishops See, (as Seignior Ferraro and others have affirmed): God having
spit it out of his Mouth, as threatened in the Revolation, and made it an
Example of his Justice and Veracity. See Mr. Wheeler p. 264. See Laudichia.

Esla, Estola, a River of the Kingdom of Leon. It washes Leon and Benvento;
and taking in the Orbico, falls into the Duero, between Samora to the East, and
Miranda to the West.

Essing, Elsing or Eslingen, Ezelinga, Eslinga, a small Imperial and Free City,
in the Dukedom of Wirtemburg in Schwaben in Germany, upon the River Necker;
nine Miles from Spier to the South-East, and the same from Vlm to the
North-West. This is now under the Protection of the Duke of Wirtemburg; ill
built, and has suffered much in the late Wars.

Esne. See Aisne.

Esperies, Eperiae, a strong Town in the County of Sarax, in the Lower Hungary,
upon the River Tarcza or Tarkz, toward the Carpathian Mountains and the
Frontiers of the Kingdom of Poland. Obtained from the Turks since the present
War.

Espernay, Sparnacum, Aspreniaoum, a Town upon the Marne, in the Province of
Champagne in France, betwixt Chalon and Chateau-Thierry. It bath a famous Abbey
of the Augustine Friars standing in it.

Espinal, Spinalium, a small City in the Dukedom of Lorrain upon the Maes, four
Leagues from the Confines of Burgundy to the North, and a little less from
Remirmont. This Town has suffered much in the Wars of this Age.

Espinoy, a Town in Flanders, betwixt Douay and L'Isle: ennobled with the Title
of a Principality, and giving its Name to an Honorable House.

Esseck, Mursd, a Town and Castle in Sclavonia, at the Confluence of the Drove
and the Danube, where great Actions have been done. The Town stands low, and
the Streets are planked with Trees, as Dr. Brown assures us, who has seen it.
Upon one side of the Gate is part of a Roman Inscription, MAELIAN: on the
other, a Maids Head of Stone. In or near this place, Constantius defeated
Magnentius the Usurper, and Murderer of Constantine II. in 359. The Town is
great and populous, by reason of the Trade and Commerce on the account of the
Passage. But not strong, and therefore the Turks have of late bestowed much
cost and pains in fortifying it. In 1537. Solomon the Magnificent, assaulted it
without Success. But that which is the great wonder, is the Bridge over the
Drove, and the Marshes on both sides: this Bridge is five Miles over, having
Rails on both sides, and Towers of Wood at every quarter of a Mile: built by
Solomon the Magnificent in 1521. so soon as ever he had taken Belgrade: it is
so broad, that three Wagons may go a breast, and all built of Oaken Timber.
Count Nicholas Serini burnt part of it in 1664. which necessitated the Turks to
build that part a little nearer the Danube, because they could not without
great charges and difficulty pluck up the remainder of the Trees which the
Water had preserved from the Fire. By this Bridge all the Turkish Armies use to
pass between Hungary and Constantinople: near here, the unfortunate Lewis King
of Hungary in 1526 was defeated, in attempting to stop Solyman's passage into
his Kingdom. Count Lesly, Aug. 15. 1685. burnt it the second time, and
possessed himself of the Town of Esseck; but the Castle holding out, he blew up
their Magazines, plundered the Town, and left it. In 1686. the Turks began to
build this Bridge after another way, by driving rows of Trees into the Earth,
and filling up the space with Earth, that it might not be so subject to be
ruined by Fire: but the Duke of Lorrain, June 15. 1687. put an end to this
Work; drove the Turks over the Drove, and in a few days entirely ruined what
eight thousand men had been many Months a building. Pursuing his design, and
passing the Drove to take Esseck, he found the Prime Vizier there posted with
all the Forces he could raise very advantageously, with the Danube on the left,
a Wood on the right, the Town and Drove behind, and a Morass before him;
between which and his Camp, was a Dike twenty foot deep, forty broad, and two
Miles long, strengthened with Palisadoes and Redoubts, with sixty thousand men
within it, and one hundred Cannon: whereupon the Duke retreated, June 20. and
repassed the Drove at Siclos. See Mohatz. After the unfortunate taking of
Belgrade by the Turks, October 1690. they set down immediately with an Army of
fifteen thousand Men before this Place, but retired without Success.

Essedones or Issedones, an ancient People of Scythia, whose Capital Town was
Issedon, now called Caracoran. Herodotus says of them, that they used to eat
the dead bodies of their Parents, reserving the head to be set in Gold and made
the object of their annual Sacrifices.

Essekebe, or Esquib, Essequebia, one of the principal Rivers of South America.
It arises in Guiana, near to the Lake of Parime; and running Eastward, to
improve its Streams, by the addition of many smaller Rivers, it falls into the
North Sea, near Meapuer. In Long. 318. The Dutch, who have many Plantations
upon it, call it by this name.

Essex, Essexia, is a County in the East of England, inhabited heretofore in
part by the Trinobantes: bounded on the North by Suffolk and Cambridgeshire: on
the West by Hartford and Middlesex; on the South by Kent; and on the East by
the German Sea: The principal City in it is Colchester. This Country is very
fruitful, full of Noblemen and Gentlemen's Houses. The principal Rivers, which
water it, are the Stour, that divides it from Suffolk; the Thames from Kent,
the Ley from Middlesex, and the Little Stour from Hartfordshire; which besides
their fruitful Meadows, and the convenience of Carriage, afford it plenty of
Fish: besides these, there is the Ill, the Crouch, the Chelme, the Blackwater
and the Colne, which arise and fall within this Country; and many of them are
great Rivers. There are many smaller ones, whose Names cannot be taken in here.
This County gave the Title of Earl to the Families of the Mandeviles, the
Bohuns, the Bourchiers, Thomas Lord Cromwell, William Lord Parre, before it
came to the D'Eureuxe's. Robert d'Eurex, Viscount Hereford, General of the
Parliaments Army against Charles I. dying Septem. 13. 1646. and his Son Robert
an Infant, before the Restitution of Charles II. Arthur Capel, Baron of Hadham,
was created Earl of Essex, and Viscount Malden, April 20. 1661. and made Lord
Lieutenant in Ireland in 1672. He perished miserably in the Tower. His Son then
an Infant, succeeded him in this Honor.

Esslingen. See Esling.

Essone, Exona, a small River and Village in the Isle of France. The Town
stands five Miles from Paris to the South-West, and one from Corbeile to the
West.

Estampes, Stampae, a Town and Duchy in Beausse in France. The Town stands
upon a River of the same Name, ten Leagues from Paris to the South, and sixteen
from Orleans to the North: mentioned in Georgius Turonensis, Aimonius, and
other French Historians. It is placed on the Some, at the Confluence of another
small River, which is sometimes called l'Yone, and sometimes La riviere
d'Estampes. There is a Collegiate Church, and diverse Religious Houses standing
in it: but the Castle was ruined in 1652. This Town was created first an
Earldom in 1327. by Charles IV. King of France. Then a Dukedom in 1536. by King
Francis I. And has been many times honored not only with French Synods, but
with the Assemblies of the States. The Huguenotts took it by Scalade in 1567.

Estaples, Stabulae, Stapulae, a Sea-Port-Town in the County of Boulogne in
Picardy; sixteen Miles North of Dieppe, and ten from Calais South.

Este, or Est, Ateste, a Town in the Dominion of the State of Venice, mentioned
by Pliny and Tacitus, which was once a Bishops See, under the Patriarch of
Aquileia. It stands in the District of Padua, upon the little Medoacus, or the
River Bachiglione; which washing the Walls of Vicenza and Este, falls into the
Venetian Gulf, twelve Miles from Padua to the South. The Dukes of Modena in
Italy (of which Illustrious House, Mary, Consort to King James II. is) take
their Name from this Place; who were before a great while Dukes of Ferrara,
Modena and Regio: Now, only of Modena. See the History of the Family of Este
written in Italian by Jean Baptist^ Pigna, and in English by Mr. Crawford.

Esteing, an ancient Barony in the Province of Rouergne in France, since
advanced to an Earldom. It gives Name to an Honorable Family, that by the
concession of Philip the August in the year 1214. as a reward for the noble
actions of one of their Ancestors, bears the same Coat of Arms with the Crown.

Estella, or Stella, a small City in the Kingdom of Navarr, upon the River Ega,
where it receives the Vreder; eight Miles from Pampelona to the South, and the
same from Calahorra to the North. Built in the year 1094. It is the Capital of
the Territory called la Merindada de Estella.

Esten, Esthonia, a considerable Province in the North of Livonia; heretofore
under the Poles, but now the Swedes. It lies between the Sinus Finnicus, a part
of the Baltic Sea to the North; Lettonia, Liefland, to the South; the Bay of
Riga to the West; and Ingria a Province of Russia, to the East: the chief City
in it, is Revel, the Capital of this Province, which is sometimes called
Eastland.

Estepa. Astapa, a City or great Town in Andalusia in Spain, seated upon a
Hill, in the Confines of the Kingdom of Granada; about twelve Miles from Malaga
to the North, and seventeen from Sevil to the South-East. This sprung out of
the ruins of Astapa, an old Iberian City, or Phoenician Colony; which being
besieged by Marcellus, a Roman General, the Inhabitants burnt themselves with
their Wives and Children and all they had, that they might not fall into the
hands of the Romans, as Livy says.

Cstoiteland, Estotilandia, a great Tract of Land in the North of America,
toward the Actick Circle, and Hudson's Bay, having New France on the South,
and James's Bay to the West. This is a part of Canada; now commonly called New
Britain, and Terra Laboratoris. The first of the American Shoars which was
discovered; being found by some Friesland Fishers, that were driven hither by a
Tempest, almost two hundred years before Columbus. In 1390. Nicolas and
Antonius Zeni, two Brothers that were Venetian Gentlemen, at the Charges of
Zichini King of Friesland, took a view the second time of these Shoars. John
Skoluo a Polonian in 14^6. about eighty six years after the first discovery,
sailing past Norway, Greenland and Friesland, and entering into the Straight
beyond the Artick Circle, arrived at this Country. Which is Mountainous,
overgrown with Woods, full of all manner of wild and savage Beasts, and only
known as to the Shoars; but yet the Soil is fruitful, Hofman.

Estouteville, a Town in the Upper Normandy in France, advanced to the quality
of a Dukedom by King Francis I. in 1538. There is a Noble Family deriving their
Name from it.

Estremadura, Extremadura, is a Province of the Kingdom of Portugal, at the
Mouth of the Tagus, upon the Western Ocean: bounded on the North by Beira, on
the West and South it has the Ocean, and on the East the rest of Portugal. The
principal City is Lisbon, the Capital of the Kingdom; and as for this Province,
it is divided into six Counties, which they call Comarcaes. There was anciently
another Province called La Estremadura de Castilla, because it was Extrema
Durii; for on the North it was bounded by the Durius, or Douero, a great River
of Spain; on the West it was separated from the Kingdom of Leon, by the Rivers
Heban and Rigamon; from thence it extended by the Rivers Guadarrama, which
washes Madrid and Somosierra, to the Fountains of the River Douero: so that it
was one hundred Spanish Leagues in compass, and Segovia was the Capital of this
Province: but as Ximines says, after it was united to Castile, it lost the
Name, which in after times was given to others.

Etsch, Athesis, a River of Italy, called by the Italians, Adige; by the
Germans, Etch. It springs out of Mount Brenna, one of the highest of the
Alpine Mountains in Tirol; and passing through a Territory of Etschlender,
which takes its Name from it, it leaves Meran and Bolsano (considerable Towns)
on the East; turning South, it takes in the Rivers Eisock (which falls by
Brixen), Neves and Lavisium; then waters the famous City of Trent, beneath
which it admits Perzene, and so goes on to Verona, which it divides in its
passage; and passing Legnano, Rovigo and Anguilara, it falls into the Adriatic
Sea by Porto di Fossone, in later Maps called Porto di l'Adige; eighteen Miles
South of Venice, and three North of the Mouth of the Po.

Etna, Aetna, a Mountain in the East of Sicily, which perpetually belcheth out
Fire and Smoke: called by the Italians, il Mongibello; by the French, Le Mont
Gibel; by the Arabians, Gibel; that is, the Mountain. It is the greatest as
well as the most known Mountain in all Sicily, in the Diocese of Catanea, nine
Miles high, and fifty in compass; and at the opening or Mouth of it at the top,
twenty four furlongs wide. The South side is planted with Vines, the North
overgrown with Woods; on the East from the Top of it to Catanea it is all
cultivated, and employed to one use or another. At some times it rages more
than at others: particularly in 1169. 1329. (when it had not flamed of many
years before,) 1408. 1444. 1447. 1536. 1554. 1566. 1579. At which last time it
damaged Catanea, and its Fields, more than usual. But the greatest Rage was in
1669, when it sent out four Rivers of melted Earth, Stones and Rocks; which
from the top descended down its sides, through the Fields, into the Sea; and
there maintained their Torrent a Mile in the Waters, before they were able to
tame these raving and furious Sons of Vulcan. Not only the City of Catanea
apprehended a sudden and inevitable Ruin, but Men thought the whole Island of
Sicily would have been destroyed; and that by degrees the Fire would have
melted the whole Rock, upon which the Island is founded: however, it destroyed
fifteen Castles or great Houses, and did an inestimable Mischief. Yet the top
of this Mountain is often covered with Snow and Ice; and the two most contrary
things in Nature seem here to unite, of which Claudian Lib. I. de Rapt. Proserp.

Sed quamvis nimio fervens exuberat aestu, Scit nivibus servare fidem,
pariterque favillis. Eu, Augum, Augae, La Ville d'Eu, a considerable Town on
the Coast of Normandy, upon the River Bresle, near the Confines of Picardy, six
Miles North of Dieppe, and about a League from the Sea. Here of old were the
Essui, a People of Gaul. It is honored now with the Title of an Earldom, and
with an ancient Abbey, and a College of the Jesuits.

Eubaea. See Negropont.

Eucarpia, an ancient Town of Phrygia in Asia Minor, famed for Grapes, in
bigness, exceeding those of Canaan.

Evenlode, a small River of Oxfordshire.

Evershot, a Market Town in Dorsetshire, in ^^l. lerford Hundred.

Evesham, or Evesholm, a Market Town in Wercestershire in the Hundred of
B^akenhu^st, with a Bridge over the Avon. It is esteemed next to Worcester the
best in the County: contains two or three Parishes, and drives a good Trade;
and has the honor of choosing two Burgesses for the Parliament.

Euganei, an ancient People of the Alps, betwixt the Lake of Coma and the
River Etsch; whereof the Sarunetes were a branch, and the most considerable:
dwelling about Chiavenne and the Valtolme.

Eugubio. See Gubio.

Euphrates, though I have discoursed shortly of this River already in the word
Aferat, yet because I then wanted some Books that were necessary to give a full
account of it, I will here enlarge upon what I there omitted. The first City of
Note it washes, is Baberd; the second Ezrum, so far as it runs West; then it
turns South, and passes by Arzingan and Maaraz, where it takes in Cobaqueb;
and over against Vrpha, it receives a River which comes from Aleppo; so passing
Bir, Rasseca, Belis, Chabuca, as far as Alchabar, it takes in from the East
Soaid; and a little lower at Waset and Olim, falls into the Tigris: thus our
latest Maps describe the Course of this vast River. The Learned Bochartus says
out of Pliny, Lib. 5. Cap. 26. that eighty three Miles beneath Zeugma, at
Massicen, the Euphrates is divided; and on the left hand (the East) it goes
into Mesopotamia by Selucia, a little beneath which, it enters the Tigris.
Ptolomy Lib. 5. Cap. 18. agrees with Pliny in this: then he mentions another
Branch by the Name of (...), the Kings River, or Cut: which by the Arabians is
called Amelic; and by Ammianus, Naar-Malcha; which he interprets too the King's
River, Lib. 24. which Abidenus says, was dug by the Order of
Nabuchodonozor. Pliny tells us, the reason of this Cut was to prevent the
Drowning of Babylon in great Floods. More to the South was a third Branch,
which went into the Tigris and Sur, upon which the great Babylon stood by the
confession of Ptolomy, though in his Maps it is placed on the second. There was
a fourth Branch went to the West, called Kulpa, now Cufa, about the Name of
which they are not agreed; but the use of it was to fill a vast Lake on the
West of Babylon. Now as to these Branches, the Arabian Geographers agree in
these Divisions as still extant. And yet that Branch which went through
Babylon, Theodoret says, was very small, and perhaps now entirely lost. The
first and second of the Eastern Branches are represented in our later Maps; and
the Western Branch at Cufa; which appear all like Rivers running into the
Euphrates, when as indeed they are Branches going out of it. The first is that
which the Maps call Zab Major; the second has no Name, but it ought to pass
straight to Bagdet; and that which is now the main Stream, seems to have forced
its way in a new Channel, after the other was lost and dammed up by Time: the
Lakes also to the West which were designed to receive the Waters in times of
great Inundations, are filled up by the Mud and Sand, brought down by the
River. However that Branch that runs to Cufa, never comes to any Sea, but is
lost in the Sands of Arabia; and has turned the fruitful Plains of Babylon into
a mere Morass or Bogg, unpassable, uninhabitable. This is the sum of what Mr.
Bochart has related more at large. Both Pliny and Strabo agree, that it yearly
overflows as the Nile does, and much about the same time; which Inundation has
the same effect, as to the sertility of Mesopotamia, that the overflowing of
the Nile has upon Egypt. M. Thevenot who crossed it at Bir, says, it is in
Semur not bigger than the Seine at Paris; though its Bed is twice as big. The
Waters of it run very slowly, and are Navigable, as far as to the place where
it joins the Tigris.

Evisse. See Ivica.

Evora, Ebora, is a very considerable City in Portugal in Alentejo; a Province
of that Kingdom beyond the Tagus, ( Taio) twenty Miles from Lisbon to the
South-East. Long. 09. 00. Lat. 38. 11. This was anciently a Bishops See under
the Archbishop of Merida, and afterward of Compostella. But Pope Paul III. at
the desire of John III. King of Portugal in 1540. raised it to the Honor of a
Metropolis; and Henry, the first Archbishop, who of a Cardinal became King of
Portugal, made it an University. There is a Court of Inquisition kept here.

Evora Monte, a small Place five Leagues from the former Evora to the
North-East, where the Portuguese gave the Spaniards a great overthrow in 1663.

Eure, Ebura, Autura, a River of France, sometimes called Yeure. It arises in
la Perch, in the Wood Logni: and running Eastward through Beausse, it waters
Chartres; turning Northward, Nogent le Roy, Dreux, Jury, (famous for the
Victory of Henry IV. over the Leaguers in 1590.) Passy, Eureux; at last it
enters the Seine at Ponte de P'arche, ten Miles above Caudebec. The rich and
fruitful Valley D'Eure, has its Name from this River, and also Eureux in
Normandy; and from one of these three, the Noble FAmily of d'Eureux lately
Earls of Essex, now Viscounts of Hereford, take their Names. Eure, a River in
Berry. See Aure.

Eureux, Ebroica, Eburonicum, Mediolanum Aul^rcorum, a City in Upper Normandy,
upon the River Iton (which afterward falls into the Eure), and a Bishops See
under the Archbishop of Rouen. Beautified with a great number of Churches and
Monasteries: It is a place of good Antiquity, and a delightful Situation:
heretofore subject to Counts of its own, who ceded it to King Philip the August
in the year 1200. Charles IX. King of France erected it into a Dukedom in 1569.
See Eure.

Euripus, called by the Ancient Latins, Euripus Euboicus and Chalcidicus, by
the Italians, Stretto di Negroponte, by the Inhabitants now Egripos, is a Canal
of the Aegean Sea, betwixt the Region of Boeotia in Achaia, and the Island of
Negropont; so narrow in the narrowest passage, as to be covered with a
Drawbridge of five Arches. And here, the inconstancy of its Flux and Reflux
appears the most visibly: that is, whereas for eighteen or nineteen days in
every Moon, Winter and Summer, in all Weathers, it regularly ebbs and flows
twice in twenty four or twenty five hours with the Ocean and the Gulf of
Venice, it most irregularly ebbs and flows for other eleven days in every Moon,
11, 12, 13, 14. times in the same compass of twenty four or twenty five hours.
See Negroponte. The Bridge is defended by a Castle built by the Venetians.

Europe, Europa, is the least, but most celebrated of the four general parts of
the World, as to Arts, Commerce, Religion, Government and War. It was the
Prediction of Noah, (the second Founder of Mankind) that Japhet (the Father of
the Europeans) should dwell in the Tents of Shem. And although the first
Church, and the two first General Monarchies fell to the share of Shem's
Posterity; yet the two last and the best and noblest state of the Church, fell
to the Japhets; by which that ancient Oracle was fulfilled. At this day whilst
the Posterity of Shem, (the Asiaticks) lie buried in Ignorance, Slavery and
Superstition; the Posterity of Japhet is innobled: the chiefest and the best
Empires, the best Religion, Learning and Arts adorn the Tents or dwelling of
Japhet: whilst the Ships of Chittim afflict Eber and Asher, not only to Trade,
but to Ride Sovereigns in their Seas; and afflict them more by the Envy of
their Wealth and Riches, than by their Power and Martial Valor, though they
have felt that too. Europe, is bounded on the East by Asia, on the North by the
Frozen Sea, on the West by the Atlantic, and on the South by the
Mediterranean. The only difficulty is in stating the Eastern Bounds: beginning
therefore at the South, where the Bounds are plainer, it is agreed that the
Archipelago, the Black Sea or Euxine, the Palus Moeotis, or Eastern Bay of Crim
Tartary, (called by the French, la Mer de Zabacche,) the Tanais, now the Don,
the Wolga, the Rooswa, the Tofda, and the vast River of Obb, are the truest
Bounds on the Eastern side. In those vast Countries of Tartary and Russia,
scarce at all known to the Ancients, though the Tanais, the Wolga, (as far as
its Course is North and South) and the Obb, are the best and most visible
Bounds; yet there is a great distance between the Tanais and the Wolga; and a
much greater between the Wolga and the Obb; but between the Rooswa and the
Tofda, very little: but in this every Man must be left at liberty. Europe is
now divided into the Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland, Bohemia, Bulgaria,
Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Holland, or the Low Countries, Hungary,
Italy, Moscovy or Russia, Poland, Portugal, Savoy, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Tartary, the Turkish Empire, the State of Venice, and some few considerable
Islands depending upon these. In length from Cape S. Vincent in Spain, to the
Mouth of the River Obb, one thousand three hundred English Miles, or nine
hundred German: from Cape Matapan in the Morea, to the North Cape in Finmark,
eight hundred and fifty, or five hundred and fifty German Miles, as Braudand
reckons it: lying between 34. and 72. degrees. of Lat. and betwixt 9. and 93. or
94. of Long. This Country is called by the Europeans, Europe; by the Turks,
Rumeli, and Al-Franck; and by the Georgians, Franckistan.

Eurotas. See Iris. It is also the ancient Name of a River of Thessalia, said
by Homer, Strabo and Pliny, to glide upon the Top of the River Peneus (to which
it runs) without mixing of Waters.

Eurymedon, a River of Pamphylia in Asia Minor, memorable for the Victory
obtained by Simon, the Son of Miltiades, over the Persians upon the Banks of
it. An. Romae, 284.

Euston, a small Town in the County of Suffolk, upon the Banks of the little
Ouse, in a fair Champaigne Country. Deserving to be particularly taken notice
of for the beautiful Euston-Hall, of the building of the late Earl of
Arlington, and the Curiosities that are to be seen about it. In 1672. King
Charles II. advanced this place to the Dignity of an Earldom in the Person of
the late Duke of Grafton, upon his Marriage with the only Daughter of the said
Earl of Arlington.

The Euxine Sea, Pontus Euxinus, Axenos, now by the Turks called Cara Denguis,
i. e. the Furious Sea, and by others the Black Sea; is encompassed round by
Anatolia, Mingrelia, Circassia, the Crim Tartary, and Podolia; with no other
outlet than the Bosphorus Thracius, accounting the Palus Moeotis as a Bay or
branch of it: so that it seems more properly a Lake. Yet these great Rivers,
the Danube, Nieper, Niester, Phasis, Corax, Sangarius, and many others
discharge their floods into it. It is in length from East to West about one
hundred eighty eight Leagues: In breadth, at the Western End, from the
Bosphorus Thracius to the Nieper, three Degrees: at the Eastern, the half
thereof. And is dangerous to navigate: Not so green, nor clear, nor brackish as
the Ocean, by reason of the Influx of those Rivers. And now wholly under the
Dominion of the Grand Seignior, without whose leave no Vessel passes upon it.

Ewel, a Market Town in the County of Surrey in the Hundred of Copthorn.

Ex, Isca, is a River of England: it arises in Somersetshire, and passing by
Winesford, it takes in Dunsbrook River, or Creden from Dulverton on the West;
then entering Devonshire, it runs directly South to Tiverton; where it takes in
Loman River from the East; at St^cke it takes in Columb on the same side, and a
little lower Credy from the West; then incompassing a great part of the North,
West, and South of Exeter, a little lower it admits Clyst on the East, and Ken
on the West; and so enters the British Sea by a large Mouth.

Exeter, Isca, Isca Dunmoniorum, Exonia, is the principal City of Devonshire;
called by the Welsh Caerisk, Caerrudh, and Pencaer, that is, the Principal
City: Seated on the Eastern Bank of the River Ex, in a barren Soil, upon the
Advantage of a small Hill, declining East and West; having a Dike, and a strong
Wall for its Safety; in Compass about a Mile and a half, with extended Suburbs.
There are in it fifteen Churches; and in the highest Part of the City, near the
East Gate, a Castle, which of old was the Seat of the West Saxon Kings, and
afterward of the Earls of Cornwall; and near this, the Cathedral built by King
Athelstan, in Honor of S. Peter. Edward the Confessor settled the Bishop's See
here, which he removed from Kirton. It fell not into the Hands of the Saxons
till four hundred sixty five years after their first coming over, viz. Anno
Christi 914. when Athelstan banished the Britains, and fortified the City, and
built the Cathedral. This City joining with the Rebels in 1640. was taken for
the King by Prince Maurice, September 4. 1643. And being Garrisoned for the
King, was again surrendered to the Parliament upon Terms, April 13. 1646. The
Honorable John Cecil is Earl of Exeter, and the fifth of his Family; he
succeeded John Cecil his Father, in 1667. The Title of Marquess of Exeter was
heretofore conferred by King Henry VIII. upon Henry Courtney, Earl of
Devonshire: And likewise of Duke, by Henry V. upon Thomas Beaufort, Earl of
Dorset; and by Richard II. upon John Holland, Earl of Huntington. The present
Bishop of this Diocese, is the forty sixth since the Removal of this See from
Kirton, about 1149. The sixty seventh from Aedulphus, who about 905. was made
the first (at least Saxon) Bishop of Devonshire.

Extremadura. (See Estremadura.) A Province of the Kingdom of Susa in Africa,
near the Atlantic Ocean, and the Mountains of Atlas, in the Southern Borders
of Morocco.

Extremos, a small Town upon the River Tera (which comes to fall into the Tajo)
near Evora and Elvas, in the Province of Alentejo, in the Kingdom of Portugal.

Extuca, a Province in the Kingdom of Morocco, in Barbary; extended along the
Sea Coast, toward the Mountain Atlas, and the Frontiers of Biledulgeridia.

Eychstat. See Aichstadt.

Eyder, Eidera, Egidora, a River of Denmark which arises above Rendsburgh; and
dividing Holstein and Dithmarsh from the Dukedom of Sleswick, falls into the
German Ocean at Tonning. This River denominates the Territory of Eyderstede in
the said Duchy.

Eye, or Eaye, Insula, a small Corporation in the County of Suffolk, near the
Borders of Norfolk; so called, says Mr Camden, because it is an Island; where
are to be seen the Ruins of an old Castle which belonged to Robert Mallet, a
Norman Baron; and of an ancient Benedictine Abbey, called S. Peter's. This Town
has been given in Jointure with the Queens of England. After many other Changes
in this Honor, Sir Frederick Cornwallis, (descended lineally from Sir John
Cornwallis, Steward of the Household to Edward VI. and Sir Thomas Cornwallis,
one of the Privy-Counsellors to Queen Mary, and Comptroller of her House,) was
April 20. 1661. made Baron Cornwallis of Eye, by Charles II. to whose Interest
and Service being ever entirely addicted, in the worst of Times, he had the
Honor to be the second Coronation Baron; to whom succeeded Charles Lord
Cornwallis his Son, who dying in 1673. Charles, the second of this Family, his
Son, succeeded, and is now living. By the Favor of this Family (as I have
heard), this small Corporation obtained its Charter, and the Honor of sending
two Burgesses to the House of Commons: Otherwise the Place is very small and
inconsiderable. It stands twelve Miles from Ipswich to the North, and seventeen
from Norwich to the South, and in the Road between those two Places.

Eyerlandt. See Aland.

Eyndhoven, Endova, is a fine Town in the Territory of Kempen, upon the River
Bommele; four Leagues from Boisleduc to the South, and almost the same from
Helmont to the West. It had a College of Canons, and belonged to the Count de
Buren. This is the Capital of that part of Kempen which lies in Brabant, and
fell into the Hands of the Hollanders, in 1629. after they had taken Boisleduc,
by a Siege of four Months Continuance; and they are still in Possession of it.

Eysenack, Isenachum, a small City in Thuringia, upon the River Nesa; eight
Miles from Erford to the West. The River Nesa, a little below it, is taken into
the VVerra. The Name of this City is written sometimes nearer the Latin,
Isenach. It is under the Dominion of a Prince of the House of Saxony, the Duke
of Weimar, with a small Territory belonging thereto. And has the Honor to be
both a Dukedom and an University, which last was founded in the Year 1555.

F A
FAenza, Faventia, a small City of Romandiola, in Italy, upon the River Lamone,
( Anemo,) which falls into the Adriatic Sea; three Miles South of the Mouth of
the Po; between Imola to the North and Forli to the South; twenty Miles from
Ravenna to the West. It is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Ravenna; and
under the Dominion of the Pope; only famous for Earthen Ware. The French call
it Faience.

Faience, Faventia, a small City in Provence in France, upon the River Benzon;
three Leagues from Grass to the West, and six from the Mediterranean Sea. The
Bishops of Frejus are Lords of it. The French call Faenza in Italy, Faience.

Faire-Foreland, Robodigum, the most North-East Country of Ireland, in the
County of Antrim, in the Province of Vlster.

Faire-Isle, a Rock in the Caledonian Sea, between the Orkneys and Shetland; in
which is the Castle Dumo.

Fairford, a Market Town in Gloucestershire, in the Hundred of Brittlesbarrough.

Fakenham, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk, in the Hundred of Gallow.

Falaise, Fallesia, Falesia, a Town in Normandy, upon the River Ante, (which
falls into the Dive at Morteaux,) seven Leagues from Caen to the South, and
four from Argentan to the North-West. The principal Seat and Garrison of the
first Dukes of Normandy. William the Conqueror, Natural Son of Robert II. Duke
of Normandy, was born here. This Place was taken by the English from the French
in 1417. There is now a round high Tower standing in it.

Cape Falcon, a Promontory, West of Oran, in Barbary.

Falconara, Assinarius, a River of Sicily: It flows by the Town of Noto, and
falls into the Ionian Sea, between the Cape of Passaro, ( Pachynum,) and the
City of Syracuse; ten Miles from the Cape to the North, and twenty five from
the City to the South. This River is made famous by the Defeat of the Athenian
Forces here by the Syracusans, in the Year of the World 3537. which Victory
being gained by the Assistance of the Lacedaemonians, they took the Advantage of
it, and at last, in 3546. took Athens, under Lysander.

Faleria, Faleris, a ruined City of the Province of Tuscany in Italy, mentioned
by the Ancients. The Episcopal See, which it possessed formerly, was
transferred to Civita Castellana, a City built nigh the Ruins of this.

Falernus, a Mountain of Campagna di Roma in Italy; famous for the excellent
Wines growing upon it, which animated the ancient Poets so often to sing its
Praises.

Falisci, an ancient People of Hetruria in Italy, who made War a considerable
time with the Romans their Neighbors, till reduced by Camillus in the Year of
Rome 360. They are said to have come hither out of Macedonia. The Capital of
their Dominions was the ancient Faleria.

Falkenburg, or Valkenburg, a small Town in Brabant, upon the River Geule; two
Leagues from Maestricht to the East, and four from Aquisgrane. It was under the
Dominion of the Hollanders till 1672. when it was taken by the French and
dismantled: But in 1678. returned under them again with Maestricht. This Town
is called by the French Fauquemont; and in Antoninus his Itinerary, Coriovallum.

Falkland, a small Town in Scotland in the County of Fife; beautified with an
ancient Retiring House of their Kings; and very commodious for the Pleasure of
Hunting.

Fallekoping, or Falcoping, Falcopia, a Town in the Province of Westrogothia in
the Kingdom of Sweden, five or six Leagues from Scaren.

Falmouth, Voluba, a noble Haven on the South of Cornwall, as great as
Brundusium in Italy, and as safe: an hundred Ships may ride in it, out of sight
each of other; secured by two Castles at its entrance, built by Henry VIII. In
1664. Charles II. Created Charles Lord Barkley, Earl of Falmouth, who was slain
at Sea June 2. 1665. George Fitz-Roy, now Duke and Earl of Northumberland, was
Created Vicount Falmouth, by the same Prince, October. 1. 1673. The old Roman
Town Voluba, from which it had its name, is now totally ruined and gone; it
stood higher up into the Land upon the River Valle, over against Tregony.

Falster, Falstria, Insula Dianae, an Island in the Baltic Sea, on the South
of the Isle of Zeeland, from which it is parted only by a narrow Channel called
Groene-Sund. It has one Town called Nykoping; and gives name to a good Family
in Denmark.

Faluga-diabete, a small Island belonging to Sardinia; on the West of that
Island.

Famagosta, Fama Augusta, called by the French Famagouste, is a very strong
City in the Island of Cyprus, on the Eastern Shore; which is a Bishop's See
under the Archbishop of Nicosia, and was of old called Arsinoe. This City has a
large and a safe Port: And was taken by the Genouese in 1370. By the Venetians
about 1470. and by the Turks from the Venetians, in the Year 1571. after a
Siege of ten Months.

Famar, or Fanar, a Town at the Entrance of the Black Sea, in Thrace; four
German Miles North of Constantinople.

Famar, Arietis Frons, Criumetopon, the most Southern Cape of the Little or
Krim Tartary, Tanricia; which lies an hundred and fifty Miles from
Constantinople to the North-East.

Famastro, Amastrus, a City upon the Euxine or White Sea, upon the East Side of
the River Dolap, fifty Miles from Scutari East, and the same from Amasia
North-West. It grew up out of the Ruins of four neighboring Cities, to a vast
greatness.

Fanar, Acheron, a River, and Town of Epirus.

Fanari-Kiosc, a Royal Pleasure House belonging to the Grand-Seignior, one
League Distant from Constantinople and Galata; at the Entrance of the Streights
of Constantinople; near the Port of Chalcedon in Natolia. Built by Solomon II.
Vessels arriving upon this Coast by Night are lightened by a Fanal from hence.

Fano, Fanum Fortunae, an Episcopal City in the States of the Church, in the
Dukedom of Vrbino. but not of it; twenty Miles from Vrbino to the East, and
thirty seven from Ancona to the North. This was the Country of Clement VIII.
his Father, a Florentine, living here as an Exile. The Temple of Fortune, which
the Romans built in Memory of their Victory over Asdrubal, the Brother of
Hannibal, in the Year of Rome 547. (wherein they slew Asdrubal himself, with
50000 Men) did stand near this City.

Fanshere, a River in the Island of Madagascar.

Fantin, a small Kingdom in Guiney, in Africa, where the English and Dutch have
some Castles.

Fanu, an Island near Corfu to the North-West.

Fara, Pharan, a City and Mountain in the Stony Arabia, upon the Red Sea;
twenty Miles from Sues South, and from Eltor North, over against Dacata in
Egypt.

Farfar, Fabris, a small River in the State of the Church: It rises near a
Castle called Capo Farfar; and running to the North-East, it waters a
Monastery of the same Name; then falls into the Tibur. Farfar, Farfaro, Fer,
Orontes, a River of Syria, which arises from Mount Libanus; and running
Northward, it waters Apamia and the great Antioch; then falls into the
Mediterranean.

Farham, a Market Town in the County of Southampton. The Capital of its Hundred.

Faribo, Helicon, Haliarkmon, one of the most considerable Rivers of Macedonia;
which rising out of the Mountains of Albania, and traversing the whole breadth
of that Kingdom, from thence falls into the Bay of Thessalonica from the West,
thirteen German Miles from Thessalonica to the South.

Farima, a City of Japan, eighteen Spanish Leagues from Meaco to the West;
which is under the King of Japan now, but had heretofore a Prince of its own.

Faringdon, a Market Town in Berkshire. The Capital of its Hundred.

Farne, an Island on the Coast of Northumberland, in the German Ocean; two
Miles from Bamburg Castle; where S. Cuthbert built him an Hermitage, in which
he took care to see nothing but Heaven, as Bede says.

Farneto, a Castle in the Dukedom of Florence in Italy, near Orvietto: Whence
the Family of the Farnese, with a little Variation, is believed to derive their
Name.

Farnham, a Market Town in the County of Surrey. The Capital of its Hundred.
Watered by the River Wey; and graced with the Episcopal Seat of the Bishop's of
Winchester. King Alfred made a great Slaughter of the Danes, in a Victory over
them, here.

Faro, Pharus, a City of Spain, in Algarva, upon the Ocean, between Cape S.
Vincent to the West, and the Mouth of the Guadiana to the East, near the Cape
of S. Mary; seven Miles from Silves to the South-East.

Faro di Messina, Fretum Mamertinum, the Straight between Sicily and Italy.

Farsa, Pharsalus, a City of Thessalia, where the fate of the Empire of the
World was determined, between Caesar and Pompey, by Battle. In some later Maps
called Farsato.

Farsi, Persia.

Farso, a Town in Carmania, over against the Eastern Cape of Cyprus, 7 German
Miles from the Mediterranean Sea; in Asia the Less.

Fartach. See Fertach.

Fasso, Phasis, a River in Mengrelia.

Fatigar, a Kingdom in Africa, which belonged formerly to the King of Ethiopia;
between the great Lake of Arpen to the East, the Mountains of Felles to the
North, the Kingdom of Olabi to the West, and that of Bara to the South; between
60. and 70. and 10 North Latitude.

Favagnana, Aegathos, Aegusa, Aethusa, an Island on the West of Sicily, near
Cape Trepano, under the King of Spain; which has a Bay fit to receive the
greatest Navies, near to which Luctatius Catulus the Consul gave the
Carthaginians their last blow at Sea.

Faudoas, a Town and Castle in the Province of Gascoigne in France, adorned
with the Title of a Barony, and giving its name to an honorable Family.

Fayal, one of the Azores in the Atlantic Ocean, under the Portuguese: little,
but fruitful: having a Town of the same name, with others, in it.

Feldkirck, Feldkirkia, a small but well peopled Town in the Province of Tirol
in Germany, upon the River Ill, toward the Frontiers of Switzerland. It is
also written Widkirch, and carries the honor to be an Earldom.

Felin, or Welin, Felinum, a City of Livonia, upon the River Felin, in
Esthonia, 150 Miles North of Riga; which has a strong Castle in it. In this
place William of Furstemburgh, Master of the Teutonick Order, was betrayed by
his own Subjects to the King of Sweden, in 1650. who has ever since possessed
it.

Fella, Carnicum Julium, a Castle in Friuli, but on the Confines of Carniola,
under the Venetians.

Felles, a Ridge of Mountains in Africa, extending from the North-East to the
South-West, on the North of Egypt. See Fatigar.

Fello, Phellos, a City of Lycia, East of the River Xanthus, (or Lycus,) and
West of the Chelidonii Scopuli, on the Shoars of Asia the Less.

Feltri, Feltria, a City in the Marchia Tarvisina, under the Commonwealth of
Venice, upon the River Asona, which soon after falls into the Piave; forty two
Italian Miles from Trent to the East. This is a Bishops See, under the
Patriarch of Aquileja; and has been under the Venetians ever since 1404.
Sometime written Feltre.

Femeren, Femerae, Fimeria, a small Island in the Baltic Sea, on the Shoars of
Holstein, and Wagria, from which it is distant only four Miles: made famous by
a Naval Victory, obtained by the Danes over the Swedes and Hollanders, in 1645.

Fenesia, Psillis, a River of Bithynia, in the Lesser Asia.

Ferden, Verda, a City of the Lower Saxony, called also Verden, which is the
Capital of a Duchy of the same name; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Mentz, by the institution of Charles the Great: It stands upon the River Aller,
six Miles from Bremen to the East, and twelve from Hamburgh to the South: of
old a Free Imperial City, afterward subject to its own Bishop; but in the
Treaty of Westphalia, it was given to the Swedes, who are still possessed of
it: the Bishop of this City embraced the Augustane Confession in 1568. The
Dukes of Lunenburgh seized it in 1676. but were forced to restore it in 1679.
to the Swedes.

La Fere, Fara, a strong City upon the River Oyze, in Picardy, in the Tract of
Tierache, five Miles from S. Quintin to the South, and 4 from Laon to the
North: it stands in a Morass, and was retaken by Hen. IV. after the Spaniards
had gained it from the French.

La Fere Champenoise, a City of Champaigne in France, between the Seyne to the
South, and the Marne to the North, eight Miles from Chalons to the South. There
is another called La Fere en Tardenois, in this Province too, in the middle
between Melun to the West, and Reimes to the East.

Ferentino, or Fiorentino, Ferentinum, a City of Campagnia in Italy, under the
Pope, which is a Bishops See, under none but him: It lies forty Italian Miles
from Rome to the South, and eight from the Confines of the Kingdom of Naples to
the North: a small place built on an Hill.

Ferento, Ferentiae, an ancient City, ruined, of Hetruria in Italy, near
Viterbo and Montefiascone. It had been an Episcopal See, before those of
Viterbo destroyed it, upon an account of Heresy in 1074.

Ferenzuola or Fierenzuola, an Episcopal City in the Capitanata, in the Kingdom
of Naples. Adorned with a famous Abbey, and made remarkable in ancient History
by the Victory of Sylla over M. Carbo here in the year of Rome 672.

Fermanagh, Fermanagensis Comitatus, a County of Vlster in Ireland, in which
lies Earne, the greatest Lake in that Kingdom. There is never a City or Town of
note in this County; and therefore it need be no further considered.

Fermo. See Firmiana.

Fernes, Fernae, a City in the County of Wexford in Ireland, with an Episcopal
See under the Archbishop of Cashel now, but formerly of Dublin.

Feroe Islands. See Foeroe.

Ferrandina, a Town in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Basilicate, upon the River
Basiento; 18 Miles from the Sea to the West, and 12 from Matera to the
South-West: built by Ferdinando, Duke of Calabria, Son of Alphonsus II. King of
Naples; and since honored with the Title of a Dukedom.

Ferrara, Ferraria, a City of Italy, under the Dominion of the Pope, and the
Capital of the Dukedom of Ferrara; which under the Family of Este, was so
improved and augmented, that it became one of the best Cities of all Italy:
made a Bishops See by Pope Vitaliano: 30 Miles from Bologna. It was so small in
the time of Theodosius junior, that it was called Ferrariola, the little
Ferrara: It stands on the smallest branch of the Po, ( Po Morto,) from which
there is a cut of six Miles, as far as Francolino Westward, for promoting of
Trade; but since 1598, when it came into the Popes hands, this City has been
decaying; which the Castle built by Clement VIII. has not been able to prevent,
though that Pope placed there his Image, with this inscription; Ne recedente
Pado Ferrariae Fortitudo recederet, Martem Neptuno substituit; that is, Least
the recess of the Po should weaken Ferrara, he has brought Mars to supply the
want of Neptune. His Holiness was however mistaken, as the event has shown; for
Neptune and Mercury, tending equally to the wealth and welfare of a City, are
much more auspicious Patrons than Mars. There was a League made here against
the Protestants in 1586. The Council of Florence was begun here in 1438; (after
a declaration of the dissolution of that of Basil made by P. Eugenius IV.) John
Paleologus VII. Emperor of Constantinople, with his Patriarch, being
personally present An University was settled by Frederick I. in aversion to
Bononia, about 1316. The Dukedom of Ferrara, is a part of Romandiola: bounded
by the Peninsula of Rodighnia; (which formerly belonged to this Dukedom, but
was taken from it by the Venetians in 1500.) on the West, by the Dukedom of
Mantona; on the South by Romandiola, properly so called; and on the East by the
Adriatic Sea. It was under the Family de Este, from 1336. to 1598. when upon
the death of Alphonsus II. without Heirs Males, it was seized by Pope Clement
VIII. as Lord of the Fee, against the pretensions of that Branch de Este, which
are now Dukes of Mantoua; a Dukedom then a dependent on this of Ferrara. The
Tract adjacent, called Ferrarese, assumes its name from it.

Ferreri, or the Island of Iron, is the most Western of all the Canary Islands:
and more particularly mentioned by Writers for a tree, supplying the
Inhabitants with water (whereof there is none elsewhere in all the Island), by
a distillation from its branches. Pet. Martyr, le Blanc, Thevet, etc.

Ferrete. See Pfirt.

Ferriers, Ferraria, a small Town in the Territory de Gastinois, toward the
Confines of Senois; two Leagues from Montargis to the North, and twenty three
from Paris to the South; which has a very famous Monastery in it.

Ferro, Calycadnus, a River in Cilicia.

Fertach, Syagros, Sapphar, Fartachium, a City and Kingdom on the South of
Arabia Foelix, which lies about eighty German Miles from Aden to the South, in
almost Long. 85. Lat. 15. 24. a hundred and thirty Miles from the entrance of
the Red Sea to the South.

La Ferte-Aleps, or Alais, a Town in the Isle of France, three Leagues from
Estampes to the East, and eight from Paris to the South. As this word La Ferte
signifies a Fort or place of Strength, so it frequently occurreth in the Maps
of France.

La Ferte sur Aube, Firmitas ad Albulam, a Town in Champagne, four Miles from
Bar to the South, and twenty from Dijon to the North.

La Ferte-Bernard, Firmitas Bernardi, a Town in the Province of Maine in
France, upon the River Huisne, ten or twelve Leagues below Man's. It bears the
Title of a Barony.

La Ferte-Gaucher, a small Town in the Province of Brie in France, betwixt
Meaux, Sezane, and Provins.

La Ferte sur Grosne, a Town in Burgundy, two Leagues from Challon to the South.

La Ferte-sous-Iovare, Firmitas Auculphi, or Subter Jotrum, a Town in la Brie
Campanoise in France, upon the River Marne, betwixt Chateau-Thierry and Meaux.
The Huguenots took it in the Civil Wars of the last Age.

La Ferte-Milon, Firmitas Milonis, a Town in the Government of the Isle of
France, upon the River Ourc or Oureque, betwixt Meaux, Soissons, and Senlis, in
the Duchy of Valois. It is a good large Town, and suffered very much in the
last Age's Civil Wars.

Fervaques, Aquae fervidae, a small Town of Bathes, of warm water, in Lieuvin
in Normandy; two miles and an half from Lisieux to the South, and three from
Roan to the South-West: it is a very small place.

Ferventia, Fons Agri Carrinensis, a Bath in Portugal, in a Village called
Cadima, two Miles from the Ocean, and the same distance from Coimbra to the
West: this Fountain is mentioned by Pliny.

Fescennia, an ancient Town of Hetruria in Italy: the same with the Citta
Castellana, says Ortelius; with Galeso, says Cluverius, of the Moderns. Noted
to a Proverb amongst the old Romans for a sort of jesting wanton Poetry.

Feschamp, a Town in Normandy, on the British Sea, four Miles from Le Haure,
and the mouth of the Seyne to the North.

Fessole or Fiezzole, Fesulae, an ancient City in the Dukedom of Florence in
Italy, one of the twelve considerable Cities heretofore of Hetruria, being the
residence of the Thuscan Augurs; and afterward a Bishops See. There is a
Treatise written by Francis Diaceti, sometimes Bishop here, of the Saints of
this City.

Fetu, or Foetu, a small Kingdom in Africa, in Guiney, with a City called also
Foetu, upon the Coast dell' Or, toward Cape Corso.

Feversham, a Market Town in the County of Kent, in Scray Lath, with a good
Port for small Vessels. King Stephen, with his Queen, and Eustace his son, were
all buried here in an Abbey of that King's foundation. The right Honorable
Lewis de Duras enjoys the Title of Earl of this place.

Feurs, Forum Segusianum, a Town in the upper Foretz in Lionnois in France,
five Leagues from Lion to the West, and six from Rohanne to the North, upon the
Loire.

Fez, one of the greatest Cities in Africa, but now declining: It is the
Capital of a Kingdom of the same name, in the West of Barbary; said to have
been built by the Moors in 786. It is divided into three parts: Beleida, a part
of Old Fez, which contains four thousand Families; Old Fez, properly so called,
in which are eight hundred Families; and New Fez, which has about eight
thousand Families. Old Fez, the most Western, lies upon Hills and Valleys
intermixed; and has fifty Mosques very beautiful, besides six hundred small
ones. The New Fez lies in a most pleasant Plain, with a double Wall, very high
and strong; and stands near the River Union, above a Mile from Old Fez. The
learned Ortelius tells us, Fez in the Arabic Tongue signifies Gold: that the
City Fez is built in the middle of the Kingdom, and the greatest part of it
upon Mountains and Hills; so that there is no Plain but in the middle: that the
River enters into the City by two ways only; and then diffuseth it self into
innumerable Branches and Channels; so that there is scarce a private House that
has not a Branch of the River belonging to it; and that the rest of the water
passing through the Common Sewers, do cleanse the City. The greatest part of
the Houses are built of Stone or painted Brick: that each House has a Tower for
their divertisement. The great Mosque called Carruen, is half a Mile in
compass, with thirty one Gates of vast height. And the Library is said to
contain, besides a great number of other books, two thousand Volumes of
Manuscripts in the Arabic Language. The Territory belonging to it extends from
the River Burgrage to the River Gnave; and on the North from the River Suba, to
the foot of Mount Atlas South; which is called the Province of Fez, and by the
Romans, Volubilis. This Kingdom of Fez was erected by Abdulack in 1212, and
long since united to the Kingdom of Morocco. This Kingdom was a part of
Mauritania Tingitana, and has for a Century of years and more, suffered great
and srequent Mutations and Insurrections. They are the greatest Bigots of all
that embrace the Mohammedan Faith; and the most bitter and implacable enemies of
the Christian Religion; having totally extirpated it in those Regions, where
there were once many great and flourishing Churches. The Kingdom of Fez is
bounded on the North by the Streights of Gibra tar, and the Mediterranean; on
the West by the Atlantic Ocean; on the South by the Kingdom of Morocco, from
which it is divided by the River Azamor; and on the East by the Kingdom of
Algier: now by reason of their great intestine Wars, much depopulated and
ruined.

Fezzen, or Fessen, a Province of Biledulgerida in Africa, which is a Desert.

Fiano, a Castle in St. Peter's Patrimony in Italy, upon the Tibur, 15 Miles
North of Rome, ennobled with the Title of a Dukedom.

Fianone, Flanona, Flavona, a Town and Port of the Province of Histria in
Italy, upon the Adriatic; belonging to the Republic of Venice. It stands
advanced upon a high hill.

Fidari, Lycormas, a River of Aetolia, which washes Calidon, now Galata, a
Village on the Bay of Thessalonica, on the Archipeiago.

Fidonisi, Achillea, an Island in the Euxine Sea: and also a Peninsula called
of old Dromos Achillis, at the mouth of the Borysthenes, on the Eastern side.
It seems to be the same with Zagori.

Fiechtelberg, Suditi and Hercinii Montes, a Ridge of Mountains which incircle
Bohemia, and divide it from Franconia to the West; whence spring these great
Rivers; 1. Moenus, the Mayn, which enters the Rhine at Mentz. 2. Sala, the
Saal, which falls into the Elb at Bernberg. 3. Egra, the Eger, which falls into
the Elb, at Deutmeritz in Bohemia. 4. Nabus, the Nab, which falls into the
Danube above Ratisbone. See Eichtelberg.

Fiesco, a City of Caria, called anciently Phusca, in the later Maps Fischio; a
little more north than the Isle of Rhodes, and on the Mediterranean Sea.

Fife, Fifa, a County in Scotland, between the Fyrth of Tay to the North, that
of Edinburg to the South, the German Ocean to the East, and Strathern and
Menteith to the West. It is one of the greatest in Scotland, as being eighty
four Scotch Miles in circuit; also one of the most fruitful and best inhabited
parts of that Kingdom; full of considerable Towns and Places; the principal of
which is S. Andrews, the Metropolitan See of that Kingdom.

Figalo, Actium, a most celebrated Promontory of Epirus. See Actium.

Figeac, Figeacum, a small City of France in Quercy, a Southern Province of
that Kingdom, upon the River Sele, nine Leagues from Caors to the East, twenty
eight from Toulouse to the North-East.

Figenia, Ephesus, a City of Ionia.

Filadelphia, Philadelphia, a City of Lydia, in the Les^er Asia, at the foot of
Mount Tmoli, upon the River Caystrus, now Chiai, thirty two German Miles East
of Smyrna. It is called by the Turks Allachars, or Alla-Scheyr; that is, the
City of God: of old an Episcopal See, under Sardus, but now the Metropolis, and
in a tolerable Estate under the Turks: being built amongst the Hills and
Mountains, it has in all times been much subject to the violence of
Earthquakes. This is one of the seven Churches of Asia, mentioned in the
Revelations, Long. 57. 41. Lat. 40. 15. There is here now about two hundred
Houses of Christians, and four Churches. It preserved it self against the
Turks, after all the rest of Asia was conquered, under Orchanes, and the two
Morats, till the time of Bajazet I. who began his Reign in 1387, reigned nine
years, and then was taken by Tamerlane. And as they held out longer, so they
submitted on better terms: God having preserved them, as he promised he would,
even from the perfidy and rage of those destroyers. See Revel. 3. 8, 10.
Wheeler's Travels, p. 265.

Fillech, Fillechum, a City of the Upper Hungary, five German Miles from Agria
to the North, and the same from Cassovia to the West. It stands on the Road
which leads from Presburg, to the Cities in the Mountains, upon the River
Gayen, which falls into the Danube over against Gran, in the County of Zabel.
There was here a Castle; and the Town being a Frontier, was walled and very
strong: taken by the Turks in 1560, retaken by the Imperialists in 1593. Again
taken by the Bassa of Great Waradin in 1682. And because he and the Tekelites
could not agree about it, he dismantled and deserted it.

Filippo, Philippi, a City of Macedonia, on the Confines of Thrace; seated on a
steep Hill, about five German Miles from the Archipelago to the West, on the
Golfo de Contessa; either built or repaired by Philip King of Macedonia, from
whom it has its Name. It was afterward a Roman Colony, and mentioned as such
in the Acts of the Apostles. S. Paul preached the Christian Faith here, and
wrote one of his Epistles to this Church: also famous for a Battle fought near
it between Pompey and Caesar; and another between Augustus and Cassius. In the
Primitive times it was an Archbishops See, but almost buried in its own Ruins
now, and desolate. See Acts 16. 12.

Filippopoli, Philippopolis, called by the Turks Filibe, and Presrem, is a City
and an Archbishops See in Thrace, upon the River Hebrus, now Meriza; an hundred
Miles from Constantinople, ninety from Philippi to the West. Here was an Arrian
Synod held in 349. And here Julian the Apostate was, when he received the news
of the Death of Constantius; and thereupon discovered his concealed Apostasy.
Frederick Barbarossa I, in 1189, took this and Adrianople from the Turks, which
was retaken from the Christians by Amurath in 1359. This City was built by
Philip the Roman Emperor, and is now in a flourishing condition; the Seat and
Residence of a Turkish Sangiack, or Governor, under the Pacha of Romania.

Final, or Finale, Finalium, a strong Town, well fortified, with a Marquisate
belonging to it, upon the Coasts of the Sea of Genoua in Italy, betwixt Savona
and Albengua. The Marquisate is not above six miles in length, and is bounded
at each end with the points of the Mountains. They both belong to the King of
Spain, who surprised them in 1602, and caused the last person of the House of
Carreto (that for a long time before had been the Proprietors thereof) to be
put to death.

Finichia, one of the present Names of Cilicia, a Province of the Lesser Asia
next Syria.

Finkeley, a Village in the Bishopric of Durham, in Chester Ward: mentioned in
the Councils by the name of Finchala and Fincenhala: there having been a
Council held at it in the year 798. by Eanbald Archbishop of York.

Finland, Finlandia, Fenni, Finnia, Fionnonia, is a very spacious Country;
heretofore a distinct Kingdom, but now subject to the Crown of Sweden, and
distinguished with the Title of a Dukedom belonging to the King of Sweden's
sons. Bounded on the North by Deserts or unknown Countries, from which it is
separated by the Lake and River Vla Tresk: on the West it has the Botner Sea, a
Branch of the Baltic; on the South the Bay of Finland, another Branch of it;
and on the East, the Dominions of the Great Duke of Muscovy. It contains
several very great Provinces, as Ciania, Tavasthia, Nylandia, Carelia,
Savolaxia, and Finland properly so called; which is the most Southern and most
noble. Aboa a Town upon the River Aurojoki, over against the Isle of Aland, is
the Capital of this Kingdom* and the Seat of the Swedish Viceroy. This Kingdom
was first conquered to the Crown of Sweden in 1384, by Erick one of their
Kings. In 1571, the Muscovites intending a Conquest fell into it with a
Savageness and Cruelty hard to be expressed, or believed; but were recalled by
an Irruption of the Tartars upon their own Countries. It is called by the
Inhabitants and Swedes, Finner; by the Danes, Finder; by the Germans, Fennen;
by the Dutch, Finlander. Cluverius says, it is a considerable part of the
Kingdom of Sweden; and that it is fruitful, and affords excellent Pasturage.

Finmark, Finmarchia, called by the Inhabitants Taakemarch and Finmark, is a
Province of the Kingdom of Norway, on the Western Ocean. The Southern part of
it is subject to the Danes; the Northern to the Swedes. This Country is barren,
rocky, covered with dreadful Woods, full of Bears and Wolves, and other
ravenous Beasts: the Inhabitants till of late lived in Summer, like the
Nomades, wandering from place to place, as the convenience of Water and Pasture
invited them. The Princes under whom they now are, to reduce them from this
vagrant way of living, granted the Lands to the first Occupant, by which means
some parts are improved; but the more barren can be used no other way, and
therefore are left still in common. The Inhabitants are a mongrel sort of
Christians, extremely ignorant and barbarous; infamous for Witchcraft,
revengeful beyond belief, and as rugged as the Country they inhabit.

Fionda, a small Village on the Shoars of the Mediterranean Sea, in the Lesser
Asia, in the Confines of Lycia and Pamphylia; which in the Roman times was
called Phaselis, and before Pityussa: it lies East of the Chelidonian Rocks,
and West of Mount Masicytus, two hundred and twenty English Miles from the most
Western Cape of Cyprus. A Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Myra, now
Stramita: but so very small, that little notice is taken of it in the ^^ter
Maps.

Fionia. See Fuynen.

Fionissi, Lyssus, a Town in Creet ( Candia), on the Western Shore; near the
most Southern Cape of that Island.

Fiore, Ossa, a River of Italy, in the Dominions of the Great Duke of Florence,
which falls into the Mediterranean Sea at Telemont, a small Seaport belonging
to Sienna.

Fiorenza. See Florence.

Firando, a City and Kingdom of Japan, in that part which is called Ximo; to
which there belongs an Island of the same Name, on the Western Shore also.

Firi, Maxera, Mazeras, a River of Hyrcania, which falls into the Hyrcanian Sea.

Firmiana, Firmanorum Castrum, a small Castle on the Adriatic Sea, in the
Marca Anconitana, near the Mouth of the River Tinna: now commonly called Fermo;
thirty Italian Miles from Ancona to the South, and an Archbishops See.

Fischio, Phusca, a Maritim City of Caria, in the Les^er Asia, over against the
Isle of Rhodes, about eighty four English Miles from Ephesus to the South. In
the later Maps, it is placed much more to the East than the Isle of Rhodes.

Fishgard, a Market Town in Pembrokeshire* in the Principality of Wales, and
the Hundred of Kemeys.

Fismes, Fimae, ad fines, a Town in the Province of Champaigne in France, upon
the River Vesle. Two Councils have been assembled at it in the years 881 and
935, which write it, Finibus apud Sanctam Macram, from a Stone ('it is supposed)
that serves as a Boundary, hard by, to the Bishoprics of Rheims, Laon, and
Soissons.

Flagania. See Paphlagonia.

Flaiz, Flaicus, an Isle of France. belonging to Santoigne.

Flamborough-head, a noted Promontory in the East Riding of Yorkshire; two
Miles from Burlington Bay: so called from the small Town, Flamborough, standing
in it.

Flanders, Flandria, by the Natives called Vlaenderen, is the greatest and
noblest of those Seventeen Provinces called the Low Countries: Bounded on the
East with Hainault and Brabant; on the West with the British Ocean; on the
North with the Seas of Zealand; and on the South in part by Artois, and in part
by Hainault and Picardy: of which Artois was at first a part, and after five or
six descents, reunited again to it. This Province, says Ortelius, is most
excellent Pasture, especially toward the West. It affords excellent Kine, and
warlike Horses; and abounds in Butter, Cheese, and excellent Wheat. The People
are much given to Merchandise and Clothing; their Linen (having plenty of
Flax and Hemp) exceeds all other Countries; and as to Woollen, they having the
Wool from Spain and England, improve it by their industry to a wonder, and
then supply all the World with the Product. But in this the zeal of Philip II.
King of Spain, has altered the state of things in a great degree. This Province
has twenty eight walled Towns or Cities, a thousand one hundred and fifty
Villages; besides Forts, Castles, and Noble Men's Houses; and a great number of
Abbeys, Priories, Colleges, and Monasteries. It has five Viscounties, three
Principalities, four Ports, and thirty one Chatellanies. The principal of which
in Ortelius his time was Gaunt. This great Province was divided into three
Parts; 1. Flanders Flammengant, bounded on the East by the Imperial Flanders,
and the Scheld; on the West by the British Seas; on the North by the Seas of
Zealand; and on the South with Artois and Flanders Gallicant; the principal
City of which was Gaunt. 2. Imperial Flanders, so called, because it was a Fee
of the Empire; divided from Brabant, on the East by the River Dender; and from
the Gallick Flanders on the West by the Scheld; on the North it has the River
Dender, and on the South Hainault; the principal Town of this is Alost, whence
it is now commonly called the County of Alost. 3. Flanders Gallicant, so
called, because the French Tongue was heretofore most spoken in it. This has
Hainault on the East, Artois on the South, the British Sea on the West, and
Flanders Flammigant on the North; from which it is parted by the River Leye;
the chiefest Town is L'isle, Insula. First united to France by Dagobert one of
their Kings; by whom about 621. it was granted to Liderick de Buque, with the
Title of Forester. In 864. it was granted to Baldwin I. by the Title of Earl of
Flanders, the Sovereignty being reserved to France, whose Homagers these Earls
were. This Earldom by the Marriage of Philip Duke of Burgundy with Margaret
Daughter of Lewis de Malatin Earl of Flanders in 1369. came into the House of
Burgundy; and so to the House of Austria by the Marriage of Mary Daughter and
Heir of Charles the Hardy, to Maximilian Emperor of Germany, in 1476. in which
Family it still is. This though the prime Earldom of all Europe, yet was a
Homager to the Crown of France; till Charles V. having taken Francis I. his
Prisoner in the Battle of Pavy in Italy, by a Treaty at Madrid, infranchised it
from that Servitude. Since the time of Philip II. it has been extremely
curtailed and harassed; many of the Inhabitants flying then into England, not
only depopulated, but impoverished it by carrying away its Trade. And the
Hollanders Revolting, not only added to this Calamity by a War of forty years
continuance, but took from them several Towns in the Northern parts. Of later
times, the French have made the same devastations on the Southern, so that not
above half Flanders is now left to the Spaniards, and that in a weak and
declining condition.

Flassans, a small Village in Provence, in the Diocese of Fre^us: remarked for
giving name to an eminent Poet of that Country in the thirteenth Century; as
likewise in the person of Sieur de Flassans, surnamed the Knight of the Faith,
for his zeal against the Huguenots of Provence in 1562.

Flatholm, an Island in the Severn, over against Somersetshire.

Flavigni, Flaviniacum, a small Town in the Tract of Auxois in Burgundy,
betwixt Dijon and Samur, upon a little River near the ancient Alize. There
stands an Abbey of the Benedictines in it.

La Fleche, a Town in the Province of Anjou in France, upon the Loyre, toward
the Frontiers of Maine. Henry le Grand founded a College of Jesuits there in
1603: whose heart is interred in the same.

Flensburg, Flensburgum, a City of the Kingdom of Denmark, on the South of
Jutland, upon the Bay of Flens, on the Baltic Sea, in the Dukedom of Sleswick,
four German Miles West of the Isle of Alsen, and 6 from Frederichstad to the
North-East. It is but small, seated on high Hills with a large Haven, and a
strong Castle. The City is under the King of Denmark; but the Territory which
belongs to it, is under the Duke of Holstein Gottorp. Christian V. King of
Denmark was born here in the year 1646.

Flerus, a Village in the County of Namur, below Charleroy, near the Sambre;
rendered remarkable by the Battle betwixt the French and Dutch Armies, on July
1. 1690. fought upon the Plains thereof, with the Victory to the French.

Fleury, or S. Benoit sur Loyre, Floriacum, a small Town which has a noble and
an ancient Monastery of the Order of S. Benedict, whose Body lies interred
therein: seated upon the Loir, nine Leagues from Orleans to the East. It
stands, according to some, in Le Gastinois; to others, in the Dukedom of
Orleans; and deserves to be remembered for the sake of Hugo Floriacensis, a
Learned Monk of this House, who wrote a loyal and a christian Discourse
concerning the Origin of Monarchy, which he dedicated to Henry II. King of
England; Published by Baluzius in his fourth Tome of Miscellanies. There is
another Fleury in the Dukedom of Burgundy, upon the River Ousche; three Leagues
from Dijon to the West: A third in Biere, which has a Priory; and a fourth in
the Isle of France.

Fliez, Phligadia, a Mountain in Sclavonia. Lazius places it in Liburnia, upon
the Adriatic Sea.

Fly, Flevo, an Island at the Mouth of the Rhine, which has a fine Haven, and
a rich Town. It stands at the entrance of the Zuidersee, near the Texel. The
English Fleet under Sir Robert Holms, entered this Port in 1666: burnt one
hundred sixty five Sail of Ships, and took and burnt the Town of Schelling,
which is the chief of that Island.

Flintshire, one of the twelve Shires in Wales; bounded on the North with an
Arm of the Irish Sea, which parts it from Cheshire, on the East of it; and on
all the other Quarters, by Denbighshire. It is Hilly, but not mountainous;
fruitful in Wheat and Barley, but especially Rye: upon the Northern Shore
stands Flint Castle, which gives name to the whole Shire; begun by Henry II.
and finished by Edward I. wherein Richard II. renounced the Crown of England.
Whereupon Henry Duke of Lancaster claimed it, and intailed a War on the English
Nation, that bid fair for its Ruin. The Title of Earl of Flint belongs to the
Prince of Wales.

Flix, a strong Castle upon the River Ebro in Catalonia, supposed to be the old
Ibera.

S. Florentin, a Town of France in Senois, in Champagne.

Florence, Florentia, one of the principal Cities of Italy, called by Pliny,
Fluentia; by the Italians, Fiorenza; and proverbially epitheted La bella, from
its great beauty. The Capital of the Province of Toscany and the Residence of
the Great Duke. It was built by Sylla's Soldiers in the Year of Rome 675,
seventy six years before the Birth of our Savior, upon the River Arno, which
passes through it, and is covered by four stately Bridges within the Walls. It
is five, or as others say, seven Miles in compass: paved with Stone, adorned
with large Streets, and stately magnificent Buildings, both public and
private; to the Beauty of which the natural Ingenuity of the Citizens has
contributed very much; no place having afforded more excellent Architects,
Painters and Carvers, than this, as Schottus observes. It is seated in a gentle
and healthful Air, upon a great and a navigable River; surrounded with a
delicate Plain, pleasant Hills, high Mountains; and abounding in whatsoever is
valuable or useful; said to contain above seven hundred thousand Souls. It may
justly own Charles the Great for its Founder, who in 902, enlarged, and new
Walled it; adding one hundred and fifty Towers, an hundred Cubits high; from
whenceforward it began to flourish, though it suffered very much from the
Factions of the Guelphs and Gibellins, that is, the Imperial and Papal Parties.
This City purchased its Liberty of Rodolphus the Emperor about 1285, after
which they subjected many of their Neighbors; but were never quiet from
Foreign Wars, or Intestine Divisions, till they fell under a second Monarchic
Government: in the interim Pope Martin V. advanced the Bishop to an Archbishop,
in 1421. Nor is it less remarkable for a Council held here for uniting the
Greek and Latin Churches; which began in 1439, and ended in 1442. Nor is the
Death of Jerome Savanarola to be forgotten, who was burnt here in 1494, for
reproving the Vices of those who love them too well to part with them. It
surrendered it self to Charles V. in 1529, who granted it the year following to
Alexander de Medices his Son in Law, with the Title of a Dukedom, under which
Family it still is; enlarged in Bounds, but perhaps diminished in Wealth and
People. Besides the Council I mention, there have been many other held here,
which for brevity I must omit; as also the vast number of excellent Men here
born; the noble Library, called Bibliotheca Laurentiana, which is one of the
best in the whole World for Manuscripts; the excellent Pieces of Architecture,
Sculpture and Painting (of which sort this City shows some Pieces drawn by John
Cimabac, who about 1200, began to revive the Art of Painting in Italy, before
which this Art was only exercised by Greeks) and many other Rarities
plentifully enough here to be found. It has three Citadels, built by its Dukes
at several times. They observe, that the politeness of the Italian Tongue
shines in its greatest perfection here, tho not so well pronounced as by the
Romans: whence that Country Proverb, La lingua Toscana in bocca Romana. The
praise whereof is in great part to be ascribed to the famous Academy della
Crusca, Authors of the Italian Vocabulary, established in this City. Long. 34.
03. Lat. 43. 15.

Florensac, a Town in Provence, seated on a River, nine Miles from Narbonne to
the North-East, and six from Frontignan to the West.

Flores, or Isla de Flores, one of the Azores in the Atlantic Ocean, under the
Portuguese.

Florida, a very large and fruitful Country in the North America; so called
because the Spaniards discovered it on Palm Sunday, which in their Language
they call Parcua de Flores, in 1512. The English had before this discovered it;
Sebastian Cabot, sent by Henry VII. in 1479, to find a way to the East Indies
by the West, being the very first European that landed here. But the Spaniards
went further, searched thoroughly, and took Possession of it for the King of
Spain: however, the English have renewed their old Claim, and taken Possession
of the more Northern Part by the name of Pensilvania, of which I shall speak in
due time. The Inhabitants call Florida, Jaquasa; it lies parallel with Castile
in Spain, and said to be of the same temper both for Air and Soil, but
abundantly more fruitful. Bounded on the North-East with Virginia; on the East
with Mar del Nort; on the South, and some part of the West with the Bay of
Mexico; and on the rest of the West with New Gallicia, and some Countries not
yet discovered. It extends from the River of Palms 25 degr. of Lat. to Rio de
Secco, in Long. 34. which evidently shows* that it is a large Country. The
Spaniards have only two Castles in the Southern Parts, S. Matthew, and S.
Augustine. It lies in breadth where it is narrowest thirty Miles, and in other
parts an hundred: toward the North beyond Florida is Canada. The whole Country
is flat; abounds with Rivers, which make it over-moist; but toward the Sea it
is more sandy. In 1520, and 1524, Lucas Vsquez invaded it to find Men to work
in the Mines. In 1528, Pamphilus Narviesius traveled over it. In 1528,
Ferdinandus Soto went thither after Peru was conquered, with three hundred
Horse, and four hundred Foot, to look for Gold; but finding none returned empty
and discontented, bestowing only the Name of Florida upon the Country. In 1549,
Charles V. sent some Priests thither to Convert the Natives; but the Natives
destroyed them. Under Charles IX. of France, in 1562, Charles Ribald sailed
thither, made a League with the Inhabitants, and built Charles Fort, settling a
French Colony. And in 1564. Renatus Laudonerius was kindly treated by the
Natives; which the Spaniards observing, and fearing, they surprised the French,
and hanged not only the meaner sort, but many Gentlemen too. In 1576. Dominic
Gurges, a Gascoign, manned out a Ship at his own cost and charge, and retook
Charles Fort, repaying the Spaniards in their own kind. The Spaniards (who were
then much in the favor of the French) had like to have been too hard for him
at his return. The Soil is very fruitful, yields plenty of Sassafras, and may
have rich Mines; but the Inhabitants take no pains to find them, and not much
to Till the Earth, which yields them two Crops of Maze in each year, one in
March, and another in June: this is the natural bread of the Country, by which,
and Hunting only, the Natives subsist. Who are of Olive Complexions, great of
Stature, go Naked, except what they are more concerned to hide; naturally
lovers of War, out of a revengeful and unquiet Temper.

Flumica, Crimisa, a River of Calabria Citerior, which falls into the Bay of
Taranto, near Capo dell' Alice; four Miles from the Promontory of Santa Maria
di Leuca; which is the most South-Eastern Cape of Italy and Europe to the West.
The Cape, the Village dell' lo Zeiro, and il Capo dell' Alice, were by the
ancient Geographers called Crimisa, as well as the River, though they have now
three several names.

Flushing, Vlissinga, Flissinga, is a Maritime Town in the Province of Zeeland
in the Low Countries; seated on the Mouth of the Scheld, in the Isle of
Walcheren, one League from Middleburgh, upon the most Southern point of that
Island. It has a very convenient Haven, and the entire Command of the Scheld;
without whose License no Ship can pass up the River to Antwerp. One of the
first Towns the Hollander took by surprise from the Spaniards in 1572. by the
diligence of Vorst a Seaman, and one Monsieur de Berland, the Bailiff thereof.
Then a mean place, of no great strength or consideration; but since fortified
by the Hollanders, to the utmost degree of human Art. This, the Briel, and Fort
of Ramekins, were, in 1585. put into the hands of Queen Elizabeth, as
Cautionary Towns for the repayment of such Moneys as she should expend in their
Protection against the Spaniards: and the famous Sir Philip Sidney was made by
her the first Governor of it. But in 1616. King James I. resigned all again
into the hands of the Hollanders. The Prince of Orange is the Proprietor of
this Town. It is the key of the Sea of the Low Countries. See Cadiz. In the
Island of Tabago in the Southern America, the Hollanders built a Fortress, and
called it New Flushing: which the French took and rased in 1677.

Fluvian, Clodianus, a River of Catalonia, commonly called El Llobregat; it
arises from the Pyrenean Hills, near Junquera in the borders of France and
Rousillon; and falls into the Mediterranean Sea near Empures, or Poret; almost
seven Miles from Perpignan to the North, and two from Narbonne to the South.

Fochien, or Fokien, a Province in China; bounded on the North by Chekiam, on
the West by Kiamsi, on the South by Quamtum, and on the East by the Chinian
Ocean: between 24. and 27. degrees. of Latitude. It is said to contain eight
Cities, whereof Fochen is the chief; forty eight walled Towns, and 509200
Families.

Fodway, a City in the Lower Hungary, which was formerly an Archbishops See:
stands in view of Colocza, a City twelve Miles distant from Buda.

Foeroe, Feroae, Provincia Feroensis, Insulae Farenses, by the Inhabitants
called Feroier, is a Province subject to the King of Denmark as King of Norway;
consisting of 17 Islands in the Northern Ocean, which have Norway on the East;
Orkney and Scotland on the South-East; Greenland on the West, and Iseland on
the North-West; under 62 degrees. 10. min. of Lat. separated by deep and rapid
Waters; from one Mile long to 24, and from one to eight broad; extending from
North to South sixty Miles, in breadth above forty; all cultivated and
inhabited. Their Names are Fugloe, Suinoe, Wideroe, Bordoe, Kunoe, Kalsoe,
Osteroe, Nolsoe, Stromoe, (which is the largest) Waagoe, Myggeness, Kolster,
Hestoe, Sandoe, Skuoe, Slorediemen, and Sudoroe. In Stromoe there is a good
Harbor called Thorsehaven; where the general Commerce of the Land is
established, and the King's Contributions kept, under the Protection of a Fort
built by Christian IV. King of Denmark. Their Commodities are Skins, Feathers,
Tallow, Train-Oil, Fish, but especially Stockins; whereof they export yearly
above 60000 pair, in their Trade to Iseland, Norway and Denmark, which they
perform without Silver Money, by adjusting their Prices, and taking Ware for
Ware. Here is Angelica, radix Rhodia, plenty of high Grass and wild Cattle;
whence the Province bears a wild Sheep for their Arms. These Islands became
first inhabited by the Norwegians about the year 868, being governed by their
own Chiefs, till reduced to the Obedience of the Kings of Norway in the
Eleventh Century: who at the same time erected them into a Bishopric. For in
an Ordinance of Hagen Duke of Norway, son to King Magnus, dated in 1040.
relating to this People (which was confirmed to them by Christian IV. King of
Denmark, Feb. 4. 1637.) we find Mr. Ellender mentioned with the Title of Bishop
of Feroe. Upon the Reformation, Christian IV. translated this Bishopric into a
Provos^ship under the Bishops of Bergen; which has since been subjected to
those of Copenhagen, upon the removal of the Commerce of Feroe from Bergen
thither. There are in all thirty nine Parish Churches, divided into seven
Church-Corporations (as they call them) and to each Corporation one Priest of
the Faith of the Confession of Ausburgh; who besides little Contributions from
Communicants, receives for Tithes (not the Tenth, but) the fourth part of Corn,
Butter, Wool and Fish: and makes out the rest of his Maintenance for himself
and Family, by honest Working and Tillage. At Thorsehaven there is a School for
the Youth, erected and endowed by Christian III. King of Denmark. They speak
the Danish and Norwegian Languages mixed; and are governed according to the Laws
of Norway. See Lucas Jacobson Debes, sometime Provost of Feroe, his Description
of the Islands and Inhabitants, translated out of Danish, and printed Land.
1672.

Foggia, a small Town in the Capitanata in the Kingdom of Naples, upon the
River Cervaro, seven or eight miles from the Adriatic Ocean. There is a famous
Custom-house here, called La Dogana di Foggia.

Fogie, Phocaea, a Town in the Lesser Asia, upon the Archipelago, over against
the Isle of Metelino; seated upon the River Lohat (Hermus): called anciently
Phociae, and now Fochia, or Foja Nova: a very considerable Place, and made more
so by a Naval Victory, obtained here by the Venetians over the Turks, in 1649.

Foglia, Isaurus, Pisaurus, a River of Italy: it springs from the Apennine,
and running through the Dukedom of Vrbino, falls into the Adriatic Sea at
Pesaro.

Foix, Fuxum, or Fuxium, a Town in Languedoc, upon the River Lauriegne, at the
foot of the Pyrenean Hills, from which the adjacent Country is called the
County of Foix: it stands six Leagues from the borders of Spain to the North,
and twelve from Tolouse to the South. Le Comte de Foix, called by the
Spaniards, El Contado de foix, is a County in Aquitain in France, which was
heretofore a part of Le Conserans, but now contained in Languedoc: there are
sixteen Castellanies or Prefectures in it; and the Cities of Pamiers ( Apamea),
Tarascon, and Foix, from which it has its name. This gives a Title to a Noble
Family of France, frequently mentioned in all their Stories.

Fokien. See Fochien.

Fokingham, a Market Town in Lincolnshire in the Hundred of Aveland.

Foligni. See Fuligno.

Folkeston, a Market Town in Kent in Shepway* Lath. It belongs as a Member to
the Port of Dover, containing formerly five Parishes; now reduced to one.

Fondi, Fundi, a small City in Terra d^ Lavoro, a Province of Naples, upon the
borders of Campagna di Roma, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Capua; from whence it stands almost forty English Miles to the North-West, and
about fifty five from Rome to the South; in a fruitful Plain, about six miles
from the Ionian Sea. There is a Castle in Fondi. It has the honor to be an
Earldom, and gives its Name to a Lake in the Vicinage. In the year 1594. the
Turks pillaged it. The famous Admiral Barberoasse with some Troops of Pirates
made once a Descent upon it, with a design to steal Julia de Gonzagua, Widow of
Vespasian Colonna, one of the finest Women of that Age, to make a Present of
her to Solomon the Grand Seignior. And narrowly missing her, he set fire, in
revenge, to the Town.

Il Lago di Fondi, is a Lake that lies between the former City, and the Sea;
which was heretofore very great and equal to that called the Pomptinae Paludes,
by the Romans; but now reduced to a circuit of about four Miles, as Baudrand
says, who saw it in 1667.

Font-Astoruge, Orge, a small River in Provence, commonly called Sorgue, in the
County of Vendosme, which falls into the Rhosne above Avignon.

Fontain-bleau, Fons-Bellaqueus, or the Fountain of fair Water; is a most
delicious Village in the Isle of France, in the Territory de Gastinois, not
above one Mile from the Seyne, and fourteen from Paris to the South. In which
Francis I. built a most stately royal Country House, much improved by Henry IV.
Lewis VII. had before built a Castle here in 1169, and to it this noble House
was added by his Successors; in which was born Francis II. in 1^^4. Henry III.
in 1551. Lewis XIII. in 1604. Philip the Fair was also born in this Town in
1266. The Conference of Religion at this place May 4. 1600. in the presence of
Henry le Grand, King of France, his Chancellors and Secretaries, seven Princes
and diverse Bishops, betwixt the Sieur du Plessis Mornay and James Davy Bishop
of Eureux (afterward Cardinal of Perron) upon an Accusation made by the latter
that Du Plessis had falsified the Fathers in the Citations of his book against
the Mass in no less than 500 places, may be mentioned here as one of the most
famous Occurrences as to Religion of this Age. The result of it was this, the
learned Thuanus and Pithaeus being Commissioners for ordering of the Dispute on
the Roman Catholics side, and Isaac Casaubon with others (according to the
Kings appointment) for the Huguenots. After an Examination of nine Passages
that day, it appearing sometimes the Objection was taken for the Answer,
sometimes Words omitted and Sentences curtailed and others misapplied, there
was no continuing of the Conference longer; for Du Plessis retired into the
Country sick, and dyed soon after. In 1679. there was a Peace concluded here,
between the Crowns of Sweden and Denmark, by which the Swedes recovered
whatever had been taken from them by the Danes.

Fontanelle, a Village and Monastery in Normandy, upon the Seyne, twelve Miles
from Roan to the East.

Fontana Bianca, Naustathmus, a Seaport on the Eastern Shore of Sicily, at the
mouth of the River Cacyparis, twelve Miles from Syracuse to the South.

Fontarabia, Fons Rapidus, called by the Inhabitants Fuenteravia, and sometimes
Ondarrivia, and Ondar Ibaya; by the French, Fontarabie; by the Italians,
Fontarabia; is a very strong Town in Guipuscoa in Spain, upon the Shoars of the
Bay of Biscay, upon the River Vidosa ( Bassages), in the Confines of France and
Spain. Built by the Goths in 625. It belonged as is pretended heretofore to
France, as part of the Territory of Bayonne, and subject to that Bishop, till
Philip II. King of Spain in 1571. caused it to be taken from that Diocese. It
is so seated, that at low Water it is easily entered, but at high Water
surrounded with the Sea; and so fortified besides, that a few Men may defend it
against a vast Army: so that it is the Key of the Kingdom of Spain; and also a
convenient Haven. The French have had an Eye upon this place. In 1638. under
the Prince of Conde, and the Duke of Espernon, they attempted to reduce it; but
were beaten off with great shame and loss, the two Generals mutually blaming
each other after the ill success. I have read that Charles V. after he had
fortified this place, called it his Pillow, upon which he could securely sleep;
and it has proved so.

Fontenay, a Town near Auxerre in the Province of Burgundy in France: famous in
History for the bloody Battle fought at it betwixt the four Sons of Lewis the
Debonnaire in 841, wherein above a hundred thousand men were slain upon the
place, with the Victory to the two younger Brothers, Charles the Bald and
Lewis, the German.

Fontenay le Comte, Fontenacum, Fontenaeum, the chief Town of Poictou, upon the
River Vendee, seven Miles North-East of Fochel: it is a fine Town, seated at
the foot of an Hill, and made rich by a great Fair kept here.

Fonteuralt, Fons Ebraldi, a little Town in Anjou in France, which has a very
much celebrated Nunnery; the Abbess of which is Head of the Order, and governs
all the Men of that Order. It stands about one League from the Loyre, and three
from Salmur to the North-East.

Forcalquier, Forum Neronis, once a City of Gallia Narbonensis, mentioned by
Pliny; now a Town in Provence upon the River Lay, which is the Capital of a
County of the same name. It stands upon an Hill, between Sisteron to the
South-East, and Apt [ Apta Julia] to the North-East; six Miles from the latter,
and eleven from Aix to the North. The Title of Earl of this place and the Lands
adjacent, is born by the Crown.

Forcheim, Forchena, Locoritum, Trutavia, a small City in Franconia, upon the
River Rednitz, where it takes in the Wisent to the North; four Miles from
Bamberg to the South, under the Bishop of Bamberg.

Forcone, Avia, Furconium, once a City of Italy, now a Village in the further
Abruzzo, upon the River Pescara, ( Aternus) eight Miles from Aquila; to which
place the Bishops See was removed, upon the ruin of this ancient City by the
Lombards.

Fordingbridg, a Market Town in the County of Southampton. The Capital of its
Hundred.

Fordon, Fordunum, a strong Town in the County of Mern in the North of
Scotland; ten Miles from the German Ocean, and fifteen from Aberdeen to the
North-East. In this Place John de Fordon, the Author of the Scotichronicon, was
born: but it was anciently much more honored on the account of Palladius, the
Apostle of the Scotch, here buried; who was sent by Pope Celestine in 431. to
Preach the Christian Faith to this Nation.

Fordsham, a Market Town in Cheshire upon the Banks of the River Weever.

Fordwich, a Member of the Town and Port of Sandwich in Kent.

Forenza, Forentum, a Town in Abruzzo in Italy.

Le Foretz, or Foresiens, a Country of France, extended in length from North to
South upon the River Loyre, and bounded on the North by Bourbon, on the West by
Auvergne; on the East by Beaujolois; and on the South by Velay. It is divided
into the Upper Foretz, (in which are Fe^rs, and St. Estienne;) and the Lower,
in which is Monbrison the Capital, and Roanne. This is a very fruitful County
under the Jurisdiction of Lion.

Forest Noire, or the Black Forest, a large Wood extending from South to North
the space of ten or twelve Leagues, as far as to the Neighborhood of
Strasburgh, beginning about Basil. The four Towns, standing at a little
distance from the head of it, (viz. Rhinfeld^, Lauffembourg, Seckinghen, and
Waldshust) are hence called the four Forest Towns.

La Forest, Sebusiani, or Segusiani Populi, the same with Foretz.

La Forest de Biere, Sylva Bierica, the Wood by Fountain-bleau.

La Forest de Bondis, Sylva Bugiensis, a Forest on the borders of Savoy.

The Forest of Dean, a vast Wood in Glouoestershire, which in ancient Times was
exceeding dark, and terrible to pass through; between the River Wye and the
Severn: it was so great an Harbor for Thieves, that robbed all Passengers, that
in the Reign of Henry VI. of England, there were Laws made to restrain them:
but (says Mr. Cambden*) since the rich Iron Mines were found here, those
frightful Woods by degrees became much thinner than before: and the Rebels of
1640. promoted it, by selling the Timber of it to the Hollanders; who returned
their kindness by a War, in Ships built of the same.

Forflamine, Forum Flaminii, a City of Vmbria, ruined by the Lombards in 740.
It stood three Miles from Nuceria.

Forli, Forum Livii, a City of Romandiola, which is a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Ravenna: It stands in a Plain near the little River Ronco and the
foot of the Hills, with a Castle; at the distance of fifteen Miles from Ravenna
to the South, between the Cities of Cesena and Faventia; within the Dominions
of the Pope. Blondus the Historian was born here.

La Formentera, Ophiusa, one of the two Islands which were anciently called
Pityusae, in the Mediterranean, upon the Coast of Spain, toward Ivica. As
desert now, as we read it was in Strabo's time: inhabited only by a number of
wild Asses.

Formigue, Formicae, one of the Isles de Hyeres, upon the Coast of Provence, in
the Mediterranean Sea.

Formipt, Gedrosia, a Province on the East of the Kingdom of Persia, now by
others called Send; which is bounded on the East by India, on the South by the
Ocean, on the West by Macran, and on the North by the Desert of Segista.

Formosa, an Island, by the Spaniards so named from the beauty and fertility of
its soil, in the Oriental Ocean, twenty four Leagues from China, toward the
Coasts of the Provinces of Fochien and Quantung. Inhabited by about 25000
Chinese, who govern themselves in the manner of a Republic without
acknowledging of any King or Sovereign. The Hollanders expelled the Portuguese
hence in 1635, and the Chinese them in 1661. It is a hundred and thirty Leagues
in circuit, a hundred and fifty distant from Japan* and subject to Earthquakes*
Called otherwise Lequeio, Talieukie^, and Paccande. Its principal Town, is
Theovan or Tayoan, at which the Hollanders built a Fort with the name of
Zeland. There is a Golden Mine found in this Island.

Le Fornaci, one of the Mouths of the River Po, in the Dukedom of Ferrara,
about six Miles from the other Mouth: by this the Po di Ariano, discharges it
self into the Adriatic Sea: it serves also as a Boundary between the Pope and
the Venetians, and i^ more commonly called il Porto di Goro.

Fornoue, a small Town in the Parmesan, in Italy: remembered by the Battle of
Charles VIII. King of France, in his return from the Conquest of Naples; at
which, with nine thousand men only he got the Victory over an Army of forty
thousand of the Confederates July 6. 1495.

Forstler, a City in Hassia. See Frislar.

Fort de Alinges, a Fort in Savoy, upon the River Drance, two Leagues from the
Lake Lemane; which is now forsaken and ruined.

Forta-ventura, one of the Azores, West of Canaria. About seventy Leagues in
Circuit, but in the middle not above four over. There is a Town in it of the
same Name.

Forth. See Fryth.

Fort-Louis, a Citadel in the Island of Cayenne, in the South America, at the
Mouth of the River Cayenne: Built by the French in 1643. Taken by the
Hollanders in 1675. and retaken by the French the year after.

Fortoro, Tifernus, a River of Abruzzo: it arises out of the Apennine, in the
County of Molise, in the Kingdom of Naples, near the City of Boiano; and
flowing to the North-West, waters Lucito, Guardia, Alferes and Iscano; and
falls into the Adriatic Sea, between Tremole and Trino, over against the Isle
di Tremiti. This River is more usually called Biferno.

Fossa, Cremera, a River of Italy, much mentioned in all the ancient
Historians, for the ruin of the Fa^i^, a great Roman Family: it springs out
of the Lake of Bacano, in S. Peter's Patrimony; and running Eastward falls into
the Tibur, six Miles above Rome.

Fossano, Fossanum, a City of Piedmont, upon the River St^ra, which falls into
the Po: it lies between Saluces to the North, and Mondovi to the South, fifteen
Miles from Alba to the West: built in 1236. and now a Bishops See, founded by
Pope Gregory XIII. under the Archbishop of Turin.

Fossat, Memphis, the first Name of Grand Cairo, and a small part of it.

Fossato, Fossatum, a Field in Romandiola, near Ravenna. Theodoricus King of
the Ostrogoths in Italy, (who was honored by Zeno the Emperor with a Statue
and a Triumph in 484) had leave from the Emperor to enter a War with Odoacer
then reigning in Italy; and accordingly beat him in this place, about 491.
Fossato, a Town in the States of the Church in the Marchia Anconitana, on the
Apennine Hills, near the Confines of the Dukedom of Vrbine, twelve Miles from
Eugubio to the West.

Fosse-Werd, a Territory in West-Friesland.

Fossigny, or Foucigni, Fociniacus Tractus, a Province in the Dukedom of Savoy,
at the foot of the Alps, which is a part of the Dukedom of Geneva, between le
Vall^ys to the East, and the State of Geneva to the West: Heretofore a
dependent of the Dauphinate, but now subject to the Duke of Savoy. There are in
it thirteen Mandements, or Districts; and the chief Town is Bonville. The Title
of a Barony is annexed to it.

Fossombruno, Fossombrone, Forum Sempronii, a City in the Dukedom of Vrbino, in
the State of the Church, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Vrbino: it stands near the River Metro, [ Metaurus] which falls into the
Adriatic Sea, four Miles from Senogalla, about half a Mile from the place
where the old City stood; and is ten Miles from Vrbino to the East. It was sold
to the Duke of Vrbino, by Galeatius Malatesta, the Lord of it, for thirteen
thousand Florins of Gold, in the time of Pope Sixtus VI.

Fossone, Fossae, one of the Mouths of the River Po.

Fotheringhay-Castle, a Town and ancient Castle in the County of Northampton,
in the Hundred of Willibrook, pleasantly surrounded with the Meadows on all
sides. Mary, Queen of Scots, was beheaded here.

Foulsham, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk, in the Hundred of Eynesford.

Fougeres, Fugeria, Fulgerium, a City in Bretagne in France, upon the River
Coesnon, toward the Borders of Normandy, eight Miles from Auranches [
Abrincae] to the South, and as many from Dole. Heretofore a Place of
considerable Strength, but now neglected. It was seized by the English in time
of Truce, in 1448. in the Reign of Henry VI.

Fowey, a Market Town in the County of Cornwall, in the Hundred of Powder,
returning two Burgesses to the Parliament.

Fraemont, commonly called Pilate's Mount, is a Mountain in Switzerland near
Lucerne, having a Spring at the Top of it.

Fraga, Fragues, Flavia Gallic^, a strong Town in the Kingdom of Arragon, upon
the River [ Cinca] or Cinga, which falls into the Segne, and with it into the
Ebro, in the Borders of Catalonia: it stands three Leagues from Ilerda to the
South-West. Near this place Alphonsus VII. King of Arragon, was overthrown and
slain by the Moors in 1134.

Fraires, Fratres, Nesides, two small Islands on the Coast of Bretagne, called
the Brothers, or les Isles de Vannes: they lie between the Mouth of the Loire,
and the Calonesus, or Bell-Isle, on the Southern Coast of that Province.

Framlingham, a small Market Town in the County of Suffolk, in the Hundred of
Looes, upon a Clayhill, near the head of the River Ore, called by others
Winchel; where was anciently a strong large Castle of Saxon Work, belonging to
the Bigot^s, by the bounty of Henry I. in which Robert Earl of Leicester took
his quarters in the Rebellion against King Henry II. To this Castle in 1553.
Queen Mary retreated, and by the assistance of the Protestant Gentry of that
County, recovered the Crown of England.

Frampton, a Market Town in Dorsetshire in the Hundred of Go^berton, upon a
River which affords plenty of good Fish.

Franc, Pagus Francus, is a Jurisdiction, extending seven Leagues about Bruges,
(which exercises is Authority without the Walls,) and the fourth Member of the
Earldom of Flanders: Gant, Bruges and Ipres, being the other three. This
Government or College, was erected in 1223. to curb the Insolence, and diminish
the Power of the City of Bruges; being over-troublesome to the Earls of
Flanders.

France, Francia, Gallia, is at this day one of the mo^^ potent Kingdoms in
Europe, and the difficultest to limit and bound; it daily like the Ocean,
gaining something from its Neighbors; whose divided strengths, are not equal
to her united Forces: but yet I shall give you a general description of its
bounds, as it stood about forty years since, and then in part show what has
been since added. On the East it was then bounded by the Alps, which divide
the Dauphine from Piedmont; as also with Savoy, Switzerland, Germany, and a
part of the Netherlands: on the North with the Netherlands, and the British
Seas: on the West with the Aquitain Ocean; on the South with Spain, from which
it is divided by the Pyrenean Hills, and with the Mediterranean. Then accounted
in length six hundred and sixty Italian Miles, in breadth five hundred and
seventy, the whole circumference being two thousand and forty. In the times of
Julius Caesar, it was bounded on the East by the Alps, and the Rhine,
extending to the Mouth of that River, from the Pyrenean Hills; so that it took
in the far greatest part of what we now call the Netherlands, with all those of
the German Empire which lie West of the Rhine, Switzerland and Savoy. And the
great design of the present French King seems to have been the dilating of it
again to the same extent: to which purpose he has spared neither Blood nor
Treasure, Arts nor Labor: and perhaps if he had not been overreached by the
Jesuits, upon the design of uniting all his Subjects in one Religion by force,
he might have succeeded when he was so near his point: for whereas Picardy was
heretofore his Northern Province, he has taken in Artois, the greatest part of
Flanders, of Hanault and Namur. Of the four Ports that did belong to Flanders,
he has two, Graveling and Dunkirk: so that his Dominions extend on the Sea
Shore from Dunkirk to S. Jean de Luz in Spain, without any interruption. On the
Eastern side he has possessed himself of the Dukedom of Lorrain, the Earldom of
Burgundy, so much of Alsatia as lies on this side of the Rhine; and what his
intentions toward the Switzers are, may be guessed at: nor has Savoy passed,
especially since the late rupture, without contributing his share to aggrandize
him. On the South he has gained from Spain, Roussillon: Catalonia hardly missed
him: all the World may remember how narrowly the United Provinces escaped him
in 1673. and 1674. He has not only been a gainer in his Wars, but even in times
of Peace, by his Courts of Dependences, Forts, and other Methods: So that
considering the Weakness and Divisions of his Neighbors, and the great
Accessions he has already made; if so many thousands of his Subjects, had not
been driven out, or rendered useless to him, who can tell what this great Prince
might not have effected before his death? This vast Country or Kingdom has for
its principal Rivers, the Loyre, the Rhosne, the Garonne, and the Seine. Called
by the Inhabitants and English, France; by the Spaniards, Francia; by the
Italians, Franza; Franzam by the Portuguese; Franckri^ch by the Germans; by the
Dutch, Urancryck: by the Poles Francya and Francukazemia; by the Illyrians,
Fracgnack; by the Turks, Franza; and by the Indians, Frankistan. All which
Names are derived from its present Conquerors, and Inhabitants, the Franks or
French. It is divided into sixty Counties, and these Provinces; the Isle of
France, Burgundy, Normandy, Aquitain, Bretagne, Champagne, Languedock, Picardy,
Dauphine, Lyonnois and Orleans. To which may be added four more, that are a
kind of Conquest. Loraine, the Earldom of Burgundy, (or Franche Compte,) the
Conquest of the Netherlands, and Alsatia. This King having added by his Arms,
the Comte de Bourgogne, both the Alsatia's, the greatest part of Flanders, and
Haynault, and Namur, part of Luxemburg, and all Artois; which last is now
annexed to Picardy. The Capital of this Kingdom, is Paris. Besides these, he
has New France in America, the greatest part of Hispaniola, several Plantations
and Colonies in Africa, upon the Coast of Guinea, and some Islands in the North
Sea. Thus Baudrand reckons up his Masters Dominions. This Tract of Land was
heretofore inhabited by the Gaul^, of which I shall give an account in its
proper place. See Gallia. The Franks were Originally a German Nation,
inhabiting Franconia; which is still called East France, to distinguish it from
this Country. This Nation joining with many other, upon the declining of the
Roman Empire, under Pharamond, about 413. obtained that part of Belgium, which
contained Zutphen, Vtrecht, Over-Yssel, both the Friselands, and so much of
Holland, as lies on the same side of the Rhine; but whether ever Pharamond
crossed the Rhine, is uncertain. However in 420. he became their first King,
and formed this Potent Monarchy. Clodius his Son in 433. crossed the Rhine, and
took Cambray, Tournay, and all Belgium to the River Some: but he dying whilst
his Children were young, commended them to Meroveus, who dispossessed them, to
make himself King of the Franks, in 441. or thereabouts: Meroveus was the
Author of the Merovingian Line, and is by some made the first that seated in
Gaul. His Son went further; and took all the Netherlands, Pioardy, Champagne,
and the Isle of France, with Paris, which he made the Seat of this Empire. This
Race under nineteen Princes continued to 742. when Pepin Son of Charles Martel,
usurped upon Chilprick V. Son of Theodorick, and deposed him. The second, or
Carolovinian Line, under thirteen Princes, lasted till 977. when Hugh Capet put
an end to it, and set up the Third. Charles IV. the fourteenth of this Race,
dying in 1328. without Issue, Edward III. of England, claimed that Crown, at
Son and Heir of Isabel, the Daughter of King Philip the Fair, and Sister to the
three last Kings. Against him, Philip de Valois set up a Title by color of the
Salick Law, which had excluded all Females. The whole Reign of this Prince, and
John his Son, was double-died in Blood by the English Valor. Charles V. by
means of the English Divisions, at last expelled them. Yet under Charles VI.
the English returned with more Vigor and Rage* and were under Henry V. in a
fair way of reducing France. And he dying young, Henry VI. his Son, was crowned
at Paris in 1422. But the Minority at first, and Weakness afterward of this
Prince, gave Charles VII. of France, an opportunity totally to expel the
English the second time about 1449. The House of Valois ended in Henry III.
slain before Paris in 1589. to whom succeeded Henry IV. the first of the House
of Bourbone, and Grandfather of Lewis XIV. now King of France, who succeeded
Lewis XIII. his Father in 1642. This is the shortest account I can give of the
Bounds and History of this Kingdom; which in the Reign of Charles IX. was
reckoned to contain above twenty Millions of people. It has in it (excluding
the Conquered Countries) ten Seats of Parliament, fourteen Universities,
sixteen Archbishopricks, besides Avignon and Besanzon, one hundred and five
Bishoprics, and fifty thousand Parishes.

La Baye Francoise, a Name given by the French to a Gulf of Guinea in Africa;
and to another in their New France in the North America. New France, see Canada.

The Is^e of France, Insula Franciae. One of the first Provinces the French
possessed themselves of in Gaul: now bounded on the East with Champagne; on the
North with Normandy and Picardy; on the West and on the South with la Beausse
and Orleance. A Country not great, when compared with the other Provinces; but
yet it has given Name to all the rest, which is not unusual. It is generally so
fruitful and delightful, that the Hills are here better than the Valleys in
most places of Europe. The Vale of Montmorency, in which Parts stands, has
scarce its equal in all the World. This was anciently a part of Belgica
Secunda. The principal City of this Province is Paris; and there are in it nine
other very considerable.

Franche Comte, Burgundiae Comitatus, called by the French, Le Comte de
Bourgogne, and sometime the Franche Comte; by the Italians, La Franc Comtea; by
the Germans, Das Over Burgund, that is, the Higher Burgundy; is now a Province
of France, and a part of the Eastern Burgundy, taken more largely. Bounded on
the East by Switzerland, and the Diocese of Basil; on the North by Lorrain, and
part of Campaign; on the West by the Dukedom of Bourgogne, or Burgundy; and on
the South by La Bresse, and Beugey. The Capital of it is Dole; and after it
came into the hands of the Spaniards, Besanson. The Country, where it is
Mountainous, affords excellent Wines; and as to the rest, is full of pleasant
and fruitful Valleys, with great plenty of fresh Streams, and delightful
Rivolets. This Country by Rodolph the last King of Burgundy, was given to
Conrade II. Emperor of Germany, and ever after esteemed a part of the Empire.
In 1101. it was given to Otho of Flanders, Son to a Sister of the Emperor
Conrade; and by the Family of Burgundy, came together with the other
Territories belonging to that Family, to the Crown of Spain: in which House it
continued, till in 1674. the present King of France got the Possession of it,
which was confirmed by the Treaty of Nimmeguen.

Franci, the ancient Franks; for whom see Gallia, France and Franconia. The
same is the common appellation of all European Christians among the Turks.

Franckendal, Franchendalia, Francodalia, a new and well fortified City of
Germany, in the Lower Palatinate, not above one Mile from the Rhine, and four
from Heidelberg to the West. Taken by the Spaniards, but restored again in
1652. by the Treaty of Westphalia. It was built by Frederick III. Elector
Palatine in 1571. and stands four Miles from Spire to the North. Surrendered to
the French in November 1688. and by them in 1689. quitted and burnt.

Franckenlandt. See Franconia.

Franckford, Franckfort, Franckfurt, Francofurtum, Trajectum Francorum, a great
and fine City of Germany. It stands in the Weteraw, toward the Northern
Borders of Franconia, upon the Mayn or Mein, [ Moenus] over which it has a
Bridge, five Miles from the Rhine and Mentz to the East: often called for
distinction, Francofurtum ad Moenum: and more anciently Helenopolis, (as
appears by an ancient Inscription) till, the French gave it this Name, from
Francus a Son of Marcomirus a King of the Franks, that rebuilt it. In very
ancient times it was an Imperial and Free City; appointed for the Election of
the Emperors. Arnulphus was the first Emperor elected here in 887. The Mayn
which passes through it, is a great and a Navigable River, taking in many
other noble Rivers, till it self falls into the Rhine: which makes this City a
fit Center of Trade for many parts of Germany; and their two great Marts every
year contribute very much to the same. This City was called thus before the
Reign of Charles the Great, upon the account of the Passage the Franks had here
over the Mayn, though it was a City long before under another Name. But the
Suburb was called Saxen-hausen, the Dwelling of the Saxons. The Bridge is a
splendid and a noble Work, supported by many Arches. This City was also the
Seat of the Eastern Franks or Austrasia. In the Suburbs or Saxen-hausen, is S.
Bartholomew's Church, built by Pepin King of France. They obtained the removal
of the Mart from Mentz (where it was at first) hither, of Frederick II. The
greatest part of the Citizens are Lutherans: though Roman Catholics and
Calvinists are tolerated. There was a great Council held here of three hundred
Bishops under Charles the Great in 797. in which the Religious Worship of
Images, and the second Nicene Council (being misunderstood, to ascribe the same
Adoration to the Images, as to the Prototypes) were condemned: and since that,
several others.

Franckfort upon the Oder, Francofurtum ad Oderam, is another German City, in
the middle Marquisate of Brandenburg, upon the River Oder; called so, because
it pays no Tolls. It is thought by some, to have been built by Simon the second
Son of Clodomir Nephew of Simon the First, Duke of the Francks, under Antoninus
Pius the Emperor: by others, to have been built in 1253. by Gedinus ab
Herzberg, by the Order of John I. Marquess of Brandenburg. This City is famous
for an University settled here by Joachim I. Marquess of Brandenburg, in 1506.
which Maximilian I. Emperor of Germany, illustrated with many Privileges. It
has also two Marts every year, as well as the other. It stands upon the
Borders of Silesia and Lusatia, four German Miles from the Confines of Great
Poland to the West; ten from Berlin: heretofore an Imperial Free City, but now
exempt, and under the Duke of Brandenburg.

Franco-castro, Stratonica, a Town in Macedonia, at the foot of Mount Athos, on
the North Shore of the Bay of Singo, in the Archipelago: which is also called
il Golfo de Fasso, and de Monte Santo; by the Latins, Singiticus Sinus.

Franco-chorium, Sordisci; that part of Hungary, which lies between the Save,
the Danube, and Zeguntum, where Sclavonia now is.

Francolin, Tulcis, a small River of Catalonia, which falls into the Iberian
Sea, near Tarragona.

Franconia, by the Germans das Francken, and Franckeudland, is a large Province
in Germany, which in the Writers of the middle Age, is called Francia
Orientalis, though it be but a small part of it. This is now the first Circle
in the Empire, upon the River Mayn; between Misnia and Thuringia to the North;
Nortgow, or the Upper Palatinate to the East; Bavaria, the Circle of Schwaben,
the Bishoprics of Wurtsburg, Bamberg and Aichstad to the South; and Mentz to
the West. Wurtsburg is the Capital City of this Circle: the other Cities are
Bamberg, Nuremberg, Rotenberg, Schweinfurt, Weisemberg and Weinsheim. This
Country, anciently inhabited by the Sicambri, in the times of Valentinian the
Emperor, having subdued the Alani, took the Name of Franckenland, that is,
Freedland. But in after times being perpetually exagitated with the Incursions
of the Goths, they resolved to seek a new Habitation; and under Marcomir their
King or Duke, settled about 433. in Friseland, Guelderland, and the adjoining
Countries: before which (faith my Author) the Name of Franks was scarce known.
This Country is partly Level, and partly Mountainous: yet the Mountains in it
are not high, nor is the Soil overfruitful, it being Sandy for the most part;
yet the Hills produce grateful Wine, especially about Wurtsburg. Of the Dukes
of Franconia, these obtained the Empire; Conradus I. in 912. Conradus II. in
1026. Henry III. in 1039. Henry IV. in 1056. Henry V. in 1108. Besides the
Cities before named, Hoffman reckons Coburg, Culembach, Franckfort, Mentz,
Anspack.

Franco-ville, a Village in the District of Paris, in the Isle of France.

Franeker, Franequera, a small City in Friseland, two Leagues from the Sea, and
from Leuwarden, the principal City of that Province: made an University in 1585.

Franza-curta, Fran^cia parva, Little France, a Territory in the States of
Venice in Italy, lying about Brescia: which took this Name from an
Establishment of the French in it, toward the end of the eighth Century, after
Charles the Great had defeated the Lombards.

Frascati, Frascata, Tusculum, a City of Campagnia di Roma, under the Dominion
of the Pope; seated at the foot of an Hill, as Holstenius proves at large,
twelve Miles from Rome to the East; in which were many of the Country Houses of
the Roman Princes. It is now a Bishopric by the Title of Episcopus Tusculanus,
which always belongs to one of the six Senior Cardinals. This ancient Roman
City being ruined in the time of Pope Celestinus III. Frascati was built in the
same place. Toward Rome there is a small Theater, which seems to have belonged
to some private Roman, and not to the City. Near this place is the Tusculanum,
or Village which belonged to Cicero, where he wrote his Tusculan Questions.

Frascolari, Oanus, a River of Sicily; it falls into the Lybian Sea on the
South side of the Island, a little below Camarina.

Frat. See Euphrates.

Frawenburg, Fravenburgus, a Town in Prussia Regalis, belonging to Poland, upon
the Bay of Frish Haff, where it takes in the River Schon; which has also a
noble Haven belonging to it, and stands not above three German Miles from
Elbing to the South-East. In this place N. Copernicus the great Astronomer and
Mathematician (a Canon of the Church of Frawenburg) died in 1543. There is also
a Castle and a Cathedral Church, with a College of Canons.

Fraxinet, Fraxinetum, a famous Retreat of the Saracens in the ninth and tenth
Ages, out of which they made their Incursions to burn and plunder the Country.
Some place it in Spain, others in Italy, in Oauphine, in Provence; and with the
greatest probability, in the latter; there being yet a Castle in the Diocese of
Frejus near the Gulf of Grimaut, which retains the Name of la Guard du
Fraxinet, and Guarda Fraxineti.

Freddano, Egelidus, Frigus, a River in Tuscany, in the Valley of Aretino.

Freddo, Acis, a River in Sicily, which arises from Mount Aetna, and is
received by the Ionian Sea, between Catana to the South, and Tavormina to the
North. This River which arises from so warm a Bed as Mount Aetna, is yet so
remarkably cold, that its Name is taken from thence; Freddo, in Italian,
signifying Cold.

Freiburg, Friburgus, is a German City in Brisgaw, upon the River Threisem, at
the foot of the Mountains, four German Miles from Brisack to the South, and six
from Basil; built in 1120. by Albert Duke of Austria. Here was an University
opened by Beroaldus Duke of Zeringen, in 1450. It was taken by the Swedes and
French in 1638. And when in 1644. the Spaniards attempted to regain it, they
received a great Defeat here. Yet it was afterward restored to them, and
retaken by the French in 1677. and left to them again by the Treaty of
Nimmeguen in 1679.

Freiburg, Friburgus, a Town and Canton in Switzerland, seven German Miles from
Solothurn, or Soleurre (as the French call it) to the South; and three from
Berne to the North-East. It was once an Imperial Free City, but in 1481.
exempted: the Bishop of Lausanne resides here. It stands upon the River Sana:
built by Berchtoldus IV. Duke of Zeringen, twelve years before Bern, in 1179.
In such a Site, that whereas all parts toward the North, East and South, are
encompassed with steep and craggy Rocks and Mountains; the Western side is
defended by a deep Dike, and has a District of three hours riding annexed to
it. Frederick Barbarossa, made it a Free City in 1218. After the death of the
Founder, it became subject to the Count of Kyburg. It was sold afterward to
Rodolphus I. Emperor of Germany, by one of these Counts: it was after this two
hundred years under the House of Austria, till about 1403. being much oppressed
by the Nobility, this City entered a League with that of Bern, but yet continued
still under the House of Austria, till 1481. when they were admitted into the
general League of the Swiss, and made the Tenth Canton. And when many of the
Cantons embraced the Reformed Religion, this stuck to the Roman Catholic; they
use the German and French Tongues, but the former most.

Freinwalt, or Fridwalt, Colancorum, a City in Brandenburg; seven Miles from
Berlin, upon the confluence of the Fubre, and the Oder to the North-East;
twelve from Stetin to the South, and six from Franckfort upon the Oder to the
North.

Freising, Freisingen, Frisinga, Fruxinum, a German City in the Upper Bavaria,
which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Salisburg, near the River
Isara, Iser. It was an Imperial Free City, but is now exempt, and under the
Jurisdiction of its own Bishop. It stands upon the confluence of the Iser and
Mosack, partly in a Plain, and partly on a Hill; four German Miles from Munick
to the North, and ten from Ratisbon.

Freius, Forum Julium, Forum Voconii, Civitas Forojuliensis, a City of Provence
in France, built in a Valley amongst Marshes: half a League from the
Mediterranean Sea, thirteen from Toulon to the East, at the mouth of the River
Argens. It is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Aix: and a place of very
good Antiquity, as the Amphitheatre, Aqueduct, Statues, Inscriptions, etc. yet
extant, demonstrate. Pope John XXII. was sometime Bishop here.

Fresingfield, a Country Town in the County of Suffolk, six Miles from
Halsworth to the West, and four from Harlson to the South: Dr. William
Sancroft, Archbishop of Canterbury, was born in this Town, and has since
erected in it a Free School.

Fremona, a Town in the Kingdom of Aethiopia in Africa, believed to be the
Primis Magna or Premnis of the Ancients.

Frias, Frigida, a City in Old Castile, in the Valley of Tobalina, upon the
River Ebro; called Phrygia in the Roman Martyrology, and by Lactantius.

Friburg in Brisgaw, in Switzerland. See Freiburg.

Fricenti, or Fricento, Aeculanum, Eclanum, Frequentum, a small City in the
Province of Principatus Vlterior, in the Kingdom of Naples in Italy, which was
a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Benevento; but the Bishopric has for
the two last Centuries, been united with that of Avellino. This City is
sometimes called Fricentum by the later Latin Writers; now almost reduced to a
Village. It stands upon the River Tripalto, Tripaltum, at the foot of the
Apennine, fifteen Miles from Benevento to the North-East, and twelve from
Avellino; in the Possession of the Prince of Venosa.

Fridberg, Fridberga, a City of Misnia, in the Upper Saxony, upon the River
Mult, toward the Mountains of Bohemia, four German Miles from Meissen [ Misna]
the Capital of Misnia to the South. This City was besieged with very ill
success by the Swedes, in the great German War in 1642. though they were then
possessed of all the other Towns in Misnia. Also honored with the Tombs of the
Electors of Saxony. Fridberg, Frideberga, a small City in Germany, in the
Province of Weteraw, which is Imperial and Free. It has its Name from Frederick
II. and is as much as Friederichberg; by contraction Fridberg. There belongs to
it a Castle of the same Name, which stands four German Miles from Franckfort to
the North.

Friedberg, Fredberga, a small Town in Bohemia, in the Dukedom of Jawer Queiss
[ Quissus] toward the Mountains, in the Borders of Bohemia; eight German Miles
from Jawer toward the West, and five from Gorlitz to the North-East.

Fridericlis, or Fri^derica, a small, but very strong City in Brasil in
America, upon the Coast of Paraiba, or La Capitania de Paraiba; which was built
by the Dutch, and taken from them by the Portuguese, to whom both this City and
Province are now subject.

Friderick-Ude, a Fort in Jutland, upon the Straight of Midlefar, built by
Frederick III. King of Denmark; taken and ruined by the Swedes in 1658.

Fridericksburg, a strong Fort in Germany, by the City of Manheim, upon the
union of the Necker and the Rhine, in the Lower Palatinate; so called from
Frederick IV. Elector Palatine, who built it in 1610. After this, it was taken
and demolished by the Spaniards, and since rebuilt by Charles Lewis Elector
Palatine: it is scarce three Miles from Heidelburg to the West, and as many
from Spire to the North. Taken by the French, and afterward burnt in 1689.
Fridericksburg, the Castle and Royal Palace of the Kings of Denmark in Zealand,
three Miles from Croonenburg to the West, and five from Copenhagen to the
South-West: famous for a Congress of the Kings of Denmark and Sweden, in these
later times. This was heretofore called the Castle of Ebelholt; and was the
Monastery of the Holy Ghost, of which William Parisiensis, who is since
Canonized, died Abbat in 1201. Frederick II* built this Castle. Christian IV.
his Son was born in it April 22. 1577. who very much beautified, and adorned
it. There is also a Fort and Town of the same Name in Guinea, built by the
Danes of late.

Friderickstad, a small Danish City in South Jutland, in the Dukedom of
Sleswick, built by Frederick Duke of Holstein and Sleswick (under whom it is)
in 1622. It stands upon the River Eyder, where it takes in the Trenna, two
German Miles from Tonning to the East, five from Sleswick, and four from
Gottorp West. There is another City of the same Name in Norway, upon the
Baltic Sea, fifty German Miles from Christianstad to the North-West, in the
Province of Agerhuis; which is under the King of Denmark.

Friesach, Friesacum, Frisakum, Virunum, a small Town in the Upper Carinthia,
but under the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Saltzburg; seated upon the
River Matuitz, with a Castle on a Rock not far off.

Frigido, Boactus, a River dividing between Genoua, and the Dukedom of Florence.

Frignana, Friniana, a Territory in the Dukedom of Modena, at the foot of the
Apennine; the chief Town of which is Sestula, toward the Borders of Bologna.

Frisch, Narung, an Island of Prussia, at the Mouth of the Vistula.

Frischaff, a long Bay in the same place, upon which stand Elbing, Frawenburg,
Brawnberg and Koningsperg.

Friseland, Frisia, called by the Dutch Uriessandt; by the French, Frise; by
the Italians, Frisia; is the Name of three several Countries. 1. Friseland,
properly so called, one of the States of Holland. 2. East Friseland, a Province
in Germany. 3. West Friseland, properly the North part of the Earldom of
Holland: and sometimes there is a fourth added, which is North Friesland, or
Jutland.

1. Friseland, Frisia, Urieslandt, Frieslandt, Friseland in Dutch, German, and
English, is a Province of the United Netherlands, heretofore much greater than
now; for it reached from the Zuyder Zee on the West, to the Bay of Dollert by
Emden on the East; and it was then divided by the River Lavica, Lawers, into
two parts: Frisia cis Lavicana, now Groningen; and Frisia trans Lavicana, now
called Friesland: but since that Omland has been taken out of this Province
too, which has much lessened it, it is now bounded on the South with the Zuyder
Zee, and Over-Yssel; on the West and North with the German Sea; and on the East
with Groningen. The principal Towns in it, are Docum, Francker, Harlingen,
Leeuwarden, which is the Capital, and Stavenen.

2. West-Friesland, is a considerable part of the Earldom of Holland, to which
it has for some Ages been united; with North-Holland on the South, the Zuyder
Zee on the East and North, and the German Ocean on the West: sometime called
Kenmar. The principal Cities in it, are Alckmaer, Amsterdam, (the greatest City
in the United Provinces), Enchuysen, Harlem, and Hoorn. This Country is
generally Marshy and Fenny, and unfit for Corn, but very good Pasture: the Air
is also foggy and unhealthful, and they want fuel too to rectify it. Charles
the Bald gave these Countries (then almost unpeopled by the Norman Pyracies) to
Thierrie, Son of Sigebert, a Prince of Aquitain, with the Title of Earl in 863.
from whom proceeded a Race of Princes, seventeen in number, which successively
governed it till 1300. from which time they were subject to the Earls of
Holland, and together with Holland came to the House of Austria: with Holland,
they revolted from the Spaniards, in 1580. and joined in the League against
them.

East-Friesland, called by the Germans, Oost-Freeslandt, by the Inhabitants,
Oost Frise, is a part of Westphalia, a Province of Germany, which heretofore
was also called the Earldom of Embden, from a City in it, which though not
great, is much celebrated. This Earldom is under a Prince of its own now:
bounded on the North by the German Ocean, on the East by the Earldom of
Oldenburgh, on the South by the Bishopric of Munster, and on the West it is
separated from Groningen, by the Bay of Dollert: it contained heretofore the
Earldom of Oldenburgh also. In this Province are three Cities or great Towns,
Embden, Aurick, and Norden. The earth is exceeding fruitful, yielding great
plenty of Corn, Cattle, Butter and Cheese. Being conquered by Charles the
Great, it continued subject to the Empire till 1453. when it was granted by
Frederick III. to Vlricus, Son of Enno, whose Posterity still enjoy it. The
Seat of these Earls, is Aurick.

Frisingen, Frisinga, a City of the Upper Bavaria, which is a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Salisburgh, near the River Iser, twenty Miles from
Landshat to the West. Once an Imperial and Free City, but since exempted, and
put under the Dominion of its own Bishop.

Frislar, Bogadium, Frislaria, a City in Hassia, upon the River Eder, under the
Archbishop of Mentz, four Miles from Cassel to the South, and the same from
Zigenheim to the North; commonly called Fritzlar. There was a Council
celebrated in this City, in 1118.

Friul, Friuli, Regio Carnorum, Forum Julii, Carnia, called by the French,
Frioul; is a Province of Italy, inhabited heretofore by the Carni: it is
bounded on the South by the Adriatic Sea, and the Golfo di Triesie; on the
West with the Marquisate of Trevigia, and the Earldom of Tyrol; on the North by
Carinthia, and Carniola; and on the East by Carniola and Istria. This Province
is under the State of Venice, and has the Title of a Dukedom. The chiefest City
in it is Vdina; and the Fort of Palma is the place of greatest strength. The
Emperors gave this Province heretofore to the Patriarchs of Aquileja. But
afterward the Dukes of A^stria and Carinthia took part of it from the
Patriarchs: and the States of Venice after many Wars, at last in 1455. forced
the Patriarch by a Treaty, to resign the rest to them: the Cities of this
Province are A^uileja* ruined, but under the House of Austria: Pieue di Cadoro,
under the Venetians; Cividat di Friuli, under the same; Goritia, under the
House of Austria; La Palma and Vdina, under the Venetians.

Frodlingham, a Market Town in the East Riding of ^orkshire, in the Hundred of
Holderness.

Frodsham, a Market Town in Cheshire, in the Hundred of Edisbury.

From or Fraw, a River in the County of Dorset; which rising by Cantmerls in
the Borders of Somersetshire, washes Frampton, Dorcester, Woodford, Morlen;
and at Wareham falls into Bruksey Haven; taking in this passage many smaller
Rivers.

Fromeselwood, a Market Town in Somersetshire, in the Hundred of From, and
upon the River From.

Fronsac, Franciacum, a Castle in Aquitain, near Bourdeaux, built by Charles
the Great, and made the Title of a Dukedom: it stands upon the River Dordogne,
Duranius, about five Leagues from Bourdeaux to the East: called Frontiacum in
the Writers of the middle Age.

Frontenac, a Citadel in New France in America, upon the Banks of a Lake of
the same Name: built in 1673. to oppose the Incursions of the Salvages.

Frontignaud, Forum Domitii, Frontiniacum, a small City in the Lower Languedoc,
upon the Lake of Magellone, fifteen Leagues from Narbone to the East, and four
from Mompellier to the West, upon the Mediterranean Sea. The Wines of this
place are much commended. In 1562. the Huguenots besieged it in vain.

Frurnove. See Fornove.

Frusilone, or Frusino, Frusio, a City heretofore, now a small Village in
Campagnia di Roma, upon the River Cosa, which falls into the Gariliano, Liris,
nine Miles from A^atro, the same from Ferentino, and forty eight from Rome to
the East: it is now commonly called Frosilone. P. Hormisdas was a Native of
this place.

The Fryth, or Fyrth, or Forth of Edinburgh, called by Ptolemy Boderia, by
Tacitus Bodotria, is an Arm of the Sea, that from the East penetrates almost
quite through the Kingdom of Scotland, to meet another such Arm from the West,
which is called the Fryth of Dunbritain: it receives into its bosom many of the
great Rivers of Scotland: on the South it has Lothaine, in which is Edinburgh,
Linlithgo, Glasco, and Sterling; the principal City of which stands at the
Western point of it: upon the North side it has the County of Fife. These two
great Bays divide Scotland into two parts, the Southern, and the Northern.

Fuenterabia. See Fontarabia.

Fuld, Fulden, Fulda, a City of Germany, in Buchaw, or Buchen, a Territory in
the Upper Circle of the Rhine, near Hassia; but from this City more frequently
called Stift von Fuld, The Territory of the Abbey of Fuld. The City is built in
a Plain: there is in it an Abbey of the Order of S. Bennet, one of the noblest
in all Europe, which has the Civil Government of the City, and Territory about
it. This Abbey was built by Pepin King of France, in 784. The Abbot is a
Prince, and Primate of all the Abbots of the Empire. It stands twelve Miles
from Coburgh to the West, ten from Cassel to the South, and eleven from
Wurtsburg. The Territory of Fuld is of a great extent, and is more properly
called Buchen: bounded on the North by Hassia, on the East by the County of
Henneberg, on the South by Franconia, and on the West by the Upper Hassia.
Fuld, Fulda, a River of Germany, which gives Name both to the City and
Territory last mentioned; it arises in this Territory toward Franconia; and
running Northward, waters Fuld, and Hurschfeld in Hassia; then entertaining
the Eder, he passes by Cassel; and at Minden in Westphalia, being united with
the Wertz and Verra, they two form the Weser, Visurgis, one of the greatest
Rivers in Germany; which dividing the Dukedom of Breme from the Earldom of
Oldenburgh, falls into the German Ocean at Carlestad, between Emden to the
West, and Hamburgh to the North-East.

Fuligno, Fullinium, or Fulginium, a small, but pretty City in the Dukedom of
Spoleto, seated in a Valley, at the foot of the Apennine, twenty Miles from
Perugia to the East, and ten from Assisio: it is divided by the River Tinna,
Topino, and is under the Pope. The Inhabitants boast much of the Antiquity of
it, not without good reason, it being mentioned by Strabo, Pliny, Appianus
Alexandrinus, and Silius Italicus. This City was rased by those of Perugia, in
1281. for which the Inhabitants of the latter were excommunicated by the then
Pope Martin II. (otherwise called the IV.): but recovering its former, or a
greater beauty, it is now a Bishopric, much enriched by its Fairs or Marts
every year, and their excellent Comfeicts. The Learned Leandro is of opinion,
this City is not the ancient Fulginia, but that Forum Flaminii stood in or near
the place; which being ruined by the Lombards, the Todi rebuilt it, and called
it by this Name; for which he cites several Authorities.

Funchal, the chief Town in the Island of Madera. It is a Bishops See under the
Archbishop of Lisbonne.

Funf-Kirken. See Quinque Ecclesiae.

Fungte, a Kingdom in Africa, in Nubia.

Fuoa, Nicii, a City of Egypt; it lies in the Egyptian Delta, or Island made by
the Branches of the N^le; forty Miles from Grand-Cairo to the South-East,
toward Alexandria.

Furnes, or Wuerne, Furnae, a City of Flanders Gallicant; not great, but well
built, and about a Mile from the Shoars of the Ocean: it has belonging to it a
large Jurisdiction, with the Title of a ^iscounty, a Collegiate Church and an
Abbey. It was three times taken by the French, and at last by the Treaty of
Aquisgrane given up to them: two Miles from Newport, and three from Dunkirk:
between which last, and this place, the Spaniards were defeated by the English
and French, in 1658.

Furstemberg, a Town and Principality in the Circle of Schwaben in Germany,
giving Name to an Illustrious House; of which the Cardinal of Furstemberg,
mentioned under the Word Bonne, is a Member.

Fuynen, Hemod ^n, one of the Orcades.

Fuynen, Fionia, an Island belonging to Denmark, in the Baltic Sea, between
Jutland to the West, and Zeeland to the East, from both which it is separated
only by two narrow Channels; the first called Middlefart, or Middle Passage;
the second Die Belt. Ottonia, ( Odensee) is the Capital of this Island:
Newburgh, or Nuborg, on the East, is well fortified, and has a good Haven. This
Island is ten German Miles in Length from West to East, and eight from North to
South in breadth. Now under the King of Denmark; but it suffered very much of
late years from the Swedes, who in 1658. took and plundered it. In 1659. the
Danes recovered the possession of it, though at the same time they lost much
Cannon and Shipping, which they could never retake; and the Inhabitants were as
much improverished by this Accident. It is a fruitful, pleasant, well seated
Island, for the Climate it is in.

Fynland. See Finland.

G A.
GAbaca, Thospites, a vast Lake in Armenia, in the Consines of Mesopotamia;
made by the River Tigris.

Le Gabardan. See Le Gave.

Gabii, a People of the Ancient Latium, near Neighbors to the Romans, in a
Town of their own Name. They became first subjected under the Dominion of Rome,
in the Reign of Tarquinius Priscus, by a Stratagem of a Son of his, pretending
Flight hither from the ill Usages of his Father, and then cutting off the
Principal Men amongst them, and betraying the rest to the Romans.

Gabin, Gabinium, a Town of Poland, between VValdislaw to the North, and
VVarshaw to the South; three Polish Miles from Ploczko to the West, in the
Palatinate of Rava; upon the River Bzura.

Gad, one of the Tribes of Israel, which had their Portion assigned them by
Moses, beyond Jordan; whose Borders to the North were the half Tribe of
Manasseh, to the East Arabia, to the South the Tribe of Reuben, and to the West
the River Jordan, by which they were separated from the rest of the Tribe of
Manasseh and Ephraim. This Country was in the Roman times called Ituraea, and
now by the Turks Beuikemane: It is almost equally divided by the River Scheriat
Mandour, as it is now called, as Michael Nau (a Jesuit) writes, who surveyed
very exactly these Parts. This Country is now under the Turks.

Gadara, Gadaris, a Town belonging to the half Tribe of Manasseh, beyond
Jordan; afterward to the Region of Trachonitis: seated upon a Hill by the
River Gadara, which falls into the Lake of Genesareth, sometimes called the
Lake of Gadara too, as Strabo says: It is six Miles from Sychopolis to the
East, and the same from Tiberias; and is frequently mentioned in the New
Testament. Heretofore thought to be invincible: It is certain, Alexander
Janaeus, King of the Jews, did not take it under a Siege of ten Months, and
then more by Famine than Force; and in Revenge ruined it, but it recovered
again. Pompey the Great, in Favor to Demetrius, one of his Freemen, who was a
Native of this City, bestowed great Privileges upon it. Philodemus the
Epicurean, Meleager, and Menippus that pleasant Philosopher, also Theodorus the
Orator, were all of them Natives of this Country. In the Revolt of the Jews
under Nero, this City h^^ its Share, and was taken by Vespasian, in the year of
Christ 66. upon which the Gadarens submitted the year following. S. Jerome says,
the Baths of Gadara were in great Esteem in his Time.

Gademes, Gademessa, a Territory in Africa, in Biledulgeridia, between the
Deserts of Fez to the East, and Gurgala to the West; which has a City or great
Town of the same Name, near the Head of the River Caspi, Capes. And also a
Desert.

Gadura, Psycus, a River of Rhodes.

Gaetulia, a large Region of Africa, according to the ancient Divisions
thereof; now thrown into a part of Bileduigerid and a part of Zaara. See
Gesula. The Roman Arms reached as far in Africa, as to this distant Province.

Gago, Gagum, a Kingdom in Nigritia, in Africa, which has a City of the same
Name, upon a River falling into the Niger below Tocrut. Great, but thinly
inhabited. This Kingdom lies between the Niger to the North, and Guinea to the
South; rich in Mines of Gold, according to some Relations; possessed also by a
Prince, who is Sovereign of the Kingdom of Tombuti.

Gajazzo, Calathia, Galathia, a City of Compania in Italy, mentioned by Cicero,
as a Colony; it belongs now to the Kingdom of Naples, and is in the Terra di
Lavoro, seated on an Hill near the River Volturno ( Vulturnus,) almost over
against Caserta, at the Distance of four Miles to the North, and eight from
Capua to the East: And although a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Capua,
yet it is in a declining Condition, and very mean.

Gajetta, Gaeta, Cajeta, a City in the Terra di Lavoro, a Province of the
Kingdom of Naples, which is well fortified; seated at the Foot of an Hill, in a
Peninsula, made by the Sea. It has two Castles, a large Haven, and a Bishop's
See under the Archbishop of Capua, but now exempted. Baronius tells us, the
Bishoprics of Mola and Mintorni are united with this See. The City of Formium
lies not far from it, buried now in Ruins by the Saracens, to which the City
of Gajetta succeeded in the Bishopric. It lies upon the Tyrrhenian Sea, four
Miles from Naples, fifty five from Rome, and fourteen from the Pope's
Dominions: It has heretofore been subject to great Variety of Fortunes, but has
now a strong Spanish Garrison to secure it. This was the Birth Place of Pope
Gelasius II. who was therefore called Cajetanus. It is mentioned by Virgil,
Aen. 7. The Haven was repaired by Antoninus Pius, Spart. Ferdinando King of
Arragon, fortified the Castle: Before this, it was Sacked by the French in
1494. who put most of the Inhabitants to the Sword; and returned it the year
after. Charles of Bourbon, Constable of France, killed at the Siege of Rome in
1527. lies buried in the Cathedral. But it is most famous for its learned
Cardinal, Thomas de Via Cajetanus, who died in 1534. and is frequently
mentioned in the Story of Henry VIII.

Gaillon, a Castle belonging to the Archbishops of Roan in Normandy; seven
Leagues from Roan, two from Vernon, and one from the River Seyne. It stands
upon a little Hill, in so agreeable a Place, that the former Kings of France,
(as Francis I. and Charles IX.) have delighted to make some stay at it.

Gainsborongh, a large, well built, Market Town in Lincolnshire, in the
Division of Lindsey, and Hundred of Gartree, upon the River Trent. It is
memorable for the Death of King Swain, or Sweno, the Dane, here by an unknown
Hand stabbed. It drives a considerable Trade, and gives the Title of Earl to
the Family of the Noels.

Gaino, Gongo, Gannum, a City of Thrace upon the Propontis; three German Miles
from Rudisto to the South, and twelve from Gallipoli to the North; about
nineteen South from Constantinople by Sea.

Gaiola, Euploea, a small Island upon the Coast of Terra di Lavoro, between
Naples and Puteoli.

Gaivo, Gagecome, a River of Phrygia, in the Lesser Asia. There is also a Town
of the same Name.

Galata, Gallita, Calathe, Galata, an Island upon the Coast of Numidia, almost
opposite to the Bay of the same Name. It lies over against Sardinia, West of
Tunis, East of Algier or Argiers, West of Cape Negro, and is about ten Miles in
Circumference.

Galata, or Galatta, Chrysoceras, Cornu Byzantii, a noble Suburb on the North
of Constantinople, toward the Black Sea, which is strongly fortified to the
North. This was first, if not built, yet beautified by the Genouese. Mr.
Wheeler, our Countryman, thus describes it; Galata is situate (says he) upon
the South side of a considerable steep Hill, setting out into a Promontory on
the North side of the Harbor; and comprehending the Suburbs on the East, West,
and North sides of it, it may be counted a good large City, and very populous;
yet the Circumference of the Wall takes up no great space of ground, but the
Houses are thick, and the Streets narrow, and the whole very populous. On the
top of the Hill is a round spired Tower covered with Lead; and on the Walls are
some Arms, and modern Inscriptions, which belonged to the Genoese, who before
the taking of Constantinople, were Masters of this Place. It is more inhabited
by Christians and Jews, than by Turks. Here is the Scale of the Merchants, who
have a good Kan covered with Lead, for the Sale of their Woollen Clothes, and
other Merchandise. There are five Religious Houses of the Latin Christians,
established in this Place: Otherwise called Pera. See Pera.

Galati, Galata, once a City, now a Village in Sicily, in the Valley of Demona;
twenty Miles from Patti South-West, thirty five from Catania North-West.

Galatia, is a Province of the Lesser Asia, called by the ancient Geographers
Gallo-Graecia, from the Galls, which are styled Galatae by the Grecians, (who,
after the burning of Rome and laying Italy desolate, went thither and possessed
it, making a mixture with the Grecians;) and the South Part of it was named
Galatia Salutaris. This Province is bounded on the North by Paphlagonia,
sometimes taken for a Part of it; on the East by Cappadocia, on the South by
Pisidia and Liaconia, on the West by Phrygia Magna, Bithynia, and Asia,
properly so taken. The Turks call this Province now Chiangare, under whom it
is. The principal Cities are Ancyra, (which is even now in a more flourishing
State than any of the rest,) and Pessinus. This Colony of the Galls is said to
have settled here under Brennus, A. M. 3671. They were subdued by the Romans,
under Cn. Manlius Vulso, in the year of the World 3760. 187 years before the
Birth of our Savior, but not made a Roman Province till the year 3925. 23
years before Christ. They were converted to Christianity by S. Paul, who
honored them with an Epistle. They did not fall into the Hands of the
Mahometans till 1524. when Solomon the Magnificent took Alsbeg, Prince of the
Mountains of Armenia, by Treachery; and possessed himself of Cappadocia,
Armenia, and Galatia.

Galaure, Galabar, a small River in the Dauphinate, which falls into the Rhosne
at S. Valerie, six Miles beneath Vienne to the South.

Galazo, Galesus, Eurotas, is a River which arises from the Appennine, in the
Province of Hydruntum, La Terra di Otranto, near Oria; and running West falls
into the Bay of Taranto; five Miles South of Taranto; but not taken notice of
in our later Maps.

Gale, a strong Town and Port in the Island of Zeilan in the East Indies, which
the Hollanders have ravished from the Portuguese; in whosetime it was a
flourishing Place, frequented by abundance of Vessels from Japan, China, the
Islands of the Sound, Malaca, Bengala, and other Eastern Parts; though the
Rocks about the Port render it very dangerous to enter without Pilots. The
Portuguese (before they quitted it) and the Siege together, destroyed most of
the Principal Buildings; which are yet unbuilt.

Galera, Gallera, Gallora, a Village, and a River near Rome.

La Galevisse, Ager Valicassi, a Region upon the Marne, a River of France.

Galfanacar, Gichehis, a Town in Mauritania.

Galgala. See Meroe. Also a Village in Palestine, in the Tribe of Benjamin, on
this side the River Jordan; three Leagues from Jericho. Now inhabited by
Arabians, and called Galgal by them. A Place heretofore sanctified by a Number
of admirable Actions, and defamed again by as many Idolatries; (S. Jerome in
Ose.) The Circumcision of all that had been born in the Wilderness, Joshua
ordered to be performed here.

Galibes, a Nation of Indians in Guiana, along the River Courbo, toward the
North Sea, in America; bounded by the Rivers Suriname and Marauvini to the
West, and the River and Island of Cayenne to the East. Other Maps place them in
New Andalusia, to the North of the River Orenoque.

Galicia, Gallaecia, is a Province of Spain, called by the Natives Galizia, by
the Portuguese Galiza, by the French Galice, and by the Italians Galicia; of a
large Extent, about fifty Leagues long, and forty broad; and once a Kingdom,
but now a Part of the Kingdom of Leon: Bounded on the North and West by the
Atlantic Ocean, on the South by Portugal, (but parted from it by the River
Douero,) and on the East by Asturia and the Kingdom of Leon. Compostella is the
Capital of this Province; Orensi, ( Auria,) Baiona, Corufia, Lugo, Mondoefiedo,
and Tuy, are the other Cities and principal Places. The Groyne or Coronna, is
the most famous of its Ports; besides which it has forty others. This Province
is Mountainous, inclined to Barrenness, destitute of Water, but abounding with
Mines of Silver, Gold, Iron; and well stored with Wood, and good Wines; it has
also great plenty of Cattle, Game and excellent Horses. The Iron they dig out
of these Mountains, is thought the best in the World, especially for
Edge-Tools: nor are their Seas less stored with Fish. This Country was never
Conquered by the Moors, though they at times made some Progress into it; and
after in 985. they had repelled Almanassor, with the Loss of 70000 of his
Moors, they were never in any danger of Conquest from that Nation. The Gallaci
or Gallaici of the Ancients, under whom the Amphilochi of Justin, the Celtici
of Mela, the Tamarices of Strabo, the Lucentii and Lucentes of Pliny and
Ptolemy have been interpreted to be comprehended, dwelt here. It became an
Apannage, with the Title of an Earldom, to the younger Sons of the King of Leon
and Castile, after its Union with that Crown. New Galicia, is a Part of New
Spain, in South America, toward the South Sea, called of old Xalisco, and
sometimes Guadalajara, from its Capital City. This is not much unlike that in
Spain, as to the Nature of the Soil. The Inhabitants were Canibals, exceeding
wild and fierce, when the Spaniards settled there, and not easily reduced from
eating Man's Flesh.

Galilaea, a very celebrated Part of Asia, on the North of Judaea; at first the
Inheritance of four of the Tribes of Israel; Asser, Naphtali, Zabulon and
Issachar; the two first of which were intermixed with the Phoenicians and
Syrians; and being more Northern and nearer the Fountain of Jordan, it was
called Galilee of the Gentiles, or the Upper Galilee; and the other the Lower
Galilee. This Country was bounded on the North by Syria and Phoenicia, from
which two Nations it was divided by Mount Libanus; on the East with the River
Jordan, on the South with Samaria, cut off from it by Mount Carmel; and on the
West by the Mediterranean Sea. The same was the Scene which our Blessed Savior
chose out of all the Earth, to dignifie with his Presence: in it he was
conceived, lived the greatest part of his time, and wrought most of his
Miracles. It is now called Belad Elbescara, that is, the Western Country; and
is almost desolate, under the Dominion of the Turks. To omit so much of the
Story of it as may be learned from the holy Scriptures; this Country was first
brought under the Roman Vassalage by Pompey the Great, Anno Mundi 3887. sixty
one Years before the Birth of Christ. They were again conquered, not without
great Difficulty, by Vespasian and Titus, in the year of Christ 66. In all
following Times it followed the Fate of the Holy Land, or Palestine. The
Country is exceeding fruitful, and in the ancient Times was extremely populous;
full of great and noble Cities; the principal of which were the Tower of
Straton or Caesarea, Caphernaum, Tiberias, Cana, Nazareth. The Inhabitants were
Men of Courage, neither fearing Death nor Poverty, nor any thing but Slavery,
and of that they were infinitely impatient. But Wars, and the ill Government of
the Mohammedan Princes, which have insulted over them ever since 637. have made
it now desolate.

Gallas, Gallanes, or Giaques, a people of the Kingdom of Monomotapa, upon the
Eastern Coasts of Africa, toward the Indian Ocean; who, in 1537. broke into
the Kingdom of Bali, and gained some Conquests over the Abyssines, in the Upper
Aethiopia. Ludolphus in his Aethiopick History describes them. Their Country is
bounded by the Nile to the West, Abyssinia to the North, and the Kingdom of
Mono-Emugi to the East.

Gallia, one of the greatest and best known Regions of Europe to the Ancients.
I have considered its present State under the Word France; and here I am to say
a little of its ancient Bounds and People, before the Francks or French entered
into it. These Nations were at first called Celtae, after that Galli, and by
the Grecians Galatae. They possessed all that vast Tract of Land between Ancona
in Italy, and the Mouth of the Rhine; from the Western Ocean of Aquitain, to
the Adriatic: Which was divided into Gallia Transalpina, and Gallia Cisalpina.
1. Gallia Transalpina was divided by Julius Caesar (who first conquered the
greatest part of it,) into four Parts; Provincia Romana, Aquitania, Celtae or
Gallia properly so called, and Belgium: All which he says had different
Tongues, Laws, Manners and Governments. 1. Provincia Romana was then bounded on
the North with the Mountains of Gebenna and the River Rhodanus, on the East
with the Alps, on the South with the Mediterranean Sea and the Pyrenean Hills,
which divided it from Spain, and on the West with the Garumna; the Rhodanus
cutting this Province almost in the middle, after it turned to the South, and
ceased to be a Boundary. This River is now called the Rhosne. 2. Aquitania, had
on the North and East, the Garumna, now Garonne; on the West the Ocean, on the
South Spain and the Pyrenean Hills; and was the least of all the four Parts. 3.
Gallia Celtica, was likewise the greatest; bounded on the North with the River
Sequana, now Seyne; Matrona, now Marne; and the Mountain Vogesus, now Mont de
Vauge, which parted it from Gallia Belgica; on the East it had also the Marne,
the Rhine, and Alps; on the South Provincia Romana, and Aquitania; and on the
West the British and Aquitain Ocean. 4. Gallia Belgica, which was the fourth
Part, on the North and East had the Rhine, on the South Gallia Celtica, and on
the West the British Ocean from the Mouth of the Seyne, to the South of the
Rhine. This vast Tract was divided into various Nations or Tribes, which had
sent their Colonies into the British Islands, and peopled all these Tracts. Yet
such was the Increase, or Restlessness of this People, that at times they broke
over all those Bounds which Nature had set about them, and invaded the
neighbor Nations. Thus they conquered that part of Italy, from them called
Gallia Cisalpina; being invited over the Alps by the sweet Wines from thence,
about the times of Tarquinius Priscus, in the year of Rome 162. 588 years
before Christ; Bellovesus, Son of Ambigatus, King of the Celtae, being their
Leader, General, or Prince. Gallia Cisalpina was the Northern Part of Italy,
extending from Arsia, now L'Arsa, a River of Istria, to the Alps; which
bounded the Provincia Romana, in the Gallia Transalpina; and its borders on the
North and West were the Alps, on the South the River Rubicon, or as others
say, Aesis, or as Pliny assures us Ancona, and on the East they had the
Adriatic Sea. These People were divided into four Potent Nations, viz. 1. The
Insubres, which dwelt from the Alps to the River Arnus, now Arno, which
passes through Florence. 2. The Cenomani, which lay next the Insubres to the
East, and possessed the greatest part of Trevigiana. 3. The Boii, which took up
the rest of Trevigiana, and the Dukedom of Ferrara, and so much of Romandiola
as lies on the North-West side of the Rubicon. 4. The Senones, who passing the
Rubicon, inhabited all the rest of Romandiola, and the Dukedom of Vrbino, to
Ancona, according to Pliny. Of all these Italian Galls, the last were the most
considerable: These were the Men who under Brennus, took and sacked the City of
Rome, in the year of Rome, 364. But in the year 470. of Rome, they were finally
conquered and extirpated by the Romans. The Boii were conquered by Flaminius,
about the year of Rome 529. and being impatient of Servitude, passed over the
Alps into Germany, and possessed themselves of Bavaria. Upon which the
Insubres, and Cenomani yielded in 431. and became subject to the Romans. The
Provincia Romana, was conquered in part by Fulvius Flaccus, in 627. The
Remainder in 631. by Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus; and the three other Provinces by
Julius Caesar, between 694. and 697. fifty three years before the Birth of our
Savior. A part of these Galls under Brennus, about 474. made their way through
Greece, and settled in Gallo-Graecia, or Galacia, in the Lesser Asia; though it
is much more probable this Expedition was immediately after the taking of Rome.
But now to give an exact Account of all the several People contained under this
Name, their Laws, Rites, Customs, Governments, and Bounds, would too much
exceed the Limits set me in this Work.

Gallipoli, Callipolis, a City of Thrace, upon the Bosphorus, called by the
Turks Geliboli; which is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Heraclea; and
the Seat of the Turkish Admiral, or Captain Bassa of his Galleys. It is great,
populous, well traded; and has an Haven, a Castle, and a good Magazine well
furnished. This Town stands on the West side of the Hellespont, not over
against Lampasco, but a little more North; neither walled, nor well built
within, the Houses being all of Earth and Timber, and low; the Streets narrow,
sometimes covered with Boards to keep off the Heat of the Sun; yet said to be
six Miles in Compass, and to have four or five thousand Christian Inhabitants
amongst others. There is little to be seen in it of its ancient Splendour and
Elegance: It stands upon a Peninsula, having upon the North and South, two Bays
for Galleys and Boats, of which the Southern seems best for Ships. This City is
one hundred and ten Miles South of Constantinople, and five from the Shoars of
Asia. Long. 54. 30. Lat. 42. 16. Gallipoli, Gallipolis, Anxa, a City of the
Kingdom of Naples, in the Terra di Otranto; built on a Rock, upon the Western
Shore, in the Bay of Taranto; thirty six Miles from that City, and in an Island
which is only joined to the Continent by a Bridge, supported by huge massy
Stones. Small, but well fortified, and populous, with a good Haven, a strong
Castle, and good Walls: it is a Bishops See, but his Diocese is bounded by the
Walls of the City, and he is under the Archbishop of Taranto. Long. 42. 12.
Lat. 39. 58.

Galloway, Novantae, Gallovidia. Galdia, is a large County in the South of
Scotland, over against Munster in Ireland, from which it is separated by a
Channel of only fifteen Scotch Miles in breadth. Bounded on the West with the
Sea; on the South with Solway Fyrth, which separates it from Cumberland; on the
East with Nithesdale, and on the North with Carrick and Kile: it takes its name
from the Welsh, who for a long time maintained this County against the Scots
and Picts, calling themselves Gaels; and in the Writers of the middle Ages, it
is accordingly called Gael-Wallia: the Country is every where swelled into
Hills; better for Pasture than Corn, but well supplied with Fish, both from the
Sea and Fresh-water-Lakes, of which there are many at the foot of the Hills.
The principal River is the Dee, called Dea, by Ptolomy. The principal Town is
Withern, ( Candida Casa) which is a Bishops See, and one of the first erected
in this Kingdom by Nina a Britain, the Apostle of the Nation of the Picts. Upon
the Coast of this County, there is a narrow Isthmus, called the Mule of
Galloway: it is the same with the Novantum Chersonesus of the Ancients, and
lies in 55 d. 10 m. of North Lat. The most Southern point of all Scotland.

The Galloper Sand, is a Shallow, ten Leagues from the Mouth of the Thames to
the East; upon which the brave Ship, the Prince, was unfortunately run
a-ground, and lost, June 4. 1666. Sir George Ayscue the Commander, being taken
by the Dutch, (who were then engaged with the English Fleet,) and carried
Prisoner into Holland.

Gallway, Duaca, Gallica, is a County in the West of Ireland, in the Province
of Conaught: bounded on the North by the County of Mayo; on the East by the
River Shannon, which parts it from Roscommon, and Kings County; on the South
with Clare, and on the West with the Ocean; a Country fruitful both as to Corn
and Pasture. Here is the Lake of Corbes, twenty Miles long, and three or four
broad. The principal City is Gallway, Galliva, called by the Irish Gallive; the
Capital City of the County of Gallway, and the third in the whole Kingdom of
Ireland; situate near the fall of the Lake of Corbes: a neat, strong Place,
built almost round, and walled with Stones; it has a Bishop's See, and a
delicate and safe Harbor, called the Bay of Gallway, capable of a vast Fleet,
and secured on the West, by five Islands. The fertility of the County in which
it stands affording plenty of Goods for Exportation, the Inhabitants of this
City, in Mr. Cambden's time, had made great Improvements by their Navigation,
and much enriched themselves. This City being so remote from England, and very
strong, at first in the Rebellion against King Charles I. stood a kind of
Neuter, and would neither admit the Irish, nor the English: but when they saw
the Irish were Masters of the greatest part of the Kingdom, it joined with them
in their Rebellion: The Pope's Legate made this a kind of Seat of his
Government, till about the year 48. he was besieged here by the Irish, who
began then to favor the Royal Interest, which he opposed to the utmost; and at
last, despairing of all Relief, he submitted and left the Island. Not long
after, this was one of the first Places that paid its Obedience and Respect to
the Earl of Ormond the King's Deputy. But it was too late: for in 1651. Ireton
having taken Limerick after a long Siege, this Town being immediately attacked
by those victorious Forces under the Command of Sir Charles Coot, an Oliverian
Captain, and their Harbor filled with Parliament Ships of War, and no hopes of
Relief, they yielded themselves to the mercy of the Rebels; who revenged the
Injuries of a Prince, which they themselves had murdered, upon this wealthy,
but then wretched City. Thus (says my Author Dr. Bates) Gallway, the greatest
place of Trade in all Ireland, the best fortified, abounding in noble
Buildings, Riches, and plenty of Inhabitants, which had had such benefit by
their Maritim Commerce, was forced to submit to the Yoke of an Enemy; after she
had refused her Assistance to her Lawful Prince, in denying a Supply to the
Lieutenant. And as if War alone had not been a sufficient Chastisement; the
Plague followed the Sword, and cut off in the space of eighteen Months, twelve
thousand of the Inhabitants. The Irish had the Possession of this Place, and
held it out for King James II. till the last Summer, 1691.

Galofaro, the same with Charibdis.

Gambay, Gambia, a vast River of Africa, in Nigritia, or rather the most
Northern Branch of the River Niger; which falls into the Atlantic Ocean, on
the North of Cape Verde; and in its passage gives name to the Kingdom of
Gambay, on its Southern Bank, not far from its first Division from the River
Niger, to the East of the Kingdom of Jalost.

Gamelara, Aethusa, an Island of Africa.

Gammacorura, a flaming Mountain in the Island of Ternate, amongst the
Moluccaes. In the year 1673. it suffered a violent Rupture, out of which it
vomited vast quantities of Smoke and Ashes.

Ganabara, Januarius, a vast River in Brasil, so called by the Natives: it
falls into the Atlantic Ocean near St. Sebastian, where it makes a good Harbor.

Gand, or Gant, Gandavum, Clarinea, called by the Inhabitants, Ghent; by the
French, Gand; by the Germans, Gent; by the Spaniards, Gante; is the Capital of
the Earldom of Flanders, upon the River Schelde, which there takes in the Lyse
and Lieue: made a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Mechlin, by Pope Paul
IV. in 1559. in the Reign of Philip 2. King of Spain. This is a vast, strong
City; and was once as rich and populous, as unquiet and seditious, as any in
the Low Countries. Erasmus says of it in his time, that he did not think there
was any one City in Christendom, that could be compared to this for Greatness,
Power, Government, and the ingenuity of the Inhabitants. But the Wars and other
Calamities which have ever since lain heavy upon this Country, have exhausted
both its Wealth and Inhabitants; and brought this City particularly into a very
languishing condition. The Strength and Situation of it, have hitherto
supported it. It has a Castle built by Charles V. in 1539, who was born here in
1500, and converted an old Abbey, which it had, into a Cathedral Church. And
when he built the said Castle, spared not to put to death about thirty of the
principal Burghers, proscribe others, confiscate all the public Buildings,
take away their Artillery, Arms and Privileges, and condemn them in a Fine of
twelve hundred thousand Crowns, for offering to put themselves under the
Protection of Francis I. King of France, by a Revolt that year; of which
Francis generously rejecting their Plot, had as generously advertised him. In
the Reign of Philip II. being injuriously treated by the Spaniards, this City
was one of the first that expelled the Roman Rites in 1578, and admitted the
Prince of Orange in 1579. and having cast out the Garrison of Spanish Soldiers,
levelled the Citadel, and fortified the City, though then three German Miles in
compass. It maintained its Liberty, till in 1585. seeing the Prince of Orange
murdered, and no hopes of succor from the Dutch, it submitted to the Prince of
Parma, who rebuilt the Citadel; but the Inhabitants being wasted, the French
took it in 1678, in six days, and after restored it to the Spaniards, who are
now in possession of it. This City stands at the equal distance of four Leagues
from Antiverp, Brussels, and Mechlin. The learned Hostius, Sanderus, and
Jodocus Badius, were Natives of it. Its ancient Inhabitants are mentioned by
Caesar under the name of Gorduni. There are a great many Religious Houses
adorning it, and seven Parishes, besides the Cathedral. There is also a strong
Castle called the Sas van Ghent or Castle of Gant, four Miles from hence to the
North, built by the Spaniards; and taken by the Hollanders in 1644. is still in
their Possession.

Gandia, a small Town in the Kingdom of Valentia, upon the Coast of the
Mediterranean Sea, upon the Bay of Valentia, eight Leagues from Xativa, (
Setabis) to the East. It is honored with the Title of a Dukedom, which belongs
to the ancient Family of Borgia; and has also a College, which bears the name
of an University, of the Foundation of Francis Borgia, a General of the
Jesuits, who was lately Canonized, and born here, and was Duke of it.

Gangara, A Kingdom in Nigritia in Africa, situated between the Lake and
Kingdom of Borno, the Kingdom of Cassena, and the River Niger. Rich in Gold,
and commanded by a King who is absolute. The Capital City bears its own name.

Gangarides, an ancient People, whose Name Curtius mentions, toward the Mouth
of the Ganges. It is conjectured, they might have their Dwelling in the Country
we now call the Kingdom of Bengale.

Ganges, the greatest River in the East India, which divides that Continent
into two parts: called Ganga by the Inhabitants, and the Gange by the
Europeans: it arises from Mount Imaus, (Dalanguer) in the Confines of the
Great Tartary, in the Province of Kakeres: and running Southward through the
Empire of the Great Mogul, it waters Sirinar, Holobassa, and Gouro; and is
augmented by the Streams of Perselus, Sersily, and Tziotza, and many other
Rivers in the Mogui's Kingdom. In the Kingdom of Bengala it is divided into
many Branches; and discharges it self by five Outlets into the Bay of Bengala,
giving its name to a Kingdom in its Passage. It is full of Islands, covered
with lovely Indian Trees, which afford Travelers great delight: The Water is
esteemed Sacred by the Inhabitants: the Great Mogul will drink no other,
because it is lighter than that of any other River: the Europeans boil it
before they drink it, to avoid those Fluxes which otherwise it enclines them
to. This River receives from the North-East, and West, an innumerable number
of Brooks; and discharges it self into the Gulf of Bengala, at the height of
23 degrees. or thereabouts. Said by Pliny, to be two Miles where it is narrowest,
and five where it is broadest, having Spangles of Gold and precious Stones,
mixed with its Sands; yet not therefore the Phison of Genesis, as some mistake;
because it springs at the distance of twelve hundred Leagues from the Euphrates.

Gangra, an Archiepiscopal City in Paphlagonia, in the Lesser Asia, in the
inland Parts; now called Cangria, Castomoni, and by the Turks Kiengara. In this
City was a famous Synod of sixteen Bishops celebrated in 324, against
Eustathius the Monk, for his condemning the Marriage-State. Dioscorus the
Eutychian was banished to this City, by Martian the Emperor in 451. after he
had been condemned by the Council of Chalcedon; and likewise Timotheus Aelurus,
a Monk of that Faction, in 457. by the Emperor Leo; this Monk having been
chosen Patriarch of Alexandria. Stephanus says, there is another City of the
same name in Arabia Foelix.

Ganhay, a Town of War (by the Chinese therefore called a Fort) in the Province
of Fochien in China, to the South-East. It is magnificently built, a Town of
great Trade, full of People: and particularly remarked for a stately Stone
Bridge, 250 paces long.

Gani, the Mine or Quarry of Diamonds, near Color in Malabar, See Color.

Ganking, a great and populous City in the Province of Nanking in China, with a
Territory belonging to, and denominated from, it; having Jurisdiction over five
other old Cities. It is the Seat and Government of a Viceroy, distinct from the
Viceroy of the Province; being the more frequented, by reason the three
Provinces of Nanking, Huquang and Kiangsi, abutt upon it. A strong Garrison is
kept in its Fort, Haymuen; commanding the Lake of Poyang and the River Kiang.

Ganna, the Caspian Sea.

Gannat, Gannatum, Gannapum, a Town in the Dukedom of Bourbon in France,
toward the borders of Auvergne, upon a small River falling soon after into the
Allier.

Gaoga, Kauga, or Guoga, a City and Kingdom in Nigritia in Africa, between the
Tract of Nubia and the Kingdom of Borno. This Kingdom about two hundred years
ago was erected by the prosperous Villainy of a Negroe Slave; before which, it
was little better than a Desert. Now inhabited by Christians, Mahometans and
Pagans. Betwixt 40 and 50 degrees. of Long. Lat. 20. 12.

Gaoxa, an Island upon the Coast of the Province of Quantung in China.

Gap, Vapingum, Appencensium, or Vapincensium Vrbs, a City of the Dauphinate in
France, which is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Aix; it stands in the
Confines of this Principality toward Savoy, two Miles from the Isere, twenty
two from Aix, and six from Embrun to the West. It is reasonably great, and
defended by a Castle; yet often taken and retaken by the Romans Catholics and
the Huguenotts in the Wars of the last Century. Farellus sowed his Opinions
here. The Bishops enjoy the Title of Earls. It is the Capital of the Territory
of Gapensois: and did heretofore belong to the Counts of Forcalquier.

Garamal, Garamantes, a People of Libya Interior (or Gaetulia) in Africa, about
the Eastern part of the Desert of Zaara and the Western of Nubia; of the
Generation of the ancient Garamantes, who dwelt in the same place. Their chief
Settlement is called after themselves, Garama.

Garanne, Varenna, an Island in the Bay of Aquitaine.

Garb, Isburus, a small River on the South of Sicily.

Guard. See Pont du Guard.

Garda. See Gardsee.

Guard, a City of Greenland, deserted and ruined two hundred years ago. It had
been a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Drontheim in Norway, and stood to
the Ocean.

Gardeleben, a small Town in the old Marquisate of Brandenburg, upon the River
Meld, seven Miles from Magdeburg to the North.

Gardicht, a Town in the Morea, toward the Gulf of Lepanto; supposed to be
the ancient Cliter.

Gardon, Nardo, Vardo, a River of Languedoc, springing from the Mountains of
Sevennes and dividing into two Streams. The one passing by Alets, with the name
for distinction, of the Gardon d' Alets, joins the other called the Gardon d'
Anduze at Anduze; and afterward augmented with the Tributes of some small
Rivulets, they both fall into the Rhine toward Beaucaire.

Gardsee, Benacus, a Lake in Lombardy, called by the Inhabitants, Il Lago di
Garda; by the Germans, Gradzee; by the French, Grade: It lies in the State of
Venice, between the Territory of Verona to the East, and Brixia to the West;
watering on the North the Earldom of Tirol; and from thence is extended to the
Castle of Pescara on the South, the length of thirty Miles: its greatest
breadth is ten Miles, as I have often seen (says Baudrand,) though Strabo
seems to think otherwise. It takes its name from Garda, in the Territory of
Verona; out of it flows the River Menzo, Mincius, which by Mantoua, falls into
the Po. And it abounds with Eels and Carps. See Benacus.

Gareligare. See Tripoli.

Garet, Gareta, a Province in the Kingdom of Fez, on the Mediterranean Sea, in
the Confines of the Kingdom of Argier, from which it is separated by the River
Mulvia, as from the Province of Errif by the River Nocor. The Mediterranean
bounds it to the North, and the Mountains of the Deserts to the South. The
African Writers have divided it into three parts. The first, containing the
Towns, Cities, and Territories: the second, the habitable Mountains: the third,
the Deserts. Mellila (under the Spaniards) Jaffarina, Tezota, etc. are the most
considerable places in it.

Gargan, a Mountain in the Province of Apulia, in the Kingdom of Naples, nigh
to Monte-di-san-Angelo; mentioned by Pliny, Strabo, etc. and the Roman
Martyrology upon May 8.

Garigliano, Liris, a River of Italy, which heretofore divided Latium from
Campania. It arises in the further Abruzzo, by the Lake of Celano, ( Fucinus)
above Antina; and passing Southward, waters Sora, Aquino, and Sessa; then
falls into the Tyrrenian Sea at Trajeto, eleven Miles South of Gaieta. The
Banks of this River were often covered with the French and Spanish Forces, in
the Wars of the Kingdom of Naples, in 1503.

Garippo, Gallus, a River of Asia the Less, which springs from the Coelenian
Hills in Phrygia Magna; and washing Pessinunta, falls into Sangiarus, (now
Sacario), and Acada; which falls into the Black or Euxine Sea at Cagari.

Garnesey, Garnia, Sarnia, an Island belonging to the Crown of England, on the
Coast of Normandy. This and Jersey, is all that is left us now of the Dukedom
of Normandy: it is about thirteen Miles long, and near as broad, where greatest.

Garonne, Garumna, called Garona by the Spaniards; and Garonna, by the
Italians; is one of the great Rivers of France, mentioned by Julius Caesar.
Also one of the greatest Rivers which springs from the Pyrenean Hills: it
arises in Arena a Spanish Village, in the Borders of the Kingdom of Arragon,
not far from Salardun; and running Westward by Bertrant, it turns there
North-East by Rieux to Tolouse; above which besides Touch from the West, and
several others, it takes in the Ariege from Foix, and Pamier on the East; then
running North at Moissac it is improved with a number of River^ brought in from
the East by the Tara; here again turning West, it passes by Again; over against
which it receives the Giers on the South from Aux; and a little further on the
same side Biese from Condom; and on the North ( Toninus) Treuyre from Cahors;
and a little further the Drot: so leaving Bourdeaux on the South, and taking
along the Dordonne from the North, it makes the vast Bay of Garronne; and by
the Tower De Cordovan on a small Island, passes with two mouths into the
British Seas. This River was heretofore the boundary of Aquitaine, but now it
divides it into two parts.

Garro, Gaurus, a Mountain near Naples.

Garstang, A Market Town in Lancashire, in the Hundred of Amounderness, near
the River Wire.

Gurtempe, Vartimpa, a small River of France.

Gartz, A Town in the Dukedom of Pomerania in Germany, upon the Oder, three
Leagues from Stetin. Formerly well fortified; but in 1638, after its being
often taken and retaken in the German Wars, totally demolished.

Garza, Mela, a River in the Territory of Brescia, in the Dominion of the
States of Venice, in Italy; which washes the Walls of Brescia on the West, and
then falls into the Oglio at Vstiano; which conveys it to the Po at Borgo
forte, not much above Mantoua.

Gascoigne, Vasconia, Novempopulonia, a Province in Aquitaine in France. The
Inhabitants write Guascoigne; the Italians, Gascogna; the Spanish, Gascona; the
English, Gascony. It lies extended between the British Sea to the West, the
Garonne to the North and East, and Spain to the South; and was the ancient
Aquitania, and afterward Novempopulonia; that is, the third part properly of
the ancient Aquitania, in the division of the Emperor Augustus, corrected by
Adrian. See Aquitaine. It had this Name from the Gascoignes or Vascones, a
Spanish People which settled here, and were Conquered by Theodebert and
Theodorick, Kings of France; at last totally subdued by Dagobert, another King
of that Nation, (but ascribed by the Chronologers to Aribert a Contemporary
King) in 634. This Name is sometimes taken for all Gascony, or the Generalite
de Guienne, or de Bourdeaux: divided at present into eleven Parts, Bourdelois,
Bazadois, Condomois, Armagnac, Bearn, Gascogne, Basques, Bigorre, Comminges,
Baionne, and Albret. This Country for a long time belonged to the Crown of
England, as Dukes of Aquitaine. It came in 1152. to Henry II. King of England,
in the Right of Eleanor his Wife. Though King John was adjudged to have
forfeited this and all his other Dominions in France, by the pretended Murder
of Arthur; (whereupon the French entered, and in 1203. and 1204. Conquered
Main, Angiers, and Normandy, King John's Subjects not well agreeing with him;)
yet in 1206. he made one Expedition to Rochel, and took Mount Alban, whereby he
preserved Gascony. And though his Son lost Rochel to the French in 1224. yet in
1225. by his Brother Richard Earl of Cornwall, he reduced the Rebellious
Gascoignes to Obedience; and in 1242. attempted to recover Poictou, but with no
good success. In 1259. for a Sum of Money given him by Lewis IX. he resigned
Normandy, Main, and Anjou; reserving to himself Gascony, Limosin, and Aquitain;
in consideration whereof, he was to have fifty thousands Crowns, and from
henceforward they were styled Dukes of Guienne: in the Possession of this the
Kings of England continued, till the twenty ninth Year of the Reign of Henry
VI. which was the Year of our Lord 1452. when the Weakness of that Prince, and
the good Fortune of Charles VII. deprived the English of all their Possessions
in France: ever since which time Gascony has been in the hands of the French.
It is observed, as the French change the Letters V and W into G, in the words
Galls for Wales and Gascoigne for Vasconia; so particularly the Gascoigners
interchange the Letters V and B with one another, in giving the same
pronunciation to both. Therefore says Joseph Scaliger of them, Foelices populi,
quibus bibere est vivere.

Gastinois, Vostinum, a Territory in the Isle of France, toward la Beauce;
between the Rivers of Estampes, and Vernison to the West; the River Yonne,
(which separates it from Senonois on the East,) and the Territory of Puysaie,
and Auxerrois to the South. The principal Town is Montargis, thirteen Miles
South of Paris.

Gath, a City of Palestine, upon the Frontiers of the Tribe of Juda, toward
the Syrian Sea, seated on a hill. It was one of the five Satrapies of the
Philistines, and the birth place of Goliath.

Gattinara, a Town in the Principality of Piedmont, advanced to the dignity of
an Earldom by the Emperor Charles V.

Gatton, an ancient Borough Town in the County of Surrey and the Hundred of
Reygate, which elects two Members of Parliament. Roman Coyns have been often
dug up here.

Le Gave de Oleron, Gabarus Oloronensis, a River of Bearn, which arises from
the Pyrenean Hills, from two Springs, le Gave de Aspe to the West, and le Gave
de Osseau to the East; which unite at the City of Oleron in Bearn; and running
Westward beneath Sauveterre, it takes in from the South le Gave del Saison,
which comes from Mauleon; beneath which it falls into le Gave de Pau, a River
of Aquitain, which arising in Bigorre, more East than the former, but out of
the Pyrenean Hills also, at a Place called Bains de Bare^ge, and running
North-West by Pau in Bearn, as far as Ourtes, turns Westward; and taking in
Gave de Oleron, falls into the Adour, less than five Miles beneath Dax, and
four above Baionne to the East.

Gavot, a small Territory in Vallais, or Wallisserlandt, one of the Suisse
Cantons.

Comte de Gaure, a County of France in Aquitaine, in Armaignac; between
Lomagne, Gimont, and Condom: the principal Town in it is Verdun, four Miles
from Tolouse to the North, and about eight from Aux to the East.

Gaures, Ghiaours or Ghiabers, a numerous People dispersed about the Indies and
the Kingdom of Persia, in the Provinces particularly of Kherman (where stands
their principal Temple) and Hyerach, of a different Institution in Religion
from all the World besides; following the Scriptures of one Ebrahim zer Ateucht
a Prophet (pretended) before the time of Alexander the Great: and as tho they
retained something of the old Religion of the Persians, they have such a
Veneration for Fire, (especially what the Priest consecrates) that they take
the most solemn Oaths before it. The Persian Proverb upon these People, it; A
Ghiaber may worship the Fire a hundred years, yet if he falls into it but once,
it will certainly burn him.

Gazara, Gaza, a City of Palestine in Asia, which belonged anciently to the
Tribe of Judah, as appears by the Sacred Scriptures: it was the fifth Satrapy
of the Philistines, seated near the Shoars of the Mediterranean Sea, on the
Confines of Idumaea, toward Egypt; Conquered by Judah, Judge. 1. 18. but not
long enjoyed. Made famous by Samson. Pharaoh, King of Egypt, gave it a second
Name, Genesis xlvii. 1. Alexander the Great totally ruined it. In the times of the
Machabees a new Gaza arose, which in those of Christianity was made a Bishop's
See, under the Archbishop of Caesarea. The Grecians finding Gaza signified a
Treasury in the Persian Tongue, thought the Persians, under Cambyses, had given
it this name. Alexander, the son of Aristobulus, took the New Gaza, and
demolished it; but no Alexander could so ruin this City, but it would recover
again. Augustus annexed this Gazara and Hippon to Syria; and in the time of
Constantine the Great, it was called Constantia, from a Sister of that Prince.
The Saracens possessed themselves of it in the year of our Lord 633. three
years before they took Jerusalem, by whom it is now called Gaza, Gazara, and
Aza. Here our Authors divide as to its present State. Baudrand says it is
little, yet divided into two parts, the Upper and Lower; and that it has a
Prince of its own (though he is subject to the Turks) called the Emir, or Pacha
de Gaza, who is Master of it, and the Neighboring Country: but Jo. Bunon
says, it is great, and twice as big as Jerusalem. This City had a Port called
Majuma. Our Sandys in his Travels, lib. 3. p. 116. says, it is seated upon a
Hill, environed with Valleys, and those again well nigh enclosed with Hills,
most of them planted with all sorts of delicate Fruits; the Buildings mean,
both for Form and Matter; the best of rough Stone, arched within, and flat on
the top, etc. but none comely or convenient: yet are there footsteps of a
better condition; diverse simple Roofs being supported by goodly Pillars of
Parian Marble, some plain, some curiously carved, and others broken in pieces,
to serve for Thresholds, etc. of almost every beggarly Cottage. He tells us
also, Baldwin III. King of Jerusalem, having in 1145. expelled the Saracens,
he, in 1148. built here a Castle. That there lives here a Sangiack. That the
Port is decayed and unsafe, and of no great benefit to the Inhabitants. There
is here one ancient Church, frequented by the Coptic Christians; whether it be
great or small, he says nothing; but very rich it plainly is not. This City
was taken from the Kings of Jerusalem, by Salladine, in 1171. This and all
Palestine was recovered back to the Christians, by Frederick, Emperor of
Germany, in 1228. Retaken by the Turks in 1234. It stands about two Miles from
the Sea, and was anciently very Illustrious, as appears by its Ruins, and
Marble Tombs, of which there are many. The Castle is near the Town, and has
four Towers, at each corner one: it is kept in good order, and has but a small
Circuit, and two Iron Gates; hard by it is the Seraglio, for the Bassa's Wives,
and not far off are the Ruins of a Roman Castle. The Town is very little, but
has a Besestein, (a Marketplace) in good Order, and a pretty large Greek
Church. Without the Town are several goodly Mosques, faced with Marble, which I
believe ( says Mr. Thevenot) belonged to the Old City. Long. 65. 26. Lat. 31.
45.

Gazaria, the Peninsula to the Crim Tartars.

Gebel Caph. See the Mountains of the Moon.

Gebel Tarif, Calpe, a Mountain in Andalusia, at the entrance of the Straight
of Gibraltar, which the Ancients called one of Hercules's Pillars.

Gebel Tor, Melani; Mountains in Arabia Petraea, supposed to be the Sinay and
Horeb mentioned in the Books of Moses: they are said to extend from Petra
Aelana, a City of Arabia, to the Red Sea; at the distance of an hundred and
eighty Miles from Jerusalem to the South: called by the Arabians now, Gibel
Mousa; by the Europeans, (who see them, when they Sail upon the Red Sea) Sinay.
See Eltor, a City from whence they have the name of Gebel Tor.

Gebelel Hadich, Herculis Promontorium, Phocra, a Mountain and Promontory, in
the Kingdom of Morocco, now called Cape Cantin, in Lat. 32. 15.

Gedrosia. See Formipt.

Geetruydenberg, Gertrudenberga, and S. Gertruchii Mons, a City in Holland;
small, but well fortified; called by the Inhabitants, Guytrenberg, or
Geetruydenberg: it stands in South Holland, two Leagues from Breda to the
North, and three from Dort to the South-East, upon the River Dunge. This City
takes its name from St. Gertrude, who was a Daughter of Pepin, King of France;
and for her great Sanctity in much honor in these Countries. It is (says
Guicciardin) a considerable Place; seated on the South Bank of the Mereuwe, at
the equal distance of three Leagues from Dort, Heusden, and Breda: the
Possession of it is now in the Prince of Orange; but the Brabantines and
Hollanders do both equally pretend to the Right of it. The Hollanders surprised
it in 1573; and diverse times since it has been taken and retaken.

Gehan-Abad, or Jehan-Abad. See Delly.

Geichon, Oxus, called by the Arabs, Ghaion, Gihon, Tihun; and now commonly
Gieihun, or Gieihoun; is a River of Persia: it arises from the Mountains of
Badachzan; and running Northward through the borders of Balch, it waters the
Cities of Termid, Zemum, and Chovarzim: Also sometimes called Balch. thus
Gollius describes in part the Course of this River. Our later Maps make it to
arise from the Mountains of Caibocoran, in the Eastern borders of the Kingdom
of Persia; to water Candahar, and Belgis on the Eastern Bank; Meder, Thalan,
and Badaschian on the Western; at which last it takes in from the East the
great River Oboengir, which comes from Balch by Vervalin and Talecan; then,
turning Westward, it takes in a River from the South out of the Deserts of
Bigul; beneath which it waters the City of Bigul, and so passes to Bichend;
above which it takes in a River from the East out of Zagathay; and beneath it
on the same side another, from the Lake of Vsbeck, which passes by Bochara;
and another on the South side from Mareuwe; and at Deristan, a great River from
the South, called Margab; beneath which it falls into the South-Eastern Angle
of the Caspian Sea, at Zahaspan, by four Mouths says Gollius, but our Maps
take notice of but one.

Geila, 1 River of Transylvania; called by Jornandes, Gilfil.

Geivise, Astacus, a Maritim City of Bithynia, in the Lesser Asia, now ruined;
it lies fifteen German Miles South-West of Nicomedia, on the Helespont.

Gelas. See Galatia.

Gelderland, Sicambri, Geldria, one of the Seventeen Provinces in the
Low Countries, which has the Title of a Dukedom; the Seat as all agree, of the
Old Sicambri. This Province has on the North Friesland, and the Zuyder Sea; on
the East Cleves; on the South the Dukedom of Juliers; and on the West Brabant
and Holland: It is a flat level Country, without any Mountains; much beautified
with Woods and Forests; abounding with all things, especially Corn, and yet as
good for Pasturage and Grazing; so that they fetch lean Cattle from Denmark,
and fat them here. Three great Rivers water it, the Maes, the Rhine, and the
Wael. Nimeguen in the Territory of Betawe, is the Capital of this Dukedom;
besides which it has twenty one walled Cities and Towns, and three hundred
Villages. This Country was first granted by Henry III. Emperor of Germany, to
Otho of Nassaw, with the Title of Earl, in 1079. Rainold II. the ninth Earl,
was Created Duke, by the Emperor Lewis, of Bavaria, in 1339. Arnold XV. in the
Descent, sold this Dukedom to Charles Duke of Burgundy, being offended with his
lewd Son Adolph: Charles, another Son of this Arnold, left it at his death in
1538. to Charles V. as Heir of the House of Burgundy. This Country in 1577.
(all but a very few Towns) revolted from Spain, and joined with the States of
Holland; from which time, till this, they have maintained their Liberty; only
they were overrun by the French in 1672. But the next year recovered
themselves again. The City Gueldres or Geldre (which some will have to be
originally derived from the Gelduba of Tacitus) took its name from an ancient
Castle, seated upon the River Niers, four Miles North of Venlo, and six East of
Nimeguen; where the ancient Counts, or Governors of this Province, chose their
Residence; by which means it grew to a fine City; and being in the hands of the
Spaniards, was by them so well fortified, that an attempt made upon it by Henry
Frederick, Prince of Orange, in 1139. miscarried. The Castle is esteemed almost
impregnable. In 1627. the Spaniards of Venloo and Ruremonde attempted to bring
the Rhine into the Meuse at this City: But their design did not take effect.
There is also a Fort of this name, built by the Hollanders, on the Coast of
Coromandel, in the Kingdom of Narfinga, on the Bay of Bengala, in the
East Indies.

Geliboli. See Gallipoli.

Geluchalat, Mantiana, a Lake in the greater Armenia: Minadoio says, it is now
called Astamar: it receives eight great Rivers, and sends none out of it; and
is eight days Journey in compass. Long. 80. Lat. 40.

Gelise, Gelisa, a River in Aquitain in France, which washes the City of
Eusse; and falls into the Loss, which falls into the Garonne, five Miles
beneath Again to the West.

Geloni, an ancient People of Scythia Europaea, Neighbors to the Agathyrsi:
described to fleay their Enemies, and make themselves Cloths of their Skins.
Mel. Alex. ab Alex.

Gemblours, Gemblacum, a Town in Brabant, upon the River Orne, in the Borders
of Namur; five Miles from Brussels to the South, four from Charleroy to the
East, and five from Lovain. This Town has a Monastery in it; and saw a bloody
Fight near it, between the Dutch and Spaniards, in 1578. Baudrand.

Gemen, Arabia Foelix.

Gemona, Glemona, a small Town in Friuli, under the State of Venice.

Gemunder, a Lake in Austria.

Genamani, an Island in the Red Sea, on the Coast of Aethiopia, called Gythites
by the Ancients, in Lat. 25. 20.

Genep, or Gennep, Gennepium, a fortified, but small Town in the Duchy of
Cleves in Germany, two or three Leagues from Cleves, upon the River Niers,
which there falls into the Meuse. It belongs to the Elector of Brandenbourg,
tho the Hollanders keep a Garrison in it too; who retrieved it from the
Spaniards in 1641.

Geneva, Civitas Genevensium, Januba, Genabum, Jenoba, is the most Eastern City
belonging to the Allobroges, or Savoyards; which together with its Bridge over
the Rhosne, is mentioned by Julius Caesar in his Commentaries: It is great,
populous, well fortified and built, with a good Cathedral and Arsenal: the
Capital of the Province of Genevois, and seated at the West end of the Lake of
Lemane, on the South side of the Rhosne, in that place where this River comes
out of the Lake; seventeen Miles from Lion to the East, and twenty six from
Basil to the South, upon the borders of Switzerland: heretofore a very famous
Mart, which is long since removed to Lion; and a Bishop's See under the
Archbishop of Vienna, and an University founded by the Emperor Charles IV. in
1368. The French call this City Geneve, the Germans Genff; about nine hundred
years since, in an ignorant and an unlearned Age, it was called Gebenna; the
Italians call it Geneura. Mercator believes it built in the Year of the World
2994. in the times of Asa King of Judah, by Leman the Father of the Germans:
there is no need of pretenses, which can never be proved. Caesar's Testimony,
and the Roman Inscriptions that are found here, are sufficient proofs of its
Antiquity: by the latter, it appears this was a Roman Colony. It was indeed the
last Town Northward in the Provincia Romana, according to the ancient Division
of Gallia. We should have had more Roman Antiquities than we have too, if this
City had not in the course of so many Ages suffered very much from Enemies and
Fire. In the Reign of Aurelius Antoninus, it was almost all burnt; which Prince
contributed so much to the rebuilding, and bestowed such Privileges on it, that
it was called Aurelia for some time from him; but upon his death reassumed its
ancient name. In the irruption of the Barbarous Nations into the Roman Empire,
it suffered the same Calamities with other Cities something sooner, as being
nearer the Frontiers; but then it met with an early Restorer in Genebald King
of Burgundy. About three hundred and fifty years since, it was burnt twice in
seven years. It has had the Counts of Geneva, and the Dukes of Savoy at all
times the great Pretenders to the Sovereignty over it; and has always defended
its Privileges manfully against them. In 1412. when Amadaeus, Duke of Savoy,
endeavored to obtain a Title to this City by an exchange, Joannes a Petra
Scissa, (then Bishop) and the Inhabitants agreed, that if any Person should
consent to the Alienation of its Liberty, he should be treated like a Traitor.
These and the like Traverses of their Neighbor Princes forced them in 1535. to
enter into a League with the Canton of Bearn, which was to last for ever; the
change of Religion having then heightened their Neighbors Rage against them. In
1584. having suffered a very sharp Siege and a miserable Famine, by the help of
the Canton of Zurich, they prevailed so far as to force the Duke of Savoy and
their Bishop to renounce all their Pretenses. They reaped no less glory from
their defeating the Nocturnal Scalado of Charles Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, in
1602. This City rejected the Chapter of Rome in 1535. Whereupon they applied the
Revenue of the Bishopric, with the Tithes of the Territory of Gex, to the
maintenance of their own Ministry of the Reformation. There has been a Roman
Catholic Titular Bishop of Geneva ever since continued, who resides at Anneci;
and with other the Titular Beneficiaries within this District, obtained a
Decree from the Parliament of Dijon ( Anno 1687.) to be restored to their
ancient Possessions* But without success, as for any effect it had upon the
Government here: who, though they enter into no Alliance (during the present
War) with the Confederate Princes, yet stand upon their Defense against France.
The Preaching of Calvin, Beza and Farellus, the retreat of some English
Protestants hither during the Reign of Q. Mary, and of others in diverse times
from several Countries, have distinguished the zeal of this place for the
Reformation. The Province of Genevois, which derives its name from it, is
bounded by the Provinces of Chablais and Fossigny to the East, the Rhone to the
West and in part also to the North, and with Savoy properly so called to the
South. There is lately published an exact History of this City, by M. Spon, and
therefore I need add no more. The Lake of Geneva. See Lemane.

Genezareth, Genesara, a Lake in Palestine, between the Tribes of Zabulon to
the West, and the half Tribe of Manasseh to the East; also called the Sea of
Tiberias, and Galilee: which Lake is entered by the River Jordan at Capernaum,
and left at Sythopolis: it is eighteen Miles long, and seven broad: on the
Western Shore stand Capernaum, Tiberias, and Bethsaida; on the Eastern
Corasain, and Gersa. The many Miracles our Blessed Savior wrought upon, and
about this Lake, have made it famous to all Ages and Nations.

Gengen, or Giengen, Rhiusiavia, a small City in Schwaben near the Danube;
others say it is Rosenfield, in the Dukedom of Wirtenburgh, to which this
ancient name mentioned by Ptolomy belongs. The City Gengen, lies between Vlm
and Norlingen, five Miles from each: the second, not above four Miles from
Tubingen to the South: but Giengen is not the same Town with Gies^ingen, but
lies about four Miles East of it.

Genichisar, Hermaeum, a Cape in Thrace, five Miles from Constantinople to the
South-East; called by the Christians Neo Castro, New Castle.

Genoua, Genua, a very ancient and great City in the North of Italy, upon the
Tyrrhenian Sea: it lies in the Form of a Theater, upon the ascent of an Hill,
opening its Bosom to the Sea, five or six Miles in compass; so full of stately
and regular Buildings, Palaces, Churches, Monasteries, etc. that its proverbial
Epithet in Italy, is, Genoua la superba; and so very ancient, that its Original
is unknown: History makes mention of it above 1800 years ago. It is certain it
was destroyed by Mago, one of Hannibal's Commanders, when by the Alps he
entered Italy in the year of Rome 534. about two hundred and sixteen years
before the Birth of our Savior. Cornelius Servilius, one of the Roman Consuls,
ordered the rebuilding it, sixteen years after its Desolation. This City in the
end of the first Punick War, had greatly shaken Rome it self, as Livy relates,
about the year of Rome 515. But being then subdued, and obliged, she continued
ever after very faithful. In the fall of the Roman Empire, she had the same
fate with her Neighbors; and fell under the Herules, Goths, and Lombards, or
the Greek Exarches of Ravenna, as they prevailed one upon the other. In 806.
Charles the Great having Conquered the Lombards, made Ademar, his Kinsman,
Count of Genoua; who got Corfica from the Saracens, and united it to this City,
which has enjoyed that Island ever since. In 935* the Saracens took and burnt
this City, and carried all her People into Captivity; but the Duke of Venice
brought them back, and rebuilt it; though others say the Genoese Fleet met
these Infidels in their going home, and recovered all again after a sharp
fight. After this they became in a short time by Navigations, Commerce, and
Wars, more famous than ever. Being grown Wealthy, in 1133. Pope Innocent II.
made this City an Archbishop's See. They deserved this Favor of the Pope, by
the great Services they by their Fleets performed against the Saracens in the
Holy War, (which began in the year 1096.); for which in 1101. they obtained of
Baldwin III. part of the Sea-Towns that should be taken in Palestine. In the
Year 1204. when the Western Christians took Constantinople from the Eastern
Emperors, the Genouese had a great hand in it: Pera was assigned them for that
Service, a place near Constantinople: they were then Masters of Lesbos and
Chio, and several Islands' in those Seas; and Caffa in the Black Sea, in Crim
Tartary. But aiming to gain Creet too from the Venetians in 1207. there arose a
War between the two States; which, joined with the Genoueses intestine
Divisions, at last ruined the Greatness of this: in 1255. they reduced the
Venetians to great streights, having taken Chioggia, an Island near the City;
but lost all by demanding more than could be granted. In 1260. the Venetians
gained another great Victory over them, taking twenty four Galleys. In 1291.
the Venetians took from them Pera and Caffa. In 1293. the Tide of Fortune
turned; the Venetians lost all their Fleet to the Genoueses, and another of
seventy Ships in 1298. In 1314. the Genouese were beaten by the Venetians, and
in 1353. reduced to such Streights, that they were forced to put themselves
under the Protection of the Duke of Milan; after which, though they recovered
to an Ability of Contesting with the Venetians, and beat them in 1401* yet the
Turks and their own Divisions, at last reduced them to so low an Ebb, that they
were not able to set out a Fleet. Between the Years 1174. and 1339. they had
four dreadful Civil Wars, or Broils in the City, which contributed very much to
their ruin. In 1452. Sfortia, Duke of Milan, possessed himself of this City. In
1563. they were cited to answer for the Expulsion or Banishment of the Marquess
of Final, by Ferdinando I. Emperor of Germany. Selim the Grand Signior, Emperor
of the Turks, beat their Republic out of the Isle of Chios, in the year 1571.
Besides all these Mutations, the French pretend that in 1396. this Republic
made over, by a formal Grant to Charles VI. of France, all the Sovereign
Lordship of it, and the States depending* which was executed and confirmed
again to Charles VII. in 1458. and from this last Date the French had the
Sovereignty of the City, till 1528. when Andreas Doria, upon the Advantage of
the Imprisonment of Francis I. (taken by the Forces of Charles V. at the Battle
of Pavia,) restored his Country to its former Liberty. Since which, this State
has had a very great Dependence on the Crown of Spain, by reason of his States
in Italy; at all times preferring the Interests of that Kingdom before all
others. This so far exasperated Lewis XIV. (the now French King) that in 1674.
he sent a Fleet and Bomb'd Genoua; in which Action the Ducal Palace was burnt,
and many other of the noblest in the City, and an incredible mischief done. In
the end he forced them to send their Duke and four Senators to his Court to
make their humble Submissions to him. Not that they parted with their Liberty,
for they are still a Free State; nor that they had done him any Injury, which
they were to acknowledge; but either because their Ancestors had revolted above
an hundred years agone, or because his most Christian Majesty would have it so.
The State of Genoua is a Part of Italy, anciently called Liguria; lying upon
the Tyrrhenian Sea, which bounds it upon the South and West; on the East it has
the Dukedom of Florence, and on the North the Dukedoms of Parma in part, and
Montisferat in part, its length from East to West is one hundred and forty
Miles, its breadth nevertheless very little. Yet that part of it which lies
next the Sea is wonderfully fruitful by Nature, and made much more so by the
Industry of the Inhabitants; and has so many Villages and fine Buildings,
especially toward Genoua, that it may seem to be one continued City. It is
governed as a Commonwealth under a Duke (to continue but two Years,) and two
Senates or Councils. This Republic has under it Corsica and Capraia, two
Islands in the Mediterranean Sea; and anciently many other. We shall only add
to this, the Italian Censure upon Genoua; Huomini senza Fide, Mare senza Pesce,
Monte senza Legno, e Done senza Vergogna; There are Men without Honesty, a Sea
without Fish, Mountains without Wood, and Women without Shame. Nevertheless
this State and City have given three or four Popes to the Sea of Rome, and
produced great Persons for all things. Their Academy settled at Genoua, takes
the Title of gli Adormentati.

Gen^^i, Melas, ^ River of the Lesser Armenia, which rises from the Mountains
of Argaeus; and running Eastward, falls into the Euphrates; when it has passed
the whole Province of Armenia Minor.

Gentilly, a Village within one League of Paris, upon the River Bievre;
mentioned in Ecclesiastical History, for a large Council assembled at it in
767. in the Reign of King Pepin, and in the Presence of the Ambassadors of the
Emperor Compronimus from the East, touching the Procession of the Holy Spirit
and the Use of Images.

Genubath. See Guinea.

Georgeto, Morgontiacum, a Town of the Further Calabria.

Georgia, a great Country in Asia, called by the Inhabitants Gurgistan; between
the Caspian Sea to the East, and the Euxine to the West; bounded on the North
by Circassia, Comania, and the Dominions of the Duke of Muscovy, and on the
South by Schirvan, a Province of the Kingdom of Persia: Containing under this
Name a Part of Armenia the Greater, and Armenia the Lesser. This Kingdom was
heretofore much greater than now; and had Monarchs for its Sovereigns, whose
Royal Seat was the City of Cotatis; but lying between the Turks and the
Persians, two powerful Neighbors, both of them have diminished the Extent of
it. Thus the Turks dispossessed the Georgian Kings of Erzerum, a City of
Armenia; the Persians of some others; and besides, the Kings of it having
divided it into several small Principalities, it is become much less able, than
otherwise it would have been, to defend it self against those potent Princes
that surround it: The Eastern Parts of it are accordingly Tributary to the King
of Persia, the Northern to the Great Duke of Muscovy, and the Western to the
Turk. The Parts of this Kingdom are Mengrelia, Guriel, and Imireta, to the
West, where the ancient Colchis was: To the North, Abaca; Carthuel (now a
Province of Persia,) and Gagheti, ( Gaguesa) to the East, formerly called
Iberia; and Samsche, [ Samesa,] to the South toward Armenia. The principal
Cities are Cotatis and Teflis. The Georgians are Christians by Profession, but
by Practice the worst in the World; especially the Princes and great Men, who
will sell their Subjects for Slaves to the Turks and Persians, or exchange them
for Merchandise: Their Faith is very tolerable; they are of the Greek Church,
and till of late never heard of the Church of Rome. In 1624. Pope Urban VIII.
sent a Mission of the Theatines thither.

Georgia, more properly so called, borders to the East upon Circassia and
Muscovy, to the West upon Armenia the Less, to the South upon Armenia the
Greater, to the North upon the Euxine Sea, and that Part of Colchis, called
Imireta, (which I believe (says Sir J. Chardin) to be all that Country which
the Ancients call Iberia.) It is a Country very full of Woods, and very
Mountainous, which yet has in it a great Number of Pleasant Plains; only the
middle of Georgia is more even and level than the rest: The River Kur, ( Cyrus)
runs through the middle of it. This Country is very fruitful in Corn, Herbs,
and Fruits; and produces a vast quantity of excellent Wines; but their most
Staple Commodity is Silk, of which they have a great quantity, but not half
what is reported: The Air is very dry, cold in the Winter, and hot in the
Summer.

Gerania, an ancient City of Maesia Superior, (now Bulgaria,) toward Thrace
and the Mountain Haemus.

Gerawer, Geravia, a Territory in the Upper Circle of the Rhine, toward the
Confluence of the Main and Rhine; between the County of Erpach on the East,
Mentz on the North and South, the Palatinate of the Rhine on the West. The
principal Places are Geraw, and Darmstad; from which latter this is sometimes
by Foreigners called the Land^gra^iat de Darmstad. The Town of Geraw, which
gives this Territory its other Name, lies not above two German Miles from the
Rhine, and Oppenheim to the East; upon the River Noir.

Gerberoy, a Town in the Isle of France, toward the Borders of Picardy, in the
Territory of Beauvoisis, four or five Leagues from Beauvais; at which the
English and French fought a Battle in 1434.

Gerbes. See Zerbi.

Gergenti, Agrigentum, an ancient, and once a most potent and magnificent City
of Sicily, mentioned in the Old Greek and Latin Historians very frequently.
Built by the Inhabitants of Gela, six hundred years before the Birth of our
Savior, as Thucydides affirms, Lib. 6. and called by the Greeks (...), by the
Latins Agragas, and Acrogas, as well as Agrigentum. It became in time so great
as to have ten Miles in Compass, and to contain two hundred thousand
Inhabitants; and others say so many more, as is incredible, if not impossible.
See Laer. Lib. 8. When this City had not stood above forty years, it fell into
the Hands of Phalaris, a Cretian, in the 41. Olympiad, about the year of Rome
183. who, being banished his Country, of a private Man became Lord of Sicily,
and one of the most noted of all the ancient Tyrants, enjoying this Power
sixteen Years, in which time Perillus invented, and first experimented the
Brazen Bull. After this the Carthaginians became Masters of it, and after them
the Romans. It was not less celebrated upon the Account of Empedocles the
famous Pythagorean Philosopher, who lived in the 44. Olympiad, and was born
here, 160 years after the Foundation of this City. Cicero speaks of a Temple
and a Statue of Hercules, that this City show amongst the finest pieces of
Antiquity. The Horses bred here were of great repute in Greece, much used in
their Games; on which occasion it is mentioned by Virgil, Aen. 3. It is now
called by the Inhabitants Gergenti, by the Spaniards Girgenti; and is a
Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Palerno now, formerly of Syracusa: Seated
between the Rivers of Arraga, and Naro, upon an Hill, almost in the middle of
the Southern Shore of that Island, in Long. 37. 38. Lat. 36. 10. The Saracens
of Sicily were a Plague to it in their times.

Gerizim, or Gerizzim, a Mountain of Palestine, near Samaria, over against
Mount Ebal, on the other side Jordan; from whence the Decalogue by Joshua's
Order was promulgated, and the Israelites blessed by Simeon, Levi, etc. Deuteronomy.
27. 12. and 11. 29. 30. The Wells of Jacob, at which our Savior discoursed the
Samaritan Woman, sprang by its Foot. This is the famous Mountain whereon
Manasses, (expelled Jerusalem for marrying the Governor of Samaria's Daughter,
a Stranger) built a Temple in Opposition to Solomon's, which began the Schisin
betwixt the Jews and the Samaritans. Hyrcanus, Nephew of Judas Maccabeus,
demolished it two hundred Years after; yet the Samaritans nevertheless
continued the Courses of their Prayers and Sacrifices here, even to the Time of
the Emperor Justinian. Zeno the Emperor built upon this Mountain a Christian
Church; Justinian repaired the same, and erected also a Fortress here to the
Insolences of the Samaritans, of whom Vespasian killed in his time eleven
thousand that had retired hither in the Wars of the Jews.

Germany, Germania, one of the greatest Countries in Europe, and the Mother of
those Nations which in the fall of the Roman Empire, conquered all the rest. At
present bounded on the North by the Baltic Sea, and Jutland; on the East by
Hungary, Prussia Superior, and Poland; on the South by the Alps, which part it
from Italy; on the West by France, the Netherlands, the German Ocean, and
Switzerland. West-Friseland, Guelderland, Over-Yssel, and Groningen, were
heretofore parts of Germany, which belong now to the United Provinces. On the
other side Cleves, Julters, Liege, the Bishoprics of Cologn, Treves, a great
part of the Palatinate of the Rhine, and Switzerland, of old belonged to Gaul,
and now to France; yet are now (of right) Parts of Germany. The French have
taken from it Alsatia. Switzerland some Ages since is Cantoned into small
Common. Wealths, which do not acknowledge the Emperor of Germany for their
Sovereign. As for Denmark, Poland, and Hungary, they have their distinct Kings,
and are by no means Parts of Germany. It is in length from the Borders of the
Dukedom of Lorrain, to those of Hungary, an hundred and twenty German Miles; in
breadth from the Baltic Sea to the Alps, which enclose Friuli, an hundred
twenty six. This vast Tract of Land is usually divided into ten Circles, to
wit, Franconia, Bavaria, Austria, Schwaben (sometimes called Suabia,) the Upper
and Lower Circle of the Rhine, Westphalia, the Upper and Lower Saxony, and the
Circle of Burgundy; but this last has no Vote in the Diet, nor contributes any
thing to the Charges of the Empire. The Emperor of Germany is not only the Head
of Germany, but the first Prince in Christendom, in Rank and Order, though not
the most powerful. This Country is called by the Inhabitants Teutschlandt or
Teitschlandt, by the French Allemagne, by the Spaniards Alemasia, by the
Italians La Germania or l'Allemagnia, by the Dutch Duystlandt, by the Poles
Nicmieczka, by the Hungarians Nemes, and by the Greeks Elmagi. In ancient times
it was extremely overgrown with Woods, and full of uncultivated Marshes: There
were then no Cities, no Arts, no Tillage: The Inhabitants were much like the
Northern Americans, Immanes Animis atque Corporibus; of great Growth as to
their Bodies, and very barbarous as to their Minds. But great Warriers, and the
invincible Enemies of the Roman Empire, which never could subdue them; on the
contrary, they at last destroyed that vast Empire, in the time appointed.
Julius Caesar was the first of all the Romans, who (building a Bridge over the
Rhine) entered this Country; yet with no great Success. Augustus and Tiberius
conquered those Nations of Germany, which lay between the Rhine and Italy; but
about the year of Christ 200. they too shook off the Roman Yoke; the rest were
always free from it. The Rhine and the Danube, were the standing Bounds of the
Roman Empire, beyond which it could rarely keep any thing long. That which the
Romans could never effect, the Francks under Charles the Great brought to pass,
and subdued Germany. This Prince, about 801. was made Emperor of France and
Germany. It continued in his Posterity till 929. when Henry I. a Saxon, was
elected by the Germans; his Family lasted till 1002. when it fell into the
House of Bavaria, in the Person of Henry II. In 1139. Conrade III. Duke of
Schwaben Succeeded, and all the Emperors following were of that Family, till
1274. After which the Empire for some time had no Head; but changed Families,
as others, very frequently; till Albert II. Duke of Austria, in 1439. fixed it
in the House of Austria. And all the Emperors ever since have been of that
Family; Leopold, the present, being the eleventh from Albert II. which have
successively swayed this Scepter: This Prince succeeded Ferdinand III. in 1657.
Under these Princes Germany is become one of the most Civilized, Cultivated,
Learned Countries in the World; full of noble and populous Cities, and most
flourishing Churches. As no Country had suffered more than this in the Days of
Ignorance, so when Learning had once discussed those Mists in the beginning of
the XV. Century, this was one of the first that threw off the second Yoke, and
made way for other Nations to do the same.

Germersheim, a small City in the lower Palatinate, upon the Rhine, in Germany;
heretofore Free and Imperial, till by the Emperor Charles IV. given with all
its Dependances, to the Prince Elector Palatine. The Emperor Rodolphus I. died
here in 1290. It is endeavoring to repair the Sufferings, which half ruined
it, of the last German Wars.

Germian, Phrygia Major, a Province of the Lesser Asia. Also a Mountain there
called by the same Name, but of old, Dindymus.

Germigny, a Village in the Province of Brie in France, upon the River Marne;
where the Bishops of Meaux have a House of Pleasure. S. Lewis in 1253. and
Philip le bell in 1319. published Ordinances from hence. A second in the
Diocese of Orleans, near Fleury, upon the Loyre; at which a French Synod was
assembled in 843.

Gerne, Garryenus. See Yare, a River of England.

Geromlea, Achelous, a River of Epirus, which arises from Mount Pindus, and
running Southward falls into the Ionian Sea: now written Aspri in our later
Maps.

Gers. See Egers.

Gertrudenberg. See Geertruydenberg.

Geru, Gerun, Ogyris, Armusia; the same with Ormus, or at least the Island in
which Ormus stands. See Ormus, and Hoffman.

Gesara. See Krim Tartary.

Geschisdag, a River in Mysia, in the Lesser Asia; and also the present Turkish
Name of Olympus, or Maesius, a Mountain in the same Province.

Gest, Gedrosia, a Province in the East of the Kingdom of Persia, next the
Moguls Empire. By others called Circan.

Gestie, a City in Parthia, called in ancient times Suphtha.

Gestrick, Gestricia, a Province of the Kingdom of Sweden, upon the Botner Sea,
to the West of which it lies; bounded on the North by Singia, on the West by
Dalecarlia, on the South by Vplandia, and on the East by the Botner Sea; and is
only famous for its Mines of Iron. Gevals and Copperberg are its most principal
Places.

Gesula, Gaetulia, a Province of the Kingdom of Marocco in Barbary: bounded by
the Provinces of Darha to the East, Marocco to the North, the Kingdom of Sus
with the Mountain Laalem to the West, and Tesset to the South: Without any City
or walled Town in it: But there are great Villages of 10000 Inhabitants, who
are thought to be the ancientest People of Africa, and descended from the
Gaetuli. The Cheriffs of Fez and Marocco choose their Guard du Corpse out of them,
for the Estem they have of their Fidelity and Courage.

Getae, an ancient People of Scythia, betwixt Maesia and Dacia, divided on each
side the Danube. In the year 505. they sell upon Macedonia and Thrace, defeated
the Forces that the Emperor Anastasius sent against them under Sabinianus,
Consul, and took a Sum of Money to retire again.

Gevals, Gevalia, a Town in the Province of Gestrick, in the Kingdom of Sweden,
at the Mouth of a River of the same Name; about four Miles from the Confines of
Vpland to the North, twenty seven German Miles from Stockholm to the North.

Gewer, Javarinum, called by the Inhabitants Raab, by the Germans Javarin,
Giavarino, is a small, but very strong City; the Capital of a County in the
Lower Hungary, and a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Gran. It stands five
Miles from Comorra to the West, where the Raab and the Rabnitz fall into the
Danube. This City is called Gewer by the Hungarians. Fortified by Ferdinand
King of Hungary, in 1550. Taken by the Turks in 1591. after a long Siege:
Retaken by Surprise, in the Night, by Count Swartzenburg, and Count Palfi, in
1606. This was at the Beginning of this present War, the most Southern Town the
Emperor had in the Lower Hungary.

Gex, a Territory and Bailiwick, belonging to the Duke of Savoy hertofore,
until yielded to the King of France by the Treaty of Lions in 1602. It is
often Comprehended in the Province of Bugey in France; having Bugey on the
West, the County of Burgundy on the North; the Teritory of Waad in Bearn on the
East, and Savoy on the South; from which last the Rhone, and in part the Lake
of Geneva seperates it. The Capital Town bears its own Name.

Geyl, Julia, a River of Germany, which, as Mercator says, flows through the
Upper Carinthia, and falls into the Drove, a little below Villach.

Gezaira, that Province in the Kingdom of Algier in Barbary, in which Algier
stands; which City too is by the Arabians called Gezaira.

Gezan, Zaaram, a City in Arabia the Happy, in the Province of Hagias, upon the
North Side of the River Laakic; which passing by Medina, there falls into the
Red Sea. This City is also called Algiar. Long. 69. 00. Lat. 26. 00.

Gezira, or Gesirat, Zegira or Zigira, a City of Mesopotamia, about twenty
Miles North of Nisibin, and sixty from Merdin to the South East.

Ghamma, a vast River of the Asiatick Great Tartary, which after a long Course,
disburthens it self into the Sea of Kaimachy.

Ghazuan, Bengebres, a Mountain in Arabia Foelix, out of which springs Eda, a
River of the same Country; which waters Mecca, and falls into the Red Sea,
over against Suquem in Egypt.

Gheneoa, or Gheneboa, a Province of the Kingdom of Tombut, in Nigritia, in
Africa, toward the Mouth of the Niger. There is neither a walled City, Town,
or Castle standing in it; but the Governor, Magistrates, and those of the best
Fashion live together in a great Village: it is a plentiful Province for
Barley, Rice, Cotton, Cattle, and Fish; and had the Character of a distinct
Kingdom, till about 1520. conquered and reduced into a Province by the King of
Tombut.

Ghierra D'Adda, a Country of the Milanese. See Adda.

Gianea, Blascon, a small Island on the Coast of Provence.

Gianich, Nichopolis, a City of the Lesser Armenia, upon the River Ceraunia,
which falls into Gensui; thirty five German Miles from Erzerum to the South
West, and forty five from Cogni to the North-East. This City was built by
Pompey the Great, and is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Sebastia. Long.
69. 00. Lat. 42. 25.

Gianuti, Dianium, Sinonia, an Island on the Coast of Tuscany.

Giavarin. See Gewer.

Giazza. See Laizzo.

Gibel, Gabalus, a City of Syria, which is a Bishop's See under the Patriarch
of Antioch; seated upon the Mediterranean, not far from Anticassium, a Mountain
of Coelo-Syria; forty Miles from Antardum, and eleven from Laodicea. In the
Maps there is a City called Gibeletto, nine Miles South of Tripoli, and ten
Miles North of Sidon; which by others is called Gebail, and is the same Place.

Gibeon, a great and Royal City of the Amorites in Canaan, upon an Hill, in the
Tribe of Benjamin: Memorable for their Stratagem to obtain a League with
Joshua, and for Joshua's Defeat afterward of the five Kings of the Amorites at
their Besieging of this Place; when both the Sun and Moon, at Joshua's Command,
the first over Gibeon, the other in the Valley of Ajalon, stood still to give
Light to the Slaughter of the flying Enemy; as this Miracle is quoted ( Josh.
10. 13.) out of a lost Book, called Jasher; about the year of the World 2584.
Joshua, though he thus protected this City, because of his League, he
nevertheless condemned them to the Slavery of hewing of Wood, and drawing of
Water for the Tabernacle. And when Saul contrived their total Destruction, his
seven Sons (except Mephibosheth) were hanged for an Atonement of their Fathers
Fault, 2 Samuel 21.

Gibraltar, or Gilbraltar, Calpe, Gibraltaria, a City and Mountain in Andalusia
in Spain; seated up on the Mouth of the Mediterranean Sea, where it runs into
the Atlantic Ocean, on the North-Eastern Point; over against Zeuta in Barbary,
from which it stands four Italian Miles, and the same from the Ruins of
Heraclea, eleven from Tangier to the North-East, and sixteen from Cadiz to the
South-West. The City is called by the Moors Gibel Tarick, the Mountain of
Tarick, from Tarif a Commander of theirs, who was the first that landed here,
when the Moors invaded Spain in 711. Small, though very well fortified: it has
a large Haven, and a strong Castle, which has always in it a Garrison of one
hundred and fifty Soldiers. The City is built upon a Rock in a Peninsula, and
the Castle stands on the highest part of the Rock. At the West and East end
there are two Forts, or Block-houses, next the Sea, each of which has nine
Cannons: notwithstanding, James Heemskirk the Dutch Admiral in 1607. entered
this Harbor, and destroyed the Spanish Fleet. This City is called in ancient
Coins Calpe, and Colonia Julia Calpa: it grew up out of the Ruins of Heraclea
and Carteja, which lies not above one League from it. This and Seuta, or Zeuta,
on the opposite Shore in Africa, were by the Ancients believed to be Hercules
his Pillars, beyond which there was no going. This City has also given Name to
the Streights of Gibraltar, ( Fretum Herculeum) which is the only Outlet the
Mediterranean has into the Atlantic Ocean: concerning the breadth of which,
there is a great Controversy; some reckon it seven French Leagues, others
twelve Italian Miles; and twenty for its length; others one German Mile and an
half. This is one of the most famous, frequented, and most anciently known
Streights in the whole World. Also a great Town in Castile d'Or, in the South
America, in the Province of Venezuela, upon the Banks of the Lake of Maracaibo,
and near the great Mountains, called (after the same Name) the Mountains of
Gibraltar; six Leagues from the River Epines, which discharges its Streams
into the said Lake. This Town is well built, and drives a Trade with Tobacco,
Sugar, and Cocao.

Gien, a small Town in the Province of Beausse in France, upon the Loyre, which
is here covered with a Stone Bridge: twelve Leagues from Orleans, and something
below the new Channel of Briare. Some will have it to be the Genabum of Caesar.

Giera, Hiera, a small desolate Island near Candia.

Gieraci, Hieracium, Locris, Narita, a City of the further Calabria, three
Miles from the Shoars of the Ionian Sea, and about one from the Ruins of
Locris, out of which it sprung. A Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Regio,
from which it lies twenty seven Miles to the North-East.

Giera-petra, Hiera-petra, Hyerpytna, a City of Candia, or Creet, which has a
Castle, and an Haven such as it is, and heretofore a Bishops See: it lies on
the South side of the Island in the Territory of Sitia, near Mount Malaura,
sixteen Miles from Setia to the West: now under the Dominion of the Turks.

Giessen, Giessa, a small, but very strong City in Hassia, in Germany, upon the
River Lhone, four Leagues from Marpurg to the South: It was of late years made
an University, and is the strongest Town in this Province; under the Landtgrave
of Darmstadt in part, and of Cassel in part.

Giffhorn, a Town in the Duchy of Lunenburg, in the Lower Saxony, upon the
River Allere: three or four Leagues from Brusnwick, and a little more from Zell.

Gigel, Gigeri, Gigari, Igiti, a City of Africa; heretofore a Bishops See, but
now a small Village in the Province of Bugia, in the Kingdom of Algier; twenty
seven Miles from Algier to the East, upon the Shoars of the Mediterranean.
Taken by the French in 1664. and afterward deserted. There was another City
which Ptolemy calls Colops, and places in the Province of Zeugitania, which is
now called Giger.

Giglio, Igilium, Iginium, Egilium, a small Mountainous Island in the
Tyrrhenian Sea, which has in it one Village and a Castle; and belonged
heretofore to the Republic of Sienna, with which it came into the hands of the
Duke of Tuscany. It lies about a Mile from the nearest Coast of Italy, between
34. and 35. degrees. of Long. in Lat. 41. 55.

Gihon, one of the four Rivers springing from the Paradise of Adam and Eve,
Genesis 2. 13. Josephus makes it the same with the Nile, others with the Araxes.
See Nilus.

Gilan, Gelae, Gilania, a Province of Persia, upon the South side of the
Caspian Sea, which from it is often called the Sea of Gilan. The chief City of
this Province is Gilan, and stands upon the River Abisirni, twenty five German
Miles from the Caspian Sea: in Long. 90. 13. and Lat. 40.

Gilboa, a Chain of Mountains in the Holy Land, extended the length of ten or
twelve Leagues, from the City Jezrael to Jordan, along the Tribe of Issachar
and the Upper Galilee. Famous in the Jewish History for the encampment, defeat,
and death, of King Saul and his three Sons here, in a Battle with the
Philistines; and for David's cursing these Mountains with Barrenness for
Jonathan's sake. They are almost all covered with Stones. Taking their Name,
some suppose, from an ancient City Gilboa. As at this time, we are told, of a
considerable Town called Gilbus, standing amongst them.

Gilead, The Mount properly in the Region of Trachonitis in Palestine, whereat
Jacob and Laban passed a Covenant with each other, Genesis 31. But afterward
extended, to express the Cities and Country adjacent, which were given by Moses
to the Tribe of Gad, Josh. 13. 25.

Gillesland, a Tract in the North parts of the County of Cumberland, from
whence the Earl of Carlisle receives the title of Baron Dacre of Gillesland.

Gilolo, an Island in the East Indian Ocean, to the west of the Moluccaes, and
East of the Terra des Papaous, in 165. degrees. of Long. It has four Points of Land
shooting forth into the Sea, as many different ways. One about twenty, another
fifty Leagues Long. The Capital of it is called Gilolo also.

Gindes, a River springing from the Martian Mountains of Armenia, and ending in
the Tigris. In which course, it retarding the passage of Cyrus's Army to the
Siege of Babylon, he broke it into three hundred and sixty Channels.

Gingi, Gingis, a great City in the Promontory of Malabar in the East Indies,
which gives Name to a Province. This City was heretofore under the King of
Bisnagar, but has now a Prince of its own; it is very strong, and has a Castle
built upon a Rock. The Province, or Kingdom of Gingi, has Bisnagar to the
North, the Gulf of Bengala on the East, the Mountains of Malabar on the West,
and the Kingdom of Tanjaour to the South.

Gingiro, a Kingdom in the Lower Aethiopia, toward Melincle, Zanguebar, and
the Eastern Ocean.

Ginopoli, Gemanopolis, Jonopolis, a City of Paphligonia, which is a Bishops
See, under the Archbishop of Gangra. It lies upon the Black Sea, ten German
Miles West of Carambis, the most Northern Cape of the Lesser Asia.

Giordano, Jordan.

Giorgiana, Georgia.

Giovenazzo, Juvenacium, a Maritim City of Apulia Pucetia, (now Terra di
Lavoro) upon the Gulf of Venice, between Bari to the North, and Trani to the
South; welve Miles from the first, and a little morefrom the latter: In Long.
40. 50. Lat. 41. 12. This is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bari. It
stands upon an Hill, and is almost encompassed with the Sea.

Giovenco, Juvencus, Invectus, a River of Italy, in the Kingdom of Naples,
which falls into the Lake of Celano, at the foot of the Appennine, forty five
Miles West of Rome, in the Province of Abruzzo. Heretofore it passed through
the Lake without mixing with it; but whether it passes into any other River,
or is swallowed up by the subterraneous passages, which carry away the waters
of that Lake, Leandro has not informed us.

Gir, a River of Africa, which rising in Biledulgerida, not far from the
Atlantic Ocean, runs Eastward; and passing under several Chains of Hills and
Mountains, at last falls into Nile, above the Cataracts of Egypt. It is a vast
and wonderful River in all things; and deserves a more particular description,
if the Counties through which it passes, were so known to us, as to enable us
to give it.

Girgia. See Hyrach.

Girigo, Girgium, a City of the Upper Egypt, near the Nile; the Capital of a
Province, which takes its Name from this City; betwixt Barbanda and the Sahid.
Otherwise written Girgilo.

Girmasti, Caicus, a River of the Lesser Asia, which rising by a City of the
same Name, washes Judai, Pergama, Caristo, and Stinga; then falls into the
Archipelago, over against the Isle of Metellino. The City of Girmasti was of
Old called Hierogerma; and is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Cyzioeno;
called only Germa in the Councils, being attributed by some to Mysia Minor, by
others to Phrygia Minor; it lies between Balichstria to the East, and Pergama
to the West.

Giro, or Palmacia, Venaria, a small Island on the Eastern Coasts of Genoua.

Girona, Gerunda, a City of Catalonia in Spain; built by Gerion, a celebrated
Hero, who is said to have lived Anno Mundi 2840. and to have been Contemporary
with Hely the Judge of Israel. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Tarragona, of a large extent; seated partly upon the descent of a Hill, partly
upon a Plain; ennobled with two Bridges, one in the City over the River Oingar,
and the other without the City, on the North side, over the River Ter: and
besides is very well fortified, and honored with the Title of a Dukedom. This
City lies seven Leagues from the Shoars of the Mediterranean Sea to the West,
eight from the Borders of France, fourteen from Perpignan to the South, and
sixteen from Barcelona to the North. A Spanish Council was held at it in 517.

Gisborn, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of
Stancliff.

Gisborough, a Market Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of
Langburgh: situated in a pleasant Flat, between Mulgrave and the River Tees,
and heretofore enriched with an Abbey. This is the first place, where Alum was
made in England.

Gisors, Caesortium, Caesarotium and Gisorium, an ancient Town in Normandy,
mentioned by Antoninus; the Capital of le Vexin Normand, a Territory in this
Province, which lies upon the River Epte, sixteen Leagues from Paris to the
West, and ten from Roan to the North-East. It has given the Title of an Earl
for many Ages past. About the year 1188. Henry I. King of England, and Philip
the August King of France, had an Enterview betwixt this place and Try, after
the news of the taking of Jerusalem by Saladine: wherein they agreed upon a
Croisade for the recovery of the Holy Land again, and to lay aside their
differences with one another, till they had performed it.

Givaudan, or Gevaudan, Gabali, a Territory in Languedoc, the Capital of which
is Mende; it lies between Auvergne to the North, Rovergne to the West, the
Lower Languedoc to the South, and Vivarais and Velay to the East. Placed in the
Mountains of Sevennes, and very subject to Snow, yet not unfruitful; near the
sourse of the Allier, the Lot, [ Olda] and the Tarn. Mende the principal City,
lies twenty five Leagues from Lion to the South West; and Baignol, the next to
Mende in greatness, lies about six Miles South of it. This was the Country of
the ancient people, called Gabales. It now gives the Title of Earl to the
Bishops of Mende, and was first united to the Crown of France in 1271. being
heretofore under its own Counts. The Huguenots ravaged it much in the last Age.

Giulap, Chaboras, Chobar, a River and City of Mesopotamia. The River arises
from Mount Masius, in the Confines of the Greater Arabia; and running Southward
through Mesopotamia, falls into the River Euphrates, at Al Thabur; which last
City, it seems, is by some called Giulap. The River is the same that passes by
Caramit, the Capital of Diarbeck, or Mesopotamia, and in the latter Maps is
called Soaid: supposed to be the River Chobar, mentioned by Ezekiel the
Prophet. See Chaibar.

Giulia, Julia, a City of Transylvania, between the Rivers of Sebekeres, and
Feyerkeres, upon the Lake Zarkad; seven German Miles South of Great Waradin;
upon the Frontiers of Transylvania; in the Hands of the Turk, whose Ancestors
conquered it in 1566. Some Authors believe this to be the same place with the
Ziridava of the Ancients.

Giulich, a Branch of Mount Taurus in Cilicia.

Giulick. See Juliers.

Giustandil, Acrys, Justiniana Prima, Lychnidus, Tauresium, a City of
Macedonia, commonly by the Christians called Locrida; standing on the Confines
of Albania, upon the Lake Pelioum, out of which the River rises, that waters
Albanopoli. This City was the Birthplace of that Great Prince Justinian the
Emperor, and from him had the Name of Justiniana: even now it is a great and
populous City, and an Archbishops See: it stands upon an high Hill, eighty
Miles from Durazzo to the East.

Glamorganshire, Glamorgania, Morganucia, one of the twelve Counties of Wales,
has on the South the Severn Sea, on the East Monmouthshire, on the North
Brecknockshire, and on the West Caermarthenshire: the North part being
Mountainous, is barren and unpleasant: the South side descending by degrees,
spreads it self into a fruitful Plain, which is filled with Towns. The
principal City of this County is Landaff. There is in this County one hundred
and eighteen Parishes. The Earldom was granted to Edward Somerset, Lord Herbert
of Chepstow, etc. by Charles I. in 1645. the Father of Henry Duke of Beaufort,
in which most Loyal and most Noble Family it now is.

Glan, Clanes, a River in Bavaria, which now falls into the Danube.

Glandeves, Glandeva, Glannata, Glannatica, a ruined City in Provence, amongst
the Maritime Alps, near the River Var; giving Name to an Honorable Family in
Province, and formerly dignified with the Title of an Earldom. The continual
Inundations of the River Var obliged the Inhabitants to desert it, about eight
hundred years ago; who settled at Entrevaux, at the distance of a quarter of a
League from it; whether they removed also the Episcopal See of Glandeves, which
is a Suffragan to the Archbishop of Ambrun.

Glanfordbridge, or Glamford, a Market Town in Lincolnshire, in the Hundred of
Yarborough.

Glanio, Clanius, Liris, a River in Italy, now frequently called L'Agno. See
Agno.

Glarys, Calarona, Glarona, a Town in Switzerland, which is the Capital of a
Canton, seated in a Valley of the same Name, upon the River Sarneff; amongst
very high Hills, called Glarnischberg; eighteen Miles from Altorf to the
South-East, and as many from Schwits to the North-East. This is so great,
populous and strong, that it may compare with most Cities. The Plain upon which
it stands, lies by the River Limat, about three German Miles in length, being
fensed on three sides by the towering Alps: having on the South and East the
Grisons; on the West the Canton Von Vry, and Schwits; and on the North the
River Limat, which parts it from the Grisons. This is one of the lesser
Cantons, and the eighth in number. Of old subject to the Monastery of Secon,
which had the Tithes, and some certain Rents; but the Inhabitants were
otherwise free of all Exactions, Taxes and Tolls; and governed by a Senate
chosen out of themselves, by their own Laws and Customs; only the Abbess of the
Monastery chose the Senators: and the Emperor was Advocate of the Monastery:
which Right being consigned by Fredericus Aenobarbus, to Otho, Palatine of
Burgundy, came to the House of Hapspurgh; and by the latter, to Albert, Son of
Rodolphus I. who attempting to change these Methods of Government, this Canton
in 1351. revolted, and was received into the League of the Cantons; and in
1386. gave the Austrians a fatal overthrow. Zuinglius, about 1515. preaching
here against the Church of Rome, many of the Inhabitants embraced the Reformed
Religion, the rest persisting in the Roman; and so it stands at this day.

Glass, Nanaeus, a River in Scotland, the same with Strachnavern.

Glascow, Glasquo, Glascum, a City in the West of Scotland, upon the River
Cluyd, [ Glotta,] sixteen Miles from the Western Shore. This was very anciently
a Bishops See, but discontinued till King William of Scotland, restored it: now
an Archbishops See, and an University, which was opened by Turnbull a Bishop,
who in 1554. built a College here: and it is now the best place of Trade in
this part of Scotland, having a delightful situation, excellent Apples, and a
Bridge of eight Arches over the Cluyd.

Glastenbury, Glasconia, Avalonia, a very ancient and famous Abbey in the Isle
of Avalon, in Sommersetshire, upon the River Parret; which is said to have been
built, or begun, by Joseph of Arimathea, the Apostle of the Britains, under the
Reign of Nero the Emperor and Arviragus King of the Britains, (according to
Gildas), and therefore honored above all other places in this Nation. The
first small Cell failing, Devi Bishop of S. David's, erected a new one in the
same place. But Ina King of the West Saxons, who began his Reign in 689. and
reigned thirty eight years, was its lasting and most beautiful Founder; who
about 7 8. erected here a very fair and stately Church, in which time it was a
kind of School, or Seminary, but managed by Secular Priests. Dunstan brought in
the Benedictine Monks, about 970. under these, the place thrived wonderfully,
and became a small City, encompassed with a strong Wall of a Mile about, and
replenished with stately buildings: they had a Revenue of 3508 l. per annum,
when Henry VIII. put an end to all their Greatness. In this place in the Reign
of Henry II. between two Pyramids, was found the Tomb of King Arthur, the
famous Prince of the Britains; which is a very great Indication of the
Antiquity of this Place, if there were no other. The Body lay very deep in the
Earth, with an Inscription in Latin upon a Leaden Cross, expressing it was King
Arthur, who was there buried in the Island of Avalon: It is certain, the
Britains made this place sometime their Retreat, from the harrassment of the
Pagan conquering Saxons.

Glatz, or Gladscow, Clacium, Glotium, Glatium, a a City of Bohemia, and the
Capital of a County of the same Name; seated upon the River Neis, which runs
through Silesia; and beneath Guben falls into the Oder, near the Mountains of
Fictelberg; twenty one German Miles from Prague to the East, and fifteen from
Olmutz to the North; it is a small City, built at the foot of an Hill, and has
a strong Castle in it. Dubravius says, it belonged heretofore to Silesia. The
chief Town in it, is Haberswerd.

Glencarn, Carbantorigum, an Earldom in Nidisdale in Scotland, belonging for a
long time to the Cuninghams, a great Family in that Nation.

Glendelagh, Glendelachum, once a City, now a Village, in the County of Dublin:
also once a Bishops See, but now united to the Bishopric of Dublin. This Name
is written Glandeloure, and Glandila^ge.

Glenluz Bay, Clen^ucensis Sinus, the Bay or Arm of the Sea, which divides
Ireland from Galloway in Scotland.

Glinbotin, Planina, Scardus, a Mountain in the Eastern Confines of Macedonia,
toward Albania, out of which springs the River Drin.

Globiokeu, a Town in Lithuania, made famous by a great Defeat of the
Moscovites by the Poles in 1661. in which the former lost twelve thousand Men,
and all their Cannon and Carriages.

Gloneck, a River of Bavaria, near Tyrol.

Gloucester, Claudia, and Claudia Castra, Clevum, Glovernum, a very ancient
City, in a County of the same Name, in the West of England, called Glevum by
Antoninus; being a Roman Colony designed for the curbing the Silures, a Warlike
British Clan. It lies on the East side of the Severn; and where it is not
secured by that River, has in some places a very strong Wall, and is a neat and
populous City; with twelve Parish Churches standing in it, besides the
Cathedral: on the South side it had a fine Castle built of square Stone, which
is now ruined. Ceaulin, King of the West Saxons, about 570. was the first that
conquered it from the Britans. About 878. it fell into the hands of the Danes,
who miserably defaced it. Soon after this Aldred, Archbishop of York, built the
Cathedral, to which belongs now a Dean, and six Prebends. In this Church Edward
II. was buried; and not far from him, Robert the eldest Son of William the
Conqueror; two unfortunate Princes. In the Barons Wars under Edward I. and
Henry III. it suffered very much. Richard III. sometime Duke of Gloucester,
made this City a County Corporate. Henry VIII. settled here a Bishops See in
1540. the first Bishop of which was Dr. John Chambers; from whom the present
Bishop, is the fourteenth in number. Geofry of Monmouth, had been Bishop of the Sea before; but it was suppressed in after times, and now again revived. This
City falling at first into the hands of the Rebels in our former Troubles, was
besieged Aug. 10. 1643. by the Kings Forces: the eighteenth the King came in
Person to the Leaguer, but Essex coming up Sept. 10. the Seige was raised: and
for ought I can find, it continued in their hands till the Restitution of
Charles II. Gloucestershire, was the chief Seat of the Dobuni: on the West it
butteth upon Monmonmouthshire, and Herefordshire; on the North upon
Worcestershire; on the East upon Warwickshire; and on the South upon Wiltshire,
and Somersetshire: from which last, it is parted by the River Avon: a pleasant
and fruitful Country, stretching in length from North-East to South-West; the
Eastern part swells up into Hills, called Cotteswold; the middle part sinks
into a fertile Plain, watered by the Severn; the Western side is much covered
with Woods. In the times of William of Malmsbury, the Vales in this County were
filled with Vineyards, which are now turned into Orchards, and employed in
Cider, the true and natural English Wine. The Honor or Dukedom which belongs
to this County, is annexed to the Royal Family. Henry. the Third Son to Charles
the Martyr was entitled Duke of Gloucester in 1641. Created so May 13. 1659.
and died September 13. 1660. a Prince of great Hope and Constancy.

Glogaw the Greater, Glogavia, Glosgavia, a City of Silesia in Bohemia, upon
the River Oder; which is very well fortified, and has a strong Castle: the
Capital of the Dukedom of Glogaw; about two German Miles from the Borders of
Poland, and fifteen from Breslaw to the North, and from Sagan to the East
seven. This City was taken by the Swedes in 1647.

Maly, or Klein Glogaw, the Lesser Glogaw, stands upon the same River, in the
Dukedom of Oppelen: four Miles from Oppelen East, ten from Glatz East, and
thirty from the Great Glogaw South.

Gluckstad, Glu^stadium, Fanum Fortunae, as the Name imports; a Town in
Germany, in the Dukedom of Holstein, upon the Elbe, in Stormaria; placed at the
confluence of the Elbe and the Stoer. It was raised and fortified by Christian
IV. King of Denmark in 1620. and belongs now to that Crown. It stands six Miles
beneath Hamburgh to the West.

Gluchsbourg, Glucsburgum, a small Town in Denmark, from which the Dukes of
Holstein have their Title of Glucksbourg, or Luxbourg. It stands in the East
part of the Dukedom of Sleswick, near Flentsburgh, from which it lies but one
German Mile to the East, upon a Bay of the Baltic Sea, toward the Isle of
Alsen.

Glycynero, Athyras, L'Acqua Dolce, a River of Thrace; which arises near
Byzia, Bilzier or Visa, a City of Thrace; and running Southward, falls into the
Propontis, South of Seliurea; ten German Miles South of Constantinople, and six
North of Perintho.

Gnesna, Limiosaleum, Gnesna, a City in the Kingdom of Poland, by the Germans
called Gnisen: it is an Archbishops See, in the Palatinate of Kalish, toward
the Confines of Germany; and was anciently called Limiosaleum. This was the
Royal City of Poland* and is now the Seat of the Primate of that Nation, and
Capital of Polonia Major; but daily decaying, having suffered much by Fire in
1613. It lies three Polish Miles North from the River Warta, seven from Kalish,
thirty five from Warsaw to the North-West, and thirty from Dantzick to the
South-West. Built by Lechus I. King of Poland in a Marshy Ground. The
Bishopric was founded by Mieczilaws, Duke of Poland, in 966. The Bishop of
this See executes the Regal Office in the Interregnum of that Kingdom, and
summoneth the Diet for the Election of a new King. He has the privilege, from
the Roman See, to be a Legatus Natus; and takes upon him to refuse to give
precedence to Cardinals.

Gnido, Cnidus, Gnidus, a ruined old City of Caria in the Lesser Asia; seventy
Miles from Halicarnassus to the East, between Rhodes and Cyprus, upon the
Mediterranean Sea. There are here many ruins of ancient Structures, as a
Theater, a Temple, and the like, which show the Antiquity of it: though now
desolate, and its two Havens, which made it once so famous, totally decayed.

Goa, Barygasa, Goa, a City of the Hither East Indies, called thus by the
Portuguese; but Goemoat by the Natives, that is, the Fruitful well watered
Land. It lies in a small Island toward the Mouth of the River Mandova, on the
Shoars of the Province of Cuncan, in Long. 104. 15. Lat. 15. 40. on the Western
Shore of the Cape of Malabar. This Island belonged anciently to the King of
Decam; but in 1510. was conquered by Alfonsus Albuquerque, a Portuguese. Pope
Paul I* made it an Archbishops See; and it was for a long time after the most
celebrated Mart and Haven in the East Indies: great, populous, rich and strong,
though neither walled nor fortified, only as it had six Forts in the Suburbs.
The Portuguese erected here an University, made it the Seat of the Viceroy of
the Indies, and improved it as much as was possible. Thus Baudrand. Thevenot
assures us, that it has good Walls, with Towers; and of Cannon plenty. The
Island produces Corn, Cattle, Fruit in abundance; and wants not good Water. It
is still the Capital of the Portuguese Acquisitions in this remote part of the
World; full of Religious Houses and Churches, Monks and Friars; but much
lessened as to its Trade, by the growth of the Dutch East India Company. The
Jesuits have five Houses belonging to their Order; and it is pretended, that
the Body of S. Thomas the Apostle is preserved in this City.

Godalming, A Market Town in the County of Surrey. The Capital of its Hundred.

Goes, Goae, Tergoes, a considerable Town in Zealand, seated on that Branch of
the Scheld, which is called the Schenk: a great, rich, and populous Town; on
the North Shore of the Isle of Beuelandt, four Miles East of Middleburgh, and
almost five from Vlilissingen to the North-East. Guicciardin.

Goga, Dunga, a small City in India Propria, under the Mogul, in the Kingdom of
Guzarat; toward the North Shore of the Bay of Barigazen, sixty Spanish Leagues
from Dabul to the North.

Gogna, Agonia, a small River in the Dukedom of Milan; which arises near the
Lake called il Magiore, in the County of Novarese; and running Southward by
Novara Mortara, a little above Dorno, takes in from the East the Ditombio; then
falls into the P^, eight Miles West of Pavia.

Gojame, Gojamum, a Kingdom in Africa, in the Higher Aethiopia, near the
Sources of the Nile; where it breaks out of the Lake Zembre, or Zaire; and lies
on the South of the said Lake, between it and the Mountains: the Capital of it
being Zembre, a City which gives Name to the Lake, between Long. 40. and 50.
and South Lat. 10. and 20.

Golconde, Golconda, a Kingdom in the Hither East Indies, near the Bay of
Bengala; on the North it has the Empire of the Mogul, on the West the Kingdom
of Decam, on the South the Kingdom of Bisnagar, and on the East the Bay of
Bengala. This is more frequently called Orixia. It is a great Kingdom; extended
by the space of two hundred and sixty French Leagues upon the South Bay; and
takes the Name of Golconda from the Capital City, which lies between the River
Guenga, and the Mountains of Balagua: a great and noble City, adorned with such
a stately Pagod or Temple, for the Indian Worship, as gains the preserence,
with some Travelers, before the most admired Ediflces in all Asia; sixty
Leagues from the Port of Masilupatam to the North, and fifty from the nearest
Coast of the Ocean to the West. The other Cities are Conteripatam, Caregare,
Orixa, Masilupatam, Narfingapatam, and Maliapaura, or S. Thomas. This Prince is
one of the most powerful in the Indies. It is a pleasant Country to travel in,
by reason of the Rice and Corn, and the many lovely Keservatories. The Earth
also is rich in Mines of Diamonds. Monsieur Thevenot in his Travels, assures
us, that Golconda is only a Castle, where the King of Orixa resides, and that
the City is called Bagnagar; a great, populous, rich, well Traded City, in
Southern Lat. 17. 10. adorned with many noble Structures, and fine Gardens,
though the common People live in low, thatched, ill contrived Hutts. The Castle
of Golconda stands two Miles West of Bagnagar, upon a Hill rising like a
Sugar-Loa^, secured by a Dike which is very deep, and a Wall of Stones three
Foot in length and breadth; the Ditches are filled with fair and good Water:
besides this Wall, it has five round Towers, with a great many Cannon mounted
both on the Wall and Towers, for the defense of the Place. The Prince of this
Country is a Mohammedan, Tributary to the Great Mogul; he has vast Revenues,
being the Proprietor of all the Lands in his Kingdom; and his Tolls yield him a
great Sum of Money.

Goldhurst, or Goudhurst, a Market Town in the County of Kent, in Scray Lath.

Goletta, or Goulette, Calache, a Fort in the Kingdom of Tunis, built by
Charles V. in 1535. at the entrance of the Bay of Tunis; which was taken by the
Turks in 1574. and since enlarged by them with a capacious Port, a
Custom-house, two Mosques, and a Prison for Christian Slaves.

Golfo di Arabia, Sinus Arabicus, See the Red Sea, famous for the passage of
the Children of Israel. That which we call a Bay, or Arm of the Sea, or a Sea
restrained within narrower Bounds, as opposed to the word Ocean, is by the
Italians, Spanish, and Portuguese, called Golfo: so that in their account there
is a vast number of Golfoes, or Gulphs: But I will only take notice here of the
more remarkable, and to which the word Gulf is commonly added, reserving the
rest to their proper places.

-- di Balsora, Sinus Persicus, the Persian Gulf, which divides Persia from
Arabia.

-- di Lepanto, Sinus Crissaeus sive Corinthiacus, is a Bay or Branch of the
Adriatic Sea; which enters on the West side of the Morea; divides it from
Livadia, (or Achaia,) a part of Greece; and extends it self to the six Mile
Isthmus, which connexes the Morea to the rest of Greece. This has been made
exceeding famous by a great Naval Victory the Venetians obtained here against
the Turks in 1571. in which the Maritim Forces of that Empire were so broken,
that it has not been able to recover the loss to his day. In the year 1687. the
Venetians again entered this Gulf, and taking its Dardanels, are become the
entire Masters of it.

-- di Mexico, a vast Bay, which from the North Sea, (or Atlantic Ocean)
between Florida, Cuba, H^^paniola, and the Caribbe Islands, insinuates it self,
a(...)ms a kind of Semicircle, of about twenty degrees from North to South, and
near fifty from East to West. In this Bay Jamaica lies upon the North; it has
Florida upon the West; New Spain. on the East; and upon the South New Granada.
The Continent of America is not here in the narrowest part above twenty German
Miles; and therefore all that lies South of this Straight, is called South; and
the other North America.

-- di Taranto, Sinus Tarentinus, is all that great Bay at the South end of
Italy, which has Otranto on the East, the Basuicate on the North, Calabria on
the West, and the Island of Sardo almost in the middle of it.

-- di Venetia, the Venetian Gulf, or Adriatic Sea, is a great Branch of the
Mediterranean; which divides Greece on the East from Italy on the West; at the
North end lies the City of Venice, which commands this Sea; and will suffer no
other armed Ships upon it (as much as in that State lies) but Merchants, and
the Convoys of them.

Golle, Galliola, a River in Soissons in the Isle of France.

Gollen-berg, Asciburgus, a Mountain in Poland, which is a Branch of the
Sarmatian Mountains, in the opinion of Ptolemy. It begins at the Town of
Twardozyn, in the Confines of Hungary; and running Northwards toward the River
Swarta, and the Marquisate of Brandenburg, ends at the Baltic Sea. This
Mountain is called Gollenberg by the Inhabitants, and Tartary by the Poles.

Golnow, Golnovia, a small City in Germany, in the Dukedom of Pomerania, upon
the River Ihna, which a little lower falls into the Oder, five German Miles
North-East of Stetin. This City was built in 1188. And was heretofore a great
and rich Place, but of later times it has suffered much by Fire, and War^ by
the Peace of Westphalia it belonged to the King of Sweden; but by the Treaty of
S Germain in 1679. it was mortgaged to the Elector of Brandenburg by the
Swedes, for fifty thousand Crowns.

Golo, Tuolo, a River in the Isle of Corsica.

Gouiera, one of the Canary Islands, betwixt Tenerissa to the East and the
Island of Iron to the West; which is twenty two Leagues in Compass, and has a
Town of the same Name, and a large Haven: supposed to be that which the
Ancients called Theode.

Gomeres, a Tribe of the ancient Bereberes in Africa: See Bereberes.

Gomorrha, an unfortunate City of Judaea, consumed, together with four others,
by Fire from Heaven, Genesis 19. and the Plains, they stood in, turned into a Dead
Sea, about the year of the World 2138.

Gonfi, Gomphi, a Town of Thessalia, in the Borders of Epirus, toward the
Springs of the River Penee, thirty Miles East of Ragusa; it is still called by
the ancient Name, but reduced to a Village.

Gonga, Gannum, Gan^s, Gonni, Gonos, a Town in Thrace, in the Province of Corp,
upon the Propontis. It lies in the middle between Rodisto to the South, and
Constantinople to the North, fifteen Miles from either. It is mentioned in the
Councils.

Gorch, a Village of the Lower Hungary, upon the River Zarwich; between
Alba-Regalis, and Quinque Ecclesiae.

Gordium, an ancient City of Phrygia in Asia Minor, upon the River Sangarius;
where was that famous Gordian Knott, which Alexander cut in two with his Sword,
when he could not otherwise untye it.

Goree, Goeree and Goure, an Island in the Atlantic Ocean, upon the Coast of
Nigritia in Africa, three Leagues distant from Cape de Verde; heretofore
belonging, as a dependent, to the Kingdom of Ale in Barbary; till taken by the
Hollanders, who built it a Fort, called Nassaw; and in 1677. from the
Hollanders, by the French.

Goritia, Noreja, Julium Carnicum, Goritia, is a small, but very strong City in
the Eastern Border of Friuli, next Carniola, upon the River Lisonzo, or Isonzo,
[ Sontius] three German Miles from Friuli East, and seventeen from Venice. This
is the Capital of a small County of the same Name, and is well feated,
over-looking a fair Plain to the South-West. The Emperors Governor of the
Country lives in the Castle, who has a Guard allowed him. The Germans call it
Gortz. This City and County fell to Frederick IV. by Inheritance from the last
Earl of Gortz, who died in 1473. and ever since it has been in the Possession
of the House of Austria. It has been esteemed a part of Carniola, though it be
in truth a part of Friuli.

Gorkum, Gorichemum, a City or great Town in South Holland, upon the Maes,
where it receives the Ling, one Mile more West than the Confluence of the Maes
and Wael, three Leagues from Dort to the East, and four from Breda to the
North; built in the year 1230. by a Lord of the Territory of Arkel, of which it
is the Capital; and very strongly fortified.

Gorlitz, Gorlitium, a City of the Upper Lusatia, in Germany, which is the
Capital of that Country. It is very strong, seated in a Marsh upon the River
Nisse, which falls into the Oder, between Gossen and Franckfort, twelve German
Miles from Glogaw to the South-West, the same from Dresden to the East, and
eighteen from Prague to the North. It was heretofore under the King of Bohemia,
but belongs now to the Elector of Saxony.

Goro, Sagis, a Haven at one of the Mouths or Outlets of the Po.

Gory, a principal Town or small City in Gurgistan (or Georgia) in Asia, upon
the River Kur, in a Plain betwixt two Mountains; built by a General of the
Persian Army, about forty years ago, and defended with a Fortress, in which a
hundred natural Persians keep Garrison. It is already grown a rich and
plentiful place.

Goslar, Goslaria, an Imperial and Free-City, in the Lower Saxony, in Germany,
within the Bounds of the Dukedom of Brunswick Wolfenbuttel, in the Forest of
Sellerwalt. Built by Henry the Fowler, and fortified in 1201. The Dukes of
Brunswick are its Protectors: it stands on the Confines of the Bishopric of
Hildisheim, five Miles from that City to the South East, and seven from
Halberstad to the West, upon the River [ Gosa] Gostar, which a little lower
falls into the River Oakre, [ Obater.]

Gostynin, Gostinia, a small Town, and a Castellany thereto belonging, in the
Palatinate of Rava, in the Great Poland; two Miles from the Vistula, and
Ploczko to the South; which has a Castle, tolerably strong. This small Place
was made famous by the Imprisonment and Death of Susicius, Great Duke of
Muscovy.

Gotham, Egates, Aegates, a knot of small Islands in the Mediterranean Sea,
over against the Western Point of Sicily, upon the Coast of Africa.

Gothardsberg, or S. Gothard, Adula, Summae Alps, a considerable Branch of the
Swiss Alps, between the Duchy of Milan and Switzers, where the Pennine Alps
begin: it lies in part in the Canton of Vri, and in part in the Upper League of
the Grisons, between Altorff to the North, and the Town of Belinzona (once a
Town of the Duchy of Milan, now belonging to the Swiss), upon the River
Tesino, to the South: the parts of this Mountain are Grispaltsberg, from whence
springs the first Branch of the Rhine; Vogselberg, called by the Italians, il
monte Vccello, from whence comes the second Branch of the Rhine; Mont Furk,
from whence the Rhosne and the Tesino; Mont Grimsel, the Mother of the Aar and
Russ, which do both afterward fall into the Rhine. It is dangerous to pass
this Branch of the Alps without Guides, being ordinarily covered with Snow.

Gothen, Gotha, a small City in Thuringia in Germany, built by the Goths; which
is now under the Duke of Gotha, a Branch of the House of Saxony, whose Castle
is Grimmestein. This place was heretofore very strong, but in the time of
Ferdinand I. it was destroyed, and in later times rebuilt, and called
Freidenstein. It stands three German Miles from Erford to the West, and four
from Eysenach. The Dukedom of Gotha, is a part of the Upper Saxony, under the
Dominion of its own Duke; who is a Branch of the Line of Weymar; and besides
this, possessed of Altenburg in Misnia, Coburg, a part of Hennenberg, in
Franconia; and Osterland in the Upper Saxony.

Gothebourg, or Gotembourg, a very strong City with an Harbor belonging to it,
in the Province of Westrogothia, at the entrance of the Baltic Sea, three
German Miles from Bahuys to the South, sixty six from Stockholm to the
South-West, and seventeen from Skagen (the most Northern Point of Jutland) to
the North-West. In this City Charles IX. King of Sweden died, in 1660. There is
another Town of the same Name in New York (formerly called New Sweden) in
America; built by the Swedes, but taken from them by the Hollanders, and taken
again from the Hollanders by the English.

Gotland, Gothia, the South part of the Kingdom of Sweden, called by the
Inhabitants Gutlandt; by the Swedes Gota; by the Germans Gotlandt. It lies
between Sweden properly so called, Norway to the North, and the Baltic Sea;
from Norway it is again divided by the vast Lake Wener, and the River that
issues out of it. This great space of Land is divided into three parts, or
Provinces, West Gota, Ost Gota, and Sod Gota; each of which is again subdivided
into lesser Provinces. In Ostrogothia, is Ost Gota, Smaland, Oeland, and an
Island in the Baltiek Sea, called Gotland. In Sod (or South) Gota, which lies
next Denmark, (being separated from it only by the Sound,) are Skone, Haland,
and Bleking; which three belonged heretofore to the Danes; but in 1658. by the
Treaty of Roschild, were yielded to the Swedes. In Westrogothia, are Daal and
Wermeland: the principal Cities in these Provinces, are, Calmar, Gottenbourg,
Bahuys, and Landskroon. This was the Country of that Nation of the Goths, which
contributed so very much to the ruin of the Western Roman Empire, being
associated in their Conquests by the Rugii, the Carini, the Sidrones, the
Vandali, and others. They began to be taken notice of under Decius the
Emperor, in the year of Christ 251. Theodosius conquered them after this, when
they had but a little before ruined Valens his Predecessor. Alaricus took Rome,
and laid all Italy desolate in the Reign of Honorius, A. D. 409. after whom,
Atulphus set up the Kingdom of Wisigoths, or Western Goths, in Aquitania and
Narbon in France; which was conquered in 506. or rather removed into Spain;
where it continued three hundred years, till Rodericus, the last King of this
Race, was overthrown and slain by the Moors and Saracens of Africa. Of all
which I shall speak more largely in the proper places. This people had a
Bishop, named Theophilus, assisting at the General Council of Nice, under
Constantine the Great; and another, Vlphilas, who was a famous Arrian. The
Island of Gotland aforementioned, in the Baltic Sea, is about twelve Leagues
long from North to South, and five broad from East to West, and nine Swedish
Miles from the Isle of Oeland to the East; with the City Wisburg for its
Capital.

Gottingen, Dulgibiorum, Dulgumniorum, Munitium, Juliphurdum, Gottinga,
Gottengen, a City of the Lower Saxony, in the Dukedom of Brunswick, upon the
River Leyne; five German Miles from Limbecke on the same River to the South,
twelve from Paterborne to the East, and sixteen from Mansfelt to the West: the
River upon which it stands, a little beneath Ferden, falls into the Weser,
above Bremen to the East, six Miles.

Gottorp, a Castle near Sleswick, in the Province of Jutland, in Denmark; which
is the ordinary residence of the Dukes of Holstein, entitled Gottorp from
hence, in distinction from the Dukes of Holstein Regalis. Two Branches of the
same Family from Christian III. King of Denmark. See Holstein.

Gotz. See Emmaus.

Goualiar, or Govaleor, a City and Province of the same Name, of the Empire of
the Great Mogul in India, on this side the Ganges, to the East of Agra. The
former is esteemed one of the most considerable places in the Indies; where the
Emperor keeps his Treasure, and confines the Prisoners of State.

Goude, Gauda, a Town and Port of Holland upon the Issel, which there receives
the River Gou, which last gives Name to this place; in an advantageous
situation upon the account of the Sluices; five Leagues from Leyden. It is said
to have been built in the year 1272. and afterward in 1420. to have been quite
destroyed by fire. The Townhouse is remarked for a good Building.

Gouel, a River of the Kingdom of Bengale in the East Indies, where Diamonds
are found.

Governo, Acroventum, a Town in the Duchy of Milan, but under the Dominion of
the Republic of Venice, upon the Po, where the River Menzo comes to join it,
between Mantoua and Concordia: Memorable for the Enterview at it of Pope Leo,
and Attila King of the Hunns.

Gournay, Gornacum, a Town in the Territory of Bray in Normandy, upon the River
Epte, five Leagues from Gisors. There is another of the same Name in the Isle
of France, upon the Frontiers of Picardy and the River Aronde, betwixt
Compiegne, Noyen and Clermont en Beauvais.

Gozi, Thera, and Island near Candia.

Gozo, Gaulos, and by the Inhabitants called Gaudisch, is a small Island near
Malta to the West, at the distance of four Miles only, mentioned by Strabo and
Pliny. Now belonging to the Knights of Maltha, who have fortified it with a
Castle. Also an Island in the Sea of Crete near Cape Crio, called Claudia, in
the Acts of the Apostles, C. 27. 16. and otherwise by the Ancients, Claudus and
Claudos.

La Grace, or La Grass, a City of Provence in France, which is a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Embrun, in the stead of Antipolis, now Antibe: it is
seated upon an Hill; and is a fine well built City, with diverse Churches and
Religious Houses in it; three Leagues from Antibe to the West, seven from Nice
to the same quarter, about twenty four from Embrun to the South, and the same
from Sisteron to the South*West. Hadr. Vales. in his Notitia Galliae says,
this City in 1285 belonged to the Bishopric of Arles, and Antibe was then the
Bishops See; but in 1322. this is named, as a Suffragan Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Embrun, in the Itinerary of Gregory XI. And that the Sea was
removed hither upon the account of the daily Incursions of Pirates and Robbers,
and upon the slaughter of one of the Bishops of Antibe. For (says he) Antibe
is a Seaport, but La Grace is a strong Castle, and more remote from the Sea.
Which reason shows the weakness of the French Nation at Sea in those times.

Gracias a Dios, a Town and Cape of the Province of Honduras, in New Spain, in
the Northern America; possessed by the Salvages, with the whole Country
thereabouts, to the extent of fifty Leagues, living in a Republican way,
without any Sovereign King or Prince over them; and when they go to War, making
choice of one out of themselves to command for that present Juncture. The
Spaniards honor them with the Title of los Indios Bravos, for their Gallantry,
having been never conquered yet.

Gradiska, Gradiscia, a principal Town of the Province of Sclavonia in the
Lower Hungary, upon the Save, betwixt Possega and Zagrabia, toward the Borders
of Croatia. See Sclavonia. Some will have it to be the true Servitium of the
Ancients. A Fortress likewise in Friuli, in the County of Goritia, upon the
River Sisonzo, which belongs to the House of Austria.

Grado, Gradus, a City and Island belonging to Friuli, on the Shoars of the
Adriatic Sea, or Gulf of Venice; built by the Inhabitants of Aquileja; eight
Miles from Venice to the East, and twelve from Aquileja to the South, under the
Venetians. The Patriarchs of Aquileja long since removed from thence, and
settled here; as they went afterward from hence to Venice, about two hundred
years since. Elias one of these Patriarchs in 602. celebrated a Council in this
place.

Grafignana, Caferoniana, a County within the Apennine; the greatest part of
which is under the Duke of Modena, the rest belongs to the Republic of Lucca.

Graftschaft Mansfeld, Mansfeldiensis Comitatus, the County of Mansfield. The
word Graftschaft, in the German Town, signifying a County.

Grafton, a Road-Town in Northamptonshire, in the Hundred of Cleley; adorned
with a Park, and an ancient Seat of the Family de Wideville, Earls of Rivers.
The Marriage of King Edward IV. with the Lady Gray, which was the first
Marriage of any King of England with a Subject from the Conquest, received its
consummation here. From the year 1490. to Henry VIII. this Seat, bequeathed by
Richard (the last of the Male Line of the Rivers), to Thomas Gray, Marquess of
Dorset, continued in the Name of the Greys: and then in an exchange for Lands
in Leicestershire, became united to the Crown. It is well known for giving the
Title of Duke to the late Henry Fitz Roy, created by King Charles II. his
Father, Baron of Sudbury, Viscount Ipswich, and Earl of Euston in 1672. and
Duke of Grafton five years after: who dyed of the Wounds he received at the
Siege of Cork.

Grambusia, Crambusia, a small Island on the Coast of Cilicia.

Grampond, a Market and Borough-Town in the County of Cornwall, in the Hundred
of Powder: which returns two Members of Parliament.

Gran, Strigonium, a City of the Lower Hungary, seated on the South-West side
of the River Danube, where the River Gran falls into the Danube. Its Castle is
a very fine Pile, built upon the Banks of the Danube, upon a Rock, which is
very steep. The City is of a Triangular form. It has two great Towers, one
toward Thomasberg, and the other toward the Danube, over against Barkan:
between these Towers there is a Wall; which has small Flanks and Redoubts, and
a Dike flanked with hewn Stone: at the foot of the Dike there runs a Terrasse,
which has strong Pallisadoes, and four great Points, instead of Ravelins: the
other side toward the Danube has nothing but Walls and Pallisadoes; it is very
steep on that side, and secured by the River. The Castle stands very high, but
there are two Mountains from which it may be battered. This City is divided
into two parts, the High and the Low Town, the last commanding the Danube: they
are both very strong, and have good Walls. S. Thomas's Hill is also well
fortified, because being very near the Town, it would otherwise have commanded
it. There are in it excellent temperate Baths. This City was heretofore the
Capital of Hungary, and has many magnificent Buildings in it, as S. Stephens
Church, the Archbishops Palace, etc. The Country about it affords excellent
Wines; there is plenty of hot Springs; so that the pleasantness of its
situation, and the fertility of the Soil easily induced the ancient Kings of
Hungary to settle here. The importance of this Place has brought upon it many
bloody Sieges. John King of Hungary besieged it without any success, about
1529. Solomon the Magnificent took it in 1544. The Count of Mansfield retook it
for the Archduke Matthias, in 1595. It was lost again by the Cowardice of the
Garrison in 1605. the Governor being accidentally killed. Just over against it
stands Barkan, to which there is a Bridge of Boats over the Danube, which
together with Barkan was burnt by the Christians in 1664. In 1683. there was
under the Walls of this City, a sharp Engagement between the Turks and Germans;
the latter prevailing, and taking the City of Gran also, October 23, after
they* had beat the Turks from Vienna. July 30. 1685. the Turks again besieged
this City, but were forced to retire, Aug. 16. with the loss of all their
Cannon and Baggage. It stands six German Miles from Alba Regalis to the East;
the same from Buda to the North, and Comora to the South; in a most fruitful
and pleasant Plain. Called by the Inhabitants Stegran; by the Germans, Gran; by
the Italians, Strigonia. S. Stephen King of Hungary was born here. This City is
also an Archbishops See; the Archbishop is perpetual Chancellor of the Kingdom
of Hungary, and ought by his place to have the Honor of Crowning the King
after he is chosen, being the Prima^^ of that whole Kingdom. The River Gran
rises in the Carpathian Hills; and passing by Liptsch, Ne^^sol, Konisperg, and
Soidig^n, at Barkan, over against Gran, falls into the Danube. Long. 41. 25.
Lat. 47. 45.

Grana, a small River in Italy, which falls into the Po, against the Mouth of
the Tanaro.

Granada, Granata, Granatum, Illiberis, and Regnum Oranatense, a Kingdom and a
City in Spain. The Kingdom of Granada lies in the South of Spain, upon the
Mediterranean Sea, being heretofore the Eastern part of Hispania Boetica.
Bounded on the East with the Kingdom of Murcia; on the North and West with that
of Andalusia; and on the South with the Mediterranean. It is full of Mountains;
the greatest of which is Apu^axara. The Soil was once very fruitful, but now
desolate, and consequently in many parts barren. This Kingdom was one of the
first the Moors possessed themselves of, and of the last they lost; the
Spaniards not recovering it out of their Hands before 1492. Peter Son of
Alphonsus, King of Castile, surprised one of their Kings and slew him in 1350.
But Ferdinando in the first mentioned year was the Prince which God had
appointed to put a final period to the Kingdom of the Moors in Spain, by the
expulsion of Mahomet Boabdelin, the last King of Granada, Son of Muley Assin.
As this raised Spain to that greatness our Fathers saw and feared; so the
expulsion of the Posterity of these Moors by Philip II. in 1571. (occasioned by
a Rebellion here and in. Andalusia, upon the score of the Inquisition) began
the ruin of Spain; the loss of so vast a number of Subjects (many of which
though banished as Mahometans, did profess Christianity in Africa amongst the
Moors) having rendered it (together with the American Plantations) weak and
unable to defend it self, or to maintain its very distant Dominions. The
principal Cities of this Kingdom are, Granada, Guadix, Baza, Ronda, and
Almeria. This Kingdom is twenty five Miles in breadth, twenty three in length,
and sixty in circumference. Granada, Nova Illiberis, the Capital City of the
last mentioned Kingdom (and from whence it had its Name:) is a great and most
delightful City as any in Spain; the Air healthful; and it has plenty of
excellent Springs; so that the Moors were of opinion, Paradise was at least in
that part of the Heavens which influenced this Climate. This City was built out
of the Ruins of Illiberis, an old Roman City, in an extended form upon several
Hills, (two of which are higher than any of the rest) upon the River Del Oro [
Darrum], the River Xenil [ Singilis] flowing also not far from it on the South.
This City is divided into four parts; the first is Granada, in which is the
Cathedral; the second, Alhambra, beautified with the Palace of the Moorish
Kings, which is extremely Magnificent, and has a delightful Prospect; the
third, Alvesia; and the fourth, Antiquerula, which for the multitude of
Inhabitants, and beauty of the Buildings, is not inferior to any of the other
three: the whole is twelve Miles in compass, inhabited by many excellent
Artificers, especially Silk-Weavers. It has also a Bishops See, an University
opened by Ferdinando, and a Parliament or Chancellary. This City was built by
the Moors, who were expelled out of it, after they had possessed it 778 years,
in 1462. It has twelve Gates, and a thousand and thirty Towers. In it lie
buried Ferdinando and Isabella, Philip I. and Joanna his Queen. On the East
there is a Castle built on a Hill of hewn Stone. This City stands thirty six
Leagues from Sevil to the East, nineteen from Cordova to the South-East, and
twelve from Ja^n to the South. Long. 17. 10. Lat. 37. 30.

New Granada, by the Spaniards styled Nuevo Reyno de Granada, a Kingdom in the
South America, in the large Country of Castile d' Or, whereof it is sometime
reckoned as a Province; lying betwixt the Provinces of Popayan, Paria, and S.
Martha; a hundred and thirty Leagues in length, in breadth where it is at the
largest about thirty, and where the least about twenty. There are Mines of Gold
and precious Stones to enrich it, with large Forests and excellent Pasturage.
It lies so near the Equinoctial, that the difference betwixt Winter and Summer,
the Day and Night, is scarce observable. Subject nevertheless to violent
Hurricanes, Thunders and Lightnings. The principal Provinces of it are Bogota
and Tunia. The Capital City, S. Fe de Bogota: the other principal Cities and
Places under the Spaniards, Trinidad, la Palma, Pampl^na, Merida, Tunia,
Merequita, Vittoria, St. John de los Lanos, etc. It is watered by the great
River de la Madalena, and in diverse parts inhabited by numbers of Salvages.
There is a Town, Granada, in the Region of Nicaragua in the North America,
toward the Gulf of Nicaragua and the North Sea; under the Government of
Guadimala. And an Island amongst the Caribbes; named so formerly by the
Spaniards, but now under the Dominion of the French: Betwixt La Trinidad,
Tabago, and Barbados.

Grandmont or Geerstberg, G^rardi Mons, a small Town in the Earldom of
Flanders, upon a Hill, with the River Dender running by its foot: three Leagues
from Oudenarde and five from Dendermonde. Built about the year 1065. by Baldwin
V. Earl of Flanders; and often taken by the French.

Grane, Grana, an Island belonging to France, in the Bay of Aquitaine.

Granea, Echedorus, a River of Macedonia, which falls into the Gulf of
Thessalonica; said to have been drunk dry by the Army of Xerxes. It is now
called Calico by some, by others Verataser; and runs near the City of
Thessalonica.

Grange, a Seigniory in the Province of Berry in France, giving its name to an
honorable Family.

Granico, Granicus, a River of the Lesser Asia, placed by Strabo in the Lesser
Mysia: it springs from Mount Ida, and bending Northward, falls into the
Propontis between Cyzicum to the East, and Lamposcus to the West; its Fountains
are twenty Stadias from the Springs of Scamander [now Scamandro.] Also at this
day called Granico by some, and by others Lazzara. Upon the Banks of it near
Cyzicum, was the first Battle between Alexander the Great, and Darius King of
the Persians, Anno Romae 420. i. e. 334 years before our Savior, in which a
hundred thousand Persians were slain. See Plutarch and Justin.

Granson, Gransonium, a Village in Switzerland, near the Lake of Newenbourg,
which has a small District belonging to it, subject to the Cantons of Bearn,
and Friburg: it lies at the equal distance of 3 Miles from Newenburg to the
South, and Friburg to the West. Near this place, the Army of Charles the Hardy.
Duke of Burgundy, consisting of 50000 Men, was defeated by 5000 Swiss in 1476.
and his Camp taken with all his Baggage and Cannon. This unfortunate Prince had
but a little before taken this Town from the Swiss; and coming too late to
relieve it again, the Swiss upon this defeat of his Army, have ever since
enjoyed it.

Grantham, a Borough and Market Town of very good account in Lincolnshire, in
Kesteven Division, upon the River Witham. The Capital of its Hundred, and
privileged with the right of sending two Burgesses to the Parliament; vulgarly
taken notice of for an extraordinary high (and therefore seemingly crooked)
Steeple.

Granville, Grandisvilla, Magna villa, a strong Seaport Town in Normandy,
betwixt Coutances and Auranches, seven Leagues from Jarsey to the South, and
five from S. Michael to the North: situated in part upon a Rock of difficult
access, and part in the Plain.

Graro, Masta, a Mountain of Aethiopia, upon the South-East of Egypt.

Gras de Passon, Massalioticum, the Mouth or Haven at the Outlet of the River
Rhosne, into the Mediterranean Sea. This French Word GRAS, (like the Latin,
Gradus, from whence it is derived) being employed by them, as the other was by
the Romans, to signify a Wharf, Key, or Stairs for the Shipping and Landing
Merchandise; and consequently for an Harbor, Haven, or Seaport, or the Mouth
of a River; it frequently occurs in the Names of such places.

Grass. See La Grace.

Grateley, Gratelea. This place is mentioned in the Tomes of the Councils for a
Council assembled at it in 928: But whether it be the Village of the name in
the County of Southampton and the Hundred of Andover, or another in Barkshire
in the Hundred of Reading, it is not clearly seen.

Gratiosa, one of the Azores.

Gratti, Crathis, a River of the hither Calabria, which arises out of the
Apennine Hills; and running Northward, takes in Busentium near Cosenza;
afterward also being swelled by the Cothyle, the Turbido, and some others of
less note, it falls into the Gulf of Taranto at Thuris, an ancient but ruined
City now called, La torre di Brodogneto.

Gratz, or Gretz, Graiacum, Graecium, Graecium Savariae, a very strong City of
Stiria, which is the Capital of that Province, and has a Princely Castle in it;
the common Residence of the Arch Duke of Gratz, or Stiria, who is of the House
of Austria; it stands upon the River Mure, thirteen German Miles from Vienna to
the South, five from the Drove, nine from Judenburg to the East; and five
Leagues below the confluence of the Mure with the Drove.

Graudentz, or Grudzanez, Graudentium, Grudentum, a sweet, well fortified Town,
in the Prussia Polonica; or that part, which belongs to the Kingdom of Poland;
seated upon the Confluence of the Osse and Vistula; fifteen Polish Miles above
Dantzick to the South, and thirty five from Warshaw to the North. It has a
Castle, and is under the Poles.

Grave, Gravia, Carvo, a strong Town in Brabant, upon the Maes, under the
United Provinces. Taken by the French in 1672. and after a Siege of three
Months left in 1674. It is the Capital of a small District called Kuiclandt by
the Dutch; and stands two Leagues from Nimeguen to the South, and four from
Bosle-Du^ to the East, upon the Frontiers of Gelderland.

Graveling, Gravelines, Gravelingen, Gravelina, Gravelinga, a strong Seaport
on the Coast of Flanders, at the Mouth of the River Aa; which arises in the
County of Bologne; and watering Renty and S. Omar, falls here into the British
Sea; three Miles from Calis to the North, and the same from Dunkirk to the
South. It was taken by the French in 1644, and again in 1658: ever since which
time it has been in their hands. The Castle was first built in 1528. by the
Order of the Emperor Charles V.

Gravesend, a noted Market Town in the County of Kent, in Aylesford Lath;
seated upon a rising Hill, on the banks of the Thames, over against Tilbury
Fort in Essex.

Gravina, a City in Puglia, in the Kingdom of Naples; which is a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Acerenza; and has the honor to give the Title of a
Duke to the Family of Vrsina. It stands at the foot of the Apennine, in the
Borders of the Basilicate; nine Miles from Matera to the North, twenty four
from Cirenza to the East, and thirty four from Bari to the West.

Gray, Graeum, Graium, Greium, a City in the County of Burgundy, or the Franche
Comte; small, but well Peopled; seated on an Hill, upon the River Saone [ Arar]
which watering Lion, falls beneath it into the Rhosne; in the Borders of the
Dukedom of Burgundy, nine Miles from Dijon to the East, and six from Dole to
the North: It was well fortified, and had heretofore a strong Castle; but being
taken by the French in 1668. and retaken in 1674, the French dismantled it,
after which by the Treaty of Nimeguen, it was in 1678. resigned to them, and
they still have it.

Grays-Thurrock, a Market Town in the County of Essex, in the Hundred of
Chafford.

Greece, Graecia, Hellas, a very large Country in Europe; which being taken in
its greatest extent, was bounded on the East by the Propontis, and the Aegean
Sea, or Archipelago; on the South by the Mediterranean Sea; on the West by the
Ionian Sea, or the Gulf of Venice; and on the North by Bulgaria, Servia, and
Illyricum: Mount Haemus running between Greece and these Countries, and ending
at the Euxine Sea, which there begins to be a part of its Northern Border. So
that it is a kind of Peninsula, surrounded on three sides by the Sea; and only
united to the rest of Europe by the fourth: now almost entirely in the Hands of
the Turks, who by the ruin of the Grecian Empire have possessed themselves of
this vast, fruitful, populous, and once most Learned and Civil Country; and by
their Tyranny, Barbarity, and ill Government, have in about two hundred years
almost entirely ruined what was the Work of two thousand to effect. It is
called Greece by the English, Das Griechenland by the Germans, and Romelia by
the Turks: it contains Thrace, (now Romania,) Macedonia, Achaia, (now Livadia,)
the Morea, (Peloponnesus) and the greatest part of the Islands in the
Archipelago; Constantinople being the head of this vast Country. This People
(says Cicero) which has flourished in Fame, Glory, Learning, Arts, Empire,
and Military Exercises, possesses but a small part of Europe: but having by
their A^ms prevailed over the Asiaticks, they surrounded the Shoars of that
Country, with their Cities and Colonies. He might have added, they did the like
by Italy, and reduced almost all that which is now the Kingdom of Naples, under
their Power, (then called Magna Graecia,) and the best part of Sicily too; and
running down beyond Italy, Marseilles in Provence was one of their Colonies. In
Asia the Less they possessed Mysia, Phrygia, Aeolia, Ionia, Doris, Lydia, and
Caria; to which Countries they gave the name of Graecia Asiatica. They
possessed also most of the Islands of the Mediterranean Sea; and this before
the Rise of the Macedonian Empire, which put the best part of Asia and Egypt
into their Hands: nor were they ever Conquered by any Foreign Power (though
Xerxes attempted it with an Army of three hundred thousand men), till the
Romans subdued them. Constantine the Great fixing the Seat of the Empire
amongst them at Constantinople, they regained their Sovereignty again; and kept
it, when Rome and all the Western Empire fell into the Hands of the Barbarous
Nations. But at last Constantinople being taken by Mahomet II. in 1453* they
fell under the most deplorable slavery that is possible to be conceived. Athens
and Lacedaemon were two of their great Republics, Rivals of each others glory.
Macedonia, Epirus, Argos, and Thessalia, had the honor to be Kingdoms.
Corinth* Thebes, Megalopolis, Megara, Sicyan, Mycenae, etc. were other of their
principal Cities. The Romans gloried to derive a body of their Laws from the
Governments of Greece, and to learn the Sciences from the Mouths and Writings
of its Philosopers* Historians, and Poets. This was also the Country of those
Primitive Grand Doctors of Christianity, Origin, Dionysius Areopag. Clemens
Alexandr^ Eusebius, Athanasius, Nazianzen, Basil, Chrysostom, etc. from whom
the modern Greek Church pretends to receive those Privileges, Customs,
Traditions, Ceremonies, Doctrines and Precepts, which no interest of the Roman
See has been able in any measure to alter amongst them to this day.

Greenwich, a delicate Village, upon the Thames in Kent^; famous of old times
for the Murder of Ealpheg, Archbishop of Canterbury, in 1012. But more for a
Royal Palace, began by Hum^ry Duke of Gloucester, enlarged by Henry VII. to
which his Son Henry VIII* added a Castle. This Palace being fallen into ruin,
K. Charles 2. began the raising of it again into a noble Structure, but dyed
before he had finished it: so that it is now made a Magazine for Powder. There
is a Royal. House, called Queen Elizabeth's. Palace, and a Park about it*
adjoining to Greenwich; who being born here in 1533. has given it a Title to
the utmost love and esteem of all Englishmen. And hard by it is Black Heath,
where several Battles have been fought in the Reigns of Richard II. Henry VI.
and Henry VII.

Grenade, the chief Town of the County of Gaure, in the Government of Guienne
in France, upon the Garonne, three Leagues from Toulouse. It was of great note
in the thirteenth Century, during the Wars of the Albigeois.

Grenoble, Gratianopolis, Acusio, Accusium, Cularo, a City of Dauphine in
France, which belonged to the Allobroges; and a Bishops See* under the
Archbishop of Vienne, and the Capital of the Dauphinate: it stands on the North
side of the Isere, where it takes in the Drac, (Dr^^^), from the South; at the
foot of an Hill, upon a fruitful Plain; thirteen Leagues from Vienne to the
East, and sixteen from Lion to the South-East. This City has its name of
Gratianopolis and Grenoble from Gratianus the Emperor, who rebuilt and adorned
it. An ancient Inscription here extant says, Dioclesian and Maximilian
repaired two of its Gates, and gave them new names. This City is now also the
Seat of the Parliament of this Province. The Bishops take the Title of Princes
of Grenoble.

Gresivandan, a Valley of Dauphine, lying about the City, and sometimes
therefore called by the name of the Province of Grenoble, supposed to have been
the Country of the Tricorii of the Ancients. It has had particular Counts of
its own, who were the Lords of it in former times.

Griechisch Weissenburgh. See Belgrade.

Grignan, a Town in Provence, toward S. Paul de trois Chasteaux and
Montelimar, two or three Leagues from the Rhosne: It has a Collegiate Church,
founded in 1512, and a noble Castle; with the Title of an Earldom, since the
year 1550: before which it was a Barony.

Grimsby Magna, a Market Town in Lincolnshire, in the division of Lindsey and
the Hundred of Bradley, near the Fall of the Humber into the Ocean, in a flat
and marshy ground. It has a sine large Church, and heretofore a Castle to
secure its Haven, at which time it enjoyed a rich trade. But as the former is
decayed, so the other is almost choked up. It is honored with the Privilege
of returning two Members to the House of Commons.

East-Grinstead, or Greenstead, a Market Town in the County of Sussex, in
Pevensey Rape, which has the honor of electing two Members of Parliament. The
Assizes are sometimes kept at it. It is graced with a fair Church, and stands
toward the Confines of Surrey.

Gripswald, Viritium, Gripiswaldia, a strong City in Pomerania in Germany, half
a German Mile from the Baltic Sea, with a very convenient Haven; between
Stralsundt to the North, and Wolgast to the East, over against the Isle of
Rugen. Heretofore an Imperial and Free City, but afterward exempted. In 1456.
Wartislaus, the ninth Duke of Pomerania, founded here an University. After a
very long Siege in 1631. it was taken by the Swedes: in 1678. it was retaken
from them by the Duke of Brandenburgh in a few days; but the year following,
restored to that Crown by the Treaty of S. German.

The Grisons, Canini, Rhaeti, Grisones* are a knot of Commonwealths, between
the Alps, the Fountains of the Rhine, and the Inn; [ Oenus,] who are more
properly called the Alpine Rhaetians, because they live within the Alps: on
the North and West, they border upon the Swisse and Schwabenland; on the East
upon Tyrol; on the South upon the State of Venice, and the Dukedom of Milan.
The whole Country is Mountainous, and generally barren. This People about 1471.
united into one body by a League; and in 1491. they again fixed the former
Union, and strengthened it by a perpetual League with the Switzers. These are
divided into three parts* First, the Grisons properly so called, which the
Germans call Oberpundt, or the Upper League. The Second is the League of the
House of God, or Gottespundt. And the Third is the League of the Ten Villages,
Zehen Gerichtenpundt. Their chief Cities are Bormio, Chiavenna, Chur, or
Choire, Meyenfeld, Morbegno and Sondrio. The Rhine begins first to carry a Boat
here.

Grodno, Grodna, a City of Poland in Lithuania, in the Palatinate of Troki,
partly upon an Hill, partly in a Valley; which has a Bridge over the River
Niemen, upon which it stands; twenty German Miles from Vilna to the South-West,
and sixty from Margenburgh to the East. It was built by King Stephen about
1585. In 1655. the Moscovites took, and wretchedly harrassed it. Stephen
Batorius, the Founder of it, died here in 1586. The Diets of Poland are often
held in this City, and it gives the Title of a Dukedom.

Groeningen, Groeninga, one of the Cities belonging to the United Provinces;
great, populous, rich, very strong, and the Capital of a Province of the same
name; having been heretofore the Capital of Friesland. It stands upon the small
River Hoorenster, where it receives the Damster; honored with a Bishops See, by
Pope Paul IV. and with an University, opened here A. D. 1615. It has a strong
Castle, which was in vain attacked by the Bishop of Munster in 1672. It stands
three French Leagues from Dam to the West, toward Leuwaerden, from which it
stands eight Miles to the East. Heretofore a Free Imperial City, but now
exempted; and is one of the States united in the Dutch League. Het
Groeningerlandt, the Province belonging to this City, was heretofore a part of
Friesland. Its present bounds on the North, are the German Ocean, and the
overflown Shallows; on the West Friesland, divided from it by the River Lavica;
on the South Overyssel; and on the East East-Friesland, from which it is
divided by the vast Lake called Dollert. The principal City is Groeningen. It
was of old subject to the Bishop of Vtretcht, from whom the City revolted, and
put it self under the Duke of Guelderland in 1515. It submitted also to Charles
V. in 1536. and under that Family continued till 1594. when it was taken by the
Forces of the United Provinces, from the Spaniards. This Province enjoys the
last Voice in the Assemblies of the States General.

Groen-Land, or Green-Land, Gronia, called by the French Terreverte; by the
Dutch, Spitsbergen; is a considerable part of the Artick Continent, which lies
more North than Island. First discovered by Ericus Rufus, an Islander, in 982.
After this it was searched, and inhabited toward the Shoars by the Danes and
Norwegians. In 1256. Magnus King of Norway sent a Royal Navy to reduce the
Inhabitants, who had refused to pay him Tribute. But from 1379 all Navigation
thither was intermitted, and the Inhabitants heard of no more. The more
Southern parts were again discovered about the end of the last Century, by
Martin Forbisher an Englishman, George Monk a Dane, and others; yet there can
very little be said of it remarkable, but its Harbors, frequented by the
Europeans for Fishing. By several advances in succeeding times, the Land is
discovered to degrees. 78. of Latitude; whether it be an Island, or a part of the
American, or any other Continent, is not known. Hofman says, the Inhabitants
live on Fish and Fowl; whereas most (I might perhaps say all) that have sailed
thither, pretend to have found no other Inhabitants than Wolves, Bears, Foxes,
and Deer. Its mo^^ Southern Cape is in degrees. 66. of Latitude. It has perpetual
day during our Summer, and Night during our Winter, and three months longer;
for their Summer lasts only three months and fourteen days.

Grol, Grolle or Groenlo, Grola, is a City belonging to the United Provinces in
Guelderland, in the District of Zutphen; little, but well fortified; and seated
upon the River Slinke. Taken from the Dutch by the Marquess of Spinola in 1605.
Again by the Dutch in 1617. By the French in 1672. and again deserted in 1674
This City is in the borders of Westphalia, and of the Bishopric of Munster,
four Leagues from Zutphen to the East. There is a Tract written by Grotius,
entitled, Obsidio Grollae.

Groneburgh. See Tavasthus.

Grosseto, Grossetum, Rosetum, a small City in the State of Siena in Italy,
upon the Sea Shore, which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Siena, and
has a Castle that is very strong. It stands about three Miles from the River
Ombrone to the North-West, near the Lake of Prilis, (now di Castiglione, or di
Buriano,) and four from Siena South. This City sprung up out of the ruins of
Rusellae, which stood about two Miles from it.

Grosso, Ticarius, a River of Corsica, on the South side of the Island.

Groswerder, an Island of Prussia, at the Mouth of the Vistula.

Grosverner, or le Grand Brenner, that part of the Alps next Trent.

Grotkaw, Grotkavia, a small City of Bohemia in Silesia, the Capital of a
Dukedom of the same Name; under the Dominion of the Bishop of Breslaw; from
which it is distant seven Miles to the South, and thirteen from Prague to the
East. The Dukedom of Grotkaw, is a part of the Upper Silesia in Bohemia, which
has belonged to the Bishopric of Breslaw, from the times of Priteslaus
Pogarellus, Bishop of that Diocese; who bought it of Bol^slaus, Duke of
Lignitz, and Brieg, and annexed it for ever to this See. It lies between the
Dukedom of Oppelen to the East, Monsterberg to the West, Brieg to the North,
and Niessa to the South. Grotkaw, and Niessa, are the principal places in it.

La Grotta de Cani, a pestilential Cavern, near the Lake Agnano in Italy, four
Leagues from Naples, toward Pozzuoli: called likewise the Cavern of Charon,
from the mortal malignity of the Air and Vapors within it. In 1628. Kircher
says, he tried the experiment of letting down a dog into it, which thereupon
became as perfectly dead: but taken up, and plunged in the Lake Agnano, he
revived again. (to 1. Mund. Subter.) And from this sort of quality, it comes to
bear the name of de Cani.

La Grotta di Napoli, Crypta Neapolitana, a Read*cut across the foot of the
Mountain Posilipo, twelve foot deep and broad, and half a League long, in the
way betwixt Naples and Pozzuoli in Italy, for the convenience of a shorter
Passage from the one to the other. It was the work of Lucullus, who empoly'd a
hundred thousand men about it, and finished it in fifteen days.

Grubenhagen, a Castle and Territory in the Lower Saxony, in the Dukedom of
Brunswick, toward the Mountains; not far from the River Leina; almost five
Miles from Gottingen to the North, and eight from Goslar to the South-West,
twenty seven from Bremen to the South-East. This is the Capital of a Dukedom,
the only City in which is Eimberke, two Miles North of this Castle, which
belongs to the Duke of Brunswick Hannover.

Gruninghen, a Town in the Principality of Halberstad in the Lower Saxony.

Guadajox, Salsum, a River of Andalusia, which at first was called Biboras, or
Viboras; but taking in the two small Rivolets, of Tovazo, and Salado, it has
the name of Guadajox; and falls into the Guadalquivir, between Sevil and
Cordova.

Guadalajara, Guadalaxara, a City in New Spain, which is the Capital of New
Gallicia, and is very considerable; being seated upon the River Baranja, and
built in 1531, by the Spaniards, under whom it is. This is a Bishops See, under
the Archbishop of Mexico ever since 1570, (when the Sea was translated from
Compostella hither.) and the Seat of the Parliament, or Courts of Justice, of
this Province. It is forty Leagues distant from the South Sea, and eighty from
Mexico to the West: standing in a well watered and fruitful Plain. The Province
of New Gallicia, called of old Xalisco, has the name given it sometimes of
Guadalajara from this City. Guadalajara, a Town in New Castile, the Capital of
Algar, upon the River Henares, four Leagues from Henares, [ Complutum] to the
East, and nine from Madrid: it has been called Carraca.

Guadalaviar, Durias, Turia, a River in Valentia in Spain: it arises in
Arragon, in the Confines of New Castile, near the Head of [ Tagus] Tajo; and
running Eastward waters Albarazin, and Tervel; then turning South, it
enters the Kingdom of Valentia; and by the Capital City of it falls into the
Bay of Valentia, over against Majorca.

Guadalentin, Chrysius, Terebs, a River of Spain; which arises in Granada,
near Guadix; and watering Baeza, Lorca, and Almacaren, falls into the
Mediterranean Sea, seven Miles South of Carthagena, in the Kingdom of Murcia.

Guadalete, Lethes, a River of Andalusia, which waters Zahara, Villa Martin,
Bornbos, Arcos, and Xeres; and ends in the Bay of Cadiz.

Guadaloupe, or Guardeloupe, Aqua Lupiae, an Island in America, which is one of
the greatest of the Antilles; and has been in the hands of the French ever
since 1627. There are in it many Plantations, or Colonies, and Castles; the
Island being sixty Miles in compass, very fruitful in Sugars, and well watered
and peopled. It lies in Long. 315. North Lat. 19. 10. to the North-West of
Barbados, betwixt Dominico and Marigalante. And is the third Island from the
Northward of the Caribbes or Antilles.

Guadalquivir, Baetis, Tartessus, one of the greatest Rivers in Spain; called
Baetis by Mela; Tartessus by Strabo. And now Guadalquivir, by an Arabic Word,
which signifies the great River or Water. It arises from Mount Carzorla, in
the Forest of Segura in New Castile, in the Confines of Granada and Murcia; six
Leagues from Baeza to the North; and being augmented with the River Borosa, it
runs Westward through Andalusia; and a little above Andujar, takes in from
the North Guadalimar; and beneath it, Frio from the South; Guadiel and
Herumblar from the North; and passing Admuz, with the addition of Arjona and
Porcuna, it enters Cordova; then taking in Cazer, and some other small
Rivers, it passes to Palma; where it receives the Xenil [ Singylis]; and so
hastes to Sevil, Hispalis; beneath which it takes in the Guadimar; and bending
Southward, enters the Ocean, five Leagues beneath Sevil. The Mouth of it is
called la Maresma. Heretofore it had another Mouth, but that lying more
Southward, is long since stopped up. Beneath Sevil it makes three or four small
Islands, not worth any further notice.

Guadalquivireio, Saduca, a River of Granada, which falls into the
Mediterranean Sea at Malaga.

Guadaxenil, more commonly called Xenil. See Guadalquivir, and Xenil.

Guadel, a Town and Port upon the Gulf of Ormus, in the Province of Kherman in
Persia.

Guadiana, Anas, a River in Spain, which is one of the greatest; its present
Name is compounded of the Arabic Word Guadi, which signifies a River; and
Anas, its ancient Name. It arises in New Castile, out of the Fens or Marshes,
called Las Lagunas de Guadiana; not above two Miles above the Town, Villa Nueva
de los Infantes: being dismissed from these Marshes, and improved by the
Boydera, it buries it self for a League under the Earth; and near Villaharta
breaks out again, five Leagues beneath Calatrava; declining Westward, (tho with
great winding) and taking in Bullaque, Estena, Guadaranque; and out of
Estremadura, Guadalupo, and Zuja; it waters Merida; then Badajox, or Badajos,
[ Pax Augusta,] where it enters Portugal; and declining to the South, visits
Olivenca; and having parted Algarvia to the North, from Andalusia on the South,
it enters the Ocean at Ayamente; seventeen Spanish Miles West of
Guadalquivir. This River is at present said not to bury it self in the Earth,
as is reported heretofore, by all the Spaniards who have mentioned it. Baudrand.

Guadiaro, Chrysius, Barbesola. See Guadelentin. Others say it is Guadalajora,
between Estropona to the North-East, and Castle de la Lucena to the West, just
by the Eastern Mouth of the Streights of Gibraltar.

Guadilbarbar, Rubricacus, a River of the Kingdom of Tunis, in Africa; called
Jadog, or Ladog by others: It falls into the Mediterranean Sea.

Guadix, Guadicium, Acci, a City in the Kingdom of Granada, which is a Bishops
See, under the Archbishop of Sevil. Seated at the Foot of a Mountain, by the
River Fardes, or Guadalentia, and the Fountains of Segura; ten Leagues from
Jaen to the South-East, nine from Granada to the North-East, and seventeen from
Almeria to the North. This City was taken from the Moors in 1489, and is now in
a declining State, tho once a celebrated Roman Colony.

Guaira, a Province of Paraguay, in South America, under the Spaniards; between
the South part of Brasil to the East, Parana to the South, and Paraguay Propria
to the West; the chief City had heretofore the same Name, but is now ruined.

Gualata, a Kingdom of Africa in Nigritia, toward the Atlantic Ocean; it has
the Deserts of Zanhaga on the North, on the East the Kingdom of Tombutum, and
on the South that of Genchoa. The King of Tombut conquered this Country in
1526; and afterward returned it to its own Prince, upon Conditions of his
paying Tribute to Tombut. It is but a barren place, affording little Provision,
no Barley, Rice, or Hirse, and plenty only of Dates. The principal City is of
the same name: Whither the Barbary Merchants used formerly to traffic for
Brass, Silver and Gold: but now the Commerce has passed thence to Gaoga and
Tombut. The other chief City in it is Hoden.

Gualentzamore, the Caspian Sea.

Gualgas, Ganges.

Gualida or Beni-Gualida, a rich and fruitful Mountain in the Province of
Errif, in the Kingdom of Fez in Africa; inhabited by sixty good Villages, out
of which they can draw six thousand effective men, who with the great
difficulty of the Avenues are a considerable defense against a Conquest. They
pay a small Tribute for the liberty of going to Fez; but otherwise are exempted
from Taxes; and by a Privilege confirmed to them by the Kings of Fez, at every
new Succession, their Country is an inviolable Asylum for Criminals that retire
to it.

Guamanga, otherwise called S. Juan de la Vittoria, a City in Peru, which is a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Lima, and the Capital of a Province; in a
good Air, a fruitful Soil, (full of Mines of diverse Metals) the Seat of a
Governor, adorned with many Convents and Churches well built, sixty Leagues
from Lima. The Spaniards reckon about thirty thousand persons in the Province,
that pay Taxes.

Guanahani, or St. Salvador, an Island of North America; one of the Lucayes,
between Florida and Hispaniola; which has a safe and a large Haven; and was the
first spot of American Ground which Columbus discovered on Thursday, October
11. 1492. By him called S. Salvador, because his finding it that day saved his
Life; the Spaniards having otherwise resolved to have slain him. In the midst
of it there is a Lake, five Leagues in circuit. The Soil is good Pasturage; and
it was heretofore well peopled with the Natives, before the Spaniards murdered
a great part of them, and carried away the rest to the Terra firma to work in
the Mines of Gold.

Guancabelica, otherwise known by the Name of El Assiento de Oropesa, are the
famous Quicksilver Mines in Peru; near the City Oropesa, and nine or ten
Leagues from S. Juan de la Vittoria. Out of which they yearly extract about a
Million of Pounds in weight of the Metal; and the Sum of forty thousand Ducats
thence accrues, besides other Emoluments, to the Treasures of the King of
Spain. The Spaniards first discovered them in 1566.

Guanser, Zalacus, a Mountain of Mauritania Caesarienfis, now the Kingdom of
Algier in Barbary.

Guarda, Guardia, a City of Portugal, in the Province of Beira, which is a
Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Lisbon; between Cauria, Coria, and Limago,
fourteen Miles from either, eleven from Viseu. The Sea was translated hither
from the Igadita of the Ancients, which had been a Suffragan to the Archbishop
of Braga.

Guarda^u, and Guardafuni, Aromata, a City and Promontory in Aethopia, at the
Entrance of the Red Sea; where the most Eastern Part of the Kingdom of Adel now
is; over against Arabia Foelix, and the Isle of Zocotora. This is the most
Eastern Cape of all the Continent of Africa.

Guardia, Siga, a Town in the Kingdom of Algier.

Guardia, Sela, a River on the West of the Morea, now Sellei, over against Zant.

Guardia Alferes or Aifenes, Guardia Alferia, an Episcopal City in the County
of Molise, in the Kingdom of Naples. The Sea is a Suffragan to the Archbishop
of Benevento.

Guardiano, Lotoa, Letoia, an Island in the Ionian Sea, on the South of Candia
or Crete.

Guargala, a Kingdom in Biledulgerida, between Gademessa to the East, and
Tegortina to the West, toward the Mountains of Zahara.

Guascogna. See Gascoigne.

Guastalla, Guardastallum, Vastalla, Guastalla, a Town upon the Po in Lombardy,
in the States of the Duke of Mantoua; at which Pope Paschal II. celebrated a
Council in 1106. It has the Honor to give the Title of a Duke.

Guatimala, a large Government and Province in New Spain. The principal City of
which (being of the same Name, S. Jago de Guatimala,) is a Bishop's See under
the Archbishop of Mexico. The feat of the Parliament; and in 1628. by Philip
IV. made an University. This City was built in 1524. in a Valley; near the
River Matataia, not far from a burning Mountain, from whence there issued such
a Deluge of Fire, Water, and Stones in 1541. as overturned a great part of the
Houses in it; thirteen Spanish Leagues from the South Sea, three hundred from
Mexico to the South-East. The Government of Guatimala reaches from the Province
of Chiapa, as far as to the Streights of Panama; including in that extent the
Provinces of Vera-Paz, Soconusco, Guatimala properly so called (of which S.
Jago aforesaid is the Capital), Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa ricca, and Veragua.
In the Indian Language it is Quatuemallac. There is plenty of Corn, Cotton,
Maze, and good Pastourage; of Hills, Forests, and Rivers; but the Air not
commended for Healthfulness; and they make Salt with great Difficulty.

Guattaro, Battarus, a River in the Isle of Corsica.

Guaxaca, a Province in New Spain, in the North America, the Capital whereof is
Antequera. It lies betwixt the two North and South Seas, with the Provinces of
Tlascala to the West, and Chiapa to the East; enjoying a healthy Climate, and
yielding plenty of Corn, Maze, Cacao, Cochineal, Silk, Fruits, with Mines of
Gold, etc. There are about three hundred and fifty Borough Town, and as many
Villages, an hundred and sixty Convents, and diverse Ecclesiastical Colleges
established in it. Ferdinand Cortez made the Conquest of it; to whom the Valley
of Guaxaca gave the Title of Marquess del Valle.

Guayaquil, a Seaport Town in the North of Peru, upon the Pacifick Ocean, or
South Sea; which has a large Haven, and lies over against the Isle of Puna; the
River that washes it is called by the same Name.

Gubel-Haman, a Sultany or petty Kingdom in Arabia Foelix, toward the Arabian
Sea, near Fartach; with a City of the same Name.

Guben, a strong Town, well fortified, in the Lower Lusatia in Germany, upon
the River Neisse. It is one of the principal Places in the Province of Lusatia.

Guber, a Kingdom in Nigritia, in Africa, between Guiana to the South, the
River Niger to the North, and the Lake of Guardia to the East; with a City, its
Capital, of the same Name. It is a well peopled Country, and the Kings of it
are absolute.

Gubio, or Gubbio, Eugubium, a small City in the State of the Church, in the
Dukedom of Vrbino, which is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Vrbino, but
exempt from his Jurisdiction. It stands at the Foot of the Apennine, near the
Fountains of the River Chias^us, in the Confines of the Marquisate of
Anconitana; twenty six Miles from Vrbino to the South, and sixty from Ancona to
the West; called Eugubio in the later Maps.

Gucheu, a great City and Territory in the Province of Quangsi in China,
extending their Jurisdiction over nine other Cities. It is one of the Keys of
the Province, and being seated at the Confluence of diverse Rivers with the
Takiang, has made it self a famous Place for Commerce. Out of the Mountains in
this Territory they draw Vermiglion.

Gueguere. See Meroi^.

Gueiheoi, one of the principal Cities of the Province of Honan, in the
North-East of the Kingdom of China.

Guelderland. See Gelderlandt.

Guenga, a River in India, within Ganges, which arises in the Kingdom of
Decam, toward Mount Gata; and flowing through the Kingdom of Orixia,
disburthens it self into the Bay of Bengala. It is called by the Portuguese,
Ganga.

Guerande, a City of Bretagne in France, in the County of Nantes, toward the
Shoars of the Bay of Aquitain, between the Mouth of the Loyre and Vdaine; where
are great Works* for the making Salt. It stands fourteen Miles from Nantes to
the West; and was once called Aula Quiriaca.

Guerba, a River of Spain.

Gueret, Gueretum, a City of France, in la March the Upper (whereof it is the
Capital), upon the River Cruse; twelve Leagues from Limoges to the East, and
twenty two from Bourbon to the West; others write it Garactum.

Gueser, Seleucia, the same with Bagdat.

Guetaria Menosea, a Town in Guipuscoa.

Gueta Opta, a City in New Castile, seated in a Plain, twenty Miles from Toledo.

Guharan. See Oran, which is the same.

Guiana. Guiania, a large Country in South America, sometimes written Guaiana;
it is bounded on the East and North by the Atlantic Ocean, or the North Sea;
on the West by the Terra Firma, on the South by Brasil and the Lake of Parimao.
This Country has, for thirty Years last past, been inhabited by the English,
Dutch, and French. The two Nations of the Indians, called Caribes and Galibes,
(besides others) possess nevertheless the far greatest part of it; who used to
War formerly with Arms all made of Gold, of which this Country afforded such
abundance, that the Spaniards at the first gave it the name of El Dorado.

Guie. Guetta, Gutta, a River in Burgundy.

Guienne Aquitania, (in Pliny Aremorica.) a Province, and Dukedom in France;
bounded on the North with Xaintoigne, from which it is parted by the River
Dordonne; on the South with Gascoigne; on the East with Perigort, and on the
West with the Aquitanick Ocean, from the Pyrenean. Hills to the River of
Bourdeaux. This Country is fruitful in Corn and Wine; the first of which is
usually transported into Spain, and the latter into the Northern Countries. The
People are of a different both Stature and Humor from the rest of France;
which is not much to be wondered at, considering the English Nation for three
hundred years together, were possessed of this Country See Gascoigne The
principal Rivers of it are the Garonne and the Dordonne, which meet at
Retraicte, and in one Channel fall into the Ocean. The chief Cities are
Bourdeaux, Baionne, and Dax or D'Acqs. Guienne is thought to be but a
Corruption of Aquitania, which was the Roman Name for it, (then) enlarged to a
sar greater Extent.

Guilan, or Guilao, the Hyrcanian Sea.

Guilford. the Capital Town of the County of Surrey, in the Hundred of Woking,
which returns two Members to the House of Commons. It is pleasantly situated
upon the River Wey, containing three Parishes; well frequented, accommodated,
and handsome. The Saxon Kings had a Royal Mansion here in whose time it was a
Place of greater Extent. The Ruins of a large old Castle, near the River,
remain yet to be seen. In the year 1660. King Charles II created Elizabeth
Viscountess of Kinelmalky in Ireland, Countess of this Place for her Life. In
1674. the Title of Earl of Guilford, was granted by the same King, to John
Maitland, the late Duke of Lautherdale in Scotland. After whom, the late Lord
Francis North received the Title of Baron Guilford, from the same King also.

S. Guillain, Gislenopolis, a Town in Hainault, which has a Monastery belonging
to it: Taken by the French in 1654. and retaken by the Spaniards in 1656.

Guimaranes, Catraleucos, Vimananum, Egita, Araduca, once a City, and
frequently mentioned as such; now a small Village in Enter Douero e Minho in
Portugal; three Leagues from Braga toward the East. This was the Place where
S. Damasus, one of the ancient Popes, was born.

Guinee, Guinea, a very great Country on the Western Shoars of Africa, which by
the Portuguese (the first Discoverers of it) is divided into two Parts, the
Upper and the Lower. The Upper Guinee is bounded with Nigritia on the North,
the Atlantic Ocean on the South, and has the Kingdom of Congo on the East, and
the Mountains of Leon on the West. It is a very fruitful Country, in Gold,
Ivory, Sugar, Cotton, Rice, etc. of a great Extent from East to West, and much
frequented by the European Ships. It is divided into three Parts; Guinee,
properly so called, which lies in the middle; Mal^gueta, which lies to the
West; and the Kingdom of Beni, which lies to the East. Guinee, properly so
called, is a very large Country in Africa, upon the Shoars of the Ocean;
between Malegueta to the West (from which it is separated by the Cape of
Palms) and the Kingdom of Beni to the East, from which it is divided by the
River de la Volta. It is divided into la Cost d'or, (which lies East between
the Rivers Asien and la Volta.) and la Cost des Dents, which lies West between
the Cape of Palms and the River Asien, by which it is parted from the former.
On the Cost d'or are many Castles belonging to the English, Swedes, Danes, and
Hollanders. This Country was discovered in 1365. by the French, as is
pretended. Baudrand. But in the dismal Wars between the English and French,
under Charles VI, and VII* they were forced to omit the Prosecution of this
Navigation Hofman. It is much more probable, and better attested, that it was
discovered in 1452 by Henry Duke of Visco* Son of John I. King of Portugal. But
then the Spaniards, in 1477. pursued this Discovery, and till 1479 excluded the
first Discoverers, who regaining the Trade in the Island of S. George, built he
the strong Fort or Town of Mina, in 1486. to secure their Trade there for the
future, and command all the rest of this Coast: Which was the first Place built
by the Europeans on this Coast.

New-Guinee, this Country has not been hitherto so far discovered, as that we
know whether it be an Island or a Part of the Continent of the Terra Australis.
It is separated from Terra de Papaous, (which lies East of Ceram and Gilolo in
the East Indies, in 51 degrees. of Southern Lat.) by a narrow Straight of the Sea.

Guinegat, a small Town in Artois, made famous by a great Defeat of the French
Forces, by the Flandrians, in 1479. by which Victory Maximilian the Emperor
(then married to Mary the Daughter of Charles the Hardy, the last Duke of
Burgundy) recovered Tournay out of the Hands of the French, and settled the
Low Countries in the House of Austria. It lies three French Miles from S Omar
to the South, the same from Renty to the East, and two from Air to the West.

Guines, a fine Town, two Miles East of Calais, and the Capital of a County of
the same Name; having Boulonois on the South and East, Terre d'Oye on the
North, and the German Sea or Streights of Calais on the East. This County was
of old a Part of Boulonois, and the Town belonged then to Picardy. King Edward
III. of England possessed himself of both in 1351. to whom afterward they were
confirmed by a Treaty in 1360. And in the Reign of Charles VI. of France, lost
again to that Crown.

Guipuscoa, Ipuscoa, now a Province, but once a Kingdom in Spain. In the middle
Times annexed to the Kingdom of Navar, but now separated from it, and united to
Biscay: By which it is bounded on the West, on the South it has A^ava, on the
North the Bay of Biscay, and the Kingdom of Navar on the East. The principal
Cities in it are Tolosa, which is the Capital, S. Sebastian, and Fontarabie. It
is about thirty six Miles in Compass; anciently peopled by the Cantabri, a
hardy and a valiant People. This Country was wrested from the Crown of Navar in
1079. by Alphonsus I King of Castile, but it was restored again, and continued
under that Crown till 1200. when it revolted to Castile again, and ever since
it has been united to Biscay.

Guir, Dirus a River of Mauritania.

Guise, Guisa, Guisia, a Town in Picardy in France, in the Territory of
Tierache, which has a Castle seated upon the River Oise, in the Confines of
Hainault; nine Miles from Cambray to the South, five from la Fere to the
North-East, and about seventeen from Amiens to the East. This Town was besieged
by the Spaniards, without any Success, in 1650. But that which made it most
remarkable, was the Dukes of Guise, who in former times had a very great Hand
in all the Affairs of France, from the Reign of Francis I. to that of Henry IV.
This Family was a Branch of the House of Lorrain; advanced by Francis I. in
1528. from Counts or Earls of Guise (which was their Inheritance) to Dukes of
the same Place. The first thus raised was Claude, the Son of Renate II. He had
eight Sons, of which were Francis Duke of Guise, Claudius Duke of Aumale, and
Renatus Marquess of Ellebove. Francis became very famous by his defense of
Mets, against Charles V. and his surprising Calais from the English. He was
assassinated in 1553. being the Father of Henry Duke of Guise, and Charles Duke
of Main, etc. Henry making himself Head of the Holy League against Henry III.
of France, was slain in the States of Blois by the Order of that Prince in
1588. and his Elegy is written by the Eloquent M. de Balsac. Charles, the other
Brother, took up Arms against Henry III. and continued them against Henry IV.
till at last in 1594. he was forced to submit to that Victorious Prince.
Charles the Son of Henry, succeeded his Father in the Dukedom, and was the
Father of Henry II. who has been famous of later Times, being chosen King of
Naples, though the Spaniards shortly outed him.

Gulick, Juliacum, a City of Germany, mentioned as such by Tacitus and
Ammianus, called now by the French Juliers, by the Germans Gulick, by the
Italians Giuliers. It is the Capital of the Duchy of Juliers; seated upon the
River Roer or Roure, which falls into the Maes at Roermande; and has a strong
square Castle; often taken and retaken of latter times, till in 1660. it was
put by the Spaniards into the Hands of the Duke of Newburg. It lies sixteen
Miles from Cologn to the West, seven from Maestricht, and four from Aquisgrane
to the North-East. See Juliers.

Guns, Sabaria, a River of the Lower Hungary, which rises in Austria, and
falls into the River Rab: The Hungarians call it Benges.

Guntz, Guntia, a River in Schwaben, which gives Name to Guntzburg, in the
Marquisate of Burgow; fourteen Miles from Kempten to the North, and thirty nine
from Auspurg. This River falls into the Danube three Miles below Vlm.

Guplo, a small Lake in the Palatinate of Breast in Poland.

Gurck, Gurcum, a City in Carinthia, which is a Bishop's See under the
Archbishop of Saltzburg: It stands upon a River of the same Name, which a
little lower falls into the Oleze; six Miles from Villach to the North, and
about five from Clagenfurt; a little East of which the River Gurk falls into
the Danube. This Bishopric was instituted by one of the Archbishops of
Saltzburg, in 1073. who reserved to himself and his Successors the Election and
Investiture of the Bishops of this See, taking the Oath of Fealty from them:
But now by Agreement with Ferdinand I. the Emperor chooses twice together, then
the Bishop of Saltzburg the third time, and so by turns, as often as this See
becomes vacant; though this Bishop is no Member of the Empire, nor has any Vote
in the Diet, as all those which were Founded by the Emperors of Germany have.

Gdreigura, or Guregra, an inhabited Mountain toward the Atlas, in the Kindom
of Fez in Africa; thirteen Leagues from the City Fez; affording Corn and Cattle
in plenty. There are diverse large Villages upon it, which stand in no need of
Walls or Castles to defend them; the Difficulty of the Avenues is a sufficient
Security.

Gurgian, the Caspian Sea.

Gurgistan. See Georgia.

Gustrow, Gustrovium, a small City in the Dukedom of Mecklenburg, which is the
Seat of a Duke, who has here a very splendid Castle: It stands seven German
Miles from Wismar to the East, four from Rostock to the South, three from
Dobbertin to the North, and about seven from the Shoars of the Baltic Sea to
the South. The Duke of Gustrow has under him Rostock, and the greatest part of
the Territory of Walden also; but Gustrow is his principal City.

Gutkow or Gutzkow, Gutkovia, is a Town of the Hither Pomerania, upon the River
Pene, which a little lower falls into the Gross Haff, and the Baltic Sea. It
stands 14 Miles from Gustrow to the East, 3 from Gripswald to the South, and 4
from Wolyast to the South-West. This is the Capital of a Marquisate, which
takes its Name from this Town; and lies between the Dukedom of Stetin to the
East and the Dominion of Bardt to the West, and the Baltic Sea to the North:
To it belongs Gripswald and Gutkow: they are all of them, together with Stetin,
under the King of Sweden, who by a Treaty in 1676. regained them from the Duke
of Brandenburg, who had seized them in a War a little before.

Guy-Clift, a very delightful Cliff, amongst Groves and little Streams, near
Warwick; so called from the Famous Guy Earl of Warwick, who retired hither from
his Valiant Actions to a Life of Solitude, and built a Chapel in which he was
buried.

Guydil, the Scotch and Irish.

Guzerate, Gedrosia, Guzarata, a Kingdom in the East Indies, in the Cape of
Malabar, to the East of the Kingdom of Decan; which had heretofore Kings of its
own, but is now under the Great Mogul; whose Viceroy lives in extraordinary
State at Amadabat: often also called the Kingdom of Cambaia, from Cambaia its
capital City, under which word there is a further Account of it: I shall here
add, that Sultan Mamoet Prince of this Country, dying about 1545. left the
Tuition of his Son to one of his great Men; who being envied and hated by his
Countrymen, and his Prince (though of Age then) not being able to protect him,
he in 1565. called in Ecbar, the great Mogul, who took Possession of this
Kingdom, and ruined the King and his Tutor together with the discontented
Party. It is the pleasantest Province in all Indostan, ever green: Its
Seaports are Surat, and Cambaya, which last is the best in the Indies.

Gwir, Waga, a River in Wales, which falls into the Severn at Chepstow, after
it has passed by Monmouth.

Gwidh, Vectis, the Isle of Wight.

Gwineth, Venedocia, North Wales.

Gyfhorn, Gyfhornia, a Town of Germany, in the Lower Saxony, in the Dukedom of
Lunenburg, under the Duke of Zell; three Miles from Brunswick to the North, and
five from Zell to the East; upon the River Aller.

Gyll, Ansoba, a River of Ireland which falls into the Bay of Gallway in
Conaught.

Gyngisch, Genadium, Cenadium, a City of the Upper Hungary, called Chanad by
the Hungarians, and Gyngisch by the Germans: It is the Head of a County of the
same Name; and a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Colocza: Upon the River
Merisch, which passing from the Carpathian Hills quite through Transylvania,
and by Lippa, a little lower than this City falls into the Teysse, over against
Segedin; from which this City stands about three Miles to the East: it was in
the hands of the Turks till 1676. but is now in the Possession of the Emperor.

Gymnosophistae, the ancient Philosophers of India, whose Memory is preserved
in History with great honor: they first taught us the placing of true felicity
in Speculation, Sense and Virtue, accompanied with a solid Contempt of
Fortune's favors. The Greeks received several Doctrines from them; and
particularly the Metampsychosis, to which the Indians to this day, as formerly,
are strictly addicted. Of these Philosophers, the Brachmanes made one principal
Sect. And some applied themselves to give Counsel to Princes and Magistrates,
some to contemplate the Works of Nature in solitary places.

H A.
HAbas, that part of Aethiopia, which lies next Egypt. See Aethiopia.

Habes, Eleutherus, a River on the West of Sicily, which falls into the
Tyrrhenian Sea, eight Miles from Palermo.

Habaynacht, the great River Indus.

Hackdar, Arsenarium, a Promontory of Africa.

Hadersleben, a City in South Jutland, in the Dukedom of Sleswick, toward the
Baltic Sea, and the Island of Fionia, which has a very large Haven. It lies
between Kolding and Apenrad, about four German Miles from either; the same
distance from Fionia to the West, and seven from Flentsburg to the North. This
City was built by John Duke of Holstein; but is now under the King of Denmark,
though often taken and lost by the Swedes, in their Wars with the Danes.
Frederick III. was born here March 28. 1609.

Kadleigh, a Market Town in the County of Suffolk and the Hundred of Cosford,
upon the River Breton.

Haerlem, Harlemum, the Capital of the Territory of Kenmerlandt in
West-Friseland, upon the River [ Spara] Putten^ Vaert; three Miles from
Amsterdam to the West, and four from Alckmar to the South; between the Lake
called Haerlem-meer, and the Sea. Made a Bishops See by Pope Paul IV: under the
Archbishop of Vtrecht, in 1559. but this See was not long-lived, the Hollanders
revolting soon after from Spain. As this City was one of the first that ejected
the Spaniards, so it was the first that felt the heat of their fury: Frederick
Son of the Duke de Alva, being sent with an Army in 1573. to reduce it: which
proved a long and b'oody Siege eight Months. This Siege was made the more
memorable by a Naval Victory obtained by sixty Spanish Ships, over an hundred
Dutch ones, which forced the City to surrender: as also by the Cruelty the
Spaniards used after they got the Place; putting two thousand Persons to the
Sword, under pretense they came from other Towns though they had given their
Oath to bear Arms no more: and having in the Siege defaced the Sacred Images,
therefore they were put to death, not as Harlemers, but as Sacrilegious
Persons. This was the last of the Actions of the Duke of Alva; being soon after
recalled. This City was built (as is supposed) by Onelem, a Noble Man, from
whom it had its Name. Others say, by the Friselanders, about 506. It is
supposed too, that here the Art of Printing was first invented. But whoever
founded, or has since improved it, it is now a great, populous, rich, well
fortified City, in a healthful Air; which has about it pleasant Meadows, and an
adorning Wood. It was in the time of L. Guicciardin, one of the biggest Cities
in Holland; making yearly ten and twelve thousand Pieces of Cloth; from which
Trade, it may be judged to have had its greatest increase.

Hafern, the Severn. See Severn.

Hag, a Town and County in the Empire, in Bavaria.

Hague, Haga Comitis, the pleasantest and greatest Village in Christendom;
seated within one Mile of the German Ocean; between Leyden to the North, and
the Mouth of the Maes to the South; four German Miles from Rotterdam to the
West, and seven from Amsterdam to the South West. The usual Residence of the
Prince of Orange, and of the Council of the United Provinces; in which the
Earls of Holland had heretofore a stately Palace. The Dutch call it Graven
Hague; the English the Hague; the French La Hay. The Hollanders would never
fortify it, out of a Vanity they have, to be Masters of the Noblest Village in
Christendom: but they have narrowly escaped the paying dear for this Boast; the
Town having been in danger of being surprised both by the French and Spaniards.
The Hage or Hagh, in the German, signifies an House.

Hagenaw, Hagenoia, Hageno, a City in the Lower Alsatia, upon the Rivers [
Matra] Moterbrun, and [ Sorna] Sorr, united: first walled in 1164. by Frederick
Aenobarbus the Emperor; who built here an Imperial Palace, and made it a Free
and Imperial City. It is now one of the Imperial Villages: and was heretofore
under the Protection of the House of Austria; but by the Peace of Munster, it
came under the King of France. In 1675. it was in vain besieged by the Austrian
Forces: yet soon after, all its Fortifications were slighted by the French; and
thereupon it suffered very much in the last German War. This City stands two
Miles West of the Rhine, and four from Strasbourg to the North: and is now
repairing.

Landtvog von Hagenaw, or the Bailiwick of Hagenaw, is almost included in
Alsatia: also called the Prefecture of the Ten Imperial Cities; because there
are so many in it; viz. Hagenaw, Colmar, Schelstrat, Wissemburg, Landaw, the
Upper Bhenbeim, R^sheim, Munster in Gregorienthas, Kaisersberg, and Turcheim,
with their dependents. Mulhuis in Suntgow, belonged also once to this
Bailiwick, which is now one of the Swiss Cantons. This Bailiwick was mortgaged
to the Elector Palatine, by Sigismund the Emperor, for fifty thousand Florens.
Ferdinand I. paid the Debt, and united it to the Dominions of the House of
Austria, in 1558. And in 1648. by the Peace of Munster, it was resigned with
all its Dependences to the French, who are still possessed of it.

Hailbrun, or Hailprun, Heilbron, Alisum, fons Salutis, Hailbruna, a German
City in the Circle of Schwaben, upon the River Necker; in the Confines of the
Dukedom of Wirtemberg; called by this Name, by reason of the great plenty of
Medicinal Springs it has. Made a Free Imperial City, by Frederick II. in 1240.
when it was also first walled: it is still a Free City, and lies two Miles from
Wimfen to the South, eight from Spire to the East. Here is a Stone Bridge over
the Necker.

Haimburg. See Haynburgh.

Hainault, Hannonia, one of the greatest Provinces in the Low Countries; called
by the French Haynaut; by the Germans Henegow; by the Spaniards and Italians,
Hannonia; taking its Name from a small River. Heretofore much less, than now;
containing only the Eastern part of this Province; the Western being a distinct
Earldom, by the Name of Valenciennes: but this has for some Ages been annexed
to Hainault, and comprehended in it. This Province has on the East Brabant,
Namur, and Liege; on the North the Imperial Flanders, or the County of Alost;
on the West Flandria Gallica; and on the South Picardy. It is watered by the
Schelde and the Haisne. First it served under its own Counts or Earls. The last
Countess of which, was dispossessed by force, by Philip Duke of Burgundy, in
1438. So it became united to the rest of the Provinces: but the greatest part
of it, is now subjected to the French; viz. Valenciennes Maubeuge, Landrecies,
Bouchaine, Quesnoy, Ostervant, and the Territory between the Maes and the
Sambre: the City of Monts being An. 1691. taken by the French.

Hair, a Desert in Lybia, in the Kingdom of Targa, on the South side toward
Nigritia; one hundred Miles in length; between the Deserts of Igni to the East,
and the Kingdom of Zuenzig to the West.

Haisne, Hania, a very small River in Hainault, which gives Name to the whole
Province: it arises near Bincha in this Province; and dividing it into two
parts, waters Monts, takes in T^u^la, and at Conde falls into the Schelde.

Halapia, Mesopotamia.

Halar, Halara, a City in Island, on the North side, which is a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Drontheim: it has no Walls, nor any great number of
Inhabitants; but stands by the Bay of Skagafi^rd, and is under the King of
Denmark as King of Norway.

Halberstad, Pheugarum, Haiberstatum, is a German City in the Lower Saxony; and
a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Mentz; being substituted in the stead of
Salinstad, in 819. The Capital also of a Principality, which has its Name from
it: it stands upon the River Hotheim, seven Miles from Magdeburg to the West,
and from Brunswick to the South. Heretofore an Imperial Free Town; but being
exempt, it fell under the Dominion of its own Bishop; till by the Treaty of
Westphalia or Munster, this Bishopric was changed into a Principality, and
given to the Duke of Brandenburg. The Bishop of this Diocese embraced the
Augustane Confession in 1586.

The Principality of Halberstad, is a small Territory granted by Charles the
Great, (who founded it) to the Bishopric; but now under the Duke of
Brandenburg. It is bounded on the North by the Dukedoms of Magdeburg, and
Brunswick; on the South by the Principality of Anhault; and lies from East to
West about nine German Miles. The Capital of it is Halberstad.

Halifax, a Corporation in the County of York, upon the River Ca^der, seated
upon the ^^eep descent of an Hill, and extended from East to West (which of old
was called Horton.) It is a very populous, rich Town; having in it eleven Chap
else, whereof two are Parishes; and about twelve thousand inhabitants. Placed in
a barren Soil: but the Inhabitants have by their Industry in Clothing, and
other Manufactures so supplied their Defects, that none are richer or better
supplied, than they. Charles II and King James II successively added to the
Honor of this Place, when they created George Savil Baron of Eyland, Viscount
and Marquess of Halifax; who is still living.

Halenberg, a part of Mount Kalenberg, which begins in the Lower Austria, at
the Danube, and runs to the South as far as the Drove; whereof this branch
parts Hungary from Stiria and Carinthia.

Halep, or Haleppo. See Aleppo.

Halesworth, a Market Town in the County of Suffolk, in the Hundred of Blithing.

Hali, Muza, a City in Arabia the Happy, upon the Red Se^ now called Gezien.

Haling, a small Island to the Eastward of Portsmouth with a Town of the same
Name.

Halitz, Ha^^otz, a Town in Poland, in a Territory of the same Name, upon the
River Niester (Tyra) in Red Russia, which has a strong Castle. Heretofore a
City of great Note, and the Capital of Red Russia, then a Kingdom; the Prince
of which was often called the King of Halitz, and not of Russia; because this
Kingdom was divided into many Dukedoms, the Principal of which, was the Duke of
Kiovia. Pope Gregory XI. made this an Archbishops See: But in 1414. the
Archbishopric was removed to Lemburg; from which Aalitz stands sixteen Polish
Miles to the North-East, and twenty five from Caminieck to the West. It is now
in a declining State, and inhabited by few.

Hall, Hala, Halla, a City in the Upper Saxony, in Misnia; which though little,
is in a good condition, and under the Jurisdiction of its own Duke. It stands
upon the River [ Sala] Saalder, three German Miles from Mersburg to the North,
ten from Magdeburg to the South, and seventeen from Wittemburg to the
South-West. It has near it a Castle, called Mauriceburg, which was heretofore
the Village of D^bredor. In 981. it obtained its Character from Otho II. and
took its present Name from four Salt Springs which are in it. Once a Free and
Imperial City, but now exempted; and subject to its Duke, who is of the
Electoral House of Saxony; therefore called the Duke of Saxony of Hall; who
besides the adjacent Country, has almost half Thuringia, and some Places in the
Dukedom of Magdeburg.

Schwabische Hall, Hall en Suabe, a small Imperial Free City in Schwaben, which
has been such ever since the year 1360. It is placed in the midst of steep
Rocks and Mountains; and had both its Name and Being from those Eleven Salt
Springs which rise in it. It is divided by the River [ Cocharus] Cochar, into
the Upper and Lower Town, which are joined by a Bridge. This City was often
taken and retaken in the great Swedish War. It stands in the Dukedom of
Wirtemberg, of which it was once a part; six German Miles from Hailbrun to the
East, nineteen from Franckfort on the Main, and fifteen from Spire: at almost
an equal distance from the Rhine, the Maine, and the Danube. Taken by the
Marshall de Turene in 1645.

Hall in Inthall, a German Town in Tyrol, upon the River Inthall, from which it
has its Name; two Miles from Inspruck to the East.

Hall, or Haut, a small Town in Hainault, in the Confines of Brabant; where is
a famous Church dedicated to the Virgin Mary, much frequented on the account of
an Image of hers, that is admired for doing of Miracles. The Walls were pulled
down in 1677. Justus Lipsius has wrote a particular Tract of the Miracles of
this Virgo Hallensis, or Image of the Virgin Mary of Hall.

Hall, Ernolatia, a Village in the Upper Austria, upon the River Krems; six
German Miles from Lintz. [ Lentia] to the South.

Hallandt, Hallandia, a part of South Gothland; which was heretofore a Province
of the Kingdom of Denmark; but now under the King of Sweden, ever since 1645.
Bounded on the East and North with Westro-Gothia; on the West with the Baltic
Sea; and on the South with Scania. The chief Town in it, is Helmstad. This
Province is extended from North to South sixty Miles upon the Baltic Sea, but
not above fifteen broad; and was once a Dukedom.

Hallaton, a Market Town in Leicestershire, in the Hundred of Gartrey.

Halsted, a Market Town in Essex, in the Hundred of Hinckford.

Halderstein, a small Seigniory in Switzerland, near Coire.

Halydown, or Haledon, a Town in Northumberland, upon the River Tine; where
Oswald King of Northumberland, invoking Jesus Christ, in 634. overthrew Edwal
King of the Britains, and thereupon embraced Christianity; sending for A^dan
the Scot, to teach him and his People, and calling the place Heavenfield. This
Field has been since consecrated to Victory; the Scots being beaten here by the
English in 1331. and again in 1402. if Halydown, and Haledon be the same
places, as I suppose they are.

Ham, the same with Egypt.

Ham, Hamum, a small, but strong City in Westphalia, upon the River Lip, in
the County of March, in the Confines of the Diocese of Munster; five German
Miles from Munster to the South, and fourteen from Cologn to the North-East;
between Dorsten to West, and Lippestad to the East. This City is under the Duke
of Brandenburg, yet a Hanse-Town: taken by the French in 1673. but now returned
under its former Master.

Ham, a City in Picardy in France, in Vermandois, upon the River Some; four
Leagues from S. Quintin to the South-West, and sixteen from Amiens to the East.

Haman, Hama, Emisa, Apamea, a City of Syria, called vulgarly Hems. It is an
Archbishops See, under the Patriarch of Antioch, upon the River Orontes, (now
called Farfar) between Arethusa to the North, and Laodicea to the South; about
forty three Miles from Damascus to the North, eighty from Antioch, and thirty
from Aleppo. Our later Maps make Haman and Hemz, two several places. Apamea and
Emisa are by Baudrand made several Cities. Vid. Hemz.

Hamay, or Haimage, a Town and Monastery in Flanders.

Hamburgh, Gambrivii, Hamburgum, Treva, is one of the most celebrated Cities
and Seaports of Germany: seated in the Lower Saxony, in the Dukedom of
Holstein, upon the River Elbe: yet an Imperial Free City, not subject to any
Prince, and one of the Principal Hanse-Towns in Germany. Heretofore it was
dignified with an Archbishops See; but the Chair was removed to Bremen in 830.
by Ansgarius the Bishop, with the Consent of Lewis the Emperor. This City is
placed in the Territory of Stormaren; eighteen German Miles from the German
Ocean, which yet Tides up to it; fifteen from Bremen to the North, ten from
Lubeck to the South, and seven from Stade to the East. Very strongly fortified,
rich, populous, and in a growing condition. It has its Name from one H^mmion a
great Man, its Benefactor Charles the Great erected it against the Danes, in
809* Heridagus was the first, Ansgarius the second and last Archbishop of it.
Subject to Albion Prince of the North* Elbingers in the beginning: afterward
to Herman Billengen, Son of Otto the First, Duke of the Lower Saxony: and to
his Son Benn^s after him, in whom this Line ended* Adolphus Count of
Schawenburg, in 1137. governed this City and Holstein, for Lotharius Duke of
Saxony. Adolphus III. granted it many and great Privileges for Money ^^ which
were confirmed by Frederick Barbarossa the Emperor. In his absence in the
East, Henry the Lion ruined it; but Adolphus upon his return recovered and
rebuilt it: he did not long survive, being slain in Battle in 1203. by
Waldemarus Duke of Sleswick, Brother of Canutus King of Denmark. Canutus gave
this City to Albertus Duke of Orlamand, who sold his Right: which Sale was
confirmed by Adolphus the third Duke of Holstein; and ever since the City has
been a Free State; though the Dukes of Holstein still pretend a Right and Title
to it. Frederick II. in 1579. had a Controversy with it, which was ended by
the payment of Money. It embraced the Lutheran Confession, at the first
Publication of it; yet it tolerates the Ca^oinists, and gave shelter to the
English in the Reign of Queen Mary, who in 1554. fled hither. In 1686. the
present King of Denmark suddenly sat down before it with an Army of thirty
thousand Men: but the Winter coming on, and the Neighbor Princes espousing
their Cause, and sending them Forces into the City, he was forced to retire:
those within, on whom he relied, being discovered, and afterward Tried, and
Executed. They think themselves obliged hereby to be very jealous of all the
motions of that King: to whom they declare their firm Resolutions to maintain,
to the uttermost, all their Privileges and Immunities whatsoever. There is
hardly in the World a finer City, nor a larger and safer Port than this: it is
said to have done Homage to Christian III. as Duke of Holstein, in 1604.

Hamel, a Town near Corbie, upon a River that falls into the Some in Picardy.

Hamelen, Hamala, Hamelia, a City of Germany, in the Lower Saxony, in the
Dukedom of Brunswick: between Hildesheim to the East, and Paderborne to the
West; upon the ( Visurgis) Weser, which parts this Dukedom from Westphalia, and
beneath Bremen falls into the German Ocean. It stands twenty Miles from Bremen
to the South-East, fourteen from Brunswick to the South-West, twenty six from
Hamburgh to the South, and twenty three from Fuld to the North. This City
belongs to the Bishop of Hildesheim, and the Earl of Lip: was heretofore
under the Abbot of Fuld, before Albert Duke of Brunswick received it into his
Protection, which in time turned from a Protectory, to a Sovereign
Jurisdiction, as is usual. It is now under the Duke of Brunswick Hannouer. Near
this Place the Austrians received a fatal Overthrow from the Suedes and
Lunenburgers, at the Castle of Ottendorp, in 1633.

Hamiltown, a Castle in the County of Cluydsdale, in Scotland, upon the Cluyd
or Glotta, above Bothwel; ten English Miles from Glascow to the South, and
thirty five from Edinburgh to the West; which gives the Title of a Duke to one
of the best Families in Scotland, in whose Possession it is.

Hammeren, Hammaria, a City of Norway, which is a Bishops See under the
Archbishop of Drontheim; in the Province of Aggerhuis, in the Confines of
Dalecarlia, (a Province of Sweden), very small. It stands thirty Swedish Miles
from Bergen to the East, and twenty from Anslo, (Ansloga) to the North. This
Bishopric is united to that of Anslo.

Hampton Court, a Noble Country House, belonging to the King of England in
Middlesex, ten Miles from London, on the Thames: built by Cardinal Woolsey, in
the Reign of Henry VIII. who also built White Hall, the common Residence of our
Kings ever since.

Hamsa. See Haman.

Hanaw, Hanovia* a strong Town in Franconia in Germany, upon the River Kin^z;
which a little lower falls into the Main; between Franckfort to the West, and
Aschaffenburg to the East; three Miles from either, and ten from Marpurg to the
South. This City has suffered very much in the late Swedish and German Wars.

Hani, Ecbatana, a great City in the Kingdom of Persia, the Capital of the
Medes; and a Regal City, mentioned by Pliny, Strabo, and Ptolemy. Said to be
built by Arphaxad; now supposed to be Tauris. See Tauris.

Hannonia. See Hainault.

Hannover, Hannower, Hannovera, Hanouer, a German City in the Dukedom of
Brunswick, in the Territory of Calemberg, upon the River ( Leina) Leine; which
falls into the Weser, beneath Ferden, four Miles above Bremen; from which last,
Hannover stands sixteen Miles to the South-West, five from Hildesheim to the
North-West, and six from Brunswick to the West. Once an Imperial and Free City,
but afterward exempted. Its Prince, who is of the House of Brunswick,
possesses one half of the Dukedom of Brunswick, with the Territory of
Calemberg, and Grubenhagen; and has under him, Hannover, Hamelen, Gottingen,
Newstad, and Limbeck. This City is very well fortified. The present Duke, John
Frederick, is a Roman Catholic, younger Brother to the Duke of Zell. But the
City of Hannover, was one of those which entered the Smalcaldick League, as
appears in Sleidan. And therefore I suppose the People are generally of the
Reformed Religion.

Hantshire, Hantonia, a County in the West of England; bounded on the South by
the British Sea, and the Isle of Wight; on the West by Dorsetshire; on the
North by Berkshire; and on the East by Surrey and Sussex. It is a large and
fruitful County: the Capital of it, is the City of Winchester; besides which,
it has also Southampton, Portsmouth, and Rumsey, very considerable Towns.

Haoaxe, Haoaxus, a River of Africa, which springs out of vast Mountains in
the Abissine Empire, in the Confines of the Provinces of Xaoa and Ogga: being
augmented with the Streams of Machi, it enters the Kingdom of Adel, (called
by the Portuguese, Zeila;) the Capital of which, Avoa Gurele, stands upon this
River: it is said to be not much less than the Nile; and after a course of six
hundred Miles, to discharge it self into the Red Sea; having fertilized the
Kingdom of Adel, in the same manner, as the other does that of Egypt. See
Jerome Lobo, a Portuguese, who traveled this Country.

Hapsel, Hapselia, a small City in Livonia, in the Province of Estonia, and the
Territory of Wick; upon a small Bay of the same name, which is part of the
Baltic Sea. Heretofore a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Riga; two
Swedish Miles from Leal to the North, and eleven from Revel to the West. It is
under the King of Sweden.

Harberick Salamboria, a Town in Mesopotamia.

Harborcagh, a Market Town in Leicestershire, in the Hundred of Gartrey.

Harburg, Harburgum, a strong, but ill peopled Town in the Dukedom of
Lunenburgh, upon the Elbe; two German Miles from Hamburgh to the South, and six
from Lunenburgh to the West. It has a Castle.

Harcourt, a small Town and Castle in Normandy, in the Territory of Eureux;
scarce five Miles from thence to the West, and two from Belmont to the North.
Philip VI. in the year 1338, erected it into an Earldom, which was bestowed
upon the Princes of Lorain; some of whose Family have of late times been famous
Commanders in War.

Harda, Artiscus, a River of Thrace.

Harderwick, Hardebones, Harderwick, a small City in Guelderland, under the
United Provinces, in the County of Veleuve; which is a Hanse Town, and an
University, opened here in 1648. It stands upon the Shore of the Zuider Sea,
from which it has received great damage; but greater from the French, who
taking it in 1672, dismantled, and left it in 1673. It lies seven Leagues from
Vtrecht to the South East, and six from Deventer to the West. First walled with
a Brick Wall in 1229.

Hardts-Walt, Hartzwald, Melibocum, a Mountain in Thuringia: and a Wood, or
Forest, called Sylva Herculis; by Ptolemy, Sylva Semana; by Caesar, Sylva
Bacenis. It lies in the South Part of the Dukedom of Brunswick, in the
Territory of Grubenhagen; between Halberstad to the East, and Gostar to the
West: the top of the Mountain is called by the Inhabitants Blokes-barch,
between Osterwick, and Werningerod, two Towns in these parts. The Forest
covering the Mountain above mentioned, lies between the Elbe and Saal to the
East, and the Weser to the West. Mercator by a mistake took it for a part of
the Hercinian Forest; and placed it between Thuringia and Bohemia.

Harfleur, a Castle in the Pais de Caux in Normandy in France; upon the North
Side of the Outlet of the Seyne; within one Mile of Havre de Grace, and three
of Honfleur to the North. Besieged in 1416, by the French; defended by the
English, who frustrated their Designs; and in a Sea Fight near this place
defeated both the French and Genoese Fleets. Soon after which followed the
taking of Caen, Falais, Conquest, and Roan it self, by the Victorious English.

Harlegh, a Market Town in the County of Merioneth in Wales, in the Hundred of
Ardydury.

Harleston, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk and the Hundred of Earsham.

Harlingen, Harlinga, a City of the United Provinces in West-Friesland; the
next to Leuwarden in order and greatness; strong and hard to be taken, because
the adjacent Country may be drowned. It has a very large Haven on the Zuider
Sea; and stands in the Territory of Westergoe, three Leagues from Leuwarden to
the West.

Harlow, a Market Town in the County of Essex. The Capital of its Hundred.

Harrie, or Harnland, Harria, a Province of Livonia, upon the Bay of Finland,
in the Province of Esthon: the Capital of which is Revel, which with this
Province is under the Crown of Sweden.

Harsan, a Mountain in the Lower Hungary, four German Miles from the Drove to
the North, and the same distance from Mohatz to the West; near which the Dukes
of Lorain and Bavaria, defeated an Army of an hundred thousand Turks, August
12, 1687. See Mohatz.

Hartfordshire. See Hertfordshire.

Hartland, a Market Town in Devonshire. The Capital of its Hundred.

Hartlandpoint, Herculis Promontorium, a famous Cape in the Western Part, and
Northern Shore of the County of Devon, near the Confines of Cornwall; which
shoots a great way into the Irish Sea, and makes a safe Bay for the Riding of
Ships.

Hartle Pool, a Market Town in the Bishopric of Durham in Stockton Ward, upon
a neck of Land, that on all sides, except Westward, is surrounded by the Sea.

Hartzerode, Hartzeroda, a Castle in the Upper Saxony, in the Principality of
Anhault, upon the River Selka; twelve Miles from Northausen to the South-East:
where was the Seat or Residence of one of the five Princes of Anhault.

Harwich, Harvicum, a Town in Essex, at the Mouth of the Stour, which has a
Large, Safe, and Noble Seaport; made famous of old by a Naval Victory, here
obtained against the Danes by the English in 888. This Town is not great (says
Mr. Cambden,) but well peopled; strong both by Art and Nature, (being almost
surrounded by the Sea;) and much improved by the Care and Charges of Queen
Elizabeth; only it wants fresh Water. It is also a Corporation, and sends two
Burgesses to the Parliament.

Hasbaigne, Hasbainensis Pagus, called by the Inhabitants Haspengow, is a
Territory in the Bishopric of Liege; extended between Brabant, the Maeze, and
the City of Liege. The Capital of which is S. Trevyen; it reached of old as far
as Louvaine, or Loeven, and is frequently mentioned in ancient History.

Hasbat, Hasbata, a Province of the Kingdom of Fez in Barbary: bounded on the
North by the Streights of Gibraltar; on the West by the Atlantic Ocean; by the
Mediterranean Sea, and the Province of Asgaria to the East: the principal place
of which was Tangier, now ruined by the English. See Tangier.

Hascora, or Escura, a Province of the Kingdom of Morocco; having Duccala to
the North, Morocco to the South, and Tedelsa to the East: the principal Town of
which is Elmadina.

Hasel, or Val-Hasal, a Valley and Bailiwick in the Canton of Bearne in
Switzerland, abutting Eastward upon the Canton of Vnderwaldt, and stretching it
self from about the Lake of Brientz as far as to the Source of the River Aar.
It yields good Pasturage and Iron-Mines. The Inhabitants hereof about the year
1332. entered into a perpetual Alliance with those of Bearne, and have since
been subjected to them.

Hasenburgh, Didatrium, a Town in the County of Burgundy.

Haslemere, a Market Town in the County of Surrey and the Hundred of Godalming,
privileged with the Election of two Parliament men.

Haslingden, a Market Town in Lancashire, in the Hundred of Blackburn.

Hassia, Hessen, called by the French Hesse, is a Province of Germany; honored
with the Title of a Landtgrave or Marquisate, which is a Provincial Earldom. It
lies in the Higher Circle of the Rhine; between Westphalia to the North;
Westerwaldt, and Weteraw to the West; Franconia to the South; Thuringe, and the
Dukedom of Brunswick to the East. The chief Cities and Towns in it are Cassel,
Hirschfeldt, Marpurgh, Smalkalden, and Ziegenheim. Princes of its own have
possessed it ever since 1263. It is fruitful in Corn, Pasturage, Woods, Mines,
and Game. This Country took its Name from the Hessi, who Conquering the Chatti,
its old Inhabitants, changed the old Name. From East to West it extends it self
thirty three German Miles, in length from North to South twenty three.
Converted to the Christian Faith by Winifrid, or Boniface, an English Saxon,
about 730.

Hasnon, a Monastery in Artois.

Haspaam, Haspahamum, Aspahamum, or Hispaham, the Royal City of the Kingdom of
Persia, in the Province of Hierach; where the Sophy or King of Persia, resides.
Very great, rich, populous, and daily growing greater. The King has here a most
magnificent Palace: there belong to it three very large Suburbs. Some think the
ancient Name was Hecatompylon; others, Aspa. The Kings of Persia have resided
here near an hundred years: and that is it that has given it this great
increase. It stands upon the River Zenderoud, or Zenderu; which arises from
the Mountain of Dimavend, and divides this City into two parts; and about five
Miles beneath, is swallowed up by the Sands. It lies seventy German Miles from
Casbin to the South; eighty from Ormus to the North, and a little more from
Bagdat to the East. Seated in a Plain, surrounded on all sides, at the distance
of about three or four Leagues, with an high Mountain, like an Amphitheatre.
Long. 86. 40. Lat. 32. 26. The Province of Hierach, in which it stands, was the
ancient Parthia. This City with the Suburbs, is about eight German Miles in
compass; and has twelve Gates: whereof there are but nine constantly open; it
has about eighteen thousand Houses, and five hundred thousand Inhabitants. The
Walls and Bastions are of Brick; but ill built, ill kept, and out of repair; so
that they are of no use, to secure the City. Upon the River there is a lovely
Stone Bridge. This City was taken and destroyed twice by Tamerlane; and about
1450, suffered much from one of its own Princes. The Mosques, the Bazar, (or
Market Place,) the Baths, great Men's Houses and Gardens, are the great
Ornaments of it. Some of the great Houses with their Gardens, take up twenty
Acres of Ground: these Gardens they adorn with Fountains, Flowers, fine Walks,
and delicate Rows of Trees, both for Shades and Fruits. So that the far
greatest part of this vast City is taken up by Gardens; and not peopled like
ours. I have taken this short Account out of Olearius, (who in 1637, was in
this City;) and Thevenot, who traveled this Kingdom since.

Hasbengow. See Hasbaigne.

Hassio Porto, Heraclea, a Town in the Lesser Asia in Caria; between Miletum,
and the Mouth of the Maeander, (now Madre;) thirty Miles from Ephesus to the
South.

Hastings, Othona, the first of the Cinque Ports, in the County of Sussex;
consisting of two Streets, extended in length from North to South; having in
each of them a Parish Church: seated between a high Clift to the Seaward, and
an Hill to the Land, upon a small Brook on the South side of it; five Miles
West of Winchelsey, and near the Eastern Borders of this County. It has had a
great Castle upon the Hill, which commanded it; but this is now ruined, and
instead of it stands a Light-House to guide the Seamen. This and the other
Cinque Ports, its Members, was to send the King twenty one Ships: each of which
to have twenty one tall Men in it; who were bound to appear upon forty days
Summons, and to serve fifteen days at their own Charge: but if the King desired
them longer, he was to pay to the Master and Constable Sixpence the Day, and
to each Mariner three pence. The Harbor here was made by a Pere of Timber;
which being destroyed by the raging Seas in 1578, Queen Elizabeth granted a
Contribution for the Repairing of it: but the Money was misimployed, and the
Work neglected; so that the Trade and Fishery of this place is since that time
much decayed. The Honorable Theophilus Hastings, Earl of Huntingdon, is Baron
of Hastings. This Title being given to Sir William Hastings, his Predecessor,
by Edward the Fourth, in the second year of his Reign. This Corporation Elects
two Members of Parliament.

Hatfield Bishops, a Market Town in Hartfordshire in the Hundred of Broadwater,
upon the River Lea. Adorned with a stately Palace, called Hatfield House, now
in the Possession of the Earls of Salisbury, but heretofore belonging to the
King.

Hatfield Broadoke, a Market Town in the County of Essex, and the Hundred of
Harlow, upon the River Touridge.

Havage. See Meroe.

La Havana, or S. Christoval de la Havana, a famous Seaport in the Isle of
Cuba, in the Bay of Mexico, in the West Indies; very great, and fortified to
the utmost that Art and Expense can arise to: seated at the North End of the
Island, over against the Cape of Florida: being the Harbor to which all the
Fleets from Spain direct their Course. Here they unlade their European
Merchandises; here they take in the Plate, and other Riches of the Spanish
West Indies, in order to their Transportation into Europe: so that it is one of
the most frequented Ports in the West Indies. Whilst all this Wealth passes
and repasseth through it, much of it must stick: so that it is become very rich
and populous. The Spaniards have built a strong Castle, and settled here a
Governor, and a good Garrison of Spaniards. Yet notwithstanding all this Care
and Charge, the Buccaneers a few years since, with a small number of Ships
under Spanish Colors, surprised and plundered this place; and made the
Inhabitants pay a vast Ransom to preserve it from being burnt. It lies in
Long. 292. 10. Lat. 20. 00.

Havant, a Market Town in the County of Southampton and the Hundred of Bosmere.

Havaspeude, Dacia Alpestris.

Havelburgh, Havelburgum, Havelberga, a small City in the Circle of the Lower
Saxony, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Maegdeburgh: it stands
in Prignitz, a Territory in the Marquisate of Brandenburgh, upon the River
Havel, which one Mile lower falls into the Elbe; ten Miles from Maegdeburgh to
the North, and twelve from Berlin to the West. The Bishops of this Diocese have
embraced the Augustane Confession ever since 1556.

Haverford West, a Market Town and Corporation in Pembrokeshire in Wales, which
elects one Parliament man.

Haverill, a Market Town in the County of Suffolk in the Hundred of Risbridg,
not far from the head of the River Stower.

Havessen, Cimmeriorum Populi, a Province in Georgia, upon the Caspian Sea, as
Ortelius conjectures from the Description of Haiton the Armenian. But not being
called by this Name by our later Travelers, it can be no further described
here.

Havre de Grace, Portus Gratiae, a strong Seaport Town in Normandy in France,
which has a well fortified Castle, and an excellent Haven. Seated at the Mouth
of the Seyne, in the Pais de Caux; eighteen Leagues beneath Roan to the West,
fifteen from Caudebec, and almost twenty from Dieppe to the South; upon the
Shoars of the British Seas, over against Shorham in Sussex. This Town was in
1563. put into the hands of Q. Elizabeth, by the Protestants of France, (then
engaged in War against their King,) as a Cautionary Place: a Peace was soon
after concluded, without any regard taken of that Princess, or her Interest, by
those she succored. And not contented with this, both Parties joining against
the English, then commanded by the Earl of Warwick, besieged the Town; which
being surrounded with Enemies without, and wasted by the Plague within, was
forced in a short time to surrender to the French. It is now one of the Keys of
that Kingdom.

Haut-Combe, a Village in the Principality of Savoy, one League distant from
Bellay; where there is an Abbey of Cistercians, and a remarkable Fountain,
which twice in an hour ebbs and flows.

Haut-Riue, Alta-Ripa, a Town in Languedoc, upon the River Auriege [
Alburacis;] which arises in de Foix, from the Pyrenean Hills, and falls into
the Guaronne, four Miles from Tolouse to the South.

Haux, Halla. See Hall in Hainault.

Hawkeshead, a Market Town in Lancashire and the Hundred of Loynsdale, in a
hilly and woody Country.

Hay, a Market Town in the County of Brecknock in Wales in the Hundred of
Talgarth.

La Hay, Haga Com. See Hague.

Hay du Routol, Haga Brotona, a Village in the Forest of Routal in France.

La Hay en Touraine, Haga Turonica, a Town in Touraine, upon the River [
Crausia] Creuse; ten Leagues from Tours to the South, in the Confines of
Poictou; three Miles from Noyers to the East; where the Creuse falls into the
Vienne. This Town gave Birth to des Carts, the famous modern Philosopher, who
died at Stockholm in Sweden, in 1650. And it is besides remarked with the Title
of a Barony.

Hay^sham, A Market Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire in the Hundred of
Bulmer.

Haynan or Hainan, an Island upon the Coast of the Province of Quangtung in
China, abounding with fine Woods, Forests, and Fruits, and Mines of Gold and
Silver. Its capital City is Kiuncheu, which with twelve other Cities lying upon
the Sea Coast belongs to the Emperor of China, whilst the inland parts remain
under the possession of the Natives. Upon the Northern Coast of this Island
they find much Pearl.

Hayne. See Haisne.

Haynburgh, by corruption Hamburgh, Comagenum, a small Town in the Lower
Austria, on the Confines of Hungary, upon the Danube; six German Miles from
Vienna to the East, and three from Presburg West: near which are the Mountains
of K^^nberg, called heretofore Comagenus Mons. This Town is remarkable for
nothing but its Antiquity, having been a Roman Town.

Hea, a Province of the Kingdom of Morocco in Barbary, bounded by the River
Ecifelmeli to the East, the Mountain Atlas to the South, and the Ocean to the
North and West.

Headon or Heydon, an ancient Borough Town in the East Riding of Yorkshire, in
the Hundred of Holderness, upon a small River near its fall into the Humber,
and a few Miles East of Hull, whose rise has occasioned the decay of this
place. It has the Election of two Parliament Men.

Hebal or Ebal, a Mountain of Palestine in the Tribe of Ephraim, from whence
Joshua pronounced a multitude of Curses upon the Violaters of the Jewish Law:
Some make it to be but a part of Mount Gerizim.

Hebrides, the same with the Ebudae.

Hebron, an ancient and famous City of the Holy Land, in the Tribe of Juda,
near to which the Patriarch Abraham did abide. It was the Capital of the
Country of the Philistines: and afterward taken by Joshua and given to Caleb
his General. David, retiring to it after the death of Saul, came to be elected
King here and made it his residence seven years, till the taking of Jerusalem.
It had the honor to be advanced to an Episcopal See, when Christianity was
reestablished in Palestine; but now almost ruined.

Hecatompylis; a Name anciently given to the Cities Thebes, Haspaam, etc. from
their having 100 Gates.

Hec^a, a burning Mountain in Island, near the City Schalholt, in the South
part of the Isle. The Natives call it, one of the mouths of Hell. It vomits
Floods and Rivers of Fire like Aetna and Vesuvius, notwithing its nearness to
the Polar Circle.

Hegow, Hegovia, a small Territory in the Circle of Schwaben; between the Lake
of Zell, or the Zeller Sea to the East; and Schwartzwaldt, or the Black Wood to
the West: not above six German Miles in length. In part under the House of
Austria, and in part under the Duke of Brandenburgh.

Heidelburgh, Edelberga, Budoris, Heidelberga. The chief City of the Palatinate
of the Rhine; seated in a Plain at the foot of an Hill upon the River Necker,
which is covered here with a wooden Bridge. This is a great, well peopled
place; and the usual Residence of the Elector Palatine, who has here a noble
and magnificent Castle, built upon an Hill. It stands three Miles from Spires
to the North-East, ten from Franckfort upon the Main to the South, and twenty
from Vlm to the North-West. Said to be a Fee of the Bishopric of Worms; and
that it was granted to Lewis Count Palatine, in 1225. by Henry Bishop of
Worms. Robert Count Palatine, afterward Emperor in 1392. (as Marquardus
Freherus says) much enlarged it; and joined the Village of Berghimb to it, as
a Suburb. Rupertus Count Palatine, in 1346. opened here an University, and
endowed it with great Privileges. In 1622 this City was taken by the Spaniards,
and plundered: and the Noble Library, which the Princes Palatine had collected,
was sent to Rome. In the long Swedish War, it was taken, and retaken several
times; till at last in 1649. by the Treaty of Munster, it was restored to its
former Master. In 1688. October 25. both the City and Castle were surrendered to
the French. This City is supposed to be the Budoris of Ptolemy; and was in
ancient times the Seat of the Vangiones.

Heiden, Heida, a Town in Holstein.

Heidenheim, Ara Flavia, a Town in Schwaben.

Her^a, Hela, a Town in Prussia Polonica, upon the Bay of Pautzkerwick, almost
encompassed by the Baltic Sea: It stands four German Miles from Dantzick to
the North; burnt in 1572. by an accidental Fire, but since rebulit.

Heilichlandt, Actania, Saxonum Insula, a small Island belonging to the Duke of
Holstein; six Miles from the Shoars of Dithmarsh to the West. Heretofore four
German Miles in Compass: but in 800. a great part of it perished by a Tempest;
and in 1300, another part of what was left before, was swallowed up by the
Ocean, which in its Rage sometimes casts away Islands like common Vessels. It
consists now but of one single Parish.

Heilsberg, a Town in the Regal Prussia, upon the River All; which has a
Castle: Seated in the Territory of Ermelandt, or Warmerland: The Bishop of
which Province resides in it: eight German Miles from Regensperg to the South.
Built in 1240.

Heis, Hericus, Herue, an Island on the Coast of Poictou, near the Confines of
Bretagne.

Heitersheim, or Haitersheim, a small Town in the Province of Brisgow in
Germany, in which the Grand Prior of the Order of Malta for Germany (who is a
Prince of the Empire) ordinarily resides.

The Island of S. Helen, is seated in the Atlantic Ocean, in 16 degrees. of
Southern Lat. Discovered by Joannes de Nova, a Portuguese, in 1502. on S.
Helen's Day. It is thirteen Miles in Compass, and lies at a vast distance from
all other Lands; between Africa to the East, and Brasil to the West, nearer the
former. It is mountainous, but fruitful, and abounds with what is useful for
the Life of Man, except Wheat. It has four Valleys, and as many Springs toward
its North end. For a long time it lay open to the Benefit of all Mankind; but
about twenty years since, the English settled a Colony here, which is become
exceeding numerous.

Helicona, Helicon, a Mountain in Baeotia, (now called Stramulipa,) near
Parnassus, if not a Part of it: Sacred to the Muses of old, thence entitled
Heliconides, and much celebrated by the Greek and Latin Poets. In it was the
Sepulcher of Orpheus the Fountains of Hippocrene and Aganippe: Near it were the
Cities of Thespia, Ascra, and Nissa, now Zagaya. There was also a River in
Sicily so called, which is now the Olivero on the North side of that Island:
And another in Macedonia, now the Faribo.

Heliopolis, an ancient City of the Kingdom of Egypt, near Cairo, to the East.
It received this Name from a stately Temple there, that was dedicated to the
Sun. The Arabians called it, Ain Schemes, i. e. the Eye of the Sun. Now nothing
but the Ruins is extant of it. There were two other Cities of the same Name in
the days of Antiquity; one in Phaenicia, and one in Cilicia, in the Lesser
Asia; both of them Episcopal Sees: The first under the Patriarch of
Constantinople; the second, Antioch. Also a City of the Upper Saxony in the
Marquisate of Brandenburg in Germany; built by Charles M. and now called
Sotwedel, i. e. the Valley of the Sun. There had been a Statue dedicated to the
Sun, and venerated here, in the Pagan Times.

Hellespont, the Famous Streights betwixt Europe and Asia, now called the
Streights of Gallipoli, or the Dardanelles, and the Arm of S. George. It was
here that Xerxes whipped the Sea, and after his Loss of the Battle of
Thermopylae, escaped to Abydos, out of a Storm, in a Fishermans Skiff.

Helmechtmenich, Gedrosia, a Province of the Kingdom of Persia.

Helmesley, a Market Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of
Ridal, upon a small River which afterward falls into the Derwent.

Helmont, Helmontium, a Town of Brabant, which has a very ancient Castle; and
is the Capital of Kemperland under the United Provinces: It lies in the middle
between Boisleduc to the West, and Roermond to the East; six Miles from the
latter, and six from Nimeguen to the South.

Helmstad, Helmestadium, Hemopolis, a small and inconsiderable Town in Germany,
under the Duke of Brunswick Wolffenbuttel, ever since 1490. having before that
been subject to its Abbot. It stands in the Confines of the Dukedom of
Brunswick; between Brunswick to the West, and Magdeburg to the East; upon the
River Aller: six German Miles from Wolffenbuttel to the East, eleven from
Hildesheime to the North-East, and five from Halberstad to the North. Julius
Duke of Brunswick opened here an University in 1576. which from him is called
Academia Julia.

Helmstad, a strong Seaport Town in the Province of Hallandt, on the Baltic
Sea, toward the Borders of Scannia; which by a Treaty in 1645. was yielded to
the Swedes.

Helsingford, Helsingfordia, a small City of Nyland (a part of Finland) upon
the Shoars of the Bay of Finland; where it receives the River Wanda, over
against Revel, in Long. 43. 45 Lat. 60. 10.

Helsinglandt, Helsinga, a Province of Sweden; between Dalecarl to the West,
Jemplandt and Midlepad to the North, and the Baltic Sea to the East: the
principal Town of which is Hadswickwalt.

Helson, a Borough Town in the County of Cornwall, in the Hundred of Kerryer,
which elects two Parliament Men.

Hemia, Amisus, a City of Paphlagonia, in the Lesser Asia; called Amid and
Hemid by the Turks, and Simiso by the Greeks: It is an Archbishop's See, built
on the Shoars of the Euxine, an hundred Miles from Sinope to the East; upon the
Outlet of the River Casalmach, which comes from Amasia; twenty German Miles
South of Hemid, or Simiso, as it is called in the Maps.

Hemid, or Cara-Hemid, Amida, a City of Mesopotamia, which now gives Name to
that Country, it being the Capital of it, and is called Diarbeck from this
City. It is a great and populous City, the Seat of a Turkish Governor, and of a
Christian Archbishop. It stands from Arziri, a City of the Lesser Armenia to
the South-East, an hundred and twenty Miles; from Aleppo to the East, sixty.
See Caraemit. Long. 78. 15. Lat. 39. 30.

Hempsted, a Market Town in Hartfordshire, in the Hundred of Dacor.

Hemz, Emisa, Emessa, a City of Syria, called Haman by the Turks, Kemps by
Postellus; which is an Archbishop's See under the Patriarch of Antioch, upon
the River Orontes, (which passes by Antioch,) forty three Miles from Damascus
to the North, eighty from Antioch to the East, and about sixty from Palmyria to
the West. It is a pretty Town, walled with black and white Stone half a Pike
high: it had formerly a Dike, now filled with Rubbish: It has twenty five
Towers, six Gates, and five Churches. The chief Church was built by S. Helen;
and was in the Hands of the Chistians till about 160 years agone. On the South
it has a Castle, not taken from the Christians without much Bloodshed, and
therefore left to be ruined. See M. Thevenot, part 1. page 223. and Haman.

Henley, a Market Town in Oxfordshire, in the Hundred of Binfield, upon the
River Thames, over which it has a fair Bridge. This Town drives a great Trade
of Malt. There is another Henly in Warwickshire, in the Hundred of Barlickway,
upon the River Alne, called Henley in Arden for Distinction from the Precedent.

Henneberg, an ancient Castle in the Circle of Franconia in Germany, seven
Leagues from Schweinfurt, and eight from Fuld, upon a Rock, at the Foot whereof
passes the River Strew. This Castle gives Name to one of the most considerable
Counties in Germany: which is bounded on the East and North by Thuringia, on
the West by Hassia, and on the South by the Diocese of Wurtzburgh; being in
length from East to West almost two days Journey. The Emperor Maximilian II.
erected it into a Principality, which Title, in 1583. passed into the House of
Saxony.

Hennebont, Hannebon, Hannebontum, a ancient Town upon the River Blavet, (which
falls into the Sea near Port Louis,) in the South of Bretagne in France; four
Leagues from the Shoars of the Sea, and three from the said Port; thirty two
Miles from Rennes to the South-West, and ten from Vennes to the North-West.
Heretofore very strongly fortified, but now neglected. It has a very fair
Church.

Hensterberg, Cetius, a Mountain of Austria; which begins in the Lower Austria
at the Danube, three Miles from Vienna to the West, and running South through
Stiria and Carinthia, ends at the Drove; being called in different Countries by
various Names.

Heppen, Apianum, a Castle in the Bishopric of Trent.

Herac, Petra, a City of Arabia Deserta, called Rabath in the Scriptures. It
was in the latter times an Archbishop's See under the Patriarch of Jerusalem,
having before been under the Patriarch of Alexandria. It stands in the Confines
of Palestine, upon the Brook Zareth. Long. 66. 45. Lat. 30. 20.

Heracaian, the same with Kherman.

Herachia, Heratia, a small Island in the Archipelago, East of Scinusa, and not
far from Heraclea in Thrace.

Heraclia, Heraclea, a City in Thrace, called Vrbs Herculea in Claudian,
Perinthus by Ptolemy, and before Mygdonia, now frequently Araclea. It is an
Archbishop's See under the Patriarch of Constantinople; at the first its
Superior, and the Metropolis of Thrace it self; so that the Bishop of
Byzantium, was a Suffragan to the Bishop of Heraclea. Severus the Emperor
finding the City of Byzantium, (now Constantinople,) in the Hands of Pescennius
Niger, his Rival, in 194. besieged it; and having taken it after a Siege of
three Years, dismantled, burnt and ruined it; and gave all its Lands to the
City of Heraclea, which from thenceforth was advanced above Byzantium; and
continued so, till Constantine built Constantinople, in the beginning of the
IV. Century. The Bishop of Heraclea became by this means superior to the Bishop
of Byzantium. But Heraclea is now in a decaying Condition, thus described by
Mr. Wheeler. This Town has a good Harbor, whose Mouth lies East of it,
turning about so, that it makes a Peninsula. The Town lies in the Neck of
this, having the Sea on one side and the Port on the other; which Port is five
Miles in Circumference. There appeared great plenty of Marble Antiquities,
broken and scattered about by the unregarding Turks. Amongst the rest, I found
one Inscription dedicated to Severus their great Benefactor. A poor Place it
is, but an Archbishops See for all that; and the Cathedral one of the best now
standing in Turkey. In it, Sir Edward Guitts, one of the Ambassadors of England,
lies buried; who died here before his Return; upon whose Tomb is a Greek
Inscription. This City lies 52 Miles from Constantinople to the West, and
seventy from Gallipoli to the North-West. Here^o^r^ a great many Cities in
Greece, Asia, Egypt, and Italy, have born the same Name of Heraclea; but they
are all ruined or changed into such distant Names, as that this Place belongs
no now to them.

Herbauges, Herbadilia, an old ruined City not far from Nantes, in the Confines
of Bretagne and Poictou; mentioned in the Lives of the Saints.

Herberstein, a Barony in the Province of Carinthia in Germany.

Herbipoli. See Wurtaburg.

Herborne, Herborna, a small Town in Westerwalt, in the County of Dillemburgh;
which is an University, or rather has a College founded in it, by John Count of
Dillemburgh, in 1585. It stands four German Miles from Marpurg to the West, and
three from Gissen, or Giessen.

Herck, Archa, a Town or Castle in the Bishopric of Liege, in the Confines of
Brabant; in the middle between Maestricht to the East, and Lovain to the West.
There is also a River called the Herck, which flowing by Tongren, or Tongres,
and this Castle of Herck, falls into the Demer [ Demera] one Mile above
Bardiest.

Herklens, Herculis Castra, a Town of Guelderland.

Hereford, Herefordia, Ariconium, a City and Bishopric under the Archbishop of
Canterbury, upon the River Wye, on the Borders of South Wales, beyond the
Severn; which grew up out of the Ruins of Ariconium, an old Roman Town not far
from it. Camden says* of old it was called Ferulega or the Forest. S.
Ethelbert King of the East Angles was slain here by Offa King of the Mercians,
who invited him to his Court to Marry his Daughter; and by the malicious
Instigation of Quenred his Queen, did this base Act, about 749. After which the
East Angles continued under the Mercians seventy seven Years. The Prince being
esteemed a Martyr, there was a Church built to his Honor, and a Bishopric
established in it. In 1055. it was burnt by the Welsh, but soon after rebuilt
and fortified: Yet it was very small at the time of the Conquest, not having
above an hundred Men within and without. The Normans built here a very strong
Castle, (now ruined,) and walled the City. Reinelm the Bishop built part of the
Cathedral, in the Reign of Henry I. whose Successors built the rest, and the
Close. Its Long. is 20. 24. Lat. 52. 06. The first Bishop was Putta, placed
here in 680. Reinelm the XXX. in Order, succeeded in 1107. and sat eight Years.
In the year 673. Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury held a Council here. There
are six Gates for Entrance into it, and fifteen Watch-Towers.

Herefordshire, Silures, by the Welsh called Erinuck, is of an Oval Form.
Bounded on the East with Worcestershire and Gloucestershire, on the South with
Monmouthshire, on the West with Radnorshire and Brecknock, and on the North
with Shropshire. It is a pleasant fruitful County, abounding with all things
necessary for the Life of Man: They have a Proverb; that as to the three W's,
that is, Wheat, Wool, and Water, it is equal to any County in England. The
Wye, Lug, and Munow, after they have fertilized the various Parts of this
County, meet below Monmouth; and pass in one Channel into the Severn, near
Chepstow. William Fitz-Osborn was created Earl of Hereford by William the
Conqueror, in the first year of his Reign, Anno Christi 1066. Henry de Bohun
(descended from the former Earls, in 1199) his Posterity in seven Descents
enjoyed it till 1371. Henry of Bullingbrook succeeded (as Duke of Hereford) in
the Right of Mary his Wife, Daughter of Humfrey de Bohun the last Earl of that
Family, in 1398. In 1547. Walter d' Eureux, descended from the Bouchiers and
Bohuns, was created Viscount of this County. Leicester d' Eureux the present
Possessour is the eighth in this Line; and a Minor.

Heren, Carrhae, a City in Mesopotamia, called Heren, or Harran by the Turks:
It was a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Edessa at first; but afterward
it became the Metropolis it self: Seated in the Province of Diarbeck, near the
River Chabor; forty Miles from Edessa, sixty from Euphrates to the East. The
Tartars under Tamberlane, treated this City with great Cruelty: since that it
has been in a declining condition, and now not much inhabited. It is mentioned
several times in the Holy Scriptures upon the account of Abraham's sojourning,
and burying his Father Terah here, before he went into the Land of Canaan, (
Genesis 11. 31. Acts 7. 4.) in which last place it is called Charran in
Mesopotamia. And by Pliny, and Ptolemy, Charrae. Its Long. is 73. 20. Lat. 36.
10.

Heresbach, a Town in the Diocese of Cleves in Germany.

Heri, Aria, a Province in Persia, in Asia; more commonly called Hera or Herat;
it has a City and a River of the same Name. This River, in the later Maps
called Pulimoilon, rises out of the Mountains of Cassubi; and washing the
Walls of this City on all sides (it standing in an Island) falls into the Lake
of Burgian. The City is called Ser-heri; in Long. 100. 13. and Lat 36. 20.
Ninety German Miles West of Candahar, one hundred and twenty South-East of the
Caspian. The Roses of this Province are thought the best in the World. The
Province of Heri is a part of that of Chorasan; which is one of the most rich,
fertile and populous Provinces in all Persia. In the City of Heri are made the
best Persian Tapestries: on which, and other accounts, it is much frequented by
the Indians, who must pass through it in their way to Persia. See Olearius his
Travels.

Herit, Adramitae, a Province in Arabia the happy.

Herma, or Erma, a City of Galatia, called Germa, or Therma, by the ancient
Geographers; and now sometimes Germaste. It stands in the Confines of Bithynia
and Phrygia; upon the River [ Sagarium] Sacrio; where it falls into the
Casilirnach, which falls into the Euxine Sea at Cagani, twenty one German Miles
East of Scutari. This City is placed thirty six German Miles East of Bursia.
Now an Archbishop's See. Long. 60. 10. Lat. 42. 25.

Hermanstad, Cibinium, a City in Transylvania, commonly by the Inhabitants
called Seben and Zeben; by the Italians Cibinio; by the Germans Hermanstad. The
Capital of that Dukedom; the Seat of the Prince: a great, populous, strong,
well built City; seated in a Plain upon the River [ Cibinium] Cibin, which a
little lower falls into the Aluta. The Inhabitants are Saxons: it stands
fifteen Miles from Clausemberg to the East, and eight from Alba Julia. A
Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Colocza; though there is now no Bishop of
it. The late Duke of Lorrain, of famous Memory, in November 1687. put into this
place a Garrison of three thousand Imperialists, by the agreement of Prince
Abafti, (then Prince of Transylvania,) to enjoy the same for their Winter
Quarters.

Hermanstein, or Erenbreitstein, Eremberti lapis, a Castle in the Bishopric of
Trier in Germany, upon the Rhine, near its Confluence with the Moselle,
standing on a Rock that is on all sides inaccessible: which makes it one of the
strongest in Germany. It sustained a long Siege in the year 1637. and could
only at last be taken by Famine.

Hermanville, a place near Calais in France.

Herndall, Herndalia, a part of Norway on this side the Mountains of Norway; by
the Province of Jemplandt; on which depends Nomedale, Hellegelandt, Frostein,
Inder, Heroa, and some others; which, together with it, were yielded to the
Swedes in 1645. by the Danes.

Herou, Heropolis, a City of Egypt, near the bottom of the Red Sea; ninety
miles from Damiata to the South-East, about thirty five English Miles from Sues
to the West, and sixty from the next Shore of the Mediterranean to the South.
Mentioned by Pliny and Ptolemy. Its Long. 63. 30. Lat. 29. 50.

Herstal, Heristel or Haristal, a Town upon the Maes, near Liege in Westphalia,
adorned heretofore with a magnificent Palace, built by Pepin King of France,
who resided so frequently at it, that in the French History he is surnamed
Pepin of Heristel. This Palace was afterward destroyed by the Normans.

Hersteld, a City in the Circle of Westphalia in Germany, upon the River Weser,
belonging to the Bishops of Paderborne since the year 1608. The People of
Paderborne conspiring once against their Bishop, the Episcopal See was removed
from Paderborne hither, which was re-established at Paderborne again in 799.
Charles the Great also resided here some considerable time.

Hertford, Durocobriva, a Town in a County of the same name, in the South of
England, upon the River Lea or Ligean, as the Saxons called it, which runs
through it: In 607. here was a Synod. Now (says Mr. Cambden) it is not very
populous, yet for its Antiquity it deserves-regard. It has given Name to this
County, and is reputed the Shire-Town. It has a Castle, built (as some think)
by Edward the Elder; enlarged by the Family De Clare, to whom it belonged, as
Earls of Hertford, in the times of Henry II. and King Stephen. Afterward it
belonged to the Crown: Edward III. granted it to John of Gaunt his Son, then
Earl of Richmond, and after Duke of Lancaster.

Hertfordshire, Herfordiae Comitatus, Cattieuchlani, has on the North
Cambridgeshire; on the West Bedfordshire, and Buckinghamshire; on the South
Middlesex, and on the East Essex: it is very fruitful as to Corn and Pasture;
has plenty of Woods, and Groves; and for great Towns and Rivers, it may vye
with most Counties in England, considering its bigness. This County had first
for Earls or Marquesses, the Family De Clare; who for seven Descents between
1139. and 1314. enjoyed this Title. Being extinguished, Henry VIII. in 1537.
created Edward Seymour, Viscount Beauchamp, Earl of Hertford; who afterward in
1551. was made Duke of Sommerset, being the fourteenth Earl, and seventh of his
Family, who has born this amongst other Titles of Honor.

Hertogenraiad, Rodia Ducis, a Town in Holland.

Hertzogthumb, in the High Dutch signifies a Dukedom, and is frequently used by
them. So Hertzogthumb Bremen, is the Dukedom of Bremen. Hertzogthumb Ferden, is
the Dukedom of Ferden.

Heruli, an ancient People of the Country now called the Dukedom of Meckleburg,
in the Lower Saxony, in Germany, toward the Baltic Sea; who established
themselves in Italy in the fifth Century, and were of the number of those
Barbarians that formed their States upon the ruin of the Roman Empire. Odoacer
their King dispossessed Augustulus in the year 476. and having reigned about
seventeen years, he was slain by Theodorick King of the Ostrogoths. The Emperor
Justinian granted them Lands to cultivate: whereupon they not only gave
themselves entirely to him, but became Christians: and Gethesius their King was
baptized in 528. Till this Conversion, their Customs were to offer Men in
Sacrifices to their Gods, to kill the sick and aged, to oblige Wives not to
survive their Husbands, and to indulge themselves in every voluptuousness.

Hervorden, Hervordia, a City in Westphalia, in the County of Ravensberg; once
an Imperial and Free City, governed by its own Magistrates: but in 1647. taken
by the Duke of Brandenburg, as Count of Ravensberg, of which this was pretended
to be a Member. In 1673. it was retaken by the French; and soon after deserted,
and restored to that Duke. It stands ten German Miles from Munster to the East,
five from Minden. There is in it a Nunnery, the Abbess of which is a Princess
of the Empire.

Herzegovina, Arcegovina, Chulmia, Zachulmia, Ducatus S. Sabae, a Province in
Servia; called by the Turks Caratze-dag-ili, that is, the Black VVood; by the
Inhabitants, Herzegovina; by the French Le Duche de Saint Saba. It is the upper
part of the Kingdom of Bosnia; lying upon Dalmatia toward the West and South;
the principal Town in it, is S. Saba. This was heretofore under Dukes of its
own, of the Family of Cossa in Venice.

Hesdin, or Hesdin-Fert, Hesdinum, Hedena, a fortified Town in the Borders of
Artois; upon the River Chanche [Quantia,] which falls into the British Sea
below Staple to the North. Built by the Spaniards in 1554. in the place where
the Village of Mesnil formerly stood, as a Fort against the French; who have
several times since taken it; till in 1659. by the Pyrenean Treaty it was
yielded to them. It is seated in a Morass, eight Miles from Abbevill to the
North.

Heserwaldt, a Forest in the Dukedom of Cleves.

Hesperia, the Name of Spain and Italy amongst some ancient Geographers.

Hessen. See Hassia.

Hessi, the People of Hessen, or Hassia; which drove out the Chatti, and
possessed their Land.

Heszgang, the Cataracts of the Danube in Austria, beneath Lentz.

Hethy, Ocetis, one of the Isles of Orkney; called also Hoy.

Hetland, the same with Shetland, another of those Isles.

Hetruria, a large Country in the ancient division of Italy: lying betwixt the
Tyber, the Apennine Mountains, the Tyrrhenian Sea; and separated from Liguria
by the River Macra, now Magra. It was likewise called Thuscia: The present
Toscana, or Province of Tuscany, containing the greatest part of it.

Heu, Itis, the same with Assin, a small River in Ross, in the North-West part
of Scotland.

Hexamili, Isthmus Corinthiacus, that Neck of Land which joins the Morea to the
rest of Greece; called thus, because it is six Miles over. This Passage has
been attempted to be cut through, to make the Morea an Island, by Demetrius,
Julius Caesar, Caligula, Nero; and after, by Herodes Atticus, a private Person.
These all failing, it was walled against the Turks by a Grecian Emperor in
1413. By the Venetians in 1224. Amurath II. threw down this Wall in 1463.
Mahomet II. in 1465. entirely ruined it, though the Venetians had spared
neither labor nor charge, to fortify and strengthen it; making to the Wall
one hundred and thirty six Towers, and three Castles. In 1687. the Venetians
cast out the Turks again, and are possessed of it. See Morea.

Herham, a Market Town in the County of Northumberland, in Tindale Ward, upon
the River Tyne, and the South side of the River Trent. This has been anciently
a place of great account. For in the Infancy of the Saxon Church, we read in
Bid, it was an Episcopal See, with the Title of Episcopus Hagulstadiensis, in
the Person of S. Eata (the fifth Bishop of Landisfarne, and the first of
Hexham); to whom afterward succeeded nine others, till the fury of the Danes
discontinued it, and the Jurisdiction was annexed to the Sea of York. King
Henry VIII. removed it from that See, to the County of Northumberland, whereby
it became annexed to the Bishopric of Durham. The Church here was scarce
inferior to any in England, before the Scots pulled a great part of it down.
It is fourteen Miles from Newcastle to the East, and has claimed the privilege
of being a County Palatine.

Heydon. See Headen.

Heyssant, an Island upon the Coast of Bretagne in France.

Hiamuen, a strong Town in the Province of Fokien in China, in a near adjacent
Island, to the South of Ganhay; from whence the Merchandises of China are
transported into the Indies and the Philippine Islands. It is a considerable
Place, as well for its Buildings, as its Commerce; yet the Chinese give it but
the Name of a Fort, because it is a Garrison.

Hichan, the same with Chios, an Island in the Mediterranean.

Hickling, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk, in the Hundred of Happing.

Hidro, a Mountain in Otranto in Italy.

Hielmeer, a Lake in Sweden, between the Provinces of Suderman, and Neritia.

Hierapolis, an ancient Archiepiscopal City of Syria. The Sea was subject to
the Patriarch of Antioch. Also called Bambyca. There was a second in the
Province now called Germian, or Phrygia Major, in the Lesser Asia: which was
likewise an Archiepiscopal See under the same Patriarch. The Turks call the
Ruins of this latter (yet extant) Bamboukale.

Hieres, Olbia, Area, a small Town upon the Coast of Provence in France, two
Leagues from Thoulon; which communicates its Name to those Islands in the
Mediterranean, over against it, called the Hieres. This was an ancient Colony
of the People of Marseilles, who then gave it the Name of Olbia, from the
Happiness of the Soil it stands in; and being afterward changed to Area, it
thence came to be called Hieres. Charles I. King of Jerusalem and Earl of
Provence, purchased it of the Viscounts of Marseilles; being heretofore one of
the strongest Garrisons on the Coast of Provence, and the ordinary place of
embarquation for the Pilgrims to the Holy Land. It has been adorned with a
Collegiate Church ever since 1572.

Hiero-Caesarea, an ancient City of Doris in the Lesser Asia, so called in
honor of Caesar; before, Hierapolis. Tacitus reckons it amongst the twelve
Towns, to which being in a great part all ruined by an Earthquake in one night,
Caesar remitted their Tribute, for five years, to recompense their loss. There
stood a celebrated Temple here, dedicated by Cyrus to Diana.

L'Hiesmois, Oximensis Pagus, a Territory in Normandy, which takes its Name
from Hiesmes, a Town in Normandy; sixteen Miles from Caen to the South-East,
and eighteen from Man's to the North.

Higham-Ferris, a Corporation in the County of Northampton, which has the
Election of two Parliament Men. The Capital of its Hundred. It stands upon the
Eastern banks of the River Nen, with a Bridge over the same, a Free School, an
Almshouse, and anciently a Castle, whose Ruins yet are visible.

Highworth, a Market Town in Wiltshire. The Capital of its Hundred.

Hiind, Indus, the great River in the East Indies.

Hildesheim, Ascalingium, Hildesia, Hildesheimum, Brennopolis, a City in the
Lower Saxony; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Mentz, erected by
S. Lewis the Emperor: it is seated upon the River Innerste, not above two
Miles from the Borders of the Dukedom of Brunswick, seven from Zell to the
South, and six from Hamelen to the East. The Bishop being the only Roman
Catholic Bishop in all Saxony, is the Protector of it; which is otherwise a
Free Imperial City. The Bishopric of Hildesheim makes a particular District of
it self, about ten or twelve Leagues long, between the Dutchies of Brunswick
and Lunenbourgh, and the Principality of Halberstad. In which extent, there are
diverse Towns following the same Religion.

Himera, an ancient City of the Island of Sicily, so called from its situation
at the Mouth of the River Himera, or the modern fiume ai Termine. Hannibal
destroyed it about six hundred forty eight years before the coming of Christ:
two years after which, the Carthaginians near its Ruins built another, named
Thermae Himerae or Thermae Himerenses, from the Hot Baths that were in the
place. This is now called Termine. The Poet Stesichorus was a Native of the
ancient Himera.

Hinckley, a Market Town in Leicestershire, in the Hundred of Sparkingho.

Hindon, a Corporation in Wilsthire, in the Hundred of Mere, which elects two
Members of the Lower House.

Hingham, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk, in the Hundred of Forehoe.

Hinghoa, a great City of the Province of Fokien in China. The Capital of a
Territory of the same Name, commanding one other old City, and diverse Towns and
Villages. It is beautified with Magnificent Buildings, and many Triumphant
Arches, and Sepulchers.

Hippocrene, a celebrated Fountain in Boeotia in Greece, sacred to the Muses
amongst the ancient Poets.

Hippone, Hippo Regius. See Bonne.

Hippopodes, an ancient People, mentioned by Mela, that dwelt about the
Scythian Sea; and were fabulously reported to have Horses feet, from nothing
but their agility and swiftness in running.

Hirpini, an ancient People of Italy amongst the Samnites, so called from their
Capital City Hirpinum, which is now a Village, says Leander, by the Name of l'
Arpaia. The farther Principate in the Kingdom of Naples was the Seat and
Country of this People.

Hirschfeld, Herofelda, a small Town in Hassia, upon the River Fuld; which had
heretofore a celebrated Abbey; and was an Imperial Free-Town, under the
Jurisdiction of its own Abbot, together with the Territory in which it stands:
but is now under the Land^-Grave of Hessen-Cassel, with the Title of a
Principality, by the Treaty of Munster. It stands five German Miles from Fuld
to the North, and seven from Cassel to the South.

Hispahan. See Haspaam.

Hispaniola, San Domingo and S. Dominique, a great Island belonging to the
North America, called by its Natives Ayti. First discovered by Christopher
Columbus in 1492. The Spaniards afterward gave it this Name; though it is also
commonly called La Saint Domingue, from its principal Town. It is seated in the
Bay of Mexico; with Cuba and Jamaica to the West; Porto Rico, and the Caribbe
Isles to the East; the Atlantic Ocean on the North; and the Bay of Mexico on
the South. It extends from 299 to 307. degrees. of Long. being one hundred and
forty Spanish Leagues from East to West; sixty in breadth; and four hundred in
compass; between eighteen and twenty degrees of Northern Latitude. The
Spaniards have some Colonies at the East end; the French others at the
North-West end toward Cuba. The Air is extreme hot in the Morning; but cooler
in the Afternoon, by reason of a constant Sea Brize, which then rises. The
Country is always green; affords most excellent Pasture; the Cattle grow wild
for want of Owners, they increase so prodigiously: Herbs, and Carrots in
sixteen days become fit to Eat. It affords Ginger and Suger-Canes in vast
abundance, and Corn an hundred fold. It has also Mines of Brass, and Iron; some
say, of Silver or Gold. When first discovered, extremely populous; but the
Spaniards in a few years destroyed three Millions of Natives; so that now there
are very few left. The prinpal Town is St. Domingo, built by Bartholomew
Columbus, in 1494. and removed in 1502 to the opposite Shore of the River
Ozama. Whilst the Natives were Masters of this Island, it stood divided into
diverse petty Provinces, each under the obedience of a distinct Cacique or
Prince of their own. The Spaniards have cast it into five Cantons; viz.
Bainora, Cubaho, Cajaba, Cassimu and Guacayatima. San Domingo stands in
Cassimu. In 1586. Sir Francis Drake made a Descent here, took Domingo, and kept
it a Month, till the Spaniards redeemed it with their money again.

Histria, Hystereich, Istria, is a County in Italy; which on the East, West,
and South, has the Adriatic Sea; and on the North Friuli. It is full of Woods
and Quarries; affords Venice (under which it is) Materials, both for Ships and
Houses; but otherwise not comparable to the rest of Italy in point of
Fertility; the Air is besides sickly and unwholsom. The compass of it is about
two hundred Miles. This Country was conquered by the Venetians first in 938.
and finally subdued in 1190. ever since which, they have been under this State;
though they have made several attempts to shake off their Yoke, and regain
their ancient Liberty.

Hitchin, a Market Town in Hartfordshire. The Capital of its Hundred.

Hoaiching, one of the principal Cities in the Province of Honan in the Kingdom
of China.

Hodu, the Persian Gulf.

Hoddesdon, a Market Town in Hartfordshire, in the Hundred of Hartford, upon
the River Lea.

Hoeicheu, a City of the Province of Nanquin, in the South part of it, toward
Chekiam; which stands in a Mountainous Country, and has five small Cities under
it.

Hoencourt, a Town in the Bishopric of Cambray, near which the French were
defeated in 1642. It lies three German Miles from Cambray to the North-West,
and a little less from Arras to the South-West.

Hoentwiel, a Fortress in Schwaben, in Germany; belonging to the Duke of
Wirtembergh; seated upon a Rock between the Rivers Schlichaim and Breym, which
both fall into the Necker, one above, the other beneath Rotweil. This Castle is
seated less than two German Miles from the Danube to the North; and two Miles
and an half from the Fountains of the Necker to the East. It stood seven or
eight Sieges against the Imperialists; who in one of these ( viz. that in
1641.) spent a whole Summer upon it, and at last could not take it.

Hog-Magog-Hilis, a ridge of Hills, two Miles South-Eastward of Cambridge: on
the top whereof is seen a Rampire, formerly so strengthened with three Ditches,
as to be esteemed almost impregnable. The same was a Danish Station.

Hohenloe, or Holach, Holachius, an Earldom in Franconia, in the Borders of
Schwaben, by the River Cochar; between the Marquisate of Anspach, and the
Dukedom of Wirtemberg; under its own Count or Earl.

Holbech, a Market Town in Lincolnshire, in the Hundred of Ellow.

Holland, one of the three parts in the division of the County of Lincoln,
which contains the Southern Towns from Lindsey, toward the Sea. Adorned with
the Title of an Earldom since the year 1624. When King James I. created Henry
Rich, Earl of Holland: whose Grandson Edward Rich, is the present Earl of
Warwick and Holland.

Holland, Batavia, Hollandia, the principal Province of the United Netherlands;
called by the Spaniards la Olandia; and by all others Holland; because it is a
low, Marshy, or Hollow Soil; and much overspread with Waters. It is great too,
and very fruitful: having on the North the Zuider Sea, on the West the German
Ocean; on the South Zealand and Brabant; and on the East Vtrecht, Guelderland,
and a part of the Zuider. About sixty Leagues in Circuit, therein containing
twenty nine walled Towns (besides others heretofore walled, which enjoy the
same privileges with those that are) and four hundred Villages: eighteen of the
principal Towns have Seats in the Assemblies of the States General: to wit,
Dort, Haerlem, Delft, Leyden, Amsterdam, Goude, Rotterdam, Gorcum, Schiedam,
Schoonhoven, Briel, Alcmaer, Hoorne, Enchuysen, Edam, Monnikendam, Medenblik,
and Purmerend. Yet the diameter of this Province may be traversed in six hours.
In former times it was more extended toward the East of Nimeguen; its District
being then a part of Holland. The Batavi a Warlike Nation possessed the
greatest part of this Country, in the times of the Roman Empire: who were
conquered by Julius Caesar, with the rest of the Galls, of whom this was then
thought a part. After the Roman Empire was overthrown in the West, this
Province being almost dispeopled by the Inroads of the Norman Pirates, was given
by Charles the Bald to Thierrie or Theodorick, a Prince of Aquitain, Son of
Sigebert, about 863. with the Title of a Count or Earl; his Posterity enjoyed
it till 1206. in seventeen Descents; when it passed to the Earls of Hainault;
in which Family it continued till 1417. and then it passed by the Surrender of
Jaqueline, (Countess of Hainaule and Holland,) to Philip the Good, Duke of
Burgundy, and so to the Spaniards. When Philip II. treated this Free People
ill, they revolted; and in 1572. submitted to William of Nassau, Prince of
Orange; and in 1581. declared King Philip to have forfeited all his
Sovereignty: and having leagued themselves with their Neighbor States, they
defended themselves so well against that Prince, by the assistance of Queen
Elizabeth, that at last they forced the Spaniards to acknowledge them a Free
State. And though the French King, Lewis XIV. by a sudden Surprise, brought
them very low in the year 1672. yet the next year they forced him to withdraw
his Garrisons, and recovered every inch of Ground from him. The Prince of
Orange, though a Child in Age, out-doing by the blessing of Heaven, the oldest
Statesmen, and the most experienced Generals. In the East Indies the
Hollanders are the Sovereign Governors of the Coast of Coromandel, the Islands
of Amboine, Banda, Ternate, Ceylon, and the City of Malaca; part of the Islands
of Sumatra and Celebes, and diverse places upon the Coast of Malabar. They have
also given the Name of New Holland to a Region of the Terra Australis, by them
discovered in 1644. to the South of New Guiney and the Moluccaes. To a
Territory of Moscovia, near the Streights of VVeigats, by them named the the
Streights of Nassaw, upon the North Sea. And lastly to a Country in the North
America, upon the Canadian Ocean, betwixt Virginia and New France, South-West
of New England and East of the Ir^quois in Canada. But this latter has been
been in the hands of the English since 1665.

Holdenby, a Castle belonging to the Crown in Northamptonshire; where King
Charles the Martyr was kept a Prisoner by the Parliamentarians, from Feb. 17.
1646. to June 4. 1647. when by Cornet Joyce, one of the Officers of the Rebels,
he was carried to Childersley, and thence to Newmarket. Here that afflicted
Prince had leisure to compose that excellent Piece, after his death Printed
under the Title of (...); which contributed more to the Re-establishment of his
Children, and the Reviving his oppressed Honor, than all the Armies and Forces
in the World could have done.

Holderness, the most South-Eastern Promontory or Cape in Yorkshire, called
Ocellum by Ptolemy. It lies North of Saltfleet, a Town in Lincolnshire, and
shoots it self forth into the Sea a great way: There are diverse Towns in it.
King James I. created John Ramsey, Viscount Hardington in Scotland, Earl of
this Place, and Baron of Kingston upon Thames, Anno 1620. The late Prince
Rupert bore the same Title, by the Creation of King Charles I. in 1643. which
is now enjoyed by Conyers D' Arcie, the present Earl of Holderness, of the
Creation of King Charles II.

La Hougst Vast, or Port de la Hogue, Oga, or Ogasti, Vedasti, a Haven, or
Sea-Port-Town in the Territory of Coutances in Normandy; ten Miles from Bayeux
to the West, and sixteen from Caen to the same.

Holstein, Holsatia, that is, as the Name signifies in the German Tongue, the
Hollow Stone, or Rock, or rather, a Country overgrown with Woods and Forests,
(as Holt signifies in the German Tongue,) is a Dukedom of great extent in the
Lower Saxony, in Germany; though often comprehended in the Kingdom of Denmark,
because a part of it is subject to that Crown. It was anciently a part of the
Chersonesus Cimbrica: bounded on the North by the Dukedom of Sleswick, or
South-Jutland; on the West with the German Ocean; on the East with the Baltic
Sea; and on the South with the Dukedoms of Bremen and Lunenburgh; separated
from it by the Elbe. It is divided into four parts; Dithmarsen, Holstein,
Stormaren, and VVageron. The principal Cities in it, are Lubeck, and Hamburgh;
which are Hanse-Towns, or Imperial Free Cities: besides which, there are Kiel,
and Rensburg in Holstein; Krempend, and Gluckstad in Stormaren. Part of this
Dukedom is under the King of Denmark, and part of it under the Duke of
Holstein. The ancient Inhabitants were the Saxons, our Ancestors, who about
449. began the Conquest of Britain, which perhaps were but some Tribes of the
Cimbrians. The rest which remained in Germany, were conquered with the Saxons,
by Charles the Great; and continued under the Empire till 1114. when Lotharius
the Emperor gave Holst, (or Holstein, properly so called,) to Adolf of
Schaumburgh, with the Title of Earl of Holstein: whose Posterity enjoyed it
till 1459. in eleven Descents; when Christiern of Oldenburgh, King of Denmark,
Sweden, and Norway, Son of Theodorick Earl of Oldenburgh, and of Hedvigis,
(Sister of Henry and Adolph, the two last Earls of Holstein,) succeeded in the
Earldom of Holstein. The present Dukes of Holstein are descended from
Christiern II. King of Denmark; who died in 1533. From Christian III. one of
his Sons, are descended the Dukes of Holstein Regalis; from Adolph, another
Son, are derived the Dukes of Holstein Gottorp. But this Work will not permit
me to pursue these Lines any further.

Holt, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk. The Capital of its hundred.

Holy Island, a small Island upon the Coast of the County of Northumberland,
not far from Berwick: in which there is one Town, with a Church and Castle, and
a good haven defended by a Block-house. The Air and Soil not very grateful; yet
well accommodated with Fish and Fowl. Its ancient Name was Lindisfarne, a
famous Episcopal See made by S. Aidan (one of the first Apostles of these
parts) in the beginning of Christianity here: which See continued from the Year
637. to 990. under two and twenty Bishops, called the Bishops of Lindisfarne,
till the insolences of the Danes on these Coasts compelled the religious to
remove to Durham. It got the Name of Holy Island from the Sanctity of the
Bishops, Monks, and others that retired hither, to enjoy the benefit of its
solitude and privacy.

Homano, Vomanus, a River of Italy in Abruzzo, a Province of the Kingdom of
Naples; which springing from the Apennine, falls into the Adriatic Sea;
between the Pescara, [Aternus] and the Tronto, [Truentus,] which last falls
into the same Sea, near Ascoli, North of Homano.

Homburgh, a very strong Town in the Territory of Wasgow, in the Palatinate of
the Rhine in Germany; which has a Castle built on a steep Hill; not above two
French Leagues from Bipont to the North. This Town was taken by the French in
1679. and is still in their Hands. There is another Town of this Name in
Hassia; and a Castle in the Dominion or Territory belonging to the City of
Basil.

Honan, a Province of the Kingdom of China, toward the North-East part:
bounded on the North with Xani and Pekim; on the West with Xensi, on the South
with Huquam, and on the East with Xantum. The Capital City is Caisung; the
other are Queite, Changte, Gueihoei, Hoaiching, Nanyang, and Junging. This
Province contains eight great Cities, an hundred smaller Cities or great Towns,
and 589296 Families. There is a City of the same Name with this Province, in
the North-West part of it, near the River Croceus; which cuts through the N. of
this Province. The Chinese call it, their Garden of pleasure, from its
sertility; and say, it lies in the middle of the World.

Hondura, a Province of new Spain, of great extent: bounded on the North and
East with the Mar del Zur, and Bay of Hondura; on the South with Nicaragua, and
on the West Guatimala. It lies two hundred Miles in length from East to West,
and an hundred in breadth from North to South; under the Government of the
Prefect of Guatimala. The principal Cities and Towns in it, are Valadolid,
Commaiagua, (made a Bishop's See in 1558.) Gracias a Dios, and T^ugilho, etc. A
very fruitful Province in Maze, Corn, Pasturage, Fruits, and Mines. The Bay of
Honduras is a part of the North Sea, with the Province of its own Name to the
South, and Incatan to the North. There are diverse Islands in it.

Honfleur, Juliobona, Honflorium, Honflevius, a City of Normandy, upon the
Shoars of the British Sea, upon the Mouth of the Seyne, over against Harfleu,
three Leagues from Havre de Grace to the South.

Honiton or Horniton, a Borough and Market Town in the County of Devon, and the
hundred of Axmister, upon the River Otter. It has the honor of electing two
Parliament men.

Honneau, Hon, a River in Artois.

Honnecour. See Hoencourt.

S. Honor de Lerin, Lerium, Lerina, a small Island on the Coast of Provence,
in which is a very famous Monastery: it lies two Leagues from Antibe,
[Antipoli,] to the South, and five from Freius to the East, toward the
Confines of Piedmont.

Hoofden, the Streights between Calais and Dover.

Hoorne, Horna, a City in North Holland, not great, but very well fortified; it
stands in the Confines of West-Friesland, upon the Zuyder Sea, (upon which it
has a large and a safe Harbor;) four Leagues from Alcmaer to the East, and six
from Amsterdam to the North. Once an Imperial and Free City, but now exempted,
and under the Dominion of the States of Holland. First walled in the Year 1426.
It had heretofore diverse fine Churches and Monasteries in it: And now the
privilege of a Voice in the Assemblies of the States General.

Hoornens, Hoornsche, Eylandt, an Island in the Mar del Zur, discovered by
James le Maire, an Inhabitant of Hoorn, in 1616. It lies twelve hundred German
Miles from the Coast of Peru, toward Asia, in Long. 228. Southern Lat. 12.
Little, but very fruitful.

Horburgh, Argentuaria, a Castle near the City of Colmar, in the Upper Alsatia.
See Colmar.

Hordogna, a ruined City of Puglia, called by the Romans Erdonia or Ardonia.

Horeb, Melani, a Mountain in Arabia Petraea; near which Moses fed the Flocks
of Jethro, (his Father-in-Law,) and received the Command from the Angel in the
burning Bush, to fetch up the Children of Israel out of Egypt: here also
Elijah, the Restorer of the Law, heard the Still small Voice. 1. Kings 19. 12.
And if this be the same with Sinai, (as S. Jerome asserts,) here was the
Promulgation of the Law of Nature, or the Ten Commandments, given to the
Israelites. It is thought by some to extend from Petra, a City of Arabia, to
Aelan upon the Red Sea; at the distance of one hundred and eighty Miles from
Jerusalem to the South. The Arabians call it Gibel-Mousa, the Mountain of
Moses; the Europeans, Sinai. Monsieur Thevenot, who some years since visited
all these Places, in his Travels, gives a large Account of these Mountains; and
of a great number of Monasteries, Chapels, Hermitages, and Cells possessed at
this day by Greek and Latin Monks: who have here many very delicate Gardens,
which besides what is eaten by them, afford a good Revenue; most of the good
Fruit that is sold at Grand Cairo, being carried thither from these Gardens, as
he observes.

Horiguela, Orcelis, Oriola, a City of Valentia, more commonly called
Grihuella; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Valentia: it is
small, and not much inhabited; tho seated in a pleasant Valley, at the foot of
an Hill; having over it a Castle, built on a Rock, which is honored with the
Title of a Dukedom: it stands upon the River Tader, (now Segura) which falls
into the Bay of Alcante; six Spanish Leagues South of that City, and three
Leagues East of Murcia.

Hormiz, Saocoras, a River of Mesopotamia, which falls into the Euphrates;
others call it Set.

Horn, heretofore Heurn, Horna, a small Town in the Bishopric of Liege, which
has a beautiful Castle: about one League from the Maes and Roermond to the
West; six from Maestricht to the North: also the Capital of the Earldom of
Horn, within this Diocese; which lies between Guelderland to the East, Bosleduc
to the North, and the County of Lootz to the South and West. This was
heretofore under Earls of its own; but they being Extinct in the last Century,
it returned to the Bishops of Liege.

Horn or Cap d' Hoorn, a Cape of the Terra del Fuego in the South America,
toward the Streights of Magellan: discovered in 1616 by Le Maire, a Native of
Hoorne in Holland: Some Spaniards call it the Cape of S. Salvador.

Hornby, a Market Town in Lancashire, in the hundred of Loynsdale, upon the
River Lon: Noted for a Castle, called Hornby-Castle, the ancient Seat of the
Lord Morley and Mounteagle.

Horn Castle, a Market Town in Lincolnshire. The Capital of its hundred; upon
the River Bane, and in the division of Lindsey.

Horndiep, Arnapa, a small River of Holland; which arises in Drent, a
Territory of Over Yssel; and flowing through Groningen, a little beneath
Hunsen, falls into the River Reit Diep, after it has watered the City of
Groningen.

Horndon on the Hill a Market Town in the County of Essex, in the hundred of
Barstable.

Horomelt, one of the Names of Greece.

Horsham, a Market Town in the County of Sussex, in Bramber Rape. It is a large
Borough Town, having the Election of 2 Parliament Men, situated near S.
Leonards Forest.

Horti, Hortanum. See Orta.

Houdain, Hodanum, a small French City in la Beausse, (or in the Government of
the Isle of France, according to others) near Chartres; two Leagues from Dreux
to the North-East, and eight from Paris to the West, upon the River Vegre.

La Houlme, Holmesia, a small District in Normandy, between the River Orne,
(Olina,) and the Territory of le Man's; in which there is no Town of note.

Howden, a Market Town in the E. riding of Yorkshire, giving Name to a small
Territory called Howdenshire, near the confluence of the Rivers Ouse and
Derwent.

Hoy, Dumma, an Island of Scotland, which is one of the Orcades, three Miles
from the Island of Mainland; called also Hethy.

Hoye, Hoya, a small Town in Westphalia, upon the River Weser; two German Miles
from Ferden to the South, and from Newburg to the North; the Capital of the
Earldom von Hoye, in Westphalia; which was under Earls of its own, till 1582.
when upon the Death of Otto, the last of them, it fell to the Duke of Brunswick
Zell.

Hudsons Bay, an Arm of the Sea, North of Estoiteland, in the North America;
discovered by one Hudson an Englishman, in 1612.

Hudwicswaldt, a City or Town in the Province of Helsing, in the Kingdom of
Sweden, on the Baltic Sea, toward the Province of Middlepad.

Huccar, Vero, a River of Spain.

Hued, or Hued-il-Barbar, Icer, Serbes, a River in the Kingdom of Algiers, in
Africa; which derives its head from the Atlas, and takes so many turnings and
returnings amongst the Mountains, that betwixt Bonne and Tunis it comes to be
passed twenty five times. At length falls into the Mediterranean Sea. They Fish
for Coral upon its Banks.

Hued Nijar, Niger, a River of Africa in Aethiopia.

Hued el Quiber, Nasabath, a River in the Kingdom of Algier.

Huesca, Faventia, Calicula, Vesci, Osca, Escua, a City in the Kingdom of
Granada. See Horiguela, which is the same City. There is another Town of the
same Name, in the Kingdom of Arragon, upon the River Ysuela; fourteen Miles
from Saragosa to the North-East, and twenty from Lerida to the North-West. This
is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of: aragossa, and called by the ancients
Osca Illergetum. A Council was celebrated at it in 598.

Huetca, a Duchy in New Castile, upon the Confines of the Kingdoms of Granada
and Murcia.

Hull, Petuaria, Hullum, a Town and River in the East Riding of Yorkshire. The
Town is seated upon the West Bank of the River, where it enters the Humber;
twenty six Miles from York to the South-East, and eleven from the Spurn Head,
or British Sea to the North-West. Of no great Antiquity; Edward I. purchasing
the Ground of the Abbat of Meaux, and built the Town, which thereupon was
called Kings-Town. He made the Haven also; granted the Town a Charter, and
diverse Liberties; by which means it grew to that it now is; being for stately
Houses, strong Forts, well furnished Ships, Merchandise, and plenty of all
things, the best in this part of England. The Inhabitants ascribe much also to
Michael de la Poole, Duke of Suffolk; who procured them many Privileges, after
he was by Richard II. made Duke of Suffolk. Their gainful Fisheries on the
Coast of Iseland, had its share in this growth. Being grown Rich, they Walled
the Town, Paved their Streets, raised their chief Magistrates from a Warden to
Bailiffs; at last in the Reign of Henry VI. got the Honor of a Mayor, and that
the Town should be a County. Charles the Martyr Treasured up here a goodly
Magazine for the benefit of his Subjects: but when he came to use it April 23.
1642: he was most unworthily and undutifully excluded by Sir John Hotham; which
on the twenty fifth of the same Month was by the Parliament justified: being
upon the matter the first act of Hostility against that Holy Prince. Hotham,
the Son, was routed April 11. 1643. at Ancaster, by Colonel Cavendish. And both
Father and Son came to be Beheaded by their Fellows Rebels: the first in 1644.
and the other in 1645. for intending to return to their Allegiance. The River
of Hull, rises by Kilham in the same County; and passing on the East of
Beverley, at the distance of a Mile, falls into the Humber; between Hull and
Dripole; being Navigable up to Beverley, and perhaps higher.

Hulst, Hulstum, a City in the Low Countries in Flanders, near Gaunt: small,
but very well fortified: the Capital of the Territory of Waes: taken by the
Dutch in 1645. and kept by them ever since. It stands five Leagues from Antwerp
to the West, and seven from Gaunt to the North-West.

Humago, Cissa, an Island near Histria.

Humain, Siga, a City of Mauritania in Africa.

Humana, a ruined City in the Marca Anconitana.

Humber, Abus, one of the principal Rivers of England; or rather an Arm of the
Sea, into which many of the Rivers of this part of England empty themselves: on
the North it has Yorkshire, on the South Lincolnshire: out of the first of
these it receives the River of Hull; then the Ouse, (which brings with it
Derwent, the Swale, the Your, the Wharf, the Are, Calder, and the Dun;) then
the Trent which divides Nottingham from Lincolnshire; and brings many other
with it, as the Darwen, the Manifold, the Stoure, and many others: above Barton
it receives the Ankam, out of Lincolnshire: the Mouth by which these Streams
enter the German Ocean being almost seven Miles wide.

Humble, Homelia, a small River of Hantshire; which rising by Bushwaltham and
watering Boteley, forms an Haven, called Humble Haven, on the East of St.
Andrew's Castle, over against the Isle of Wight, where it enters the British
Sea.

Hungaria, Pannonia inferior, is one of the Noblest, but most unfortunate
Kingdoms, next to Greece, in Europe. The Natives call it Magiar; the Poles,
Wegierska; the Germans, Vngarn; and the French, Hungary: On the North it is
bounded with the Upper Poland, and Red Russia; the Carpathian Mountains
interposing between it and them: on the East with Transylvania and Moldavia; on
the West with Stiria, Austria, and Moravia; and on the South with Sclavonia,
and Servia. Baudrand (including Sclavonia) bounds it on the South with Croatia,
Bosnia, and Servia. It extends in length from Presburgh, along the Danube, to
the Borders of Transylvania, the space of three hundred English Miles: and one
hundred and ninety of the same in breadth: it takes in all that Tract of Land,
that was possessed heretofore by the Jazyges Metanastae, a Sarmatian People;
and part of Pannonia Superior, and Inferior. Wonderfully fruitful; yielding
Corn and Grass in abundance; the latter exceeding (when at its greatest length)
the height of a Man: it abounds so in Cattle, that it is thought alone to be
able to serve all Europe with Flesh; and they certainly send yearly into
Germany eighty thousand Oxen. They have Deer, Partridges, and Pheasants in such
abundance, that any body that will may kill them. They have Mines of Gold,
Silver, Tin, Lead, Iron and Copper; store of River, or Fresh Water Fish; and
Wines equal in goodness to those of Candia. The People are Hardy, Covetous,
Warlike; but Slothful and Lazy, not much unlike the Irish. Their best Scholar
was St. Jerome. Their best Soldiers, Johannes Huniades, and Matthias Corvinus.
The principal Rivers are the Danube, (which divides this Kingdom from end to
end,) the Savus, the Dravus, and the Tibiscus: they have one famous Lake,
called the Balaton, which is forty Italian Miles in length. The principal
Cities are Buda or Offen, Presburgh, Alba-Regalis, and Caschaw. The Hungarians
are a Tribe of the Scythians or Tartars, which in the times of Arnulphus,
Emperor of Germany, possessed themselves of Transylvania, and the Upper
Hungary; under Lewis IV. Successor to Arnulphus, they passed the Danube; wasted
all Germany, Italy, Greece, Sclavonia, and Dacia; till broken by the Forces of
Germany, and sweetened by the Christian Religion, (first taught them under King
Stephen, about 1016. by Albert, Archbishop of Prague,) they became more quiet,
and better civilized. This Stephen began his Reign in 1000. This Race of Kings
continued to 1302. in twenty three Descents: when Charles Martel, (Son of
Charles King of Naples, and Mary Daughter to Stephen IV. King of Hungary,)
partly by Election, partly by Inheritance and Conquest succeeded to this Crown:
to him succeeded Lewis his Nephew, in 1343. Charles II. (another of his
Descendents) in 1383. Sigismund Emperor, King of Bohemia, in the Right of Mary
his Wife, (Eldest Daughter of Lewis) in 1387. Albert of Austria, in the Right
of Elizabeth his Wife, (Daughter of Sigismond) in 1438. Vladislaus, Son of
Albert and Elizabeth, in 1444. Matthias Corvinus, Son of Johannes Huniades, by
Election in 1458. Vladislaus II. Son of Cassimir IV. King of Poland and of
Elizabeth, (Daughter of Albert) in 1491. Lewis II. slain in the Battle of
Mohatz, succeeded in 1517. and was slain in 1527. John Sepusio, Vaiwode of
Transylvania, chosen upon his Death, succeeded that year; but was outed by
Ferdinand, restored by Solomon the Turk, and at last died in 1540. The
Hungarians Crowned Stephen his Son, an Infant, in the Cradle: but Solomon,
seized the best part of his Kingdom, (under pretense of defending it against
Ferdinand of Austria) and Ferdinand the rest; so that ever since this wretched
Kingdom has been a Stage of War, between the Austrian and the Ottoman Families.
The former at this time having recovered from the latter, all the Lower
Hungary; and all Tameswaer, in the Upper. The Reader may be pleased to know,
that all that part of Hungary, which lies on the West and North of the Danube,
is called the Lower Hungary: what lies on the East and South, the Upper. This
Kingdom is divided into fifty five Counties; three and twenty of which in the
beginning of this last War, were in the Hands of the Turks, and the rest in the
Emperor's. It has also two Archbishops Sees, Gran [Strigonium,] and Colocza;
thirteen Bishoprics; six under the first, and seven under the latter.

Hungerford, a Market Town in Berkshire, in the hundred of Kentbury, upon the
River Kennet.

Hunni, the ancient Inhabitants of the Marshes of the Maeotis; who for the sake
of a better Country to live in, invaded Pannonia in great numbers, and thence
under Attila their King, who styled himself the Scourge of God, marched
victoriously into Germany, Italy, and France; till Aetius General of the Romans
and Meroveus King of France slew 200000 of them in one Battle in 450. Then they
retired into Pannonia again, and maintained themselves in diverse Wars. At
length the Hungarians, a Scythian race, appeared about the end of the Reign of
Charles the Gross, and expelled them.

Huntingdonshire, is bounded on the North by the River Avon, or Afon, which
parts it from Lincolnshire; on the West by Northamptonshire, on the South by
Bedfordshire, and on the East by Cambridgeshire. The North-East parts of it are
Fenny; but yield plenty of Grass for feeding of Cattle. The rest is very
pleasant, fruitful of Corn, rising into Hills, and shady Groves. The whole
indeed was one Forest, till Henry II. in the beginning of his Reign disforested
it.

The Town of Huntingdon, which gives Name to the County, is seated upon the
North side of the River Ouse, somewhat high; and stretches out it self in
length to the Northward: it has four Churches in it, a fair Bridge of Stone
over the River, and near it is the Mount or Plot of an ancient Castle, (now
ruined,) built by Edward the Elder, in the Year 917. Which King David of
Scotland, (who had this County with the Title of an Earl, from King Stephen of
England, for an Augmentation of his Estate,) in the Year 1135. enlarged with
new Buildings, and Bulwarks: but Henry II. finding great Inconveniences from
it, razed it to the Ground. This was a very considerable Town in the times of
Edward the Confessor, and perhaps greater than now. The first Earl of
Huntingdon was Waltheof, Created in 1068. two years after the Conquest: he
being beheaded, Simon de Lyze, (who Married Maud the Daughter of Waltheof) was
made Earl in 1075. David Prince of Scotland, her second Husband, was the next
Earl in 1108. It continued in this Family of Scotland, till 1219. but it is now
in the Family of the Hastings: George Lord Hastings and Hungerford, being by
Henry VIII. Created Earl of Huntingdon, in the Year 1529. Theophilus Hastings,
the present Earl, succeeded his Father in the Year 1655. and is the seventh
Earl of this Noble Family.

Huquang, a very large Province in the middle of the Kingdom of China; counted
the seventh in number, but in extent one of the greatest; its greatest length
is from North to South: being bounded on the North by Honan; on the East by
Nankim, and Kiamsi; on the South by Quamtum; and on the West by Queycheu, and
Suchen. It contains fifteen Cities, an hundred and eighteen great Towns, five
hundred thirty one thousand six hundred eighty six Families. The greatest City
is Vuchang. The great River of Kiam crosses it, and divides it; and in the
middle of this Province it receives two other great Rivers, one from the
North, and the other from the South; whose Names I cannot assign. And these
three Rivers form at their meeting a very considerable Lake, between the Cities
of Kincheu and Yocheu. The Chinese call it also Jumichiti, and the Granary of
China for its abundance: As to which they have a Proverb, that the Province of
Kiangsi may furnish all China with a Breakfast; but Huquang is able entirely to
maintain it.

Hurepois, Hurepoesium, a District in the Isle of France; between la Beause to
the West, la Brie to the East, (from which it is parted by the Seine,) and la
Gastinois to the South. This heretofore was a part of la Beause. The Cities in
it are Corbeil, Castres, and la Ferte Alais.

The Hurons are a People of North America, in the Northern parts of New France,
toward a Lake of the same Name. The River Des Hurons arises in the West of
New France, called also the River of the Otavacks, a People bordering on the
Hurons; and runs a great way toward the North-East, till at last it falls into
the River of St. Laurence. The Lake des Hurons is very great, and in its extent
resembles a Sea; but the Waters are fresh: it is seven hundred Leagues in
Compass, as the Inhabitants about it pretend: the Lake of Illinia, and the
Upper Lake do both fall into it.

Huz, the Country of Job, between Syria and Arabia; now Omps.

Husum, a City of Denmark in Jutland; in the South part of the Dukedom of
Sleswick, near the Shoars of the German Ocean, and Nort Strand, (an Island so
called.) It has a most noble Castle, built by the Duke of Holstein Gothorp, in
1581. under whom it now is. It stands a Gorman Mile and an half from
Frederickstad to the North, four from Sleswick to the West. Some few years
since, it was fortified; but the King of Denmark has slighted its Outworks.

Huy, and Hu, Huum, Huyum, Huyonum, a Town of the Low Countries in the
Bishopric of Liege, in the Territory of Condrotz; between Liege, and Namur;
which has a Castle, and a Stone Bridge over the Maez, (which here receives the
River Huy, which latter gives Name to it) but ruined. This place was taken by
the French in 1675, and its Fortifications ruined. It stands five French
Leagues from Liege to the South-West, and thirteen from Brussels to the
North-East; adorned with a Collegiate Church, and diverse others.

Hyesmes. See Hiesmois.

Hyeres, a Knot of small Islands on the Coast of Narbonne, or Provence, in the
Mediterranean Sea. See Hieres.

Hymburgh. See Haynburgh.

Hymettus, a Mountain of Achaia in Greece, within a League of Athens, and about
seven or eight in circumference, yielding plenty of odoriferous Herbs for the
making of Honey, which has been always in great esteem. Some call it,
Monte-Matto, by a corruption. There are six Convents of Caloyers or Religious
Greeks planted upon the sides of it. The chief of which, called by the Turks
Cosbachi, by the Greeks Cyriani, since the Year 1455. (when Mahomet II. took
Athens and the Abbot of this House brought the Keys to him) is exempt from all
Taxes to the Port, paying a sequine by way of homage.

Hythe, one of the Cinqueport Towns in the County of Kent, in Shepway Lath:
which Elects two Members of Parliament.

Hyrach, Hyrcania, a Province of the Kingdom of Persia; heretofore bounded on
the North by the Hyrcanian Sea, on the East by Margiana, on the West by Media,
and on the South by Parthia, properly so called: Now divided into two
Provinces, called Taberistan, Mazenderan.

The. Hyreanian Sea, Mare Hyrcanium, takes this ancient well known Name from
this Province: but it is no less frequently called, both in Ancient and Modern
Geographers and Historians, the Caspian Sea. This Sea is called by various
Names according to the Countries which do border upon it. It was anciently
called the Sea of Chosar, from the eldest Son of Th^garma, a Great Grandchild
of Noah, by Japhet. Nubius, in his Geography, calls it the Sea of Tavisthan;
the Arabians Baharcorsum; the Persians Kulsum; (as they do also the Persian
Gulf.) The Greek and Latin Authors, Mare Hyrcanium, or Mare Caspium; the
Persians call it also the Sea of Baku; the Muscovites, Gualenskoi-More. The
Ancients generally thought it had a communication with the Indian Ocean; which
is not true: for it has no communication with any other Sea in the World known;
and therefore may most properly be called the Mediterranean Sea: this was known
to Aristotle, and Herodotus of old. Its greatest extent is from North to South,
(that is, from Astrachan, to Ferabath,) eight degrees. of the Equator; or one
hundred and twenty German Miles, or four hundred and eighty English Miles: its
Breadth from the Province of Chuaresin, to the Mountains of Circassia (or
Shirwan,) is six degrees. or ninety German Miles, or three hundred and sixty
English Miles. The Waters are in the middle as salt as those of any other Sea
whatsoever; but it neither Ebbs nor Flows, as all the rest do, which have any
Intercourse with the Ocean. It has in a manner never a safe Harbor upon it:
the best is Minkischlak, or Manguslave, on the side of the Grand Tartary. The
Water is of the same color with that of other Seas: it has but one Island in
it, and that lies toward Persia, called Ensil, which has never an House in it.
Thus far Olearius, who Traveled over it in 1636. It is generally very shallow,
and flat; therefore in Tempests dangerous to those that Sail upon it: the
Persians never trust to it, and rarely go out of sight of the Shore. This Sea
has on the North the Kingdom of Astrachan, and Negaia; on the East Chuaresm; on
the South, the Kingdom of Persia; and on the West Georgia: it receives there
above an hundred Rivers which fall into it, many of which are very great; as
the Wolga, the Araxis or Cyrus, the Keisilosein, the Bustrow, the Aksay, and
the Koisu: toward the North, are the Rivers of Jaika, and Jems; toward the
South and East the Nios, Oxus, and the Oxentes, which Curtius calls Tanais:
Olearius assures us, that in twenty days Travel between Roschot and Schamakap,
he crossed above fourscore Rivers great and small.

Hyth, a Port in the County of Kent, in Shepway Lath, which has a Castle for
its Defense; upon the Streights of Calais, between Dover to the North, and Rye
to the South; two Miles from the first, and five from the latter. It elects two
Members of Parliament.

J A.
JAbesh-Gilead, an ancient Town of Judaea, in the Territory of Gilead,
belonging to the Tribes of Israel. All whose Inhabitants, saving four hundred
Young Virgins, were by the Israelites put to the Sword, for not assisting in
the War against the Benjamites, Judge. 21. 11. 12. In the Year of the World
2963. Nahash, King of the Ammonites, besieged it, and refused to accept of its
surrender, otherwise, than upon the condition of putting out the right eye of
every one. In the mean time Saul, coming to their relief, engaged Nahash,
defeated him, and raised the Siege. 1 Samuel 11.

Jacatra, a City and Kingdom in the Island of Ja^a in the East Indies. The
latter, is subject to the King of Bantam; the other, the same with Batavia; the
Hollanders, under whom it is, having so new-named it. See Batavia.

Jacca, an ancient City belonging to the Vascenes, now in the Kingdom of
Arragon; supposed to be built by Pompey the Great, but certainly called by this
very Name by Ptolemy. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Saragoza;
and stands upon the River Aragona, at the Foot of the Pyrenean Hills; twenty
one ( Baudrand says sixteen) Spanish Miles from Saragoza to the North, eight
from the Confines of France, and eight from Huesca in Arragon to the
North-West. This City is the Capital of the County of Arragon.

The Jacobites. Under this Name, says P. Simon, in general we may comprehend
all the Monophysites of the East, i. e. such as acknowledge one only Nature
(the Humane) in Jesus Christ; in which Latitude the Armenians, Cophtites and
Abyssines will be included. But it more particularly denotes a separate Church
of Christians in Syria and Mesopotamia, consisting of about forty or forty five
thousand Families, under a Patriarch of their own, who keeps his Residence at
Caramit, and assumes the title of the Patriarch of Antioch, having diverse
Metropolitans under him. Jacobus Zanzalus, a Syrian, of the sixth Century,
dressing up a particular Creed out of the opinions of Eutyches and Dioscorus,
was the Founder of this Church, which therefore retains his Christian Name.
Amongst other customs and tenants, they deny the Trinity; they circumcise their
Children first, then baptize them upon their forehead with a hot Iron; because
of the words, Matthew. 3. 11. He shall baptize you with the Holy Spirit and with
fire. And no endeavors of the Roman See (whose Supremacy they disown) have
hitherto been sufficient to alter their Principles.

Jacamcury, a City of the Hither East Indies, called of old Sosicurae as
Castaldus conjectures.

Jacuby, a River of Tartary, which falls into the Caspian Sea, on the Confines
of Bochar.

Jada, Lade, an Island in the Archipelago.

Jader, or Jada, Jadica, Guttalus, a River of Germany, more commonly called the
Oder. It falls in the Baltic Sea near Stetin; having watered Silesia, Marchia,
and Pomerania, Hoffman places it in East Friseland. Others, in the County of
Oldemburg in the Circle of Westphalia. See Oder. It gives Name to a Town at its
fall.

Jadog, a River in Africa; called Rubricatus, Armua, and Ardalia of old: Ladog,
and Guadilbarber, as well as Jadog, in later Writers. It falls into the
Mediterranean Sea, through the Kingdom of Tunis.

Jaen, Giennium, Gienna, Aurigi, Iliturgis, Aurinx, Oringe, Oningis, is a City
and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Toledo, ever since 1249, having been
three years before recovered by Ferdinando out of the Hands of the Moors. It is
a great and populous City, in the Kingdom of Andalusia, upon the River
Guadalbollon, where it receives that of Susanna; twelve Miles from the
Guadalquivir to the South, toward the Borders of Granada; and eighteen from
Alcala to the South-East. This City has been heretofore so considerable, as to
bear the title of a Kingdom.

Jafanapatan, Jaffanapatan, a City on the North of the Island of Ceylan, in the
East Indies: in the Hands of the Dutch, (who have built it a good Fortress) and
the Capital of a Kingdom of the same Name. It lies in Long. 110. 00. Lat. 10.
07.

Jaffo, or Jaffa, Joppe, a Maritime City of Palestine, in the Tribe of Dan,
upon the Mediterranean Sea, twenty four Miles from Jerusalem; thought to be one
of the ancientest in the World, as having been built and so named by Japhet the
Son of Noah: Famous in all ages for the convenience of its Port; at which
particularly Hiram King of Tire his Fleet, laden with Cedar and Marble for the
building of K. Solomon's Temple, discharged; and Jonas the Prophet took Ship
for Tharsis. St. Peter also here raised Tabitha from the dead, and saw the
Vision of the Beasts. This City was ruined by Judas Macchabeus, and afterward
by the Emperor Titus. Next the Arabians established themselves in it; from whom
the Christians under Godfrey of Bovillon recovered it, rebuilt the Castle, and
made it a strong Garrison; adorning it likewise with the title of an Earldom,
and an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Cesarea. In the Year 1188.
Saladine overcame and dismantled it. But Richard I. King of England, and S.
Lewis King of France successively repaired it again, till it fell finally into
the hands of the Saracens in 1252. Now it consists of some poor Houses, with a
small Fort, garrisoned for the Bassa of Gaza; nothing of its ancient Buildings
appearing but in their ruins.

Jagerndorff, Carnovia, or Karnow, a Town in Sil^sia in Bohemia, the Capital of
a District of the same Name, and heretofore under the Duke of Brandenburgh* It
stands upon the River Oppa, which near Hilschin falls into the Oder; four
German Miles from Ratibor, a City of Bohemia, toward the West; and about three
from the Confines of Moravia: there is in it a very splendid and magnificent
Castle.

S. Jago-Cavallero, a small Town in the Island of Hispaniola in America, twenty
Leagues from S. Domingo to the East, near a Mountain from whence the rains
bring down little pieces of Gold. The Inhabitants trade to San Domingo in Hides
and Tallow.

Jagos, a vagabond Barbarian People of Africa, abounding more especially in the
Kingdom of Ansico in the Lower Aethiopia, or according to others, in Congo;
without a certain abode, living by robbery and carnage. Parents and Children,
it is said, have no horror amongst them, to eat the flesh of one another.

Jagel, one of the Heads of Dwina. See Dwina.

Jagntevo, a City of Servia, built on a Plain amongst the Hills; not above half
a Days Journey from Monte-Novo, another City of the same Province. It is pretty
considerable, and has some Christians residing in it, though under the Dominion
of the Turks.

Jaitza, or Jaicz, Jaitia, Gaitia, Jaycza, a City of Bosnia, toward the
Confines of Croatia, upon the River Plena; defended by a strong Castle, which
is in the Hands of the Turks, as Calchondylas says. The Kings or Despotes of
Bosnia did heretofore reside here.

Jakotyn, a small Town in the Vkrain, in the Palatinate of Kiovia, beyond the
Nieper, which has a strong Castle. It stands upon the River Supoi, eleven Miles
from Kiovia to the East, and about thirteen from the Nieper, into which the
Supoi falls, six Miles above Czyrkassy. This Town belongs to the Muscovites now.

Jala, a Kingdom in the Eastern part of the Island of Ceylan in the
East Indies, with a City of the same Name; little inhabited, by reason the Air
is very contagious.

Jalea, Elis, a City in the Morea.

Jalina, Acherusia, a Lake in Epirus.

Jalines, Macaria, a Town in Cyprus, toward its North End.

Ialofes, the People of the Kingdom of Senega, in Nigritia, in Africa, lying
betwixt those two branches of the Niger, the Rivers Senega and Gambay. Their
Emperor is called the Grand Jalof, and takes the Style of the Sovereign of
thirteen or fourteen Kingdoms. The Capital, where he keeps his Court, is
Tubacatum: There are no Towns or Cities walled in all this Empire; Tobacco,
Hides, Ivory, Gum-arabick, Ambergrease, Wax, Dates, and Maze, are its principal
Commodities. See Senega.

La Ielle, Gala, a small River of France, which falls into the Guaronne.

Iamagorod, Jama, a strong Castle anciently belonging to the Russ, and
accounted the Key of that Kingdom; but in 1617, resigned to the Swedes. It is
seated on a River called Iamische Reck; three German Miles from Narva, in
Livonia. See Narva.

Iamaica, a very great Island in North America, first discovered by Columbus,
and called thus in Honor of S. James. It was found out by him in his second
Voyage to America, whilst he sailed about Cuba. In his third Voyage he suffered
Shipwreck upon it; and the Spaniards ungratefully designed to have suffered him
to perish, out of pure envy; but he found the Natives more kind than they.
Whereupon he landed, and fell to Plant it; building the Town of Metilla; which
they deserted soon after, and built Sevil, ten Leagues more West. In 1509, the
Natives rebelled against Didacus, the Son of Columbus, but were subdued. In
1590, the Spaniards built S. Jago, and deserted Sevil. In 1638, one Jackson, an
English Man, with a Fleet of English Privateers, surprised and plundered S.
Jago; then left it to the Spaniards again. The time being come when the
Spaniards were to pay for their Ingratitude to Columbus, and their Cruelty to
the Natives, (some Millions of which they had barbarously murdered;) the
English, under Penn and Venables, Landed here, about twenty thousand strong,
being mostly necessitous Persons, who had been undone by our then Tyrant, and
the Times, May 3. 1655. The Spaniards unable to resist so great a force,
retired into the Woods, and Fastnesses; hoping to retrieve what they thus left,
by a Treaty; but it proved otherwise. For part of the English fell to Plant;
the rest to Privateer upon the Spaniards, by which they got Wealth: and the
Fame of this so increased, that many going over to them, it became in a few
years a very powerful Colony; now able alone to manage a War against all the
Forces the Spaniards have in the West Indies. This Island is situate between
seventeen and eighteen degrees of North Lat. within the Tropicks, in the Mare
del Nort; one hundred and forty Leagues North of the Main Continent of America,
fifteen South from Cuba, twenty West from Hispaniola, and one hundred and forty
from Carthagena Nova. It is of an Oval Form; one hundred and seventy Miles
long; seventy in breadth; and contains four or five Millions of Acres; Nine
hundred thousand of which were Planted in 1675. In the middle there is a lofty
Chain of Mountains, which run the whole length of the Isle, from East to West;
from which spring plenty of pleasant and useful Rivers, to the great
refreshment and convenience of the Inhabitants. It has a very rich fat Soil,
black and mixed with Clay, except in the South-West Parts, where it is
generally a more loose Earth: it every where answers the Planter's Care and
Cost. The Air is always serene and clear; the Earth in her Summer Livery; here
being a perpetual Spring. It has frequent Showers of Rain, constant cooling
Breezes of Wind from the East: the Dews in the Night quicken the Growth of what
is Planted: so that it is the most delightful, temperate, healthful, pleasant
Island of all those in the West Indies: and will be extremely considerable,
when it comes to be thoroughly Peopled. The principal Towns in it are Port Royal,
(built by the English) S. Jago, and Sevilla. The Earl of Inchequin, and the
Duke of Albemarle, two late Governors, both of them here died.

Iamaistero, or Jamaisoit, a very large County in the West Part of the Island
of Nivon, or Niphonia, belonging to Japan; under which are ordinarily computed
twelve Provinces, or Kingdoms.

Iamama, a City of Arabia Foelix, upon the River Astan; which falls into the
Mouth of the Euphrates and Tigris, about thirty German Miles South of Balsera.
Jamama stands toward the Borders of Arabia deserta; two hundred and fifty
Miles from the Persian Gulf to the West, and seventy German Miles from Balsera
to the South-West. Long. 77. 30. Lat. 27. 00.

Iamba, a Province under the Great Mogul, toward the River Ganges; between
Patna to the East, Naugracut to the North, Lahor to the West, and Bakar to the
South; the City of Jamba, from which it takes its Name, stands eighty Miles
from Ganges to the East, toward Lahor.

Iamby, or Jambis, a Seaport Town, and a Kingdom of no great extent, in the
Island of Sumatra, toward the Eastern Part of it. The Town stands toward
Palimban, within five or six Miles of the Sea, driving a notable Commerce.

Iambol, Joannipolis, a City in Bulgaria.

Iamboli, Chalcis, Chalcidica Regio, a Province in the North of Macedonia;
between Thessalonica, the Arm of the Sea which runs up to it, the Archipelago,
and Thrace. The chief Towns of which are, Thessalonica, Amphipolis, and
Contessa.

James Bay, a Bay in Virginia.

James Town, Jacobipolis, the principal City or Town in Virginia, upon the
River Pawhatan, near its fall into the North Sea: begun by the English about
1607, and honored with this Name from King James I. Another in the Country of
Letrim, in the Province of Connaught in Ireland; so called from King James I.
its Founder, upon the Shannon; well Walled, but almost wholly ruined as to its
Buildings, in the Wars against King Charles the First, and Second.

Iam-suqueam, or Nanquin, a River of China.

Iametz, a strong place in Lorain, yielded to the French King in 1632. It
stands upon a little River in the Confines of the Province of Luxemburgh;
between Monmedy to the North, and Damvillers to the South; thirteen Miles from
Metz to the West: now dismantled.

Iancoma, a Kingdom in the East Indies, beyond the Ganges, under the King of
Pegu: it stands between the Rivers Mecon to the East, and Menan to the West.

Ianeiro, or Rio de Janaira, a River, the same with Ganabara in Brasil; see
Ganabara. It gives its Name to a Province, under the Portuguese, in that
Country, whereof S. Sebastian is the Capital.

Ianiculus mons, a Hill or Mountain beyond the Tiber, in the vicinage of Rome,
yielding by its eminence an excellent prospect of that City; and famous in
History for the Sepulcher of King Numa Pompilius, the encampment of Porsenna
King of Etruria upon it, whilst he besieged Rome; and for the Martyrdom of S.
Peter. Now called Montorio, because its earth is of the color of Gold.

Ianna, a part of Greece; some say Epirus, others Thessalia.

Ianinnina, Cassiope, a City of Epirus.

Iannizari, Promontorium Sigeium, a Cape at the entrance of the Streights of
Gallipoli, or the Hellespont, in Asia, within half a League whereof the Rivers
Scamander and Simois in an United Stream discharge themselves into the Ocean.
The Greeks wholly inhabit a plentiful Village upon it, called by them, Troyasis
or Little Troy; but by the Turks, Giaour-kioy, or the Village of Infidels; this
being the best Name the Turks give to Christian places, where there are no
Mosques. The delightful Country of Troas is mostly discovered from this Cape;
and the Island of Tenedos, in the Aegoan Sea, stands at the distance of a
League from it.

Ianowitz, a small Town in Bohemia; where the Swedes in 1645, gained a great
Victory over the Imperialists: six German Miles from Prague to the North-West,
toward the Confines of Moravia.

Iaocheu, a great City in the Province of Kiangsi in China, with a Territory of
the same Name whereof it is the Capital, extending its jurisdiction over six
other great Towns; and particularly remarked for good Porcelain Ware.

Iantra. See Ischar.

Iapan, Japonia, a vast Country in the Eastern Ocean, called by the Inhabitants
Niphon; by the Chinians, Gepuen, that is, the East; and from thence by the
Europeans Japan. On the West it is bounded by the Sea of China, (which divides
it from China,) and the Island or Promontory of Corea. It is supposed to be an
Island, one hundred and fifty German Miles in length; seventy in breadth: The
Inhabitants are all under one Prince, Heathens, and sworn Enemies of
Christianity: which begun to take rooting amongst them by the Preaching of the
Portuguese; but was extirpated by Fire, Sword, and the bloodiest Persecution
that ever was practiced amongst Men. The Dutch, (who Trade here) are secured
with the utmost Caution, that they may not surprise any part of the Shore, or
build any Fort, or do any other Act whereby they may settle themselves: nor
will they permit them to see more of the Country than one small Peninsula; or
of the Inhabitants, than those they Trade with; and for a long time they would
not permit them to Land, Buy, or Sell, till they had renounced their
Christianity. This Island lies sixty Leagues from Cantan, a Province of China
to the East; and about three hundred from New Spain, in America: mountainous,
and generally barren; but it maintains a vast number of Cattle; yet the
Inhabitants do not know how to make either Butter or Cheese. This Island,
totally unknown to the Ancients, was first discovered by Antonio Mota, a
Portuguese, in 1542. The Jesuits in 1556, sent S. Francis Xavier to Preach
here, who is called therefore the Apostle of Japan: at first they had great
success, insomuch that in the Year 1587, they pretended to have gained two
hundred thousand Converts. But this lasted not long; for about the Year 1622,
there began so dreadful a Persecution, as is no where to be met with; and these
new Converts having never been well grounded in their new Religion, Apostatized
so fast, that in seven years there were very few Christians to be found, and
perhaps at this time, none. This Country lies in 35 degrees of Lat. In Long.
betwixt 171. and 188. The air very healthful and generally cold. The Earth
affords Gold, Silver, and Pearl; watered by diverse Rivers, and Lakes, with good
Ports. Some describe it to be a Mass of many Islands, going altogether under
the Name of Japan; and that the three most considerable, are Niphonia, Ximo,
and Nicoco. The Japonese are jealous, fierce, pompous in their habits and
language, sincere in Commerce, and ingenious imitators of the Characters and
Hyeroglyphicks of the Chinese, from whom they descend. The principal City is
Meaco, tho the Emperor of late has resided at Jendo.

Iapara, a Kingdom in the North of the Island of Java, in the East Indies, with
a City of the same Name, which has a good Port.

Iappenaw, Japodes, a small District in Carniola, under the Emperor.

Iaracazes, Canea, two Rocks at the entrance of the Euxme Sea, in the Propontis.

Iaretta, Terias, Simethus, the greatest River in the Island of Sicily; it
falls into the Sea, three Miles from Catania to the South West.

Iarnac, Jarnacum, a small Town in Angoulmois, upon the River Charente,
dignified with the Title of an Earldom: between Angoulesme to the East, and
Saints to the West, eight Miles from either; memorable for a Battle here
fought in the Year 1569, betwixt the Roman Catholics and Huguenots; in which
the old Prince of Condy, who commanded the latter, was slain, by one Montesque
(a Captain under the Duke of Anjou, afterward K Henry III. the head of the
Catholics) tho he offered one hundred thousand Crowns for his Ransom; and the
Hugenots defeated, after a bloody Fight of ten hours continuance.

Iaromitz, a small Town in Bohemia, upon the Elbe, twelve Miles from Prague to
the East.

Iaroslaw, a pleasant Town in Red Russia, belonging to the Poles, upon the
River Sane, with a Castle; forty five Polish Miles from Warsaw to the South,
thirty five from Cassovia to the North-East, and twenty from Lemburg to the
North-West: near this place the Swedes gave the Poles a fatal overthrow, in
1656. In 1625. it suffered much by Fire.

Iaroslaw, a great City in Muscovy, which is the Capital of a Dukedom of the
same Name, and has in it a Timber Castle; it is seated upon the Wolga, thirty
German Miles South of Wolgda, thirty seven North of Moscho. The Dukedom of
Jaroslaw is very great; and lies between that of Wologda to the North, Rostow
to the South, and the River Wolga to the East. Governed by a Prince of its own,
till John Basilovits, Duke of Russia, Conquered it, and annexed it to his own
Dominions. Since that, it has been given to the eldest Son of the Duke of
Muscovy, as his Title and Residence.

Iarrow, a Town in the Bishopric of Durham, in Chester Ward; deserving a
remark, for being the Birth place of the Venerable Bede.

Iarsey, Caesarea, an Island on the Coast of Normandy, and part of the Dukedom
of Normandy; but now annexed to the County of Southampton. This, and Guernsey,
being all that is left to the Kings of England, of their great Dominions in
France: from the Shoars of which it lies about five Miles to the West, and
thirty from those of England to the South. The Inhabitants speak a Norman kind
of French. There are in it twelve Parishes; and two Gastles, Montorgueil, and
Elizabeth. This Island was one of the last that yielded to the prevailing
Rebels, not without force, in October 1651. after the Kings return to France
from the Battle of Worcester. The same Prince in 1663. sent them a Silver Mace
to be born before their Chief Magistrate, as a remembrance of this their
fidelity to him in his greatest distress.

Iasque, a Principality of the Kingdom of Persia, upon the Borders of the
Province of Kherman, extended along the Sea Coast from thence betwixt the Cape
Jasque and Cape Guadel (which two are the most Southern points of Persia) and
possessed by three petty Princes, of whom the chief takes the Style of the
Prince of Jasque. This Prince after the Conquest of Ormus by Cha-Abas I. K. of
Persia paid a yearly tribute to that Crown: which being remitted in the Reign
of Cha-Sephi, his Successor Cha-Abas II. endeavored by War to compel the
Prince of Jasque again to pay the same, but in his attempts was beaten.

Jassy, or Yassi, Jassium, a City of Walachia, called by the French Jas, upon
the River Pruth; thirty Miles from the Confines of the Kingdom of Poland to the
South, fifty from Soczow to the East, and a hundred and twenty from Caminieck
to the North-East. It is not improbable, this is the Augusta Dac^^: but the
later Geographers are very much mistaken in placing it in Moldavia, when it
belongs to Walachia. The Vaivode, or Prince of these Countries, for the most
part resides here; having suffered much from the Cossacks of later times, the
Turks maintained a strong Garrison in it. The present King of Poland in 1686.
marching this way against the Turks and Tartars, possessed himself of it,
leaving a Garrison: but before his return, there happened so great a Fire, that
when he came, he was forced to withdraw his Forces, and leave it to the
Walachians to be repaired.

Jati, Bathis, a River on the West of Sicily, which falls into the Bay or Gulf
of Amar on the North side, twenty five Miles South of Palermo.

Java, a great Island in the East-Indian Sea, two hundred Leagues in length,
and near fifty in breadth. On the West it has Sumatra; on the East, some other
small Isles; on the South the vast Ocean plays full upon it; and on the North
it has the Island of Borneo, at the distance of forty five German Miles. It is
divided into nine Kingdoms; the greatest of which is the Kingdom of Bantam, and
next the Kingdom of Materan. The whole Island produces great quantities of
Spice, and is on that account much frequented by the English and Dutch. The
Dutch had heretofore the Fort or City of Batavia in this Island: not contented
with this, about 1684. joining with a Son of the King of Bantam, (then in
Rebellion against his Father) upon pretense of assisting him, they seized the
City of Bantam, took Possession of the English Factory, and all the Goods
belonging to the English, and kept the old King a Prisoner in the Castle of
Bantam. But finding there were several Attempts to restore him to his former
Possession, in 1686. the young King (by the Advice of the Dutch) removed his
Captive Father to Batavia. See Batavia. The principal Cities of this Island
are, Balambuan, Bantam, Batavia or Jacatra, Japara, Jortan, Materan, (once the
Capital of the whole) Panarucan Passarvan, Saraboy, and Tuban. The Southern
parts were never yet much sought into, and so not much known. It lies between
130 and 140 Long and 5 and 10 of Southern Lat. There is another Island near
this, called the Lesser Java.

Jaur, Jauriu, a small River in Languedoc; which rises near S. Ponthois, and
falls into the Orba, near the Castle of Pujols.

Javarin, [ Jaurinum.] See Gewer, and Raab.

Jawer, Jauria, a City of Silesia in Bohemia; small, but indifferently
populous, and the Capital of a Dukedom; and has also an ancient Castle: it lies
not two Miles from Lignitz to the South, and about nine from Breslaw to the
West. The Dukedom of Jawer lies between Lusatia to the West, Bohema (properly
so called) to the South, the Dukedom of Lignitz to the North, and that of
Swyednitz to the East.

Jayck, Rhymnus, a River of the Asian Tartary, which falls into the Caspian
Sea, between the Rha and Jaxartes: Olearius places it in the middle of the
North end of that Sea.

Jaziges, by Ovid styled Jaziges acres, and by the Writers of the middle Ages
Jaziges Metanastes, were an ancient People of Sarmatia Europaea; who being
almost entirely exterminated thence by Boleslaus the Chaste, King of Poland, and
Lescus, in the years 1264* and 1282. retired in great numbers into the Upper
Hungary.

Jazzo, See Laiazzo.

Jberia, an ancient Name of the Kingdom of Spain in Pliny and Strabo, taken
from the River Iberus ( Ebro.) Likewise of a part of Georgia in Asia, now
called Gagheti. See Georgia.

Jcaria, a Mountain of Attica in Greece, in the ancient Tribe of Aegeus.

Jda, a Mountain of Troas in Asia Minor, at the foot of which stood the famous
City Troy. Athenaeus says, nine Rivers derived their Springs from it. Therefore
Horace styles it, Ida undosa. And Diodorus makes it to be the highest in the
Neighborhood of the Hellespont. Hence the Idaeus sinus took its Name, which
was otherwise called Andramyttenus sinus and now le Golfe Andramytti. A
Mountain also of the Island of Candia, environed with Forests, and inhabited
heretofore by the People, Dactyli Idaei.

Jdanhas, Igaeaita, a ruined City in Portugal.

Jddle or Iddel, a River in the County of Nottingham, upon which Redford is
situated, emptying it self Northward into the River Dun.

Idafa, a Branch of Mount Imaus.

Jdria, a Town in the County of Goritia; encompassed with Hills on all sides;
and seated upon a River of the same name. Remarkable for the Quicksilver Mines
in it. See Dr. Brown's Travels, p. 82, 83. It stands ten Miles from Goritia to
the North-West.

Jducal, Atlas Major, a vast Mountain on the South of Barbary in Africa.

Jdumaea, Edom, the Country of the Edomites, mentioned frequently in Scripture,
was a Kingdom of the ancient Canaan, betwixt Judaea properly so called, the
Stony Arabia, and the Mediterranean Sea. Its principal Cities, Dinhabah, Avith,
Pai, Rehoboth. 1 Chronicles. 1. 43. etc. where see the list of the Kings and Dukes
of Edom, before the time of the beginning of the Israelitish Monarchy. David
afterward conquered and garrisoned it, 2 Samuel 8. 14. But in the Reign of
Jehoram King of Judah, the Edomites revolted, and made themselves a King, 2 Chronicles. 21. 8. 10. and joined with the Chaldaeans under Nebuchadonezar in the
Siege of Jerusalem. Hyrcanus in the Ages following made War against them so
effectually, that he caused them to turn Jews. They were of the Descendants of
Esau.

Jefferkin, Capernaum, a City in Palestine.

Jehan-Abad. See Delly.

Jempterlandt, Jemptia, a Province in the Kingdom of Sweden; which has Angerman
to the East, Middlepad to the South, Helsing to the West, and Norway to the
North. It belonged to the King of Denmark till 1645, and then by the Treaty of
Bromsbroo, was resigned to the Swedes. There are three Castles, but never a
City in it.

Jena, a small City in Hassia in Germany, upon the River Saal, over which it
has a Bridge, under the Duke of Saxon Weimar; two German Miles from Weimar to
the East, nine from Leipsick to the North-East, and three from Naumburg to the
South. It has a small University opened here in 1555, by the Dukes of Saxony,
and a Monastery of the Dominicans founded in 1286. The Valley about it yields
plenty of Wine.

Jende, or Pajende, Jendus, a Lake in the Province of Tavasthia, in Finland.

Jendo, Jedo or Yendo, the capital City of the Empire of Japan, in the Island
of Niphonia, at which the Emperor, since his leaving Meaco, keeps his Court. A
vast and magnificent City, upon the Banks of the River Tonkaw or Toukon, and
near a great Gulf yielding variety of Fish. The Palace Royal is a work of
state: the Temples and the Palaces of the Nobility attract the admiration of
Strangers. There is one Street in it almost four Leagues in length. In 1658. it
suffered by fire to the value, they say, of forty eight millions of Gold.

Jengan, a City in Xensy, a Province of the Kingdom of China. It stands in a
Mountainous Country near the Lake of Lieu, and has eighteen smaller Cities
depending on it.

Jeniscey, Jeniscea, a River in the North of Muscovy, which runs more East than
that of Obb, and said to be greater: on the East it has a Chain of vast high
Mountains, (some of them burn like Aetna;) on the West a fruitful Plain or
Level, which it overflows every Spring for seven German Miles together, as the
Nile does Egypt. This River having watered the Tingoesians and Samoieds, falls
into the Sea of Zemla, or Weigats Straight.

Jeniza, or Jenizza, a small City in Macedonia, built by the Turks out of the
Ruins of P^lla, the Birthplace of Alexander the Great: it stands upon the Bay
of Thessalonica, between the Outlets of Beuoda and Castora, (two Rivers,)
twenty eight Miles from Aedessa to the East, and the same from Thessalonica to
the South* The Inhabitants finding here great Ruins, and much Marble, believe
it to have been the Palace of Philip King of Macedon.

Jenkoping, Jencoping, or Jonekoping, Jonekopia, a small City in Smalland, a
Province of the Kingdom of Sweden; it lies between the Lake of Wether to the
West, and the Baltic Sea to the East; sixteen Miles from the latter: built all
of Wood.

Jenupar, a City and Kingdom under the Great Mogul, which is a part of the
Hither India, on this side the Ganges: seated upon the River Coul; a hundred
and thirty Miles from Delly to the South, and Lahor to the North.

Jepes, a Town in the Territory of Toledo in Spain.

Jerby, a Market Town in the County of Cumberland, in the Division of Allerdale.

Jere, Eara, a River near Calais in France.

Jerne, Jerna, a River in Gallicia.

Jero, Giaros, a small Island, or rather Rock, in the Archipelago. See Joura.

Jerico, Hierico, a celebrated City in Palestine; built by the Jebusites,
whilst the Children of Israel were in Bondage in the Land of Egypt, with Walls
and other Defenses to a wonder; all which fell down before the Ark of God, as
is recorded in Joshua 6. After this it lay desolate 531 years; and was rebuilt
in the Reign of Ahab King of Israel, by Hiel the Bethelite, with the loss of
his Eldest and Youngest Sons, according to the Prediction of Joshua, in the
year of the World 3117. It stood not above 335 years, before it was ruined by
the Chaldeans under Nebuchadnezzar. After the Captivity it recovered again.
Herod the Great made it his residence for some time, it having a noble Palace,
an Hippodrome, an Amphitheatre, and other stately Buildings. Our Savior
honored it with his Presence and Miracles. About the year of Christ 68. it was
taken by the Romans under Vespasian and Titus. It became after this a Bishops
See, and was in some esteem till it fell to the Saracens. In the times of the
Holy War, it was again in the hands of Christians, and of great fame; but
falling the second time to the Saracens, they entirely ruined i^: so that it is
now only inhabited by the Arabians, who have here thirty or forty Brick Houses,
as M. Thevenot assures us. It is seated in a pleasant and fruitful Plain;
twelve Miles West from Jordan, and the same from Jerusalem to the North-East.
The Arabians at this day call it Rih^ha. Mr. Fuller, in his Pisgah Sight, is of
opinion, it was well inhabited between the days of Joshua and Ahab, though not
walled: he makes the City of Palm* Trees where Ehud stabbed Eglon King of Moab,
to have been Jerico. The Plain it stands in abounds in Palm Trees, and is about
nine Leagues long, and five broad.

Jeroslaw. See Jaroslaw.

Jersey. See Jarsey.

Jerusalem, Hierosolyma, the capital City of Palestine, and for a long time of
the whole Earth; taken notice of by Pliny, Strabo, and many of the Ancients.
Called, when the Children of Israel entered Canaan, Jebus; and by that name
assigned to the Tribe of Benjamin by Joshua. It was in the hands of the
Jebusites till the Reign of David, who took it from them, Anno Mun. 2898, and
gave it the name of the City of David. Absalom his Son dispossessed him again
for some time, in 2920. Solomon his Son consecrated here the noblest Temple the
Sun ever saw, in 2939. Sheshack, King of Egypt, came up against Rehoboam Son of
Solomon, and took and plundered Jerusalem in 2973. In 3117. it was taken by
Joas, one of the Kings of Israel, and plundered the second time. Again taken by
Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, in 3339. By Nebuchadnezzar the first time in 3350.
The second time in 3360. when the Temple was burnt, and the City totally razed,
and destroyed. It lay desolate thus, till the first year of Cyrus; when the
Jews returned and began to rebuild it in 3420. About 3500. Nehemiah finished
this Work. In 3619. Alexander the Great came up against Jerusalem; and it was
delivered to him without resistance, by Jaddus the High Priest. In 3629.
Ptolemaeus Lagus took Jerusalem by surprise, and carried many of the Jews into
Egypt. In 3780. Antiochus, King of Syria, took Jerusalem; slew vast numbers of
the Inhabitants, profaned the Temple; and endeavored to extirpate the Jewish
Religion by a Persecution. In 3805. the Jews, under Jonathan, totally expelled
the Syrians; and regained the entire Possession of Jerusalem. In 3880. Pompey
the Great entered Jerusalem, saw the Temple, and made Jerusalem Tributary. In
3896. Crassus entered and plundered the Temple, contrary to his Faith given. In
3909. Pacorus King of Parthia took and plundered Jerusalem. The next year,
Herod began his Reign over the Jews, by the appointment of Antonius: in the
latter end of his Reign, and in 3950. our Savior was born: in 3983. he
suffered Death for us, being thirty three years old. In the year of our Lord
69. Titus, after a dreadful Siege, put an end to the Jewish Government;
destroyed Jerusalem and the Temple; which lay desolate till 132. when Adrian
rebuilt it, and called it Aelia Capitolina; permitting the Christians to live
here, and prohibiting the Jews. In this interval, the Bishop of Caesarea got
the Superiority over the Bishop of Jerusalem. In 361. Julian the Apostate, to
contradict our Savior's Prophecy, sent the Jews to repair the Temple of
Jerusalem; wherein they and he were disappointed by miraculous Earthquakes,
Tempests, and Balls of Fire issuing out of the Foundation. In 636. Omar the
Saracen took it after a Siege of two years. In 1099. the Christian Armies under
Godfrey retook it from the Saracens, when it had been four hundred sixty three
years in their hands. In 1187. Saladine the Saracen recovered it out of the
hands of the Christians. In 1228. Frederick the Emperor recovered Jerusalem by
a Treaty, without blows; and was crowned at Jerusalem* But in 1234 the Templars
having perfidiously broken the Peace, the Saracens retook and defaced it,
abusing the Sepulcher, which till then had been reverenced by all Men but Jews.
Ever since this, it has been in the Possession of the Mahometans, as they at
times prevailed one upon another. It continued under the Sultans of Egypt till
1517, when Selim Emperor of the Turks, took it from them; and under this Family
it is at this day; called by the Turks Elkods; that is, the Holy City. It is at
this day the principal Place in Palestine; seated (says Mr. Sandys) on a rocky
Mountain, every way to be ascended (except a little on the North) with steep
Descents, and deep Valleys about it, which do naturally fortify it: for the
most part it is environed with other (not far removed) Mountains, as if placed
in the midst of an Amphitheatre. On the East is Mount Olivet, separated from
the City by the Valley of Jehosaphat, which also circleth a part of the North,
and affords a passage to the Brook of Kedron: on the South is the Mountain of
Scandal, with the Valley of Gehinnon: on the West formerly it was fenced with
the Valley and Mountain of Gthon. Mount Sion lay within the City, which stood
upon the South side of it: on the East side of this Mountain stood the famous
Temple; and between the City and the Temple, the King's Palace. Mount Calvary
(which formerly lay without the City to the North-West,) is now well nigh the
heart of it; the visiting the Holy Sepulcher being the almost only reason why
Jerusalem at this day has any being. The Inhabitants of it are not many; for
the most part Monks, and Religious Persons of all Nations; miserably oppressed
by the Turks, who seek all opportunities to impoverish and injure them. This
City stands forty Miles from Joppe, and the Mediterranean Sea; a hundred and
sixty from Damascus to the South, three hundred from Grand Cairo to the
North-East, and four hundred from Alexandria; commonly believed to have been
built by Melchisedech, and called Salem from him. It had diverse Names of old,
expressed in this Distich; Solyma, Lusa, Bethel, Hierosolyma, Jebus, Elia, Vrbs
sacra, Jerusalem, dicitur, atque Salem. For above eleven hundred years
together, this City was the Queen of the East. None ever so sacred, yet none
ever has suffered greater Profanations than it. The Emperor Titus erected a
Temple here to Jupiter Capitolinus; and Adrian in derision both of Judaism and
Christianity, engraved a Swine upon the Gate of Bethlehem; dedicated a Chapel
to Venus upon Mount Calvary, another to Jupiter in the place of our Savior's
Sepulcher, and a third to Adonis in Bethlehem: all which continued till the
Reign of Constantine the Great. See Bethlehem and Calvary. The Church of
Jerusalem is the Mother of Christendom; sanctified by the Death of Christ, the
Descent of the Holy Spirit, the Preachings of the Apostles, a General Council
of the Apostles in the year 49 or 50, and the Martyrdom of S. James its first
Bishop. The Council of Nice allowed this Church the style and dignity of a
Patriarchate, tho at the same time subjecting it in point of Jurisdiction to
the Bishops of Caesarea. But in 553. in the fifth General Council, or the
second of Constantinople, that Subjection was reversed; and not only the Sea of
Caesarea, but Scythopolis and Berytus, were made subject to this Church. After
Christianity received its Restoration by the Arms of Godfrey of Bouillon,
Jerusalem bore the Title of a Kingdom; which continued from the year 1099 to
1187. in the Persons of about eight Christian Kings from the said Godfrey, with
possession of the Lands and Rights of a Crown. But Frederick II. and others
after, who enjoyed the Title of Kings of Jerusalem possessed no Land in
Palestine. It lies in Long. 69. 30. Lat. 31. 20. according to Mr. Fuller.
Others say Long. 69. 00 Lat. 32. 44.

Ieselbas, Margiana, a part of the Province of Chorasan, in the Kingdom of
Persia.

Iesi, Aesium, a City in the Marchia Anconitana, in the Dominions of the
Church; which is a Bishops See, immediately under the Pope: it is but small;
and stands upon an Hill, by the River Jesi; six Miles from the Confines of the
Dukedom of Vrbino, twenty three from Ancona to the West.

Iesselmeer, or Gislemere, a City and Kingdom under the Great Mogul, lying
North of the Kingdom of Guzarat, on this side the Ganges: the City is great; a
hundred and twenty Miles from the River Indus to the East, and the same from
Guzarat to the North. The Kingdom lies amongst the Mountains.

Terra de Iesso, or Yezo, Essonis Terra, a large Country toward China and
Japan; discovered by the Hollanders in 1643. It is joined by some to the North
parts of Japan; by others, separated from it by a Straight of fifteen Miles
broad. All agree it is of a great extent from East to West. The chiefest City
is Matzumay, which is the Capital of a Province of the same name; but no
European having yet settled here, it is very little known. The later Voyagers
have discovered a Straight betwixt Tartary and this Country, which they call
the Streights of Jesso.

Iesual, another Kingdom belonging to the Great Mogul in the East Indies,
betwixt the Kingdom of Patna with the River Ganges to the West, and that of
Vdessa with the Mountains to the East. The chief City is Rajapour.

Iesupol, a very strong Town and Castle in Podolia in Poland; on the Confines
of Pocuock, upon the River Bistris.

Ieter, Jatrus, a River of Mysia, in the Lesser Asia.

Ietsegen, and Iesten, or Jetsengo, two considerable Territories or Provinces
in Japan, in the Island of Niphon, subdivided into diverse other Provinces.
Jetsegen has the Region of Quanto to the East, and Jetson to the West. The
latter is bounded by Jamaisoit to the West.

Iex, and Jexdi, Hecatompylos, a City of Persia.

If, Hypaea, one of the Hyeres.

Iglaw, Iglova, Iglavia, Giblova, a City of the Kingdom of Bohemia, but in
Moravia, upon the River Iglaw, on the Confines of Bohemia; twenty four German
Miles from Prague, and ten from Lentz. This City is reasonably well peopled.

Igliaco, Peneius, a River on the West of the Morea.

Ihor, a City and Kingdom at the most Southern Point of the Promontory of
Malacca, in the East Indies, over against the Isle of Sumatra; distant little
more than one degree and a half from the Line, in Long 129. 31. The King is a
potent Prince in these parts. The City Ihor is situated upon a River, which
falls into the Ocean near the Promontory of Sincapura, where it has a good Port.

Iksworth, or Ickworth, a Market Town in the County of Suffolk, in the Hundred
of Thingo; retaining in its Name, says Mr. Cambden, the memory of the ancient
Iceni, who dwelt in a part of this County. The remains of a Priory, founded by
Gilbert Blunt (sometime Lord of the Town), and of a Guildhall, are yet extant.
A Pot of Roman Coyns, bearing the Inscriptions of diverse Roman Emperors, was
dug up here not many years since.

Ila, Yla, Epidia, one of the Western Isles of Scotland, over against Cantyr,
in 56 degrees. of Lat. twenty four Miles long, and sixteen broad; plentiful in
Wheat, Cattle, and Herds of Deer. The principal Towns in it are Kilmany,
Dunweg, and Crome; besides which it has diverse Villages.

Ilchester, a Market and Borough Town in Somersetshire, in the Hundred of
Tintinhull, which returns two Burgesses to the House of Commons. It stands upon
the River Ill or Yeovel, having heretofore sixteen Parish-Churches, as a place
of great Note, Strength, and Antiquity: now reduced to two. The County-Goal is
kept here.

Iler, Hilarus, Ilarus, a River of Schwaben, in Germany, which rises in Tirol;
and running Northward, waters Kempten; then falls into the Danube over
against Vlm.

Ilerda, Lerida, Athanagia, a fortified and strong City in Catalonia in Spain;
which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tarragona: seated upon the
River Segre [ Sicoris,] three Leagues above its fall into the Ebro, in the
Confines of Arragon. This City is mentioned in Livy as taken by Scipio; and
rendered famous for an Encounter near it, between a General of Sertoris and
Manilius Proconsul of Gallia; where the latter was defeated with the loss of
three Legions of Foot, and 1500 Horse.

Ilion. See Troja.

Ilfordcomb, a Market Town in Devonshire, in the Hundred of Branton.

Ill, Ellus, Hellus, Hellelus, a River of Germany, which arises in Suntgow,
and passing through Alsatia, waters Mulhausen, Ensisheim, Colmar, and
Strasburg; below which it falls into the Rhine.

Illyricum, Illyris, Illyria. In the ancient Geography of Europe, this Country
lay betwixt Pannonia to the North and the Adriatic Sea to the South; divided
into two parts, Liburnia and Dalmatia: whereof the first was subjected to the
Romans a little before the second Punick War, the other (the Eastern part) not
till the Reign of Augustus. It is now nigh wholly comprehended under Dalmatia
and Sclavonia, under the respective Dominion either of the Venetians or the
Turks, except the Republic of Ragusa and some Places more. The Illyricus Sinus
is now called the Bay of Drin and the Gulf of Venice.

Ilmen, a considerable Lake in Russia, toward Livonia, on the South of the
City Novogorod; which disburthens it self into the Lake of Lagoda, by a River
which passes on the East of that City called the Wolga.

Ilment, Arabius, one of the most considerable Rivers in the Kingdom of Persia:
it arises from the Mountains of Sibocoran, in the Province of Sigistan; and
watering Mut, Gilechi, Racagi, beneath Sistan, it takes in the Sal; beneath
Sereng, the Ghir; beneath Chicheran, the Ilmentel; and beneath Pasir, falls
into the Arabic Ocean, in Long. 106. 30. near Macran to the West.

Iltz, or Izilz, Ilza, a small Town in the Palatinate of Sandomir, in the
Lesser Poland, with a Castle, which belongs to the Bishop of Cracow.

Ilmister, a Market Town in Somersetshire, in the Hundred of Abdick.

Imaus, is one of the greatest Mountains, in the Greater Asia: it begins at
Mount Taurus, near the Caspian Sea; and running Southward through the whole
Continent of Asia, it divides the Asian Tartary into two parts and ends, at the
rise of the River Ganges; where it again spreads it self East and West; and
becomes a Northern Boundary to the Empire of the Great Mogul, (or Indostan;)
having performed a Course of 450 German Miles, and taking various names from
the Nations it passes, as Althai, Belgan, Dalanguer, etc.

Imiretta, or Imaretza, a Kingdom in Gurgistan in Asia, styled by the Turks
Pacha Koutchouc, or a Little Principality, is enclosed betwixt the Mountain
Caucasus, Mengrelia, the Black Sea, Guriel, and Georgia properly so called.
About 120 Miles in length, in breadth 60. Woody and mountainous; yet not
without its agreeable Valleys and Plains, Mines of Iron, and the Necessaries of
Life. Under a Prince of its own, to whom heretofore Mengrelia and Guriel, after
their shaking off of the Yoke of the Emperors of Constantinople and Trebizond,
owned Subjection: but now together with them, tributary to the Turk, who
obliges the King of Imireta every year to send him eighty Children, as a
Tribute. There are three Fortresses in this Kingdom; Scander toward the South,
and Regia and Scorgia toward the North, near the River Phasis; besides
scattered Villages. Its most valuable Commodities are Wine and Swine, which
makes it difficult here to observe the Laws of Mahometanism. The Kings pretend
to be descended of the race of King David.

Imzagor, Claudius, a Mountain in Stiria.

Immirenieni, an ancient People toward the South of the Kingdom of Persia: of
which History relates, that they embraced Christianity in the Reign of the
Emperor Anastasius, about the year 500; and at their request had a Bishop sent
amongst them.

Imola, Cornelia, Forum Cornelii, Imola, a City in the Dominions of the Church,
in Romandiola, upon the River Santerno. This is a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Ravenna; of which Alexander* VII. was Bishop, when in 1655* he
was chosen Pope. It is a fine and a populous City; twenty Miles from Bononia to
the East, and twenty five from Ravenna. Narses is said to have ruined, and the
Lombards to have repaired it. Caesar Borgia made himself Master of it in the
Pontificate of Alexander the Sixth; from which time it became subject to the
Church.

Imperiati, a small City in the Kingdom of Chili in America, near a River of
the same Name, four Leagues from the South Sea; said to be an Episcopal See,
under the Spaniards.

Inacho, Apheas, a small River of Epirus; which waters Larta on the South,
and falls into the Bay called the Gulf of Larta.

Index. Vid. Indus.

India, is taken for a considerable part of Asia, commonly called the
East Indies, to distinguish it from America, which is called the West Indies.
It is thought to be the Havilah in the Holy Scriptures: by the Natives,
Indostan. Bounded on the North with the Asiatick Tartary, the Mountains of
Imaus, and Emodus; on the East with the Kingdom of China, on the South with the
Indian Ocean, and on the West with the Kingdom of Persia. This Country consists
partly in a vastly extended Continent, partly in Islands, some of which are
very great. That upon the Continent, is divided into three Parts. 1. The Empire
of the Great Mogul, or North India; which is a part of India intra Gangem and
Indum; and more peculiarly called Indosthan; in this there are thirty five
Kingdoms. 2. The Peninsula of Malabar. 3. The India extra Gangem. In the India
extra Gangem, are four more considerable Kingdoms; Pegu to the West, Ava to the
North, Siam to the South, and Cochinchina to the East; each of which contains
many particular or lesser Kingdoms in it. The principal of the Islands are
Borneo, Ceylan, Java, Sumatra, Celebes, Mindano, Luconia, Hainan, Pakan,
Gilolo, the Moluccaes, and Philippine Isles. Many of these are so great, as to
be divided in many Kingdoms: some of them have never been thoroughly discovered
by the European Nations. This Country extends in length from degrees. 106. to
159. of Long. and from degrees. 10. of Southern Latitude, to 44. of Northern. It
abounds with Gold and Silver Mines, and all other sorts of Metals, but Copper
and Lead; with all sorts of Cattle, but Horses; with all sorts of Corn, but
Wheat. So that these and Wines are almost the only things they need from other
Nations, toward the Convenience, or indeed Luxury of humane Life; for this is
the Storehouse of Spice and Jewels, to the whole World. Alexander the Great
was the first of the Grecians, who Discovered and Conquered a part of this vast
Region; which soon after revolted from his Successors. The Romans never went so
far; but were honored with some Embassies from them, when they had Potent
Princes, as Augustus, Antoninus, and Constantine. Aftertimes wrapped them up
in the Clouds again. There was a Trade driven by the way of the Red Sea,
between the Persian, Turkish, and Indian Merchants for Spice; yet there was
little known of of them, till the Portuguese discovered the way by the Cape of
Good Hope, in 1499. and the first Voyages were made hither by them in 1500. and
1502. The principal Rivers are Indus and the Ganges. Amongst the ancient
Inhabitants, the Brachmanes and Gymnosophistae for Philosophy, the Gangarides
for War, were the most considerable. Alexander the Great carried his Victorious
Arms hither in the year of Rome 426. and 427. (where he defeated Porus King of
India). And before him, some write, Semiramis. There is a Tradition, that St.
Thomas preached Christianity here, (whence comes the Church of the Christians
of St. Thomas); and that his Body, first found at Meliapour, now lies interred
at Goa in a stately Church built for the purpose by the Order of Emanuel King
of Portugal. In the third Century, the Philosopher Pantaenus was sent by
Demetrius Bishop of Alexandria to preach to the Indians. Aedesius and
Frumentius in the Reign of Constantine the Great, two Laics traveling into
India, voluntarily did the same. The latter of which, was afterward by
Athanasius consecrated Bishop of India. See Brachmanes, Banjans,
Gymnosophistae, and Benares.

India extra Gangem, is bounded on the West by the furthest, or most Eastern
Branch of the River Ganges; (which is called Antiboli from its spring unto its
fall into the Ocean;) on the North, with unknown Countries; on the East with
the Kingdom of China, and the Eastern Ocean; and on the South with the same
Ocean. In this there are four great Kingdoms, which do not depend on the Great
Mogul. See the general Division.

The West Indies, are all those Countries more commonly called America; and the
Indies, only by reason of their Wealth and distance.

Indigetes. Besides the deified Heroes of the Ancients, understood by this
Name, they used it to denote the mixed people of Ampurdan, in the Principality
of Catalonia, in Spain. See Ampurdan.

Indostan, or the Empire of the Great Mogul, is bounded on the North by the
Asian Tartary, and the Kingdom of Thibet; on the West by the Kingdom of Persia;
on the East by the River Cosmin, or Cosmite, (by which it is divided from the
rest of India;) on the South with the Bay of Bengala, and the Promontory of
Malabar. There are, besides what lies within these bounds, some Kingdoms under
this Prince beyond the Ganges toward China: in all he has under him thirty
five Kingdoms. His Capital City is Agra. He is of the Race of Tamerlain, the
Great Scythian Conqueror; and has been possessed of this Country ever since
the year 1473. It is abundantly rich in Gold, Silver, Precious Stones, and
Merchandises. The propriety of almost all the Lands belongs to the Great Mogul:
who besides, is heir to the great Lords of his Court and all Officers within
his pay.

Indre, Ingeris, Ander, Andri, a River of France, which arises in the Province
of Berry; and watering la Chaster, Chateau roux, Loches, and taking in the
Cher, falls with it into the Loyre; eight Miles beneath Tours to the West. This
River in the Writers of the middle Age is called Anger.

Indus, one of the greatest, first, and best known Rivers of the East Indies;
called by the Natives Sinde. It springs out of the highest part of Imaus, (by
some called Taurus,) in the Kingdom of Cassimer, in the Empire of the Great
Mogul, toward the Confines of the Asian Tartary: and turning Southward,
watering many Provinces or Kingdoms, and taking in the Rivers of Behat, Nilab,
Ravee, Coule, and many others, it at last falls into the Arabian or Indian
Ocean, by four great Mouths, in the Kingdom of Tatta, between the Kingdoms of
Guzarat and Persia. The Name of that Mountain, out of which it springs, is
called Peropasin. It receives between its Head and its Fall one and twenty
Rivers. It had of old seven Mouths; three of which are now stopped.

Ingelheim, Ingelenheinum, Ingelhemium, a small Town in the Lower Palatinate,
in Germany, two German Miles from Mentz to the West. Charles the Great was born
in this place in 732. After this, it was an Imperial and Free-City; but
exempted in 1402. by Lewis the Emperor, and now under the Elector Palatine.
Near this place S. Lewis, King of France, died in 840. Called Nyder Ingelheim,
the Lower or Nether Ingelheim, to distinguish it from another called Over or
Upper Ingelheim. In the years 788, 948. and 972. there were great Councils held
here.

Ingermanlandt, and Ingrie, Ingria, a Province of Sweden; between Moscovy to
the East, Livonia to the West, the Lake of Ladoga, and the Bay of Finland:
betwixt which two last, the River Nerva serves as a Canal. Heretofore subject
to the Russ, (who call it Isera,) before the Swedes took it from them by
Conquest. The chief Town is Notteburgh, upon the Lake.

Ingoldstad, Ingoldstadium, Aureapolis, a City of Germany, in the Dukedom of
Bavaria, which has a Bridge over the Danube. It was at first a Village; but
exalted to the dignity and magnitude of a City by Lewis of Bavaria, Emperor of
Germany. In 1546. the Protestant Arms proved unsuccessful before it. Gustavus
Adolphus, the Victorious King of Sweden, was not able to take it, when he
attempted it in 1632. In 1410. here was an University opened, which has
obtained many Privileges and good Endowments from Lewis Duke of Bavaria, and
Pope Pius II. It is now under the Duke of Bavaria. This City lies three Miles
from Newburgh to the East, and seven from Ratisbone to the West. The houses are
almost all of Wood.

Inhambane, a Kingdom in the Lower Aethiopia, between Monomotapa to the North,
and Caferia to the South. The chief place of which is Tongue.

Inhamior, another small Kingdom in the Lower Aethiopia, toward the River
Cuama, and the Confines of Monomotapa.

Inifa, one of the Names of Mount Imaus.

Inneken, Aguntum, a Town in Carinthia.

Innerness, a Town in Scotland.

Ins, Inn, Oenus, Aenus, a River in Germany, which arises in Switzerland, from
Mount Moloia (one of the Alps,) from two Springs, on the Borders of the
Valtoline; and flowing through the Earldom of Tyrol by Inspruck (the Capital of
it,) Hull, Schwatz, and Kufstain, it enters the Dukedom of Bavaria; where
being augmented by several other Rivers, it falls into the Danube at Passaw,
over against Ilstat.

Inspruck, or Insprug, Oenipons, is the Capital City of the County of Tyrol in
Germany: little, but neat and populous; built in a fruitful Valley upon the
River In, (or Inns,) over which it has a Bridge, and from whence it has its
Name; at the foot of the Alps. It has a neat strong Castle, in which the Dukes
of Austria have sometimes resided. Walled by Otho the Great, in 1234. but those
Walls are not now maintained: it is under the Emperor. This City stands twenty
Miles from Saltzburgh to the South-West, and eighteen from Trent to the North.
Most memorable for the shameful Flight of Charles V. in 1552. when Maurice,
(Duke of Saxony,) Albert, (Marquess of Brandenburgh,) and William (Landtgrave
of Hessen,) joining their Forces suddenly, took Auspurg (twenty Miles from
hence to the North-West) in four days; thence marching directly for Inspruck,
they took in their passage Eresburgh, (which was thought Impregnable;) and put
that Prince, with Ferdinando his Brother, (then at Inspruck,) into such a
fright, that they were forced to cross the Alps in the dead of the night by
Torchlight: many of the Nobility not having so much as an Horse to ride on. The
next day these Confederate Princes took the Town, plundered all they found
belonging to the Emperor, and Spaniards; but spared the Towns Men's Goods and
Houses. This Action put an end to all the Projects of that Prince in Germany;
and has established the German Liberty, then in great danger of ruin. In 1689.
about January, this City suffered much by the repeated shocks of an Earthquake.

Instad, Oenostadium, a Suburb of the City of Passaw, upon the Eastern Bank of
the River Inn, where it falls into the Danube.

Ioannipoli, Jambol, a City of Bulgaria, which is a Bishops See.

Iocelin, Josselinum, a Town in Bretagne in France, upon the River Ouste; which
coming from S. Quintin, falls into the River Vilaine, near Redon. It stands
sixteen Miles from Rennes to the West, and as many from S. Brieux to the
North-West.

Ioden, Judaei, the Jews.

I^gues, Gymnosophistae, a Heathen Sect of Philosophers, of great Antiquity in
the East Indies, still extant.

Ioigny, Joviniacum, a City in France, upon the River Yonne, [ Icauna,] in
Champagne, in the Territory of Sens; which is built at the foot of an Hill, and
has splendid Castle belonging to it: written by some Iviniacum.

Ioinville, Joanvilla, a small Town in Champagne in France, upon the River
Marne [ Matrona;] eight Leagues from Chaumont to the North, eighteen from
Chalons to the South-East. Ennobled with the Title of a Principality by Henry
II. of France, in 1552. in favor of Francis of Lorrain, Duke of Guise.

Iolcos, an ancient Maritime Town in Thessalia, upon the Archipelago, at the
foot of the Mountain Pelion, and near the Cities Demetrias and Pagasae. The
famous Argonautae were said to embarque here. It has been since called Iaco.

Iona, Ibona Hii, an Island on the West of Scotland: famous for the Sepulchers
of the old Scotch Kings. The chief Town is Sodore, a Bishops See in time past;
who had in his Jurisdiction all these Western Isles, and the Isle of Man. This
See was erected in 840. This is the same with Cholmkil, and lies five Miles
from Dunstafag to the North-West.

Ionia, a fruitful Province of the Lesser Asia, betwixt Caria and Aetolia, now
called by the Turks Quiscon. Famous in ancient times for many considerable
Cities, and Noble Temples standing in it: as also for a Sect of Philosophers,
called the Ionian Sect, who were of the Disciples of Thales of Miletus. The Sea
betwixt Greece and Sicily, toward Macedonia, Epirus, Achaia, and the
Peloponnesus, anciently bore the Name of the Ionian Sea: which Name some derive
from Javan the Son of Japhet.

Ionne, Joanna, a River, written also Yonne: it arises in the Dukedom of
Burgundy, from the Mountain called Morvant, near the Castle of Chinone; and
visits the City of Clamesy in Nivergne, and Cretian, where it takes in the
Cure; after which, passing on the East of Auxerre, it becomes sufficient for
the passage of Boats of some Bulk; and admits the Serine, and Armancione: then
passing by Sens, falls into the Seyne at Montreau sur Yonne, seventeen Leagues
above Paris.

Ionquera, Juncaria, an old Roman Town mentioned by Antoninus and Ptolemy. It
is in Catalonia, at the foot of the Pyrenean Hills, near the Passage called Col
de Pertus, in the Confines of Rousillon, and France; three Leagues West from
the Mediterranean Sea, five from Perpignan to the South, and seven from Girona
to the North-East.

Ionquieres, Juncariae, a Town in Provence in France, upon the Mediterranean
Sea; five Leagues from Marseille to the West, and fifteen from Avignon to the
South.

Iortan, Jortanum, a City and Kingdom on the North side of the Island of Java,
in the East Indies. The City has a good frequented Port, betwixt the Streights
of Palambuam and Passarvan. Also a River of the same Name.

Ios, an Island of the Aegean Sea, to the North of Candia; one of the ancient
Sporades. Famous heretofore for the Tomb of Homer, according to Pliny.

Iotapata, an ancient City of Palestine: besieged, taken, and ruined by the
Emperor Vespasian, at the same time that Josephus the Jewish Historian
assisted in its defense; who describes the Siege. Ant. Jud. l. 3.

Iouare, or Jouars, Jotrum, an Abbey of the Benedictines, in the Province of
Brie in France, in the Diocese of Meaux: where a Council was celebrated in 1130.

Iour, Jura, a Mountain which divides France from Switzerland.

Ioura or Jero, Gyarus, Giaros, Giara, a small and barren Island of the
Archipelago, whether the Romans used relegare their Criminals; i. e. in the
sense of the Roman Law, in opposition to deportare, to banish them for a
determinate or indeterminate time. Juvenal understands the same place in his
Aude aliquid brevibus, gyaris, and carcere, etc. There is nothing at this day
to be found upon it, but Fishermens Cabbins.

Iourdain, Jordan, Jordanes, is the greatest River in the Holy Land, or
Palestine; and the most celebrated in the Holy Scriptures: called at this day
by the Inhabitants Scheriah. It arises in the Confines of Coelosyria, from two
Fountains, ( Jor and Dan,) both at the foot of Mount Libanus; four Miles above
Caesarea Philippi: and running Southward, it makes two Lakes; first that of
Meroz, then that of Capernaum, called also the Sea of Galilee; and having
watered several of the ancient Cities of the Land of Canaan, (none of which are
now extant,) it falls into the Dead Sea, or Lake of Sodom. It is the greatest,
or rather the only River in all this Country; the rest being mere Brooks rather
than Rivers. About half as broad at Jerico, as the River Seine is at Paris;
very rapid, and the Water of it thick; because it passes through fat Lands,
and is very full of Fish; beset on both sides with thick and pleasant Woods.
This account is given of it by Monsieur Thevenot, who saw it himself. Famous
moreover to all posterity, for the Children of Israel's passing it on dry
ground at their entrance into Canaan, and the Prophet Elijah's doing the same
in company with Elisha: Our Savior received Baptism here from the hands of S.
John; near to which particular place, the Christians built a Monastery, that is
now in ruins. The Pilgrims delight to bathe in this River fancying the Water
sanative from the virtue of that Sacred Contact. It overflows in Summer with
the melted Snow from Mount Libanus. But in the Winter runs a low Water: and
after its Current into the Dead Sea, it is clear without mixture, for above a
League together: issuing thence by a subterraneous Channel into the
Mediterranean.

Ioyeuse, Gaudiosa, a Town in France, in the Province of Vivarais, toward the
Borders of Languedoc; honored by being first a Viscounty, next a Duchy: and
giving Name to a Noble Family.

Ipepa, Hypaepa, a City of Lydia, in the Lesser Asia; between Mount Tmolus, and
the River Caystro; not far from Thyatira. It is a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Ephes^s.

Ipre. See Yperen.

Iprichia, the same with Africa.

Ips, Ipsium, and Ibissa, a Town in Austria.

Ipsala, Cypsella, a City in Thrace, by the River Mela: at first a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Trajanopoli, or Zernis; afterward it became the
Metropolis. It lies between this City to the West, twenty nine Miles, and
Drusilaba to the North-East twenty six Miles: the River in our latter Maps is
called Larissa; and falls into the Archipelago, over against the Isle of
Lembro, just behind that Peninsula which makes the Dardanels straight.

Ipswich, Gippo-vicus, the County Town of Suffolk, heretofore called Gippwich:
seated on the North side of the River Stour, upon the foot of a steep Hill, in
somewhat a low Ground: it has a commodious Haven, and was heretofore a place of
great Trade, with many wealthy Merchants in it, and a vast number of other
people; but now decayed as to both. It was also formerly fortified with
Trenches and Rampires; the loss of which, is not to be lamented; the Town being
so seated, that it can never be made a place of Defense, the Hills on all sides
(but the South, and South-East,) commanding it. It has fourteen Parish
Churches, and a great many goodly Houses, the tokens of its former Wealth. In
991. the Danes sacked it, and nine years after repeated their Cruelty upon it.
In the Reign of S. Edward, it had eight hundred Burgesses, who paid Custom to
the King. There was also a Castle built here by the Normans, which Hugh Bigod,
Earl of Norfolk, defended against the Usurper King Stephen; but was forced to
surrender at last: the ruins are now lost. Mr. Cambden supposes it to have
been demolished by Henry II. when he did the same by Waleton Castle not far
off. Here landed the three thousand Flemings, which the Nobility called in
against Henry II. when his Son rebelled against him. In the late Rebellion,
this Town stood clear of all those Calamities which involved the rest of the
Nation. The Bishop of Norwich has a House here; and the Viscount of Hereford
another, befitting his degree and quality. The Honorable Henry Fitz-Roy, Duke
of Grafton, was created Viscount Ipswich, Aug. 16. 1672. who died of the Wounds
that he received in the Service of King William before Cork, October. 9. 1690.
This Town is also a Corporation, and sends two Burgesses to the Parliament. It
has a Free School, with the convenience of a good Library, and a Hospital.
Cardinal Wolsey was born here, and began the building of a stately College,
which bears his Name to this day.

Ireland, Hibernia, Ivernia, is a great, fruitful, and noble Island on the West
of Great Britain: accounted in ancient time for greatness and glory, the third
Island of the World; and called then the Lesser Britain. Orpheus, Aristotle,
and Claudian, call it Ierna; Juvenal, Mela, Juverna; Diodorus Siculus, Iris.
Others Jovernia, Overnia, and Burnia. The Natives Erin. The Welsh Yuerdon. The
English Ireland. It is three hundred Miles long, and two hundred broad: on the
East it has the tempestuous Irish Sea, between it and Great Britain; on the
West the Vergivian Ocean, on the North the Deucalidonian Sea, and on the South
the British Ocean. Divided into four Provinces, Leinster, Mounster, Vlster, and
Connaught, which heretofore sustained the Title of as many Kingdoms;
comprehending in all thirty Counties, four Archbishopricks, and twelve
Bishoprics. The Country is full of Woods, Hills, and Bogs. The Soil, rich and
fruitful, especially as to Grass; ( Pomponius Mela in the times of the Emperor
Claudius, gives the very same character of it;) and therefore it has ever
abounded in Cattle, which is its most Staple Commodity. The principal Rivers
are the Shannon, the Sewer, the Barow, the Black-Water, the Shour, the Neure,
the Boyne, the Leffy, etc. The Capital City heretofore Armagh, now Dublin. The
Air is at all times temperate; but too moist to be at all times pleasant or
wholesome. The Romans in all probability never had any footing in this Island.
This Nation was converted to Christianity in the fifth Century by Palladius,
and S. Patrick; especially the latter: who planted not only Religion, but so
much Learning too amongst them, that in the next Age the Monks of Ireland were
eminent for Holiness and Learning; and Ireland thence called, Insula Sanctorum,
an Island of Saints. In 694. Egfrid, King of Northumberland, first entered, and
destroyed this Nation with Fire and Sword; after this, the Danes, for thirty
years together, wasted and destroyed them. After these, the Germans. After
them, Edgar, the most powerful King of England, conquered a great part of
Ireland. And when by Massacres and other Accidents the Irish were freed from
all these Calamities; there ensued Domestic Broils among themselves. In 1155.
Henry II. being called in by the Natives, resolved on the Conquest of them;
whereupon Richard Strongbow, Earl of Pembroke, began it: in 1172. Henry II. in
Person entered Ireland; and taking upon him the Style of Sovereign Lord of
Ireland, the States and all the petty Kings submitted to him: and passed over
all their Rule and Power, which was confirmed by Pope Hadrian. The Kings of
England continued the Title of Lords of Ireland, till the Reign of Henry VIII.
who took first upon him the Style and Title of King of Ireland, in 1541. which
was confirmed to Mary his Daughter, by Pope Paul IV. in 1555. The Irish have
ever looked upon this Conquest as a Wrong and an Usurpation, which no Act of
theirs, nor Time it self could make valid. Hence, when ever England has been
imbroiled, they have taken the opportunity of Revolting. In the Reign of Edward
I. when that Prince was engaged against the Scots, one Donald O-Neal styled
himself King of Ulster; and in Right of Inheritance, the undoubted Heir of all
Ireland. But when in the Reign of Henry VIII. the pretense of Religion was
added, first the Earl of Kildare rebelled in 1537. and was presently
suppressed, taken, and beheaded, with his five Uncles. In 1539. O-Neal began
another Rebellion: but so soon as Thomas Earl of Sussex, Lord Lieutenant, came
against him with an Army, the Gentleman grew humble, submitted, and was
pardoned. He flew out again in 1563. burnt the Cathedral of Armagh, and
besieged Dundalk; but with no success. In 1565. Sir Henry Sidney, Lord
Lieutenant, went against him, and in a Fight broke his Forces: so that flying
to the Scots, (whom he had likewise injured) in 1567. he was assassinated in
cold blood, and presently after attained in Parliament, and the Title of O-Neal
abolished. The Earl of Desmond was the next, who in 1579. calling in the
Spaniards, began another Rebellion, which ended ill for him; the Spaniards
being driven out the year after, and this Earl taken and slain in 1583. In
1595. Tir-Oen, who had done great Service against the Earl of Desmond, and was
highly favored by Queen Elizabeth, most ungratefully began a Rebellion, the
most dangerous of all the other; this Earl having been bred in the Queens
Service, and learned Military Di^cipline from the English, which he now made
use of against them. In 1598. he defeated the English at Blackwater. In 1599.
brought the Earl of Essex to condescend to a Treaty with him. In 1601. he
brought the Spaniards over to his Assistance, who took and garrisoned Kinsale;
which was retaken by Sir Charles Blunt, (afterward Lord Montjoy,) and the
Spaniards totally driven out: whereupon Tir-Oen submitted, and was brought over
by the Lord Lieutenant, to King James I. in 1603. This War lasted eight years;
and might have proved fatal to the English, if God had not prevented it. After
this I find no general Insurrection of the Irish till 1641. when seeing Charles
I. engaged in War with the Scots at home, they on a sudden rose up and
assassinated two hundred thousand English in a few days, when no body suspected
any such thing. This Insurrection began September 3. The Troubles of England
gave them some respit; but in 1649. and fifty, Oliver Cromwell began their
Chastisement so effectually, that Ireton, and those he left to carry it on,
erected mournful Trophies of the Divine Vengeance against them, with no great
expense of Time, Blood, or Treasure: it missed but a little, that the Irish
Name and Nation had been totally extirpated. Charles II. upon his Restitution
in 1660. showed them more Mercy; restored such as had any pretenses of Loyalty
to plead for their Estates; and governed them all his time with so much
Clemency, that this Nation never was in a better State since they fell under
the English, than at the time of the Death of that Good Prince.

Irenopolis, an ancient City of Cilicia in Asia Minor. Afterward called
Neronias, and made an Episcopal See, some write, under the Archbishop first of
Selencia, then of Anazarbus. Others place an Episcopal City of this Name near
Babylon, under the Patriarch of Antioch.

Iris, Eurotas, a River in the Morea; which washes Misitra, and falls into the
Gulf di Colochina on the South side of the Morea. It is now called
Vasilipotamo, or Basilipotamo, that is, the Kings River. Another in Cappadocia,
understood by Valerius Flaccus, where he says, -- longisque sluens amfractibus,
Iris: now called Casalmach. See Casalmach.

Irneo, Vindius, Hirmius, a Ledge of Mountains in Spain; commonly called El
monte de las Asturas, the Mountain of the Asturas; which is a Branch of the
Pyrenean Hills, running out to the West, between the Asturas to the North, and
the Kingdom of Leon to the South: the greatest is called Irneo, or Erneo; and
also Cueto de Hano, or Ori.

Iroquois, a valiant Nation of Indians in New France, in the North America.
They have maintained diverse bloody Wars with the French there, and are the
particular Enemies of the Hurons, another salvage people of the same Country.

Irus, a Mountain, mentioned by Arrian, upon the Shoars of the River Indus,
toward Gedrosia.

Is, an ancient Town of Susiana in Asia, eight days journey from Babylon, upon
a River of the same Name, which discharges its Streams into the Euphrates. Both
remembered by Herodotus and Stephanus.

Isauria, a Province, according to the ancient division, of Asia Minor: now
thrown into a part of Caramania, and subject to the Turks. Its Capital City was
Isauropolis or Isauria, by Ammianus Marcellinus called Claudiopolis; now,
Saura. Publius Servilius first reduced this Province under the Dominion of the
Romans, whence he attained the Title of Isauricus. Claudian thus mentions them
and him, Indomites curru Servilius egit Isauros. Historians write of their
Incursions into the Roman Empire, in the fourth and fifth Centuries.

Iscariot, a Village of the Tribe of Ephraim, or as others say, Dan, in
Palestine, not far from Samaria to the East. The Birthplace of the traitorous
Judas.

Ischar, Jatrus, a River of Bulgaria; which rises out of Mount Hemus, and
watering Ternova, a City of that Province, falls into the Danube at Suistefo.
It is the third River from the Western Border, and now more usually called
Iantra.

Ischeboli, or Ischepoli, Scopelus, an Inland City of Thrace; made a Bishops
See by Leo the Emperor, under the Archbishop of Adrianople. I suppose it is
the same with that which is now called Ipsola.

Ischia, Aenaria, Inarime, Pithecusa, an Island on the Coast of the Kingdom of
Naples, near the Bay of Puteolum; not above three Miles from the Shore to the
West. Its Circuit is of twenty Miles; of old called Inarime; and by the Greeks,
Pithecusa. It has a City of the same Name, well fortified, with a Castle built
on a Rock; in which Ferdinando, King of Naples, found shelter, during the storm
brought upon him by Charles VIII. of France; who in 1495. conquered this whole
Kingdom in a few days. This City is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Naples; eighteen Miles from Naples to the West. Claudius Nepos, a Frenchman, in
1586. published an exact Map, and Description of this Island; which is inserted
into the Description of Italy, published by Antonius Maginus.

Iscodar, the Turkish Name of Scutari, or Scodra.

Idenstein, a County in Weteraw, a Territory in the Upper Circle of the Rhine;
between Hassia to the East, and the Rhine to the West: by some, Isembourg.

Isakal, Lein Alschemes, Busiris, Ramesses, a ruined old City in Egypt, within
the Delta; the ruins of which are so called.

Isenberg, Isidis Mons, a Mountain in Schwaben, near Ausburgh.

Isendyck, Isendium, a small but strong Town, upon the Sea Coast in Flanders,
over against Biervliet, a Town belonging to the Hollanders. This Town stands
upon the Scheld; three French Leagues from Sluys to the East, and something
above four from Middleburgh to the South; and was fortified by the Spaniards
against the Dutch.

Isenach. See Eysenach.

Isenghien, Isegemium, a Castle in Flanders, in the Territory of Courtray;
which gives the Title of an Earl or Count, to the Family of Vilnia. It is now
under the French, two Leagues from Courtray, toward Bruges to the North.

Iser, Isara, a River of Germany, in the Dukedom of Bavaria. It arises in the
Borders of the County of Tyrol, three Miles from Inspruck to the West; and
flowing to the North through Bavaria, waters Munick, or Munichen, (the
Capital of that Duchy) and Frisingen; beneath which, the Amber ( Ambra) from
the West, falls into it at Landschut: and at last it ends in the Danube, over
against Derkendorf; six Miles West of Passaw, and the same distance above
Straubing to the East.

L'Isere, Isara, a River in France, which is caled Isar by Ptolemy, and Scoras
by Polybius: it arises in the Territory of Tarentaise, near Moutiers, in the
Dukedom of Savoy, which it waters; beneath which, it takes in the Arche from
the South; then passes by Montmelian to Grenoble; over against which, it
admits the Drac, from the South; and above Valence, falls into the Rhosne. It
is a rapid River. There is another of this Name in the Dukedom of Bavaria in
Germany.

Isernia, Aesernia, a City in the Kingdom of Naples, by some called Sernia. It
stands in the Province of Molise; and is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Capua; seated four Miles from the River Volturno to the East, and the same from
the Confines of the Terra di Lavoro; at the foot of the Apennine; thirty Miles
from Capua to the North, and almost twenty from Trivento to the South. It is
now in a tolerable good state, and made more famous by the Birth of St. Peter
Celestine, a Pope.

Isin, Istnisca, a Village and a River in Bavaria; six Miles from Munichen to
the East.

Isis, a River of Oxfordshire; at the Confluence of which with the River Them,
stands Dorchester in the same County.

Island, Thule, Islandia, is a great Island in the Northern Ocean, called by
the Dutch Het Islandt; by the Germans Ynslandt. It lies between Norway to the
East, and Greenland to the West; from East to West two hundred French Leagues,
and about half so broad. Well peopled, and fruitful toward the Sea-shoar; but
the middle is barren, desolate, and very Mountainous. N^ddock a Norwegian,
first discovered it in 860. and called it Sneeland, that is, the Land of Snow.
Flocko, a Pyrate of Norway, afterward gave it the Name of Isee-Land; from the
great quantity of Ice he found about it. It began to be inhabited by the
Norwegians under Ingulphus, so soon as ever it was discovered; that Nation
being then dissatisfied with Horald their Prince. It became subject to Norway
in 1260. by doing Homage to that Crown; and in the Right of that Kingdom it
belongs to the King of Denmark, who every year sends them a Governor, who
resides at the Castle of Bestede, called otherwise Kronniges-Gard, that is, the
Viceroys Residence. They were converted to the Christian Faith, by Adebert
Bishop of Bremen: Canutus, King of the Vandals, settled Bishops first amongst
them, in 1133. one at Hola, another at Schalholt (the two principal Cities) and
to each of them annexed a School. They had at first neither Money nor Cities;
but lived in Caves, in the sides of Mountains; covered their Huts with Fishes
Bones, and eat dried Fish instead of Bread. They speak the ancient Cimbrian
Tongue. In 1584 the Bible was Printed in their Language. They have no Cattle,
but Horses and Cows; nor any Trees, but Box and Juniper. The Country produces
so great a quantity of sweet Grass, that their Cattle would burst, it is said,
if they did suffer them to eat it as they would. On the East and West sides of
the Isle, there are burning Mountains. The Inhabitants are strong and fierce.
It lies between eight and ten degrees of Long and in Lat. 67. one hundred and
fifty German Miles from the Shoars of Norway to the West. Their longest day in
Summer is twenty four hours without night, and their night in Winter, when the
Sun enters into Capricorn, the same without day. The Vulgar believe the
Mountain Hecla to be the Prison of damned Souls Mines of Sulphur are found in
it, with which the Merchants drive a Traffic.

Isle de feu, the Island of Fire, one of the Islands of Cap. Verde, upon the
Coast of Africa; so called from a burning Mountain therein. It has a Port
defended by a Fort on the North West.

The Ille of France, Insula Franciae, is a very great Province; the most
celebrated, rich, and populous of any in that Kingdom. It is bounded on the
North by Picardy, on the East by Champagne, on the West by Normandy, and on the
South by La Beausse: it contains in it twelve Counties, as le Parisis, la Brie
Francoise, l' Hurepois, le Gastinois, le Mantoan, le Vexin Francois, le
Beavoisis, le Valois, le Soissonois, etc. The principal City is Paris, the
Royal City of this Kingdom.

Islas de los Ladrones, or Islas de las Velas, by the French called Isles des
Larrons, a mass of little Islands in the Archipelago of St. Lazare, betwixt the
Oriental and the Pacifick Oceans, extending from North to South, at the
extremity of our Hemisphere, Eastward. Discovered in 1520. by the famous
Magellan. Some, inhabited by a salvage people, whose addiction to Thievery
occasioned this general ill name upon them all, of the Islands of Thieves. Yet
the greatest part are barren. They reckon fifteen principal ones. The Air,
temperate: but that the Hurricanes from time to time rage with violence. These
Salvages are excellent at making of Matts; and they traffic to Tartary in
Canoes.

Isle Maurice, an Island in the Aethiopick Ocean, to the East of Madagascar: so
named by the Hollanders in 1598. in honor of Maurice of Nassaw, Prince of
Orange: But the Portugueze made the first discovery of it, who called it Ilha
do Cerno or Swan-Island; the English also have given the Name of Warwick to its
Haven. In 1640. the Hollanders settled upon it, and have built it a Fort. It
yields Palmtrees, Cocao, Ebony, plenty of Fish, and Tortoises of a vast
magnitude. There is another small Island of this Name, near the Coast of
Moscovia, to the West of Weigats Straight, discovered by the Hollanders in
1594. in their search for a North Passage to China. Full of Lakes, Ponds, and
Marshes.

Isles des Papas, du Pape, or des Princes, called by the Turks Papas-Adasi; by
the Greeks, Papadonisia, or the Priests Island, (from their being inhabited by
the Religious Caloyers of the Order of S. Basil) lie within four Leagues of
Constantinople, betwixt the Sea of Marmora, and the entrance into the Streights
of Gallipoli. The Europeans of Constantinople and Pera ordinarily divert
themselves at them.

Isles des Perles, the Islands of Pearl, are a Shoal of Islands in the South
Sea, twelve Leagues from Panama, in South America: to which the abundance of
Pearls, heretofore fished out of the Sea adjacent, occasioned the giving of
this Name. The two principal, are Del Rio and Tararequi. Maze, and odoriferous
Trees grow upon them. The Spaniards here having made an end of all the Natives,
serve themselves of the Negro Slaves of Nicaragua to look after the Fields and
the Cattle.

Isle des Sacrifices, an Island upon the Coast of the Province of Tlascala in
New Spain in America, near the City St. Jean d'Vlva: so called, from the cruel
Sacrifices of Men, made by the Natives, to their Gods. The Spaniards used for
some time to discharge their Merchandises at this place.

Islebe. See Eisleben.

Issenos, Selinus, Trajanopolis, a City in Cilicia, in the Lesser Asia.

Ismar. See Smyrna.

Isne, Issny, Ysna, Viana, a small City in Schwaben, in Germany, in the
Territory of Algow, upon the River Arg; which falls into the Lake of Constance;
four German Miles from Kempten to the West, the same from Lindaw to the
North-East, and eleven from Vlm to the South; made an Imperial Free Town by
Charles IV. Emperor of Germany.

Isnich, Ascania, Palus, Nicaea, Antigonia, a City in Bythinia; famous for the
first General Council here held in 325. See Nicaea.

Isnig^mid, Nicomedia, a ruined City of Bythinia.

Isola, Insula, Aesulum, Aesulae, an Episcopal City in the Province of Calabria
Vlterior, in the Kingdom of Naples. This Name is also given to the River
Cremera in Tuscany: to an Island of the ^iber, called in Latin, Libanus almae
Veneris: and to a City of Histria, in Latin Alietum.

Isonzo, Isontius, Natisco, Sontius, a River of Friuli: it arises out of the
Carinthian Alps in Carniola, a Province of Germany; and entering Friuli, a
Province of Italy, it waters the County and City of Goritia, and also
Gradiska; where taking in Frigido, Turre, and some other Rivers, it leaves
Aquileja; and falls into the Gulf of Trieste, five Miles South-East of
Aquileja: near this River Odacer, who had made himself King of Italy, was slain
by Theodorick King of the Goths, in 489. To this Place the Turks came under the
Command of Asa-Beg, in 1177. in the time of Mahomet the Great; and overthrew
Jeronimo Novello, Count of Verona, a famous Commander of those times; and slew
him in Battle, together with his Son, and most of his Commanders; destroying a
Party of three thousand Venetians, and setting one hundred Villages on fire.

Ispaham. See Haspaam.

Ispirite, Sparte, a Village and Mountain in Thrace, upon the Euxine or Black
Sea.

Issar, Sichem, a ruined Place in Samaria, in the Holy Land.

Issedon, an ancient City of Scythia beyond the Mountain Imaus, supposed by
some to be the Modern Ciracoram in Tartary; or Synchun, or Suchur, in the
Kindom of Tangut, toward the Region of Cathay in China.

Issel. See Yssel.

Issoire, Isiodorum, a City in Auvergne in France, upon the River Allier, which
divides this Province; and falls afterward into the Loyre; six Leagues from
Clermont to the South. This City is called Icciodorum, Issorium, and Ic^odurum.

Issoudun, Exelodunum, Exsoldunum, a strong Town in the Dukedom of Berry in
France, in the Diocese of Bourges, upon the little River Thiol, seven or eight
Leagues from Burges. A Synod was assembled at it in 1081.

Issus. See Laiazzo.

Istacar, Istacarta, a City in Persia, one of the most ancient of that Kingdom,
and once a Royal City; but now scarce a Village; the City of Xiras having
sprung out of its Ruins, and overwhelmed it. It stood one Mile from the
Araxis, now Bendamur.

Istthmus Corinthiacus, the Neck of Land betwixt the Ionian and Aegean Seas,
near Corinth; or betwixt the Gulf of Corinth, and the Gulf of Engia, which
connects the Morea with Achaia, and the rest of Greece. The Emperors, Julius
Caesar, Caligula, and Nero, in vain attempting to cut a passage from the Ionian
Sea into the Archipelago through it, created the Proverb, Istthmum fodere, for
an unsuccessful undertaking. It is six Miles long. There was afterward built
upon it a Wall of the same length, called Hexamilium and Hexamili; which Amurah
II. destroyed; the Venetians repaired and fortified; and Mahomet II. again
destroyed in 1443. Istthmus of Panama. See Panama. Isthmus of Suez, an Istthmus
betwixt the Mediterranean Sea to the North, and the Red Sea to the South, which
joins Egypt to Palestine and Arabia Petraea, seventy Arabian Miles large:
taking this Name from the City Suez upon the Banks of the Red Sea. It has been
attempted to cut a passage through it from the two Seas, diverse times, in vain.

Istria. See Histria.

Istrig, Sargetia, a River of Walachia; which arises in the South part of
Transylvania, and falls into the River Marish. In the Bed of this River,
Decebalus buried his Treasure, when invaded by the Emperor Trajan.

Italia, Latium, Ausonia, Hesperia, Oenotria, Saturnia, is the most celebrated
Country in Europe; the Mistress, and Civilizer of all the rest. As she had
anciently all those Names I have already expressed; so of later times, the
Germans call it Welschlandt, or Wallischlandt; the Danes Ualland; the Turks
Talia; the Poles and Sclavonians Uloska. Its ancient Bounds extended no further
to the North, than the Rivers of Arnus, now Arno; and Aesis, Esino; afterward
it was enlarged by the Conquest of the Senones, to the River Rubicon, now Il
Pisatello. All between these Rivers and the Alps, being then called Gallia
Cisalpina. But at this day it is extended to the Alps, and the River Varus;
which parts it from France and Germany to the West and North; on which side
also the Adriacick Sea divides it from Dalmatia: on the South the Tyrrhenian,
Sicilian, and Ligurian Seas divide it from Africa; on the West the same Sea
washes it; and on the East the lower part of the Adriatic Sea, and the
Ionian, which divide it from Greece. This Country lies in the form of a vast
Peninsula; and resembles very much the Leg of a Man. It contains in length
from Augusta Praetoria, (now Aoust,) at the foot of the Alps, unto Otranto,
(in the most Eastern Point of the Kingdom of Naples) one thousand and twenty
Miles: in breadth from the River Varo, (which parts it from Provence) to the
Mouth of the River Arsa in Friuli, where it is broadest, four hundred and ten;
about Otranto, where narrowest, it has not above twenty five; and in the middle
from the Mouth of Pescara on the Adriatic Sea to that of the Tiber, on the
opposite Shore, is one hundred twenty six Miles: its whole Circuit may be about
three thousand four hundred forty eight Miles. The Apennine Hills divide it
into two parts: it is a very fruitful, pleasant Country; and toward the North
extremely well watered with Rivers. At first divided into diverse Tribes and
Nations; which being all united by the Roman Conquests into one Empire, upon
the ruin of that, it became again divided into diverse Seigniories and
Republics; that are now severally in the hands of the Pope, the King of Spain,
the Republic of Venice, the Dukes of Savoy, Florence, Mantoua, Modena, and
Parma; the Commonwealths of Genoua and Lucca, and some other small
Principalities; of all which, I shall discourse in their proper places. This
Country lies toward the midst of the Temperate Zone: from 28. degrees. and an half
of Long. to 42. and an half: and from 37. degrees. and an half of Lat. to 46. and
an half. In every respect so delightful, that diverse Writers call it the Garden
of Europe. Watered by the Rivers Po, Tanaro, Garigliano, Arno, Reno, Tiber,
Volturno, etc. Adorned with a great many magnificent, handsome, well built
Cities, diverse Universities, and more Bishoprics than any Country in the World
besides.

Italica, Heraclea, a City of Asia.

Itching, a River of Hantshire, meeting with the River Test at their fall into
the Sea, near Southampton. Winchester stands upon its Banks.

Ithaca, an Island in the Ionian Sea, near Cephalonica: now called Isola del
Compare, and Val de Compare: by the Turks, Phiachi or Theachi. And in Dionysius
Africanus, Nericia. This was the Birthplace of Ulysses, as Virgil has it, Sum
patria ex Ithaca comes infoelicis Vlyssei. Aen. 3. Iton, Itona, a small River
of Normandy, which washes Eureux; and then falls into the River Eure.

Ituraea, the ancient Roman Name of a Region in Palestine, since called Bacar.
See Bacar. In the time of our Savior it was a Tetrarchate under the Government
of Philip, Herod's Brother. The Inhabitants were a mixture of the Tribes of Gad
and Reuben.

Itzeho, Itz^hoa, a small City in Holstein properly so called, in the very
Borders of Stomaria, upon the River Stor; two German Miles from the Eibe and
Gluckstadt, toward the South-East.

Iuanogrod, a Castle in the County of Ingermanland, near Narva; from which it
is parted only by the River Plausa. Built and fortified by the Russ; and
conquered by the Swedes, together with the Province, in which it stands.

Iucatan, or Yucatan, a Peninsula in New Spain, in North America, within the
Government of Mexico, running into the North Sea, betwixt the two Gulphs of
Mexico and Honduras, above two hundred and fifty Leagues in circuit. Fertile,
especially in Cotton; and planted with the Cities, Merida, Salamanca,
Valladolid, etc. It was first discovered by Francis Hernandez of Corduba: and
afterward conquered by Francis Montege, by a War of nine years, in 1536.

Judea. See Palestine.

Iudenburg, a City of the Upper Stiria, upon the River Muer, which falls into
the Drove, in the Borders of Hungary; nine Miles above Gratz to the West, and
two from the Confines of Carinthia. It is under the House of Austria, and
thought to be the ancient Sabatinca Norici.

Iudia, Vdia, Odiaa, the Capital City of the Kingdom of Siam, in the
East Indies, where the King resides: thirty Leagues from the Indian Ocean, upon
the River Menan. In Long. 129. 00. Lat. 15. 00. And is a Place of great Trade.

Iudicello, Amananus, a River of Sicily, which arises from Mount Aetna; and
passing through the City of Catania, falls into the Ionian Sea, after a Course
of ten Miles.

Ivel, a River of Bedfordshire, falling into the Ouse: upon which stand
Biglesworth and Shefford.

Ivetot, a Seigniory in the Paix de Caux in Normandy. Said to have been erected
into a Kingdom by King Clotaire I. in satisfaction for the Murder of Gautier
Lord of Ivetot, committed in the Church upon a Good Friday by King Clotaire's
own hand. Others write, this is a Fable.

St. Ives, a Borough and Market Town in the County of Cornwall, in the Hundred
of Penwith, which returns two Burgesses to the House of Commons. It has a Haven
to the North or Irish Sea. A Market Town in Huntingtonshire, in the Hundred of
Hurstington, upon the River Ouse, over which it has a fair Stone Bridge. Said
to be so called from S. Ivo a Bishop, who about the year 600. preached
Christianity throughout England, and here died.

Ivette, Iveta, a small River of France, which falls into the Orb.

Iuhorsky, or Juhora, Jugra, Juhra, a Province in the North of Moscovy, upon
the White Sea. It has a City of the same Name.

Ivica, Ebusus, an Island on the East of Spain, belonging to Majorca, and
seated between it and Spain: only twenty Miles in compass, with a secure Haven
on its South side. It affords great plenty of Salt, and has no hurtful Creature
in it. The Bishop of Tarragona is the Proprietor of this Isle. It is on all
sides encompassed with Rocks, or small Islands, which make the approach to be
very dangerous.

Iuine, Junna, a small River in Gastinois in France; which arising near the
Forest of Orleance, and bending Northward, takes in Estampes and some other
small Rivers; and falls into the Seyne at Corbie. Some believe it to be the
same with the River Yone; and that it was called Estampes, from the Town of
that Name upon it.

Ivingo, a Market Town in Buckinghamshire, in the Hundred of Colstow.

Iuliers, Juliacum, a City of Germany; mentioned by Tacitus and Ammianus
Marcellinus; called by the Inhabitants Gulick: See Gulick. Also the Name of a
Dukedom in the Province of Westphalia, between the Rhine to the East, and the
Maes to the West; bounded on the North by Upper Guelderland; on the East by the
Bishopric of Cologne; on the South by Eifall, and the Bishopric of Treves;
and on the West by the Dukedom of Limburg. The River Roer divides it into two
parts. This from 700. was under Princes of its own, to 1609. when upon the
death of John William, the last Duke, there arose a contest between the Duke of
Newburg, and Brandenburg; which in 1612. broke out into a War; these two Dukes
in the end dividing the Dukedom between them; and entering a League for their
mutual defense, against who ever should annoy either of them in that which he
possessed. The Dukes of Saxony at the same time pretended a Right; which though
they never prosecuted, yet they still reserve unto themselves.

Iuncto, Tagrus, a Mountain in the Kingdom of Portugal.

Iunnan, Junnanum, a great Province in the Kingdom of China, in the South-West
Borders toward the East Indies: on the North it is bounded by the Kingdom of
Tibet, and the Province of Suchem: on the East it has Queycheu, and Quamsi,
(two other Provinces of China;) on the South the Kingdoms of Tunkim, and
Cochin-China; and on the West, the Kingdom of Pegu. The Southern parts of this
Province have been conquered by the King of Tunkim, and are in his hands. It
has its Name from Ynvam, a vast City, seated in Long. 131. 00. Lat. 25. 30.
This Province contains two and twenty great Cities, eighty four smaller, and
one hundred thirty two thousand nine hundred fifty eight Families.

Iunquera. See Jonquera.

Iura, a Mountain which divides France from Switzerland, called by the Germans
Iurten; by the Swiss Leberberg and Leerberg. It begins at the Rhine near Basil
to the North; extends to the Rhosne, and the County of Beugey to the South;
having many different Names from the People by which it passes. That part
which begins at the Rhosne, four Miles from Geneva (and lies between the County
of Burgundy and Beugey) is called le Credo: afterward it is called St. Claude,
about the rise of the River Doux; it has the Name of Mont de Joux, in the
Borders of Basil, Pierreport, and Botzberg; more South Schafmat; and by the
Swiss Leerberg.

Jurat, a part of the Mountain Jura, which lies between Burgundy and
Switzerland; also called Jurten.

Iurea, Eporedia, called Vrbs Salassiorum by Ptolemy, and Eporaedio by
Antoninus in his Itinerary; at this day Jurea by the Inhabitants; Juree by the
French; is a City of Piedmont in Italy; the Capital of the Territory of
Canavese, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Turin: seated upon the
River Doria [ Duria] which falls into the Po beneath Rivarotta; between Chivas
to the West, and Casal to the East; thirty Italian Miles from Turin to the
North, and twenty five from Aoust to the South-West. This City has been under
the Duke of Savoy, ever since 1313. who has taken care to fortify it very
well: it has also an ancient Castle, and a Stone Bridge over the River Doria.
The French took it in 1554. during the Wars of Italy. It has of ancient time
given the Title of a Marquess.

Iuriogrod. See Derpt.

Iustinopolis or Justiniana. See Achrida, Cabo di Istria, and Giustandil.

Iutland, Jutia, Cimbrica Chersonesus, is a very great Province of the Kingdom
of Denmark; extended in the form of a vast Peninsula from North to South, and
only joined to the Continent at the South end; where Holstein, a part of this
Promontory, joins it to Germany; on the West it has the German Ocean, on the
North and East the Baltic Sea. It is divided into the Northern and Southern
Jutland. The Northern Jutland is divided into four Dioceses, viz. Rypen,
Arhusen, Alborch, and Wisborch; this part is under the King of Denmark: the
Southern is divided into three, viz. Sleswick, Flensborg, and Hadersleben; this
is under the Duke of Sleswick, who is of the Blood Royal of Denmark. Charles
Gustavus King of Sweden took Jutland in his late Wars, and thence passed over
the Ice into the Neighboring Islands. It was the Country, most suppose, of the
ancient Cimbri.

Ixar, a small Town in the Kingdom of Arragon, upon the River Martinium; twelve
Miles from Sarragoza to the South; which gives the Title of a Duke.

Ixe, a Kingdom on the South of Japan.

Iyo, a Province in Japan, in Xicoca; toward the West of it, and the Island
Ximoam; which has in it a Town of the same Name.

K A.
KAchemire, a Kingdom in the Estates of the Great Mogul, along the Mountain
Caucasus, toward the Kingdom of Lahor, and the Borders of Indostan; with a
City, its Capital, of the same name. The City is all built of Wood, unwalled,
traversed by a River over which it has two Bridges, and near a great Lake, four
or five Leagues in circuit, falling into the same. The Country affords
excellent Pasturage, about thirty Leagues long, and twelve broad.

Kaimachites, a Province or Tribe amongst the Asian Tartars, by the great River
Ghamma; between Mongal to the North, and the Kingdoms of Thibet, and Tangut.
These People give Name to that part of the Ocean, which bordereth upon them.

Kalisch, Calisia, a City in the Kingdom of Poland; built upon the River
Prosna, which a little lower falls into the Warta; five German Miles from the
Confines of Silesia, and twelve from Breslaw to the North-East. It is the
Capital of a Palatinate in that Kingdom, and suffered very much from the Swedes
in the year 1657.

Kalmar. See Calmar.

Kalmintz, Celemantia, called by Ptolemy the Town of the Quades, is now a
Village in Austria; not far from the Fountains of the River Teye, in the
Consines of Moravia; thirty Miles (says Baudrand) from Zuaian, a Town of
Moravia to the West.

Kalmouchs, a People or Tribe of the Grand Tartary, toward the Coast of the
Caspian Sea.

Kam, the ancient Name of Egypt.

Kamenieck, Camienick, Camenecia, Clepidava, Camenecum, a strong City in the
Vkraine, in the Kingdom of Poland, which is the Capital of Podolia. The Poles
call it, Kaminieck Podelsski. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Lemberg; and stands upon a Mountain by the River Smotrzyck, which a little
lower falls into the Neister: thirty Miles from Lemberg to the South-East,
eighty from Warsaw, and one hundred and seventy from Constantinople, toward
the Frontiers of Moldavia. The Turks very often attempted this Place without
any success: but having suffered much by Fire in 1669. and being thereupon in
1672. besieged by them, it was taken; the Poles being then engaged in a Civil
War amongst themselves, and the Town not in a condition to defend it self. The
Cossacks under the Command of the Sieur Mohila blocked it up in April 1687. The
Polish Army offered to attack it about September following: but upon the
Approach of the Ottoman Forces, they were both of them forced to retire: the
Polish Army kept it in a manner blocked up by their Encampment in September
1688. About a Month after, they left the Tartars to put a Convoy of Provisions
into the Place. In 1689. August 20. the Forces as well of Lithuania as Poland,
under the Command of the great General of Poland, setting down before it, began
a formal Attack; till on the eighth of September following, being crossed with
ill success, they raised the Siege.

Kaniow, Kaniovia, a strong Town in Poland, upon the Nieper, where the River
Ross falls into it, in the Palatinate of Kiovia. It lies seven German Miles
from Czyrcassis to the North West, twenty seven from Kiovia to the South-East,
and upon the same side of the River. This Town is one of the strong Places
which belongs to the Cossacks.

Kanisa, Canisia, a Town of the Lower Hungary; seated upon the River Sala in
the County of Zalad, between the Lake of Balaton, and the Drove; not above one
Mile from the Confines of Stiria to the East. This was taken by the Turks in
1600. though the Imperialists did all that was possible to prevent it; the year
following the Archduke of Austria, besieged it from the beginning of
September, to the end of October, without any success. In 1664. Count Serini
besieged it, and had infallibly carried it, if he had been succored in time.
In 1688. June 30. the Count de Budiani blockaded it with a Body of six thousand
Hungarians, and two thousand Heydukes: which continued till April 13. 1690.
when in pursuance of a Capitulation, that the Emperor had ratified, the Keys
of the Gates hanging upon a Chain of Gold were delivered to the Count de
Budiani by a Turk, saying, I herewith consign into your hands the strongest
Fortress in the Ottoman Empire. The Imperialists found in it great store of
large Artillery, taken heretofore from the Christians; and some with old German
Inscriptions.

Kargapol, Cargapolia, a City in Muscovy, in the Western parts of that Kingdom,
near the Lake of Onega; between the Confines of Sweden, and the Dwina: there is
a Lake and a River of the same Name belonging to this City.

Karkessa, a Town in Arabia Deserta.

Karn, Taurn, a Mountain in Carinthia.

Karnwaldt, a Forest in Switzerland.

Karopnitze, Orbelus, a Mountain in Macedonia, which is a Spur of Mount Hemus;
dividing Macedonia from Thrace.

Kassel. See Cassel.

Katsbach, Cattus, a River in Silesia, which washes Lignitz.

Kaufbeurn, Kaufbura, a City in the Circle of Schwaben, in Germany, in the
Territory of Algow, upon the River Wertach; between the Bishopric of Ausburg
to the East, and the Territory of the Abbat of Kempten; not above sixteen Miles
from the Confines of Bavaria to the West, eight from Ausburg to the South, and
five from Nimmeguen to the East. This Town bought its Liberty of Conrade II.
Emperor of Germany, at the price of fifty thousand Crowns; when it had been
two hundred years in the Possession of the Barons Uon Hoff; who coming out of
France into the Service of Lotharius the Emperor, built it in 1340. It
embraced the Reformation in 1624.

Kaunberg. See Haynburgh.

Keci, Daona, the Capital City of the Kingdom of Tunking in the East Indies.

Kederminster or Kidderminster, a Market Town in Worcestershire, in the Hundred
of Halfshire, upon the River Stower, over which it has a Bridge: well inhabited
and traded for its Stuffs, and beautified with a fair Church.

Keisers-Lautern, Caesaropolis, a City in the Palatinate of the Rhine, upon the
River Lauter, near the Dukedom of Bipont; six Leagues from Spire to the West, a
little less from Worms: called by the French, Caseloutre: it has a Castle, and
a Territory or Jurisdiction, belonging to it: which surrendered to the Marquess
de Boufflers, the thirtieth of September 1688.

Kelaggebar. See Petra.

Keldan, Chaldaea, a Province of Asia, in Assyria; toward the Conjunction of
the Euphrates and Tygris; often called Babylonia from its Capital City. This
Province, which lay all on the West of the Euphrates and Tygris, by the taking
of Bagdat, fell under the Dominion of the Turks; whereas before it was under
the Persians. The Principal Cities in it are Bagdat, Cufa, and Vaset. It is now
called Yerach Arabi, and Kaldar.

Kelh or Kill; Kylli, Celbis, a rapid River of Germany; much celebrated for
plenty of Fish, and Corn Mills. It washes Gerhardstein, Kilburgh, and Erang;
then falls into the Maes beneath Treves, almost over against the Mouth of the
Roer, or Rober. This River is called Rapidus Celbis, in Ausonius.

Kellen, Trdjana Colonia, once a City, now a Village in the Dukedom of Cleves.

Keller Ampt, the Territory belonging to the City of Zell, in the Bishopric of
Breme, upon the River Aller. See Zell.

Kelnsey, Ocellum, a Promontory in the South of the East Riding of Yorkshire,
commonly called Holderness, upon the North side of the Humber, over against
Saltfleet in Lincolnshire. See Holderness.

Kemach, Camachus, a City of Cilicia, in the Lesser Asia, in the Borders of the
Lesser Armenia; which was made a Bishops See, under the Patriarch of
Constantinople, by Leo the Emperor. Now a mean Village, under the slavery of
the Turks. Baudrand writes it Chemach.

Kemois, a People in Chochin-China.

Kempen or Kampen, a Territory in Brabant; which was of old the Seat of the
Toxandri; by the latter Latin Writers called Campinia. It is called by the
Flandrians, Het Kempelandt. The greatest part of it lies in the North of the
Bishopric of Liege, toward the Maes, and the District of Boisleduc; and
contains also the South part of the Counties of Lootz, and Hoorn; in which are
the Towns of Masark, Bering, etc. The lasser part of it lies in the Dukedom of
Brabant, in the Territory of Boisleduc; between Peeland, Osterwick, and the
Kempen in Liege. The only Town of any Note in this part, is Eyndhoven, which is
in the Hands of the Hollanders. See Eyndhoven.

Kempten, Drusomagus, Campodunum, Campidona, a City of Schwaben in Germany, in
the Territory of Algow. It is one of the most ancient Cities of Germany, being
mentioned by Ptolemy; and had heretofore a Castle called the Burghald, which is
now pulled down and ruined. This was the Seat of the old Dukes of Schwaben:
amongst which, Hildebrand was of great fame; whose Daughter Hildegard, marrying
to Charles the Great, founded here a Monastery: the Abbat of which, as a Prince
of the Empire, was Lord of the City, till the Inhabitants purchased their
Liberty of one of them, with a vast sum of Money: after which, it was annexed to
the Empire; and in 1625. obtained a Charter from Frederick III. who gave them
an Eagle for their Arms, (one half Gold) with a Crown. Maximilian I. and
Charles V. both determined the Controversies between them and their Abbot. It
is now governed by a mixture of an Aristocracy and a Democracy; and it embraced
the Reformation in 1530. This City is seated upon the River Iler, which falls
into the Danube, over against Vlm; five German Miles from Memmingen to the
South, twelve from Constance to the East, and twelve from Vlm to the South. The
Monastery founded by Hildegardis, was of the Order of St. Benedict.

Ken or Kan, a River of Westmorland, on which Kendall stands; having two
Cataracts, descending with a great noise near that place.

Kenchester, Ariconium, a desolate Roman Town in Herefordshire, in the Hundred
of Grimsworth.

Kendal, a Town, Earldom, and Barony in Westmorland; seated upon the West side
of the River Ken or Kan, in the South part of that County in a fruitful Valley.
The Town is not great, but rich; being a place of Trade, and the Inhabitants
very industrious in making Clothes. It has two fair Stone Bridges over the
River, and another of Wood. Also a large Church, to which belong twelve
Chapels of Ease: and a Free School, endowed with Exhibitions for Scholars
going thence to Queen's College in Oxon: and seven Halls for so many respective
Companies of Tradesmen. John Duke of Bedford, Regent of France, and Brother to
Henry V. was by him created Earl of Kendale. John de Foix received the same
Title from King Henry VI. Queen Catharine, the sixth Wife to King Henry VIII.
was born in a Castle here, whose ruins may yet be seen. The Barony is in the
Earl of Pembroke. The Ward, called Kendal Ward, takes its Name from this place.

Kenelworth, a large, beautiful, strong Castle in Warwickshire, in the Hundred
of Knightlow; which in the Reign of Henry III. stood a Siege of six Months; and
being at last surrendered, there was here a Proclamation issued out, That all
that had born Arms against the King, should pay five years Rent of their Land:
which was called Dictum de Kenelworth. In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, it was
given to Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester; who spent very freely in the Repair
of it; so that it was then the second or third Castle of England.

Kenet, a River in Wiltshire, running Westward thence through Berkshire, into
the Thames, at Reading, where a fair Bridge covers it. Newbury and Hungerford
are both seated upon it.

Kenkis, Anchialo, Anohialus, a City of Thrace; which is an Archbishops See,
and has a Haven upon the Mouth of the River Eriginus, upon the Euxine; fifteen
Miles from Mesember to the South-East. It is under the Turks, and not expressed
in our latest Maps.

Kensington, a Town in Middlesex, in the Hundred of Finsbury; of which the Earl
of Warwick bears the Title of Baron.

Kent, Cantium, is the most South-Eastern County of England: on the North it is
bounded by the Thames, which parts it from Essex, on the East and South it has
the British Sea; in part on the North, and on the West it has Sussex and
Surrey. It is in length from East to West fifty Miles, and from South to North
twenty six. Divided into five Lathes ( Sutton, Aylesford, Soray, St. Augustine,
and Shepway) wherein are four hundred and eight Parishes, and thirty Market
Towns. That part which lies toward the Thames is healthful, but not fruitful:
the middle parts are both; the Southern are very fruitful, but not healthful.
The Thames, the Medway, the Stower, the Tun and the Rother, besides lesser
Streams, water it. Some give this Character of it: The Weald for Wood, East
Kent for Corn, Rumney for Meadow; Tenham for an Orchard, Shepey and Reculver
for Wheat, Thanet for Barley, and Hedcorn for Capons. This Country was first
conquered by Julius Caesar (though not without Resistance) in the years of Rome
696. and 698. fifty three years before the Birth of our Savior; being forced
to a double Expedition against almost this single County. As he began the
Conquest of Britain here, so did the Saxons: Hengist erecting the Kingdom of
Kent, in the year of Christ 456. seven years after the first arrival of the
Saxons. Against the Danes, the Kentish men did also great things; and with much
Courage and Patience, repelled those Barbarous People. When William the
Conqueror had subdued all the rest of the Nation, he was glad to come to a
Composition with the Inhabitants of this County; and to grant them their
ancient Liberties and Customs. Whence the Laws of Gavelkind obtain here to this
day. This County was also the first that embraced the Christian Religion, from
Augustine the Monk, in the year 568. Accordingly Canterbury is justly the
Metropolis of the whole Kingdom of England; as having been the first Fountain
from whence the Christian Religion spread it self amongst the Saxons: for as
for the British or Welsh, they had embraced Christianity long before. William
the Conqueror in 1067. created Odo, Bishop of Bajeux, (his half Brother) Lord
Chief Justice, and Lord Treasurer of England, Earl of Kent. In 1465. Edward IV.
created Edmund Gray, Lord Ruthyn, Lord Treasurer of England; which Family still
injoys this Honor; Anthony II. the present Earl of Kent, being the eleventh in
this Succession. Besides the Sea of Canterbury, this County injoys a second
Bishopric, which is Rochester; and a great many populous rich Towns, fafe
Roads, large and secure Harbors for Ships; and whatever else is desirable in
Human Life, except a more serene Air.

Kerci or Chierche, Cercum, a small Town at the Mouth of the Streights of
Caffa, upon the Euxine Sea, belonging to the Precopensian Tartars.

Kerez. See Keureuz.

Keriog, a River in Shropshire, which falls into the Dee, above Bangor.

Kerka or Karka, Titius, a River of Dalmatia; which washes Sardona, and
Sebenico; then falls into the Adriatic Sea, eight German Miles North of
Spalatro.

Kermen, Germia, a considerable City at this day in Thrace, seated not far from
Adrianople; the Turks have here a Sangiack.

Kerry, a County in the Province of Munster, on the Vergivian or Western Ocean;
between the County of Clare to the North, and the County of Cork to the South,
and East; the Capital of which is Ardart.

Keschidag, Olympius, a Mountain of Misia in the Lesser Asia.

Kesmarckt or Keysermarkt, Caesaropolis, a Town of the Upper Hungary, at the
foot of the Carpathian Mountains, toward the Frontiers of the Kingdom of
Poland.

Keswick, a Market Town in the County of Cumberland in the Hundred of
Allerdale; near to which, Black Lead is dug up in plenty. It stands in a
Valley environed with Hills, and has been formerly a famous Town for Copper
Mines.

Kes^el or Cassel, Castellum Menapiorum, a Town in Brabant; two Leagues beneath
Roermond to the North; between the Maes to the East, and the Peel to the West;
seated upon the River Neerse; which a little lower falls into the Maes.

Kettering, a Market Town in Northamptonshire, in the Hundred of Huxton, upon a
Rivulet which falls into the Nen: delightfully seated on an Ascent. It has a
Sessions House for the Justices of Peace of the County.

Keureuz, Keres, Krais, Chrysius, Cusus, a River of Transylvania, and the Upper
Hungary; which arises in the Western Borders of Transylvania, near Feltat; and
watering Giula, a little above receives another Branch, called by the same
Name, which passes by Great Waradin; both which Rivers being united, fall into
the Tibiscus, or Tyesse, at Czongrodt, above Segedin. One of these is called by
the Germans, Fekykeres, which goes to Giula; the other, Sebeskeres: Feky
signifying White, and Sebes Black.

Kexholm, Kexholmia, a Province of the Kingdom of Sweden in Finland; which was
heretofore under the Russ; but conquered by the Swedes in 1617. It is the most
South-Eastern part of Finland. The Capital of this Province is Kexholm; seated
upon the Banks of the River Voxen, near to the Western Shore of the Lake of
Ladoga; which together with the Castle, (which is very strong) was taken by
Monsieur Pont de la Gardie, a French Gentleman, from the Russ in 1580. The year
following this Gentleman took Narva, and several other strong places for the
Swedes, from the Moscovites; and was at last drowned in the River of Narva.

Keyserstul, Forum Tiberii, a small Town in Switzerland, upon the Rhine, over
which it has a Bridge. It lies in the County of Baden; nine German Miles from
Basil to the West, and Constance to the East; and belongs to the Bishop of
Constance, but is subject to the Canton of Zurick.

Kidwelly, a Market Town in Caermarthenshire in Wales. The Capital of its
Hundred.

Khoemus, Margiana, a Province of the Kingdom of Persia. See Margiana.

Kherman, Kermoen, Kermon, or Kirman, Carmania, or Caramania, a Province of the
Kingdom of Persia; with a City of the same Name.

Kiburgh, a Castle in the Canton of Zurich, upon the River Toss; two Miles from
Zurich to the East; the Earls of which, were heretofore of great Name. This
Castle was purchased by them of Zurich, in 1452.

Kiel or Kill, Chilonium, a City in the Dukedom of Holstein, under the Duke of
Holstein; upon the Mouth of the River Swentin; having a convenient Port upon
the Baltic Sea, much frequented by Merchants Ships: there belongs to it a
Castle seated on a Hill; and an University opened here in 1665. The Convention
of the States of Holstein, are usually held here. This City stands nine German
Miles from Lubeck to the North, ten from Flensborg to the South; and tho very
well fortified, has of late suffered very much from the Swedes.

Kiengara. See Gangra.

Kienning, a great City of the Province of Fokien in China, and the Capital of
a Territory of its own Name, commanding six other Cities. It is adorned with a
magnificent Pagod or Temple, and stands upon the River Min, over which it has a
Bridge.

Kill, Gelbis, a River in the Bishopric of Treves; which falls into the Maes,
three Miles beneath Treves; having watered Kilburgh, and some other small
Towns. Its Rise is in the Dukedom of Limburgh.

Kildare Kaldaria, Kildariensis Comitatus, a County in the Province of
Leinster, in the Kingdom of Ireland: which has the County of Dublin on the
East, the Kings County on the West, the County of Mead to the North, and that
of Catherlach to the South. The principal Town of it is Kildare. This Town was
taken by the Duke of Ormond, in the Year 1649, from the Parliament Forces: and
retaken in a few Months after by Hewson. The same has the honor to be an
Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Dublin.

Kile, Covalia, a County in the West of Scotland, upon Dunbrita^n Fyrth, over
against the Isle of Arran.

Kilgarran, a Market Town in Pembrockshire in Wales. The Capital of its
Hundred.

Kilham, a Market Town in the East Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of
Dickering, on the Woulds; yet a good soil for Corn.

Kilia Collatia, Insula Achillea, a City of Mysia.

Kilkenny, Kilkennia, Oseria, a City of Ireland, in a County of the same Name;
in the Province of Leinster, in the Confines of the Province of Munster: the
Seat of the Bishop of Ossory, a Suffragan to the Archbishop of Dublin; and the
Capital of the County in which it stands. It is a great and a strong City;
placed upon the Banks of the River Nure; ten Miles from Cashel to the North
East, fifty five from Dublin to the South West, and twenty eight from Waterford
to the North. The most populous, rich, and well traded inland Town in the
whole Kingdom of Ireland; it took its Name from one Canic, who leading here a
solitary life, was in great esteem for Holiness amongst the Irish; whence the
place was called by them Cell-Canic, quasi Cella Canici, or Canicks Church.
This consists of two parts: the Irish Town, in which is Canic's Church, the
Cathedral; and the English, which was built since; it is now the principal
part; the former only a Suburb to it. It was walled by K. Talbot, a Noble Man;
and the Castle built by the Butlers. This City was the Fountain and Head of the
late Irish Rebellion; the very Center from whence all the Lines of Treason
against the King, the Nation, and the Religion of Ireland were drawn; the Seat
of their Council or Committee, from whence the Conspirators sent out their
Orders. It was also one of the first in the Punishment: for Cromwell having
taken Drogheda, marched to Kilkenny, and besieged it; and after a short, but
sharp Resistance, took it upon Articles in eight days time, in the month of
June, 1650. The Committee being fled, before his coming, to Athlone in
Conaught, whither their Calamities followed them. After the Fight of the Boyne,
Kilkenny was readily submitted to the Duke of Ormond, (who has a Noble Seat in
it) and made the Head-Quarter for the Forces of K. William in this part of the
Country. The County of Kilkenny is bounded on the West by the Province of
Munster, and County of Tipperary; on the North by Queens Courty; on the East by
Catherlach, (cut off from it by the River Boyne;) and on the South by the
County of Waterford. The River Nuro divides it from North to South; and
afterward falls into the River Boyne at Rosse. The City of Kilkenny stands
almost in the Center of the County; which the Learned Dr. Bates makes to
consist of three parts, whereas Mr. Cambden gives it only two.

Killair, the same with Kildare.

Killian, Celenius, a River of Scotland.

Killaloo, Killala, a small City and Bishops See* under the Archbishop of Tuam;
in the Province of Conaught, in the County of Mayo; twenty four Miles from
Gallway to the North.

Kilmalock, Killocia, a small City in the Province of Munster, in the County of
Limerick; eighteen Miles from Limerick to the South. This was taken by Hewson
in 1650. And gives the title of a Baron.

Kilmar, an Arm of the Sea in Munster, which lies between Dingle and Bantry.

Kilmore, Kilmora, a small City in the Province of Vister, in the County of
Cavan; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Armagh, by the
appointment of Pope Nicholas V. in 1454. It stands upon Ninty, in the Confines
of Conaught, and Leinster; thirty two English Miles from Drogheda to the West,
and forty one from Armagh to the South-West. The Irish call this City Chilmhor.
Kilmore, a small City in the County of Knapdaile, upon the Bay of Fynn; forty
Miles from Dunbritain to the North-West.

Kimbolton, a Market Town in Huntingdonshire, in the Hundred of Leightenstone;
adorned with a Castle belonging to the Earl of Manchester, to whom it gives the
title of a Baron.

Kingchieu, a City of China, and a Province also. See Queicheu.

Kings-County, a County of Ireland, in the Province of Leinster; bounded on the
West by Conaught, and the County of Gallway; on the North by Mead; on the East
by Kildare, and on the South by Queens-County. The principal Town in it is
Kings-Town, Regiopolis, seated upon the River Esker, which falls into the
Boyne; twenty Miles from Athlone to the East, and forty from Dublin to the West.

Kingsbridge, a Market Town in Devonshire, in the Hundred of Stanborough.

Kingsbury, Kingnesburia, there are of this Name several small Towns or
Villages in England: Of which we take notice only, upon the occasion of a
Council held at a place, so called, in 851. under the reign of Bertulph King of
the Mercians.

Kingsclere, a Market Town in the County of Southampton. The Capital of its
Hundred.

Kingston, a Market Town in Surrey, the Capital of its Hundred, upon the
Thames, over which it has a Bridge: famous heretofore for the Coronation of the
Saxon Kings, from whom it received the Name of Kingstown (but before called
Moreford;) and also for a Castle belonging to the Clares, Earls of Gloucester.
The County Assizes are held here. In the Year 838. there was a Council
assembled at it under the Reign of Egbert K. of the West Saxons. This Town is
called for distinction Kingston upon Thames: There being Another Kingston in
the East Riding of Yorkshire, at the fall of the Hull into the Humber, called
Kingston upon Hull: built by K. Edward I. with a Harbor to it, a Custom-house
and Key, two Parish-Churches, together with Walls, Ditches, Forts, Blockhouses
and Castles, which render it capable of a strong defense. The same has the
honor and privilege to be both a Borough-Town and a County Corporate: giving
the title of Earl to the Right Hon. William Pierrepont. See Hull.

Kinsale, Kinsalia, a Town and Port of the County of Cork, in the Province of
Munster, on the River Ban, near the Ocean; fifteen Miles from Cork to the
South. This Town was seized by D' Aquila, a Spaniard, in 1601, with two
thousand Soldiers in favor of that dangerous Rebel Tir-Oe^n: but being
presently besieged by the Lord Montjoy (Lieutenant of Ireland) both by Sea and
Land in December; and Tir-Oen, coming up to relieve the Spaniards with six
thousand Foot and five hundred Horse, amongst which were two thousand fresh
Spaniards who had landed a little before at Berehaven, Baltimore, and
Castle-haven, being defeated December 24. by a Detachment drawn out of the
English Camp; D' Aquila thereupon, January 2. following, surrendered the Town
to the English; and was Transported, with the Remainder of his Men, by the
English into Spain. The Forces under the Earl of Marleborough, possessed
themselves of this Town. October. 2. 1690: the next day they took the Old Fort by
Storm; (the Governor for King James II. with several other Officers being slain
upon the Ramparts.) On the seventeenth following, the New Fort surrendered upon
Articles; and the Garrison of about 1200 Men marched out with their Arms and
Baggage to be conducted to Limerick.

Kintzig, Kintia, a small River in Schwaben in Germany; which arises in the
Dukedom of Wirtemberg, in the Black Forest; and running South-West through the
Territory of Ortnaw, it waters Wolsach, Hussen, and Offenburgh; then falls
into the Rhine at Strasburgh, four Miles South-West of Baden.

Kiovia, Kiow, a City of Poland, seated upon the Nieper in the Vkrayne; which
is the Capital of a County or Palatinate of the same Name; and a Bishop's See,
under the Archbishop of Lemburgh; having still a very strong Castle. The Ruins
of its Walls show that it was once a great and a magnificent City; containing
eight miles in circuit: which appears also from the Cathedral Church. Toward
the North it is yet full of People; but what lies to the South and West has
only a Timber Fence. This City was built by Kio, a Russian Prince, in the Year
861. After this it was the Capital of Russia, in which it stands; which then
had Princes of its own. And at last it was taken by the Poles. In 1615, it was
taken and burnt by the Tartars; and could never since recover that loss. Within
these thirty years last past it has suffered very much from the Cossacks and
Moscovites. In 1651, the Poles took it from the Cossacks; but they having
afterward recovered it, mortgaged it to the Moscovites; who are in that Right
still possessed of it. Its Long. is 61. 20. Lat. 50. 51. This City is called by
the Poles, Kiouf, or Kioff; and lies forty Polish Miles from the Borders of
Moscovy to the West, seventy from Caminieck to the North-East, and an hundred
from Warsaw to the East. The Palatinate of Kiovia is called Volhinia Inferior,
and also the Vkrayne: it is a part of Red Russia; and lies on both sides of the
River Nieper; between Moscovy, the Deserts of the Lesser Tartary, Volhinia
Superior, the Palatinate of Barlaw, and the Tartars of Orzakow. In 1686, this
was yielded to the Russ, to engage them in an Alliance with the Poles against
the Crim Tartars.

Kiri, Drinus. See Drino.

Kirkby or Kirby Lonsdale, a Market Town in the County of Westmorland: The
Capital of its Ward, upon the Banks of the River Lon, in a rich and pleasant
vale called Lonsdale: large, well built, and populous; having a fair Church and
Stone Bridge over the said River. The Name signifies, the Church in the dale or
Valley of Lon. Kirkby Moreside, a Market Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire,
in the Hundred of Ridal, upon a small River which after some course falls with
others into the Derwent. Kirkby Stephens, a Market Town in the County of
Westmorland in East Ward, near the skirts of the Hills, which sever Cumberland
from Yorkshire. It has a fair Church; and the Lord Wharton a Seat near it,
called Wharton-Hall.

Kirkham, a Market Town in Lancashire, in the Hundred of Amounderness, near the
mouth of the River Rible.

Kirkton, a Market Town in Lincolnshire, in the division of Holland and the
Hundred of Corringham; adorned with a fair Church built Cathedral wise, in the
form of a Cross, with a broad Steeple in the midst. It stands upon a rising
sandy ground.

Kirkwall, Carcoviaca, the principal Town in the Isles of Orkney; which has a
Castle, and a large Haven. It is seated upon the Island called Mainland, on the
North Side of the Island, but toward the Eastern End; and is in subjection to
the King of Scotland; the Seat of the Bishop of the Northern Isles.

Kisdarnoczi, Claudius, a Mountain between Stiria to the West, and the Lower
Hungary to the East; which has various Names given by various Nations.

Klagenfurt, or Clagenfurt, Claudia, Claudivium, a City of Carinthia. Dr. Brown
in his Travels, says, it is a fair apiece Town; enclosed with a handsome
Wall; the Rampart is very broad; at each Corner there is a Bastion, and one in
the middle of each Curtain: the Streets straight and uniform, as well as the
Works. There is a very fair Piazza, (or Square) in the middle, which was thus
adorned by the Lutherans, whilst they held this place; who also erected the
Noble Fountain in the Piazza, the Figure of which is represented by this
Author. This is the Capital of Stiria at this day; and lies upon a small River
a Mile and half N. from the Drove; thirty one from Vienna to the South-West,
and seventeen from Aquileja to the North East.

Kleckgow, Eremus Helvetiorum, a small Tract by the River Rhine; between
Scaphuis to the East, and the Canton of Vnderwaldt to the West, in Schwaben, in
Germany; but on the very Borders of Switzerland.

Klein Glogaw, Glogavia Minor. See Glogaw.

Klogher, an Episcopal City in the Province of Vlster in Ireland, and the
County of Monagham.

Knapdaile, Knapdalia, a County in the North of Scotland; between Argile,
(separated by an Arm of the Sea) to the East, the Isle of Jurai to the West,
Cantyr to the South, Domin and Lorn to the North. Kilmore is the chief Town in
it.

Knaresborough, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred
of Claro, which elects two Members of the House of Commons. It a Castle upon a
Rock; and a Well (says Mr. Speed) which petrifies Wood.

Knaringen, Grinario, a Roman Town in Schwaben, in the Marquisate of Burgaw,
upon the River Carnlach; a Mile from Burgaw to the West, and four from Vlm to
the same quarter.

Knighton, a Market Town in the County of Radnor in Wales; the Capital of its
Hundred.

Knin, Arduba, a City of Dalmatia.

Knockfergus, Carrickfergus, Rupes Fergusii, a City in the County of Antrym, in
the Province of Vlster; on the British Sea, over against the Isle of Man;
seated on the North Side of a fine Bay, which affords it the Convenience of a
large safe Haven. This Bay is called by Ptolemy, Vinderius; at present the Bay
of Fergus, from a King of these parts; who is said to have led the Scots out of
Ireland into Scotland, and afterward to have been drowned here. This City is
more populous, rich, and frequented than any other in this part of the Nation,
on the account of the Haven, and the Castle; which being Garrisoned, keeps the
Country quiet, and in awe. In the time of the Rebellion of the Irish, it held
out against them; and afforded shelter and relief to many thousands which fled
to it. When Cromwell came up, it yielded without a Stroke, in 1649. It
surrendered to General Schomberg, for want of Ammunition, August 27. 1689, upon
Articles, after a Siege of eight or ten Days by Sea and Land. King William
landed here, June 14. 1690, at his coming into Ireland. At this day the Trade
is going to Belfast, a Town eight Miles more to the South upon the same Haven;
and that has put a stop to the Growth of Knockfergus.

Knockenhauss, a Town in Livonia, in Leisland, upon the River Duna; which
belonged heretofore to Poland, but is at present under the Swedes: it lies
sixteen German Miles East from Riga, upon the same River.

Knoctoe, that is, the Hill of Axes, a place in the County of Gallway; four
Miles from the City of Gallway, on the West of Ireland; under which the Noble
Girald Fitz-Girald, Earl of Kildare, (and by times, for the space of thirty
three years, Lord Deputy of Ireland*) in 1516, overthrew the greatest Rabble of
Rebels that ever was seen together before in Ireland; which had been assembled
by William Burk, Obrian, Macnemare, and O. Carral.

Knottesford, a Market Town in Cheshire, in the Hundred of Bucklow.

Kola, a small Town of Lapland, which stands upon a River of the same Name; and
has a Haven upon the White Sea. This is under the Dominion of the Russ; much
frequented by the Ships of England and Holland. It lies sixty German Miles
South-East from the North Cape, ninety five North-West from Archangel, in Long.
57. 30. Lat. 68. 30.

Koldinguen, Coldinga, a City of South Jutland, which has a Castle called
Arensborch, and a Haven upon the Baltic Sea, over against the Isle of Fiona.
Here the Horse and Oxen which are driven into Holstein and Germany, in vast
Numbers, pay a Toll to the King of Denmark. Christian III. King of Denmark,
died here in 1559.

Kolom, Columna, a considerable City in the Province of Mosco, upon the River
Mosco; where it falls into that of Aka or Occa; sixteen Miles to the East from
Mosco It has a delightful appearance, by reason of its Towers and Stone Walls,
which are not usual in Moscovy. The Duke has here a Governor or Vaiwod. And it
is also the Sea of the only Bishop in this Province.

Koloswar. See Clausenburgh.

Kom, Komum, a vast City in Persia, in the Province of Hierach; in the middle
between Hispahan and Casbin.

Komare, Komore, Komorra, Comaria, a very strong and well fortified Town in the
Lower Hungary; seated on the South point of the Isle of Schut; where the Danube
reunites into one Stream; four German Miles from Raab; two from Neuheusel to
the South, and five from Gran to the North. This Town was first fortified by
Matthias Corvinus, King of Hungary, in 1472. against the Germans in design, but
for them in effect; it having been one of the impregnable Bulwarks of
Christendom against the Turks, ever since they took Gran in 1542. It is a
great, populous, rich City, as well as a strong one. By a Line drawn from the
Waagh, (that is, the Southern Branch of the Danube,) to the Northern Branch of
the Danube, strengthened with four Bastions, the Emperor has much enlarged it.
The Emperor kept here always a great Garrison, and a Trusty Governor. After the
taking of Raab in 1591. Sinan Bassa, besieged this Town with sixty Ships and a
great number of Turks and Tartars; but without any success; to the great
slaughter of the Tartars especially. All his Treachery (for he sent five Turks
to suborn Baron Brown, the then Governor, to sell the Town under the show of a
Parley,) and Valor too, were here equally baffled: sour of the five Turks having
their Heads set upon Spears; and the fifth being sent back to the Bassa, to let
him know there were no more Traitors to be bought. The chief strength of it is
in a Fort, called the Tertise.

Kongel, Congella, a City in Norway, in the County of Babuis, upon the River
Trolhet; five Miles above its outlet, and twelve from Gottenburgh to the North;
now under the Swedes.

Koningsberg, Mons Regius, Regio-mons, or Regiomontum, a City in Prussia
Ducalis, whereof it is the Capital, under the Elector of Brandenburgh, upon the
River Pregel. Adorned with a Ducal Palace; and an University, which was sounded
by Albert Duke of Prussia in 1544. It is a great and handsome, a trading and an
Anseatique City.

Koning-gratz, Gradium Reginae, Ragino, Gradecium, a City of Bohemia, called
also Kralowihrades, and Koningsgrats; which in 1664. was made a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Prague, by Pope Alexander VII. It is seated upon the
Elbe, twelve Miles from Prague to the East, thirty two from Vienna to the
North-West, in the prefecture of Gradetz.

Konitz, Conitia, a Town in Prussia Regia, upon the River Bro, near the Desert
of Waldow, in the Confines of the Brandenburgh-Pomerania; eight Polish Miles
from Culm to the West. This Town is called by the Poles Choinicke.

Koperberg, Cuprimontium, a Free Town of Sweden; which has rich, and most
useful Mines of Copper; from whence it has its Name. It stands not far from a
Lake in the Province of Gestrick; fifty Miles from Gevals, a Town in the same
Province to the West, and a little more from the Botner Sea. See Gestrick.

Kopizath, Imaus. See Imaus.

Koppan, Campona, Copanum, a Town in the Lower Hungary, upon the Danube,
mentioned by Antoninus in his Itinerary, which is near Buda; some suppose it
the same with this; others Keppel, and others Theten, two Miles from Buda.

Korbaten, Colapiani, the Croates. See Croatia. They are also called Krabaten
by the Germans.

Kornthaurn, Taurus, a Mountain of Carinthia, between it and Salisburgh;
mentioned by Tacitus, Jornandes, Eutropius, and Herodian. Ortelius says, it is
of a vast height; and is called Thaurn, Kornthaurn, Krumlechthaurn, and
Rhadstratterthaurn.

Korsoe, Corsoa, a small City in Denmark, on the Western Shore of the Island of
Zealand; at which Charles Gustavus first Landed in 1658. It stands upon that
Arm of the Baltic Sea, which is called Die Belt, over against the Island of
Fionia, and the City of Newborg; two English Miles West of Skelsor; and has a
Castle belonging to it.

Korsum, Korsuma, a Town in the Palatinate of K^ovia, upon the River Rosse;
built in 1581. by K. Stephen, and memorable for a great Victory obtained over
the Poles by the Cossacks, in 1648. It stands five Polish Miles from Czyrkassy
to the West.

Kotting, Cotuantii, an ancient People amongst the Grisons; the same perhaps
with the Gotthouspunt.

Kouuno, Couuna, a City in Poland, in the Dukedom of Lithuania, upon the River
Chronus, or Niemen; where it receives the Vil; in the Confines of Samogitia;
eighteen Polish Miles from Vilna to the West, fourteen from Troki, (in which
Palatinate it stands,) and forty from Koningsberg to the East. It is written
Kowno.

Krabaten, Croatia.

Krach, Petra. See Petra.

Krain. See Carniola.

Krainburg, Carrodunum, a small Town in the Lower Bavaria, upon the River Inn;
two German Miles above Oetingen, and nine from Munichen to the East. Written
also Craiburg. Krainburg, or Kornburg, Carrodunum, a small Town in the Lower
Stiria, upon the River Raab; three German Miles from the Confines of Hungary to
the West, toward Gratz six Miles, and twenty four from Krainburg in Carniola
to the South-West. This is written Cornburg.

Kraines, Carni, Taurisci, Japodes, the Inhabitants or People of Carniola.

Craiss, Chrysiw. See Keureuz.

Kracow. See Cracow.

Kraneburg, Burcinacium, Burginatium, a Roman Town, now a Castle only; one
German Mile from Cleves to the West.

Kranz, Scardus, a Mountain dividing Albania from Macedonia.

Kratzer, Vogesus, called by the French Vauge; a Mountain dividing Lorain from
Alsatia, and the County of Burgundy; out of it rises the Mosella, or Maes,
which runs North; and the Saone, or Sosne [ Arar,] which falls into the Rhosne
beneath Lions.

Kray, Jena, an arm of the Irish Sea, in the County of Galloway, in Scotland.

Krayn, Liburnia, Carinthia.

Krems, a City of Austria, Cremsa, Cremisum, seated upon the North side of the
Danube, over which it has a Bridge; ten German Miles above Vienna to the West.
This Town is walled.

Krickieth, a Market Town in Caernarvanshire in Wales, in the Hundred of
Esyonid.

Krim, or Krimenda, Crimaea, a City of the Lesser Tartary, in the Taurick
Chersonese, in the Euxine Sea. It stands toward the middle of this Chersonese;
between Precop to the North, and Caffa to the South. Very small, and almost
reduced to the meanness of a Village; though it gives Name to the whole Nation
in which it stands; and is the usual Seat of the Cham. The Krim Tartars, are a
Nation of Europe, bounded with the Borysthenes, [ Nieper] to the West: the
Psola, and Desna, (two Rivers which fall into the Nieper,) the Donetz, or
Lesser Tanais, and in part by the Greater Tanais, to the North: by the last
River to the East also, and in part to the South: the rest of their Southern
Border is made by the Euxine or Black Sea, into which the Nieper falls. The
most Southern part of this Country is the Taurica Chersonesus, anciently filled
with Noble Greek Cities, the Principal of which was Theodosia, now Caffa; but
this Hord, or Tribe of Tartary, which now possess it, coming out of Asia, have
so ruined them, that there are scarce any footsteps left of their ancient
Grandeur. These Tartars lead their Lives after the ancient manner; having no
fixed Habitations; but driving their Cattle, Wives and Children about from
place to place, as Necessity and the Season of the Year require. They have only
covered Wagons to preserve them from the injury of the Weather. And they
accordingly value themselves upon this Nomadical way of living; as the
Protectors of their Cities, and Men of such exalted Virtue, as is not to be
confined within any smoaky Walls. In the interim they are extremely proud,
ignorant, nasty and barbarous. Their Diet is Roots, Cheese, Garlic, and for
the most part Horseflesh; which they eat without Bread, and often raw: Beef
and Venison being reserved for their Great Men. They value Brass and Steel,
above Gold and Silver They were once Christians, but have since Apostatized to
Mahometanism: yet they retain one Article of the Creed firmly, that Christ
shall Judge both the quick and the dead, in the day of Judgment. Upon this
account they are more favorable to the Christians that live amongst them, than
any other Mahometans are. They use their own Tartarian Tongue, intermixed with
Arabic and Turkish; and the Chaldean and Arabian Characters. This Prince has
heretofore been able to Arm one hundred and fifty thousand of his own Subjects:
and in 1571. pierced as far as the City of Mosco; and set fire on the Suburbs,
which taking the City, in the space of four hours, burnt the greatest part of
it, (though thirty Miles in compass:) Eight hundred thousand People of all
Sexes, and Ages, perishing in this Ruin. After all, the Turk treats this Prince
as his Slave; at some times removes, at others Murders him. In 1686. there was
a League between the Russians and the Poles, for the Conquering this People:
but the former have done no great Wonders yet with an Army of three hundred
thousand Men.

Kriviezne, Haemus, a Mountain of Thrace.

Kronningesard, a Castle in the South part of Iseland, at which the Viceroy for
the King of Denmark resides. Also called Besteda.

Kruppa, Carpis, a River of Servia, which falls into the Danube; called now
also Crapin.

Kudack, or Kudak, a small Town in the Vkraine, or Palatinate of Kiovia, on the
West of the Nieper, beneath the Confluence of Samara; in 1637. fortified by the
Poles, to keep the Cossacks from Pyratizing on the Euxine Sea: but in 1648.
taken by the Cossacks. It lies forty Polish Miles beneath Czyrcassy to the
South, and the same distance by the River from the Euxine Sea to the North.

Kulp, Krup, Culpa, Colapis, a River of Croatia; it arises in the Eastern
Borders of Carniola, from the Alps which here end; and watering Metling in
that Province, and Carlstat in Croatia, it falls into the Save; two German
Miles and an half above Sisegh in Croatia.

Kunisberg, or Konisberg, Regismons, a small Town in Stiria, upon Mount Rogel,
in the Confines of Carniola; four German Miles from Cilley to the East, and
eight from Pettaw. Koningsberg, in Prussia, is sometimes thus written.

Kur, Cyrus, a River of Georgia; which rises from Mount Caucasus, near
Akalzike, (a Fortress and Town, consisting of about four hundred Houses, upon
Mount Caucasus; the Seat of a Bassa; it was built by the Georgians, but is now
in the hands of the Turks.) This River falls afterward into the Caspian Sea.
It is much mentioned in ancient Writers.

Kurzitadan, Jerusalem.

Kuttenberg, Cutnae, a City of Bohemia; written also Cuttemburg, and called by
the Bohemians Hora. It is a small City, seated four Miles from Cazlaw to the
North, the same distance from the Elbe to the South, and seven from Prague to
the East.

Kylan, the same with Gilan.

Kyneton, a Market Town in Warwickshire, upon a small River running into the
Avon. And another in Herefordshire, pretty large and well built.

L A.
LAbach, Loybach, Laubach, Labacum, Nauportus, a City of Carniola, called by
the Italians Lubiana. It is seated upon a River of the same Name, which after a
short course, falls into the Save. It stands nine German Miles from Trieste to
the North-East, and fifteen from Villach a Town of Carinthia to the North-West.
Made a Bishops See by Pope Paul II. under the Patriarch of Aquileja in 1468.
together with Cita Nova, (a place distant from it about sixteen Miles to the
South;) and since this Bishop of Laubach has been exempted from the
Jurisdiction of the Patriarch. Dr. Brown who saw it, says, it is the principal
City of Carniola, and a handsome Place, with a Castle seated on an Hill, which
overlooks two large Valleys to the North and South; and has a fair Prospect of
many Hills, and Castles; but being commanded by another Hill not far from it,
it is neglected: tho we find that it has endured a strong Siege. For whilst
the Emperor Frederick was receiving the Crown at Aken, his Brother Albertus and
Count Vlrick took the advantage to besiege it: but it made so good a
resistance, that the Emperor had time to raise the Siege, and destroy the Army.

Labathlan, Commercium, a Village not above one Mile from Gran, in the Lower
Hungary; found out by an Inscription.

Labe, the Elbe. See Elbe.

Labirinto, Dicte, Dictaeus, a Mountain in Crete, or Candia; which lies in the
Eastern part of the Island, and is much celebrated by the ancient Poets, on the
account of Jove's being brought up here: now also called Lassiti, and Il Monte
di Setia.

Labus Athres, a River in the European Scythia.

Lacari, Libnius, a River of Ireland. Baudrand makes it the Lisly, which falls
into the Irish Sea near Dublin.

Lacedaemon. See Misitra.

Lacedogna, Aquilonia, Laquedonia, Erdonia, a City of the Kingdom of Naples;
called also Cedogna. It is seated at the foot of the Apennine, in a Plain in
the Principatus Vlterior, in the borders of Puglia; and though half ruined, and
that which is standing but meanly inhabited, yet it is a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Conza.

Lacerea, Labedus, a City of Ionia, in the Lesser Asia.

Lacha, Olympus, a Mountain of Thessalia.

Lachish, an ancient City of Palestine in the tribe of Juda; memorable for the
proud Embassy of Sennacherib, King of Assyria, to Hezekiah King of Judah sent
from hence; and the destruction of 185000 of Sennacherib's Men in one night, by
an Angel soon after, 2 Kings 18. 17. and 19. 35.

Laconia, the same with the modern Sacania.

Lacosichia, Pieria, a pleasant and much celebrated place in Thessalia, in
Macedonia; at the entrance of the Gulf of Thessalonica.

Ladenburg, or Ladebourg, Ladenburgum, a Town in the Palatinate of the Rhine,
upon the River Necker; part of which is under the Bishop of Worms, who resides
in the Castle of this Town; and the other part under the Elector Palatine; to
whom it was mortgaged by a Bishop of Worms in 1371. It stands two Miles from
Heidelburg to the West: and having suffered much in the late Swedish Wars, is
now in some degree repaired.

Ladi, Cyrrhus, a River of Albania in Asia; supposed to be the same with Cyrus,
now called Cur, or El-car, Ser and Chiur, tho by Ptolemy distinguished from it.
This River falls into the Caspian Sea, having passed through Georgia.

Ladog, Rubricatus, one of the principal Rivers in Barbary; it falls into the
Mediterranean Sea, through the Kingdom of Tunis. See Jadog.

Ladoga, a vast Lake, which is thought to be the biggest in all Europe; called
by the Russ Ladesko Ozero. It lies between Kelholm or Kexholm, a Province
belonging to the Swedes to the West, and Kargapol a Province of Moscovy to the
East: thirty six German Miles long, and twenty broad; abounding with Fish to
that degree, that it has enriched Kexholm with the Fishery of Salmons. The Russ
are Masters of about a fifth part of it, the rest is possessed by the Swedes:
this Lake receives, besides a vast number of Rivers, the Waters of the Lake of
Onega; which lies about sixty English Miles from it to the East, and is not
much less than it; it transmits all these Waters into the Bay of Finland, by
the River of Spasco, a Passage of about eleven German Miles.

Laestrigones, an ancient People of Latium, mentioned in Ovid and Horace.

Lagenia. See Leinster.

Laghi, Laghium, perhaps Laasa, a City of Arabia Foelix, on the South side;
nine German Miles from Aden to the East, and twenty five from Cape Babelmandel
to the South-East. It is under a Prince of its own, and lies in Long. 81. 05.
Lat. 15. 00.

Laghlyn, Laglinia, once a City, now a Village in the Province of Leinster, in
the County of Catherlagh, upon the River Barrow; six English Miles from
Catherlagh to the South. The Episcopal See, which it had, is united with that
of Fernes.

Lagny, Laciniacum, a Town in the Province of Brie in France, upon the Marne,
six Leagues from Paris; which has the honor of the title of an Earldom. There
is a Benedictine Abbey in it, said to be founded by S. Foursye a Scotch-man in
the seventh Century; and tho the Normans ruined it in the ninth, it found
Benefactors again to repair and endow it. In 1142. a Council was celebrated
here. In 1590. the Duke of Parma, having first obliged Henry le Grand K. of
France to raise the Siege of Paris, took this Town by a sudden assault and laid
it in ruins.

Lago, Lac, Lagus, a Lake or Collection of Waters, surrounded on all sides by
the Land, to distinguish it from a Bay, or Arm of the Sea. There is a vast
number of these in all parts of the Earth; serving for Cisterns to preserve
Water, and to restrain the Course of Rivers, which would otherwise be too rapid
for humane uses.

Il Lago Maggiore. See Lang see.

Lagos, Lacobriga, a small City in Algarva in Spain, which has a Castle, and a
Harbor upon the Ocean. It lies in Long. 09. 00. Lat. 36. 36. five Miles from
Cape S. Vincent to the East; and is under the King of Portugal.

Lagosta, Lastovo, Ladesta, Ladestris, Lastobon, Landestina, an Island on the
Coast of Dalmatia, in the Adriatic Sea; under the States of Venice; near
Curzola.

Lagune di Venetia, a part of the Adriatic Sea, called Gallicae paludes,
Septem maria, Stagna Hadriatica; in which the City of Venice stands, built upon
a great number of Rocks, and small Islands; which are separated one from
another by the Waves of the Sea.

Lagusta, Celadussa, Celadusa, an Island on the Coast of Dalmatia; near Curzola
on the East, five Miles from Ragusa to the West; under the Venetians.

Laholm, a Town of Halland, a Province of Sweden; seated upon the Baltic Sea,
in the Consines of Scania; seven Swedish Miles from Helmstad to the South, and
six from Elsingburg to the North-East. It has a Harbor and a Castle; and was
fortified by the Danes, whilst it was in their hands; but notwithstanding often
taken, and retaken in their Wars; till at last the Swedes held it, with the
Province in which it stands.

Lahor, Lahorium, Bucephala, a City of the East Indies, which is also called
Pengeab. It is seated upon the River Ravi; one hundred and eighty Miles from
Multan to the East, three hundred and sixty from Agra to the North, in Lat. 31.
50. as M. Thevenot states it. This River falls into the Indus at Luckar. The
name of Pengeab is given to this Province and City by the Moguls who are Lords
of it; and signifies in their Tongue the Five Rivers. This was anciently the
common Residence of the Moguls, and then in a much more flourishing Condition
than now: the Castle, being very strong, and part of the Royal Palace retain
their former Beauty; the rest of the noble Structures are much decayed: some
Streets, of near a League in length, are falling down, and ruinous: yet is this
no old Town, having been raised, since the days of Humayon, one of the Moguls,
who brought it to be a City of three Leagues in length, in a short time. Yet
this Town is full of Mechanics, and all sorts of Manufactures, made in these
Countries. The Province of Lahor or Pengeab, is bounded on the North by
Cassimer; on the East by the Kingdom of Negercoot; on the South by Jenba, or
Genupara; and on the West by Multan; it is one of the largest and most
plentiful Provinces in the Mogul's Empire, by reason of the Rivers: yields
Rice, Corn, Fruits, and reasonable good Wine in great abundance; and the best
Sugars in the Indies: out of which arises to the Prince a Revenue of thirty
seven Millions and upwards, as the Indians reported to M. Thevenot.

Laiazzo, Jazzo, Issus, a City in the most Eastern part of Cilicia, in the
Lesser Asia, next Syria; near which Darius the last of the Persian Monarchs was
overthrown by Alexander the Great in the Year of Rome 421. as Quintus Curtius
shows. Ventidius Bassus, a Roman General, gained a Victory over the Parthians
here in the Year of Rome 715. The Emperor Severus defeated his Competitor
Pescennius Nger here, Anno Chr. 194. and Bajazet II. Emperor of the Turks, was
defeated by the Sultan of Egypt in the same place, in 1487. by which, and other
losses, this Tyrant was forced to sue to the Sultan for Peace the next year. It
is now a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tarsus; and stands near Mount
Amanus, (now called the Mountains of Scanderoon,) in the Province of Caramania,
under the Dominion of the Turks: it has a convenient Harbor upon the
Mediterranean Sea, and is now in a tolerable good Condition. Six German Miles
from Antioch to the North, and seventy from Cogni [ Iconium] to the South-East,
Long. 69 45. Lat. 37. 00. The gulf of Lajazzo, whereon this City stands,
receives its name from it.

Laimon, Bosphorus Thracicus, the narrow Straight or Sea between the Propontis
and the Euxine Sea; upon which the City of Constantinople stands.

Laino, Laus, a Town and River in the Hither Calabria, upon the Tyrrhenian Sea.
It stands in the Confines of the Principatus, seventy five Miles South of
Salerno.

Laire, Leria, Sigmas, a River of France in Gascogne, which falls into the
Ocean at La Buch; eight Leagues from Bourdeaux to the West; written Leyra also.

Lalandt, Lalandia, an Island belonging to Denmark in the Baltic Sea, so
called from its low situation. It is eight German Miles long, and five broad;
lying on the South of Zelandia, and on the West of Falflria or Falster; from
which it is separated by a narrow Passage called Gulburg. The chief Towns in it
are Naxkow, Saxkoping, and Nysted; the first, fortified. This Island was taken
from the Danes by the Swedes in 1657.

Lali, Halys, a River of Lydia, in the Lesser Asia, fatal to Croesus.

Lalisa, Laodicea, a City of Syria, seated upon the Mediterranean, between
Antioch to the North, and Tripoly to the South; which has a large Haven, and is
an Archbishops See, under the Patriarch of Antioch; but falling into decay and
ruin for want of Inhabitants. The Inhabitants call it Lyche, and the Arabs
Ladikia.

Lamballe, a Town in Bretague, in France, in the Territory of S. Brieux; five
Miles from S. Brieux to the East, eight from Dinant to the West, and four from
the British Sea to the South. Some have thought it to be the Capital of the
Country of the ancient Ambiliates, mentioned by Caesar. It is a famous Town for
making of Parchments.

Lambec, a pleasant spruce Town in Provence in France, near the River Durance;
four Leagues from Aix, and nine from Avignon to the East.

Lambesa, or Lambesca, Lambaesa and Lampaesa ad fluvium Ampasgam, a City of the
Kingdom of Constance, in Barbary; near the Mountains of Calamati, on the
Confines of Biledulgerida; twenty four Miles from Cirta to the South; it was
once a Bishops See. About the Year 240, a Council of 90 Bishops was assembled
here against Privatus, the Bishop of this See, upon an accusation of heresy
and crimes.

Lambeth, a well inhabited large Parish, opposite to the City of Westminster,
on the other side of the Thames, in the County of Surrey, the Hundred of
Brixton, and the Suburbs of London. Of Note for the Palace and Residence of the
Archbishops of Canterbury. Canutus, the last King of the Danes, dyed here. And
in the Year 1280. there was a Council assembled at this place under John
Peacham Archbishop of Canterbury; as also a second under Cardinal Thomas
Bourchier, Archbishop of the same See in 1486.

Lamborne or Lainborne, a Market Town in Berkshire. The Capital of its Hundred.

Lambro, Lambrus, a River in the Dukedom of Milan, which arises out of the
Mountains near Como, and the Lake of the same name; and running South, waters
Monza, and Marignano; then falls into the Po between Pavia and Placentia, or
Piacenza, nine Miles above the latter to the West.

Lamego, Laconimurgi, Lamaca, Lameca, a City in Portugal, in the Province of
Beira, near the River Duero, and an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of
Braga. Ptolemy mentions it by the Name of Lama. It is likewise mentioned in the
third Council of Carthage.

Lameto, Lametus, a River of Calabria Vlterior, which rising from the Apennine,
falls into the Bay of S. Eufemia, upon the Tyrrhenian Sea, in the same
Province. This is the same with Amato.

Lamina, Thessalia, a Province of Greece.

Lamo, Lamus, a Kingdom in Africa, which takes its Name from a City of
Zanguebar, in the Lower Aethiopia; over against the Isle of Madagascar; one
degree from the Line to the South; North of Melinde, thirty three Leagues,
Baudrand places it North of Melinde, and South of Quiloa: but the Maps, as I
have set it.

Lamo, Lamus, an inland City of Cilicia, in the Lesser Asia; which is a
Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Sileusia; near Tarso.

Lampedosa, Lopadusa, or Lampadousa, in Ptolemy called Lipadusa, is an Island
in the Mediterranean Sea; between the Kingdom of Tanu to the South (on which it
depends,) and the Island of Sicily to the North; seventy Miles from the nearest
Coast of Africa, and one hundred from Malta: it is fifteen Miles in compass,
but desolate; there is in it a Chapel dedicated to the Virgin Mary, much
esteemed by Seamen: near it the Fleet of Charles V. suffered Shipwreck in 1551.

Lampsaco, Lampsacus, a City of the Lesser Asia, in Mysia; much celebrated in
all the ancient Geographers; being supposed to have taken its name from its
Beauty or Splendour. It stands at the entrance of the Propontis, over against
Gallipoli; five German Miles from the New Dardanels to the North, and a little
more from Marmora an Island to the South. The Turks call it Lepseck and
Lasipio, the Europeans Lampsaco. It is now in a tolerable good Condition, and
the Sea of an Archbishop. Xerxes King of Persia gave the Revenues of this City
to Themistocles the Athenian, in his Banishment, to find him Wine. It consists
of about two hundred Houses, inhabited partly by Turks, partly by Christians.
It has a very fine Mosque, whose Portico is supported by Red Marble Pillars;
the same was formerly a Christian Church, as appears by the Crosses that yet
remain on the Capitals of the Pillars. This City has even at this day a great
many fine Vineyards, especially on the South Side, fenced in with Pom granate
Trees. Wheeler, p. 76. In the ancient Roman Times, the God Priapus was revered
here. In the Year of Christ 364 the Demi-Arrians, in a Council at this City,
condemned the Forms of Faith that had been published by the Councils of Rimini
and Constantinople, confirming another made by the Council of Antioch in 341.
There was also a second Synod assembled here about the Year 369.

Lampura, Selampura, a City of India, beyond Ganges, mentioned by Ptolemy.

Lancashire, Lancastria, is a part of that Country which was of old possessed
by the Brigantes. This County has Westmorland and Cumberland on the North;
Yorkshire on the East; Cheshire on the South; and the Irish Sea on the West. In
length from North to South fifty seven Miles, in breadth thirty two: containing
twenty six Market Towns, sixty one Parishes, and many Chapels of Ease, equal
for the multitude of Inhabitants to Parishes. Watered with the Rivers Mersey,
Rible, Son, (all three running from East to West into the Irish Sea, and the
first serving as a Boundary betwixt this County and Cheshire); besides the
great Lakes of Merton and Winder, which last divides it from Westmorland. Where
the ground is plain and champaign, it yields good store of Wheat and Barley;
the foot of the Hills is fitter for Oats. All is tolerably useful and good;
except the Mosses or Bogs: which yet afford excellent Turffs for firing. There
is also Marle in many places; and in some, Trees are found under Ground, which
have lain there many Ages. This County is a Palatinate, and has many Royal
Privileges belonging to it. In the time of Henry of Bullingbroke, afterward
King of England, (the fourth of that name, and first of Lancaster) the half of
the Lands of Bohun Earl of Hereford, Essex, and Northampton, being added to
what before belonged to the Honor of this County, (which was then a Dukedom,)
it became the richest Patrimony that was in the hand of any one Subject in
Christendom: and in that Prince's Person it was annexed to the Crown of
England, and never since granted to any Subject whatsoever.

Lancaster, Alione, Mediolanum, Lancastria. The Town, which gives name to this
County, stands on the South Bank of the River Lunne, or Lone, (from which it is
supposed to be denominated five Miles from the Irish Seas, and toward the
Northern Bounds of the County. It seems to Mr. Cambden to be the Longovicum of
the Romans, which was one of their Military Stations. Not overmuch peopled, and
consequently not extraordinarily rich. It has a small, but fair and strong
Castle, built on a Hill near the River; and one large fair Parish Church, with
a S one Bridge of five Arches over the River Lon. This Town in 1322. was burnt
by the Scots, in an inroad they made into England: and although it is thereby
removed into a better Situation, yet it may be presumed to be the less at this
day for that Calamity. Of the House of Lancaster abovementioned, Henry the
Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh, inherited the Crown of England. The last of
which, marrying Elizabeth Daughter and Heiress to Edward IV. of the House of
York, united those two Houses of York and Lancaster, whose competition for the
Crown, under the names of the Red and the White Roses, had caused the effusion
of more English Blood, than was spent in the Conquest of France. Lancaster
stands in the Hundred of Loynsdale, and returns to the Parliament two
Burgesses. Long. 20. 48. Lat. 54. 05.

Lanceston or Launceston, the County Town of Cornwall, in the Hundred of East,
upon the banks of the little River Kensey, not far from its fall into the
Tamer: Well inhabited, marketed, and traded. It returns to the House of Commons
two Burgesses.

Lanciano, or Lansano, Anxanum, the capital City of the hither Abruzzo, in the
Kingdom of Naples; and an Archbishop's See, built five Miles from the
Adriatic; two from the River Saras, (now il Sangro,) about eighty from Naples
to the North, and a little more from Ancona to the South. This City was raised
to the Dignity of an Archbishopric in 1562, and built, as is supposed, upon
the Ruins of the ancient Anxanum. Long. 38. 55. Lat. 42. 27.

Landaff, Landava, Landuvia, a small City and Bishops See in Glamorganshire in
Wales: seated on the North side of the River Taff. over which it has a Bridge;
about three Miles from the Irish Sea to the North. The Cathedral and Bishopric
hereof was founded by S. Germanus and Lupus (two Holy French Bishops, who came
twice into Britain to extinguish the Pelagian Heresy) about the Year 522. They
preferred Dubricius a holy Man, to this newfounded See; to whom Meuricke, a
British Lord, freely gave all the Land that lies between the Taff and Ele^. But
this See has since met with others of a contrary temper, who have reduced it to
that Poverty, that it is scarce able to maintain its Bishop. The present Dr.
William Beaw is the LXXVI Bishop, consecrated in 1679. June 22. Many Synodal
Constitutions, we find in the Councils, were made and published by the Bishops
of this See in ancient times.

Landaw, Landavia, a City of Germany, in the Lower Alsatia; in the Territory of
Wasgow, upon the River Queich; in the Confines of the Palatinate of the Rhine;
four Leagues from Spire to the West. Once an Imperial and Free City; but by the
Treaty of Munster, yielded to the French, who still have it.

L'andramiti, Adramytium, a City of Phrygia, in the Lesser Asia; which is a
Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Ephesus; called by the Europeans
Andromiti; by the Turks Endroinit; in which word there is a further account of
it.

Landrecy, Landrecium, a City in Hainault; small, but well fortified. It is
seated at the Fountain of the River Sambre [ Sabis], six Leagues from
Valenciennes to the North-East, and two from the Borders of Picardy to the
North. This has been made at once famous and miserable, by the frequent Sieges
it has suffered of late. But by the Pyrenean Treaty it was put into the hands
of the French. The Emperor Charles V. besieged it in 1542. for six months, with
fifty thousand Men, and retired from it at last without success.

The Lands End, Antivestaeum, Bolerium, Ocrinum, the most Western Cape or
Promontory of England; in the County of Cornwall.

Landshut, Landshutum, a City of Germany, in the Lower Bavaria, in the
Marquisate of Brandenburg, upon the River Warta; twenty Miles from Frisingen to
the East, and thirty from Ratisbon to the South. It is well fortified, and has
a Castle seated on or near a Hill.

Landskroon, Stephanopolis, Corona, a small City, but very strongly fortified,
belonging to the Crown of Sweden; seated in the Province of Scania, upon the
North side of the Sound, or entrance into the Baltic Sea. It belonged to the
Danes till 1658. when by Treaty it was yielded to the Swedes. It stands
eighteen German Miles from Koppenhagen to the North-East, and a little more
from Malmoe to the North. Built by Erick the Pomeranean King of Denmark, in
1413. before which time it was called Sundre Soeby. Near this place Christian
V. King of Denmark, received a great defeat from Charles X. King of Sweden,
July 24. 1677. The Danes took it from the Swedes in 1676, and restored it to
them again in 1679.

Landsperg, Lansperga, a Town in Germany, in the New Marquisate of Brandenburg,
upon the River Water; six Miles from Custrin to the East, and thirteen from
Stetin to the South, in the Confines of Poland. Often taken and retaken in the
Swedish War.

Landsperk, a Town in Germany, in the Dukedom of Bavaria; built on a Hill, by
the River Leeh [ Licus] which parts Schwaben from Bavaria; and falls a little
beneath Auspurg into the Danube: above which last place this Town stands five
German Miles to the South.

Landspurg, Segestica, a City of Sclavonia, the same with Zigea.

Landt van Endracht, a part of the Southern Continent; which was accidentally
discovered by the Hollanders, in a Voyage to the Molucho Islands, in 1618.
called also Concordiae Regio.

Land van Pieter Nuitz, another part of the same Continent, found in 1625. by a
Dutchman: It is a great Country, of a vast extent from North to South; and is a
part of New Holland: but only viewed by the Dutch as yet.

Langhac, Langh^acum, a small City in Auvergne, seated in a Plain; surrounded
almost on all sides by Mountains, near the River Allier, over which it has a
Bridge: three Leagues from Fleury to the East, and fifteen from Clermont to the
South.

Langhe, Langa, a small Province in Italy, on the South of Piedmont, and the
Dukedom of Montferrat; between the Apennine, and the Rivers of Tanaro, Vrba,
and Stura: extending also to the Confines of the State of Genoua: the City of
Alba is the Capital of it. This is a fruitful and well peopled Territory.

Lang-landt, an Island belonging to Denmark in the Baltic Sea; between the
Isles of Fionia, Zeland, and Haland; seven German Miles in length, and two in
breadth: it has sixteen Villages, and a strong Castle; and from its form is
called the Long-Land.

Langley Abbey, a Town in Hartfordshire, in the Hundred of Cashio, not far from
Watford. Remarkable for being the Birthplace of Pope Adrian IV. who was
sometime surnamed Breakspear.

Lango, Cos, Coos, an Island in the Archipelago, called Stinco by the Greeks,
and Stanco by the Sailors; so that this name begins to prevail. It lies not
above twenty Miles from the Shoars of Asia; of a great length, and about
seventy Miles in Circuit: the principal Town in it is Lango, which is a
Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Rhodes. This Island was the native place
of Apelles, the Painter; and Hippocrates the great and most ancient Physcian.
It was under the Knights of S. John of Jerusalem, now of Malta; but conquered
by the Turks from them, under whom it now is. Our Sandys who saw it, says, it
is a delicate Country to behold, lying for the most part level, only toward
the East it is not unprofitably Mountainous; from whence fall many Springs,
which water the Plains below, and make them extraordinarily fruitful; where
grow those Wines valued in all times, Cypress Trees, and Turpentine, with
diverse other Plants, delightful as well as profitable. In ancient times it was
much regarded on the account of a Temple of Aesculapius, to whom this Island
was consecrated: in which those who recovered out of any Disease, Registered
their Cures, and the Medicines by which they recovered; which Hippocrates
abridged, and recommended to Posterity.

Langport, a Market Town in Somersetshire, in the Hundred of Pitney, upon a
Hill, near the River Parret, in a Moorish Country.

Langres, Andromatunum, Lingones, Andromadunum Lingonum, an ancient, great,
strong and rich City of France; in the Province of Champagne, near the
Fountains of the Marne, (one of the principal Rivers of France) six Miles from
the Borders of the Dukedom of Burgundy, twenty two from Troyes to the
South-East, sixteen from Dijon to the North, and thirty from Monthelyard to the
West. This is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Lions: the Bishop is
always one of the twelve Peers of France, and a Duke. Near this City
Constantine the Great twice overcame the Germans; in one of which Battles, that
Prince slew 60000 of them. The Vandals, in the beginning of the fourth Century,
committed great spoils here. Within the Diocese, there are six hundred Parishes
contained; and the Territory of Langres, giving source to five or six Rivers,
is thought to stand the highest of any in the Kingdom. Diverse French Synods
have been assembled at it.

Lang See, Verbanus Lacus, a Lake in the Duchy of Milan, called by the Italians
il Lago Magiore; and by the Germans Langsee. It is extended from North to South
36 Italian Miles, in breadth five. It lies thirty six Miles from Milan to the
North-West, and twenty five from Como to the West; and is one of the most
considerable Lakes in Italy.

Langis, Aturus. See Dour.

Languedoc, Volcae, Septumani, Occitania, a Province in France, of very large
bounds and extent. It is the Western part of that which the Romans called
Gallia Narbonensis; afterward it was called Gallia Gothica, and then the
Earldom of Tolouse. Bounded on the East by the Rhosne, (which divides it from
Dauphine, and Provence;) on the South by the County of Rousillon, and the
Mediterranean Sea; on the West it is separated from Gascogne, by the Garonne;
and on the North it has Quercy, Rovergne, Auvergne, and le Forez. There are in
this Province twenty two Dioceses: the principal City in it is Tolouse, which
is the Seat of the Parliament of this Generality. This is also one of the most
Populous, Rich, Fruitful, and Pleasant Provinces in France. Divided into the
Upper and Lower Languedoc, to the East and West; and watered by the Rivers
Rhosne, Eraut, Vistre, Tarn, etc. The Goths established a Kingdom here in the
fifth Century, (from whom some derive its name, as Languedoc, quasi Landt-Goth)
making Tolouse the Capital of the same; which they afterward extended as far
as to the River Loyre. In 778. Charles the Great granted this Province to the
Earls of Tolouse: from whom in 1361. K. John finally taking it, united it to
the Crown of France.

Lauschet, a City of Poland. See Lencicia.

Lantaine, Lantana, a River in the Earldom of Burgundy, which falls into the
Saone; between Falcougney, and Conflans: upon it stands Luxevil, which is about
six Leagues from Langres to the East.

Lantriguet. See Treguier.

Lanzano. See Lanciano.

Lanzerote, or Lanzarotta, Pluitalia, one of the Azores, or Canary Islands,
which lies in Long. 4. Lat. 27. 40.

The Kingdom of Lao, or Laos, in the East Indies, is bounded by the Kingdoms of
Tunquin to the East, Cambaia to the South, Siam and Pegu to the West, and Ava
to the North. Of great strength against Invasion, from the Mountains
surrounding it. Fruitful, temperate, and very healthful; under a King
heretofore tributary to China, but now absolute, who receives the Tributes of
diverse petty Kings as their Sovereign. It is divided into seven great
Provinces, governed by Viceroys; and watered by the Mother of Rivers (as they
call it) the River Lao, which springing from about the high Mountains of the
Province of Junnan upon the Frontiers of China, divides into two great Rivers
some Leagues from Lao; whereof one passes West by Pegu to the Gulf of Bengale,
the other expands it self in diverse Branches throughout all Lao, cutting the
same in two from North to South. The Capital City is Langione in 18 degrees of Lat.
The King of Tonquin attempted not long ago to unite this Kingdom with his own,
but not with success. It has been a Kingdom since the year 600; before which it
was a sort of a Republic; and before that, a Member of the Kingdom of China.

Laodicea See Eskihisar, Laudichia, and Lyche.

Laon, Laudunum, Lugdunum Clavatum, a City in Picardy in France, which is
commonly pronounced Lan. It is great and very well fortified; and a Bishop's
See, under the Archbishop of Rheims. Baudrand places it in the Isle of France,
on a high Hill, but in the borders of Picardy; of which (he says) it was once
a part; ten Miles from Rheims to the North-West, and twenty eight from Paris to
the North-East. The Bishop is always one of the twelve Peers of France, and a
Duke. The Diocese belonging to this City, is called Laonnois, or Lannois. It is
bounded on the North with Tierache, a part of Picardy; on the East by
Champagne, and on the South and West with Soissonne: it takes this name from
the principal City. Some French Synods have been assembled here.

Lapord, Lapurd, Labord, more commonly called Bayonne. See Bayonne.

Lapathios, Lapithus, a City at the North end of the Isle of Cyprus, which is
yet a Bishop's See, and retains the Greek Rites. It is very ancient, and called
Lapethos by Pliny, and Lapatho by Strabo.

Lapithae, an ancient People of Thessalia, dwelling in the Country about
Larissa, and the Mountain Olympus. Ovid styles them Sylvestres. Virgil ascribes
to them the Invention of Bridles.

Lapland, Lapponia, Lappia, called by the Inhabitants Lapmarck; by the Swedes,
Sabmienladti; by the Germans, Laplandt; by the Moscovites, Loppi, and by the
French, Laponie. It is the most Northern part of Scandinavia, first mentioned
by Saxo Grammaticus, about the year of Christ 1190. Bounded on the North with
the Frozen Sea, or the North Ocean; on the West with the Kingdom of Norway; on
the South with Bothnia and Finia, (two Provinces of Sweden) and on the East by
the White Sea. It was heretofore divided into three Kingdoms; and is now at
this day divided between three Princes, the Emperor of Moscovy, the King of
Sweden, and the King of Denmark, of which the King of Sweden has the greatest
share. Johannes Schefferus lately put out a very exact Account of these
Countries: toward the North and East it is extremely Mountainous and barren;
but the South is more level, and well watered with Rivers and Lakes. There have
been, not long since, found in it, Mines of Brass, Iron, Silver and Lead,
besides diverse sorts of precious Stones. As this is one of the Hyberborean
People, who are buried the greatest part of the year in Snow and Darkness; so
they are extremely Rude, Ignorant, Poor, and Barbarous: so fearful, that they
will start and be in a fright at the noise of a Leaf: infamous for Witchcraft,
and Conjurations; yet Christians in Profession; and so revengeful that they
will throw themselves sometimes into a River, to perish willingly with one they
hate in their Arms, if they can but so destroy him. The more Northern are the
most barbarous.

Lar, Laria, a great and magnificent City in that Province, of the Kingdom of
Persia, which gives name to a Kingdom: seated in the Confines of Caramania,
upon the River Tisindon; a hundred and seventy Miles from Ormus to the
North-East: but in the later Maps it is placed only forty German Miles from
Ormus, and on the West side of the River. Monsieur Thevenot gives a large
Account of this Town in the second part of his Travels, cap 4. to whom I refer
the Reader. It lies Long. 93. 40. Lat. 27. 40. Mr. Herbert says, it consisted
of about two thousand Houses, and had had five; but lost three thousand in an
Earthquake. It is, as he says, famous for nothing but its Castle; built at the
Northend, on an aspiring Mountain, and stored with the Cannon brought from
Ormus. The Kingdom of Lar took its name from the last mentioned City; lying
near Ormus, and the entrance of the Persian Gulf. Schah Abbas, King of Persia,
annexed this to the rest of his Dominions in the end of the last Century; viz.
in 1596. by a Conquest of the Guebres; who were before Masters of it, and were
Governed by a Prince of their own, styled King of Lar; the last of which was
slain by the Persians, with all his Progeny, to secure this barren and poor
Kingdom to the King of Persia. The Water of this Kingdom is extreme bad and
unhealthful, as both Herbert and Thevenot agree: the Soil barren and sandy: and
they both say also, that in this Kingdom there are a vast number of Jews. But
Mr. Herbert says, That there is neither River nor Rivolet near the City of
Lar, by a hundred Miles; and Thevenot, they had nothing but Cistern-Water to
drink, which was subject to Corruption; which seems to confirm Mr. Herbert's
Report. See Herbert, page 52. Thevenot, Part. 2. page 131. Ptolemy mentions an
Arabian River, Lar; Now called Om. See Om.

Larache, L'Haris, or Arays, Lixa, a Town in the Kingdom of Fez in Africa, in
the Province of Asgar, at the mouth of a River of its own name, (called by
Castaldus, Lusso; by the Italians, Fieume di Larach; in Silius Italicus, Lixus)
toward the Atlantic Ocean, between Cape Spartel and Mamera: taken from the
Spaniards, by the Moors in November 1689. after a Siege of three months,
mutually asserted and resisted with extraordinary Bravery.

Larad, or Lara, a Town in Old Castile in Spain, upon the River Arlanza, at the
foot of the Mountains: remakable in the Spanish History, for giving name to the
Family de Lara, which once had seven Sons all Knighted in a day.

Laranda, a City of Cappadocia, called by the same name it now has by Ptolemy
and Strabo. It is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Iconium; but very
small, and ill peopled; and stands fifty Miles from it, toward the Borders of
Cilicia, and Mount Taurus Eastward.

Laredo, Laredum, a small City, or Seaport Town, in the Kingdom of Spain, in
the Province of Biscay; which his a large and a safe Harbor, and is the
principal of the four Seaports: seven Miles from S. Andreo to the North, and
twelve from Bilbao to the South-West. Near this place the Archbishop of
Bourdeaux defeated the Spanish Fleet in 1639.

Larghier, Tarras, a City in the Island of Sardinia.

Larignum, a famous old Castle near the Alps, built of the Wood Larix or
Larchtree, in the times of Julius Caesar, who besieged and took it. Yet
Vitruvius reports, that when Caesar set fire to it, it resisted the Flames.

Larina, Larinum, a City of the Kingdom of Naples, in the Capitanata, which is
a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Benevento; but little and ill peopled,
and in the possession (as to the Revenue) of the Prince of Cassal. It lies in
the Confines of the County of Molise, near the River Bifernum, forty Miles from
Benevento to the North, and four from Tremoli on the Adriatic Sea, to the
South.

Laris, an ancient City of Idumea, in Palestine; between the latter and Egypt,
upon the Shoars of the Mediterranean Sea; in which, William, Archbishop of Tire
reports, Baldwin I. King of Jerusalem died in 1118.

Laris, Larissa, a City of Syria, mentioned by Strabo; which is a Bishop's See,
under the Archbishop of Apamia, (now Haman,) and stands between it and
Epiphania; now inhabited by very few People, being in the hands of the Turks.

Larissa, the principal City of Thessalia, a Province of Macedonia, and the
Country of Achilles; seated upon the River Peneo; twenty five Miles from the
Bay of Thessalonica to the West, twenty five from Pharsalus to the South, and
two hundred from Constantinople to the South-West. It is now an Archbishop's
See, and one of the most flourishing Cities in Greece, by reason the late Grand
Seignior being disgusted with Constantinople, almost twenty years together kept
his Court here. This City is thus described by the learned Dr. Edward Brown.
The City of Larissa is pleasantly seated on a rising Ground; in the upper part
whereof stands the Grand Seignior's Palace, upon the North the famous Mountain
of Olympus, and on the South a plain Country; inhabited by Christians, Turks
and Jews. There is a handsome Stone Bridge over the River, consisting of nine
Arches. Extraordinary populous, by reason the Sultan was then there; yet kept
in great quiet by the Officers. I might from him transcribe some Historical
Passages concerning this place; but I shall rather remit the Reader to his
pleasant Description for further satisfaction. Achilles was surnamed Larissaeus
from this City. It is otherwise called Larsa. The Ancients mention more places,
less important, of this name; and also a River Larissus, in the Peloponnesus.

Larius Lacus, the same with the Lake of Coma. See Coma.

Larozo, Ladicus, a Spur of the Pyrenean Hills in the Kingdom of Leon; in the
Road which leads from Leon to Compostella.

Larone, Laros, a small River in S. Peter's Patrimony; which flows out of the
Lake of Bracciano, and falls into the Tyrrhenian Sea; about fifteen Miles from
Rome to the North West.

Larta, one of the Names of Epirus, a Region of Greece.

Lartacho, Rhyndacus, Lycus, a River of Mysia in the Lesser Asia; which rises
out of the Lake of Artynia, at the foot of Mount Olympus; and fails into the
Propontis; called by the Turks, Vlabat.

Lascaris, a Seigniory near Nice in Provence, upon the Confines of France and
Italy, giving name to an honorable Family.

Lassan-Zee, Lassanensis Lacus, a Lake in the hither Pomerania, so called from
a Town upon it. This Lake is made by the Western Branch of the River Oder, (
Der Pfin,) a little above Wolgast, and is extended to the length of some Miles
in the Isle of Vsedom; then falls by the Oder into the Baltic Sea, over
against the Isle of Ruden, in the Bay of Rugen.

Latium. The far greatest part of this ancient Region of Italy is now contained
in the Campagna di Roma. At the first it extended only from the Tyber to the
Premontorium Circaeum, and its most ancient Inhabitants were called Aborigines.
But when the Hernici, the Aequi, the Volsci, and the Ausones united under one
common Name of Latini, then the bounds of Latium reached as far as to the River
Liris. For 543 years, we have a Chronological Succession of the Kings of the
Latins, till the year of the World 3299 or 3330, that Romulus founded Rome.

Latomiae, a Cavern, cut out of a Rock, by the Tyrant Dionysius, near Syracusa,
in the Island of Sicity, about two hundred feet broad and one Stadium long, to
serve for a Prison. Cicero reproaches Verres with enclosing diverse Roman
Citizens therein. It is now called le Togliate.

Lavagna, Lavania, L^bonia, a small River and Town in the State of Genoua, upon
the Mediterranean Sea; between Chiavari to the West, and Sestri di Levante to
the East. The Counts di Flisci are of this place.

Laval, or Laval Guion, Vallis Guidonis, a Town in the Province of Maine, upon
the River la Main, in France, in the Diocese of Man's; giving Name to an
honorable Family, and famous for making of Silks. In 1242. a Council was held
here.

Lavanmynd, Lavemunde or Lavenmind, Ostium Lavanti, Lavanmunda, a City in
Germany, with a Castle belonging to it in the Lower Carinthia, and an Episcopal
See under the Archbishop of Saltzbourgh, upon the River Lavant; in the Valley
Der Lavanthal, where it falls into the Drove: about two Miles from S. Andre to
the South, twelve German Miles from Pettaw to the West: Lavanmynd signifies
Lavant's Mouth.

Lavaur, Vaurum, or Vaurium, a small City in Languedoc in France; by Pope John
XX. in 1317. made a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Tolouse, out of which
Diocese it was taken. It stands upon the River Agout, in the Upper Languedoc,
in the Confines of the Albigeois; five Leagues from Tolouse to the East, and
six from Castres to the West. In this Diocese are contained sixty nine
Parishes. There have been two French Synods assembled at Lavaur; the first in
1213. against Peter K of Aragon for taking part with the Albigenses; the other
in 1368.

Laubach. See Labach.

Laubenburgh, Lawenburth, Coenoenum, a Town in the Lower Saxony, upon the River
Elb; eight German Miles from Hamburgh to the East; which is also the Capital of
a Dukedom of the same name. Written sometimes Lawemburgh. It is under the
Dominion of its own Duke, who is a Roman Catholic Prince; of the ancient
Family of the Dukes of Saxony. This Dukedom lies between the Dukedoms of
Lunenburgh, Mecklenburgh, and Holstein; the Counties of Ratzburgh, Frantzhagen,
Sassenhagen, with many other places toward the Elb, belonging to this Duke and
Dukedom.

Lauden, Lauda, a Town in Franconia in Germany, under the Bishop of Wurtsburgh;
from which it stands five German Miles to the West; in the borders of the
Bishopric of Mentz, upon the River Tauber.

Lauden, Laudonia. See Lothaine.

Laudichia, Laodicea, a City in the Lesser Asia. It stood in Galatia, in the
Consines of Lycaonia; but is now a small Village, called by the Turks, Ladik;
consolated by nothing but a Caravansera (or place for the Lodging of
Travelers,) and Baths of warm Waters, now wholly neglected. There is another
City in Asia, called by the same Turkish name; but Lyche, by the Inhabitants.
See Lyche.

Lavello, Labellum, Lavellum, a City in the Basilicate, in the Kingdom of
Naples; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bari; very small, but
it has marks of great antiquity. It stands in the limits of the Capitanata;
three Miles from the River Ofanto. The Bishop's Jurisdiction is no larger than
the Walls of the City.

Lavenham, a Market Town in the County of Sussex, in the hundred of Babergh,
upon the River Breton, and an Eminence; adorned with a spacious Church.

Lauffenburgh, a small German City upon the Rhine on a Rock, well fortified;
under the Dominion of the House of Austria; between Sohafhausen to the East,
and Basil to the West, five Miles from either. It was often taken by the French
and Swedes in the great War; but by the Treaty of Munster at last restored to
the Emperor. There is here a Bridge over the Rhine; and the Town stands on both
sides of the River.

Laugingen, or Lawgingen, Lavinga, a City in Schwaben in Germany, under the
Duke of Newburgh: it has been a Free and Imperial City, but is now exempted. It
stands upon the Danube, one Mile above Dilingen, and six beneath Vlm to the
East.

E. Lavington, a Market Town in Wiltshire, in the Hundred of Swanborn.

Lavinia, Lavigna, or Citta Lavinia, Lavinium, a City of Latium in Italy; built
by Aeneas, forty one years after the ruin of Troy; which is now a small Village
in Campagna di Roma; 18 Miles from Rome, 10 from the Tyrrhenian Sea, and 42
from Gajetta to the North-West. It is now under the Dominion of the Pope, but
inhabited by a very small number of People.

Lavino, Labinius, a small River in Bononia, about eight Miles from that City
to the West, toward Modena. It falls into the River Samogia; which a little
lower ends in the Reno; which falls into the Po, six Miles below Buondeno. Upon
the Banks of this River the Triumvirate between Octavianus, (afterward
Augustus) M. Antonius, and Lepidus, was agreed and signed.

Lauraguais, Lauriacus Ager, a District in Languedoc in France; which gives the
Title of a Count, and takes its name from a Castle. It lies between the River
Ariege, and Agout, within the Mountains: The capital Town of it is
Castelnaudari.

Lauriol, or Loriol, a considerable Town in Dauphine in France, near the River
Drome, which soon after falls into the Rhosne, betwixt Valence and Montelimar.
It was often taken and retaken by the Catholics and Huguenots in the Civil
Wars of France, in the last Age. Some suppose it to be the Aria of the
Ancients. Now fortified.

Lausanne, Lausonium, Lausanna, a City in Switzerland; the Capital of the
District of le Vault; belonging to the Canton of Bearn, ever since 1536.
whereas before it was an Imperial and Free City, subject to none but the
Empire. It is also a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Besanzon, or
Byzants, as the Germans call it; but the Town being possessed by none but
Heretics (as Baudrand says,) the Bishops have removed their Residence to
Friburgh since the year 1532. It stands six German Miles from Geneva to the
North-East, and a small distance from the Lake of Lemane to the North. This
Lake is sometimes from this City called the Lake of Lausanne. This City, since
it, fell under the Dominion of the Canton of Bearn, has been made an University.

Lausanitz. See Lusatia.

Lautree, a small Town in the Territory of Albigeois, in Languedoc in France
two Leagues from Castres, upon a sruitful Hill for Wine. The Castle it formerly
had is ruined. Yet it retains the honor of a Viscounty.

Lawenburgh. See Laubenburgh.

Lawenburg, Lawenburgum, a Town in Pomerania, near the Baltic Sea, under the
Duke of Brandenburgh; but a Fee of the Kingdom of Poland. It stands in the
Territory of Pomerel, upon the River Lobo; eight German Miles from Dantzick to
the West, two from the borders of Prussia, and three from the Baltic Sea. The
Poles call it Louwenborch.

Lauwers, Lavica, Laubacus, a small River in the Dutch Friesland, which parts
it from Groningen; and then falls into the German Ocean over against the Isle
of Monick Doge.

Laxia, Colchis. See Mengrelia.

Lazach, a City and Kingdom of Arabia Foelix, under the Turks.

Lazi, an ancient People of Sarmatia Europaea, dwelling heretofore upon the
Banks of the Palus Maeotis, or rather toward the Caspiae Portae, near the
Iberi. We read of their Conversion to the Christian Faith about the year 522,
when Zatus their King was baptized at Constantinople, the Emperon Justinus
standing his Sponsor.

Lazzara. See Granico.

Laberberg. See Jura.

Leaotung, a Province of the Kingdom of China, subject to the Tartars, since
the Year 1630. toward whom it lies.

Lea, a River of Hartfordshire, on the Banks whereof Hartford, Ware, Harfield,
and Hodsdon are all four situated. The same separates the County of Essex also
from Middlesex.

Lebuss, Lebusia, a small City, in the Marquisate of Brandenburg; which is a
Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Gnesna; one Mile from Frankfort on the
Oder to the North. This Bishopric was founded by Miecislaus, Duke of Poland,
in 965. Sold in 1260. to Otho, Marquess of Brandenburgh, by Boleslaus, Duke of
Silesia; and has ever since been in this Family. In 1555. this Bishopric with
its Bishop, embraced the Augustane Confession.

Lecca, Lecci, Lecce, Aletium, the principal Town in the Province of Otranto,
in the Kingdom of Naples; which is great, rich, and (next to Naples) the most
populous in that Kingdom. It is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of
Otranto; from which it stands 20 Miles to the South, and 7 from the Shoars of
the Adriatic. Called by the later Latin Writers Litium.

Leck, Lech, Licus, Lechus, Lycias, a River of Germany; which arises in the
County of Tirol, in the Confines of the Grisons; and flowing Northwards between
Bavaria and Schwaben, and passing through Ausburgh, falls into the Danube over
against Papenheim a little beneath Danawert. The Inhabitants of that of
Bavaria, which lay next this River about Ausburgh, are called by Strabo and
Pliny, Licatii; and at this day Lechrainers from this River.

Leck, Fossa Corbulonis, a Branch of the Rhine in Holland; which divides from
it at Wyke in Vtrecht; and running Westward in the North part of Holland,
beneath Rotterdam, falls into the Maes.

Lectoure, or Leictoure, Laictoure, and Letoure, Lactoracum, Lactorium,
Lectora, Civitas Lactoracium, a City in Gascony in France: which is the Capital
of the County of Armagnac, and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Aux. It is
seated on an Hill, and defended by a strong Castle, upon the River Gers; six
Miles from Aux, ten from Tolouse to the South-West, and three from Condom.

Ledbury, or Lidbury, a well built Market Town in Herefordshire, in the Hundred
of Radlow; standing in a rich Clay Ground, near the Malvern Hills, and much
inhabited by Clothiers.

Ledesina, Bletisa, a small Town in Leon in Spain, upon the River Tormes; six
Leagues from Salamanca to the North-East.

Ledung, Dur, a small River of Ireland, in the County of Kerry.

Leeberg, or Leerberg. See Jura.

Leeder, one of the Islands on the West of Scotland.

Leeds, a considerable Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the
Hundred of Skirack, upon the River Are: well inhabited by Clothiers. The Kings
of Northumberland had anciently a Palace Royal here.

Leek, a Market Town in Staffordshire, in the Hundred of Totmonslow.

Leerpoole, or Leverpoole, a considerable Seaport Town, upon the River Irwel,
in the South part of the County of Lancaster, toward the Borders of Cheshire;
three Miles from the Irish Sea. It is now one of the most thriving Ports; and
has a Trade equal to the best Town on the Western Shore, except Bristol: it
sends also two Burgesses to Parliament. The Pool is commanded by a Castle,
built by King John, on the South side; and on the West, upon the River, stands
a stately strong Tower. The Mores of Banck Hall at their proper Charge and
Industry have much improved and beautified this Town.

Leeuwarden, Leovardia, the Capital City of Friesland; which was made a Bishops
See by Pope Paul VI. It is great, well built, and strongly fortified; almost
two German Miles from the Sea to the South, and seven from Groningen to the
West.

Leffy, Liffee, Luffee, the noblest River of Ireland; upon which Dublin stands.
So far, (says Mr. Cambden) overpowered by the County of Dublin; that though
his Spring be but fifteen Miles from his Fall into the Sea, yet to accomplish
his Course, he is forced to fetch a very great compass: first running South
through S. Patrick's Fields eight Miles, then West five Miles, then North by
the County of Kildare ten Miles, North-East five; at last East by the Castle of
Knock, and the City of Dublin, into the Irish Sea, ten Miles. This River was
without doubt mentioned by Ptolemy; but by the negligence of Transcribers
omitted in its proper place; and Libnius put into the same Latitude on the
opposite side of Ireland, where there could be no such River. In 1687, toward
the beginning of December, there happened such an Inundation of this River by
Rains and Storm, that not only Men, Cattle, and Goods in great quantities were
carried away by its rapidity, but the Bridges were broken down, and Dublin so
filled with water, that Boats plied in the Streets: the like never known
before, either upon Record, or in the memory of Man.

Legnano, a strong Town in the Province of Veronois in Lombardy, in Italy,
under the Venetians. In Latin, Liviacum.

Leicestershire, Leicestria, one of the inland Counties of England; bounded on
the North by Nottingham, on the East by Lincoln and Rutland, on the South by
Northampton, and on the West by Warwickshire and Darby. It abounds in Corn,
Pease and Beans, but wants Wood; it has plenty of Coal, and excellent Pasture.
The Air is soft and healthful. Its shape is Circular; being about 196 Miles in
Circumference. Containing twelve Market Towns, and one hundred and ninety two
Parishes: in length from East to West about thirty Miles, in breadth twenty
five. Watered by the Rivers Stower and Wreak, together with many others of
lesser Courses.

Leicester, the principal Town of it, (which gives name to the whole,) lies in
the middle of the County on the East side of the Stoure, over which it has two
Bridges, in Long. 19. 22. Lat. 53. 04. Etheldred the Mercian, made it a
Bishops. See in 680. which continued not long. In 914. Edelfled, a Noble Saxon
Lady, rebuilt and strongly walled this Town. At the time of the Conquest it was
Great, Rich, and Populous, beautified with a Collegiate Church, an Abbey, and a
Castle, which time has ruined. In the Reign of Henry II. it was besieged,
taken, and dismantled upon the Rebellion of Robert Crouch its Earl. Richard
III. was buried obscurely here; and Cardinal Woolsey. That great, though not
good, Statesman, ( Robert Dudley) was by Queen Elizabeth Created Earl of
Leicester, in 1564. To him in 1618. succeeded by a new Creation, Robert Sidney;
Descended from a Sister of his. Philip, the present Earl, is the Grandchild of
the last Robert; and succeeded Robert his Father in 1677. It now contains three
Parish Churches, and several good Buildings, with the honor of returning two
Burgesses to the House of Commons.

Leighton Beaudesect, a large Market Town in Bedfordshire, in the Hundred of
Manshead, on the Borders of Buckinghamshire, upon a River running Northward
into the Ouse, over which it has a Bridge.

Leine, Linius, Lina, a River of the Dukedom of Saxony in Germany, watering
Gottingen, E^mbeck, etc. in the Dukedom of Brunswick, and passing near Hanover
and Newstadt to join the Aller. See Leyne.

Leinster, Lagenia, one of the four Provinces of Ireland; called by the
Inhabitants, Leighnigh; by the Welsh, Lein; by the English, Leinster; and in
old times Lagen: on the East it has the Irish Sea; on the West Connaught,
divided from it by the River Shannon; to the North the Territory of Louth; and
to the South the Province of Munster: the form of it is Triangular; its
Circumference being about two hundred and seventy Miles: the Air is clear and
gentle; the Earth fruitful both as to Grass and Corn: it affords plenty of
Butter, Cheese and Cattle; and being well watered with Rivers, as the Neure,
the Sewer, the Barow, etc. wants neither Fish nor Fowl: but it has not much
Wood. Dublin is the Capital of this Province, as well as of the Kingdom. This
Provine contains these Counties; Kilkenny, Caterlogh, Queens-County,
Kings-County, Kildare, East-Meath, West-Meath, Wexford and Dublin; to which
Wicklow, and Fernes, in Mr. Speed's time, were intended to be added. Some
believe this Province to have been the ancient Seat of the Caucenses, Blanii,
Menapii, and Brigantes mentioned by Ptolemy.

Leirge, See Lergue.

Leiria or Leria, an Episcopal City of the Province of Estremadura, in the
Kingdom of Portugal, upon a small River, one League from the Sea, below Tomar.
The Sea is a Suffragan to the Archbishop of Lisbon.

Leleges, an ancient People of Caria in the Lesser Asia: and others amongst the
Locrenses in Achaia, mentioned by Pliny, Strabo, and Virgil.

Lem, Lemuris, a River of Italy, in the States of Genoua; which rises out of
the Apennine, and waters Gavi, in the Borders of Montisferrat, and Milan;
then falls into the River Bormia, in the Dukedom of Milan; which falls into the
Tuanara, and ends in the River Po at Basignana; six Italian Miles East of
Giaroli. This River is also called Lim, and il Lemo.

The Lake of Lemane, Lemanus, a considerable Lake made by the River Rhosne;
between Switzerland to the North, and Savoy to the South. Called by those who
live near it, the Lake of Geneva; by the Germans, das Genfferzee; by the
Italians, illago di Genevra: extending from East to West about nine German
Miles; and about two over, where it is broadest: the Rhosne enters it at
Noville, and goes out at Geneva, in the most Western end of it. It is
surrounded with good Towns; the principal (next Geneva,) is Lausanne on the
North; by the name of which this Lake is sometime called.

Lemburgh, Luwow, Leopolis, a great and populous City of the Kingdom of Poland;
the Capital of Red Russia; which was made an Archbishops See, (instead of
Halitz, or Haliotz,) in 1361. by Pope Urban V. It stands amongst the Hills upon
the River Peltew, (which with the Bug, falls into the Vistula, a little above
Ploczko;) and is very strong: being walled and fortified with two Castles, one
within the City, the other without. It was built by Leo Duke of Russia, who
flourished about 1280. In 1648, belleged by Chieilneck General of the Cossacks,
without any success. In 1672. the Turks took it, and soon lost it; for in 1673.
Michael King of Poland died in it. This City stands fifteen Miles from
Premislia to the East, a little less from the Carpathian Hills to the North,
and about fifty from Warsaw to the South-East.

Lemgow, Lemgovia, a small City in the Circle of Westphalia, in the County of
Lip; which was once a Free Imperial City, but now exempt, and under the Count
of Lip. It stands upon the River Begh; five Miles from Minden to the North,
and Paderborne to the South; and nine from Lippestad to the North-East.

Lemington, a Market Town in the County of Southampton, and the Hundred of
Christ Church, by the Seaside. There is another Lemington, a Parish in
Warwickshire, in the Hundred of Knightlow: remarkable for two Springs, within
few Foot of each other, the one Fresh, the other Salt, yet at a great distance
from the Ocean, and of different Operations.

Lemnos, an Island in the Archipelago. See Staliment.

Lem^ta, a Town and Desert in Libya (now Zaara) in Africa.

Lencicia, or Lanscher, Lancicia, Lancicium, a City of Poland; the Capital of a
Palatinate, called by the Poles, Lenczyc, from this City, which they call
Lenczyckie. It lies in the Greater Poland, in a Marshy Ground, upon the River
Bsura; not above ten Miles from the River Warte, the same distance from Gnesna
to the East, and thirty from Warsaw to the West. There belongs to it a Castle
built on a Rock; and in 1656. this City suffered much by Fire. Diverse Polish
Councils have been Celebrated at it.

Lendrosia, one of the Islands on the West of Scotland.

Lenham, a Market Town in the County of Kent, in Aylesford Lath, at the Spring
of the River Stewer.

Lenox, Lenoxia, Levinia, a County in the North of Scotland, through which the
River and Lake of Lomond passes: on the East it has the County of Menteith,
on the South Cunningham, (cut off by Dunbriton Fyrth,) on the West Argile, and
on the North Albania. This County has the Honor of being a Dukedom; which Title
has been born by several of the Royal Line of Scotland. The principal Town in
it is Dunbritown.

Lens, Lentium, Lendum, Lenense Castrum, Nemetacum, a small Town in Artois,
upon the River Souchets; three Leagues from Arras to the North, and four from
Doway to the West. The French besieged this small place in 1647. but by the
loss of their General le Gasse, (slain by a shot, whilst he was plucking at a
Palisadoe) they were forced to leave it: near this place the French gave the
Spaniards a great overthrow in 1648. and after possessed themselves of it; to
whom the Pyrenaean Treaty confirmed it in 1659. The Town has been fortified;
but was some years since slighted and dismantled.

Lentini, Leontina, a very ancient City in the Isle of Sicily, in the Valley of
Netina on the Eastern Shore. Heretofore a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Syracuse; whilst Syracuse was the Metropolis of the Island under the Greek
Emperors. It is now pretty considerable and populous, but very confusedly
built. A place of greater Antiquity than Syracuse, and perhaps than any other
City now in the Island. It stands five Miles from the Sea to the West, and ten
from Catania to the South-West.

Lenza, Nicia, a River of Italy; which springing from the Apennine, runs
North; and parts the Dukedom of Parma from that of Modena; then falls into
the Po at Barsello, eight Miles from Parma to the North.

Leominster, or Lemster, a Market and Borough Town in Herefordshire, in the
Hundred of Wolphey, upon the River Lug: of chief Note for fine Wheat, Flower,
and Wool.

Leon, Legio Germanica, Sublanco, a City of Spain in the Astures; built in the
Reign of Nerva the Emperor. It is now called by the Inhabitants Leon, or Leone:
a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Compostella, (so far exempted, that he
acknowledges no Metropolitan but the Pope;) and the Capital of the Kingdom of
Leon, ever since 658. It stands at the bottom of an Hill, by the Fountains of
the River Esla; very great, but not much peopled: twelve Miles from the Ocean
to the South, and twenty one from Valedolid to the North-West. It was Recovered
from the Moors in 722. and is adorned with one of the most beautiful Cathedrals
in Spain. There is another City in New Spain in America, called Leon by the
Spaniards, and Nagarando by the Natives, which being the Capital of Nicaragua,
(the Province in which it stands,) is sometimes called Leon de Nicaragua. This
is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Mexico: by a Lake of the same name;
about 12 Leagues from the Shoars of the Pacifick Ocean, and 18 from New Granada
to the East.

The Kingdom of Leon and Oviedo, Legionense Regnum, has on the East the County
of Biscay; on the North the main Cantabrian Ocean, on the South Castile, and on
the West Gallicia. It has its name from Leon and Oviedo, the two chief Cities
in it. This is the most ancient Kingdom in Spain; and began about 717. being
more anciently called Asturia, from the Astures, an old People, who possessed
it. It is mountainous, and full of Woods, divided in two by the River Duero;
about fifty five Leagues long from North to South, and forty broad. Augustus
Caesar was the first Roman that conquered it. The Goths, after five hundred
years free possession of it, outed the Romans; and after four hundred more, the
Saracens did as much for the Goths: but they (the Saracens) did not long enjoy
it; this being the first Kingdom the Christians recovered from them, under the
Command of Pelagius, a young Prince of this Nation, about 717. It continued a
separate Kingdom, under twenty nine Princes; till in 1228. Ferdin. III. annexed
it to Castile (he being married to Berenguela, second Sister of Henry King of
Castile;) tho in prejudice of Blanch, the eldest Sister, (married to Lewis
VIII. King of France:) which was afterward in 1267. set right by a Treaty, when
Lewis IX. in consideration of a Marriage surrendered all his Right and Title,
(as Son of the said Blanch,) to Alphonsus V. King of Leon and Castile. Peter de
la Marca, Archbishop of Paris, in his History of Bearn, says, this Kingdom did
not begin so early as the Spaniards pretend; and endeavors to prove it. But
this is no place for Controversies.

Leon, Leondoul, Leona, a City in Britagne in France, on the North Shore of
that Province; thirty three Leagues from Rennes to the West, ten from Treguier,
and eleven from Breast to the North. This is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop
of Toures: one S. Paul being its most ancient Bishop, about the year 600, the
City is often called S. Paul de Leon, from him: it is the Capital of the
Territory of Leonnois, well fortified, and has also a Castle, and a safe
Harbor upon the British Sea. Heretofore the Seat of the Dukes of Britagne; and
the Country of the ancient Osismi or Osismii mentioned by Caesar: whence its
Latin Name, besides Leona and Leonum, is Civitas Osismorum. There is mention
made of another Leon in Cappadocia in the Lesser Asia, otherwise called Vatiza,
and thought to be the Polemenium of the Ancients.

S. Leonard, a Town in Limosin in France; and another in Nivergne.

Lepanto, Naupactus, Aetolia, a Seaport in Achaia, (now Livadia,) called by
the Turks, Enebchti; is seated in that part of Greece, which the Ancients
called Aetolia, twelve Miles from Patras: the Italians gave it the name of
Lepanto: it is seated not far from the entrance of the Western Bay of Corinth,
heretofore so called; but now from this place the Gulf of Lepanto. The City is
built on the South side of a towering Mountain, formed like a Cone; on the top
of which is a strong Castle, surrounded with four strong Walls, set at some
distance one above another; between which the Inhabitants have their Houses.
The Port is very handsome and beautiful; and may be secured by a Chain, the
Mouth of it is so straight; it will hold but a few Ships, and those cannot go
out and in at any time, for want of Water. It is seated in a pleasant Country,
filled with delightful Gardens, yielding some of the best Wine in Greece; and
has on the East side a a fine River, which serves their Mills, then their
Gardens, and afterward all the City and Seamen. The Turks have six or seven
Mosques in it, the Greeks two Churches, and the Jews three Synagogues. In 1408.
it was under the Emperor of Greece; but being too remote (as things then stood)
for him to secure it, Emanuel the Emperor, assigned it to the Venetians; who
took care to fortify it, as it is now. In 1475. Mahomet the Great, the same
that took Constantinople, having gained Corinth, besieged it with an Army of
thirty thousand Men; and after four Months spent before it, was forced to
retire with with shame and loss. The Turks having found by this costly
experiment the strength of this important place, in 1499. made use of another
method: besides a victorious Army, and a potent Fleet, to terrify them, he
employed Bribes; corrupted Hi^ronimo Tropo, the Venetian Governor; and by a
Treachery altogether unworthy of Bajazet II. (who was here in person,)
possessed himself of it. In 1571. October. 7. in the Gulf of Lepanto, from five
a Clock in the morning till night, was fought the most bloody Sea Battle
betwixt the Christian and the Ottoman Fleets, that ever besel the Turks since
the beginning of their Empire. There, in the same Gulf, where the Emperor
Augustus overthrew Marc Anthony. The Christians lost eight thousand Men. Of the
Turks, five thousand were taken prisoners, and about thirty thousand slain,
with Hali Bassaw their Admiral. Of the Turkish Galleys, one hundred and thirty
were taken, and above ninety others sunk, burnt, and destroyed. The
Generalissimo on the Christians side was Don John of Austria, a Natural Brother
to Philip II. King of Spain, accompanied with the Flower of the Italian
Nobility. At the same time, nigh twenty thousand Christian Slaves recovered
their Liberty. In 1687. the Venetians having in the three preceding years
almost beat the Turks out of the rest of the Morea, and resolved to begin this
Campaign with the Siege of Patras; their General Morosini, Landed in the Morea
near Patras on July 22. notwithstanding all the opposition of the Serasquier:
the 24. he fought, and defeated the Serasquier: and having thereupon taken in
Patras, and the Dardanell Castle on that side, (so called in imitation of those
of the Hellespont) he crossed to the other to Lepanto; and found the Turks
making all the haste they could to empty the Place for him; whereupon he entered
and took Possession of it for that Republic, without striking one blow. Thus
was this important Place lost, as basely as it was gained; and the Cowardice of
this Age has revenged the Treachery of the former. It had in it one hundred and
twenty Brass Canon: And it is an Archiepiscopal City, tho the Archbishop has
used to reside at Larta. The Gulf of Lepanto is formed by the shooting forth
of two Promontories into the Ionian Sea, from the Morea and Achaia; called Capo
Antirio and Capo Rione. The first of which has the Castle of Patras, the other
the Castle of Romelia for its defense.

Leprus, Pariedrus, a huge Mountain of a vast height, out of which Araxes, and
Euphrates spring.

Lera, Igmanus, Sigmanus, a River of Aquitain in France, more commonly called
La Leyre; which falls into the small Bay of Buch, eight Miles from Bourdeaux to
the South-West, and the same distance from the Mouth of the Guaronne to the
South.

Leresse. See the Nieper.

Lergue, Larga, a River in Gallia Narbonensis. Hoffman.

Lericee, a small Town upon the Coasts of the Republic of Genoua in Italy, at
the Foot of the Rocks, looking to the Sea. It is taken to be the Portus Erycis
of Ptolemy and Antoninus. A frequented place for Embarkations; four or five
Miles from Sarzana, and East of Sestri de Levante. There is a Gulf by it,
separated by a Neck of Land from the Gulf of Spezza or Speccia.

Lerida, Ilerda, a City of Catalonia in Spain, which in the Roman times was the
Capital of that part of Spain, they called Tarraconensis. It is now called
Leyda by the Inhabitants; and Lerida by the Spaniards: a strong place, built
upon a rising ground, but declining to the River Segre. Taken from the Moors in
1143. and made a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tarragona. In 1300. here
was an University opened, at which Pope Calixtus III. took his Degree of Doctor
of the Laws: yet it never acquired any great Fame or Repute: of later times it
has suffered much from the French, who have made many Attempts upon it. But in
1646. in one of their Attacks they were beaten off, and lost all their Cannon
here. This City lies twenty four Spanish Miles from Saragoza to the East; seven
from the Ebro North, and twenty nine from Barcelona to the West. Julius Caesar
overcame Afranius and Petreius, Pompey's Friends, here. In the year 514. under
the Reign of Theodorick King of the Ostrogoths, a Council was celebrated at the
same place. Long. 21. 31. Lat. 42. 20.

Les, Lerines, two Islands of the Mediterranean Sea, upon the Coast of
Provence, at a small distance from each other. Now called severally, S. Honor
de Lerin, and Margarita. See those Words. In Ptolemy and Strabo, their Names
are Planasia and Lero. In Pliny and Antoninus, Lero and Lerina. Hither, say
Tacitus and Suetonius, the Emperor Augustus banished Agrippa. They are
commended for Temperature and Fertility. The Saracens of Fraxinetum in the
seventh Century much infested them. In 1635. the Spaniards surprised, but were
obliged to quit them the year after. To which add, that the Monastery of S.
Honor, founded in 375, by Honorius, Archbishop of Arles, has been reckoned to
produce twelve Archbishops, twelve Bishops, ten Abbats, four Monks, all
Confessors; and one hundred and five Martyrs. It belongs to the Order of S.
Benedict.

Lerma, a small Town in Old Castile, upon the River Arlanzon; six Leagues from
Occa to the South, and twelve from Pincia to the East; which is born, by the
Title of a Dukedom, by one of the greatest Families in Spain. Some write it
Larema.

Leros, an Island in the Archipelago, adorned with an Episcopal City of the
same Name, and driving a considerable Trade with Aloes.

Lers, Lertius, is the Name of two Rivers in Languedoc in France: the great
Lers rises in the higher Languedoc, and waters Mirepoix; then falls into the
Ariege, and with it soon after into the Garonne. 2. The little Leers arises in
the same Province; and falls into the Garonne a little beneath Tolose.

Les, or Lez, Telis, Ledus, a River which arises in Languedoc, three Leagues
above Montpellier; and a little beneath the Castle of Latte, about four Miles
from the Mediterranean Sea, falls into the Fens of Magulone.

Lesdos. See Metelin.

Lescar, Lascura, Beneharnum, Benarnensium Vrbs, Bearnensium Civitas, Bernanus,
a City in the Principality of Bearn, upon the River Le Gave de Pau; one League
from Pau to the East, seventeen from Baionne, and five from Olerone to the
East. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Aux; and was built in the
year 1000. upon the Ruins of the City Bearn, which was ruined by the Normans in
845. The Huguenots in 1569. much endamaged this City. In the Cathedral, the
Kings of Navarre lie entombed: but their Tombs also were defaced in the Civil
Wars of France.

Lesche, Laetia, a small River in the Diocese of Liege, which falls into the
Maes a little above Dinant.

Lesina, Pharia, an Island on the Coast of Dalmatia, under the Venetians;
thirteen German Miles long, and almost three in breadth; seated about four from
Spalato, to the South-West; having a Town of the same Name, in the North-East
part of the Island, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Spalato.
The Sclavonians call this Isle Huar. Mr. Wheeler in his Travels, page 24.
says, it is very high, Rocky and Mountainous; and by computation one hundred
Miles in compass. It has a good Haven at the South End, the Town whereof is
called by the Name of the Isle: this represents a Theater, the Figure of which
he gives us. It appears very beautiful to those that enter the Port; being
built in several degrees one above another, according to the rising of the
ground; having a Citadel on the top of a steep Rock, backed with exceeding
high Mountains, and lying open to the South; but the Harbor is secured by the
Rocks against it, etc. It is deep enough for Ships of any Rate; and Bread and
Wine are cheap. Their chiefest Trade is the Fishing of Sardelli, which are like
Anchovies: over against it lies Lissa, a small Island. Spalato (says he) lies
from this Town thirty Miles to the North, and Lissa the same distance to the
South. Also a City of the Capitinata in the Kingdom of Naples, near a Lake of
its own Name: a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Benevento.

Leskeard or Liskerd, a Corporation in the County of Cornwall, in the West
Hundred: which has the Election of two Burgesses for the House of Commons.

Lesnow, Lesnovia, a small Town in Wolhinia in Poland; fifteen Miles South of
Lucka, or Luceoria; where John Cassimir King of Poland, in 1651. defeated the
Cossacks and Tartars, and slew twenty thousand of them.

Lessines, or Lessen, Lessina, a small City in Hainault, upon the River Dender,
( Tenera) in the Confines of Flanders; five Leagues from Brussels to the West.

Lesteiocori, Lechaeum, the Haven of Corinth, upon the Gulf of Lepanto.

Lestoft, or Laystoff, a Market Town in the County of Suffolk, in he Hundred of
Lothingland: the most Northern Sea-Town of this County. It drives a Trade of
Fishing for Cod in the North Sea, and upon its own Coasts, for Herrings.

Lestwithiel, or Listhiel, a Market Town and Corporation in the County of
Cornwall, in the Hundred of Powder; which has the Honor of electing two
Burgesses for the Parliament.

Letchlade, a Market Town in Glocestershire, in the Hundred of Brittles-barrow.

Lethe, and Lethes, the ancient Name of the River Guadalete in Spain. Of Fiume
di Mangresia (as the Italians call it) in Lydia, in the Lesser Asia. Of two
others in Macedonia and Candia. And in the Fictions of the Poets, Lethe makes
one of the Rivers of Hell, wherein the pleasures of the World are forgotten.

Letines, Lestines or Liptines, Liptinae sive Lestinae, an ancient Palace
Royal, near Binche in Hainault, in the Diocese of Cambray. There was a Council
assembled here in 743. in the Reign of Charlemaigne, who had a part of the
Church Lands, by a Sentence thereof, granted to him, to support his Wars.

Letrim, a County of the Province of Conaught in Ireland; between the County of
Slego to the North, Roscomon to the West, Longford to the South, and Cavan to
the East. It takes its Name from the Castle of Letrim, on the West side of this
County: there is besides it no place of any Note. This County is full of Hills,
which afford plenty of Grass; and from thence abounds with Cattle above belief.

Lettaw, the same with Garnsey.

Letten, or Leitland, Litlandia, a considerable part of Livonia; the Western
part of which (which is the greatest,) is under the King of Sweden, and the
Eastern under the Duke of Moscovy. The principal City is Riga: on the North it
have Easthonia, on the West the Bay of Riga, on the South Semigallia, (parted
from it by the River Dwina,) and on the East the Dominions of the Duke of
Moscovy.

Lettere, Letteranum, a small City which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop
of Amalsi, in the Kingdom of Naples: seated in the Hither Principate, upon a
Hill; about three Miles from the Tyrrhenian Sea, and the same from the Confines
of the Terra di Lavori; fifteen Miles South of Naples.

Leucate, Leucata, a small Town in Languedoc, in the Confines of Roussillon;
seated upon a Lake of the same name: it had heretofore a Castle, built by
Francis I. upon an inaccessable Rock, very strong, which is now destroyed: near
this place the Spaniards received a great overthrow by the French in 1637.

Leuchtemberg, Leuchtemberga, a Castle in Nortgow, in the Dukedom of Bavaria;
which is the Capital of a Langravate: seated upon an Hill, near the River and
Town of Pfreimbt; one German Mile from the River Nab. The Territory is but
small that belongs to it; yet was subject only to its own Landgrave, till 1646.
when the Males of that Family failing, it fell to the Elector of Bavaria, who
still has it.

Leucosa, Leucosia, or Licosa, a small Island in the Sea of Tuscany, near a
Cape of its own name, called Capo della Licosa. The Ancients have not omitted
the mentioning of it.

Leuctra, an ancient City of Boeotia in Greece, supposed to be the present
Maina by some Geographers: famous in History for the Victory of Epaminondas
over the Lacedaemonians, in the one hundred and second Olympiad, and the year
of Rome 383. Cleombrotus, the Lacedaemonian General, was there slain.

Leudrac, Vuldraca, a small River of France, in Autunois, in the Dukedom of
Burgundy.

Leverano, a Principality in the Terra di Otranto in the Kingdom of Naples,
near the City Lecca.

Leuvin, a Lake and a Castle in the South part of Scotland, in the County of
Fife; this Castle belonged to the Dowglasses, Earls of Morton: In it the famous
Princess Mary, Queen of Scots, and Dowager of France, was imprisoned by her own
Subjects in 1567. There is also a River of the same name, which falls into the
Fyrth of Edinburgh, by Wemmis Castle.

Leutkirchen, or Leutkirch, Ectodurus, a small Imperial Free City in Schwaben
in Germany, upon the River Eschach; (which a little lower falls into the Iler,
which last falls into the Danube at Vlm) three German Miles from Memmingen to
the South, ten from Vlm, and six from the Lake of Constance to the East; in the
Territory of Algow.

Leutmeritz, Litomerinm, or Litomiersca, a City of Bohemia, called by the
Inhabitants Litomiersk; by the Germans, Leutmeritz, and Letomeritz. It stands
upon the Elbe, eight Miles from Prague to the North, and ten from Dresdin. This
was made a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Prague, by Pope Alexander VII.
in 1655. This City is the Capital of one of the Seventeen Praefectures of the
Kingdom of Bohemia.

Leutomissel or Littomissel, Litomascum, an Episcopal City of the Kingdom of
Bohemia, in the Praefecture of Chrudim.

Leuwentz, a Town in the Government of Newhausel, but in the County of Gran, in
Hungary, upon the River Gran, six Miles from the City Gran to the North.
General Souches put the Turks to a Rout here in 1664.

Leweck, Levecum, the Capital of the Kingdom of Cambay, in the East Indies.

Jews, a Town in Sussex, esteemed one of the biggest in that County. In 1263.
here was a bloody Battle near this place, between Henry III. and the Barons; in
which the Barons prevailed at last against the King, and forced him to a
disadvantageous Peace. This Town is in the South part of the County, upon a
River that has no Name; almost six Miles from the Sea-Shoar to the South,
twenty five from Winchelsey to the West: containing six Parish Churches The
Assizes are commonly kept here. At the Rivers Mouth is New Haven, some years
since made secure for the harboring of Ships. It returns two Members of
Parliament, and is the Capital of a Rape.

Lewemberg. See Lawenburg and Lemburg.

Lewis, Logus, Haraia, a great Island on the West of Scotland; which extends
almost from 58 to 59 degrees. of Lat. and lies sixty five English Miles directly
West from Row-stoir Assyn, the most Western Cape of Assinshire in Scotland.
This is the largest of all the Hebrides; said to be sixty Miles in length, and
thirty broad. The Inhabitants of this, and all the other Western Isles, do much
resemble the Wild Irish; being rude, uncivilized, and will hardly endure any
Government or Law: belonging heretofore to the Kingdom of Norway, they were by
Magnus King of that Country, sold to Alexander III. King of Scotland; and never
thought worth the disciplining.

Lewroux, Leroux, Leprosium, a small City in le Berry in France, two Leagues
from Bourges to the West.

Leybnitz, Savaria, Polybianum, once a City of the Upper Pannonia, now a small
Village of Stiria, upon the River Sack; which a little lower falls into Mure;
four German Miles from Gratz to the East.

Leyden, Lugdunum Batavorum, is a great City in the State of Holland, mentioned
by Ptolemy and Antoninus. It is seated upon the old Stream of the Rhine, and is
the Capital of Rheinlandt, near the Lake of Harlem; three Leagues from Delft,
and seven from Amsterdam, Dort, and Vtretcht. Perhaps the most populous and
wealthy City in all Holland, next Amsterdam. In the Roman times, the Praetor of
the Empire for the Belgic Gaul, resided here with one of the Legions. It is
situate in a plain and low Country, and has many Channels of Water passing
through it: so that the City is divided into thirty one Islands, joined by one
hundred forty five Bridges each to other: one hundred and four of which, are
built with Stone. There lie about it most beautiful Meadows and Gardens; and
the Air is reputed the best of all Holland. As this was one of the first Cities
which revolted from the Spaniards in 1572. so it was one of the first also that
felt their fury. For they having besieged Harlem in 1573. without success, in
the year following sat down before Leyden; and had reduced it to great
extremity; when the Prince of Orange letting loose upon them the Waters which
the Dams restrained before, by the same Stratagem brought relief to Leyden, and
ruin on the Spanish Army: the year following, February 8. 1575. He opened the
University there, to reward their Valor, and recompense their losses: to which
there has been added an excellent Library, a Physic Garden, and a Hall adorned
with many Rarities of Anatomy-Antoninus gives this City the Title of Caput
Germanorum.

Leye, Legia, a River in the Low Countries, called by the French Lis. It
arises in Artois, by the Castle of Lisburg; and watering Airen, and S. Venaut,
enters Flanders at Stegers; then passes by Armentiers, Menene, and Cortryck to
Gaunt, where it falls into the Schelde.

Leyne, Lynius, Leinius, a River in the Lower Saxony, which arises in the
Territory of Eisfeld or Eschfeld, near Heiligenstad; and flowing through the
Dukedom of Brunswick by Gottingen, Lymbeck and Alfeld, at Saxstede it
entertains the Inders: and so by Hannover, and Newstad, falls into the Aler.
This River in the old Maps is called Rhum.

Leypsick, Lupfurdum, Lipsia, Lypsiae, a City of Germany in Misnia, in the
Lower Saxony; which has a celebrated Mart upon the River Pleiss; under the
Elector of Saxony; twelve German Miles from Dresden to the West, and sixteen
from Magdeburg to the South. It has a Castle called Pleisenburg, and an
University opened here by Frederick Marquess of Misnia, in 1409. Upon the
Banishment of the followers of Jerome of Prague from that City, four thousand
Students retiring to this. In 1520. Luther disputed here with Eckius against
the Popes Supremacy; soon after which, they embraced the Reformation. In 1547.
this City (which then belonged to Maurice Duke of Saxony) was besieged by John
the Elector of that House, in the Month of January: Maurice (tho a Protestant)
having joined with the Emperor against the rest of the Augustane Princes, who
had taken Arms for the defense of their Religion and Liberty, against Charles
V. And although the City was not then taken, yet it was much defaced by the
Battery, and its Suburbs burnt. In 1630. Gustavus Adolphus gave the Forces of
Ferdinand II. a great defeat near this place. In 1642. the Swedes defeated the
Forces of Ferdinand III. under the Archduke Leopold, and Piccolomineo; and
thereupon the City was forced to yield it self to the Victorious Swedes. It is
not great, but rich, by reason of its Mart twice every year; and the great
concourse of Students to this University.

Leyte, Leyta, Lutis, a River of Austria; which washing the Town Prurck adder
Leyta, in the Lower Austria, at Altemburg falls into the Danube; three
Hungarian Miles from Presburg to the South, and six from Javarin.

Lez, Ledum, Liria, a River of Languedoc; it arises three Miles above
Montpellier, and a little beneath falls by the Lake of Maguelone, into the
Mediterranean Sea. See Les.

Lhon. See Lip.

Lhundain, the Welsh Name of London.

Lhydaw, the Name of Bretagne, a Province in France, in some of the Writers of
the middle Ages.

Liacura, Parnassus, a Mountain in Greece, in Achaia.

Liamone, Pitanus, or Ticarius, a River in the Isle of Corsica.

Liampo, the most Easternly Cape of all the Continent of China in the
East Indies, taking its Name from a Town, so called, in the Province of
Chechiara.

Lianne, Liana, Elna, a small River in Picardy in France; which arises in the
Confines of Artois; and flowing through the County of Bologne, by the Capital
City of it, falls into the British Sea.

Liasto, Liguidon, a Seaport on the East of Sardinia, an Island in the
Mediterranean Sea.

Libano, Libanus, the greatest and best known Mountain in Syria; which alone
produces the Cedar Tree in that Country. It begins between the Confines of
Arabia, and Damascus; and ends at the Mediterranian Sea near Tripoli; having
run from East to West one hundred and twenty five Miles. It is the oftenest
mentioned of any Mountain in the Sacred Scriptures: exceeding high, and very
far spread; fruitful and pleasant; and was the Northern Boundary of the Holy
Land, and Mother of the River Jordan. Now inhabited by diverse Towns and some
Cities, amongst which, is the Seat of the Residence of the Patriarch of the
Maronites. The Rivers Rochan, Nahar-Rossens, and Nahar-Cardicha spring from it.
The Northern part is said to be continually covered with Snow. It has
Palestine to the South, Mesopotamia to the East, and Armenia to the North, with
one foot in Phoenicia, another in Syria and the Mediterranean to the West.
Opposite to it, stands a Mountain called Antilibanus, separated only by a
Valley. See Antilibanus.

Libaw, Liba, a Town in the Dukedom of Curland, in the Kingdom of Poland; which
has an Haven on the Baltic Sea; in the Confines of Samogitia; eighteen German
Miles from Memel in Prussia; and twenty five from Mittaw, the Capital of
Semigallia, to the West. This Town was often taken and retaken in the late Wars
between the Swedes and Poles: at last by the Treaty of Olive-Kloster, in 1660.
it was restored to the Duke of Curland.

Liburnia, a Branch of the ancient Illyricum, now thrown partly into Croatia,
and partly into Dalmatia. Its principal City was Scardona, now Scardo in
Dalmatia. The Lopsi were some of its ancient people: to whom, is owing the
invention of light Frigates, thence called Naves Liburnicae.

Libya, is so considerable a part of Africa in the old Geographies, that the
Greeks called all Africa, Lybia. It stood divided into the Exterior and
Interior. The former lay along the Mediterranean, betwixt Egypt and Marmorica;
or from Egypt South, according to others, along the left Bank of the Nile, as
far as to Aethiopia; in which space the Desert of Elfocat, and the Kingdom and
Desert of Gaoga ( now) are contained. The other ran from the Mountain Atlas, to
the River Niger, containing the (now) vast Desert of Zaara. And this latter is
Libya, properly so called. Which, together with Libya Marmorica (now Barca),
and Libya Cyrenaica, makes up a second division, that we find in Writers, of
Libya.

Lichfield, Lichfeldia, a City (which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Canterbury) seated in the County of Stafford: twenty four English Miles from
Leicester to the West, ten from Stafford to the North-East, and sixteen from
Coventry to the North-West. It is a low seated, beautiful, and large City;
divided into two parts by a clear Brook, which is crossed by Causeys, with
Sluices in them for the Passage of the Water. That part which lies on the South
Side of this Water, is the greater by far; and divided into several Streets:
and the North Part, though less, has the Cathedral Church, the Close
(encompassed with a strong Wall) in which are the Prebends Houses, and the
Bishops Palace. This has been a Bishops See very long; for in the year of our
Lord 606. Oswius King of Northumberland, having conquered the then Pagan
Mercians, instituted a Bishopric, and settled Dwina as Bishop here, to
instruct them in the Christian Faith: his Successors were in such esteem with
the following Kings of Mercia, that they did not only obtain large Possessions
for the maintaining the Dignity of this See; but were also reputed the Primates
of Mercia, and Archbishops. Ladulph (one of them) had a Pall sent him as such,
upon the Golden Solicitations of Offa, King of the Mercians, about 779. Which
Dignity lasted not long; for it died with this King and Archbishop Ladulph. A
Synod held in 1075. ordaining, that the Bishops Sees for the future should be
settled in the greatest Cities; Peter Bishop of Lichfield, removed this to
Chester. Robert Lindsey, another of them, removed it to Coventry. Roger
Clinton, a third Bishop, but the thirty seventh in Succession, in 1148. began
the beautiful Cathedral here, which he dedicated to the Blessed Virgin, and S.
Chad; and rebuilt the Castle, which is now entirely ruined. The Ciose, in the
old Rebellion, was garrisoned for the King: But the Lord Brook, a zealous
Parliamentarian, coming before it, March 2. 1642. (though the General was
slain, and so paid dear for his Disloyalty) yet the place was taken by that
Party. The twenty second of that Month, the King's Forces returned, and
besieged it the second time; and April 8. after a Defeat of three thousand that
came to the Relief of it at Hopton Heath, it was again surrendered to Prince
Rupert. How long it continued in the King's Hands I know not; but I find it
taken by Storm by the King May 30. 1645. and retaken by Treaty, June 18. in the
same year, by Fairfax, after the fatal Battle of Naseby. Its Long. is 21. 20.
Lat. 52. 42. Sir Edward Henry Lee, created Baron of Spellesburg, and Viscount
Quarendon, was made Earl of Lichfield, June 5. 1674. Lichfield has also the
honor to be a County Corporate, and besides the Cathedral, shows three Parish
Churches.

Lico, Lycus, a River of Phrygia, in the Lesser Asia, which waters Laodicea,
and falls soon after into the Meander. See Laodicea.

Licosia, Ledrensis Vrbs, the same with Nicosia, the principal City of the
Island of Cyprus.

Licostomo. See Scotusa.

Lida, a small Town which has a strong Castle built upon a Rock, and is the
Capital of a Territory in the Palatinate of Vilna, in Lithuania, under the
Kingdom of Poland. It stands upon the River Deta, ten Polish Miles from Vilna
South, and seven from Novogrod; severely handled by the Moscovites in 1655.

Liddesdale, a small County in the South of Scotland, in the Borders of
England; which takes its Name from a River that runs through it. It is bounded
on the North with Tivedale, on the West with Annandale, on the South with
Cumberland, and on the East with Northumberland.

Lidkioping, Lidkiopinga, a small City in Westrogothia, a Province in Sweden,
upon the Lake of We^er, and the River Lid; three Miles from Marystad to the
West, forty five from Daleburg, and thirty from Falkop to the North.

Liechtenstein, a Principality in the Province of Austria in Germany. There is
another Liechtenstein in the Trentine, in Italy, near Bolzano.

Liege, Leodium, a City of Germany, which Lipsius calls Leodicum; the Writers
of the middle Ages, Legia; the Inhabitants Luyck; the Germans Luttyck: and the
French Liege. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Cologne; a great and
populous City, built upon the Maes, and annexed to the Low Countries; yet a
German City in the Circle of Westphalia, and under the Protection of its own
Bishop: fifteen Miles from Cologne to the West, five from Aquisgrane, ten from
Louvain, and three from Maestricht to the South. It had a very strong Castle,
which was ruined by the French. Though in the Protection of its own Bishop, yet
it is a Free Imperial City: and herefore a pleasant Village situate in the
Woods and Hills, amongst sweet Springs, which fell down from those Hills;
frequently visited by Landebert Bishop of Tongres, who was afterward slain
here by Dodon a Servant of Pepin King of France. The Sea was first settled at
Tongres, from thence removed to Maestricht, and at last by S. Hubartus (one of
these Bishops) settled at Liege. It takes this Name from a small River which
there falls into the Maes: a vast part of the Ground within its Walls is not
built; but employed in Vineyards, and Orchards; and withal so very fruitful,
that it may contend with Sicily. In this City Charles the Great, kept his
Christmas in the year 769. Henry IV. died here of Grief in 1197. In the year
1131. Pope Innocent II. crowned the Emperor Lottharius in the Church of S.
Lambert here. Henry VI. reduced this City, (then in Rebellion) in 1191. It is
supposed by some to be built by Amborix a German Prince, mentioned by Julius
Caesar. It suffered much from the Normans; much also from one of the Dukes of
Brabant, who in 1212. took it, and suffered it to be plundered six days
together: in the fifteenth Century, Charles Duke of Burgimdy, taking advantage
of their Disagreement in the Election of a Bishop, grievously afflicted it, (in
1468.) and destroyed a part of it: in this last Age it has been ill treated by
its Bishops: and the French taking it by surprise in 1675 the next year after
ruined the Castle; so that it is no great wonder, if after all these
Calamities, the number of its Inhabitants are diminished. The Baron D'Elderen,
great Dean of the Cathedral, was chosen Bishop and Prince of Liege, by
plurality of Votes against the Cardinal of Furstenburgh, August 17. 1688.

The Bishopric of Liege, or Luyck, is a part of the Circle of Westphalia;
though annexed to the Spanish Netherlands: its ancient Inhabitants were the
Eburones, of old called Tungri also. It is bounded on the East and South, by
the Dukedoms of Limburgh, and Luxemburgh; on the West by Brabant, and the
Earldom of Namur; and on the North by the Upper Guelderland: Luxemburgh, Namur,
and Hainault, have every of them agrandised themselves with the Spoils of this
Diocese. The principal City is Liege; the rest are Dinant, S. Trayen, Huy,
Maseich, and Tongres: besides these, it contained fifty two Baronies, eighteen
walled Towns, and four hundred Villages; being no less populous, than fruitful.
It is thirty one Miles long, and fifteen broad: the Valleys produce plenty of
Grass; the Plains, of Corn; the Hills, of Wines; the Mountains have their
Quarries of Marble, and Mines of Lead, Iron and Brimstone; and Pit-Coal in
abundance. Its Forests affords all sorts of Venison in great plenty: besides
the Maes which runs the whole length of this Country, it has fourteen other
Rivers; some very considerable; which both enrich the Lands, promote Trade, and
afford them a great plenty of Fish: and after all, the Air is very temperate
and healthful.

Lier, Ledo, a River in the Low Countries.

Liere, Lier, a very strong Town in Brabant, in the District of Antwerp; seated
upon the great Nethe, which falls two Miles further to the South into the
Ruypel. This Town is under the Spaniards, and is a Frontier against the
Hollanders; two Miles from Mechelen to the North, six from Brussels to the
North-West, and three from Antwerp to the East. Naturally very strong by its
Situation, and made much more so by Art. See Lire.

Liesse or Notre Dame de Liesse, a small Town in Laonnois County in Picardy,
famous for the Devotions there paid to a Chapel of the Virgin Mary.

Lieuvin, a District belonging to the City of Lisieux in Normandy; which lies
between Auge to the West, the Mouth of the Seine to the North, the Territory of
Roan to the East, and the Territory d' Ouche to the South. This was the Seat of
the Lexovii, a Gaulish Tribe; and is now called Lexoviensis Ager, from them.

Lignitz, Lignitia, Lignitium, Hegetmatia, a City of Silesia in Bohemia, upon
the River Katzbach, ( Ca^us) which falls into the Oder; not two Miles from
Jawer to the North, five from Glogaw, and seven from Wratislaw. It was
heretofore under a Duke of its own, together with a small Territory belonging
to it; and has a noble Castle at this day. The Duchy since 1675. is in the
Emperor, as King of Bohemia.

Ligor, Ligorium, a City of the Kingdom of Siam, in the East Indies, upon the
Promontory of Malaca, near the Bay of Siam; in the middle between the City of
Judia, (Vdia or Odida, the Capital of that Kingdom, to the North) and Malaca to
the South; three hundred and eighty Miles from either: it has a good Harbor.

Ligorne, Livorno, Ligurnus, Liburnus portus, Leghorn, an ancient and
celebrated Seaport, mentioned by Polybius, Antoninus and Cicero. It is called
by the Italians, Livorno; by the English, Legorne; by the French, Ligourne;
seated in the Territory of Pisa, on the West of Italy, under the Dominion of
the Duke of Florence, in a Plain; fifteen Miles from Pisa to the South, ten
from the Mouth of the Arno, forty from Piombino to the North, and sixty from
Florence to the South-West. There belongs to it a large and a safe Haven, very
much frequented by Merchants; the Great Duke to secure the Wealth and Trade of
it, has built three strong Forts upon it. This City belonged heretofore to the
States of Genoua. Cosmus de Medices Duke of Florence, had it from them in
exchange for Serezana; being then a poor despicable Village not much inhabited,
by reason of the unhealthfulness o^ the Air, corrupted by the Marshes near it.
Francis and Ferdinando, (two of his Successors) having improved its condition,
by making it a Free-Port, at a time when the Genouse had excessively inhansed
their Imposts upon the Merchants, built the three Forts and walled the Town;
and built in it also a Noble Palace for the Governor, and for the Reception of
Foreign Ambassadors, with a large Arsenal or Magazin. It has two Havens; the
greater is extremely large, safe, and convenient for Ships of any Burden: the
lesser, called Darsi, is of some use for smaller Ships. See Du Val Voyage d*
Ital.

Liguria, a part of the ancient Gallia Cisalpina in Italy, now contained in the
States of Genoua.

Liiflandt. See Livonia.

Lilers, Lilerium, a Town in Artois, upon the River Navez, seven Leagues from
Arras to the North.

Lille, L'Isle, Insula, Insulae, a City in Flanders, called by the Inhabitants
Lyssel; by the English, Lisle; by the Italians, Lida; is the Capital of
Flandria Gallica; a great, strong, populous place, well Traded, upon the River
Deuller. Lewis XIV. (the present King of France) took this from the Spaniards
in 1667. It lies five Leagues from Ypre to the South, six from Doway, four from
the Borders of Artois, and five from Tournay. Built by Baldwin IV. Count of
Flanders, in 1007. Baldwin the Pious, his Son, being born here, favored it
very much: and on that account walled it in 1066. and built in it also a
magnificent Church, and a delicate Monastery. There is (says L. Guicciardin) a
good Castle in it, and the Ruins of an old one, called Buck; where the
Governors for the ancient French Kings resided, which were then instituted the
Forestexs of Flanders. This City was taken and burnt by Philip II. King of
France, about 1185. Being rebuilt, it was again taken and harassed by Philip IV
about 1304. Since then it is much increased, (says the same Author) by the
Industry of the Inhabitants, who employ themselves mo^^ly in weaving Silks: so
that it is raised to be the third City in the Low Countries after Antiverp and
Amslerdam; and frequently called in French, La petit Paris, for its Beauty. The
French had it confirmed to them in 1668. by the Treaty of Aix la Chapelle. It
is the Head of a large Chattellany, containing diverse Villages; and strongly
fortified. Also, a pleasant Town in the County of Venaissin in Provence, five
or six Leagues from Avignon, and about the same from Carpentras, in a fruitful
Country; surrounded by the River Sorgue, like an Island, and thence called
L'isle.

Lille, Illa, a River in Aquitain in France; which arises in the Province of
Limosin; and flowing through Perigord, waters Perigeux (Vesima) the Capital
of that County, and Mucidan: at Coutraz it entertains the Dormia, from
Aubeterre; then a little beneath Lisbourne falls into the Dordonne, seven Miles
above its conjunction with the Garonne.

Lillebonne, or Islebonne, Islebonna, Juliobona, a Town in the Paix de Caux in
Normandy, in the Diocese of Rouen; giving Name to a Branch of the House of
Lorrain. In the year 1080. the Bishops of Normandy were assembled in a Council
here, in the presence of William the Conqueror, King of England, at which the
Archbishop of Rouen presided.

Lillo, Lilloa, a strong Fort built by the Hollanders upon the Schelde, two
Leagues beneath Antwerp to the North, one above Santvliet or Sanflit to the
South; and four from Bergen op Zoom. At this Fort all Ships that pass up the
River to Antwerp, are by the Treaty of Minister to stop.

Lima or Ciudad de Los Reyes, Lima, the Capital of the Kingdom of Peru; a
beautiful, great, well traded City; and the Sea of an Archbishop. Built in
1535. by Francis Pizarro, a Spaniard, in the Valley of Lima, called by Natives
Rimac. The Viceroy of Peru resides here; which with other Advantages has made
it very great, rich, populous, and beautiful; though it be all built with
Timber, and an open unwalled Town. They compute about five thousand Spaniards
and forty thousand Negroes in it; a great number of Ecclesiastical Buildings,
as Churches, Convents, Colleges, and Hospitals; and a stately Palace Royal,
wherein the Viceroy keeps his Court. It stands upon a River of the same Name;
one Mile from the Pacifick Ocean, two from its own Harbor called Callao de
Lima, one hundred and twenty from Cusco, the old Metropolis of this Kingdom, as
Jo. Laei says. It is under the King of Spain, and had an University opened in
1614. Long. 296.40. Lat. 23.30. A dreadful Earthquake October. 30. 1687.
overthrew most of the Buildings, both public and private, and buried above a
thousand Inhabitants in the Ruins. The Ecclesiastics of Peru have celebrated
two or three Councils here.

Lima, Lamia, a River in Portugal, which washes the Town of Viana de Foiz de
Lima, six Leagues from Braga to the West; and then falls into the Ocean.

Limagne, Limane, Limania, or Alimania, a small Territory in Auvergne; which
for the greatest part is contained in that Province. It is very well watered,
and wonderfully fruitful; being a Plain, upon the River Allier, extending from
North to South twelve Miles, near and below Clermont.

Limat, Limmat, Limagus, Lindemagus, a River in Switzerland; which arises in
the County of Sargans, or Sarganzerlandt; and runs North through the Lake of
Riva, and that of Zurich; after which it waters Zurich, and Baden; and a
little lower falls into the Aar, the chief River of Switzerland.

Limburg, a Duchy and Town in the Low Countries. The Duchy, though one of the
Seventeen Provinces, is not great. It lies between the Duthcy of Juliers to the
East and North, and the Bishopric of Liege to the West and South. It had
heretofore Dukes of its own: but upon the Death of Walrame the Third (by Dr.
Heylin called Henry) in 1285. Adolph the next Heir sold it to John Duke of
Brabant; who pretended at the same time a Right to it, as descended from
Margaret, Daughter of Henry Duke of Limburgh, in 1172 married to Godfrey III.
Duke of Brabant. In 1293 Reinold, Earl of Gelders, set up another Title in the
Right of Ermingrade his Wife, Daughter of Herman, late Duke of Limburg; but his
Forces being defeated, and he taken Prisoner in the Battle of Worancan, he was
forced to refign his Right to John Duke of Brabant, to regain his liberty; and
from that time the Dukes of Brabant have peaceably enjoyed it. The Earth is
very fruitful as to Wheat and Fuel; it has excellent Mines of Iron, and one of
Copperas. It contains one hundred and twenty five Villages, whereof five are
walled.

Limburg, Limburgum, the principal City of the last mentioned Dukedom, is
pleasantly seated upon a Hill by the River Weser, amongst shady Woods; in the
Consines of the Bishopric of Licge; six Leagues from that City to the East,
seven from Maestricht, and four from Aquisgrane to the South. It had a very
strong Castle, mounted upon a steep Hill, and of a difficult Access. The
Hollanders took this City in 1632. but the Spaniards recovered it again. In
1675. the French surprised it; and being forced to leave it in 1677. they
destroyed the Castle, which now lies in Rubbish.

Lime otherwise called Lime Regis, is a small Town in the Western Borders of
the County of Dorset, next Devonshire, in the Hundred of Bridport, upon a steep
Hill, and a River of the same Name; which hardly deserves the Name of a
Seaport, though it is frequented by Fishermen. It has a Road, sufficiently
secured from the violence of the Winds by Rocks and high Trees. It is a
Corporation, governed by a Major, and sends two Burgesses to the Parliament:
defended by Blake against the Kings Forces in the late Parliamentarian
Rebellion to a Wonder, though it has no other Fortifications, than what Nature
bestowed upon it. To this Place, Charles II. after the Battle of Worcester
retired, and was promised passage for France; but deluded by the Master, and
forced to seek it elsewhere. The late Duke of Monmouth on June 11. 1685. with
about one hundred and twenty Men on Board a single Vessel from Holland
surprised this Town, and began a Rebellion against King James II. which was of
short duration, unfortunate in all its events; and ended in the ruin of that
Duke: being beheaded July 15. following, on Tower Hill, in London.

Limen, Palus Moeotis, a Branch or Bay of the Euxine Sea, on the East of the
Crim Tartary; called also Mar de Zabacce, and de Tana, from the River Tanais,
which falls into it.

Limerick, Limericum, a strong City in the Province of Mounster, (but in the
Confines of Connaught) upon the River Shannon: forty five Miles from Kilkenny
to the West, thirty five from Gallway to the South, and from the main Ocean
about sixty; but so accommodated by the River, that Ships of Burden come up to
the very Walls. This City is the Capital of a County of the same Name; and a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Casshel. The Irish call it Loumeagh. It
was first conquered from them, by Raimond de Gross, an English Man: after
which one Danewald, an Irish Royolet of Thomond, burnt it. King John built the
Castle: the English in after times built an additional Town, and walled it;
securing it by Draw-Bridges, and whatever might contribute to the strength of
it. What became of this Place in the beginning of the Irish Rebellion, I do not
find: but when Ireton came before it in 1651. to take it for the
Parliamentarians, Hugh O-Neal, a Valiant Irish Man, and a good Commander, being
entrusted with the Government of it by the Lord Lieutenant; it made the best
defense, and slew more of the Parliamentarians, than any place in Ireland: till
after a Siege of three Months, it yielded upon Articles, when all their
Victuals were spent. Having the Consolation of seeing her Conqueror soon swept
away by the Plague, which he found here, when he forced the Town. After the
Rout at the Boyne, King James's Forces rallied again here; and made a very
vigorous defense under the Conduct of Monsieur Boiseleau the Governor:
insomuch, that though King William in Person commanded the Siege, which began
about the tenth of August 1690. yet his Army was forced to decamp the one and
thirtieth following without success. The next year it surrended upon Articles

The County of Limerick is bounded on the North by the Rivers Shannon and
Mysker, which part it from Clare and Ormond; on the East it has the County of
Tipperary, on the South that of Cork, and on the West that of Kerry. A fertile
Country (says Mr. Cambden) and full of people, but able to show few places of
any account. The Western side is Mountainous; the rest Plain.

Limino, Lemene, Romatinum, a River of Friuli, which arises out of the Carnick
Alps; and washing Concordia, an old ruined City, twenty seven Miles from
Aquileja to the East, falls into the Venetian Gulf.

Limoges, Lemovicum urbs, in Ptolemy called Rastiatum, in Ammianus Marcellinus
Lemovix, and otherwise Lemovica, Lemovicina, a City which is the Capital of the
Province of Limosin in France; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Bourges: great and populous; seated amongst Hills, by the River Vienne; twenty
Leagues from Angoulesme to the East, twenty five from Poictiers to the
North-East, and forty from Bourdeaux. This City was of old times pillaged by
the Goths and Franks. Afterward by Storm taken by the Black Prince in 1371.
who put four thousand of the Inhabitants to the Sword. Adorned now with diverse
Religious Houses, and has been a Viscounty for many Ages. The Bishops of
Aquitaine have celebrated some Councils at it.

Limosin, Lemovicensis Provincia, is a Province of France, in the Generalite of
Aquitain; which is part of what was possessed by the Lemovices. It is a great
and populous Province, but cold and barren, affording little Corn, or Wine,
that is good: divided into two parts, the Upper and the Lower: on the North it
is bounded by la March; on the East by Auvergne; on the South by Cahors; and
on the West by Perigort, and Angoumois. Foreigners do sometimes include la
March in this Province. The principal Cities are Limoges, Tulle, Brive, and
Vserche.

Limoux, Limosium, a City of Languedoc, upon the River Aude, [Atax;] three
Leagues from Carcassone to the South, and six from Mirepoix to the East. It is
built amongst the Hills, well peopled, and belongs to the Diocese of Narbonne.

Linceo, and Lincen, Lincestis, a River of Macedonia.

Linchiang, a City of the Kingdom of China, in the Province of Quamsi; upon the
River Can, at the foot of the Mountains: esteemed the eighth City of that
Province.

Liuck, or Lincken, a Fort in Flanders, in the District of Bourbourg, upon the
River Colme, one League from Bourbourg to the North-East, and two from Audomar
to the North. Taken by the French in 1676. and still in their Hands.

Lincoln, Lincolnia, Lindum, a famous City seated on the North side of the
River Witham, over which it has several Bridges; almost in the Center of the
County to which it gives name: large, well built, and populous; extending from
the top of a high Hill (where Lindum, the old Roman Town, stood; its Ditches
and Rampire being still visible) a great way downwards unto the River. In this
Town, the Valiant Britain, Vortimer, died in 456: being Poisoned by Rowena, the
Daughter of Hengist, and Wife of Vortiger. The Saxons after this ruined Lindum
and built Lincoln nearer the River, about the times, when Paulinus first
Preached the Christian Faith to them. The Danes destroyed it twice. In the time
of Edward the Confessor, here was one thousand and seventy Mansions. In the
Norman times no City in England was more Rich or Populous, as Will. of
Malmsbury acquaints us. Will. the Conqueror thought fit to build here a very
strong Castle upon the top of the Hill aforesaid to awe the Inhabitants.
Remigius, Bishop of Dorchester, near Oxon, at the same time removed the Sea
hither, and built the Cathedral above the same Hill. In the Reign of Edward
III. it was made a Mart or Staple. King Stephen was overcome and taken Prisoner
near this City, in 1140. Sept. 5. in a great Battle with Maud the Empress, and
afterward at Bristol laid in Irons. Henry III. had better success here; when
it being defended by the Barons against him under Prince Lewis, in 1217. May
19. he took it, forced Lewis to Flee to London, and soon after into France. Mr.
Cambden observes, that of fifty Churches standing within an hundred Years of
his time, there were only eighteen left. It has by times gone through all the
calamities of Fire, Sword, and Earthquake. Yet a large, populous, and well
frequented place still, and enjoying the greatest Diocese of any in the
Kingdom; as the Cathedral, there called commonly the Minster, is one of the
stateliest Piles perhaps in Christendom. It has the privilege also of being a
County Corporate, whose Liberties extend about twenty Miles in compass, with
the title of the County of the City of Lincoln. Its Long. 22. 52. Lat. 53. 12.

Lincolnshire, is bounded on the North by the Humber, and the British Sea; on
the East by the same Sea, and part of Norfolk; on the South by Cambridge,
Northampton, and Rutlandshire; on the West by Leicester, Nottingham, and
Yorkshire. It is a very large County; extending in length from North to South
almost sixty Miles, and carrying in some places thirty in breadth; fruitful in
Corn and Grass, thick set with Towns, and well watered with Rivers; As the
Humber, the Trent (which severs part of it from Nottinghamshire,) the Witham,
running a cross it, the Woland and the Nen. The whole is divided into Lindsey
to the Northward, which takes up about one half; Holland toward the Sea,
Southward; and Kesteven, West from thence; which three divisions contain six
hundred and thirty Parishes, and thirty five Market Towns. Here is plenty of
Fowl and Fish. The old Inhabitans were the Coritani. The present Earl of this
County is Edward Lord Clinton; who succeeded in 1667, being the fifth of his
Family that has born this Title, and the sixteenth Earl. Edward Fines, Lord
Clinton, Lord Admiral, having obtained this Honor from Qu. Elizabeth, in 1565:
before whose time the same title had passed through several Families by
frequent interruptions.

Lincopen, Lincopia, Lingacopia, a City of Sweden, which is a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Vpsal in Ostro-Gothia; between Soderkoping to the East,
and Wadtena to the West; twenty eight German Miles from Stockholm to the
South-West, and almost eight East from the Lake of Veter. Long. 32. 48. Lat.
58. 3. The City is very small and inconsiderable. We read of a Synod celebrated
at it in 1148. under P. Eugenius III. It is also written Lindkeeping.

Lindaw, Lindavia, Lindavilum, Philyra, a City of Germany, in the Circle of
Schwaben, in an Island in the Lake of Constance; joined to the Continent by a
Bridge two hundred and ninety Paces long. It is an Imperial and Free City,
situate in the borders of Switzerland: eight Miles from Constance to the
North-East; and grew up out of the ruins of Aeschach, a place near to it. Very
strong both by its Site, and by Art; and therefore it the more easily repelled
the Forces of Count Wrangel the Swedish General, who in 1647. besieged it. The
beginning of this City was a Monastery, built here by Adelbert Rorbuck, a
Kinsman of Charles the Great, in 810. This occasioned the building of a
Village; and the Site being pleasant, fruitful, and convenient, it grew up by
degrees to a City: at first subject to the Abbess; after that to the Dukes of
Schwaben; obtaining its Privileges since from Rudolphus I. Frederick III. and
Sigismond.

Lindo, Lindus, a Seaport Town in the Isle of Rhodes; the Christian
Inhabitants of which can bring about twenty good and large Ships into the Grand
Seignior's Service.

Line, a rivulet in Staffordshire, upon which Newcastle stands; thence commonly
called Newcastle upon Line, to distinguish it from Newcastle upon Tine.

Lindsey, one of the three parts of the County of Lincoln; containing all the
Northern parts from the River Witham to the Humber, and from the Ocean to
Trent. This was in 1626. by Charles I. made an Earldom; and granted to Robert
Bartie, Lord Willoughby of Eresby, Lord Great Chamberlain of England; who died
in the Bed of Honor at Edgehill October 23. 1642. being the King's General in
that Battle. The present Earl, Robert Bartie, the third of this Family,
succeeded in 1666.

Lingen, Lingo, a strong Town in Westphalia, which is the Capital of a County
of the same Name; under the Prince of Orange, upon the River Ems; forty five
Miles from Munster to the North, and fifty five from Emden to the South. The
County, that belongs to it, lies in the Bishopric of Munster; and is very
small. It belonged to the Spaniards in the time of Charles V. but is now in the
hands of the Prince of Orange.

Linlithgo, Linlithquo, Lithquo, Lindum, a Town and a County in the South of
Scotland. The Town stands on the South side of the Fyrth of Edinburgh; twenty
two Miles from that City to the West. This Place, as Mr. Cambden says, is
called Lindum by Ptolemy; and it takes its Name from a great Lake in this small
County: from which ancient, the present Name is derived.

Linosa, an Island of the Mediterranean Sea, upon the Coast of Africa, near
Maltha. It depends upon the Island of Maltha.

Linton, a Market Town in Cambridgeshire, in the Hundred of Chilford.

Lintz, Aurelianum, Lentia, called by Aurelian, Lyncia, Lyncium; and by some
understood to be the Aredate of Ptolemy; is the Capital City of the Upper
Austria; small, but populous; seated upon the Danube, over which it has a
Bridge; and in it a magnificent Castle, whither the Emperors of the House of
Austria have frequently retired for their Pleasure, and Divertisement. It
stands six German Miles from Passaw to the East, and twenty four from Vienna to
the West. Dr. Brown gives this account of it. It is not very great, but as neat
and handsome a City as most in Germany. There is in it a very great Marketplace,
with never a bad House in it: the whole Town is built of a very white free
Stone, and the Castle upon the Hill is of a Modern building, very large; there
is also a Bridge over the Danube. The Imperial Forces Rendezvouzed here, when
Solomon came to Vienna, in 1532. This was also besieged by the Peasants of
Austria, in the time of Ferdinand II. They having got a Body together of forty
thousand Men, and many pieces of Ordnance; but were stoutly repulsed after many
Assaults, and at last overcome by Papenheim. The late renowned Duke of Lorraine
dyed at a Convent near this Lintz. See Lorraine.

Lintz, Lentium, a small Town upon the Rhine, in the Diocese of Cologn in
Westerwaldt; five Miles beneath Coblentz to the North, six from Cologn; in the
borders of the Dukedom of Juliers.

Lintzgow, Lentinensis Populus, a part of the Dukedom of Bavaria.

Lipari, Liparae, a knot of small Islands, being seven in number, belonging to
the Kingdom of Sicily: they lie in the Tyrrhenian Sea, about thirty Miles to
the North-West of the Island, and the same distance from Calabria to the West.
Though they belong to Sicily, yet Charles V. for his convenience attributed
them to the Kingdom of Naples: but in 1609. they were restored to Sicily, and
at this day are holden by the King of Spain as a part of it. The ancient Poets
Epithet them Aeoliae and Vulcaniae, from a fiction of their being the Country
of the Gods of those names. The principal is the Island called Lipari, which
has an Episcopal City to enable it, under the Metropolitical jurisdiction of
Messina in Sicily. In 1544. Barberousse, the Turkish Admiral, ruined this City;
but it was rebuilt again, and a considerable Fortress added to it.

Lippa, a City of Transylvania, seated upon the River Marosch, which falls in
the Tibiscus at Segedin. It stands five Hungarian Miles from Temeswar to the
North, and thirteen from Alba Julia, or Weissenburgh, to the South-West. This
City was taken in 1595. from the Turks, by the Emperor: Retaken by Assault by
General Caraffa with a Body of ten thousand Imperialists on Aug. 19. 1688. And
the Castle, into which the Garrison retreated to save themselves, being about
two thousand Soldiers, was obliged to Surrender upon discretion two days after.
There were eighteen pieces of Cannon in it.

Lip, Lippia, a City of Westphalia, more commonly called Lipstat. It stands
upon the River Lip, three German Miles from Paderborn to the East; in
Marshes, and a bad Air; yet it is a Hanse Town, very great, and the Capital of
a County of the same name. It was once too a Free Imperial City: in length of
time it became exempt, and fell under the Jurisdiction of the Counts of Lip,
and by one of them was mortgaged to the Duke of Cleve for eight thousand Marks
of Silver; and never since redeemed; but together with Cleve fell to the Duke
of Brandenburgh. Charlemaigne assembled the Bishops of Germany here in 780. The
County of Lip is a part of the Circle of Westphalia; between the Bishopric
of Paderborn, the Dukedom of Westphalia, and the County or Earldom of
Ravensberg. It is under its own Count, (the principal Town excepted) whose
Residence is at Lemgow. He has also a part of the Earldom of Schaumburgh, not
long since granted him by Maurice Landtgrave of Hassia.

The Lip, Lupias, Luppia, is a River of Germany, mentioned by Strabo and
Mela. It arises in a Village called Lippsprinck, near Paderborn; and running
Westward, waters Lip, or Lipstad; separating the Diocese of Munster from
the County of Mark; it passes by Ham, Dorsten, and Wesel into the Rhine;
twelve Miles beneath Cologn to the North-West.

Lippio, Hyppius, a River of Bithynia, which falls into the Euxine Sea, near
Heraclea Ponti.

Lipuda, Aretas, a River of Calabria, which falls by the City of Vmbriatico,
into the Ionian Sea.

Lire, Lira. See Liere above. Only let me add the Elogy given it by L.
Guicciardin; Lira, elegans and amoenum Brabantiae oppidum; adeo ut multorum
hujus Tractus Nobilium, in otio degentium, a curis and turba jucundissimus sit
recessus. Lire is so beautiful and pleasant a Town of Brabant, that many of the
Nobility thereof, make it their beloved recess from Cares and Crowds of Men.

Lirio, Iris, the same with Casalmach.

Lis, Loegia: The same with Leye.

Lisbon, Olysippo, Vlysippo, (the Spaniards call it Lisboa,) the Capital City
of the Kingdom of Portugal, the Royal Seat of their Kings, and an Archbishops
See made by P. Boniface IX. It has a large, safe, convenient Harbor; and a
Castle built on a Hill by the Taso; on the North side of which River the City
stands two Leagues from the Ocean, and six from Cabo di Rocca Sintra. In Long.
11. 00. Lat. 38. 50. According to Dr. Heylyn, in Long. 9. 10. Lat. 38. 30. This
City was recovered from the Moors by Alphonsus King of Portugal, in 1147. It is
the greatest in all Spain, and every day increasing. At a Town, called Bethlem,
within half a League of it, are to be seen the Tombs of the Kings of Portugal.
Of this City the Spaniards have a Proverb, Qui no ha visto Lisboa, no ha visto
cosa boa. He that has not seen Lisbonne, has seen nothing that is good.

Lisieux, Lexobii, Lexovium, Neomagus, a City in the Upper Normandy, upon the
River Tucca, (or rather Lezon;) which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Roan: a great and fine City, seated in a fruitful Country; five Leagues from
the Shoars of the British Seas to the East, eighteen from Roan to the West, and
ten from Caen to the East. The Country about is from it called the Lieuvin.
Caesar in his Commentaries twice mentions the Forces of the ancient People
thereof, against the Romans. In 1106. The Ecclesiastiques held a Council here
in the presence of Henry I. King of England; and since, others.

Lismore, Lismora, a small City in the Province of Munster, in the County of
Waterford; which was a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Cashell; but this
Bishopric has been united to that of Waterford, since 1363. It stands upon the
River More; fifteen Miles from the Vergivian Ocean, and twenty two from Cashell.

Lisnia, a strong Fortress in Bosnia, surprised by the Imperialists July 18.
1690. after having in the two precedent Years been thrice attacked by them in
vain. Two hundred Christian Slaves were here freed.

Lison, Casius, a Mountain of Syria, mentioned by Pliny and Ptolemy; lying
between Cilicia and Phoenicia, near Antioch and Laodicea. There is another
Mountain by it, called the Anticasus; and a Country between them called
heretofore Casiolis; in which are the Cities of Antiochia, Seleucia, Laodicea,
Epiphania, Marathus, Antaradus, and some others; most of which are by the
Turks, (now Masters of this Country) ruined. A Gentleman, who had Traveled
over this Country, informing me; that it was little inhabited by any but the
Wild Arabs, though prodigiously fruitful; and that he frequently met the ruins
of great Cities, buried in their own Rubbish, whose Memorial was perished with
them.

Lisonzo. See Isonzo.

Lissa, an Island belonging to Dalmatia, thirty Miles South of Lesina.

Lissus, a River of Thrace, said by Herodotus to be drunk dry by Xerxes's Army.
This is likewise the ancient Name of the Town Fionissi in Canadia; which Strabo
calls Lictus. See Fionissi. And of another in Albania, near the Bay of Drin,
now called Alessio.

Listra, Lystra, a City of Lycaonia, in the Lesser Asia, mentioned in the Acts
of the Apostles. It lies forty Miles from Cogni, [ Iconium,] to the West; and
was once a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Iconium; but is now totally
ruined and desolate.

Lita, Let, a City of Macedonia, upon the Gulf of Thessalonica; which is a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Thessalonica; two Miles from it to the
South.

Lithquo. See Linlithgo.

Lithuania, a Province and Grand Dukedom belonging to the Kingdom of Poland;
called by the Inhabitants, Litwa; by the Germans, Littawen; by the Poles,
Litewsky; which was heretofore a part of Sarmatia Europaea. This Country
embraced the Christian Faith, in 1386. Jagellon, Grand Duke of Lithuania, being
made King of Poland; and in 1569. this Dukedom was for ever united to the
Kingdom of Poland. It is bounded on the East by Moscovy, or great Russia; on
the North by the same in part, and by Livonia and Samogitia; on the West by
Poland (properly so called) and Moz^via; on the South by Red Russia. The
Dukedom of Czernichow did heretofore belong to this Province, which is now
under the Russ. The principal Cities are Breslaw, Breast, Grodno, Minsko,
Mohilow, Noovogrodook, Poloczk, Troki, Wilne, or Vilna, (the Capital) and
Witebsk. This is the greatest Province belonging to that Kingdom: being in
length from the River of Polet to Dassow two hundred and sixty* German Miles;
and in breadth (between the Niemen or Memel, and the Nieper) eighty. It is all
overspread with Woods, Forests, and Marshes, which since the times of Sigismond
I. have yet been very much improved. The Air is exceeding cold, and the
Inhabitants as barbarous. Their language is a dialect of the Sclavonick; and
their Frontiers have been often desolated by the incursions of the Tartars and
Moscovites.

Livadia, Lebadia, Creusa, a City of Boeotia, which from this City is now
called Livadia. It is seated upon a River, which falls into a Lake of the same
name, but was anciently called Cephissus. Mr. Wheeler, who had seen this Place,
says; It is an ancient City, and still called by its ancient name; the Greeks
pronouncing B as we do the V Consonant. The ancient buildings are yet
remaining: we found (says he) several Inscriptions to the same purpose; it is
situate about a pointed Hill, on the top of which is an old Castle, on the N.
side of the high Cliffs of a Mountain of a moderate height, which I took to be
part of the Helicon, till I found it afterward parted from it by a Valley;
therefore I now take it to be Mount Tilphusium. This City stands fifteen
Leagues from Delphis, now Salona, to the East. From this City all that part of
Greece, which was anciently called Achaia, is now called Livadia; lying from
Negropont in the East, to the Ionian Sea West: having Thessalia on the North,
the Gulf of Lepanto, the Hexamilia, and the Bay of Corinth on the South; in
which stand Lepanto, Salona, Livadia, and Athens.

Livenza, Liquentia, a River in the State of Venice, which arises in the
borders of Bellunese; and flowing South, separates the Marquisate of Treviso
from Friuli; then falls into the Venetian Gulf, twenty Miles from Venice to
the South East.

Livonia, called by the Inhabitants Lie^land; by the Poles, Inflanty; by the
French, Livonie; is a great and cultivated Province of the Kingdom of Poland,
ever since it was taken from the Knights of the Teutonick Order: but the
greatest part of it has since been taken from them by the Swedes. It is bounded
on the North by the Bay of Finland; on the West with the Bay of Riga, (both
parts of the Baltic Sea;) on the South with Samogithia, and Lituania; and on
the East with Ingria and Pleskow, two Provinces belonging to the Russ. It is
divided into four Counties; Esten ( Esthonia,) Curland, Semigallen, and Letten.
Esten is under the Swede, and also Letten; except a little part toward the
East, which the Russ have. Curland and Semigallen, are subject to a Duke, who
is a Feudatary of the Crown of Poland: there belong to it also Oesel, and
Dagho, (two Islands in the Baltic Sea,) which were possessed by the Dane; till
in 1645. by a Treaty at Bromsbro, they were yielded to the Swede. The chief
Towns in it are Narva, Parnaw, Revel, Riga (the Capital,) Derpt and Wolmer. Its
length from Narva to Memmel is ninety German Miles: its breadth from the Sea to
Dodina, sixty. It produces Wheat in abundance; which the Dwina and Narva,
bring down to Riga and Narva, for Exportation. Its Forests abound with wild
Boars, Bears, etc. which come over the Narva, out of Russia. This People being
then Barbarous, began to embrace the Christian Faith about 1161. Meinradus
became their first Bishop in 1190. The way of Instruction being thought too
slow by his Successors, Albertus, (one of them) instituted an Order of Knights
to Bang them into Christianity, which were called the Livonian Order; but in
time united with the Teutonick in 1237. About 1525. these two Orders were again
parted by Albert Duke of Brandenburgh; and Sigismond, King of Poland, put an
end to them in 1587. In 1617. the Swedes became Masters of this Country. In
1634. the Muscovites ceded all their right to it to Ladislaus K. of Poland; who
by the treaty of Stumsdorf, confirmed the Swedes in the possession of as much
as they held on the North of the Dwina, for twenty six years: All which was
entirely yielded to them in 1660. by the peace of Oliva.

Livorno. See Ligorne.

Lizaine, Liricinus, a River in Normandy.

The Lizard Point, the furthest South-West Point or Cape of the Goon-hilly
Downs in Cornwall; which is a tract, pretty large, shooting forth from the main
Land into the South Sea. In Latin called, Danmoniorum Promontorium.

Lizza, Laodicea.

Llanbeder, a Market Town in Cardiganshire in Wales, in the Hundred of Moythen.

Llandaff, Landava, a small City and a Bishops See in the County of Clamorgan,
in South Wales; seated upon the West side of the River Taff; three Miles to the
North from the Sea. This Bishopric was Founded by Germanus and Lupus, two Holy
French Bishops, about 522. And Dubricius (a Holy Man) was made the first
Bishop; to whom Meuricke, a British Lord, freely gave all the Land that lies
between the Taff, and the Elei. But one Kitchen, a Bishop about the time of the
Reformation, so wasted the Revenue, that it will scarce maintain its Bishop.
Dr. William Beaw, the seventy sixth Bishop, is the present Bishop of this See,
and was Consecrated June 22. 1679. Its Long. is 16. 52. Lat. 51. 49.

Llandilo Vawr, a Market Town in Carmarthenshire in Wales, in the Hundred of
Cayo.

Llanelly, a Market Town in Carmarthenshire in Wales, in the Hundred of
Kidwelly.

Llangadoc, a Market Town in the County of Caermarthen, and the Hundred of
Perueth.

Lleleyda, Ilerda. See Lerida.

Llobregat, Clodianus. See Fluvian.

Loanda, a small Island on the Coast of the Kingdom of Congo; in which is the
City of St. Paulo, with a large and safe Port, and a strong Castle, under the
Dominion of the Portuguese; an hundred and eighty Miles from the Mouth of the
River Zaire to the South. This City was once taken by the Dutch, but valiantly
retaken by the Portuguese. The Bishop of Angola has his Residence here. Long.
34. 40. South Lat. 9. 10.

Loango, Loangum, a City, and a great and powerful Kingdom in the West of the
Lower Aethiopia, in Africa; between the Kingdom of Congo to the South, and
Bidfara to the North. Written also Lovango and Loanga. The City stands within a
League and an half of the Sea.

Lobach, Laubachus, a small River which falls into the Sambre.

Lobaw, a small Town in Poland, in Prussia Regia; thirteen Miles from Culme to
the East* in which is a Castle, wherein the Bishop of Culme for the most part
resides; who is therefore often called the Bishop of Lobaw.

Locarno, by the Germans called Luggar, a Town and Bailiwick in Italy, upon the
Lake of Verbanus, (now Magiore;) thirty Miles from Como to the South-East,
forty from Novara, and five from the Confines of the Dukedom of Milan. This is
now under the Swiss, since the Year 1512. but was heretofore a part of the
Duchy of Milan.

Lochem, Lochemum, a strong Town in Guelderland, under the Hollanders, in the
Confines of Over-Yssel and Westphalia; two Leagues from Zutphen to the East.
This was taken by the French in 1672. dismantled, and deserted in 1674.

Loches, Lochia, a City of France, in the Province of Touraine, upon the River
Indre, with a Fortress and a strong Castle, wherein have been kept some
Prisoners of State. Charles VII. K. of France made it his ordinary Residence:
Lewis XI. added diverse apartments to it: seven Leagues from Amboise to the
South, and twenty two from Bourges.

Locra, a River of Corsica.

Locris, in Magna Graecia; see Gieraci, its modern name. This was also a
Country in Graecia Antiqua, adjoining to Phocis in Achaia.

Loda, Olda* See Lot.

Lodeves, Glanum, Luteva, Forum Neronis, a City of the Lower Languedoc; which
is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Narbone; being raised to this Honor
by Pope John XXII. It stands upon the River Lergue, at the foot of Mount
Sevennes, in the borders of Rovergue; twelve Leagues from Narbone to the North;
it has heretofore given the title of a Viscount. The Bishops style themselves
the Counts of Montbrun, from a Castle in the Neighborhood of this City.

Lodi, Laus Pompeia, a City and Roman Colony settled by Pompeius Strabo, the
Father of Pompey the Great. It became a Bishops Sea, under the Archbishop of
Milan: and is now a considerable Town in the Dukedom of Milan, well inhabited;
and shows many footsteps of a great Antiquity. Called Lodi Vecchio, and for
shorter Pronuntiation, Lodive, that is, Old Lodi: it stands upon the Rivolet
Silaro; five Miles from the New Lodi to the West: much ruined by the
Inhabitants of Milan, in 1158.

Lodi, or New Lodi, is a City in the Dukedom of Milan, upon the River Adda;
twenty Miles from Milan to the West, and the same distance from Cremona,
Brixia, and Placentia: built by Frederick the Emperor, in 1204. and being
placed in a fruitful Soil, is now great, populous, and well fortified; being a
Frontier toward the State of Venice; and the Capital of the Territory of
Lodesane.

Lodrino, the same with Drino.

Lodro^, a Seigniory in the Trentine in Italy.

Lodun. See Loudun.

Loet, Lo^, a River of France near Estampes.

Logan, a Town and Bailiwick in Italy, belonging to the Swiss.

Logronno, Juliobrigo, an old City of Spain, in the Confines of Castile and
Navarre.

Loignon, or Lougnon, Ligno, a River in the Franche Comte; which falls by
Besanzon into the Saone, at Pontalie; four Miles above Auxonne to the North.

Loing, Lupia, a River of France, which rises in Puysdie, in the borders of
Burgundy; and running North, waters Chastillon sur Loing, Montargis, and
Nemours; then falls into the Seyne at Moret, four Leagues above Melun to the
East.

Loiowogrod, Loiovogrodum, a Town in Red Russia, in the Palatinate of Kiovia,
on the West side of the Nieper, where it receives the Sosz. This Place was
ennobled by a signal Victory obtained by Janusius Radzivil, a Polander, against
the Cossacks, June 31. 1649.

Loir, Arula, Laedus, is a River of France; which arises in the Province of le
Perch, near the Village de Corves; and running into the Territory of Chartres
in la Beause, waters Chaudun, Vendosme, le Jude, la Fleche; then falls into
the Sartre, a little above Angers: this last, and the Mayenne, fall into the
great Loyre, twelve Miles above Nantes, and five beneath Angers.

Loire, or Loyre, Liger, Ligeris, is one of the greatest, and most celebrated
Rivers of France. It has this name from a Meddow, which it washes near its
Fountain, in the Parish of Eulatia in Velay, at the foot of Mount G^rbier de
Joux: hence flowing Northward by le Puy, it enters Foretz, and passes Feurs;
having taken in the Rioutort, Loigno, Anse, and Furan: then passing to Roanne
and Bourbon-Lancy, it passes to Nevers; before which time it has entertained
amongst many others, the Lay, the Brebinche, the Aroux, and the Besbre, over
against Bourbon. A little beneath Nevers it admits the Allier out of Bourbon;
and passing by la Chayite, Chistillon, Gien, and Chauneuf, it washes Orleans:
then bending from North-West to South-West, it enters Vendosme at Blangency;
and waters Blois and Tours. Beneath which from the South it receives the
Cher, and the Rideau or Indre, (two great Rivers, but united in one before they
fall into the Loire) and a little further the Vienne, which brings a great many
other Rivers with him: so entering the Dukedom of Anjou, and leaving Saumur
upon his Southern Bank, at Ingrande from the North he takes in the Sartre; and
hastes to Nantes; from which to the Sea he bears Ships of burden. At last he
falls into the Bay of Aquitain, with a vast Stream, by a wide and large
Channel, twelve Miles beneath Nantes; after a Course of two hundred French
Leagues; one hundred and sixty six of which are Navigable by Boats, and the
twelve last by Ships: the Current, rapid. It is said to entertain 1*12 Rivers
in this course.

Le Loiret, Ligerula, a River which arises near Orleans, and falls into the
Loir. It issues from so plentiful a Spring, that it will presently bear a Boat.

Loket, Locta, a City of Bohemia, called by the Germans Ellebogen. It is very
strongly fortified, and has a Castle on a Hill, upon the River Eger; in the
Confines of Misnia; four Miles from Eger or Heb, another City of Bohemia to the
East; eighteen from Prague, and as many from Dresden.

Lomaigne, Leomania, a Tract or Country in Aquitain, (or Gascony;) the
principal Town of which is Vi^ de Lomaigne: it lies between the County of
Armagnac, Verdun, and the Garonne; by which it is parted from the County of
Agenois.

Loman, a River in Devonshire, which falls into the Ex by Tiverton in that
County.

Lombardy, Lombardia, Longobardia, is a considerable Country in the North of
Italy; under which is contained the greatest part of Gallia Cisalpina. It is
divided into two, the Higher and the Lower Lombardy. In the Higher, are
Piedmont (with what is annexed to it,) the Dukedoms of Milan, and Montisferat:
in the Lower are the Dukedoms of Mantua, Modena, and Parma; with the Western
parts of the State of Venice, viz. The Territories of Bergamo, Brescia,
Cremona, Verona, and Vicenza: also the Dukedoms of Ferrara, with the Territory
of Bononia, (or Bologna,) which are in the States of the Church, and now under
the Pope. The Italians also divide it into Lombardia di qua dal Po, and
Lombardia di la dal Po, i. e. Lombardy on each side the Po. This was that
Kingdom of the Lombards ( Langobardi or Longobardi) in Italy, which Charles the
Great ruined, after he had at Pavie taken Desiderius (their last King)
Prisoner. The principal City of this Kingdom was Milan. This Kingdom was
erected in 578. Isaacson places its beginning in 393. with whom Helvicus
agrees; Agelmond being their first King; before whom they had Dukes: it
continued so under eleven Princes; that is, in Pannonia, (or Hungary,) not in
Italy. They came into Italy in 568. And their Kingdom continued there under
twenty one Princes till 774, when Carlous Magnus Dethroned. (as was said) In
all, two hundred and six Years.

Lombez, Lombaria, or Lumbaria, a small City in Aquitain in France; in the
County of Cominges, upon the River Sava; (which falls into the Garonne, four
Miles beneath Tolose.) Lombes stands five Leagues from the Garonne to the
North, eight from Aux to the South-East, and ten from Tolose to the South-West.
Made a Bishops See by Pope John XXII. (who at the same time erected its ancient
Abbey into a Cathedral) under the Archbishop of Tolose, in 1317. But little,
and not well inhabited. The Albigenses were excommunicated in a Council here.

Lombura, the Indus.

Lomond, and Lough Lomond, Lomandus, is a great Lake in the South of Scotland,
in the County of Lenox; between Menteith to the East, and Argile to the West.
In length from North to South twenty Miles, ten in breadth from East to West in
some places, in others three and four. It is only four Miles from Dunbritown to
the North, and a little more from its Fyrth; the River Levin empties it into
the Fyrth. There is in it sixteen small Islands.

Lon, Lone, or Lunne, a River of Lancashire, upon which Lancaster and Hornby
are situated, and Kirkby Lonsdale in the County of Westmorland. It ends in the
Irish Sea.

London, Londinum, Augusta Trinobantum, the Capital City of the Kingdom of
England; or rather three Cities united into one: Its length from East to West,
from Lime-house to the further end of Millbank in Westminster, coming to 7500
Geometrical paces, i. e. seven measured Miles and an half, at a thousand paces
a Mile: Its breadth, from the further end of Whitechappel-street to St.
George's Fields in Southwark, near three Miles. It is first mentioned by
Tacitus, afterward by Ammianus Marcellinus, who calls it Augusta; Stephanus de
Vrbibus, Lindonium; Bid and Sigebert call it Lindona; the English, London; the
Saxons, Lundain; the French, Londres; the Germans, Londen; and the Italians,
Londra. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Canterbury; seated in the
County of Middlesex, upon the Thames (a noble navigable River), over which it
has a Bridge of nineteen Arches, built with Houses on both sides, and of late
enlarged as to the Passage. This is also the Royal City, the Seat of the Kings
of England, and has been so for many years. Therefore called the King of
Englands Chamber. It is situate in a rich and plentiful Soil; abounding with
plenty of all things; and on the gentle ascent of an Hill, on the North Side of
the Thames. By whom, or when it was first built, is now unknown. Tacitus says,
that in Nero's time, about the Year of Christ 66, it was Copia Negotiatorum,
and Commeatu maxim celebre. A place of great resort for Commerce, and famous
for plenty of provisions. But London was then near a great Calamity: for
Boadicia, Queen of the Iceni, being provoked by the Injuries of the Romans, to
assemble the Britains, fell first upon Camalodunum, (now Maldon in Essex;) and
taking it by surprise that year, put all the Romans to the Sword. Petilius
Cerealis, coming up with the ninth Legion, was defeated; and all his Foot put
to the Sword too, the Horse hardly escaping. In the Interim Suetonius, the
Roman Propraetor, or Governor. (who was then conquering the Isle of Anglesey)
comes up to London; and was at first almost resolved to make it the Seat of
War; but finding reasons to alter this Resolve, he marched away to S. Albans:
so Boadicia (who was not far off) came up, and put all She found in the Town to
the Sword; and soon after treats S. Albans in the same manner: in which three
places She destroyed seventy thousand Romans and their Allies. This City soon
recovered this Blow, and was afterward as famous as ever. In the Year of Christ
292, it was in danger of being Sacked by the Franks; if an unexpected Arrival
of some Roman Forces had not accidentally preserved it, even when the Franks
were actually in Possession of it. Soon after this, Constantine the Great is
said to have Walled it. In 313, we find Restitutus, Bishop of London, at the
Council of Arles in France, subscribing after Eborius, Bishop of York. Bid is
very positive, that it was then an Archbishops See. Mr. Cambden is of opinion,
it was delivered up to the Saxons, under Hengist their first King, by
Vortigern, about the Year of Christ, 463. Tho this changed the state of things,
and ruined Christianity; yet London continued in all this Storm a considerable
Mart, or Seaport: in 610. S. Paul's Church was built, (or rather rebuilt) and
assigned to the Uses of Christianity, by Athelbert, King of Kent. Miletus was
made the first Bishop of London, after the Conversion of the Saxons, in 604;
the Metropolitick See being removed by Augustine the Monk then from London to
Canterbury. About the Year 701, Offa, King of the East Angles, enlarged and
endowed the Church of Westminster: which is since become another City, joined
to London. In the Year 854, this City fell into the Hands of the Danes, who
Sacked it, and Canterbury; coming then with a Fleet of two hundred and fifty
Ships. In 1012, these Barbarians slew the Bishop of London, for not paying them
their Tribute; the Year after, Sweno (King of the Danes) took the City, and
expelled King Ethelred out of England; but this lasted not long. In the Year
1016, Canutus the Dane took London; and in 1018, was there Crowned King of
England. In 1042, there was an end put to this Danish Race; and Edward the
Confessor was Crowned King of England. In 1064, this Prince died; and Herald
usurping upon Edward Atheling, the Right Heir, William Duke of Normandy entered
England, slew him, and in 1066, was Crowned in London. The Fate of London has
been much the same with that of England ever since; for this Prince in 1078,
having built the Tower of London, it became the settled Residence of our Kings
from that day forward. William II. in 1099, Walled the Tower. King John in
1210, Granted this City its first Charter; and Instituted its Major, and
Government. In 1211, He built London Bridge. In 1217, Lewis of France was
besieged in London by Henry III. and forced to leave the Land. In 1378, John
Philpot, a Londoner, at his own Cost, and upon his own Authority, put out a
Fleet, and cleared the Seas of Pirates. In 1381, the Country Clowns rising
against the Nobility, and one Jack Straw behaving himself insolently toward
the King in Smithfield; Sir William Wallworth, the Lord Major, stabbed him, and
put an end to that Rebellion; for which Service the Red Dagger was added, as is
said, to the Arms of London. In 1392, that Prince seized their Liberties, for
resusing to lend him Money. In 1567, the Royal Exchange was built by Sir Thomas
Gresham. In succeeding times it throve to that degree, as to have one hundred
and thirty three Parishes, accounted within its Walls and Suburbs. In 1665, a
Plague swept away one hundred thousand of her Inhabitants. In 1666, a devouring
Fire Levelled thirteen thousand of her Houses. The Footsteps of which dismal
Calamity, by the Industry of the Citizens, encouraged by their Gracious King
Charles II. are not otherwise to be seen, but in a more glorious Restoration.
A great multitude of Provincial and National Councils have been celebrated at
London in all times. Long. 23. 25. Lat. 51. 34. Boston in New England is
sometimes also called New London.

Londonderry, is a Colony of the English, Planted in the County of Col^ain, in
the North of the Province of Vlster: in a fruitful Soil, and upon Waters that
afford it great plenty of Fish of all sorts. This in 1612, was made a London
Colony; some of the Companies in London bearing the Charge of it; and one
Colonel Dockwray (an old experienced Commander of the English) being sent with
them to command, govern, and take care of them. Being thus happily begun, and a
great number following the first, in a short time it became the most
considerable City in Vlster. And being as well carefully Fortified and
Garrisoned as Peopled, in the time of the Irish Massacre, it stood so firm for
the English, that no Force or Fraud of the Irish could expel them. The Irish
had reduced them to great extremity in 1649, but one Owen Row Oneale in time
frustrated their Attempts, and relieved the Town, when it was just upon the
point of being starved into a Compliance. See Derry.

Longford, a Town and County in Ireland, in the Province of Leinster. The
County has Connaught on the West, Vlster on the North, Letrim and Roscomen on
the West, and Mayo on the South. The Town is small, and stands upon the North
Side of the River Long; where it falls into the Lake of Eske.

Longland, an Island in the Baltic, taken from the Danes by the Swedes, in
1657.

Long Meg and her Daughters, a Trophy in the County of Cumberland, erected at
Salkeld, on the River Eden. It consists of seventy seven Stones, each ten foot
above ground; but the highest is fifteen foot, and this by the Inhabitants has
the Name given it of Long Meg.

Longouy, or Longwy, a Town in the Duchy of Lorain, in the Dukedom of Bar, in
the Confines of Luxemburg; five Leagues from Montmidy to the East, and the same
distance from Luxemburg to the South; lately fortified by the French.

Longtown, a Market Town in the County of Cumberland, in Eskdale Ward.

Longueil, a Town in Normandy near Dieppe, giving its name to an honorable
Family.

Longueville, a Town in the Paix de Cauxe in Normandy, which had the honor to
be erected from the Title of an Earldom into a Dukedom in 1505. by Lewis XII.
K. of France.

Loon, Loen, Lon, Los, a River in the Bishopric of Liege, in the Earldom of
Loots; called by these various Names by the Germans, Dutch and French.

Lopski, Lopia, a part of Tartary, on the East of Moscovy; beyond the River Ob;
which is subject to the Russ, but lies in Asia; between Siberia and Baida; two
other Provinces of that vast Empire.

Loquabre, or Lockabre, a County in Scotland, called by Latin Writers Abria,
and Loquabria: it lies on the West of Scotland, toward the Hebrides; written
by the Scots, Loch Quaber; and bounded on the North with the Ocean and the
County of Ross; on the East with Murray and Athole; on the South with Perth,
Menteith, and Loune, cut off from it by the broad Tay; and on the West with the
Ocean. There are some Castles, but never a Town or City of any Note in it.

Lorain, Lotharingia, Austrasia, is a Dukedom belonging to Germany; of late
seized by the French King, and therefore by Baudrand made a part of France.
Bounded on the East with Alsatia, (cut off by the Mountain Vauge, Vogesus, and
the Dukedom of Bipont or Westreich, as the Germans call it;) on the South with
the County of Burgundy, or the Franche Compte; on the West with the River Maes,
which parts it from Champagne; and on the North with Luxemburg, Metz, Verdun,
and the Land of Triers. This Country is in length about four days Journey, in
breadth three; much overgrown with Woods, very Hilly and Mountainous, being a
part of the once vast Forest of Ardenne. It was given by Lotharius, the
Emperor, to his second Son Lotharius; and from him took the Name of Lorain, or
(as others write it) Lorraigne. This happened about the Year 851. Others say,
it took this Name from the Father, and not from the Son, about the Year 843:
but all agree, that from Lotharius this County was called by the Germans
Lotreich; by the Dutch Lot-reigne; ( i. e. the Kingdom of Lot;) and from hence
of later times by the Germans Lotthiringen; by the Inhabitants Lorrain; by the
French Lorain. The first of these Dukes of Lorain was Charles, right Heir of
the Caroline Line of France; but excluded, defeated, and taken Prisoner by Hugh
Capet. His Advancement was from Otho II. (Emperor of Germany,) about the Year
981; being the Son of Lewis IV. of France, and of Gerbage an Aunt of the said
Otho. From this Charles, the present young Duke of Lorain is Lineally
Descended, being the thirty fourth Duke of his Family. The French first
Possessed themselves of this Dukedom under Lewis XIII, in 1663: It was restored
to this Family again by the Pyrenean Treaty, in 1659. In the Year 1674, it was
again reassumed by the French. Charles Leopold, the late Duke of famous memory,
being in the mean time employed by the Emperor as his General, won more Honor
than he could have done if he had succeeded his Uncle in his rightful
Inheritance. This great Prince died on the eighteenth of April, 1690, suddenly,
in his forty eighth year, at a Convent near Lintz, in his Journey to Vienna;
his renowned Actions and high Merits making him extremely lamented. He Married
Elionora Maria of Austria, Dowager of Michael, King of Poland, and Sister to
the present Emperor; by whom the Title to this Dukedom continues in the Family
to his eldest Son.

Lorca, Eliocrata, Ilorcis, a small, but ancient City of the Kingdom of Murcia
in Spain: it was in the times of the Goths a Bishops See, under the Archbishop
of Toledo. But this See was since removed to Cartagena Nueva. It stands upon
the River Guadilentin, in the Confines of the Kingdom of Granada, ill peopled;
twelve Miles from Murcia; in Long 19. 15. Lat. 38. 2.

Lorne, Lorna, a County in the North of Scotland, upon the Western Ocean,
bounded on the North by Loquabre; on the East by Menteith; on the South by
Argyle, and Cantyr; and on the West by the Vergivian Ocean: the old Inhabitants
of this County were the Epidii, as Cambden acquaints us.

Loretto, or Lauretto, Lauretum, a small, and a New City in the Marcha
Anconitana, in the Dominions of the Church; made a Bishops See by Pope Sixtus
V. in 1586. and in 1591. the Bishopric of Recanati was for ever united to this
new See. It stands upon a long Hill; three Miles from the Shoars of the
Adriatic Sea, fifteen from Ancona to the South; very well fortified to
preserve it from the Incursions of the Turks, and has a Noble Palace. But that
which is its greatest, yea, its only Glory, is the Chapel of the Virgin Mary,
called La Santa Casa, the Holy House; Pilgrims out of all parts of Europe
repairing hither, to perform their Devotions to the Virgin. This place was
anciently a desolate Grove, where in the Pagan Times some think there was a
Temple of Juno Cuprana. The Chapel, that is so much esteemed, is supposed to
be the very Chamber in which the Queen of Heaven was her self Educated; and
received the Angel's Salutation. They believe it was brought hither out of
Palestine by Angels. All this is proved by the Testimony of Grave Men, and the
Memorials of an innumerable number of Miracles, which are believed to have been
wrought here. The Reader is not to suppose it was brought from Palestine hither
at once: no, it was deposited, after the taking of Ptolomais by the Saracens,
first in Dalmatia, in the year 1291. Thence the Thieveries of that Nation
occasioned her Remove three or four years after, to a Wood in this Marquisate,
and from thence to a Hill; and here two Brothers not agreeing, She at last
removed to Loretto: Where (says Tursellinus) She has resolved to take up her
fixed, and as we hope ( if no grievous offense of the Inhabitants or Neighbors
prevent it) her eternal Rest: her last Remove (he assures us) was in 1295. And
if she has been able to digest all the Italian Sins for almost four hundred
years, we may well presume She will remove no more; at least not in our Days.

Lorgues, Lonas, Leonas, Leonicae, a Town in Provence, in the Diocese of
Frejus, two Leagues from Draguignan, five from Frejus, and fourteen from Aix:
situated in a fertile Soil; and adorned with a Collegiate Church of the
Foundation of Pope Martin V. in 1421. together with diverse Religious Houses.

Lorris, Lauriacum, a Town in the Diocese of Angers and the Dukedom of Anjou in
France: remarked for a French Synod there assembled in 843.

Losere, a Mountain in Languedoc, in which are the Fountains of the River Tarn,
that separates Aquitain from Languedoc. This is a Branch of the Sevennes;
extended toward the Lower Languedoc, six Leagues from Ghave (or Javoux) to the
North-West, and eight from Vzes to the South-East: mentioned by Sidonius
Apollinaris, in his twenty fourth Verse.

Loss, a River of Scotland, in the County* of Murray, called by Ptolemy, Loxa:
it waters the North part of that County, and falls into the German Ocean
beneath Elgin, the Capital of that County.

Lot, Le, Olda, Loda, a River in Aquitain in France; which arises from the
Sevennes, a Mountain in Givaudan, (a County of Languedoc;) and flowing within
one Mile of Mende, a City in the County, and soon after augmented by the Truer,
and some smaller Rivers; and running Westward through Rovergne, and Querey,
(which latter it divides;) it at last waters Again, Cassenneil, and Clerac;
then falls into the Garonne near Aiguillon, four Leagues beneath Again. Whereas
heretofore this River was passable by Boats only as far as Ville Neuve de Again;
it is of late with vast Expense made Navigable as high as Chaors; (to the
inestimable Benefit of this Province) by the present King of France, in 1677.

Lothaine, Laudonia, a County in the South of Scotland; bounded on the North by
the Fyrth of Edinburgh; on the East by the German Ocean: on the South by
Marches, Twedal, and Cluydesdale; and on the West by the County of Sterling.
This County is thirty four Scotch Miles in length from East to West: but not
above ten broad for the most part. It is the principal County in that Kingdom;
Edinburgh standing almost in the middle of it; besides which, it has Lyth,
Dunbar, and Dalkeith.

Lotophagi, the ancient People of the Island, now called L'isle des Gerbes,
upon the Coast of Africa, under the Spaniards. They are mentioned by diverse of
the Ancients with applause.

Lotreich, or Lothar-reich, Lorain.

Loudun, Juliodunum, a City of France, in the County of Poictou; six Leagues
from Salmur to the South, ten from Poictiers, and eighteen from Amboise to the
North-West: from this City the circumjacent Country is called le Laudonnois,
which King Henry III. erected into a Duchy; and in the Writers of the middle
Age this City is called also Lausdunum.

Lovenstein, Lovenstenum, a Castle, or Triangular Fort in the County of
Holland, in the Island of Bommel; at the union of the Vahal, and the Maes, over
against Worcum; four Miles from Vtrecht to the South, and a little more from
Dort to the East. This Fort belongs to the States of Holland, and lies in the
Borders of Guelderland.

Lough, the Irish word for a Lake.

Loughborough, a handsome, pleasant Market Town in Leicestershire, in the
Hundred of West Goscote, upon the Banks of the River Stowre, over which it has
a Bridge; and near the Forest of Charwood, amongst fertile Meadows.

Lough Foil, Logia, a River of Ireland, in the Province of Vlster; which by
Londonderry falls into the Deucalidonian Ocean, between the County of Derry,
and the Isle of Owen; nine Miles from Coldagh to the East.

Loughabrin, Loughaber: see Loquabre.

Louisiane, a large Country South West of New France in America, lately
discovered by the French as far as to the Mouth of the River Colbert, in the
South Sea, and so called in honor of their present King Lewis XIV. They report
it to enjoy a very fruitful Clime for Wine, Corn, Fruits, Fish, and Fowl.

Low, East and West, two Market and Borough Towns in the County of Cornwall,
in the West Hundred, both upon the South Sea, and both having the Election of
two Burgesses for the Parliament.

Lowitz, Lovitium, a small, but well built and populous Town of the Greater
Poland, upon the River Bsura; in which the Archbishop of Gnesna has a noble and
strong Castle, seated in a Marsh, built by Jarowslaws, (one of those
Archbishops) in which the rest of his Successors have for the most part
resided: it is in the Palatinate of Rava, between Vladislaw to the North, and
Rava to the South; five Polish Miles from the latter, and six from Ploczko to
the South-West.

Le Loup, Lupus, a River in Provence in France. There is another of the same
Name in Lionnois, which falls into the Adour.

Lourdes, Lorda, a City of France in Bigorre:

Louses, Loutosa, a place or Town in the Diocese of Troyes in France.

Louth, Lutum, Loutha, a small Town in the Province of Leinster, in the County
of Louth, upon a River of the same Name; between Dundalk to the North, and
Ardrac to the South, seven Miles from either.

The County of Louth lies in Leinster, or rather Vlster: bounded on the East by
the Irish Sea; on the North by Down; on the West by Armagh, and Monaghan; and
on the South by Fingall in Leinster. There is called by this Name a Market Town
also in Lincolnshire, in the Hundred of Loutheask.

Louvaine, Louvanium, a great City in Brabant, in the Low Countries; called by
the Inhabitants Loeven; by the Spaniards *Lobayna; by the Italians Lovanio; and
by the French Louvaine. It stands upon the River Dele, (which a little lower
falls into the Demer, which last falls into the Schelde at Rupelmondel) four
Miles from Mechlen to the South-East, eight from Namur to the North, and the
same distance from Antwerp to the South-East. In 1427. there was an University
opened here by John Duke of Brabant: others make it to have been Founded by
another John Duke of Brabant in 926. The Popes Martin V. and Eugenius IV.
granted it great Privileges. It has thriven very well; here being more than
twenty Colleges founded by several Persons for the encouragement and promotion
of Learning, very magnificent, and well governed: to which belong the public
Schools, which are very magnificent. This City is four Miles in compass within
the Walls; seated in a very fruitful Soil; and has so gentle and pleasant an
Air, that Wine is made both within the Walls, and without. It is so very
ancient, that its Original is supposed to have been before the Roman Conquest
by Julius Caesar: and has been several times enlarged. The Walls, it now has,
were built in 1361. There are within these Walls, says L. Guicciardin, great
Meadows, beautiful Vineyards, rare Orchards and Gardens, and all manner of
Conveniences; which shows that it is not overstocked with Inhabitants. This
Town is still under the Spaniards; and has about it a District, called the
Quartier de Louvaine; which is one of the four Jurisdictions of Brabant. The
Dukes of Brabant used to take the Title of Earls of Louvain. Long. 26.00. Lat.
50.54.

Lovat, Lowa, Chesinus, a River of Russia; which falls into the Lake of Ilmen,
on the Borders of Livonia. This Lake disburthens it self into that of Ladoga,
by a River which passes on the East of the City Novogorod.

Louwenborch. See Lawenburg.

Le Louvre, the King of France his Royal Palace in Paris.

Lowther, a River of the County of Westmorland, joining with the Eamont at
Whinfield Forest; upon the Banks whereof is Lowther-Hall, the Seat of the
Family of the Lowthers, who for thirty Descents lineally from Father to Son
have flourished here. The Park belonging to this Seat, the Parish, and the
Bridge over the River, have the same Name.

Loylandt, one of the Shetland Islands on the North of Scotland.

Lubanskerzee, Lubanius, a Lake in Livonia, on the Confines of Poland, near the
Town of Luban; near twenty Miles from Dunenburgh to the North.

Lubeck, Lubeca, Lubecum, a Great City in Germany; in the Circle of the Lower
Saxony, in the Dukedom of Holstein; which has been a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Bremen, ever since the year 1162. when the Chair was Translated
hither from Oldenburgh. It is a celebrated Mart, and one of the principal Hans
Towns; upon the River Trave, in the Territory of Wagria; of which it is the
Capital; about three Miles from the Baltic Sea to the South, upon which it has
a great, and a safe Harbor. It was at first a very small Town, enlarged to a
considerable City, by Adelph, Count of Holstein, under Conrad III. Emperor of
Germany. In the year 1209. the Danes being beaten out of it, it was made a Free
Imperial City by Frederick II. Seated in the Limits of the Dukedom of
Mecklenburg and Lawenburg; ten German Miles from Hamburg to the East, and as
many from Wiesmar to the West. In 1238. it happened to be almost totally consumed
by Fire. In 1500. they defended their Liberties by Arms against the King of
Denmark; which War broke out again in 1509. when the Suedes took their part.
They had the same Privileges confirmed to them by the Emperor Charles the
Fifth, at the Diet of Ausburgh, in 1547, which before were granted them by
Frederick II. This City embraced the Augustane Confession, in the year 1561. In
1562. they begun a War with the King of Sweden, which lasted till 1570. The
Bishopric is settled in Appenage to the younger Sons of the House of Holstein
Gothorp, the Chapter having only an umbrary Election left to them: they are
called Dukes of Oytin, from a small Town (four German Miles and an half from
Lubeck to the North) where they for the most part reside; which was given these
Bishops by Adolph Count of Holstein, before the Sea was removed from Oldenburg
to Lubeck In this Town there was a Peace concluded between the Emperor and the
King of Denmark, in the year 1629. It is governed in the manner of a Republic,
and observes a strict Alliance with Holland. Long.32.45. Lat.54.48.

Lubiana, Labachum. See Labach.

Lublin, Lublina, a City of the Lesser Poland; the Capital of a Palatinate of
the same Name, upon the River Bistricz; twenty four Miles from Warsaw to the
South, twelve from Chelm to the West, thirty six from Cracow to the South-East,
and seventy from Vilna. It is a neat, spruce, populous City; and has a Castle
seated on a Hill. The Palatinate of Lublin is one of the three which constitute
the Lesser Poland; and lies between Mazovia, Red Russia, and the Palatinate of
Landomir. Long.45.00 Lat.51.00.

Lublaw, Lubloa, called by the Poles Luboulia, i^ a Castle belonging to the
Upper Hungary; but mortgaged to the Crown of Poland in 1412, which has been
ever since in their Hands: and being cut off from the County of Cepasz, it is
annexed to the Palatinate of Cracow.

Lucania, an ancient Province of Italy, now thrown into the Basilicata in part,
and part into Calabria; but before, a Member of Magna Graecia. Its Inhabitants
made frequent Wars with the Romans, and in the year of Rome 428. killed
Alexander, King of the Epirots, near the River Acheron.

The Luccaye Islands, near the Continent of America, in the North Sea, lie
betwixt 294. and 304. Degrees. of Long. and 21. and 28. of Lat. making a part of
the Antilles. The chiefest of them are Lucaioneque, Amana, Abacoa, Bimini,
Guanahani, Majaguana, Juma, etc. enjoying a temperate Air and a fruitful Soil.

Lucca, Luca, Luceria, a City and Republic of Italy, ascribed by Pliny and
Strabo to Hetruria, but now in the Dukedom of Florence; and a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Pisa, tho not subject to his Jurisdiction. It is very
strongly fortified with eleven Bastions; and very populous. Built by the
Thusci, in the Year of the World 3236. thirty nine years after Rome, in the
times of Senacherib, and of Ezekiah King of Judah. Narsetes, the General of the
Emperor Justinian, besieged it in the Sixth Century. Charles V. left this City
under the Government of a French Cardinal, who set them at liberty. One of
their own, Paulus Giunisius, Ravished this from them; they soon recovered it
again. In the year 1390. the City was taken by Galatius, Duke of Milan: but in
1430. they again recovered their Liberty, which they have ever since carefully
preserved; and to that purpose in 1626. made the present Fortifications. The
Dominions belonging to this State (by the Italians called Il Luchese) are
small, not above thirty Miles long, and twenty five broad; lying between the
Appennine to the North, the Mediterranean Sea to the West, the States of Genoua
to the North, and Pisa to the South; its greatest length is from North to
South. The Earth brings forth here, Wine, Oil, and Chestnuts in abundance; not
so productive of Corn. The Inhabitants have improved every Inch of it to the
utmost, by which they have made it very pleasant. The Bishop is immediately
subject to the Pope. This City stands ten Miles from Pisa to the North,
thirteen from the Sea to the East, and forty five from Florence to the West.
Commonly Epitheted, Lucca l'industriosa. The Tomb of Richard King of England
(who died here in a journey to Rome) is to be seen in the Church of S.
Fridainus. Long. 33. 16. Lat. 42. 50.

Luceria. See Nocera.

Lucerne, Lucerna, a City and Canton in Switzerland. The City stands in Argow,
upon the Lake of Lucerne; where the River Russ flows out of it through this
place; and is covered by three Bridges, nine German Miles from Bearn to the
East, and six from Altorf to the South-West. An Imperial Free City, till the
year, 1332, when it was exempted. The Marquess de la Parelle,
Lieutenant General of the Duke of Savoy's Army, recovered it out of the Hands
of the French, in Aug. 1690.

The Lake of Lucerne, called by the Germans Lucernerzee, is extended twenty
four Miles from East to West; and is often called the Waldtstatteuzee, from the
four Cities which encompass it, viz. Altorf, Swiss, Stantz, and Lucerne.

The Canton of Lucerne, the third of the twelve Swiss Cantons, is Roman
Catholic; united to the rest in 1332. and bounded North, West, South, and East
by the Cantons of Zurich, Swiss, and Stantz.

Lucomerie, Lucomorie, a Province belonging to the Russ; beyond the River Ob in
Asia, toward the North Ocean; in which there are no Cities: the People living
in Woods, Caves, and desert places. Toward the South of this Province there
are Mountains called by the same Name.

Lurko. See Lusuc.

Luconia. See Lusson.

Ludlow, a large, populous, well built, Market and Borough Town in Shropshire,
in the Hundred of Overs, upon the Banks of the Teme: walled and defended by a
Castle built by Roger Earl of Montgomery. It elects two Parliament Men: and the
Court for the Marshes of Wales, first ordained by King Henry VIII. used to be
kept here.

Lug, Logus, a small River which arises in Radnorshire; and flowing through
the County of Hereford, a little beneath the principal City, falls into the Wye
at Mordeford; bringing with it the Arrom, the Wadels, the Oney, the Laden, and
the From.

Lugnitz, Vallis Leguntia, a Canton belonging to the Grisons.

Lugo, Lucus Augusti, Turris Augusti, Arae Sextianae, a City and Bishops See,
in Gallicia in Spain, under the Archbishop of Compostella; upon the River
Minho: eighteen Leagues from Compostella to the East, ten from the Shore of the
Ocean South, and thirty from Leon to the West. An ancient Roman City, mentioned
by Pliny and Antoninus. This City falling into the Hands of the Moors, was
recovered by Alphonsus King of Leon, who died in 756. That which has most
contributed to its preservation, is its Hot Baths. Long. 12. 00. Lat. 43. 00.
Several small Synods have been anciently assembled at it. There is another Town
called Lugo, about fifteen Miles from Ferrara in Italy; which was almost quite
destroyed by the overflowing of the Po, in May, 1688.

Luki, Lodusia, a City and Port in Gothland in Sweden.

Lulworth Castle, a delightful and noted Castle in Dorsetshire, in the Hundred
of Winfrith, with a large Park about it, and enjoying a Prospect into the
British Sea. The Kings of England, in their Western Progress, have often
honored it with their presence.

Lumasia, the same with Bulgaria.

Lumellina, a Territory of Lumello, (a Town in Lombardy, in Italy, in the
Dukedom of Milan, in the Territory of Pavia;) twenty Miles from that City to
the West toward Casale.

Luna, an ancient Roman City in Italy, out of whose Ruins is sprung the present
Sarzana. See Sarzana.

Lunden, Lundis, Londinum Scanorum, a City of the Kingdom of Sweden; which was
the Capital of the Province of Scania; and an Archbishops See, with six
Suffragan Bishops under it. These are all in the Kingdom of Denmark, to which
this City belonged, till 1658; when it fell into the Hands of the Swedes; who
in 1668, opened here an University. It was once much Celebrated; but now in a
declining Condition: eight German Miles from Copenhagen to the East, and six
from Landscroon to the South-West: commonly called Lund by the Inhabitants.
Made a Bishops See in 1065, an Archbishops in 1103: Ill treated by the Swedes
in the latter Wars; the Danes receiving a considerable Overthrow near it,
December 14. 1676. It is now only a Bishops See: the Archbishop being in 1660,
Translated to Copenhagen. Long. 41. 00. Lat. 57. 23.

Lunenburgh, Luneburgh, Lunaeburgum, Selenoburgum, a City of the Lower Saxony
in Germany, formerly one of the principal Hanse Towns in the Empire; and the
Capital of the Dukedom of Lunenburgh. It stands upon the River Ilmenaw; not
above two German Miles from the Elb to the South, ten from Lubeck, seven from
Hamburgh to the South-West, and twenty from Bremen to the North-East. Built by
Henry the Lion, in 1190: but the Castle is older than the City an hundred and
twenty four years. It took this Name from the Moon; the Image of which was
worshipped here, till the Reign of Charles the Great, who took that Idolatry
away. It grew up out of the Ruins of Bardwick, a Town within two Miles of the
Elb to the South. When it was exempted from the Empire I do not find; but it is
now under the Duke of Lunenburgh, and is one of the strongest, and best
fortified Towns of Germany. There was anciently a very famous Monastery in it,
of the Order of S. Benedict: which Christian Lewis, Duke of Lunenburgh, in the
year 1660. turned into a College. Near it stands a Mountain, called by the
Germans, Kalckberg, which affords excellent Chalk; and by it are many Salt
Springs, that contribute much to its Wealth: it has one of the noblest Bridges
in Europe, over a Navigable River. The Houses are magnificent; the Inhabitants
rich, and numerous. The Dukes of Lunenburgh are of the House of Brunswick.
Long. 32. 20. Lat. 53. 34.

The Dukedom of Lunenburgh is a part of the Lower Saxony; bounded on the North
by the Earldom of Pinnenburgh, and the Territories of Lubeck and Hamburgh; on
the West with the Earldom of Hoy, and the Dukedoms of Bremen and Ferden; on the
South with the Dukedom of Brunswick, and the Bishopric of Hildesheim; on the
East with the Dukedom of Mechlenburgh, and the Marquisate of Brandenburgh. It
is watered by the Elb, the Aller, the Ilmenaw, (anciently called Lindaw, now
commonly Die Awe) and the Jetze. The principal Cities and Towns are, (next that
which gives its Name) Zell, Danneberg, Harburgh, Winsen, Gifhorn, Borchdorp,
and Walsrade. This Dukedom was first given to one Otho, of the House of
Bavaria, by Frederick II. in 1235. which Family is still extant, and divided
into several Branches.

Lure, Lurense Monasterium, a Monastery dedicated to S. Martin, in the Franche
Comte; upon the River Lougnon, at the Foot of Mount Vauge; thirteen Leagues
from Besanzon to the North. The Abbat of which has a Sovereignty belonging to
his House.

Luri, a vast Village in the Isle of Corsica, near the Town of S. Florence.

Lusatia, a Province in Germany; called by the Germans, Lausnitz; and by the
French, Lusace. It has been annexed both to Misnia, and Bohemia; but in the
year 1623. it was granted by Frederick II. to the Elector of Saxony, and
confirmed in the year 1637. Bounded on the East by Silesia; on the North by
Marchia; on the West by the Vppper Saxony, and Misnia; and on the South by
Bohemia. It is watered by the Sprew and Neiss; and has in it six great Towns or
Cities; Bauken upon the Sprew, Gorlitz upon the Neiss, Sittaw, Ramitz, Luben,
and Guben. Also divided into two parts; The Upper, which lies toward Bohemia,
and Misnia; and the Lower, toward Saxony; which latter was granted to John
George the First, by the Elector of Saxony, in the year 1652. The Capital of it
is Soraw.

Lusignan, Lusignanum, Lucinianum, a Town in Poictou, with a Castle, upon the
River Vona; five Leagues from Poictiers to the North-West toward Rochel. In
this place there arose a Family, some of which have been Kings of Cyprus and
Jerusalem; it is also famous for the noble Castle of Melusine.

Luso, or Pluso, Aprusa, a River of Romandiola in Italy; it falls into the
Adriatic Sea, near Rimini, between Ravenna and Pesaro.

Lusson, Luciona, Lucionum, Luxiona, a small City in Poictou in France; which
is yet a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Bourdeaux, Instituted by Pope John
XXII. in 1317. who at the same time changed its Benedictine Abbey into a
Cathedral. It stands near a Marsh, and has no Walls; two Miles from the Sea,
six from Maillezais to the West, twenty four from Poictiers to the West, and
five from Rochelle to the North. Cardinal Richelieu was once Bishop of this See.

Lusson, Luconia, Lussonia, the principal of the Philippine Islands; frequently
called Manile, from the principal City in it; which is a Bishops See, and
together with the Island subject to the Spaniards. This Island is said to be a
thousand Miles in compass. It lies between Long. 145. and 150. and 14. and 20.
South. Lat.

Lusuc, Luzuck, Luzko, and Luckolusuc, Luceoria, a great City of Poland, which
is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Gnesna, and the Capital of Wolhynia.
It stands upon the River Ster, by a Lake, and has a strong Castle in it; not
above seven Polish Miles from the Confines of Russia to the East (twenty five,
says Baudrand,) thirty four from Lemburgh to the North-East, and eighty five
from Kiovia to the West. There are more Protestants and Jews than Roman
Catholics in this City, as Le Vasseur reports.

Luton, a Market Town in Bedfordshire, in the Hundred of Flitt, upon the
Borders of Hartfordshire and Buckinghamshire.

Lutterworth, a Market Town in Leicestershire, in the Hundred of Goodlaxton,
upon the River Swift, which soon after falls into the Avon; in a good Soil, and
beautified with a large Church; whereof the famous John Wicliff was a Parson,
whose Opinions entertained the Sessions of diverse Councils at London, Oxford.
etc. besides the General Council of Constance.

Lutzeilstein, a County in Lorain.

Lutzen, Lutza, a small Town in Misnia, a Province of the Upper Saxony in
Germany; where the Swedes won a signal Victory over the Austrian Forces; but
lost Gustavus Adolphus, the bravest Prince they ever had, Nov. 16. 1632. This
Town stands upon the River Elster, two German Miles from Maryburg to the
North-East, and the same from Leypsick to the West.

Lutsko, or Lutscko, the same with Lusuc.

Luwow, the same with Lemburgh.

Luxemburgh, Luxemburgum, a very strong City, and a Dukedom in the Low
Countries. The City is the Capital of that Dukedom. It is seated upon the River
Elza, in part on a Hill, the rest on a Plain. Ptolemy calls it Augusta
Romanduorum: Guiccardin says, it has a good Situation, a great Compass, strong
Fortifications, and convenient Buildings; tho by reason of the many Hazards of
War it had gone through, many of its Houses were not only neglected, but
deserted by their Owners. It has a Convent of the Order of S. Francis; Founded
in the time of that Saint: in which lies buried John King of Bohemia, Father of
Charles IV. Emperor of Germany, slain by the English at the Battle of Cressy,
in 1346. This City has continually born the first Brunts of the Wars between
the French and the Netherlands. In 1529. Charles V. took it from Francis I.
King of France. In 1542. it was taken and sacked by the Duke of Orleans;
retaken, and treated in the same manner in the year following. It is at this
day in the Hands of the French, who since their late Possession of it have
added to its Fortifications. Four Leagues from Thionville to the North, six
from Trier or Treves to the South-West, and nineteen from Maier to the
North-East.

The Dukedom of Luxemburgh, is one of the seventeen Provinces of the Low
Countries; lying most to the South-East; which was a part of the District,
belonging of old to the Treviri: on the East it is bounded by the Bishopric of
Trier, separated by the Mosel: on the North it has the Dukedoms of Limburgh and
Namur, with the Bishopric of Liege; on the West Picardy in part, and Hainault;
on the South Lorrain: on the West the Maes, and the Forest of Ardenne do both
close it. That part that lies towarps the West is barren; but abounds in Game,
and Venison. That which lies more to the East is fruitful in Corn, Minerals,
Quarries of excellent Stone, and whatever is necessary to the Life of Man. It
is in compass about sixty French Leagues. At first a part of the Earldom of
Ardenne; dismembered from it in the time of Otho the Emperor; made a Dukedom in
1309. (as L. Guicciardin avers,) by Henry VII. who had been Count of
Luxemburgh, before he was chosen Emperor. Sigismond, the last Duke and Emperor,
gave it to Elizabeth, (Daughter of John Duke of Gorlitz, his Brother,) to
prefer her in Marriage to Anthony Duke of Burgundy; and with the rest of the
Estates of that House, it came to the House of Austria. The French, who have
ever lain heavy on this Frontier Country, have ravished from them the Southern
parts, and the Cities of Monmedy, and Thionville. The Spaniards possess the
Northern, with Bastogne.

Luzcko. See Lusuc.

Lyche, Laodicea, an ancient Maritime City of Syria, toward the foot of the
Mountain Libanus: built by Seleucus, together with Antioch and Apamea; who
called those three Cities, the three Sisters. Dionysius Africanus intimates its
pleasant situation upon the Sea Coast. It is a different place from Laodicea in
Asia Minor.

Lycia, an ancient Province of Asia Minor, betwixt Caria and Pamphilia; famous
for the Mountain Chimaera, and the Cities Patara, Mira, Andriaca, etc. A part
of it is now contained in Aidinelli, and the rest in Briquia or Manteselli.

Lycopolis, the ancient Name of Munia in Egypt; given it, says Diodorus
Siculus, from the peoples adoration of Wolves there, in the time of the
Egyptian Idolatries. It has sometime been a Bishops See. See Munia. The famous
Meletius was Bishop of Lycopolis about the year 300.

Lydia, an ancient and celebrated Province of Asia Minor, wherein stood the
Cities Sardus, Philadelphia, Thyatira, etc. It had the honor to be a Kingdom
for six hundred seventy five years, till King Croesus in the fifty ninth
Olympiad, and the year of of the World 3510. and the year of Rome 210. was
overcome by Cyrus; who subjected it to the Persian Empire, as afterward it
fell successively under the Greeks and Romans, and now is under the Turks, by
the name of Carasia. The Rivers Hermus (now Sarabat), Pactolus, and Caystrus
(now Chiai), added to its ancient fame. A Colony, which this Country
transmitted into Italy, settled in the Provinces of Tuscany (the present), as
Virgil also remarks.

Lyd, A Market Town in the County of Kent, in Shepway Lath: It is a Member of
the Cinque Ports.

Lym, Moschius, a River of Bulgaria. Baudrand calls it Ibar.

Lymbach, Olimachum, a Town in the Lower Hungary, in the Consines of Stiria;
not above one German Mile from the River Muer, and four from Canisa to the
South West. There is another called by the same name, four Miles from this to
the South.

Lyn, Linum Regis, a Sea-Port-Town and Corporation in the County of Norfolk;
seated on the Eastern Shore of the River Ouse, where it falls into the Washes;
called by Ptolemy Aestuarium Metaris. It is a large Town, encompassed with a
deep Trench, and for the most part walled; divided by two small Rivers, which
have about fifteen Bridges over them. Built out of the ruins of another old
Town, called Lyn too; but standing in Marsh Land, on the opposite side of the
River; chiefly preferred on the account of the Haven, which is safe and easy
of access. It was at first called Bishops Lyn; because the ground it stands
upon, belonged to the Bishop of Norwich, till the Reign of Henry VIII. It has
great Privileges, which it obtained from King John, by siding with him against
the Barons: he gave them his own Sword, to be carried before their Mayor; and a
gilt Cup, which they still keep. From this place he went in 1216. with a mighty
Army, over the Washes, into Lincolnshire; with a design to fight the Barons,
(then united against him under Lewis, Dauphine of France,) but lost his
Treasures and Carriages in the passage, and his Life soon after. Then it was,
that he granted them their Charter; and he expiring soon after, and his Son
having a necessity to comply with his Barons, for the expulsion of the French,
their Liberties were seized, and the Town reduced to what it was before. In
1221. a Rebellion breaking out in Lincolnshire, this Prince ( Henry III.) had
occasion for their Loyalty, and Valor again: and they gave him such experience
of both, that he regranted them their Charter, which they have ever since
enjoyed. Nor does this place deserve the less commendation for their Loyal
Attempt, on the behalf of Charles I. in 1643. though instead of success, it
involved the Loyal Inhabitants in great Calamities. Charles II. created Sir
Horatio Townsend, Baronet, Baron of Lyn, April 20. 1661. rewarding at once his
and their Loyalty by this Honor. It elects two Members of Parliament.

Lions, Lugdunum Segusianorum, is an ancient City in France, called by the
Inhabitants, Lion; by the Germans, Leon; by the English, Lions; and by the
Poles, Lugdun. It is a very great, famous, strong, rich, populous City; an
Archbishops See, and the Capital of a Province, called from it Lionnois; seated
at the foot of an Hill, upon the confluence of the the Saone and Rhone, (two of
the principal Rivers of France,) in the Confines of la Bresse, and le Dauphine;
one hundred Leagues from Paris to the South, five from Vienne, thirty six from
Avignon, sixty from Turin, (as Baudrand represents the distances) and sixty
five from the Mediterranean Sea to the North. The first Colony the Romans
settled in this part of France; and built by Munacius Plancus under Augustus,
thirty five years before Christ. After this it flourished very much; especially
under the Auspicious Reign of Claudius Caesar, who was born here, nine years
before the Birth of our Savior, thirty three after the slaughter of Julius
Caesar. In the twelfth year of the Reign of Nero, the year of Christ sixty
five, it was miserably ruined by Fire; and Nero contributed very freely to the
rebuilding of it, as Tacitus tells us in his Annals. In after times no City in
the Empire flourished more, both as to Learning and Commerce. Severus, the
Emperor, treated it about 199. with great severity, for adhering to the Party
of Albinus against him; burning a great part of the City. Gratianus, the
Emperor, was perfidiously murdered in this City, in 384. Majoranus, General to
Leo the Emperor, at the request of Sidonius Apollinarus, repaired and
beautified this City very much, about 460. But this was no long-lived splendour;
the Goths and Almains soon after prevailing against the Romans in France. In
the Reign of Clothaire King of France, about 532. an end being put to the
Kingdom of Burgundy, (erected here by the Goths,) this City fell into the Hands
of the French. In the Reign of Gunthram, King of Metz, between 565. and 596.
this City was again burnt: nor did it suffer less from the Moors about 730. who
were called by the remainder of the Goths, against the Franks. About 955. it
was given to Conrade I. King of Burgundy. After this, it was for some time
subject to the Counts of the Forest, till 1173. The Sea was founded by S.
Potinus, and Irenaeus; the first of which suffered Martyrdom here, about 177.
Anno 1079. Pope Gregory VII. is said to have made it an Archbishops See;
doubtless it was so long before. Pope Clement V. was crowned here in the
presence of Philip ( the Fair) King of France, Edward I. of England, and James
King of Arragon, in 1305. There have been many Councils held here. The most
celebrated, was that in 1245. under Innocent IV. against Frederick II. where
that Prince was deposed as an Heretic, for Intelligence with the Sultan, and
Familiarity with his Women; which produced a destructive War in Germany and
Italy. There was another in 1274. under Pope Gregory X. against the Greek
Church, in which were five hundred Bishops, sixty or seventy Archbishops, and
one thousand other Ecclesiastics, together with the Patriarchs of Antioch and
Constantinople, etc. Long. 26. 00. Lat. 45. 15.

Lyonnois, Lugdunensis Provincia, is a small Province in France; having on the
East la Bresse, and the Dauphine; on the South and West le Foretz; and on the
North le Beaujolois; it has on the East the Rhosne, and extends from it to the
West about twelve Leagues, in length about fifteen.

Lions en Forest, Leones, a small Town in Normandy; encompassed with Woods and
Forests, upon the River Orleau; four Leagues from Roan to the East.

Lion en Beausse, a Village in that Province, seven Leagues from Orleans to the
North.

Lion sur Loyre, a Village in Orleans, in the Confines of Berry, one League
above Sully to the East.

Lysmore. See Lismore.

M A.
MAara, Spelunca Sidoniorum, a Grott or Cave in Palestine, in the Territory of
Great Zidon, or the Land of the Sidonians, mentioned Josh. 13. 4. In the year
1161. the Christians secured themselves for sometime here against the Saracens.

Macandan, a Promontory in Africa, called by the Ancients Arsinarium; now
commonly, Cape Verde.

Macao, Amacao, Amacum, a City in China, in the Province of Quantum; upon the
South part of that Kingdom; in Long. 141. 30. Lat. 23. 00. Built upon a small
Island, with two Forts: heretofore under the Portuguese; during which times it
was a celebrated Mart, much frequented, and very rich: but being now in the
hands of the Tartars, who have conquered China, it decays a pace; and is much
declined from what it was.

Macaria, a Lake or Marsh, near Marathon, a Town in Attica; in which a
considerable part of the Forces of Xerxes, King of Persia, perished; being
beaten by the Grecians both by Sea and Land at the same time; and in their
flight forced into this unpassable place by the pursuers. Whence the Proverb,
in Macariam abi, for a Curse. This also was the ancient Name of a City in the
Island of Cyprus, now become a Village, and called Jalines. The whole Island of
Cyprus had the Title of (...) given it, by the Greeks from its fertility. And
the Island of Maczua, in the Gulf of Arabia, has been honored with the same.

Macascar, Macassar, Macasaria, a great Island in the Indian Sea, sometimes
called Celebes. Extended from North to South two hundred French Leagues; and
one hundred broad: there are in it six Kingdoms, Macasar, Cion, Sanguin,
Cauripana, Getigan and Supara: the two principal Cities, are Macasar and
Bantachia. The South parts are much frequented by the English and Dutch: which
latter of late in 1669. have severely treated the King of Macascar; whose
Dominions lie in the South of the Island, and comprehend the far greatest part
of it. This Island lies between the Molucco's to the East, and Borneo to the
West; and is sometimes ascribed to the former. The Line cutteth the Northern
part of it. The Inhabitants heretofore went naked; did eat Man's Flesh, and had
all the Criminals of the Molucco's sent over to them for that purpose: but they
are much civilized. Two young Princes of this Country, Brothers, that were bred
at Siam in the Mohammedan Religion, and sent to Paris by the King of Siam to be
instructed in Christianity, on October 17. 1687. received Christian Baptism at
Paris. It produces plenty Rice, Fruit, Cocao, Cattle, Fish; besides Gold,
Ivory, Cotton, etc. The City Macasar stands in the South part, and enjoys the
benefit of a good Port.

Macclesfield or Maxfield, a large fair Market Town in Cheshire, upon the River
Bollin. The Capital of its Hundred. Adorned with the Title of an Earldom, in
the Person of the Right Honorable Charles Gerard.

Macchia, a Duchy in the Capitanata, in the Kingdom of Naples.

Macedonia, is a Kingdom of great antiquity and fame in Greece. Anciently
bounded by the Adriatic Sea to the West; the Aegean Sea to the East, (now
called the Archipelago;) the Upper Moesia, a part of Illyricum, (now called
Servia, cut off by Mount Sandus) to the North; and on the South it had Epirus,
Thessalia, and Achaia. It was then divided into four parts, as Livy says;
under which were twenty six Provinces: and at this day, though Albania, (which
was of old a part of it) is dismembered, yet the remainder is divided into four
parts by the Turks. 1. Jamboli, of old Macedonia prima, and secunda; which lies
East between Thrace and the Bay of Thessalonica. 2. Macedonia, properly so
called, lies between Mount Karoponitze to the North, Thessalia to the South,
and the Bay of Thessalonica to the East. 3. Comenolitari, the third part, (
Macedonia tertia, and part of Thessalia,) has Macedonia properly so called, on
the North; Albania on the West, Thessalia on the South, and the same Bay on the
East. 4. Janna, lies yet more South; and is the remainder of that which was
anciently called Thessalia: on the North it has Commenolitari, on the West
Epirus, on the South Livadia, and on the East the Archipelago and Bay of
Negropont. The Reader may observe, that Thessalia is now a part of Macedonia,
though anciently not; and Albania which anciently was a part of it, now is a
separate Kingdom: both are under the Turks. This Country, anciently divided
into one hundred and fifty Tribes or Nations, (as Pliny says,) was by Philip
and Alexander his Son, reduced first into one great and formidable body: which
spread its Conquests not only over all the rest of Greece; but passing the
Hellespont, Alexander the Great overthrew the Persian Empire; and became Lord
of all those Countries between the Caspian and Euxine Seas to the North; Mount
Imaus to the East; the Persian Sea, Red Sea, the Cataracts of Nile to the
South; the Deserts of Lybia, and the Adriatic Sea to the West: which Empire at
his death became divided into four great Kingdoms, whereof Macedonia was the
least. Philip of Macedon, (the two and twentieth King of the first Race,) began
in the year of the World 3155. which ended in Alexander the Great, in 3642. or
thereabouts. Cassander extirpated the first Family; and began a second in 3648.
which ended in Perseus XI. in that Succession, subdued by the Romans in 3789.
But it became not entirely subject, till the Turks first entered this Province
under Bajazet their fourth King; who took Nicopolis, (a Town upon the Bay of
Thessalonica,) in 1392. The Conquest thereof was finished by Amurath II. (their
sixth King) in 1429. by the Conquest of Thessalonica, and all the other places
in this Kingdom, considered without Albania. Now governed by a Turkish
Sangiack, under the Beglerbeg of Greece, who has 8000. Crowns the year Revenue;
and finds in Peace only one hundred Horse for the defense of the Country, in
times of War four hundred. All the ancient Cities are ruined, except
Thessalonica, and Larissa.

Macerata, a City in the Dominions of the Pope, in the Marcha Anconitana; which
is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Fermo: it stands upon a Hill near the
River Chiento, and is thought one of the best places in this Marquisate, being
therefore chosen for the Residence of the Governor. Built about 410. as
Blondus avers, The University was opened here by Pope Nicolas IV. in 1290.
restored by Pope Paul III. in 1322. united to this See for ever in 1586. It
lies fifteen Miles from Loretto, and the Shoars of the Adriatic Sea to the
West. There was a Synod here assembled in 1615.

Machere, Machera, or Macheronta, a Castle upon the River Jordain, and the
Banks of the Dead Sea, in Palestine, five or six Leagues from Jerusalem: where,
according to Josephus, S. John Baptist was beheaded by the order of Herod.

Machian, one of the Molucco Isles.

Machynleth, a Market Town in the County of Montgomery in Wales, and the
Hundred of Kyfilog.

Machlyes, an ancient People, that dwelt near the Magna Syrtes of Africa,
mentioned by Aristotle.

Maclena, Cydarus, a small River of Thrace, which falls into the Black Sea, a
little above Constantinople.

Macoco, a vast Kingdom in the middle of Africa, toward the Upper Aethiopia,
and the River Zaire; the Prince of which has ten Kingdoms under him: on the
North he has the Kingdom of Muaco, (which is ever in War with him;) to the
South-East that of Giringbomb. This Kingdom lies two hundred and seventy
Spanish Miles from the Kingdom of Congon to the South. Jerome Lobus mentions it
in his History of Ethiopia. Mensol is the Capital City of it.

Macran, or Makeran, Caramania, a Province of Persia toward the Indian Ocean,
and the Confines of Indostan; which is a part of the ancient Caramania. It has
on the North Sigestan, on the South the Indian Ocean, on the West Caramania,
(properly so called,) and on the East Sinda. It is under a Prince of its own,
who is a Tributary to the King of Persia. Its principal City is Macran, and its
best Port is called Guadel.

Macre, a Gulf of the Mediterranean Sea, betwixt Lycia in Asia Minor, and the
Island Rhodes: said by some to be the Glaucus Sinus of Caria.

Macrobii, the ancient people of the Island of Meroe in Aethiopia, so called
from an observation of their living to a great age: Not but that this Name, in
the Writings of the old Geographers and Historians, is communicated to the
Hyperborei, Macedonii and others, where the same Longaevity occurred.

Macrocephali, an ancient people toward the Bosphorus Thracius, in the account
of P. Mela; so named, from an observation, that they had extraordinary long
heads. But Stephanus places them near Colchis in the Lesser Asia, and Pliny in
the neighborhood of the City Cherasonda in Cappadocia.

Macuf, Mosceus, a River of Persia, which falls into the Bay of Persia.

Macyn, India Vlterior, one of the Provinces of Asia; called the further
Indies, or India beyond Ganges.

Maczua, Orine, an Island in the Gulf of Arabia, near Africa; over against the
City of Mazzuan, in 17 degrees. Lat. In the Maps, called Mazuan, and sometimes
Macaria; under the Turks, since 1557.

Madagascar, Cerne, Menuthias, Madagascaria, Delphina, a vast Island on the
Eastern Coast of Africa; called by the Inhabitants, Madecase; by the French, l'
Isle de Dauphine; by the Portuguese, S. Lorenzo; by the English, Madagascar and
S. Laurence; by the Arabians, Sarandib. Ptolemy calls it Menuthias; Pliny,
Cerne Aethiopica. It is near one hundred Miles from the Coast of Africa to the
East; and one of the greatest Islands in the World; extentending from 1 to 25
degrees. of Southern Latitude; but its breadth much less; as not exceeding one
hundred and thirty English Miles. Discovered by the Portuguese in 1506. on S.
Laurence's day. There was no Cities in it: the French have of late settled some
Colonies on the Southern Shoars. Stephen Flacourt, a Frenchman, has given a
large account of this Island. The Inhabitants are large of Stature, exceeding
black, Warlike, much addicted to Fishing, great Eaters: Nature has accordingly
provided them with plenty of Cattle, Fish, Fowl, Fruits, and what ever is
necessary for the life of Man; which they use without Labor or Care, regarding
neither Silver nor Gold, nor any thing but Beads and Bracelets for Ornament,
Music and Dancing for their Recreation. And the utmost Number they can tell,
is Ten. Herbert. It Is also related, there is a mixture of Whites amongst them,
who being circumcised, and using the Names of Moses, Aaron, Esther and the
like, may be thought to descend from the transmigrations of some of the ten
lost Tribes of the Jews. About two hundred years ago, the Caliph of Meccha
dispatched a Mission of Arabians hither, to teach Arabic and the Alcaron;
which altogether missed not of its effect. The Northern Provinces are yet
unknown to the Europeans. As for Capes, Ports and Roads, Rivers, and fruitful
Mountains, Mines of Iron and Steel, Precious Stones and Woods, Madagascar has
them. But no Mines of Brass, Tin, Lead, Silver or Gold: And the Natives are
divided into diverse Herds and Tribes, under a Chief, like the Tartars.

Madaura, an ancient City betwixt Lambesa and Hippo in Barbary: remarkable for
being the Birthplace of Apuleius, thence intiuled Madaurensis. It had the
honor heretofore of a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Carthage, and
likewise of an Academy of note, at which S. Austin studied.

Maday. See Media.

Madera, an Island on the Western Shore of Africa; called Madeira by the
Portuguese, of old Atlantica. Discovered by the Portuguese in 1419. and called
by this Name from its plenty of Wood. Its length is twenty five Leagues, its
Circuit sixty. The principal Town, Funchal. It lies in 32 degrees. Lat. and Long.
360. Prodigiously fruitful; especially in Sugar, Mather, (a Dying stuff,) and
Wines; the slipes whereof were brought from Candy. The Birds at first suffered
themselves to be taken up; but have since learned to fear Mankind. It has
plenty of Water, and all other things needful for the life of Man. Though an
Englishman is said to have landed here in 1344. yet the Portuguese were the
first that peopled this Island, and still possess it. They found it as one
great Wood; and to clear it, they put fire to it, which raged so horribly at
first, that they were forced to go to Sea, to avoid its fury. The Ashes
contributed exceedingly to the Fertility of it. It is now returned to its
natural strength, sufficient to maintain a vast number of Inhabitants. Funchal
is an Archbishops See, and the Residence of the Governor: besides which, they
reckon thirty six Parishes: Some call Madera, from its Fertility and Beauty,
the Queen of Islands.

Madera, a River in South America, also called Cayane. It arises in the
Confines of Peru, by the City Argentea; and after a long Course, falls into the
River of Amazons, in the Province of Cayane, in Long. 312. Lat. 02. 12.

Maderaspatan, (that is, the Port of Madera,) is a City in the Kingdom of
Narsinga; on the Coast of Coromandel, in the Bay of Bengala; which has been
some years in the hands of the Hollanders.

Mader. See Maeander.

Madrid, Madritum, Mantua Carpetanorum, Madridium in Carpetanis, a great City
in Spain, the Royal Seat of the Kings of that Country. It has a noble Palace,
and is every day increasing. It stands upon the River Manzanares, (which falls
into the Xaraina, at S. Martin; which falls into the Tajo, Tagus, above Toledo)
twelve Miles to the North of Toledo. This City, says Baudrand, has no Walls:
some, that have lived there, say, it has a Mud one. It stands in the Kingdom of
New Castile, upon the top of an Hill, in a fruitful Country, an healthful Air.
The Royal Palace, though not great, is very beautiful and magnificent. The
Kings of Spain have resided here, but since the Reign of Philip II. before
which time it was accounted only a Village. In 1473. a Council was celebrated
here, to correct the Simony, Debauchery, and Ignorance of the Clergy of this
Kingdom, under Pope Paul II. Long. 17. 00. Lat. 40. 40.

Madure, a City in the East Indies, in the Promontory of Malabar; great and
populous. Heretofore under the King of Bisnagar; but now, together with the
Country in which it stands, subject to a Prince of its own; who is yet a kind
of Subject to the King of Bisnagar. It lies between Malabar to the West, and
the Gulf of Manar, (which parts Malabar from Ceylon) to the East: he is
Sovereign of this Coast, and draws a considerable Revenue from it.

Maeander, a great River in the Lesser Asia, in the Greater Phrygia. Now
commonly called Madre Mindre, and Bojouc Mindre; that is, the Great Mindre; in
opposition to that at Ephesus, which is called the Little Minder. It springs
from a Fountain, called by the ancient Greeks, Alocrene; and runs with so
Oblique a Current, as it often seems to be returning back again into it self:
making in its passage six hundred Turns, though it is no very long Course it
performs. Hence one of the Ancients observes, it was the only River in the
World, which returned almost back to its Fountain. Many of the Poets alluded to
it in their Poems. Our Countryman, Mr. Wheeler, who crossed it, says; it was
there sixteen Fathoms over: they pretended, it was as deep as broad, the
Current was exceeding swift: he gives a Figure of it. It falls into the
Archipelago, between Heraclea and Miletus, on the South of Ephesus.

Maelstroom, Vmbilicus maris, a Gulf or Whirl. Pit on the Coast of Norway, and
Province of Scanea; between the Isles of Luffoot and Weroe. Many wonders are
told of this place, which in all probability are not true.

Maes, Mosa, a vast River in the Low Countries; called by the French, la Meuse;
and by the Dutch, die Maes: it arises in the Mountains of Vauge, ( Vogesus) in
Champagne in France; ten Leagues from Chaumont en Bassigny to the East: running
North through Lorrain and the Dukedom of Bar, it washes S. Michael, Verdun,
Sedain, Charleville, and Maiers; then entering Namur, it washes Dinant and
Namur; at which it takes in from the West the Sambre: turning East it enters
the Bishopric of Liege; and waters Hoey and Liege, (where it takes in the
Our, Vrta, out of Luxemburgh on the East) Maestricht, and Maseyck: so passing
to Roermond and Venlo, at Lettem in Guelderland he changes his Course from
North-East to North-West; and at Cuyck turns directly West: passing by Grave (a
Town of Brabant,) Ratenburgh and Heusden, at Worckum he takes in the Vahal, or
Wael, (a Branch of the Rhine) beneath the Island of Bommel, made by these two
Rivers: so watering Gorcum, Dort, and the Briel, he falls together with the
Rhine, into the German Ocean: This is a noble, stately Stream; and has upon his
Banks many great Cities, and fine Towns.

Maeseyck, Masacum, is a City of the Lower Germany, in the Bishopric of Liege;
in the County of Loss, in the Borders of the Upper Guelderland; five Leagues
beneath Maestricht, three above Roermond, seven from Liege; and is a
considerable Place.

Maesland. See Masay.

Maestricht, Trajectum ad Mosam, Trajectum superius, is a City of Brabant; upon
the Western Bank of the Maes, (which is here covered with a beautiful Stone
Bridge, consisting of nine Arches) from whence it has its name, signifying the
Passage over the Maes. On the Eastern Bank lies the Wyck, which is a Suburb to
this City. The Bishops of Liege, and the Dukes of Brabant, heretofore divided
the Jurisdiction of this City between them: but the City was in the hands of
the latter, and with that Duchy passed to the House of Austria; who enjoyed
it, till 1632. when it was taken by the Hollander. In 1673. it was taken after
a sharp Siege by the French. In 1676. the Hollander attempted the reduction of
it, without success: in 1678. they recovered it by the Treaty of Nimeguen. It
is both walled, and covered with considerable outworks, after the new Mode:
toward the South-East, lies a Hill that rises gently and overlooks part of
the Town, under which is one of the noblest Quarries of Stone in the World: to
secure the Town from any disadvantage it might receive from this Hill, the
Bastion answering to it, is built very high: there is a Horn-work within Musket
shot of it, and the Wyck is rather stronger than the Town. For the distances,
see Maeseyck. The Bishops See was removed from hence to Liege, by S Hubert, in
713. Long 27. 12. Lat. 50. 50.

Maesta, Mapha, a City in Arabia Foelix.

Magadoxo, a City on the East of Africa, in the Kingdom of Zanguebar; which has
a strong Castle, and a convenient Port. This City lies four hundred and fifty
Miles South, from the Mouth of the Red Sea. In Long. 70 00. Lat. 02. 40. The
Portuguese have treated it severely.

Magareb, the Atlantic Ocean.

Magdeburg, Mesujum, Parthenopolis, Magdeburgum, a great City and an
Archbishops See, the Metropolis of the Lower Saxony, upon the Elbe; the Capital
of a Territory of the same name; a Hanse Town, and an Imperial Free City, ever
since 940. Which still retains its Freedom and Liberty, though under the
Protection of its own Archbishop, and the Elector of Brandenburg; who had the
adjacent Territory assigned to him, with the Title of a Dukedom, by the Peace
of Munster, after the death of the present Administrator or Archbishop. This
City embraced the Reformation in 1567. upon which account it has suffered very
much since. It lies twelve Miles from Wittenburg to the North-West, a little
more from Wolffenbuttel to the East, and nine from Halberstadt to the same. In
Long. 33. 53. Lat. 52. 18. commonly called Meydburg, that is, Maids-Town.
Ptolemy calls it (...); and most believe it to be the Mesuium in Antoninus; but
however the present Pile was built by Otho I. Emperor of Germany, at the
request of Editha his Wife, Daughter of Edmund King of England, about 940.
Which Lady was afterward buried in this City. It was for some time the Seat of
the Empire; fortified with Walls, Rampires, Towers, and a deep Trench; so that
Charles V. in 1549. could proscribe and spoil its Territories, but not take it.
In 1631. it was taken by Du Tilly, the Emperors General; being suddenly
surrounded by an Army, when they did not expect it, nor had made those
Preparations requisite, of Men, Victuals, and Ammunition; the want of which
last was the principal cause of its being taken by Storm, May 10. after a Siege
of great sharpness for fifteen Months: and being set on fire to fright the
Inhabitants from the defense of it, the fire prevailed so far above the
intentions of the Incendiaries, that the whole City was laid wast. The Duke of
Saxony retook it in 1636. In 1666. it was again forced, by the Arms of the Duke
of Brandenburg, to accept Augustus Duke of Saxony for its Administrator or
Archbishop.

The Archbishopric of Magdeburg, now turned into a Dukedom, is a very small
Province of Germany, in the Lower Saxony. Bounded on the North with the old
Marquisate of Brandenburgh; on the East with the middle Marquisate; on the
South with Anhault, and Halberstadt; and with the Dukedom of Brunswick on the
West. The Capital of it is Magdeburg.

Magdeburg, a Castle of Germany, in the Upper Circle of the Rhine, in the
Bishopric of Spire; in 1517. sold by Vlricus Duke of Wirtemburg, to Philip
Electoral Bishop of Spire. It is also called Madenburg.

Magellanica, a Country in South America, of great extent toward that Pole. On
the North it has the Countries of Cili, Tacumania, and Paragua; on the South
the Streights of Magellan, and le Maire; on the West, the Atlantic; and on the
East the Pacifick Ocean. This together with the Streights, took its name from
Ferdinando Magalhaens, a Portuguese, who in 1520. in the name of the King of
Spain discovered it. His Ship came home, but he was slain in the East Indies:
and this was the first Ship that ever Sailed round the Globe of the Earth;
which has since been done by Sir Francis Drake, Cavendish, and several others.
Magellanica is little known, and less inhabited by any of the European Nations
for the present.

Magi, the Philosophers and Priests of the ancient Persians, famous for their
application to the knowledge of the Stars, and their introduction of a natural
Theology from thence upon the belief of one Supreme Divinity. Their esteem in
Persia was so great, that when K. Cambyses went in Person to the War in Egypt,
he left the Government of his Estates in his absence to one of these Magi,
called Patizithes; who after the sudden death of Cambyses, established by a
cheat Smerdis, another Magus, Brother to Patizithes, upon the Throne of the
Empire, in the room of Smerdis Brother to Cambyses.

Magiar, Hungary.

Magna-vacca, Caprusia, one of the Mouths of the River Po; which separating
from the Branch called di Volana at Ferrara, falls into the Adriatic Sea at
Comachio; between Po di Primaro to the South, and Po di Volana to the North.

Magnesia in Lydia, see Manissa. In Caria, see Mangresia. Also an ancient
Province of Macedonia; and a Promontory, now otherwise called Capo Verlichi and
Capo di San Georgio.

Magog, Persia.

Magonza, Moguntia. See Mentz.

Magra, Cinyphus, Macres, a River of Africa.

Magra, Macra, a River in Italy, which was heretofore the boundary of Liguria
to the South. It arises in the Apennine Hills, in the limits of the Dukedom of
Parma; and running Southward by Pontremoli, being augmented with the Verra,
Vla, and some other, it waters a Valley called by its own name; and passing
through the States of Genoua, a little above Serezana, falls into the Ligurian
Sea; sixty five Miles East of Genoua, thirty five North-West of Lucca. Lucan
mentions this River in his Second Book.

Magarah, Pharos, a small, but celebrated Island near Alexandria in Egypt.

Maguelone, Magalone, an ancient Roman City in the Lower Languedoc; seated in a
small Island in the Marshes so called, on the Mediterranean Sea; taken by the
Saracens, at their Entrance into France by Aquitain, after their Conquest of
Spain, in 730: retaken and destroyed by Charles Martel, about 735. or 736. for
fear it should fall into the hands of the Saracens again. And it lay in its
Ruins till 1075. when its Bishop took some care to revive it, but to small
purpose. The Bishops See being removed in 1536. to Montpelier, this Town is
almost totally desolate. It had formerly Counts of its own to be its
Governors. But in 1215. P. Innocent III. invested the temporalities in the
Church, because Raymond VI. Earl of Toulouse, then Earl of Maguelone, espoused
the cause of the Albigenses.

Mahara, Nilus.

Maholech, Delta, the Lower part of Egypt, enclosed by the Branches of the Nile.

Mahamora, a Fortress upon the Coast of the Kingdom of Fez, upon the River
Suba; on the Coast of the Atlantic Ocean, in the Province of Fez; but on the
Confines of that of Asgar. In Long. 10. 00. Lat. 33. 10. It has a good Harbor,
of great Reception; and has been in the hands of the Portuguese ever since 1614.

Mahometa, or Machometa, Adrumetum, a City on the Coast of Africa, mentioned by
Pliny, Mela, and Ptolemy. Heretofore a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Carthage: now a strong Town on the Mediterranean, in the Kingdom of Tunis;
seated upon the next Bay to that of Tunis to the East, which is called the
Gulf of Mahometa. This place is also called by the Arabs, Hamammetha. In the
Year 394. a Council was held here, the Canons whereof are confused amongst the
Body of the Canons of the African Church. Long. 36. 40. Lat. 32. 40.

Majaquana, one of the Luccaye Islands, belonging to North America; between
Hispaniola to the South and Samana to the North.

Maida, a Principality in the further Calabria, in the Kingdom of Naples, near
Nicastro.

Maidenhead, a Market Town in Berkshire, in the Hundred of Bray.

Maidstone, Madus, Vagniacae, is a fair, sweet, populous Town in the County of
Kent, in Aylesford Lath, upon the River Medway, near its head, from which it
has this name: There is a fair Stone Bridge built by the Archbishops of
Canterbury over this River. Edward VI. Incorporated this Town, and granted it a
Mayor; which was taken from them in Queen Mary's time for favoring Wyat's
Rebellion in 1554. But Queen Elizabeth restored them to their former State. In
ancient times their chief Magistrate was called a Portgreve, from Grave an old
German word still used by the Germans in Markgrave, Reingrave, and Landtgrave.
Charles I. added another Honor to this Place, when in 1628. he created
Elizabeth Finch, (Grandmother to the late Heneage Finch, Earl of Winchelsey,
late Lord Chancellor of England) Viscountess of Maidstone, and Countess of
Winchelsey, with an Entail upon her Heir Males: which Honors are now possessed
by Heneage Her Grandchild, the Second of this Family. Heneage, late Earl of
Nottingham, and Lord Chancellor of England, was another of Her Posterity. This
is the Town where the Assizes and Sessions are kept; with which honor, it has
that of the Election of two Members of the House of Commons.

Maienne. See Mayenne.

Majella, Nicates, a Mountain in Abruzzo, a Province of the Kingdom of Naples;
near the River Pescara [ Aternus,] as Holstenius affirms.

Maillezais or Mallezais, Malleaca, Malleacum, a small City in Poictou in
France; seated in a Morass made by the Rivers Seure Niortoise, (which falls
into the Bay of Aquitain) and the Hautize: The ancient Earls of Poictou and
Dukes of Guyenne chose it for their Residence, and Founded in it an Abbey about
the Year 1030. which by P. John XXII. in 1317. was changed into a Bishops See;
but being little inhabited by reason of the badness of the Air, the Bishopric
was suppressed in 1649. and the City of Rochell substituted in its place by
Pope Innocent X. It stands nine Leagues from Rochell to the North-East, and
five from Niore to the South. Long. 19. 36. Lat. 46. 21. according to the last
Maps.

Mailly, a Seigniory near Amiens in Picardy, giving name to an honorable Family
of that Province.

Maina or Maines. or Braccio di Maina, a City on the South of the Morea,
supposed to have been the ancient Leuctra or Tenarus in Laconia; on the East
side of the Gulf of Coron; North of Cape Matapan, the most South Cape of the
Morea. The Inhabitants are called the Mainotes; and have in this present War
contributed very much to the driving the Turks out of the Morea, by serving in
great numbers under the Venetians against them. It is said it was a
Commonwealth before: but Coronelli in his late description of the Morea,
assures us; it was a Fort built by the Turks upon the Ruins of Cersapolis, to
keep these Mainotes under; who being impatient of the Turkish Slavery and
extremely Warlike, had betaken themselves to the Rocks and Forests, and would
pay no Tribute to the Turks: thereupon the Turks began to build the Fort of
Maina: but Querini Captain of the Gulf for the Venetians in 1570.
understanding their design, Landed, and by the help of the Mainotes took this
Fort, and ruined it entirely; by which means the Mainotes were preserved, and
obliged to the Service of this State.

Main Amber, a noted strong Rock, nigh to Mounts Bay, in the County of
Cornwall; mounted upon others of a lesser size with so equal a ponderation,
that it may be stirred, it is said, yet not moved out of its place.

Maine, le Maine, Cenomanensis Provincia, is a great and fruitful Province in
France; the old Inhabitants of which were the Cenomani Aulerci; its greatest
extent is from East to West: on the North it is bounded by Normandy, on the
West by Bretagne, (This part is called the Lower Maine;) on the South by Anjou,
and on the East by Le Perch. (This, the Upper Maine; and of the two, the most
fruitful and pleasant.) The Rivers Huisne, Sarte and Mayenne water it. The
Principal City in it is Man's, the next Mayenne. Charles, the second Son of
Francis Duke of Guise, being made Duke of Maine and after that General of the
League against Henry III. and IV. of France, made this Province frequently
mentioned in the Histories of France of those times. The Common Proverb of the
People of this Province, is, Qu' un Manceau vaut un Norman and demi; One Man of
Maine is worth one Norman, and the half of another.

Main Land, Pomona, the Principal of the Isles of Orkney; which is twenty two
English Miles long; and has a Town called Kirkwall, on the Northern Shore for
its Capital: its greatest extent is from East to West, and its greatest breadth
about ten Miles.

The Mainotes. See Maina.

Maintez, Meintez. See Mentz.

Majorca or Mallorca, Balearium insulae, Palma Majorca, an Island in the
Mediterranean Sea, on the Eastern Coast of Spain, over against the Kingdom of
Valencia; at the distance of about sixty Miles between Minorca to the East, and
Yvica to the West; which three Islands constituted the Kingdom of Majorca, so
called from this, the greatest of them. Its Circuit is near one hundred and ten
Miles: the Principal City is Mallorca, Palma, or Majorca, which is a Bishops
See, under the Archbishop of Tarragona, and a flourishing University, in which
Raymundus Lullius taught, and his tenets are now ex instituto maintained. It is
great, strong, and has a Haven belonging to it on the Western shore of the
Island. Long. 24. 40. Lat. 40. 00. The Maps place it in Lat. 38. 26. The
Inhabitants of this Island were of old famous Archers, from whence they were
called Baleares; at first they went naked: being subdued by the Carthaginians,
Anno Mundi 3500. they became more civilized, and served in the Carthaginian
Wars against the Romans; till together with Spain they fell under that
Republic in the Year of Rome 630. 521 Years before the Birth of our Savior.
The Moors were their next Masters; who crossing out of Africa took Possession
of them about the same time they Conquered Spain. Raymund Earl of Barcelone, by
the assistance of the Genouese, expelled the Moors in 1102: but the Genouese,
as if they had repented this good Deed restored them again. In 1228. they were
finally ex elled by James King of Arragon. This Prince in 1230. made James his
Son King of Majorca; whose Posterity enjoyed this Kingdom till 1341. when James
III. (the fourth King of Majorca) was slain in Battle by Pedro IV. King of
Arragon; and ever since these Islands have been annexed to that Kingdom. The
Land on all sides toward the Sea is Mountainous and Barren: inwards more
Champain and Fruitful; affording sufficient Oil, Corn, Wine, and Fruits, to
maintain its Inhabitants, who are estimated to be thirty thousand.

Maira, Merula, Macra, a River in Piedmont; which rises out of the Alps; and
flowing through the Marquisate of Saluzzo, falls into the Po at Pancalieri, a
small City nine Miles above Turino to the South.

Malabar, Malabaria, Dachinabares, a vast Peninsula, or Promontory of the
Hither East Indies: between the Arabic or Indian Sea to the West, and the
Gulf of Bengala or Ganges to the East. Dr. Heylyn bounds it on the North with
the River Gangeraco; Baudrand with the Kingdom of Decam; Buno bound it to the
North with the Cape of Darame, ten Miles beneath Goa. Cluverius reckons up
these Kingdoms in it; Calicut, Coulete, Cranganor, Cochin, Coulam, and
Travancor: of which Calicut is the Supreme, and therefore styled Samory by
them, that is, the Great Emperor, and God on Earth. For its extent Dr. Heylyn
gives it three hundred English Miles to the Cape of Comori, (which he supposes
to be the Commaria Extrema of Ptolemy;) and its greatest breadth fifty Miles at
the North. Baudrand makes its length one hundred French Leagues; and its
breadth ten, or fifteen, which is too little. Cluverius makes it eighty German
Miles long, and forty five broad. All agree, that it is the most fruitful,
populous, and temperate Region in the whole East Indies. The Inhabitants are
very fierce, savage, and go naked, except what Nature desires to have hidden.
They have a hatred of theft. The Women take as many Husbands as they please,
contrarily to the custom of the Plurality of Wives amongst the Mahometans. It
is also one of the most ancient Kingdoms; for many Ages subject to one Prince;
till about 900, Sarama Parymal being seduced by the Saracens left his Kingdom,
and went and died at Meccha: and having no Children, parcelled out his Kingdom
amongst his most faithful Servants. Cananor had a strong Castle in the hands of
the Portuguese till 1663. when the Dutch expelled them: the Hollanders are also
possessed of Cochin and Coulam. The rest is in the Possession of Indian
Princes, whose Dominions are very small.

Malaca, Malacca, Aurea Chersonesus, a City and Kingdom in the Aurea
Chersonesus, or most Southern Promontory of the East Indies; between Sumatra
and Borneo. The City stands on the Western Shore; in Long. 127. 25. Lat. 03.
40. Subject to the King of Ihor, till the Portuguese in 1511. took it under
Alphonsus Albuquerque, who made it an Episcopal City: In 1606. the Dutch
besieged it in vain: but in 1640. the Dutch took it from them after a Siege of
six Months. It is a celebrated Mart, has a large Haven, a strong Castle, and a
River of the same name with the City; lying a Mile from it to the South-East.
The Kingdom or Promontory of Malaca, which takes its name from this City, has
the Kingdom of Siam to the North; and on all other sides is surrounded by the
Ocean: it extends from one degrees. of Northern Lat. to Queda, in six degrees. Dr.
Heylyn gives it two hundred and seventy English Miles in length: it is not of
equal breadth: and being extremely hot and parched by the Sun, not very
populous, or fruitful; but very rich by reason of the vast resort of all
Nations for Trade. This was a part of the Kingdom of Siam, till 1258; when
Parimisera and some other of the Javan Nobility being oppressed by their own
King, fled to Sangesinga Viceroy for the Siamite; who receiving them kindly,
was by them perfidiously slain: they erected in Sicapura this New Kingdom;
which being soon reduced again by the Siamite, they built the Malaca; and got
the Trade too from the former. The Moors joining with them, they wholly
revolted from Siam, (to whom they had submitted:) therefore that Prince in
1500. sent a Navy of two hundred Ships to reduce them; and thirty thousand Men
with four hundred Elephants to attack them by Land: but Tempests and the
disorders of his Soldiers made this Expedition miscarry. And in 1511. they fell
into the hands of the Portuguese.

Malaca, Pangaeus, a Mountain in Thrace, near the City Philippi; at the foot of
which runs the River Nestus.

Malaga, a City in the Kingdom of Granada in Spain; seated in a Plain on the
Shoars of the Mediterranean Sea; twenty seven Leagues from Sevil to the
South-East, the same from Cadiz to the East, and twenty four from Granada to
the South West. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Sevil heretosore,
now of Granada: a famous Port, much frequented on the account of its Wines; and
has the River of Guadalani on the West of it, with two strong Castles, and an
excellent Magazine. Taken from the Moors by Ferdinando and Isabella, in 1487.
after a very long Siege. In 1661. an Inundation of the River swept away one
thousand and sixty Houses, drowned two thousand Men, and made three thousand
more unfit for Habitation. It was built by the Phaenicians, and is mentioned by
Strabo and Pliny. Long. 16. 02. Lat. 36. 30. According to the Maps, Long. 12.
42. Lat. 36. 09.

Malatiah, Melitene, an ancient City in the Confines of the Greater Armenia,
upon the Euphrates; seventy Miles from Samosat to the North, and one hundred
and fifty from Caesarea to the North-East. It is an Archbishops See. Long. 71.
00. Lat. 40. 32. According to the Maps 39. 52.

Les Maidives, Maldivae, called the Naldives by the Natives: there is an
incredible number of them, extending in a kind of a straight Line from nine
degrees. of Northern Lat. to two degrees. beyond the Line; and stretching from
North-West to South-East, to the South-West of the Cape of Comori or Malabar.
They are very fruitful, and populous; under one King, whose Residence is in
Male, or Maldiva. Francis Pirard has written a particular Discourse of these
Islands; said to be some thousands in number; and to extend three hundred
Leagues in length: partly inhabited, partly not; that where the King resides is
not above five Miles in compass; whose Revenue principally consists in the
fifth part of all the fruits, and in the Confiscation of Wrecks. He assumes the
style of Sultan, King of thirteen Provinces and twelve thousand Islands.

Maidon, Camalodunum, Camulodunum, a Town in Essex, in the Hundred of Dengy,
upon the River Chelmer, on the Sea-shoar, on the South side of that Arm of the
Sea called Idumanius, and about seven Miles distant from the Sea; between which
and it lie two small Islands called Northey and Osey. This was the Royal City
of Cunobelinus a British Prince; who lived in the times of Tiberius and
Caligula, to whom one of his Sons fled. Aulus Plautius the Roman General here
in the Reign of Claudius fought Caractacus another of his Sons, and slew him in
Battle. Claudius coming over into Britain in Person, in the Third Year of his
Reign, in the 43 Year of Christ, took this City; and was therefore called
BRITANNICVS. He made it a Roman Colony, planting in it a Regiment of old
Soldiers; and ordered Money to be Coined with this Inscription, COL. CAMALODVN.
Cambden says, from this Money, it is Collected this Expedition was in the
twelfth Year of his Reign, fifty two years after the Birth of Christ. Certain
it is, this City soon felt the fury of the Britains under Boadicia Qu. of the
Iceni; who took and burnt it, and put all the Romans to the Sword, about the
Year of Christ sixty three. Yet the Romans rebuilt it, as appears by Antoninus.
Edward the Son of Alfred, a Saxon King, finding it much ruined by the Danes,
repaired and fortified it with a Castle. William the Conqueror had here one
hundred and eighty Houses in the Tenure of the Burgesses; and eighteen wasted.
In Mr. Cambden's time it was a well inhabited Town; consisting of one Street of
a Mile in length, built on the ridge of an Hill; and having a convenient Haven.
Now not only a Corporation, which sends two Burgesses to Parliament; but also
made a Viscounty the thirteenth of Charles II. and given to the late Earl of
Essex.

The Maleas, are a People which live in the Mountains of Malabar; toward the
Confines of Coromandel, near the Dominions of the King of Madura. Amongst them
there live many Christians of the old Conversion, called the Christians of S.
Thomas.

Maleg, a River of the Upper Aethiopia, which arises in the Kingdom of Damut;
and receiving the River Anquet, after a Course of eighty Leagues, falls into
the Nile in Nubia, below the Province of Fasculon.

Malaguette, Mallaguete, or Managuete, the Western part of Guiney in Africa,
called by the Dutch, Tand-Cust; by the French, Cote des Graives; about 60
Leagues long, extending from the River Sanguin to the Cape of Palms, which
Cape separates it from Guinea propria. It has the reputation of a considerable
place for the Pepper trade. First planted with some Colonies of French, and
afterward by the Portuguese, English, and Dutch.

Malemba, a Kingdom of Africa, betwixt the Kingdom of Angola and the Lake of
Zembre.

Malespine, a Marquisate and Souereignty in Tuscany, in Italy, near the States
of Genoua: The same properly with the ancient principality (or now Dukedom) of
Massa; belonging formerly to the Family of the Malespini, which since has been
incorporated with the House of Cibo.

Malfi, Amalphis, or Amalphi, a City in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Hither
Principato; honored with an Archbishops See, and a Dukedom; but little, and
not well inhabited. It lies on the North side of the Bay of Salerno; eleven
from Salerno to the West, and twenty two from Naples to the South. The Emperor
Lotharius II. in the War he undertook in the behalf of Pope Innocent II.
against Roger K. of Sicily and Anacletus an Antipope, mastered and plundered
this City. They pretend that here are the Bones of St. Andrew the Apostle,
brought from Judea about the Year 1206; and that the Seaman's Compass was
invented here by Flavio Gioia an Italian, in 1300. P. Nicholas II. celebrated a
Council here in 1059. in which the Dukedoms of Puglia and Calabria were
confirmed to Robert Guichard, the Valiant Norman, for his Services in the
expulsion of the Saracens. Long. 38. 35. Lat. 40. 52.

Malines. See Mechelen.

Maliapur, Maliapura, a City on the Coast of Coromandel, commonly called St.
Thomas, as being the place of the Martyrdom of that Apostle, and an
Archiepiscopal City; written also Meliapor: it was taken by the French in 1671.
and deserted two years after. Long. 108. 50. Lat. 13. 12.

Malling West, a Market Town in the County of Kent, in Aylesford Lath.

Mallorca. See Majorca.

Malmesbury, Maldunense Caenobium, a Town built on the Western Bank of the
River Avon; the Capital of its Hundred; on the Confines of the County of
Gloucester, in the County of Wiltshire; which took its name and rise from
Maidulph a Learned Irish Scot, who being highly admired both for his Piety and
Learning, erected here a School and a Monastery; which Adelme his Scholar much
improved; becoming after his death the Tutelar Saint of Athelstane King of
England, who died in 938. after he had much enriched this Monastery by his
Princely Donations: this Adelme was the first who taught the Saxons the Latin
Poetry. No less honor is due to this Place on the score of William of
Malmesbury, a Learned Historian for the Times in which he lived; which was
about 1143. The Monastery thrived so well, that at the suppression of it by
Henry VIII its Revenue was above eight hundred and three pounds the year.
Whether its late Philosopher, Thomas Hobbs, has added to the Honor of this
Place, by being born here, is left to the Judgment of Posterity. The Town is
now a Corporation, represented by its Burgesses in Parliament; and in a
tolerable Condition, by reason of its Clothing Trade. It has six Bridges over
the River, being almost encircled therewith. A Synod was held at it in 705. or
707.

Malmugon, Malmoe, Malmogia, a City in Scania, in the Kingdom of Sweden; called
by the Hollanders Elbogon, because it represents the Bent of the Elbow of an
Arm. It was built in 1319. and has a safe Harbor over against Coppenhagen, on
the Sound. In 1434. here was a strong Castle built by Ericus King of Denmark,
the first Encourager of lasting Architecture in this Kingdom. In 1658. it first
came into the hands of the Swedes: in 1676. the Danes endeavored the recovery
of it by a Siege, but without success; they did the like the year following
with the like event. It stands four Danish Miles from Coppenhagen to the East.

Malpas, a Market Town in Cheshire, in the Hundred of Broxton.

Malta, Melita, and Island belonging to Africa, in the Mediterranean Sea; by
some taken for the Place where S. Paul suffered Shipwreck in the Year of Christ
58. Its length is twenty Miles, breadth twelve, circuit about sixty: which is
its distance too from Pachyno, the most South-Eastern Cape of Sicily; one
hundred and ninety from the nearest Coast of Africa. Taken from the Saracens by
Roger the Norman Earl of Sicily, in 1089. And was under the Kings of Sicily,
till Charles V. granted it to the Knights of Saint John of Jerusalem, (now
called Knights of Malta from it) after they were beaten out of Rhodes, in 1530:
that he might the easier protect Sicily from the Incursions of the Moors. In
1566 they began to build the Bourg, or principal City; after Solomon the
Magnificent had in 1565. reduced the greatest part of the old Town into Dust,
by a Siege of five Months, managed by Dragut his General, with the loss of
twenty four thousand Men spent to no purpose on this small Island. There are
sixty Villages in it, and three Cities; all seated at the East end, within the
distance of eight Miles; which have two large Havens, divided by a Rock: on the
Point stands the Castle of S. Hermes, to defend the entrance; against which the
Turks spent twenty thousand Cannon Shot, and at last took it to their no great
advantage. In the middle of the Eastern Haven stands the Castle of S. Angelo
upon a Rock: this and Burgo quelled the fury of the Turks, and prevented their
Triumph over Malta. Though the Inhabitants exceed not twenty thousand, yet it
is not able to supply them with Necessaries: but that the fertile Sicily is so
near, from which they have much of their Provisions. They have some fresh water
Fountains; the Rain that falls they reserve in Cisterns; and have always three
years Provisions beforehand, kept under ground. The Great Master of the Order
of the Knights of Malta at present is Alarame de Vignecourt, chosen in Aug.
1690. The City Malta is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Palermo in
Sicily, and the Residence of the Grand Prior of the Church; also now the
Capital of the Island; which last honor formerly was enjoyed by Citta Vecchia,
another Episcopal City in the middle of Malta. Several small Islands adjacent,
(the Principal, are Gozo, Comini, and Farfara) depend upon the Grand Master, as
their Sovereign. The illustrious Order of the Knights of this place, is
composed of eight Nations, (amongst which England was the sixth in rank) before
the Reformation: To each Nation there belongs a Grand Prior: The Persons
incorporated are divided into three Estates of Knights, Ecclesiastics, and
Servans des Arms, or Esquires, all vowing celibacy. Some out of both the two
first, have been known advanced to the Dignity of Cardinals; and the Sons of
Kings and Princes have adorned the rank of the Knights. This Island produces no
Wine, nor Corn; but Cotton, Oats, and delicious Fruits in Plenty. There is
another Island Malta in the Adriatic, belonging to Dalmatia, and called by the
Sclavonians Milet, by others Meleda. The Miletaeus Catellus, a Proverb for a
Lap-dog, is derived from the little Dogs of this latter place, according to
Athenaeus. Long. 39. 25. Lat. 34. 40.

Malvasia, Epidaurus, an Archiepiscopal City of the Morea, on the Eastern
Shore, in the Province of Tzaconia; near the most South-Eastern Cape called
Cape Maleo, built upon a Rock; which advanced position gives it an agreeable
Prospect both by Sea and Land. This Rock is surrounded by the Sea on all sides.
being only joined to the Continent by a Timber Bridge; yet has Nature provided
it a fresh and clear Fountain of good Water, sufficient to serve the City, and
their Gardens; it is approachable only on one side, that is, on the South;
which is secured by a triple Wall of great strength. In the times of the Greek
Idolatry it was famous for a Temple of Esculapius, much frequented. It was
ravished from the Greek Emperors by the Venetians and French, about the year
1204. The Emperors recovered it again from William a French Baron, to whom it
was given by the Latins: but he returning to Venice, freely resigned his Right
to that State; whereupon the Venetians sent a powerful Fleet, and regained the
Possession of it, which they kept till the year 1537. when they were forced to
surrender it to the Turks to purchase a Peace. In the times of the late Wars in
Candy, the Venetians took this Town by Storm; plundered, burnt, and then left
it, after they had put most of the Inhabitants to the Sword, and carried away
the Cannon: The Turks rebuilt it. General Morosini bombarded it in his way to
Athens, Sept. 1687. Afterward it was blockaded, then besieged. At last it
surrendered to General Cornaro, Sept. 12. 1690. whereby the whole Morea stands
now reduced under the Dominion of the States of Venice. They found in it
seventy three Pieces of Cannon; and above one hundred and thirty Christian
Slaves recovered their Liberty. Long. 50. 00. Lat. 38. 30.

Mamertini, an ancient People of the Island Samos, in the Icarian Sea: said
afterward to establish themselves at Messina in Sicily. Whence the Messenii
have the Name also of Mamertini, and the Sea adjacent of Fretum Mamertinum.

Mamotta. Arabia Foelix.

Man, Eubonia, Monaaeda, Monapia, Monavia, Mona, an Island in the Irish Sea;
between Lancashire to the East, and Vlster to the West. The Welsh call this
small place Menow; the Inhabitants Maing; the English Man. It lies in length
from North to South thirty Italian Miles; its greatest breadth is fifteen. It
has seventeen Parish Churches; brings forth Flax, Hemp, and Corn in plenty;
affords more Cattle than they need, especially Sheep; they have no Fuel but
Turff. In the middle it swells into Hills; from the highest of which (
Sceafull by Name) in a clear day may be seen England, Scotland and Ireland. The
chief Town is Russin, seated at the South End of the Island, which has a
Garrisoned Castle: it has also a Bishop, who is styled Sodorensis, and is now
under the Archbishop of York. This Island was first possessed by the Britains;
after them succeeded the Scots, about the times of Honorius and Arcadius: these
were driven out by Cuneda, (Grandfather of Maglocunus) styled by Gildas, the
Dragon of the Islands. Edwin, King of Northumberland, Conquered it next for the
Saxons, about 618. The Danes being driven out of England by Harold, they were
invited Hither by one Godred Corvan, who had been entertained in his flight in
the Isle of Man. This Dane brought over his Country Men, three times
successively invaded it before he could master the Inhabitants: but then
prevailing, he became King of Man, soon after the time William of Normandy
conquered England. This Race of Kings continued to 1270. about two hundred
years: about which time Robert the King of the Scots, (having succeeded
Alexander, who had purchased the Hebrides of the King of Denmark,) made another
Conquest of the Isle of Man, which was one of the last they gained the
Possession of. After this sometimes the Scots, sometimes the English were
Masters of it: till in 1340. William Montacute, Earl of Salisbury, (descended
from Mary the Daughter of Reginald the last King of Man) finally drove out the
Scots: and in 1393. sold it to William Scrope; who being beheaded for Treason,
Henry IV. granted it to Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland, about 1400. He
likewise forseiting it, this Prince granted it to Sir John Stanley; whose
Successor in 1486. was by Henry VII. created Earl of Darby: And in this Family
it still is. wi^h the Title of Lord of Man; being possessed by William Earl of
Darby, the Grandchild of James, who in 1651. was beheaded for his Loyalty to
Charles II. After which the Rebels by force reduced the Island under them; it
was restored to this Family in 1660. by Charles II. The Language here spoken is
different from that of all His Majesty's other Dominions; being a mixture of
Scotch, Irish, Danish and English: but the Southern part nearer to the Scotch,
and the Northern to the Irish. The first Bishop of Man is said to have been
Amphibalus in 360. There are great Chasms in the Succession till 1203. and
again from 1396. In 1505. Huamus became Bishop of it; from whom the present
Bishop Dr. Levinz is the fourteenth, and the twenty ninth of those whose Names
are Recorded. This Bishop is no Lord of the Parliament of England, (tho
presented to the King for his Assent Royal, and to the Archbishop of York for
Consecration) by reason he holds immediately, not of the King, but of the Lord
of Man, to whom, under the Fief and Sovereignty of the King, belongs the Right
of Nomination.

Manar, Manaria, a small Island, with a City on it; which is in the Hands of
the Hollanders: it lies in the Straight, between the Island of Ceylon and the
Coast of Malabar, in the East Indies; and gives Name to that Straight. Long.
108. 30. Lat. 09. 33.

Manceaux, the People of Maine, a Province in France.

La Mancha, Lamitanus Ager, a Province in the South of New Castile in Spain:
the Seat of the Oretani, an ancient People of Spain, mentioned by Strabo and
Pliny. It is divided into La Mancha d' Arragon, and La Mancha Cieca.

La Manche, Mare Britannicum, the French Name of the British Sea, lying between
France and England.

Manchester, Manduessedum, a Town in the County of Warwick, mentioned by
Antoninus: now a poor Village, of about fourteen Houses; one Mile from
Atherstone to the South, and eight from Covenventry to the North Manchester,
Mancunium, Manucium, a very rich, populous, and beautiful Market Town, upon the
East side of the River Spoden; near the Borders of Cheshire, at the South End
of the County of Lancaster, in the Hundred of Salford; in which Thomas Lord de
la Ware founded a a College. This was an ancient Roman City; and being ruined
in the Saxon and Danish Wars, was rebuilt by Edward the Elder, about 920. The
College has been since refounded, and confirmed by Queen Elizabeth, and is
still in being. There is also a Collegiate Church. Charles I. added another
Honor to this Place, by creating Henry Montague Earl of Manchester, in 1625.
which Honor is now possessed by Edward Montague, his Grand child, the third
Earl of this family.

Mandignan, Hesperium Cornu, Cape Verde, the most Western Cape of Africa.

Mande, Mimatium, a City of Aquitain, in Languedoc in France; toward the
Mountains of Sevennes, and the Fountains of the River Lot, [ Olda:] which is a
Bishop See, under the Archbishop of Alby; called by some Latin Writers
Anderitum, and Gabalum: the Capital of the Territory of Givaudan: four Miles
from Jaoux, where are are the Ruins of that old City, out of which this we are
speaking of sprung; being before only a Village, at the Foot of this Mountain:
ten Leagues from S. Flour to the North East, fourteen from from Rhodez to the
East. It stands in a mountainous, but fruitful Soil; and it is honored with
the Bones of S. Privatus, a Martyr. The Bishop enjoys diverse great Privileges,
together with the Title of an Earl.

Mandinga, a Kingdom in Nigritia, in Africa, betwixt the River Niger to the
North, and the Kingdom of Malaguette to the South: its Capital City bearing the
same Name.

Mandou, a City and Kingdom in the Empire of the Great Mogul, in the East
Indies.

Mandoua, a River in the Kingdom of Decam, which falls by the City of Goa, into
the Indian Ocean. See Goa.

Mandrerey, a River in the Island of Madegascar: it springs in a Territory of
its own Name, and greatned with the Currents of diverse other Rivers, discharges
it self into the Ocean at the North of the Island, near the Province of
Carcanossi.

Manfredonia, Sepontum Novum, Manfredonia, a City in the Province called the
Capitanato, in the Kingdom of Naples; which is an Archbishops See, and has this
Name from Manfredus, King of Naples, (Son of Frederick II. Emperor of Germany)
who built it about the year 1256. Not above two Miles from hence, at the Foot
of Mount Gargano, are shown the Ruins of Sepontum, an old ruined Roman Town;
the Sea of which was Translated to Manfredonia. It has a large Haven, a strong
Castle; seated twenty five Miles from Nocera to the East, and twenty two from
the Mouth of the River Ofanto, (Aufidus) to the North. Taken once by the Turks,
in the year 1620. and miserably defaced, spoiled and ruined; since in some
degree repaired; but the memory of that Calamity has made it little, poor, and
not much inhabited. A Provincial Council was assembled at it in 1567. Long. 40.
10. Lat. 41. 40.

Mangalor, Mangalora, a City of the Kingdom of Bisnagar, upon the Western
Shore; which has a Castle, and an Harbor upon the Indian Sea; in a Tract
called Canara, toward Malabar: Heretofore under the Portuguese. This may
possibly be the same, with that the Ancients called Mandagara. Long. 105. 00.
Lat. 12 30.

Mangresia, Magnesia, the Capital City of Caria, a Province in the Lesser Asia,
near the River Maeander; whence it was called Magnesia ad Maeandrum, to
distinguish it from some other Cities of the same Name. Before this it was
called Thessaloce and Androlitia, as Pliny says. It stands near Mount Thorax;
seventy Miles from Smyrna to the North-East, and twenty six from Ephesus.
Themistocles the Athenian died here in Banishment; and Antiochus, King of
Syria, sixty three years before the Birth of our Savor. Long. 57. 00. Lat. 39.
00.

Manhate, the same with New Amsterdam, in North America, in New-Holland.

Manheim, Manbemium, a Fortress in the Lower Palatinate, where the Rhine and
the Necker meet; grown up to a City, whereas before it was only a Village.
Frederick IV. Elector Palatine, in 1606. fortified it. In 1622. the Spaniards
took and dismantled it. Being restored by the Treaty of Munster to this House,
Charles Lewis, the last Elector, resortified it. It stands three German Miles
from Spire to the North, and as much from Heydelburgh to the West. It has a
very strong Castle, called Friderichsbourgh: near it upon the Rhine lies
another called Eichelsheim, now ruined; in which John XXIII. Pope was kept two
years a Prisoner, after he was deposed by the Council of Constance. The French
possessed themselves both of the City and Fortress, Nov. 13. 1688.

S. Manehu. See S. Meneboult. ^

Manifold, a River of Staffordshire.

Manille, Manilla, the same with Lusson.

Maningtree or Manytree, a Market Town in the County of Essex, in the Hundred
of Tendering.

Manissa, Magnesia, a City of Lydia, in the Lesser Asia, which is a Bishops
See, under the Archbishop of Smyrna; twenty four Miles from Smyrna to the North
West. Now in a tolerable Condition under the Turks; and the Capital of a
Province.

Manoa el dorado, a Town in South America, in Guiana; upon the Western Shore of
the Lake of Parime; concerning which the Indians report great things, but it
was never yet seen by any European.

Manosque, Manuesca, a Town in Provence in France, in the Diocese of Sisteron,
in a Plain, one League from the River Durance; belonging to the Order of the
Knights of Malta, by the Concession the ancient Counts of Forcalquier, who had
a Palace in it. Some would have it to be the Bormanicum of Pliny. Others, the
ancient Alaunicum or Machaovilla. There are diverse Religious Houses there.

Manresa, Manrese, Minorissa, a small City in Catalonia, in Spain, upon the
River Cardoner; (which a little lower falls into the Lobregat,) ten Leagues
from Barcellona to the North. Once a Bishops See.

Man's, Vrbs Cenomanorum, Cenomanum, a great, rich, populous City in the Duchy
of Maine, in France; of old called Vindinum; seated upon the River Sartre,
(where it takes in the Huisne,) ten Leagues from Alenson to the South, sixteen
from ^ours to the North, and the same distance from Vendosine to the
North-West. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tours; the Capital of
Le Maine, and heretofore one of the most flourishing Cities of Gallia Celtica.

Mansfeldt, an Island in Hudson's Bay, in the Terra Arctica of America,
discovered some time since by the English.

Mansfeld, Mansfeldensis Comitatus, is a County or Earldom in the Upper Saxony;
in the Landtgravate of Thuring; between the Principality of Anhalt to the
North, the Territory of Mersburgh in Misnia to the East, and Thuring, (properly
so called) to the East and West. It is now sequestered in the Hands of the
Elector of Saxony; but was before under a Count of its own: whose Family being
now divided into four Branches, each of them has the Right of Living, Hunting,
and Fishing in this County; with that of Patronage, and two thousand Florins
yearly Income; the Government is in the Hands of the Electors, for their
security and payments. The chief Town is Mansfeld; which stands nine Miles from
Maegdeburgh to the South, and Erfurd to the North; and sixteen from Gottingen
to the East.

Mansfield, a good, large, well built and inhabited, Market Town in the County
of Nottingham, in the Hundred of Broxtow. It stands in the Forest of Sherwood.

Mantale, an ancient Castle in the Territory of Vienne, in Dauphine: remarkable
upon the account of a Council called, Concilium Monotalense, in 879. for the
Election of Boson, King of Provence, Arles, and Burgundy.

Mante, Medunta, commonly Epitheted la Jolie, a City or great Town in the Isle
of France; which has a Stone Bridge over the Seyne; in the very Borders of le
vexin: twelve Leagues beneath Paris to the West, and sixteen above Roan, to the
South-East. Philip II. King of France died here in 1223. It heretofore enjoyed
the Honor of the Title of an Earldom, and had a Citadel which was destroyed
by Henry IV. In 1376. Charles V. King of France; Founded a Monastery of the
Celestines in it: besides which, it is adorned with a Collegiate Church.

Mantonea, a City in the Morea, in Arcadia; famous for the Death of
Epaminondas, the celebrated Thebean General, in the year of Rome, 391. It lies
at the Foot of the Mountain Parthenius; twenty five Miles from Megalopolis to
the North, and seven from Misitra, to the North-West. Now called Mandi, or
Mundi.

Mantoua, Mantua, a very ancient City in Lombardy in Italy; built three hundred
years before Rome. It is the Capital of a Dukedom, and a Bishops See under the
Patriarch of Aquileja; but exempt from his Jurisdiction ever since 1453. A
great and a magnificent City, seated within the Bosom of a Lake of the same
Name, (made by the River Menzo) which contributes very much to its strength and
security. In 1629. it was taken by the German Imperial Forces, and miserably
impoverished: but soon after restored to its Duke by the Interposition of the
French Court. It stands forty five Miles from Modena to the North, twenty from
Verona to the South, and forty from Cremona to the East. This was the Country
of Virgil, the great Latin Poet; who Celebrates the Fertility of its Fields in
his Georg. 2. And of Tasso, the Italian. In the year 1064. the Election of Pope
Alexander II. to the Sea of Rome, was confirmed in a Council here, against
Honorius II. an Antipope, set up by the Emperor Henry IV.

The Dukedom of Mantoua, is bounded on the East by that of Ferrara; on the
North by the Territories of Verona, and Brescia; on the West by Cremona, and
the Dukedom of Milan: on the South by the Dukedoms of Modena and Mirandola.
Said to be equal together with Montisferat, (which belongs to this Duke) to the
Dukedom of Florence in extent, but not in Revenue; yet it is fruitful, and
abounds in Cattle. This Dukedom fell first into the Family of Gonzaga, (which
now possesses it,) in 1328. Lewis I. of this Line then slaying Passavino, the
last of the Bonocelsi's, in the Marketplace; and assuming the Government into
his own Hands, as Lord of Mantoua. John Francisco, the Fifth of the Line, was
made Marquess of Mantoua, by Sigismond the Emperor, in 1433. Frederick II. the
ninth of them, was Created Duke by Charles V. in 1530. Charles III. is the
eighteenth of this House, and succeeded his Father Charles II. This Dukedom is
thirty five Miles from North to South, and fifty from East to West.

Manata, the same with la Mancha.

Mar, a County in the North-East part of Scotland; extending in length from
East to West sixty Miles; partly mountainous and barren, partly fruitful: on
the North it has Murray and Buchan; on the East the German Ocean; on the South
Mern and Angus; and on the West Athole. The River Dee enricheth the South, and
the Done the North side of this County; yet is there in it no Town of great
Note.

Maracaibo, or Marecaye, a City in the Province of Venezuela, in Castile d' Or,
in the South America, upon a vast Lake of the same Name: well built, rich,
populous, well traded, and enjoying the Benefit of an excellent Port, wherein
the Spaniards build their Ships.

Maragnan, Marahim, Maranania, an Island on the Coast of Brasil; at the Mouth
of the River Mirary, which gives Name to the next Province to it. This was once
planted with French; but in 1641. taken by the Hollanders, and since retaken by
the Portuguese. There is in it a Town called S. Lewis, with a Castle: and although
but a small Place, yet it is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of S.
Salvador. Long. 332. 40. Southern Lat. 02. 10. The River Xauxa in Peru is also
called El Vio Maragnon. See Xauxa.

Marans, a Town upon the River Sicur Niortoise, in the pais d' Aulnis, in
France, two Leagues from the Sea, and four from Rochelle. It stands in a Marsh,
has a Castle, and been often taken in the Wars by the Roman Catholics and
Huguenots.

Marasso, C. Delle Cacca, Haermaeum, the most Western Cape in the Island of
Sardinia; lying Long. 32. 10. Lat. 41. 15.

Marata, a small Kingdom in North America, placed by Sanson near the New
Kingdom of Mexico, and the Vermiglian Ocean.

Marathon, Marason, Marathona, an ancient City of Attica in Greece; famous in
History for the Defeat given by Miltiades with his Army of twelve thousand
Athenians, to five hundred thousand Persians, in the year of Rome 264. and the
third of the seventy second Olympiad.

Marca d'Ancona, Picenum, Marchia Anconitana, is a large Province, under the
Dominion of the Church in Italy: bounded on the North by the Adriatic Sea, on
the West with the Dukedom of Vrbino, on the South with the Apennine, and on the
East with Abruzzo. It has this Name from Ancona, the principal City in it. This
was formerly the Seat of the Picentes; who for aiding their Allies (the
Tarentines) against the Romans, were subdued, and made a Roman Province in the
year of Rome 485. The City of Ancona being given to Pope Zachary by
Luitprandus, King of the Lombards, about the year 741. his Successors in time
gained all the rest of this Marquisate to it. This Country is so fruitful, that
in the times of the Roman Empire it was called Picenum Annonarium.

Marca Hispanica, the Name of Catalonia, in the time of the Emperor Lewis the
Debonnaire.

Marcha Trevisana, or Trivigiana, Euganei Populi, Marchia Tarvisina, is a large
Province of Italy, under the State of Venice. Heretofore much greater than now.
Bounded on the South at present by the River Athesis, (now Adige,) and the most
Northern Branch of the Po, called Fornaces; on the West with the Duchy of
Milan; on the East with Friuli, and the Gulf of Venice; and on the North with
the Alps, which divide it from Tirol. In the time of Augustus, called Venetia,
from its ancient Inhabitants; and one of his eleven Regions of Italy. The
principal Towns and Cities are, Vincentia, Treviso, Padua, Brescia, Verona,
Crema, Bergomo. This Marquisate having suffered many Changes was about the year
1390. conquered by the States of Venice; who are at present in possession of it.

Marcana, Marea, Marca, Merca, a small City, in an Island of the same Name, in
the Gulf of Venice; under the State of Ragusa; and not far from the Coast of
Dalmatia; which was a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ragusa. The City is
ruined; but the Bishopric is still in being, and united to that of Trebinga,
which is now under the Turks. It lies five Miles from Ragusa; the Island in
which it stands, is about four in compass. The Town has not now above three or
four Houses.

March, the most South-East County of the Kingdom of Scotland; on the East
bounded by the German Ocean, on the North by Lothaine, on the West by Twedale,
and on the South by Tivedale and Northumberland; cut off by the River Tweed;
upon the North Bank of which stands Berwick, the last Town of England; and more
North, Coldingham, the Colania of Ptolemy. This is written Merch, and Mers.

La March, Marchia, a Town in the Dukedom of Barrois, in Lorain; in the
Borders of Champagne; about three Leagues from the Fountains of the Maes to the
South-East, and five from Mirecourt.

La March, or La March en Limosin, Marchia, a Province in Aquitain in France,
which is great and fruitful. Bounded on the North with Berry, on the East by
Auvergne, on the West by Poictou, and on the South by Limosin; to which it is
sometime attributed, tho it is a distinct Province. It is divided into the
Upper and Lower March. Geieret is the principal Town in the former, and La
Dorat in the other. The Rivers Vienne, Cher, Creuse, Gartempe, etc. derive
their Springs from this Province. It gives the Title of an Earldom which was
united to the Crown about 1531.

Marcianopoli, Marcianopolis, a City of the ancient Mysia, now in Bulgaria,
commonly called Preslaw; it had this Name from Marciana, a Sister of Trajan;
and and was a Bishops See, but is now an Archbishopric, and in a flourishing
State: twenty Miles from the Euxine Sea, on the Borders of Thrace; by the Turks
called old Constantinople.

Marck, and Markishlandt, Marchia, by the French called la Mare, a Province of
Germany, in the Circle of Westphalia; under the Dominion of the Elector of
Brandenburgh, who succeeded to it as Heir to the Duke of Juliers: Bounded on
the North by the Bishopric of Munster, on the East by the Dukedom of
Westphalia; on the South and West by the Dukedom of Mons. It has the Honor of
the Title of an Earldom. The chief Town in this Province is Ham: it takes its
Name from the Castle of Mark, near the said Town of Ham.

Marckfeldt, Marckfeldberg, Teracatriae Campi, a Tract of Germany near the
Danube; in the Confines of Austria and Moravia, toward Presburgh.

Marckpurg, Marcpurgum, Marcopurgum, a City of Germany, in Stiria; upon the
Drove; thirteen Miles from Laubach to the North-East, and twenty two from
Vienna to the South.

Marcomanni, Marcomades, Marcomates, a people of the ancient Germany, whom
Cluverius places betwixt the Rhine, the Danube, and the Necker; from whence
they passed into Bohemia, together with the Sedusii and the Harudes; and made
frequent Revolts against the Romans.

Mardike, a strong Fort in Flanders, built by the Spaniards; about one German
Mile from Dunkirk to the West, and two from Gravelin to the East; not far from
the Sea Shore. It was taken by the French in 1645. and 1657. when it was put
into the Hands of the English with Dunkirk: with which it was resigned back to
the French, who have slighted and ruined it.

Marecchia, Ariminus, a River of Romandiola in Italy. It arises from the
Apennine, not above four Miles from the Fountains of the North-East; and
running Northwards, waters S. Leo, S. Marino, and Rimini: where it buries it
self in the Adriatic Sea.

Mareotis, a Canton of the Territory of Alexandria, in Egypt, consisting of
diverse Villages; so called from the Lake Mareotis, watering it, which has since
changed its Name to Lago di Buchiara. Ischyras the great Antagonist of S.
Athanasius dwelt in a Village of this Country.

Margaias, a People in Brasil.

Margarita, an Island of South America, in the North Sea; eight Leagues from
the Coast of New Andaluzia, and forty from the Island of S. Trinidada to the
West. Long. 314. Lat. 11. First discovered by C. Columbus in 1498. and since
mostly frequented on the account of the Pearl Fishery, from whence it has its
Name. It is about forty French Leagues in compass; very fruitful, but
mountainous; watered by two Rivers, and adorned with the Town of S. Jago de de
la Vega, and some Villages.

Margarita, Lero, an Island on the Coast of Provence, in the Mediterranean Sea;
which, with its Neighbor S. Honorate, being taken by the Spaniards, was
recovered by the French, in 1637.

Margiana, a large Province of the Ancient Asia, which lay betwixt Bactriana
and Hyrcania: now for the most part contained in the Provinces of Khoesme and
Charasan in Persia.

Margosest, Marcodava, a City of Walachia, upon the River Bardalach, eleven
German Miles from Jazi to the South.

Marguerite, Margereta, a small River in Soissonois in France.

Mariana, a Colony, and a City in the Eastern Part of the Isle of Corsica;
which had its Name from Marius, the great Roman Consul; and is a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Genoua. Heretofore very great and populous; seated upon
a small River, which runs through it; but now it lies in Ruins; (therefore
called Rovine di Mariana;) nothing being left but the Cathedral Church, which
has no Roof neither; the Bishops See being removed to Bastia in 1575.

Marib. See Mecca.

Mariemberg, Mariae-berga, a Town of Germany, in the Upper Saxony in Misnia;
nine German Miles from Meissen, the Capital of that Province, to the South.
This is one of the Mine Towns; seated in the Mountains, near Annaberg, in the
Borders of Bohemia: built by Henry Duke of Saxony, in 1519. and still in the
Hands of that Family.

Marienbourg, a Town in Hainault, in the Low Countries; built by Mary of
Austria, Queen of Hungary, and Governant of the Low Countries, in 1542. and
strongly fortified against the French; who nevertheless gained the possession
of it by the Pyrenean Treaty in 1660. and dismantled it. This stands upon the
River Aube; eleven French Leagues from Mons to the East, and four from
Charlemont to the South-West.

Marienburgh, Mariaeburgum, called by the Poles, bork, by the Inhabitants,
Margenburgh; is a strong City in Prussia Regalis, whereof it is the Capital,
upon the River Nogat (a Branch of the Vistula;) six German Miles from Dantzick
to the North-East, and four from Elbing to the South-West. Heretofore the
principal Seat of the Knights of Prussia, who built it, and dedicated it to the
Virgin Mary; the Castle, in 1281, the Town in 1302. Casimirus, King of Poland,
took this City in 1460. The Swedes in 1625. The Castle was burnt in 1644. and
restored to the Poles in 1655. by Treaty.

Marienburgh, or Marieburgh, the same with Queen's Town in Ireland. See Queen's
County.

Mariendal, the same with Mergentheim.

Mariestadt, Mariaestadium, a new City in Westrogothia in Sweden, between the
Lakes of Wener and Neter; three German Miles from the former, and six from the
latter. Long. 31. 19. Lat. 58. 27.

Marigalante, one of the Caribby Islands in South America, under the French:
six Leagues from Guadeloupe, and ten or twelve from Dominco. Recommended for
Fruitfulness.

Marignano, Melignanum, Meriganum, a Town in the Duchy of Milan, upon the River
Lambro; in the middle between Milan and Lodive, ten Miles from either. Near
this the Swiss were beaten by Francis I. in 1515.

Marinat, Scardus, a Mountain in Macedonia; it parts Servia, Albania, and
Macedonia; and ends at the Euxine Sea, near Saramontin, the Borders of Romania.
Drino, and many other Rivers spring from it. In the Maps it is written Mazinai.

Marish, Mariscus, Marus, a River of Transylvania: it arises from the
Carpathian Hills.; and passes by Neumark, Radnot, Alba Julia, (or Weissenburg)
Branksa and Lippa, to Segedin; where it ends in the Tibiscus. This is the
principal River of Transylvania.

Mariza, Hebrus, a River of Thrace: it arises out of Mount Hebrus (which is a
Branch of Mount Marinat,) in the Northern Confines of Macedonia, Servia, and
Bulgaria: where they all meet from two Fountains; and running East it waters
Phileba, (or Philippopolis,) Adrianople, and Ploutin; where it receives
Copriza; and turning Southward, falls into the Archipelago, over against Lembro.

Mark. See Marck.

Market-Iew, a Market Town in the County of Cornwall, and the Hundred of Penwith.

Marieborow, or Marleburg, Cunetio, an ancient Roman Town; seated upon the
River Kenet in Wiltshire, in the North-West Bounds toward Barkshire, upon the
ascent of an Hill. In this there was a famous Parliament held for ending the
Differences between the Barons and the King, in the fifty second year of Henry
III. A. C. 1267. where were made the Statutes, called the Statutes of
Marleburgh. The Parliament assembled in a Castle, which this place anciently
had, belonging unto John Sans terre (as he was surnamed) afterward King of
England. It is still a Corporation, which sends two Burgesses to the
Parliament: and has withal the Convenience of Savernake Forest, and Aldburn
Chase in its Neighborhood. Charles I. at his Coronation, added another Honor
to this place; by Creating James Lord Ley, (Lord Treasurer) Earl of Marleborow,
February, 5. 1625. which was afterward possessed by William, the fourth Earl
of this Family (Grandchild to the first Earl) who succeeded Henry his Nephew,
slain in a Sea Fight against the Dutch, in 1665. The Lord Churchill enjoys this
Title at present, by the Creation of King William.

Marlow Magna, a Market Town in Buckinghamshire, in the Hundred of Disborough:
probably so called for the Store of Marl or Chalk here dug up.

Marmara, Strymon, a River on the South of Macedonia; toward the Borders of
Thrace; more usually called Stromona, and also Radnitz, and Iscar: it falls in
the Archipelago at Amphipoli.

Marmora, Elaphonesus, an Island in the Propontis, on the Coast of Asia; famous
for Marble Quarries: it is ten or twelve Leagues in circuit, with a City, the
Capital of its own Name; and diverse Villages inhabited by the Religious
Caloyers. The adjacent Sea is called from hence the Sea of Marmora; which
discharges it self on one side into the Pontus Euxinus by the Bosphorus
Thracius, and on the other toward the South into the Aegean Sea by the
Hellespont. The ancient Poet Aristeas adorned this Island with his Nativity. It
communicates its Name to the three Neighboring Islands, Avezia, Coutalli,
Gadaro, called in general the Islands of Marmora, They all stand in a good
Climate, abounding in Corn, Wine, Cattle, Cotton, and Fruit; inhabited
principally by the Religious Greeks, and some Arabians. Ptolemy mentions
Marmora by the Name of Proconnesus. Others call it Neuris.

Marmorica, the present Kingdom of Barca in Africa: it had heretofore for its
Bounds Libya Propria to the East, and Cyrenaica to the West.

Marne, Matrona, a great River in France; which arises in Champaigne near
Langres, in a Village called Marmote, in the Confines of the Franche Comte; and
running North-West, waters Langress, Chaumont, ^oynevil, S. Dizier, Chalons,
and Meaux; then falls into the Seyne, two Miles above Paris.

Maro, A Valley, Marquisate, and Town upon the Confines of the States of
Genoua: belonging to the Duke of Savoy.

Marocco, is both a City and a Kingdom in Africa, in the West Part of Barbary:
the Kingdom of Marocco is a considerable part of Mauritania Tingitana; extended
on the Atlantic Ocean from the River Abene, to that of Azamor: on the East it
has the River Malava, (which parts it from Tremesen;) on the West the Atlantic
Ocean, on the South Mount Atlas, and on the North the Kingdom of Fez. The
Country is said to be very fruitful and pleasant; abounding in Cattle, Fruits,
Corn, Sugar, Oil, Honey, and whatever is useful to the Life of Man. Divided into
seven Provinces; which are Guzzula, Sus, Marocco, Hea, Hascora, Daccala, and
Tedles. The King takes the style of Emperor of Barbary and Marocco, King of
Fez, Suz, etc. Has a great number of Castles in this Kingdom; yet there is one
kept by the Portugueze, two Leagues from Azamor.

Marocco, Marochum, Marochia, Marochium, the principal City, (which gives Name
to the whole) called by the Spaniards, Maruccos; by the Italians, Marocho; is
supposed to have been the Bocanum Hemerum of Ptolemy; once one of the greatest
Cities in the World, and the ancient Capital of this Kingdom. It is seated on
the South Side of the River Tansiff; an hundred and sixty Miles to the East,
from the Atlantic Ocean, and ninety from the Borders of Fez: heretofore an
Archbishops See, very potent; but the Royal Seat being many Ages since removed
to Fez, it is hardly a third part of what it was: on the top of the Castle are
three Globes of Gold, one hundred and thirty thousand Barbary Ducats weight;
which could never be taken away, (as the Inhabitauts pretend) because they are
guarded by Spirits. This City stands in a fine Plain, five or six Leagues from
the Mountain Atlas, encompassed with very high strong Walls, with twenty four
Gates, which may be reckoned to contain one hundred thousand Inhabitants. It
has a Fortress, a stately Palace Royal, and Colleges for Professors of the
Sciences, with diverse Mosques enriched with the Spoils of the Christian
Churches of Spain. The Inhabitants glory in being Enemies to Christianity.
Long. 09. 20. Lat. 29. 30.

Marogna, Marognia, Maronea, Ismaros, a City of Thrace; ^seated at the Mouth of
the River Sconenus; three Miles from the Mouth of the River Mariza to the West,
and the same distance from Asperosa to the East. Once a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Trajanople; but now become the Archbishops See it self.

The Maronites, Maronitae, a particular Church of the Eastern Christians,
dwelling principally about the Mountain Libanus in Syria, under a Patriarch of
their own, who resides at a Monastery called Eden Canobin on the said Mountain;
yet nevertheless there are of them in Tripoli, Zidem, Damascus, Aleppo, and
Cyprus. Their Name is diversely derived: as from an Episcopal City of their
Country, called Maronia, in S. Jerome: from the holy Monk and Priest S. Maron,
whose Life Theodoret writes, and whose Disciples strenuously defended the
Decrees of the Council of Chalcedon against the Eutychians. (This person, the
Maronites say, built them a Monastery in the beginning of the Fifth Century.)
Also from another Maron, an ancient Monothelite. About the year 1180, William
Archbishop of Tire, their Neighbor and Contemporary, says, that they did the
King of Jerusalem great Service in the Wars with the Sarazens, and exceeded
then the number of forty thousand. Their Patriarch, assisted at the General
Council of Lateran, in 1215. under Pope Innocent the Third: since which, there
have been several Embassies and Treaties of Reconciliation betwixt the Roman
See and them, under Pope Eugenius IV. in 1445. Pope Paul II. in 1469. Pope
Clement VII. in 1526. and 1531. Pope Gregory XIII. in 1577. and 1584. Pope
Clement VIII. in 1596. Pope Paul VI. in 1612. Their Patriarch assisted again at
the Fifth Council of Lateran in 1516. They speak a mixture of the Syriack and
Arabic Languages: but officiate Mass in Syriack only, using the Missal of S.
Ephraem Syrus, and the Rites and Customs for the most part of the Greeks,
excepting that they consecrate in Bread unlevened. Pope Gregory XIII. Founded a
College for their Youth at Rome.

Maros. See Marish.

Marotto, Misa, a River in the Marquisate of Ancona.

Marpnrg, Amasia, Marpurgum, a City of Germany, in the Landtgravate of the
Upper Hassia: at the Head of the River Loghne, (which falls into the Rhine, a
little above Coblentz) eleven Miles from Franckfort on the Maine, to the North;
twelve from Cassel to the North-West, and twenty from Cologne to the
South-East. It has a strong Castle built on a Hill; heretofore a Free and an
Imperial City, but long since exempted: for some time put under the Dominion of
a Prince of its own, now under the Dominion of the Landtgrave of Hesse Cassel.
Here was an University opened in 1535. which is now in some repute. This City
was taken by the Imperialists in 1647. But the Castle holding out, they
plundered and deserted it. The Marquess of Baden in this City narrowly escaped
Death; his House having seven Cannon at once fired at it. Some would believe it
to be the Mattium of Tacitus, and the Mattiacus of Ptolemy.

Marsal, Marsalium, a small, but strong Town, in the Dukedom of Lorain in
France; upon the River Seile, in a Marsh; five Miles from Nancy: which stood a
Siege of thirty four days, in 1663. against the Forces of Lewis XIV. So strong
both by Art and Nature, that it was thought it might have cost many Months to
reduce it.

Marsala, Lilybaeum, a City in Sicily, seated upon the most Western Promontory
of that Island; (which had of old its Name from this City; but is now called il
Capo Boco.) Built by the Romans; a magnificent populous Town; and well
fortified against the Turkish Pirates. It stands fifty Miles from Palermo to the
South, twelve from Trapano, and one hundred and sixty from the nearest Coast of
Africa. Near this City, the Romans, under Attilius Regulus, gave the
Carthaginian Fleet a very great Defeat There is a little River that runs near
it, called by the same Name. Long. 36. 03. Lat. 36. 40.

Marsan, Marsianus Ager, a small Tract in Gascogne: the principal Town has the
same Name; which lies sixteen Miles from Dax to the North-East, and from
Bourdeaux to the South. This Territory is watered by the River Midcux, and has
been a Viscounty above six hundred years.

Marsaquivir, a Spanish Port upon the Coast of Barbary, in Africa, near Oran.

Marseilles, Massilia, Masalia, Phocais, a City of Provence in France, upon the
Shoars of the Mediterranean Sea; seventeen Miles to the East of the principal
Mouth of the Rhosne, and fifteen West of Toulon. It is a great, rich, populous
City; and now in a thriving condition; the Suburbs having been lately added to
it. So very ancient, that it is supposed to have been built by the Phoenicians.
Justin says, it was built by the Phocians, in the Times of Tarquinius, King of
the Romans; who in their way thithe, contracted an Alliance with the Infant
City of Rome; and did great things in their Offensive and Defensive Wars
against the Barbarous Galls. That, the Soil of their Country being barren, they
were forced to depend more upon Navigation than Agriculture for their
Subsistence; and would now and then exercise the (then thought innocent, if not
glorious) Trade of Piracy: which led them round about Italy, to the Mouth of
the Rhosne: and the pleasantness of the place allured them to go and settle
there; where they were kindly treated by the Galls; the King granting them
leave to build the City, and marrying his Daughter to their General. That,
these were the great Civilizers and Instructors of the Galls in Learning, Arts,
and Architecture. After this they managed some Wars against the Ligurians: and
became formidable to all their Neighbors: having great success, till they
interposed in the Quarrel between Caesar and Pompey; being in this more Loyal
to that State, than prudent in the estimation of their Forces: for they
pretended to interpose between those they were not able to force; and
consequently fell a Victim to the Fortunes of Caesar, whose Army left them
nothing but their Liberty. This Calamity befell them about forty two years
before the Birth of our Savior. They recovered again as great an esteem as
ever. Tacitus informs us, that in his time it was a place where the Grecian
Affability and the Provincial Thrift were rarely mixed. In the Fall of the
Roman Empire, this City became a prey to the Goths and Franks: but in what
Times I cannot assign. In 1243. after the Goths were expelled, it was put under
Counts of its own; and continued so till 1481, when it returned to the Crown of
France: during the time it was under these Counts, about 1423. it was taken by
Alphonsus, King of Arragon. In 1524. it withstood the furious Assaults of
Charles Duke of Bourbone. But the height of all its modern Glory was its
sustaining the mighty Forces and great Valor of Charles V. in 1536. Since the
settling Christianity here, it has ever been a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Vienne formerly, now of Arles. Its first Bishop being said to be
S. Lazarus, whom Christ raised from the dead. That which has in all times
continued to its continuance, is, its excellent, safe, large Harbor; and the
Fertility of the Soil it stands in; being otherwise not the best seated for
Traffic, there being no Navigable River near it but the Rhosne, which is at
some distance. Long. 26. 22. Lat. 42. 18.

Marshfield, a Market Town in in Glocestershire, in the Hundred of Thornbury.

Marshland, a Tract in the County of Norfolk, nigh Lyn Regis, on the other side
of the River Ouse, so called from its being a Marsh. There are seated several
Towns in it, which in recompense for the want of fresh Water and their
Liableness to the Inundations of the Sea, enjoy a Soil exceeding fat, and
feeding abundance of Cattle. There is another such Tract in the West Riding of
Yorkshire, about fifteen Miles in circuit: called also Ditch-Marsh, and
excellent for the same use.

Marsi, an ancient People of Italy, in the Province now called the Further
Abruzzo, in the Kingdom of Naples, toward the Patrimony of S. Peter: whose
Name is still preserved in a Territory there, called the Duchy of Marsa. The
Marsick War in the year of Rome 663. and their killing of all the Romans in the
City Asculum, together with Q. Servilius Proconsul, and Fronteius, render this
People memorable in History. Also a People of Germania Antiqua, mentioned by
Tacitus: of whom Ortelius fancies, there are some Footsteps remaining in the
Village Detmarsen, in the Province of Over-Yssel, in the United Netherlands.

Marsico, Marsicum, a City in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Hither Principate;
called New Marsico, to distinguish it from another Town of the same Name in
that Province. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Salerno; of little
circuit, but well peopled and built; seated upon an Hill, at the Foot of the
Apennine; near the Fountains of the River Agri, (which washes Marsico,
Vecchio, and then falls into the Bay of Taranto, in the very Borders of the
Basilicate;) six Miles from the last named Town to the West, and fifty five
from Salerno to the North. The old Marsico stands eighteen Miles from the
Tyrrhenian Sea; and sensibly decays, being inhabited but by a few.

Marsley Hill, a Hill in Herefordshire, whereof Mr. Cambden, and Mr. Speed
relate a Story; That, on Saturday, Feb. 7. 1571. about six a Clock in the
Evening, it moved with a roaring noise from the place where it stood, and by
seven the next Morning had gone about two hundred Foot, continuing its Travel
three days together; That, Kinnaston-Chappel hereupon fell down, with some
Trees, Hedges, and Coats for Sheep, and some stood; That, two Highways were
turned about three hundred Foot from their former Paths, the East Parts to the
West, and the West to the East; Pasturage being left in the place of Tillage,
and Tillage of Pasturage.

Marta, Martha, a River ascribed by Antoninus to Hetruria, now in the Dominions
of the Church: it arises out of the Lake di Bolsena (Lacus Volsiniensis;) and
running Southward by Tuscanella, (a small City in S. Peter's Patrimony, the
Walls of which it washes) it falls into the Tyrrhenian Sea beneath Cornetto,
another City of the same Province; twenty two Miles from Viterbo to the South.
There is a Town of the same Name, seated upon this River, where it breaks out
of the Lake; twelve Miles from Viterbo.

Martaban, Martabanum, a City of the Further East Indies: on the Shoars of the
Bay of Bengala; which has a convenient Port: under the King of Pegua, tho it
has had Kings of its own; till of late it was conquered, and very ill used. The
Kingdom belonging to it lies between that of Pegua to the North, and Ligor, a
Promontory of the Kingdom of Siam, to the South.

Martegues, or Martigues, Maritima Colonia, a Seaport Town in Provence, built
in 1239. upon the Lake of Berry, at the distance of one Mile from the Sea,
betwixt which and the Lake a Communication is made by Ditches so surrounding
and dividing the Town, as it were into three several small Towns, (called
Fonquieres, L'isle and Ferrieres,) which are passed from one to another upon
Bridges, that Martigues has therefore the Name of the Venise of France. Those
Fosses are thought to be Works of the Romans. Martigues also was of old a
Viscounty, and now a Principality enjoyed by the House of Vendosme.

Martel, Martellum, a small City in the Province of Quercy, near the River
Dordogne; seated on a Hill in the Confines of Limosin; six Leagues from Sarlat
to the East, and as many from Tulle to the South.

Martimos, Marithae, a Ridge of Mountains in the South of Arabia Foelix; not
far from the Shore, and the Fountains of the River Liris; mentioned by Ptolemy.

S. Martin, a great Village in the Isle of Rade, in Soisonois in Reims.

S. Martin, one of the Antille or Leeward Islands, which was under the French.

S. Martin de Re, a Fort in the Isle of Re; near which the English received a
great Defeat from the French, in 1627.

Martinique, M^danina, an Island in the West Indies, which is one of the
Antilla's; forty five Leagues in compass, very fruitful, and well peopled, and
well watered by Rivers. It having been in the Hands of the French ever since
1635. The Dutch attempting it in 1674 were repulsed. Long. 315. ^^. Lat. 12 10.

Martiopoli. See Marcianopoli.

Martpurg. See Marpurg.

Martorano, Martoranum, a small City in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Hither
Calabria, but in the Borders of the Further Calabria; six Miles from the Shoars
of the Tyrrhenian Sea, and fourteen from Cosenza; in a declining state, and
inhabited but by a few; tho it is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Cosenza. The River which runs by it is called il Savuto: it is thought the old
Name of this City was Mamertum.

Marubeni. See Marogna.

Marueccos. See Marocco.

Maruege, Maruejols, Marengium, a small City in the Province of Languedoo, in
the Territory of Givaudan; upon the River Colange, toward the Borders of
Rouergne: seven Leagues from S. Flour in Auvergne to the South; and almost four
from Mende (the Capital of Givandan) to the West: some write it Marologium.

Maryland, a considerable Country and Colony of the English in the North
America, in forty degrees. of Latitude. Bounded with Pensylvania, New England, and
New York to the North; with the Atlantic, and De la Ware Bay to the East; the
River Potomeck, which divides it from Virginia, to the South; and the Indian
Territories to the West. It contains ten Counties. The Capital Town of all is
S. Mary's, which is well built and provided with a convenient Harbor for
Shipping.

Masandran, Hyrcania, a Province of the Kingdom of Persia, upon the Caspian Sea
(which is called the Masandran Sea also from this Province, as it was before
the Hyrcanian Sea.) There is a City in this Province of the same Name.

Masano, Massalia, a River in the Isle of Candy or Crete.

Masay, Misauci, Pagus Mosanus, a Canton amongst the Grisons, called by the
Inhabitants, Maeslandt.

Masbate, one of the Philippine Islands; which is under the Spaniards.

Mascalate, a City in Arabia Foelix; about sixty Miles from the Shoars of the
Persian Gulf; which is the Capital of a Kingdom of the same Name. Long. 85.
10. Lat. 24. 10.

Mascate, a City, together with a Sovereign Principality, on the South-Eastern
Shore of Arabia Foelix, upon the Gulf of Ormus; which has a convenient Haven,
and a strong Castle built by the Portuguese, who for a long time were Masters
of it, but some few years since were beaten out by the King of Mascate. Long.
94. 00. Lat. 24. 27.

Mascon, Matiscona, Matisco, a City of France, in the Dukedom of Burgundy;
which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Lion; and has a Territory
belonging to it of the same Name. It stands upon a rising ground, upon the
River Saone; in the Borders of the Province of Bresse; and it has a Stone
Bridge over the Saone. Eleven Miles (says Baudrand) from Lion to the North,
and Challon to the South. Long. 26. 07. Lat. 46. 00. according to the newest
Maps.

Le Masconois, is a small Territory in the South part of the Dukedom of
Burgundy, to which it is annexed for ever: whereas heretofore it had Counts of
its own: it lies between the Territory of Challon to the North, Beaujolois to
the South, La Bresse to the East, and Foretz to the West.

Maseyck. See Maeseyck.

Masfa, a City in Arabia Foelix, in the inland parts; three hundred Miles from
Ormus, and two hundred from Mascate to the West. The same with that which was
called of old Maspha, as some think; and now the Capital of a Kingdom of the
same Name. Long. 90. 00. Lat. 23. 00.

Masham, a Market Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of
Hangeast, upon the River Your.

Masiers, Maderiacum, a strong City in the Province of Champaign; seated upon
the East Side of the Maes, which almost surrounds it; about half a League from
Charleville to the South-East, four from Sedan to the West, six from Bouillon
to the North, and fifteen from Namur to the South. It is now in a thriving
state.

Masotto, the same with Masano, a River in Candy.

Masovie, Mazovia, a Province in the Kingdom of Poland, (the Capital of which
is Warsaw) called by the Poles Mazowskie; by the Germans, Masaw; and by the
French Masovie: On the East it has Lithuania, on the North Prussia, on the West
the Greater Poland, and on the South the Lesser Poland. It is divided into four
Palatinates; which have their Names from the Cities of Mazow, Ploczko, Dobrin,
and Podlach. This was once a separate and independent Dukedom: which submitted
to the Crown of Poland, under Casimir the Great: but continued under its own
Duke, till the year 1526. when upon the Death of John and Stanislaus, (the two
last Dukes,) it was united, under Sigismond I. King of Poland, to that Kingdom.

Massa, or Massa di Carrara, Massa Carraiae, a Town in Italy; between the
Dukedom of Florence, and the State of Genoua; great and well peopled; lately
adorned with the Title of a Dukedom, it being also a small Sovereignty: twelve
Miles from Sarasana to the South-East; twenty five from Lucca to North-West;
and three from the Shoars of the Tyrrhenian Sea. Most famous for its excellent
Quarries of Marble.

Massa di Sorriento, Massa Lubrensis, a City in the Kingdom of Naples, in the
Terra di Lavoro; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Sorriento;
small and not much inhabited. It stands twenty Miles from Naples to the South,
on the opposite Shore of the Bay of Naples; and about nine from the Town of
Capri to the North-East. Built in 1465. in a place of great height, and natural
Strength.

Massa, Massa Veternensis, a small City in the Territory of Siena in Italy;
within five Miles of the Tyrrhenian Sea; thirty five from Siena to the
South-West, and twenty from Piombino to the North-East: made a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Siena, in the stead of Populonium, (a ruined City on
this Shore, called Porto Barbato;) yet it is very small. Built upon a Hill,
under the Dominion of the Duke of Florence.

The Dukedom of Massa, is a small Territory between the States of Genoua to the
West, the Dukedom of Florence to the North, the States of Lucca to the East,
and the Tyrrhenian Sea to the South; under its own Duke, who is of the House of
Cibo; whereas before, it was but a Principality. The principal places are
Massa, and Cararia; which last, though very small, is a Marquisate; and lies
five Miles from Sarasana to the South, thirty from Pisa to the North.

Massagetae, an ancient Scythian people. Some place them about the Palus
Moeotis, and the Euxine Sea. Others toward the Mountain Imaus, and the Country
now called Zagathai in Tartary. They dwelt in Tents, and sacrificed to the Sun.

Masserano, Massoranum, a small Town in Piedmont; upon a Hill, sixteen Miles
from Iurea to the East, and eight from Vercelli to the North. This is the
Capital of a Principality, under its own Prince, who is under the Protection of
the Pope: He has Crevacore and some other places of small importance.

Masulepatan, Musulepatanum, a City and Seaport in the Hither East Indies; on
the Shoars of the Bay of Bengala, in the Kingdom of Golconda; which has a
convenient Harbor and a Castle; heretofore in the hands of the Portuguese.

Mataca, a Bay on the North side of the Island of Cuba, in America: where all
the Spanish Galeons, in their return to Spain, touch for Water; and where the
Dutch defeated a Fleet of those Galeons, richly laden, in 1627.

Mataman, a Kingdom of Africa, to the West of the Aethiopick Ocean, betwixt
Caffreria and the Kingdom of Angola; and toward the River Verte.

Matan, one of the Philippine Islands, in the East-Indian Ocean; where the
famous Magellan, some say, died. It had heretofore Kings of its own, till the
Portugueze expelled them. But of late the Natives have expelled the Portugueze.

Matane, a Country in Africa, East of the Island of Madagascar; where the
French have, some time since, established Colonies.

Matapan, Taenarus, the most Southern Cape of all Europe, in the Morea,
provided with two good Ports: betwixt which, the Turks in 1570. built a
Fortress to bridle the Mainotes, called Castro di Maini. But the Venetians soon
after destroyed it, to favor the Mainotes with their Liberty again.

Mataya, a Province toward the River of Amazons, in South America; betwixt the
Mouth of the Rivers Madera, and Tapaysa, where they both fall into the River of
Amazons.

Matayone, a Duchy in the Terra di Lavoro, in the Kingdom of Naples: supposed
to be the Magdalonum, or the Meta Leonis, of the Ancients.

Matera, Mateola, a City in the Province of Otranto, in the Kingdom of Naples;
in the Borders of the Basilicate, and of the Territory of Bari; upon the River
Canapro; seated in a Valley, surrounded on all sides with Mountains. This is a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bari; and now in a very good state: it
stands thirty six Miles from Taranto to the North-West, and twenty five from
Bari to the South-West. Long. 40. 45. Lat. 40. 42.

Materan, or Materaw, Materanum, a great City on the South Side of the Isle of
Iava, in the East Indies; one hundred Leagues from Bantam to the East. The
Capital of a Kingdom of the same Name, of great extent from East to West. And
once the Capital City of the whole Island of Iava. Long. 135. 40. Southern Lat.
8. 20.

Matharee, or Matheree, a sweet and delicious Seat, two Leagues from Cairo, in
Egypt: concerning which, the Cophtite Christians entertain a Tradition, that
the Blessed Virgin with the young Child reposed, for some time, there, in their
flight from Herod into this Kingdom.

Matin, Mathis, a River of Macedonia, which falls into the Gulf of Venice,
near Durazzo.

Matique, Matica, a Province in Florida, toward the Apalatean Hills.

Mat^agia, Messene, a very ancient, but ruined City in the Morea; on the
Southern Shore toward the West.

Matzuma, a Country in the Land of Jesso, lately discovered by the Hollanders;
between Japan and Tartary; which has a City of the same name. See Jesso.

Maudre, Modre, Maldra, a small River in the Isle of France, which arises near
Montfort, and falls into the Seyne at Mayenne.

Maulcon, a Town in Biscay.

Mauleon de Soul, Malleo, Mauleosolium, a Town in the Pais des Basques, in
France. The Capital of the Viscounty of Soul.

Mauli, a River in Sicily. See il fiume di Ragusa.

Mau^ve. See Mauve.

Mauren-Haer, Sogdiana, a Province on the North-East of Persia.

Mauriac, Mauriacum, a Mountain in Auvergne.

Maurice, Mauritia, a City in Brasil in Pernambuck; built by John Maurice,
Prince of Nassaw, in 1644. The Capital of the Dutch Plantations in those
Countries; afterward taken by the Portuguese. This City stands upon the River
Biberibi, a little above its Mouth; two Spanish Leagues from Olinda to the
South: and has a safe Port near Reciff. It was called by the Dutch Mauritzstadt.

Maurienne, a Valley or Province of Savoy, extended from the Alps to the River
Isere on the one side, and from la Tarantaise to Dauphine on the other. Its
Capital City is S. Jean de Maurienne, an Episcopal See, upon the River Arche.
This Valley has been honored with the Title of an Earldom above six Ages
since; and some are of opinion, that it anciently was the Seat of the
Brannovices mentioned by Caesar.

Mauritania, an ancient large Region of Africa, which now lies contained within
the Western part of Barbary. They divided it into Caesariensis, Tingitana, and
Sitifensis. Mauritania Caesariensis had Getulia to the South, the Mediterranean
Sea to the North, Tingitana to the West, and Sitifensis to the East: and is now
almost wholly included in the West of the Kingdom of Algiers. Mauritania
Tingitania was bounded, on all sides, by the Atlantic and Mediterranean
Oceans, together with Caesariensis and Getulia: And in the time of the Emperor
Constantine, was called by the Spaniards Mauritania Transfretana. The name of
Tingitana came from the City Tingi, now Tangier. Mauritania Sitifensis had for
its bounds Numidia to the East, Caesariensis to the West, the Mediterranean to
the North, and Gaetulia to the South. And the Eastern part of the present
Kingdom of Algiers stands in this Mauritania.

Mauritz-Mylandt, Cygnea, an Island in the Ethiopian Sea, upon the Coast of
Africa; called Docerne by the Portuguese, who first discovered it. See Isle
Maurice. Long. 80. Lat 20. South.

Mauritzlandt, a part of America Magellanica, in the Land of Fire; on the South
of the Streights of Magellan: most extended to the East of those Streights, and
first discovered by the Hollanders in 1616. It had this name from the Prince of
Orange, who occasioned the Discovery.

Maurothalassa, the Euxine Sea.

Maurum, Taurus, a Mountain in Asia.

Mauve, Malva, a small River in the Dukedom of Orleance, which falls into the
Loyre at Mehun, four Leagues beneath Orleans to the West. Baudrand writes
Mau^ve.

St Maws, a Borough and Market Town in the County of Cornwall, in the Hundred of
Powder, returning two Members to the House of Commons.

Maxi, Loryma or Laryma, a City of Caria, in the Lesser Asia, over against the
Isle of Rhodes; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Rhodes; from
whence it stands twenty Miles to the North.

Mayence. See Mentz.

Mayenne, Meduana, a fine City in the Province of Maine, upon the River Main;
six Leagues from the Borders of Normandy toward Anjou, twenty Miles from
Angiers to the North, the same distance from Dol in Bretagne to the East, and
from Rennes to the North-East. This City is honored with the Title of a
Dukedom.

Mayn, Meyn, Moenus, a River of Germany; which arises from a double Spring in
Mount Fichtelburg, called Meiss-Mayn, ( White Main,) and Rot-Mayn, ( Red
Mayn;) which two uniting in one Stream at Culembach, and flowing Westward near
Bamberg, it receives the Rednitz, Wareres, Swinefurt, Wurtsburg and Vertheim;
then cutting Franconia into two parts, it passes by Asburg and Franckfort,
(augmented with the Saal, Tauber, and some smaller Rivers) into the Rhine;
near, but above Mentz. Gustavus Adolphus laid a Bridge of Boats over this
River, which has not been-since continued. See Mentz.

La Main, Mayenne, or Majene, Meduana, a River of France; which arises in the
Territory of Seez, in the Borders of Normandy; and flowing South through Maine,
waters the City of Mayenne, La Val, the Castle of Gontier, where it enters
Anjou: and a little above Angiers, being augmented with the Sartre and the
Loir, it falls into the great Loire above Nants, twelve Leagues to the East.

Mayo, Maii Insula, an Island on the Coast of Africa, in the Atlantic Ocean;
one of those that belongs to Cape Verde; and famous for its Salt Works. It is
under the Portuguese. Long. 366. 4. Lat. 50. 00. North.

Mayo, Majensis Comitatus, a County in the West of Ireland, in the Province of
Connaught; bounded on the West by the Ocean, on the South with the County of
Gallway, on the East with that of Roscomen, and on the North with Slego. It is
a fruitful pleasant County, rich in Cattle, Deer, Hawks and Honey: taking its
name from Mayo, a small City, and a Bishops See, (in the Roman Provincial
called Mageo;) but the Bishopric is annexed to that of Tuam; and the
Jurisdiction assigned to that of Killaley, in the Barony of Tir Auley. There
lies in this County a vast Lake called Lough Mesk; in which are two small
Islands with strong Forts, belonging to the Family of the Burkes, who raised
heretofore great Rebellions here. Cambden.

Mazagan, Mazaganum, a City or Fort in the Kingdom of Marocco, in the Province
of Ducala; with a Harbor upon the Atlantic Ocean, and a very strong Fort, in
the hands of the Portuguese, who built it in 1508. and in 1562. defeated a vast
Army of Moors, that came to besiege it; eighteen Leagues from Cape Cantin to
the North-East.

Mazandran. See Masandran.

Mazar, Babylon, an ancient City in Egypt.

Mazara, a City in the Island of Sicily, on the Southern Shore near the
South-West Cape; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Palermo: it is
seated in the Valley or Province of Mazara, at the Mouth of a small River of
the same name: it has a large, safe, convenient Haven, and is well fortified:
thirty Miles from Trepano to the South, and sixty from Gergenti to the West.

The Province of Mazara, is one of the three into which Sicily stands now
divided on the North, West and South. It is surrounded with the Sea; but on the
East it has the Valley De Demona, and De Noto, which are the other two
Provinces. The principal City, is Palermo; the rest are Trepano, Marsella,
Mazara, and Gergenti.

Mazarino, or Moracini, Mactorium, a Castle in the Valley del Noto, in the
Island of Sicily, giving the Title of a Count.

Mazari^ci, Hippici, a Branch of Mount Taurus in Asia.

Mazira, an Island in the Red Sea, belonging to Arabia.

Mazoure, a Town in the Kingdom of Egypt, in the lower part of it; near to
which, S. Lewis, King of France, gave Battle to the Saracens, and was taken
Prisoner by them, in 1250.

Mazzo, a small Town in the Valtoline; where the French under the Conduct of
the Duke of Rohan gained a memorable Victory over the Imperialists in 1635.

M^islaw. See Mscislaw.

Meaco, Meacum, a vast City in the Kingdom of Japan, in the Island of Niphon;
in the Province of Jetseng; called by the Inhabitants Cabucoma. It has a Royal
and Princely Palace, in which their Kings formerly lived; a fine Haven and a
Fort; still very great and populous; yet much diminished, since the Court went
to reside at Isdo, one hundred twenty five Miles from this City to the West;
and because in the Civil Wars of Japan, the greatest part of it was burnt.

Mearon, Mearus, a River of Galicia in Spain.

Mead, Media, a County in the Province of Leinster in Ireland, called by the
Irish Midh: bounded on the East by the County of Fyngal, and Kildare,
(separated by the River Bayne;) on the South by Kildare, and Kings County; on
the West by Roscomen and Longford; and on the North by the County of Monaghen.
It is divided into two parts, by the names of East and West Mead. An ancient
English Pen says, it is very fruitful and pleasant to the Eye, well watered
with Rivers, abounding with Fish, full of Cattle, well supplied with Corn; and
that the Woods and Marshes in the Skirts of it make the access so difficult on
all sides, that it is justly called the Chamber of Ireland. In the thirty
eighth year of Henry VIII. this County being thought too big to be governed by
one Sheriff, was divided by Act of Parliament into two Counties.

Meaux, Meldorum urbs, Meledis, Jatinum Meldarum, Meldae, Jatinum, a City in
the Province of Brie, (of which it is the Capital,) and a Bishops See, under
the Archbishop of Sens: it is a delicate, populous City, seated upon the Marne,
which divides it into two parts: ten Leagues from Paris to the North-East,
eighteen from Reims to the South-West, and twenty five from Amiens to the
South. In the year 1358. (during the Imprisonment of John King of France), it
was sacked and burnt, for complotting with the Parisian Faction against Charles
the Dauphine, Regent of France, Son of King John. In 1421. the Victorious
English took it by Capitulation, after a Siege of three Months: and some
private Synods have been assembled at it.

Mecca, Mecque, a City in Arabia; which Bellonius in his Observations thinks,
was called by the Ancients Petraea; but others, upon better Reasons, suppose it
to be their Marraba. It stands upon the River Chaibar, in a Valley; ten days
Journey from Medina; twice so big as it; and about forty Miles from the Shoars
of the Red Sea to the East. Compassed on all Sides by Mountains; the Soil of it
is dry and barren: yet much frequented by vast Shoals of Mahometans from all
parts every year, which come to celebrate the Memory of that Grand Impostor
Mahomet; who in 622. first began to settle his abominable Doctrine, to the ruin
of so great a part of mankind. The Mahometans pay so great a respect to this
Place, that should any Christian be found in or near it, they would burn him
alive. For the rest, the Reader may consult M. Thevenot's Travels. The Mosque
stands in the middle of the City, in a descent, with two Towers and a Dome of
extraordinary height* one hundred Gates, and a Window to each; adorned
throughout the whole, with Structures, Artifices, and Donations, inestimably
fine and rich. See Medina.

Mechelen, Malines, Mechlinia, a City in Brabant, made an Archbishops See by
Pope Paul IV. It is called by the French Malines, and by the Spaniards Malinas.
Seated upon the River Dender, in the midst of the Dukedom of Brabant; between
Antwerp, Brussels, and Lovain; about four Leagues from each of them. It fell to
the Bishop of Liege by Inheritance, as Heir of the Family of Berthold; and in
1328. was sold by him to Reginald Duke of Guelderland, for forty thousand
Crowns; who again sold it to Lewis Earl of Flanders; who in 1346. granted it to
the Duke of Brabant. Before these times it was an Imperial Free City, but long
since exempt. Till 1503. it was the seat of the Great Council, that governed
all these Countries; which was then removed to Brussels.

Mechoacan, a Province of New Spain in America; between Mexico to the East, and
New Galicia to the West; extended eighty Leagues upon the Pacifick Ocean to the
South. The City of Mechoacan gives it this name; which is very great, populous,
and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Mexico; forty seven Spanish Leagues
from Mexico to the West, and seven from the Lake of Mechoacan to the South.
This Word, in the Indian Tongue, signifies the Fishing-Place.

Meckleburg, or Mekelbourg, Meckelburgum, Megalopolis, a City of Germany, in
the Lower Saxony; heretofore a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Breme, and
the Capital of the Dukedom of Meckelburg; now ruined; nothing remaining but a
Castle near the Baltic Sea, one Germany Mile from Wismar to the South, and
three from Swerin (which is now the Bishops See) to the North. This in the
times of the Vandals and Heruli, was the greatest City in Europe: ruined by
removing the Ducal Seat to Wismar; because this Town was too big to be
fortified, as Crantius says.

The Dukedom of Meckleburg, is a Province of Germany in the Lower Saxony, of
considerable extent: on the North bounded with the Baltic Sea, on the East by
Pomerania, on the West by Holstein and Lawenburg, and on the South by the
Marquisate of Brandenburg. It is now under two Princes of the same Family: the
Eastern under the Duke of Gustrow, and the Western under the Duke of Swerin.
The Vandals, Heruli, and Burgundians, were the ancient Inhabitants of this
Country. The Dukes are descended from Peribislaus, the last King of the Heruli;
who being conquered by Henry the Lion, was forced about 1158. to take the Title
of Duke, instead of King, as an Homager to the House of Saxony. This Division
was made about 1592 upon the Death of John, the last single Duke of this entire
Dukedom. The Reformation was embraced betimes in this Country.

Medelpad, Medelpadia, a Province of Sweden, which is a part of Angerman;
between Helsinga to the South, Angerman properly so called, Jemptland to the
North, the Baltic Sea to the East, and Dale-Carle to the West.

Medemblick, a Town in West Friesland, (one of the United Provinces of the
Low Countries,) seated upon the Zuyder Sea, upon which it has a large and
secure Haven, two Miles and an half from Hoorn, and above eight from Amsterdam
to the North. It is in the Maps Medenblick.

Media, an ancient and celebrated Kingdom of Asia, betwixt Armenia Major,
Hyrcania, the Caspian Sea, Assyria, Susiana, etc. Where are now the Provinces
of Schirvan, Gilan, Hyerach, Agemy, and Dilemon in Persia. It was in the
beginning subject to the Assyrians, till Arbaces Governor of Media under
Sardanapalus, King of Assyria, taking advantage of the looseness of that Prince
to cast off the yoke of the Assyrian Empire, established a Second in Media in
his own person, Anno Mundi 3178. according to the common Computation, one
hundred years before the first Olympiad, and eight hundred seventy six before
the Coming of Christ. This Monarchy of the Medes continued under nine Kings,
from Arbaces to Astyages, three hundred and seventeen years: and then Astyages
lost his Crown and Throne to Cyrus, Anno Mundi 3495. Anno Romae 195. in the
beginning of the fifth Olympiad. The Capital City of the Medes, was Ecbatana.
The others, Arsacia (now Casbin,) Cyropolis, etc. As for the name of Media,
most agree to derive it from Madai, one of the Sons of Japhet.

Medina del Campo, Methymna Campestris, a Town in Old Castile in Spain.

Medina Caeli, Ecelesta, Augustobriga, Mediolum, Secontia Vetus, Methymna
Celia, a small Roman City in Old Castile in Spain; built upon an Hill, near the
River Xalon [ Salo;] and gives the Title of a Duke to the Family de Corda, one
of the Noblest Families in Spain, which pretends a Right to the Crown of that
Kingdom. This City stands two Leagues from the Fountains of the River Xalon to
the East, thirty one from Madrid to the North-East, and thirty four from
Saragoza to the South-West.

Medina del rio Seco, Forum Egurrorum, Methymna Sicca, a Town in the Kingdom of
Spain.

Medina Sidonia, Asindum, Assidonia, a Town in Andaluzia, mentioned by Ptolemy;
now made famous, by giving the Title of a Duke to the Family of Gusman in
Spain: it stands upon a Hill, nine Miles from Cadiz to the East, twenty five
from Malaga to the West; and was once a Bishops See, as Haubertus avers.

Medina Talnabi, that is, the City of the Prophet; a City in Arabia, upon the
River Laakic; thirty Miles from the Red Sea to the East, two hundred from Mecca
to the North; having a Port upon the Red Sea, called Jambi, at the Mouth of the
River. Long. 70. 10. Lat. 26. 00. according to our last Maps. This City was of
old called Jatrib; by Stephanus, Jatrippa; by Ptolemy, Latrippa; at present
Metina, Medina. It is seated in a Plain, between Mount Ohod to the North, and
Mount Air to the South. Mahomet, the Grand Impostor, (who was born here in
560.) finding his Countrymen not overmuch inclined to embrace his new
Doctrines, fled from hence to Mecca in 617. Having there by his Impostures
gathered a great Rabble, and pretending a quarrel against the Jews, (who had a
Synagogue in this City,) he attempted to reduce it by force of Arms;
unprosperously at first, but with better success the second time: thereupon he
turned the Jewish Synagogue into the first Mosque for the Exercise of his new
Religion. They of Mecca being alarmed with this Conque^t, in the next place
took up Arms against him, and prevailed: but in the second Battle were defeated
and subdued. Therefore he fixed his chief Seat at Mecca, where (or here, as
others say,) he died in 631. at sixty three years of Age; according to some, at
seventy: twenty three of which, he spent in propagating his abominable
Doctrines; thirteen at Medina, and ten at Mecca; five of which ten, followed
his Conquering Mecca. The Mosque is extremely rich and magnificent, sustained
by four hundred Pillars, which are charged with above three thousand Lamps of
Silver; and Here there is seen the Tomb of Mahomet, which is a Coffin elevated
upon Pillars of Black Marble, under a Canopy of Cloth of Silver and Gold,
(which the Bassa of Egypt by the Grand Seignior's Order renews every year),
surrounded with Ballisters, and abundance of Lamps of Silver.

The Mediterranean Sea, called by the Romans, Mare Internum; by the French,
Italians, and Spaniards, with little difference, il Mare Mediterraneo; by the
Germans, die Mittellendish Mere; by the Dutch, het Meid^anichezee; by the
Poles, Morze Modke^emie idoce; by the Turks, Ac Denghiz. This is the most
celebrated Sea in the whole World, first discovered, and most used by mankind.
It breaks in from the Atlantic Ocean, between Spain and Africa, by a Straight
of seven Miles broad, as the Ancients report it: on the North it has Europe, on
the East Asia, and on the South Africa. Called by various names, as to its
parts; that Branch of it between Spain, France and Italy, is called the
Tyrrhenian Sea; that between Italy to the West, Greece and Dalmatia to the
East, the Adriatic (now the Gulf of Venice,) and the Ionian Sea: that which
parts Greece from Asia, to the Dardanells, (formerly called the Aegean Sea,) is
now called the Archipelago; that which expands it self between Greece and Asia,
as far as Constantinople, is called the Propontis, or Sea of Constantinople:
and that much more extended Sea, North of Constantinople, between Europe, to
the North and West, Asia to the East, and Anatolia to the South, is called the
Euxine or Black Sea. To give an exact account of all the smaller parts of it,
would too much exceed my narrow bounds.

Medniky, Mednicia, a small City of Poland, in Samogitia, sometimes called
Womie; seated near the Fountains of the River Wirwitz. It is the Sea of the
Bishop of Samogitia: founded by Wenceslaus King of Poland, in 1413. fifteen
Polish Miles from Memel, and the Shoars of the Baltic Sea to the East; thirty
from Riga to the South-West.

Medoc, Medulanus, a small Tract in Aquitain; between the Mouth of the Garrone
to the North, the Bay of Aquitain to the West, and Bourdeaux to the East. There
is not above three or four small Towns in it. The ancient Meduli are understood
to have dwelt here.

Medway, Vaga, a River of Kent, which rises in the Weald or Wild, in the
South-West part of that County: at Penhurst it receives the Eten out of Surrey;
so dividing it self into five Streams, it surrounds Tunbridge; from thence
passing North-East, it goes to Maidstone, from thence to Rochester; by which
time it is become exceeding great, by the concourse of many Rivers it takes in
its short Course. Here he is covered by a Stone Bridge, beneath which, he
becomes capable of the greatest Ships: and in his Bed the Royal Fleet of
England rides in time of Peace. Below Rochester, he forms the Isle of Shepey;
one of his Mouths entering the Ocean at Sherness, and the other at Shellness;
above eight Miles from each other. In 1667. the Dutch Fleet entered this River
June 22. having with their Cannon battered down the Paper Fort of Sherness;
where they carried off the Royal Charles, and burnt and spoiled four or five
other Ships.

Megalopolis, an ancient City of Arcadia, near the River Alpheus: renowned for
the Birth of Polybius, the Noble Grecian Writer of the Roman History. Since
Christianity, it has been an Episcopal See. But this glory, under the Turks,
is changed into the condition of a miserable Village. And the Proverb* Magna
Civitas magna solitudo, was never more verified of it, than now.

Megara, a City of Achaia, in ancient times cal-Nisa, or Nissaea: it stands at
the North-West Point of the Bay of Corinth, near the Hexamilia or Isthmus; two
Miles from the Sea Shore, twenty five from Athens to the West, and the same
distance from Corinth to the North East. This was the Birthplace of Euclid, the
Master of the Mathematics: Lat. 38. 05. (which is the true height of Athens.)
Mr. Wheeler, who saw this place, thus describes it. It is situate in a Valley,
between the Mountain Kerata North; (which has a Ridge running Northward, to
join with Mount Cithaeron, at the bottom of the Bay of Corinth, now called
Livadostro;) the Mountain Macripaldi to the West toward Corinth; the Mountain
of Palaio Bouni South-East, and the Bay of Livadostro North-West. This Plain is
reasonably fruitful, twenty Miles in compass. The City was anciently built upon
two Rocks. Now one of the Rocks is desolate; the other has about three or four
hundred pitiful Cottages, (built one Story high and close together) the Walls
of which are the ruins of the former Houses, or a few Faggots covered with
Clay: Chimnies they have none, except it be a hole in the top of the House, or
the Door. The Turks of themselves abandoned this place, after the reduction of
Athens. It is now called Megra. A City, in the beginning, the Capital of a
Monarchy under the Reign of twelve Kings. Then a Republic, which maintained
diverse Wars with the^ Athenians and others; and also established a Colony in
the Island of Sicily.

Meghen, a Town in the Dukedom of Brabant, in the Low Countries, upon the left
side of the Meuse, three Leagues from Boisleduc. It gives the Title of an
Earldom.

Meissen, Misnia, a Territory and City of Germany, in the Upper Saxony; which
is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Magdeburgh; and under the Dominion of
its own Bishop: but now in the hands of the Elector of Saxony, as Administrator
of the Bishopric of Misnia. It stands three German Miles from Dresden to the
East, nine from Leypsick to the same Quarter, and twelve from Wittemberg to the
South, upon the Western Shore of the River Elbe, over which it has a fine
Wooden Bridge. Built by Henry the Fauikoner, who constituted the Marquess of
Misnia in 928. Sigismond, the Emperor, in 1423 granted to its Marquess,
(within the Dukedom of Saxony) the Electoral Dignity. Its Bishop was one of
them that led the way to the Reformation, by ejecting the Pardon-mongers in
1500. In 1581. the Reformation was settled here, and the Augustane Confession
embraced. This is at this day a great, rich, populous City; and has belonging
to it a Castle.

Mela, or la Mela, a River in Lombardy, which washes the Walls of Brescia, and
then falls into the Oglio.

Melas, the ancient Name of the Rivers Larissa and Gensui. (See those Names.)
As of several others mentioned by the Ancients in Lycia, Arcadia, Mygdonia,
Sicily, Cilicia, and Achaia.

Melasso or Melazzo, a Town in the Valley of Demona, in the Island of Sicily,
near Messina. Likewise, a City in the Province of Aidinelli, in the Lesser
Asia, which was the ancient Mylassa of Caria. This is a Bishops See under the
Archbishop of Stauropolis or Santa Croce.

Melohited, a general Name for all the Syrian, Cophtite or other Oriontal
Christians, not being natural Greeks, who adhere to the Decisions of the Great
Council of Chalcodon, and the common Sentiments of the Greek Church. Given them
by the opposite Parties, from the Hebrew Word (...) ( a King,) in derision of
their being of the Religion of the Emperor, who presided over the said
Council. They call themselves the Orthodox: and have translated into the
Arabic Language, the Bible, Councils, and Euchologies, with most of the
Ecclesiastical Books, of the Grecians.

Melcomb Regis, a Corporation in Dorsetshire, in the Hundred of Vgscomb, upon
the River Wey, where it falls into the Sea; united by a fair Timber Bridge with
the Town of Weymouth on the other side of the same River; and together with it,
by Act of Parliament in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, incorporated into one
Body, governed by one Mayor, with Aldermen, etc. yet they both elect two
Burgesses to the Parliament.

Meldola, Meldula, a small Town in the Dominions of the Church, in Romandiola,
in the Confines of Tuscany; upon the River Bedese, (or Ronco,) which falls
beneath Ravenna, into the Ionian Sea; ten Miles from Forli to the South. This
is said to be a Marquisate, and a Sovereignty, in the possession of Prince
Pamfilio.

Melfi, Melphis, Melphia, a City of the Kingdom of Naples in the Basilicate;
which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Acerenza, or Mateola; but now
exempt from the Jurisdiction of its own Archbishop. It is a great and well
peopled City, in the Borders of the Capitanate, toward the Mountains, upon the
River Melfi, or Molpa; four Miles from the River Ofanto, sixty five from Naples
to the East, and almost forty from Manfredonia, South.

Mellila, Ryssadirum, a Town in Barbary, subject to the King of Spain. It lies
in the Kingdom of Fez, in the Province of Garet, or Jeyrat; taken by Ferdinand
King of Spain, in 1496. who gave order for the fortifying it. It is seated on
the Mediterranean Sea, in a fruitful Plain, at the foot of a Mountain; almost
forty German Miles from the Mouth of the Streights of Gibraltar to the East;
over against Almeria, in Granada. Being besieged by the Moors, Anno 1687. the
Garrison slew five hundred of them in one Salley, October 5. whereupon the next
day they lest the Town, and drew off.

Melinde, Melinda, a Town and Kingdom in Zanguebar, in Africa. The Town is a
Seaport, fortified with a Castle which the Portuguese have erected. And the
Sea adjacent, some take to be the Asperum Mare of Ptolemy.

Melito, or Meliton, Miletus, a small City in the Kingdom of Naples, in the
further Calabria; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Regio; but
exempt from his Jurisdiction. Pope Gregory VII. translated this See from
Taurianum, (a ruined City) in 1075. This City is called Melita, by Cicero: it
stands between Cosenza to the North, and Regio to the South, forty Miles from
either; five from Nocera, and the Tyrrhenian Sea to the East. It has been in a
decaying condition a long time; especially since 1638. in which it suffered
very much by an Earthquake.

Melli, Mellum, a Kingdom in Nigritia in Africa, in which the River Niger is
first divided into several Branches. Bounded on the East by the Kingdoms of
Mandinga and Malegneta; on the West by the Atlantic Ocean. It has a great and
populous City of the same name, where the Court resides* thirty days journey
from Tombut. And the Kingdom is tributary to that of Tombut, since 1520.

Melun, Melodunum, a City of France, in the Province of Brie; in the Borders of
Gastinois, in the Generalite of the Isle of France; upon the Seyne, which it
covers with two Bridges: four Leagues from Fountainbleau to the South-East, ten
from Paris to the South, and three from Corbeil. In this City died Robert King
of France, in 1030. and Philip I. in 1109. It has a Castle, many fine
Churches, gives the title of a Viscount, and its name to an honorable family.

Memel, or Memmel, Memelium, Memmelburgum, Cleupeda, a Town in the Kingdom of
Poland, in the Province of Samogitia; seated upon the Banks of the Baltic Sea;
thirty Polish Miles from Koningsperg to the North, thirty eight from Riga to
the South-West. Baudrand ascribes it to Russia Regalis, and to the County of
Sambienfi; and says, it has a strong Castle, a Lake, and a safe Harbor. This
Town was taken by Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, in 1628. But restored to
the Poles, under whom it now is; almost entirely ruined by Fire in 1678. now
rebuilt. Long. 50. 00. Lat. 56.

Memel, Chronus, a River which arises in Lithuania, about fifteen Polish Miles
South of Minski; called Niemen by the Poles. It waters Grodno and Kowna; and
entering Prussia Regia, is called Russ; and falling at last into the Lake of
Memel, by the Town of Memel, enters the Baltic Sea at Kowna. This River
takes in the Vill, which waters Vilna; and is one of the most considerable
Rivers in these parts.

Memmingen, Drusomagus, Memminga, an Imperial Free City in Schwaben in Germany,
upon the River Iler; seven German Miles from Vlm to the South, and nine from
Ausburg to the North-West.

Menan, Menanius, a vast River in the further East Indies; which arises out of
the Lake of Chiammay; and passing the Kingdoms of Pegua and Siam, it waters
Odia, (or Siam, the Capital of that Kingdom) and Anio: then by two great Mouths
falls into the Bay of Siam, in Long. 328.

Menapii, an ancient People of Gallia Belgica, whose Capital Town was the
Modern Kessel in the Duchy of Brabant.

Menaw, the Isle of Man.

Mende. See Mande.

Mendlesham, a Market Town in the County of Suffolk, in the Hundred of
Hartesmere.

S. Menehoult, Sancta Menehildis, a strong Town in Champaign; put into the
Hands of the Spaniards, by the Prince of Conde, in 1652. and recovered to
France in 1653. It is seated in the Territory of Argonne, (the Capital of which
it is) upon the River Aisne, Axona; nine Leagues from Verdun to the South, and
six from Bar le Duc to the North-West. It has a Castle of great strength.
Baudrand writes this S. Menehould; the Maps S. Manheu.

Mengrelia, Colchis, a Province in Asia, in Georgia; toward the North, and the
Euxine Sea, which bounds it on the West. Abascia (separated from it by the
River Coraz, now called Colors,) lies on the North: Guriel on the South, (cut
off by the Phasis, now Rione:) Imaretza and Susan on the East. This Country is
well watered, fruitful, under a Prince of its own, descended of the Kings of
Georgia. It had a City called Sebastopolis, which is now swallowed up by the
Waters. See Archangelus Lambertus, and Sir John Chardin. The first of which
lived many years in this Country: the latter has lately published an account of
what he saw there. For their Manners, see Georgia. The present Prince of
Mengrelia is the eighth of this Family, and Tributary to the Turks: whose
Tribute is sixty thousand Else of Linen Cloth made here: and this is as much
as he can well afford: his Revenue not exceeding 20000 Crowns per ann. much of
which is raised from his Subjects, sold for Slaves to the Turks to the number
of seven or eight thousand in a year. Which with their perpetual and fierce
Wars has so depopulated this Country, that the Prince is not able to bring
above four thousand Horse, and three thousand Foot into the Field; and might
easily be totally subdued by the Turks, if it were thought worth the while; or
possible to keep a roving People, (who have neither Towns nor Cities,) in
subjection, when they are once Conquered.

Menteith, Menthitia, a County in the North of Scotland. Bounded on the West by
Lenox, and the Lake Lomond; on the North by Albain; on the East by Stratherne;
and on the South by Sterling and Lenox. The principal Town in it is Dunblain.
The Damnii inhabited in ancient times a part of this County, in the Opinion of
Mr. Cambden.

Mentz, Meintz, Moguntia, Magontiacum, a City of Germany, of great Antiquity;
called by the Inhabitants, Mayntz; by the French, Mayence; by the Spaniards and
Italians, Magonza. It stands in the Lower Circle of the Rhine; upon the Rhine;
six German Miles from Franckfort on the Main to the West, eighteen from
Treves, and fifteen from Spire to the North. Mentioned by Ptolemy and Tacitus.
It has its Name from the River Main or Moin, which falls into the Rhine over
against it: The ancientest City in that part of Germany; as having been
certainly built before the Birth of our Savior; being a City in the times of
Drusus, General to Augustus. ( Florus, lib. 4.) In 745. it was made an
Archbishops See, instead of Worms; to which it was a Suffragan See before. It
was very severely treated by Frederick Aenobarbus, the Emperor, in 1158. But
rebuilt and restored by Otho IV. In 1462. it was taken October 27. by Adolphus
Nassaw, its Bishop: and whereas before it was Imperial and Free, it has been
ever since subject to its own Archbishops. There was an University opened here
in 1482. Others say in 1461. Gustavus Adolphus entered this place in Triumph,
December 14. 1631. In 1635. it was retaken from the Swedes: but the next year
they again took it, and kept it till the Peace of Munster. It claims also the
invention of Printing about 1430. A strong place, and well guarded (says Dr.
Brown;) has many Churches and Monasteries, and some fair Buildings, especially
those of Public Concern; but the narrowness of the Streets, and many old
Houses, take away much from the Beauty of it. It is most extended toward the
River; and that part excels the other also toward the Land, as being more
populous, and better built. It paid to the King of Sweden, as a Ransom, above
an hundred thousand Dollers; which shows its Wealth. This Prince built a Bridge
over the Main here, and another over the Rhine: partly upon Piles of Wood,
partly upon Boats; the first of these is taken away, but the latter is
continued still. The Archbishop is Arch-Chancellor of the Empire, and the first
of the Electoral College: in all public Conventions he sits at the Right Hand
of the Emperor; and is the Successor of Boniface, an Englishman, who very much
promoted the Christian Faith in these parts. This City received a French
Garrison in October 1688. Surrendered again to the Consederate Forces Sept. 11.
1689. after a Siege of six or seven Weeks. The Electorate of Mentz, Moguntina
Ditio, called by the Inhabitants, Maintzische; by the Germans, das
Churfurstenthumb bon Mayntz; is a small Province in the Lower Circle of the
Rhine, under the Dominion of this Archbishop: stretching from East to West,
between the Territories of Weteraw and Westerwalt to the North, and the Lower
Palatinate to the South. The bounds cannot be exactly stated; because the
Dominions belonging to this Bishopric lie dispersed in Franconia, and the
other Circles; and render this Elector the less considerable. Dr. Heylyn
observes, that a Bishop of Mentz subscribed in the Council of Colen in 347. So
that this Bishopric was only Refounded in 745* after the barbarous Nations had
extirpated Christianity here. Dr. Brown says, the Soil of this Country is
fertile; abounds with all sorts of Provisions, and excellent Wines: So that his
Revenue will afford him six or seven thousand Crowns a year.

Meppen, Meppa, a City in Westphalia, in the Bishopric of Munster; upon the
River Hase, (which falls into the Emes, a little below Lingen,) eleven Miles
from Emden to the South, and thirteen from Munster to the North.

Merch. See March.

Mercia, a great and inland Kingdom in the old Heptarchy of the Saxons in
England; which contained Gloucester, Worcester, Hereford, Stafford, Darby,
Nottingham, Leicester, Rutland, Lincoln, Huntingdom, Northampton, Warwick,
Salop, Oxon, Buckingham, Bedford, and Hartford.

Mercoeur, a small Town in the Province of Anvergne, in France, upon an Ascent,
and a Rivulet falling afterward into the Allier. Charles IX. advanced it to
the dignity of a Principality in 1563, and into a Dukedom and Peerage of France
in 1569. It gives name to a Family of Honor.

Metense, Myndus, a City of Caria, in the Lesser Asia; which is a Bishop's See,
under the Archbishop of Stauropolis [ Santa Croce.] It is even now the Capital
of the Province, and the Seat of a Turkish Governor; 16 German Miles South of
Ephesus, upon the Archipelago; and five West of Melasso. From this City, Caria
is now called Menteseli by the Turks.

Merdin, Marde, a City of Assyria, upon the River Tigris, in the Confines of
Mesopotamia; which is now an Archbishop's See in the Province of Diarbeck, in
the Confines of the Greater Armenia; twenty German Miles from Caramit to the
East, and thirty from Nisibin to the North. Long. 76* 30. Lat. 36. 10.

Mere, a Market Town in Wiltshire. The Capital of its Hundred.

Mergetheim, a Town in Franconia in Germany; made famous by a Defeat of Turin
in 1645. It stands upon the River Goliach, in the County of Werthaim; four
German Miles from Wurtzburgh to the South-West, and nine from Hailbrun to the
North-East.

Merhern, the same with Moravia.

Merida, Emerita Augusta, a City in Portugal; heretofore an Archbishop's See,
and the Seat of the Courts of Justice, for the Province of Extremadura; upon
the River Guadiana; twelve Miles above Badajox to the East, fourteen from
Alcantara to the South-East, and twenty five from Sevil to the North. Now very
small, and in a declining condition; only the Spaniards (in whose hands it is,)
have bestowed of late years something in Fortifying it against the Portuguese.
The Archbishop's See was removed hence in 1124. by Pope Calistus II. to S. Jago
di Compostella. In 1230. the Moors were driven from Merida. Some Synods have
been assembled here: and some place it in New Castile in Spain. Also an
Episcopal City in the Province of Jucatan, in New Spain in America, toward the
Gulf of Mexico.

Meridiano, the same with Lambro.

Merindol, the Place of the Retreat of the Vaudois, upon the Frontiers of the
County of Venaissin in Provence, which was put to Military Execution by order
of Francis I. King of France and the Parliament of Aix, with all its Houses,
Castles, and People of the Reformed Religion (then in Rebellion) in 1545. after
the trial, in vain, of other Courses to reduce them.

Merionethshire, Mervinia, is one of the twelve Shires in the Principality of
Wales; called by the Inhabitants, Uerionethshire: on the North it has Carnarvan
and Denbigh, on the East Montgomery, the South Cardigan, (cut off by the River
Dowy,) and on the West it is washed by the Irish Sea. Extremely Mountainous,
Barren, unpleasant, and exposed to raging Winds; having nothing of value but
Cattle. This was the Seat of the Ordovices, a British Clan. It was not
Conquered by the English till the Reign of Edward I. in 1283. In the Reign of
Hen. IV. Owen Glendover drew this and all wales into a Combination against that
Prince; which might have ended in the loss of Wales, under a less Martial
Prince than he. There is in this County no Town of Note.

Mern, Mernis, Marnia, a County in the North-East part of Scotland; bounded on
the South-East by the German Ocean, on the North-West by the County of Mar,
and on the South-West by Angus: the chief Town of which is Fordun. It is
little, and lies in the form of a Triangle.

Meroe, a very great Island, made by the River Nile in Aethiopia; which has
this name from the principal City in the Island. It is now called Gueguere; but
by the Inhabitants, Neube. Indeed Lobus, a Portugal, (in his History of
Aethiopia,) is of Opinion, there is no such Island at all: and says, the Nile
makes never an Island in Aethiopia; and the Ancients were much deceived in
placing this pretended Island so far from the Red Sea; therefore he is not
pleased with their conceit, who make the Kingom of Goyaume to be Mero^: and
upon the whole he concludes the distance of the place and difficulty of access
gave occasion to all those fictions of the Ancients concerning this Island;
which by them was placed in Lat. 16. 23.

Mersburgh, Martinopolis, Mersoburgum, a small City in Misnia in Germany; which
is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Magdeburgh; upon the River Saal;
three German Miles from Hall to the South, and as many from Leipsick to the
West. The Bishop of this Diocese embraced the Augustane Confession, in 1565. In
1592. John George, Bishop of it, became Elector of Saxony: his Successors have
ever since been Administrators of this Bishopric; being chosen, upon every
vacancy, by the Chapter: and in this Right they are possessed of the City of
Mersburgh; which was once an Imperial Free Town, but long since exempted. There
is another Mersbourgh in Schwaben, upon the Lake of Constance, where the Bishop
of Constance resides.

Mersey, the Arm of the Sea, into which the River Dee in Wales falls. See Dee.

Merton-meer, a great Lake in Lancashire.

Mesember, Mesembria, a City of Thrace; ascribed by Ptolemy to Moesia Inferior,
and in our latter Maps placed in Bulgaria; on the North side of the great
Mountain Hermus, upon the Shores of the Euxine Sea: twenty seven German Miles
from Adrianople to the North-East, and thirty two from Constantinople to the
North-West. It is now an Archbishop's See, and in the hands of the Turks.

Mesendin, the Persian Gulf.

Mesmes, a Castle and Seigniory in the Diocese of Bazas, in the Lower Guienne,
in France, which gives Name to an Honorable Family there.

Mesopotamia, a large Country of Asia, enclosed within the Rivers Tigris and
Euphrates, and heretofore making a considerable part of the Assyrian Empire.
Its principal Cities (now) are Caramit, (the Capital), Merdin, and Heren. The
Arabians call it, Al-Gezira; as the Hebrews did, Aram Naharajim, i. e. the
Syria betwixt two Rivers, in conformity to the Greek of Mesopotamia. Vid.
Diarbeck.

Mesrata, the same with Cairoan.

Messapia, a Province of the Ancient Italy, where now lies the Terra di Otranto
in the Kingdom of Naples. It had a City of its own Name, called afterward
Messana Apuliae, and now Mesagna. Virgil mentions the ancient Inhabitants with
the Character of Equum domitor, Neptunia proles.

Messene. See Moseniga.

Messin. See Metz.

Messina, Messana, an ancient and very celebrated City, on the Northern Point
of the Isle of Sicily; ten Miles from Reggio in Italy, sixty from Catania to
the North, and a hundred and fifty from Palermo to the North-East. It is a
great, rich, well traded City; an Archbishop's See; the Capital of the Province
of Demona; and the second City in the Island: being five Miles in compass,
having an Harbor of great safety, and wonderfully frequented by Merchants.
Nobly built, has a Princely Palace, a well furnished Magazine, a noble
Metropolitan Church; and great plenty of Silk Weavers. It is of a long figure,
with four great Suburbs. The Philosopher Dicaearchus was a Native of this City.
Charles V. in 1535* spent very much in fortifying it, and built four Castles to
that purpose. This City was recovered out of the Hands of the Saracens by Roger
the Norman in 1060. The Spaniards provoked it so far, that in 1674. it shook
off their Yoke; who were never able to reduce the place again under their
Obedience, till March 16. 1678. The Inhabitants pretend to have a Letter, which
was Written to them by the Virgin Mary; and certainly they have great reason to
value that singular favor.

Messo, Bermius, a Mountain lying between Macedonia, Thessalia, and Epirus;
called in the latter Maps Mezova. It stretches from North-West to South-East;
and ends at the North Point of the Isle of Negropont; and seems to be the same
with Mount Pindus, or a part (at least) of it.

Mesuna, Medama, a River of the further Calabria; it falls into the Sea about
four Miles South of Nicotera.

Mesapontum, a Town of the ancient Lucania in Italy, now called Torre di Mare.

Metelin, Lesbos, Mitylene, an Island in the Archipelago, on the Coast of the
Lesser Asia; six Miles from its Shoars to the South. Now commonly called
Mitelino, from its principal City; which is seated on the East side of the
Island, and an Archbishop's See. It has two other Cities, which are
Bishoprics: that is, Gerema, and Calono. The Circuit of this Island is 140
Miles, its length from North to South 40. It was under the Family of the
Catelusii, from 1355. to 1462, when it was taken from Dominico Catelusio, (the
last Prince of this Race,) by Mahomet II. Emperor of the Turks. This Family
being of a Genouese Extraction, the Island is generally said to have been so
long under the States of Genoua. Written also Mettelen. It pays eighteen
thousand Piastres Tribute to the Turks.

Metoro, Metaurus, a River in the Dukedom of Vrbino; which arises in the
Confines of Tuscany, near Borgo S. Sepulchro; and running East, waters (says
Baudrand) S. Angelo, and Vrbino: In the Maps it is placed more South; and
waters Fossombrone, (Forum Sempronii) and so falls into the Gulf of Venice;
between Fanno to the North, and Sinigaglia to the South.

Metramo, or Marro, Metaurus, a small River of Calabria the further; which
falls into the Sea, eleven Miles South of Nicotera.

Metz, Meta, Metis, Mediomatricum, Divodurum Mediomatricorum, a City, and
Bishop's See in the Dukedom of Lorrain, under the Archbishop of Trier, and the
Capital of the Territory of Messin. It stands upon the Moselle, where it takes
in the Seile, ( Sala;) ten Leagues from Nancy to the North, and Verdun to the
East, and sixteen from Trier to the South. At first the Capital of the Kingdom
of Metz: after this, an Imperial Free City; and being exempted, it fell in
1552. into the hands of the French. Charles V. the same year with a powerful
Army sat down before it; and omitted nothing that Courage or Art could dictate
to recover it: but failing in the Attempt, fell out with the World; and soon
after resigned all his Dominions to his Son in 1555, and went into a Monastery.
Some considerable Councils have been formerly assembled at this place.

Meulan, Mulanum, a Town and Fortress upon the Seine; in the Government of the
Isle of France; which has a Stone Bridge over the River. It stands nine Leagues
above Paris to the West. Henry IV. could not take the Fortress in 1589, tho he
made himself Master of the Town.

Meun or Mehun, a small Town in the Province of Berry in France, upon the River
Yeure, betwixt Bourges and Vierzon: showing the Ruins of a Castle, heretofore
demolished by the English. It has a Collegiate Church. There is another Meun in
the same Province, upon the River Inde, betwixt Chateau-roux and Bruzancais:
And a Third in the Province of Orleanois, under the right side of the Loyre,
betwixt the City Orleans and Baugency. Adorned with a Collegiate Church, and
taken heretofore by the Victorious English under the Earl of Salisbury. In
Latin, Magdunum.

Meurs, Meursia, a small City of the Dukedom of Cleves, though seated in the
Bishopric of Cologn; which is an Earldom, and belongs (together with its
Territory,) to the Prince of Orange, by the gift of the last Countess in 1600.
Yet the Duke of Brandenburgh lays claim to it, as Duke of Cleves. It lies two
Miles from Rhineburgh to the South, one from the Rhine to the West, about ten
from Cologn to the North-West, and seven from Cleves to the South-West.

Meurtre, Mourtre, Murta, Morta, a River of Lorrain; it arises from Mount
Vauge; and watering Nancy, falls into the Moselle, three Leagues above Pont
Mouson.

Meuse, Mosa, the same with the Maes.

Mexico, Mexicum, a vast City in the North America; the Capital of New Spain,
and of a Province of the same name in that Kingdom; the Seat of the Spanish
Viceroy of the West-^na^es, and an Archbishop's See. This City stands upon the
North side of a Lake of the same name; in a most pleasant, fruitful, and large
Plain, and in great part surrounded with the Lake. The Inhabitants pretend it
was built in 1322. The Spaniards by the current and thread of their Story, say,
it was built in 902. It was many Ages since, the Royal Seat of the Kings of
Mexico; had then a great and splendid Palace, called in their Tongue the Tepac;
but burnt together with the City, when it was taken by the Spaniards in 1521.
by Francis Cortez; who rebuilt the City, and made it the Capital of his
Conquests. Its Streets are great, straight, and beautiful; its Churches
magnificent, its public Buildings noble. It has an Aquaduct three Miles long,
and many Monasteries. John de Turre Cremata, our Countryman Mr. Gage, and some
others, have given large accounts of this noble City; which is the greatest in
America. It has no Walls, Forts, Bastions, nor any Cannon, or Defense
whatsoever, beside what the number of its Inhabitants afford: which is a part
of the Spanish Jealousy, for fear a Viceroy should set up for himself. In
1527. Pope Clement VII. made it a Bishop's See. In 1547. Paul III. made it an
Archbishop's See; in which Year Cortez the Conqueror died. It was made an
University in 1551. by Charles V. As it is seated in a very low ground, so it
has often suffered very much by Inundations of the Lake, particularly September.
21. 1629. forty thousand of its Inhabitants were drowned: to prevent this for
the future, they have with great Charges found out a means to drive part of
these Waters other ways. There is no way to the City but over three Causways,
on the North, West, and South sides: the latter of which is the longest. Long.
269. 00. Lat. 28. 30. eighty Spanish Leagues from the South Sea, and the same
distance from the Shores of the Bay of Mexico. See Golfo di Mexico. There are
also two Lakes of Water called by the name of this City: one of which is fresh
Water, seven Leagues long, six broad: the other is salt Water, forty Leagues in
compass.

Meydenburg. See Magdeburg.

Meylandt, the German Name for Milan.

Meyne. See Mayn. Also a Mineral Spring, much resorted to of late, near the
City Arles in Provence.

Mezaal, a pretended Island in Aethiopia. See Meroe.

Mezieres, Maderiacum, Meceria, a City of France in Champagne, in the Territory
of Retelois; built upon, and almost encompassed with the Maes; and very well
fortified besides. It stands not above half a League from Charleville, four
beneath Sedan to the West, three from the Confines of Luxemburgh, and sixteen
from Reims to the North-East: and has a Collegiate Church.

Mezo, Amyzon, a City of Caria, in the Lesser Asia; still extant; and a
Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Sancta Croce; being seated between
Magnesia and Alabanda; thirty Miles from Miletus, (now Melasso) and the same
distance from the Shoares of the Archipelago to the East.

Mezuma, oppidum novum, a City in the Kingdom of Algier, in Africa, in the
Province of Tenez; between Algier and Tremesin.

Mezzaba, a Province in Biledulgerida in Africa, with a City of the same name,
by the great River between Zeb and Tegorarina to the West.

Mezzovo, Pindus.

Miana, Apamia, or Apamea, a City of Media. Long. 79. 50. Lat. 34. 20.

Miary, a River in Brasil, which receives the Ovaro Covo, and diverse other
Rivers; then falls into the Ocean, near the Island of Maragnan, upon the Coast
of Brasil.

Micoli, an Island of the Aegean Sea, betwixt Nicaria to the East, and the
Islands Tenon and Andron to the North. One of the Cyclades; called by the
Ancients Mycone and Myconos. It produces Wine, Cotton, Barley, and abundance of
Game: planted with one only Village, which pays a yearly Tribute to the Turks.

Middleburgh, Metelli Castrum, Middleburgum, Metelloburgum, a Town in Zealand;
the Capital of the Isle of Walcheren; made a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop
of Vtretcht, in 1559. by Pope Paul IV; the Collegiate Church in 1561 being
converted into a Cathedral, and the Revenues of a famous Abbey, that was here,
applied to serve for the use of the Bishopric. It is great, rich, populous,
extremely well fortified, and has been under the United Provinces ever since
1574: in which it was taken by their Forces from the Spaniards. The Abbey is
now the Townhouse. There is a Town in Flanders, under the United Provinces,
two German Miles from Bruges to the North; and an Island in the East Indies,
both called by the same name.

Middlefart, a Town in the Island of Fuynen, in the Baltic Sea; giving name to
the Channel, Middelfart or Middle-Passage, betwixt this Island and Jutland.

Middlesex, Middlesexia, Trinobantes, is bounded on the North by Hartfordshire;
on the West by Buckingham, (separated by the River Colne;) on the South by
Surrey, cut off by the Thames; and on the East by Essex. divided from it by the
Lea. It is nineteen English Miles in length, and sixteen in breadth; one of the
least Counties in England: but its Fertility and nearness to London, abundantly
recompenseth this want of Extent. The ancient British Inhabitants were the
Trinobantes: afterward it was a part of the Kingdom of the East Saxons.
White Hall and S. James, the Royal Mansions of the Kings of England, are both
in this County: to which may be added Hampton Court, their Country House of
Pleasure: and LONDON the Capital of England, is its Head. The Honorable Charles
Sackville Earl of Dorset, is also Earl of Middlesex, by a Creation of Feb. 4.
1674. Which Title was first bestowed by K. James I. in 1622. on Lionel Lord
Cranfield, Lord Treasurer of England; whose Son James enjoyed the same; and
after him Lionel, Brother of James, in whom it died.

Middleham, a Market Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of
Hangwest, upon the River Your.

Midhurst, a Corporation in the County of Suffolk, in Chichester Rape, which
returns two Members of Parliament.

Midlewich, a Market Town in Cheshire, in the Hundred of Northwich, upon the
River Croke, near its fall into the Dane.

Midour, Midorius, a River in Gascogne in France; which arises in the County
of Armagnac; and flows Westward through Marsan, (the Capital of which it
washes;) then takes in the Douse, and beneath Tartas sixteen Miles from
Bourdeaux to the South, falls into the Adour.

Mignone, Minio, Magnone, a River of Italy, which arises in Sabatina; and
flowing through S. Peter's Patrimony, falls into the Tyrrhenian Sea between
Civita Vecchia and Cornetto.

Milan, Milano, Mediolanum, by the Germans called Meilandt, one of the greatest
and most noble Cities in Italy; built by the Galls in the year of Rome 345.
three hundred and fifty seven years before the Birth of our Savior; others say
it was built Anno Mundi 2488. which is above one thousand years sooner. The
Romans first took it in the year of Rome 531. Marcellus their General
Triumphing for the Slaughter of Viridomare the Prince of it, and the taking
this City. This City however joined with the Carthaginians in the Second Punick
War; and was not reduced without the loss of six thousand of her Inhabitants.
In the times of Christianity, being converted by S. Barnabas, it became an
Archbishop's See, and suffered very much from the Arrian Princes, though in the
end it preserved the Catholic Faith. Attila, King of the Huns, took and
spoiled this, and several Neighboring Cities; particularly Florence and Verona
in the year of Christ 452. The next that became Masters of it were the
Lombards, who possessed themselves of it about 570. It continued under this
Nation till 774. under a Succession of twenty three Princes. Only it is said
Aribert, the seventeenth King, gave the Duchy of Milan to the Church of Rome.
But the Successors of this Prince not agreeing with the Popes, Adrian I.
procured Charles the Great to destroy this Kingdom: who took Desiderius,
carried him Prisoner into France, and put an end to the Kingdom of the
Lombards, in the year of Christ 774. It continued under this Family, and the
Emperors of Germany, till 1161: when it took part with Pope Alexander III.
against Frederick Barbarossa, and was for it rased to the ground: but it
recovered; and outing the Emperors about 1221. became a Republic: and
continued so till 1277. when it fell under Otho by the Title of Visconti, but
as subject to the Emperors of Germany. John Galeazo, the eighth of these, was
made a Duke by Wenceslaus I. Emperor, in 1395. It continued under Dukes, till
Lewis XII. in 1501. by the Conquest of Lewis, an usurping Duke, got it;
Maximilian got it from the French in 1513. Francis, a Brother of this
Maximilian, the seventeenth Duke, succeeded him in 1529. Francis I. King of
France, won and lost it again in 1521. And being taken Prisoner by the Forces
of Charles V. in the Battle of Pavia in 1525, he was forced for his Liberty to
renounce all his Pretenses to this Duchy: upon the death of Francis Sforze, in
1535. it was by Charles V. united for ever to the Crown of Spain, under which
it still is. At this day, after all these Sufferings, it is the greatest and
most beautiful City in Lombardy; the most populous too; its Inhabitants being
thought to be two hundred thousand Souls. Its Trade is equal to its Greatness;
and the Inhabitants very rich. It is seven Miles in compass; has one of the
strongest Cittadels in the World, with an University. It stands upon the River
Olona, three hundred and twenty five Miles from Rome, one hundred and sixty
five from Venice, and two hundred and thirty from Lions. Long. 31. 30. Lat. 44.
40. In the years 344. and 350, two Councils were here Congregated against the
Arrians. In 355. the Arrians carried it against the adverse Party, and sent a
great number thereof into Banishment. In 390. there was another celebrated
against Jovinian. In 451. the Doctrine of the Incarnation of the Word, as
expressed in the Epistle of Pope Leo to Flavianus Bishop of Constantinople,
received the approbation of a Council at this place. In 679. they held another
against the Menethelites. And diverse since, of inferior note. The Dukedom of
Milan is a part of Lombardy; bounded on the North by Switzerland, and the
Grisons; on the East by the Republic of Venice, and the Dukedom of Placentia;
on the South by the States of Genoua; and on the West by Montisferat and
Piedmont. The Soil is extremely fruitful, plain, well watered, very full of
People, and consequently well improved. It especially abounds with Vines and
Barley. Heretofore much greater than now: It contained twenty nine Cities,
which are now reduced to ten; Alessandria, Bobbio, Como, Cremona, Lodi, Milan,
Novara, Pavia, Tortona, and Vigevan. Of the Fate and History of this Dukedom, I
have spoken in the Description of the City: and I need add nothing here, but
that it is accounted the richest and noblest Dukedom in Christendom; as
Flanders is the noblest Earldom.

Milel, Lethon, a River in Africa, in Cyrene.

Mileto, Melita. See Melito.

Miletus, one of the most considerable ancient Cities of Ionia, in the Lesser
Asia, with a Port to the Aegean Sea, upon the Frontiers of Caria, and near the
River Meander. Founded in the year of the World, according to Eusebius, 2779;
and, in the beginning, famous above the rest of Greece for Naval Forces. They
built the Town Naucratis in Egypt, and made War with Sadyatus King of Lydia.
Alexander M overcame them, next the Romans. Thales the eldest Philosopher,
Anaximander, and Anximenes, were Natives of this City.

Milebum, Milevis or Mela, an ancient City in the division of Numidia, in
Africa. Aurelius, Archbishop of Carthage, assembled a Council here in 402.
There was another in 416. at which S. Augustine assisted. The latter condemned
the Principles of Pelagius and Caelestius, touching Grace and Infant Baptism.

Milford Haven, a Celebrated Seaport in the County of Pembroke, in South
Wales, upon the Irish Sea.

Milau, a Territory in Rovergue in France; Ager Aemilianus.

Milaud, Milhaud, Millialdum, Amilhanum, a City of France, in the Province of
Rovergue; in the Borders of Languedoc; upon the River Tarn, which watering
Alby, falls into the Garonne. Its Fortifications were razed in 1629. This City
is seated in Givaudan; seven Leagues from Lodeve to the North, and eight from
Rhodez to the North East: heretofore very strong.

Mildenhall, a large and populous Market Town in the County of Suffolk, and the
Hundred of Lackford, upon the Banks of a River running into the Ouse; adorned
with a fair Church.

Milli, Milliacum, commonly called Milli en Gatinois, is a Town in the
Territory of Gastinois, in the Isle of France, upon the Rivulet of Escolle,
five Leagues from Melun and twelve from Paris.

Milo, Melos, an Island in the Aegean Sea, or the Archipelago; sixty Miles in
compass, very fruitful and well peopled; having a City of the same name, which
has a large and a safe Haven, defended by three Forts, seated on the South side
of the Island; and a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Rhodes. It lies in
the middle, between Candy and Negropont. First inhabited by the Phoenicians;
after by the Greeks, who gave it this name from its abundance of Honey. It was
the Country of Diagoras, the first Atheistical Philosopher. It has plenty of
delicate spotted Marble, all kinds of Corn and Oil, Pitch and Brimstone; but it
wants Wine. Over against it lies a little Island, called Anti-Milo.

Milopotomo, Milopotamos, a Castle, and a City which has an Harbor on the North
Shore of the Isle of Candy: also a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of
Candia; seated near the Mouth of the River Arcadius; thirty Miles from Candia
to the West. This Town and Castle is now in the Hands of the Turks.

Milton, a Market Town in the County of Kent, in Scray Lath, not far from the
Isse of Shepey. It was a Place of Account in the Reign of Edward the Confessor.

Mina, or S. George de Mina, a Castle in Guinee, on the Coast de Or; which is
of great strength, and has belonging to it a very large Harbor. This Castle was
first built by the French in 1383. They being forced to leave it, the
Portuguese in 1482. built another in the same place; which continued in their
Hands till 1637. when the Hollanders took it from them. John II. King of
Portugal gave it the name of S. George, after his Conquest of it. There is also
a River called Mina, in the Kingdom of Algier.

Mindanao, one of the greatest of the Philippine Islands, and the most
Southern: heretofore under the Dominion of the Spaniards, but now revolted from
them; it is in length from East to West, four hundred Spanish Miles; in Long.
150. Lat. between 5. and 10. The principal City lies on the South-West side of
the Island, and is of the same name.

Minden, Minda, a strong City in Westphalia in Germany; which is a Bishop's
See, under the Archbishop of Cologn. Also an Imperial and Free City, and a
Hanse Town; governed by its own Officers, tho it is but small. It stands nine
German Miles from Osnabruck, (or Osenburgh) to the East; ten from Hanover, and
twelve from Ferden to the South; upon the Weser. Made a Bishop's See in 780. by
Charles the Great; and it embraced the Augustane Confession in 1582. There is a
Principality belonging to it, called Furstenthumb Minden.

Mindora, one of the Philippine Islands; about a hundred Leagues in Circuit,
with a City and Port of its own name; separated from the Island of Lusson by
the Streights of Mindora; under the Spaniards. It lies in 145 degrees. of Long.
North-West of Mindanao, South-West of Lucania, and North-East of Paragoa.

Minehead, a Corporation in Somersetshire, in the Hundred of Carhampton, by the
Seaside, to which it has a Harbor; electing two Parliament Men.

Mingrela, a great Town in the Province of Visapour, in the Kingdom of Decan,
in the Hither East Indies, within half a League of the Sea; much frequented by
the Vessels from Japan, Bengale, Zeylan, etc. especially Dutch, whose
East India Company keeps a Comptoir here.

Mingrellia. See Mengrelia.

Minibar, India, a Province of Asia.

Minho, or Minno, Minius, a River in Spain, which arises in Galicia, near the
Village called Il Castro de Rey: four Leagues from Mondofiedo: and watering
Lugo and Orense, (after it has divided Galicia into two parts) it becomes a
boundary between it and Portugal; five Leagues beneath Tuy, it passes into the
Atlantic Ocean, between Bayone and Lima.

Minorca, an Island belonging to Spain in the Mediterranean Sea; which belonged
to the Kingdom of Majorca: about fifty six Miles in compass, and much of the
same nature with Majorca: the principal Towns are Citadella, (seated on the
West side of the Island) and Porto Mahon a delicate Haven.

Minori, Minora, a City in the Principato Citra in the Kingdom of Naples, being
a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Amalfi; upon the Gulf of Salerno.

Minturnae, a ruined City of the ancient Campania, in Latium, in Italy, below
the mouth of the River Liris; showing nothing at this day, but the marks of its
pristine honor, in the rests of Aquaducts and Amphitheatres. It has been an
Episcopal City.

Minucciano, a small Town in the Territory of Carfagnano in Italy, under the
Republic of Lucca.

Mirali, the same with Derbent.

Miranda de Douro, a City of Portugal, upon the North side of the River Douro;
twelve Leagues from Samora to the West, and from Salamanca to the North West;
and six from Braganza to the South. Built in 1312 by Dionysius King of
Portugal; and made a Bishops See, under the Archibishop of Braganza, by Pope
Paul III. in 1555. Being a Frontier Town against the Kingdom of Leon, in the
Western Confines of which it stands, it is very strongly fortified.

Miranda de Ebro, a small City in Old Castile, which has a Castle upon the
Ebro, in the Confines of Biscay and Castile; seventeen Miles from Bilbao to the
South, thirteen from Burgos to the North-East, and twelve from Logrono to the
West.

Mirande, a small Town in the County of Armagnac in France, in the Territory of
Astarac or Estrac, whereof it is the Capital, upon the River Baise: four or
five Leagues from Ausch, and something more from Tarbes.

Mirandola, Mirandula, a small but very strong City in Italy, which has a
strong Castle; under its own Duke, who is a Sovereign Prince, with a small
Territory which belongs to it. This City stands twenty, two Miles from Modena
to the North, ten from the Po to the South, and twenty seven from Mantoua to
the South-East.

Lo Stato della Mirandola, is a small Dukedom in the Lower Lombardy; bounded on
the North by the Dukedom of Mantoua, on the South by that of Modena. This
Dukedom is a Fee of the Duchy of Parma; and together with Concordia, (another
small Territory) makes the Patrimony of the Family of the Pici; who obtained it
from Matilda, Countess of Parma, in 1102. Ever since which time they have
enjoyed it.

Mirebeau, Mirabellum, a small City in the Province of Poictou in France; built
upon an Hill, five Leagues from Poictiers to the North. It is now in a
declining Condition; and its Castle demolished; having much suffered in the
late Civil Wars. It is the Capital of the Territory of Mirebalais.

Mirecourt, Mirecurtium, a City of the Upper Lorain, toward Mount Vauge; seven
Leagues from Nancy to the South, and from Toul to the same quarter; thirty six
from Dyon to the North-East, six from the Confines of Champagne to the East. It
is the Capital of the Territory of Vauge, standing upon the little River
Maidon, which falls into the Moselle at Chaligni.

Miremont, a Town in the Province of Perigort, in Aquitain in France, upon a
small River falling into the Vezere, seven or eight Leagues from Perigueux and
Bergerac. Here there is a very long Subterraneous Caverne, called la Caverne de
Cluseau; in which Altars, Paintings, and rooms are pretended to be discovered,
as if the Pagans had sacrificed in this place to the Infernal Gods.

Mirepoix, Mirapisca, Mirapicium, Mirapincum, a City of the Upper Languedoc in
France, in the County of Foix, upon the River Gers; three Leagues from Foix to
the East, and eleven from Tolouse to the South. Made a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Tolouse, by Pope John XXII. In 1318; having been before a part of
the Diocese belonging to that Archbishopric. The Earls of this place, in the
War against the Albigenses, for their bravery, obtained the title of
Mareschalls of the Faith.

Miron, or Hued Icer, Serbes, a River in the Kingdom of Algier.

Miscow, an Island in the Gulf of S. Laurence, in the North America, belonging
to New France, betwixt that Country and the Island of S. John: small but very
fruitful.

Missa, Senna, Sena, a River of Italy, which waters Vrbino, (the Capital of
the Dukedom of that name) and falls in the Gulf of Venice; four Miles from
Signiglia to the North-West. Called by the latter Geographers il Cesano.

Misitra, Lacedaemon, Sparta, is an ancient and most famous City of the Morea;
seated upon the River Eurotas, (now called Vafilipotamo;) thirty Miles from
Megalopolis to the South, one hundred and twenty from Athens to the South-West,
and twenty from the nearest Shore of the Mediterranean Sea. This was the Old
Sparta. Long. 48. 50. Lat. 38. 31. It is situate partly upon a Plain, partly
upon the foot of Mount Tayget; which within Cannon Shot closes it on the
North: the River descending from some Hills on the North-West, incompasseth it
on the West and South. In ancient times it was (as Polybius says) forty eight
Greek Stades in Circuit, which is six English Miles: but it had a very
unhealthful Situation; the Mountain on the North side cutting off the cooling
Breezes, and redoubling by Reflection the Violence of the Rays of the Sun,
which make it even now (when there is so few Inhabitants in it) subject to the
Plague every Autumn: besides the Mountain renders it weak and undefensible.
This City is said to be built about the Year of the World 2997. in the days of
the Patriarch Jacob; 1763 Years before the Birth of our Savior: which account
(if it be true) makes Misitra 983 years older than Rome. There was no City in
the World that flourished so many Ages as this in Military Glory: it had a
considerable share in all those Actions which made the ancient Greeks so
famous. It had Kings also the longest of any of the Grecian Cities: for many
Ages two at once: and when they took away the Power from them, they preserved
the name. This City was never brought under the Power of any Stranger; till
Philopoemen (a Macedonian, who died in the Year of the World 3767.) took and
abolished Lycurgus his Laws. Which is placed by Helvicus in the Year of the
World 3767. one hundred and ninety one Years before the Birth of our Savior.
After this it became so inconsiderable, as to be rarely mentioned: only we are
informed the Greek Emperors made it the Appenage of their Elder Sons. Mahomet
II. (styled the Great) was the first of the Turkish Princes, who in 1458. or
thereabouts, possessed himself of this City and the Citadel, built in the
latter times on the top of Mount Taygetus. In 1473. the Venetians took the City
from the Turks: but not being able to master the Citadel, they were soon after
forced to desert it. In 1687. the Bassa of Misitra Articled with the Victorious
Venetians to March away with only what the Garrison could carry. This City is a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Corinth; at this day very small, and
little peopled.

Misnia, Libonotria, is a Province and Marquisate of Germany, called by the
Inhabitants Meissen, or Meissnerlandt. It is a considerable part of the Upper
Saxony; bounded on the North by the Principality of Anhalt; on the East by
Lusatia; on the South by Bohemia, and Franconia; and on the West by Thuringia.
The greatest part is under the Elector of Saxony, who resides at Dresden, the
Capital City. The other considerable Places are Leipsick, Meissen, Mersburg,
Naumburg, and Zwicaro.

Misraim, the most ancient name of Egypt.

Mistretta, Amestrata, a very ancient Town in Sicily, in the North-West part of
the Island; upon the River Alaesum; fourteen Miles from the Tyrrhenian Sea, and
fifty five from Palermo to the East.

Modbury, a Market Town in Devonshire, in the Hundred of Armington, betwixt the
Rivers Arm and Aune.

La Mocha, an Island of the South Sea, near the Kingdom of Chili, in America.

Modena, Mutina, a City of Lombardy in Italy; the Capital of a Sovereign
Dukedom of the same name. Seated in a Plain upon the River Secchia; the
greatest Bed of which runs four Miles more to the West: but it has two
Branches; one runs under the Walls, the other through the City of Modena; and a
little beneath the City unite and fall into the Panaro. This City lies twenty
Miles from Bologna to the North-West, and forty four from Ferrara to the
South-West. It is naturally strong by its Situation; fortified too; and has had
a Castle added of latter times for its greater security. Ancient Story informs
us, this City was a Roman Colony of great Strength and Reputation; and that M.
Antonius besieged D. Brutus, (the principal Conspirator against Julius Caesar)
here: but Hirtius and Pansa, (the two Consuls) coming up, Antonius was forced
to raise the Siege: whereupon followed a bloody Fight, in which both these
Consuls were slain, in the Year of Rome 711. In the times of the Goths and
Lombards, it was entirely ruined; but rebuilt by the Children of Charles the
Great. In 973. here was a Council held for the composing some differences
amongst the German Princes. This City is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Ravenna.

Lo Stato di Modena, Mutinensis Ducatus; the Dukedom of Modena is bounded on
the North with the Dukedoms of Mantoua and Mirandola; on the East with the
Territory of Bologna; on the South with the Dukedom of Tuscany; and the States
of Luca on the West, with the Dukedom of Parma. It extends from North to South
sixty, from East to West forty five Miles: heretofore under the Duke of
Ferrara; but the eldest Line of that Family failing in Alphonsus II. in 1597,
the Dukes of Modena, (who were a younger Branch of the same Family) put in
their Claim for the whole Succession; but were opposed by Pope Clement VIII.
Whereupon ensued a War, which was ended by a Treaty the next Year; the Pope
keeping Ferrara, and the Duke Modena, as a Sovereign State. Alphonsus d'Este
the present Duke, is the Third of this Line, since the Sovereignty fell into
this Family; descended from a Race of Dukes which began in 1452. when the
Emperor Frederick III. in favor of Borso d'Este, first erected this State into
a Dukedom. Tho this Family is the same with that of Brunswick in Germany, said
to be eight hundred years old; yet the noblest Branch it ever produced, is Mary
Queen Consort to King James II. This Country is much celebrated for its great
fertility.

Modica, Motuca, an ancient City of Sicily, upon a River of the same name; ten
Miles from Pachino, the most South-East Cape of that Island, and five from the
Southern Shore. It is now in a flourishing State.

Modin, an ancient Town of Palestine, upon a Hill, betwixt Emaus and Rhama;
famous for being the Country of the Heroical Macchabees.

Modon, Methone, a City of the Morea, on the Southern Shore, in the Province of
Belvedore, called Messenia by Strabo, Pliny and others; by the Venetians Modon;
by the Turks Mutune. It is now a fine strong City, a frequented Port, and a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Patras: has a strong Castle, a large and
safe Haven; about eleven English Miles from Navarino to the South, twenty five
from Coron to the West, and sixty two from Cape Matapan to the same quarter.
Seated in a fruitful and delightful Country, strong by Nature and Art, and is
the common Residence of the Sangiac of the Morea. In the times of Trajan it
suffered very much by a parcel of Illyrian Barbarians, who surprised and slew
many of its Inhabitants: which loss that generous Prince repaired by his
Princely Compassion, and advantageous Privileges granted to it. In 1208. the
Genouese ravished it from the Venetians, but did not hold it long. In 1124. it
came first into the hands of the Venetians; but was taken from them the year
following by the Greek Emperor. In 1204. the Venetians retook it. Bajazet II.
in 1498. besieged it with an Army of an hundred and fifty thousand Men; and
took it by a kind of surprise, after a stout defense, upon the arrival of a
considerable Succor; which drew the Inhabitants from their Posts to their
ruin. In 1659. Morosini, the Venetian General, took it; and might have taken
Coron too, if he had not been forced to Sail away to the Dardanells, for the
security of Candy. The Turks regained this Place in the end of the Candian War.
But in 1686. the Venetian Arms again prevailed, to deliver this noble and
strong City out of the Hands of the Infidels. They found in it ninety nine
pieces of Canon.

Modruch, Modrusa, a City in Croatia; eighteen Miles from Zeng or Segna to the
North, and eight from Carlstat to the South-West: Once a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Zara in Dalmatia.

Moen or Moan, an Island in the Baltic, belonging to Denmark, and not far from
Zeland. Having in it a Town called Stege, or Stoke.

Moers. See Muers.

Moeris, a Lake in the Kingdom of Egypt, seventy two Miles from the ancient
Memphis, to the West: said by Mela to be twenty Miles in circumference. Here
stood the Labyrinth, so famous in Antiquity, by the descriptions that are given
of it in Pliny, Herodotus and Strabo. It contained sixteen, or thirty (some
say) several principal quarters of Apartments; full of the Statues of the Gods
and Kings of Egypt, together with such numbers of Palaces, Temples, Pyramids,
Galleries etc. Contrived one about and within another, that it required the
help of a thread to walk forth. Travelers report, there are yet to be seen
three hundred and fifty Chambers, in the fashion of a Labyrinth, in the same
place; and that it is now called Castro Caron.

Moesel, Mosella, a River in the Dukedom of Lorain, called by the French, la
Moselle; by the Germans, Das Moesel; it arises from Mount Vauge, a little
above the Village of Bussans, in the Confines of Alsatia and the Franche Comte;
and flowing Northward through Lorain, waters Toul; beneath which it takes in
the Murthe from Nancy; so goes to Metz, where it takes in the Seylle, another
great River from the East; so passes Thionvillein, and Luxemburgh, to Trier
(or Treves), above which it takes in the Sar; and at Coblentz, falls into the
Rhine.

Moesia, a Province of the ancient Illyricum, betwixt Macedonia, Thracia, and
Dacia; called by the Romans, for its fertility, the Granary of Ceres. It was
divided into the Upper and Lower Moesia. The first is the same now with the
modern Servia, the other with Bulgaria.

Moghali, Emodus, a vast Branch of Mount Taurus in Asia; which separates India
from Tartary; called by others Dalanguer. See Taurus, and Dalanguer.

The Empire of the Great Mogul. See Indostan.

Mohacz, Mohatz, a Town in the Lower Hungary, upon the Danube; between the
River Sarwiza to the North, and the Drove to the South; four German Miles from
either, six from Esseck to the North, and nine from Colocza to the South. This
otherwise small Place is memorable for two great Battles here fought: the first
between Lewis King of Hungary, and Solomon the Magnificent, in 1526: in which
that unfortunate Prince Lewis, (being about twenty years old) with twenty five
thousand Men, fought three hundred thousand Turks: when being overpowered by
number, twenty two thousand of the Christian Army were slain upon the place;
five thousand Wagons, eighty great Cannon, six hundred small ones, with all
their Tents and Baggage were taken by the Victors; and the King in his flight
over the Brook Curass feil into a Quagmire, and was swallowed up: after which
Solomon took and slew two hundred thousand Hungarians; and got such a footing
in this Kingdom, that he could never be expelled. This fatal Battle was fought
October 29. The second in some part retrieves the Loss and Infamy of the
former. The Duke of Lorain being sent by the Emperor with express Orders to
pass the Drove and take Esseck, his Highness July 10. 1687. with great
difficulty passed that River, then extremely swelled with continued Rains: but
finding the Prime Vizier Encamped at Esseck with an Army of an hundred thousand
Men, so strongly, that it was not possible to Attack him in that Post, without
the ruin of the Christian Army; he retreated, and repassed the 23 of the same
Month: whereupon the 29 the Prime Vizier passed that River at Esseck; and upon
August 12. there followed a bloody Fight; in which the Turks lost an hundred
pieces of Cannon; twelve Mortars; all their Ammunition, Provisions, Tents,
Baggage, and Treasure; and about eight thousand Men upon the place of Battle;
besides what were drowned in passing the River, which could never be known:
after which Victory, General Dunewalt, September 30. found Esseck totally
deserted by the Turks, and took Possession of it.

Mohilow, Mohilovia, a City of Poland, in the Province of Lithuania, upon the
River Nieper; in the Palatinate of Witebsko; ten Polish Miles from Orsa to the
South, twenty two from Smolensco to the North-West, and eighteen from M^islaw
to the West. It is seated on a Hill, well fortified, full of Inhabitants: the
Russ in 1654. took it; but the Poles in 1656. regained the Possession of it.
There is a College of the Jesuits here.

Moienvic, a small Town in the Duchy of Lorain in France, upon the River
Leille, betwixt Marsal and Vic. Taken by Lewis XIII. and ceded by the Treaty of
Munster to France in 1648. Its Fortifications are demolished.

Moissac, a Town in the County of Quercy, in Guienne in France, upon the River
Tarn, which soon after falls into the Garonne. This Town has been often taken
and retaken, by times, by the Romans, Goths, the Kings of France, Dukes of
Aquitaine, Earls of Tolouse and Montfort, in the English Conquests, and the
French Civil Wars. It now has a famous large Abbey of the Benedictines, to whom
belongs the Lordship of part of the Town, and to the King the other.

Moldavia, Pars Moesiae inferioris, is a considerable Region in Europe; which
heretofore belonged to the Kingdom of Hungary, and more anciently was a part of
Dacia: Called by the Inhabitants, Moldove: Multaus, (or Multauska) by the
Poles; and Moldau by the Germans. Bounded on the North by Transylvania, on the
West by the Upper Hangary, on the South by the Danube, (which parts it from
Servia, and Bulgaria) and on the E. Walachia. The Capital of it is Buchorest.
The same Author tells us on the Authority of the Count de Morstein, Lord
Treasurer of Poland; that it is of much greater extent than Walachia, though
otherwise represented in the Maps. This Country takes its name from a River or
Town in it; and extends from East to West ninety French Leagues, from North to
South s^^e^ty. Very fruitful, and has an excellent Air. The Inhabitants are
Christian^ of the Greek Church, under the Patriarch of Constantinople. After
Bajazet II. had in 1485 Conquered Bessarabia, the Moldavians set up a Prince of
their own Nation; who prevailed against the Tarturs, Turks, and Poles. His
Successors have not been equally Fortunate: For after many bloody contests, in
1620. the Turk got finally the Mastery of the Moldavians; and disposed of this
Principality to whom he pleased; who paid yearly to the Port, as a Tribute, one
hundred and eighty thousand Crowns; besides Presents, and other Exactions; the
Turks laboring to impoverish this People what they could to keep them the more
under. In 1686. the Poles overran all their Country, and took their principal
Cities: They therefore since relinquished the Ottoman Interest and voluntarily
put themselves under the Protection of the Emperor. Anno 1688.

Mole, a River of the County of Surrey, which runs through Darking, and empties
it self into the Thames near Hampton Court.

Molfa, Melphes, a River of the hither Principate, in the Kingdom of Naples;
which falls into the Tyrrhenian Sea, twelve Miles from Policastro to the West.
It is written sometimes Molpa.

Molfctta, Melfictum, a City in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Province of Bari,
on the Ionian Sea; between Bari to the South, and Trani to the North; which is
a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bari. It is small but well Peopled; and
born by the Family of Spinula, with the Title of a Principality.

Molina, a Town in New Castile, seated in a Plain; between two Mountains; four
Leagues from the borders of Arragon; which has under it a Jurisdiction of
seventy five Villages; called, El Sennorio di Molina, the Lordship of Molina;
which is thought so considerable, that the King of Spain wears this Title.

Molingar, Molingaria, a small City in the County of East Mead, in the
Province of Leinster in Ireland; which is the Capital of that County: thirty
Miles from Dublin to the West. Upon a Lake.

Molise, Molisinus Comitatus, a County in the Kingdom of Naples; between
Abruzzo to the North, the Capitanate to the East, Terra di Lavoro to the West,
and the Principato to the South. It takes its name from a Castle in it.

Molossi, an ancient People of the Kingdom of Epirus, in Greece.

Molsheim, Molsemium, a small City in the Lower Alsatia, upon the River Breuch;
two German Miles from Strasburgh to the West; in which the Chapter of
Serasburgh settled, after they were by the Reformation driven thence. This City
was severely treated in 1677: but is now rebuilding.

The Molucques, Moluccae, by the Spaniards called las Molucas, are five small
Islands toward the Western Shore of the Isle of Gilolo in the East Indies;
lying near the Line: in Long. 150. degrees. called Ternata, Tidor, Machian, Motir,
and Bachian. The greatest of them is forty five Miles in Compass. They lie
extended from North to South, on both sides the Line; only regardable on the
account of the vast quantities of Spice, which are from hence sent over all the
World. About the Year of Christ 1013. the Chinian Empire, being then in a
flourishing State, first became Masters of these Islands; but not without Blood
and Treasure. About sixty years after, they were expelled by the Inhabitants of
Malucca; after which succeeded the Persians, mixed with Arabians; and by the
latter they were called the Molucca Isles. The ancient Greeks and Romans knew
nothing of them, though they had Spices from them, brought by the Indian and
Arabian Merchants by the way of the Red Sea. In latter times those were brought
by Persia to the Caspian and Euxine Seas; and thence dispersed over Christendom
by the Genouese and Venetians. After the Turks prevailed in Asia, the Trade was
turned by the way of Grand Cairo, and Alexandria. But after the Portuguese by
many discoveries had opened their way to the East Indies, about 1512. they
first arrived in these Islands; and cut off all Trade between the Arabians and
them; by which the Sultan of Egypt lost eight hundred thousand Ducats a year.
The Spaniards came hither under Ferdinando Magalhaens, about 1520: whereupon
ensued a Contest between Charles V. and John III. (King of Portugal) concerning
the Dominion of these Islands: Charles resigned his Right to John for two
hundred thousand Ducats. About 1579. the English, under Drake, began to disturb
the Portuguese here. About 1599. the Hollanders began to send numerous and
strong Fleets into these Seas; by which, (and the great Wars, and Changes which
have since happened in Spain and Portuga') they have entirely possessed
themselves of these Islands. The Earth is extremely dry and po^ey, ke a
Pumice-stone: it drinks up, not only the Rain as fast as it falls, but all
those Springs and Rivers too from the Hills, before they can reach the Sea: and
in many places sends out fire and smoke. The Plains are covered with Sand and
Shells; so that except Spice, it scarce affords any thing useful to the Life of
Man.

Mombaza, or Monbaze, Monbaza, Monbaccia, a Kingdom, near the Equinoctial Line,
of Zanguebar, in Africa; betwixt the Kingdoms of Queilloa and Melinde, of great
extent: the King, who gives himself the title of the Emperor of the World, is
able to bring into the Field an Army of 80000 Men. The Capital City enjoys the
same name, and has a strong Castle built by the Portuguese, and a fine Seaport
or Haven: It stands an hundred and fifty Leagues from Quiloa to the North, in
an Island of about four Leagues Circumference. Long. 65. 00. Southern Lat. 30.
00. Dr. Heylyn places it Long. 72. 00. Lat. 4. 50. Francis Almaida, the
Portugal Viceroy of Africa, sacked and burnt this City in 1505. After which,
the Portuguese secured themselves of the Citadel, till 1631: when the King of
Monbaze took it by assault, Massacred all the Christians, and (from a Christian
Convert) turned Turk again to be protected by the Turks.

Mommedi, a strong Castle in Lorain.

Mompellier, Mons Pessulus, or Pessulanus, a City in the Lower Languedoc in
France; which has been a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Narbon ever since
the Year 1636: when it was substituted in the place of Maguelone, a ruined
City, by Pope Paul III. It stands upon the River Lez upon an Hill; two Leagues
from the Mediterranean Sea to the North, and fifteen from Narbon to the East.
Sold in 1349. by Sanctius, King of Majorca, (whose Predecessors, and he till
then was possessed of it) to Philip de Valoise, King of France. It is great,
populous, well built; and has an University, particularly famous for the study
of Physic.

Monaco. See Munchen.

Monaco, Menaecium, Herculis Monoecii Portus, corruptly called Mourgues by the
Neighborhood; is a small Sea Port Town in the States of Genoua; of great
Antiquity, being mentioned by Strabo and Ptolemy. It is now very strongly
fortified; has a strong Castle built on a Rock, a safe Harbor upon the
Mediterranean Sea, and a Princely Palace belonging to the Family of Grimaldi;
(the supreme Lords of the Town), though under the Protection of the Crown of
France, ever since 1641. This is the Capital of the little principality of
Monaco, to which belong only two places more, Rocca Bruna and Menton. It is
almost surrounded by the County of Nice: but on the East it has the States of
Genoua; and at this Town the Maritim Alps begin. It stands about two Miles
from Nizza to the East, and sixty two from Embrun to the South-East.

Mon, Mona, Anglesey, an Island and County in Wales.

Monaghan, a Town and County in the Province of Vlster in Ireland. The County
has on the East of it Armagh; on the North Tyrone; on the South and South-East
Cavan, Lowthe, and part of East Mead; and on the West Fermanagh. It contains
five Baronies.

Monbeliar, Mons Belligardus, a Town and County in the Franche Comte; belonging
to the Duke of Wurtenburgh; called by the Germans, Mompelgart, by the French,
Montbeliart. The County lies between Suntgow to the East; and the Franche Comte
to the West, North, and South: under a Prince of its own. The Town stands at
the foot of Mount Vauge, upon the River Alaine; (which a little lower falls
into the Doux, Dubis:) and has a Castle in which resides the Count, who is of
the Family of Wurtenburgh; but the outworks of this Castle are destroyed. This
Town is forty Miles from Besanzon to the South-East, and thirty three from
Basil to the West.

Monbrison, Monbrisonium, a City in le Forez, (a Province of France) upon the
River Vesie; sixteen Leagues from Lion to the West, and two from the Loyre to
the same. Called in the middle Writers Mons Brusonis.

Moncastro, the same with Bialogorod.

Moncayo, Caunus, a Mountain which lies in the Confines of Arragon and Old
Castile; two Leagues from Tarrazona to the South, and six from the Ebro.

Moncenis, Mons Cenisius, Cibenica juga, a Mountain, over which the high Road
lies between Piedmont and Savoy.

Moncon, Montio, a fortified Town of the Kingdom of Arragon, in Spain, upon an
Hill, with the River Cinea running at its foot.

Moncontour, Monconturium, a small Town in the Province of Poictou in France,
upon the ascent of a Hill, where the River Dive passes, nine or ten Leagues
from Poictiers, toward Loudun. It was made remarkable in 1569. by the Victory
which the Roman Catbolicks gained over the Huguenots in the Reign of Charles
IX; whose Army Royal fought under the Command of Henry Duke of Anjou,
afterward K. Henry III. and that of the Huguenots, under Admiral Coligny.

Mondego, Monda, Munda, a River in Portugal; which arises near la Guarda, a
City of that Kingdom; and flowing Westward, between the Douero to the North and
the Tajo (Tagus) to the South, it divides the Province of Beira: and washing
the City of Coimbra, seven Leagues lower, falls into the Atlantic Ocean.

Mondonnedo, Mindon, Mindonia, Glandomirum, a small City of Galicia, which is a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Compostella; it sprung up out of the ruins
of Bretonia, a near City; four Leagues from the Ocean, eight from Lugo to the
North, and six from Rivadeo to the West. It is small, and in a decaying State:
seated in the Mountains; and washed by Valindares and Sexto, two small
Rivolets. Long. 9. 25. Lat. 43. 18.

Mondi, or Mondevi, Mondovi, and Montdevis, Mons vici, Mons Realis, a strong
City in Piedmont in Italy; which has a Noble Castle, and is a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Turin; the second next to Turin, within that
principality, for largeness and populousness. Seated on a Mount or Hill, at the
Foot of the Apennine; toward the Borders of the State of Genoua, and of the
Dukedom of Montisferat: it had heretosore an University, which is since removed
to Turin. It belonged heretofore to the Dukedom of Montisferat; and at the
Request of Theodorus II. (Marquess of Montisferat) was made a Bishops See in
1388. Pope Pius V. was Bishop of this place, when he was chosen Pope. It stands
two Miles from the Tanaro, fifteen from Cunio to the East, and eighteen from
Alba to the South: now under the Duke of Savoy. Charles Emanuel I. Duke of
Savoy, was the Founder of the Cathedral here, in which they pretend to preserve
a miraculous Image of the Blessed Virgin.

Mondidier, Mons desiderii, Mondiderium, a strong and garrisoned Town in the
tract of Santerre, in Picardy in France, upon an Hill, betwixt Amiens and
Compiegne, near a little River falling into the Auregue. It has repulsed
several attacques of the Spaniards.

Monemagt, or Mono-Emugi, Monemagium, a Kingdom in Africa, in the Lower
Aethiopia; otherwise called Nimeamaje: it is a great Kingdom; extending from
the Kingdom of Macoco on the West, to that of Monotapia on the South; the
Kingdoms of Monbaza, and Quiloa East; Sofala and Mosambick North. But what
Cities or Provinces it has, was never yet discovered by any European.

Monervino, Minervium, Minervinum, Mons Orvinus, a City in the Province of
Bari, in the Kingdom of Naples; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Bari. Small, ill built, not much peopled, and seated in the Confines of the
Basilicate.

Monfeltro, or Montefeltro, Feretrum, Mons Feretranus, Leopolis, a City of
Vmbria, now in the Dukedom of Vrbino, and the Capital of a Territory in the
same, in the States of the Church; commonly called San Leo: it is a Bishops
See, under the Archbishop of Vrbino. It stands upon the Skirts of Mount
Feretranus, near the River Arimino, in the Confines of Romandiola; twenty Miles
from Vrbino to the South-West, and fifteen from Arimini to the South: giving
name to an honorable Italian Family. This Chair was removed to Pinna, a Town
four Miles from it, by Pope Pius V. in 1572.

Monferrant, Monferrandum, a City in Auvergne; in a very fruitful Soil; from
whence it has the name: It stands upon an Hill about one Mile from Cleremont,
two Leagues from the River Allier, and twenty five from Lion; now in a
flourishing state, with diverse Religious Houses in it: The River Bedat glides
by it. There is another Monferand in the Territory called, le Pais enter les
deux mers, that is, betwixt the confluence of the Garonne and the Dordogne.
This latter is the first Barony in Guienne.

Monferrat. See Montferrat.

Monf^a, an Island on the Eastern Coast of Africa, over against against Quiloa.
In Long. 65. and degrees. 8. Southern Lat.

Monfort l' Amauri, Montfortium Amalrici, Monfortium Almariae; a small Town in
the Territory of Montoran, in the Government of the Isle of France; betwixt
Dampiere and Mante, upon an Hill, with a little River gliding at its foot;
about ten Leagues from Paris. It carries the name of an honorable Family.

Mongaguabe, a River in Brasil, in the Prefecture of Paraiba.

Mongibello, Mount Aetna; and by allusion any burning Mountain in the Italian
use of this Word.

Mongul, a Province in the Asiatick Tartary.

Monlui, a Mountain in Catalonia.

Monlusson, Monlussonium, a City of France, in the Dukedom of Bourbon, in the
Confines of Berry, upon the River Cher: four Leagues from the Borders of
Auvergne, and thirteen from Moulins to the West. It is ordinarily epitheted la
fertile, for its Vineyards and Pasturage.

Monnedy, Mons medius, Mons maledictus, a small but very strong City, in the
Dukedom of Luxemburgh, in the Low Countries, upon the River Chier; seven
Leagues from Virdum to the North, and about nine from Luxemburgh to the
South-West. It stands upon a Hill, very well Fortified; yet by the negligence
of the Spaniards, for want of Ammunition and sufficient Garrisons, frequently
taken by the French. At last in 1657, being taken by then, it was by the
Pyrenean Treaty yielded to France.

Monmirail, Monmiralium, a Town in the Province of Brie, in France, upon an
Hill; where glides the River Morin, falling afterward into the Marne. Also one
of the five ancient Baronies of Perche-Gouet.

Monmorency, Monmoreniacum, a Town in the Isle of France, four Leagues from
Paris to the South-West; which gives the Title of a Duke to one of the best and
most ancient Families of France. From this Town, the Valley in which it lies,
(one of the most fruitful spots of Ground in the whole World) is called the
Valley of Montmorency.

Monmorillon, a small Town in the Province of Poictou, in France, upon the
River Gartampe, (here covered with a Bridge) and the frontiers of la Maache.

Monmouthshire, Monumethia, has on the North the County of Hereford, on the
East Gloucester, on the South the Severn, and on the West Glamorgan and
Brecknockshires. It is twenty four English Miles from North to South; and
nineteen from East to West. Full of Hills, Valleys, Woods and Springs: every
where fruitful; abounding in Corn and Cattle; and injoys a temperate,
healthful, clear Air. The most ancient Inhabitants were the Silures, Conquered
by Julius Frontinus, in the Reign of Vespasian, after a War of about an hundred
years continuance, with great loss on the Roman Side: nor was this County won
with less difficulty by the English; the Welsh being entirely possessed of it
when the Normans conquered England: yet being conquered before Wales, it was
united to the Crown of England in the Reign of Edward I. and accounted an
English County, tho lying on the North of the Severn.

Monmouth, which gives Name to this County, stands between the Wye and the
Monow; over both which Rivers it has a Bridge: in the North-East Border of the
County; where Monmouth, Hereford, and Glocestershires meet, as it were all in
one Center. Three parts of it are secured by these Rivers. On the fourth it has
a small Brook called Monnors, which runs through the Town: on the North-East
Side, where the Town is most accessible, it has an ancient Castle; (once a
place of great Strength and Beauty) in which Henry V. (King of England) thence
called Henry of Monmouth, was born. But now ruined, and used as a Farm-House:
there are three of the Gates standing, with a part of the ancient Wall: it is
still a Corporation governed by a Mayor: This was also the Birth place of
Geofry of Monmouth, the Historian. It now gives the Title of Earl to the R. H.
Charles Mordant, Created E. of Monmouth by K. W. As before, of a Duke, in the
Person of James, the late unfortunate Duke of Monmouth; and it returns two
Members to the House of Commons. Long. 17. 36. Lat. 52. 08.

Monnow, a River of Monmouthshire, between which and the River Wye stands the
Town of Monmouth; falling into the Severn.

Mono Emugi, a Kingdom in Africa, see Monemagi. There are abundance of
Elephants, with Mines of Brass, Silver, and Gold, found in this Kingdom. A part
of the Mountains of the Moon is enclosed therewith: and the Subjects traffic
more especially for Silk, Cotton, and Amber, with the Kingdoms of Queilloa,
Melinde and Monbaze. Betwixt the Estates of the Grand Negus and it, lie some
petty principalities, which are ever in Vassalage to the strongest side.

Monomotapa, a City and Kingdom in the Southern Aethiopia in Africa, of great
extent: which contains in it twenty five other Kingdoms; and reaches from North
to South two hundred and fifty Spanish Leagues. Cluverius stretches it from the
Aethiopick Ocean to the Red Sea. Some speak particularly of an Amazonian
Kingdom amongst the rest, where the Women go to War and acquit themselves with
admirable bravery. The Portuguese call the King of Monomotapa, the Emperor of
Gold, from the abundance of that metal found in Mines and the Rivers of his
Dominions. Monomotapa (the Principal City, which gives Name to this vast and
fruitful Empire) lies in Long. 48. 00. Southern Lat. 24. 35. Upon the banks of
the River Spiritu Santo, very large, and adorned with a most magnificent Palace
Royal.

Monopoli, Monopolis, a City in the Province of Bari, in the Kingdom of Naples;
which sprung out of the Ruins of Egnatia, an ancient City not far off: a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bari; but exempt from the Jurisdiction of
its Metropolitan. This City tho small, is very splendidly and magnificently
built: twenty two Miles from Bari to the East, and twenty five from Taranto to
the North.

Monosceli, an ancient People of Aethiopia; also called Sciopodes, and
mentioned by Pliny.

Monreale, Montreali, Mons Regalis, a small City in the Island of Sicily, which
is yet an Archbishops See. It stands upon a Hill, about four Miles from Palermo
to the South; built by William II. King of Sicily. By Pope Lucius III. adorned
with this Archiepiscopal Chair, in the Year 1182, at the Request of that
Prince; who assigned this See a large Revenue, and built a stately Palace for
the Archbishops.

Mons, Montes, Montes Hannoniae, the Capital City of the Province of Hainault,
in the Low Countries; called by the Dutch Berghen; by the Germans Berg; by the
French and English, Mons: Seated upon the River Troville, (which a little lower
falls into the Haisne,) in the middle between Douay to the West, and Namur to
the East; twelve Miles from either; and ten from Brussels to the South-West. It
is very strongly seated, because all the Country about it may be drowned: and
it is well walled, has three deep Trenches about it, a Castle in it. The
public and private Buildings are very Magnificent: many of them adorned with
excellent Fountains. The French besieged it with an Army of thirty thousand
Men, in 1678, under the Command of the Duke of Luxemburgh; and so strongly
retrenched their Army, that they despised any Attempt that could be made upon
their Camp; yet the Prince of Orange coming up to the Relief of this City,
bravely and resolutely attacked them; and by the Valor chiefly of ten thousand
English, (led on by the brave Lord Ossory), entered the French Camp, with their
Swords drawn at high Noonday; the French General very hardly escaping. This
rich, strong, populous City defended it self against the encroachment of the
French, and remained in the hands of the Spaniards, till 1691. when the French
besieged and took it. The ancient Counts or Earls of Hainault used the title of
Earls of Mons. There is a famous Abbey of Chanonesses in it, permitted to marry.

Mons en Puelle, a Village and Castle in the Chastellanie of L'isle, in
Flanders, betwixt the Cities L'isle and Doway: where Philip le Bell K. of France
fought the Flemings, Aug. 18. 1304. and killed of them 25000.

Monserat, or Montserrat, Mons Serratus, a Mountain in Catalonia in Spain, upon
the River Lobregat; nine Miles from Barcelone to the South-West: very high and
steep: in the middle of it is a Monastery famous for the Worship of an Image of
the Virgin Mary, which was found here in 880.

Monsoreau, a Town in Anjou in France.

Monstieres, a City and an Archbishopric in Tarantaise in Savoy.

Mont, a Marquisate in the Ecclesiastic State, subject to the Pope.

Montacute, a sharp-pointed Hill in the South parts of Somersetshire, which has
the honor to give the title of a Viscount to the R. H. Francis Brown,
descended from Anthony Brown created Viscount Montacute in the Reign of Qu.
Mary in 1554: which Anthony was descended from Tho. Montacute Earl of
Salisbury, created Lord Montacute and afterward Marquess Montacute by K. Edw.
IV.

Montagnia, a considerable City of Natolia, upon the Coast of the Sea of
Marmora, and the Gulf called heretofore Cianus Sinus; five Leagues from Bursa:
accounted to have five or six thousand Inhabitants, of Turks, Greeks, and Jews;
and by the way of the Gulf, entertaining a good Commerce with Constantinople.

Montaldo, a small place in Piedmont, subject to the Pope.

Mont-alcino, or Monte Alcino, Mons Alcinous, and Mons Alcinus, a small City in
the Territory of Siena, under the Great Duke of Tuscany; built upon an Hill;
twenty one Miles from Siena to the South-West, and fifty five from Piombino to
the North-East. A Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Siena; but exempt from
his Jurisdiction.

Montalto, Mons Altus, a New City in the Marchia Anconitana. in the States of
the Church; under the Dominion of the Pope, upon the River Monocia; twelve
Miles from Fermo to the South-West and eight from Ascoli to the North A Bishops
See under the Archbishop of Ferme, founded by Pope Sixtus Wwho was born here.
There is another Montalto in the Hither Calabria, in the Kingdom of Naples,
which passes for the Vffuguim of Livy. A Bishops See under the Archbishop of
Cozenza. Besides a small Town under the Pope in Italy, upon the Confines of
Piedmont and the Dukedom of Montferrat.

Montames, Caliabrum, once a City of Lusitania, and a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Merida: now a considerable Town in the Province of Estremadura in
Spain; which has a Castle in the Possession of the Knights of Saint James; six
Leagues from Merida.

Montargis, Montargium, a pleasant City in le Gastinois, a Province of France;
seated upon the River Loing, (which falls into the Seyne) twenty five Leagues
from Paris to the South, and eighteen from Orleans to the East. Being besieged
by the English in 1418. it was burnt; and rebuilt in the Year 1528. since which
time it has been esteemed the Capital of le Gastinois.

Montauban, Montalbanus, Mons Aureolus, Mons Albanus, a City of France, in the
Province of Quercy in Aquitain, in the Confines of Languedoc; which is a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tolose, founded by Pope John XXII. in
1317. upon the River Tarn; eight Leagues from Tolose to the North, nine from
Caors to the South, and ten from Again to the North-East. This is a pleasant,
great, rich, populous City: generally built with Brick, and a very strong
Place. By the Edict of Nants, (made in 1599, by Henry IV.) this was one of the
places put into the Hands of the French Protestants for their Security. They
quietly enjoyed it till the Year 1621, when it was in vain attempted to take it
from them by a potent Siege. It had a Brick Bridge upon the River; which being
much damnified in this Siege, was rebuilt in 1667, with a flanting Inscription
in Latin.

Montbelliard. See Monbeliar.

Montblanc, Mons Albus, a small Town in Catalonia; Honored by being made the
Title of a Dukedom; it stands upon the River Francolinum, five Leagues from
Tarragona to the North.

Montbrison. See Monbrison.

Monte-Cassino. See Cassin.

Monte-Corbino, a City of the Kingdom of Naples in Italy, of good antiquity. It
was heretofore a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Benevento: but in 1433,
the Sea became united with that of Vulturara in the same Kingdom.

Monte-Falco, a Town in the Province of Ombria in Italy, near the City Spoleti.

Monte-Fiascone, Mons Physcon, a small City in S. Peter's Patrimony in Italy;
made a Bishops See by Pope Urban V. It stands upon the Lake of Bolsena,
[Volsinium;] between Viterbio to the East, and Bolsena to the West, eight Miles
from either of them; and twenty from Corneto to the North. with the Bishopric
of which this is united for ever. The Wines of this place have ever been in
great esteem.

Monte-Fiore, a Town in the Marcha Anconitana in Italy.

Monte-Leone, Mons Leo, Hippo Vibo, a City and Colony of the Brutii, now in the
Further Calabria; which was a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Cosenza; but
that Chari was removed to Melito, by Pope Gregory VII. This place is in a very
good estate: four Miles from the Tyrrhenian Sea, twenty from the Ionian Sea,
and about thirty eight from Cosenza to the South. See Melito. Some imagine,
that it was built upon the ruins of the ancient, Vibo Valentia.

Montelimar, Mons limarii, a Town in Dauphine in France, upon the River Rubion,
and about one League from the Rhosne. It is a large, handsome, well peopled
Town, with diverse religious Houses in it, and a Citadel: Frequently taken and
retaken in the Wars of Religion in the last Age; but chiefly addicted to the
Huguenot Party.

Monte Marano, Mons Maranus, a very small City in the Further Principate, in
the Kingdom of Naples; which is yet a Bishops See under the Archbishop of
Benevento. It stands ten Miles from Avellino to the East.

Monte Peloso, Mons Pilosus, Pelosius, Pelusius, etc. a small, but populous
City, in the Basilicate, in the Kingdom of Naples; which is a Bishop's See,
under the Archbishop of Acerenza, tho exempt from his Jurisdiction. This
Bishopric was instituted by Pope Sixtus IV. in 1643. It stands upon the
Borders of the Duchy of Bari, betwixt Acerenza and Matera.

Montepulciano, Mons Politianus, a City in the Province of Toscana in Italy,
toward the States of the Church, and the Lake of Chiano, upon an Hill: It has
the Title of an Episcopal See, and may deserve a further Remark for being the
Birthplace of the ingenious Angelus Politianus.

Monte S. Angelo, a City and Archbishopric in the Kingdom of Naples.

Montereau faut Yonne, Mons Regalis, Monasteriolum ad Icaunam, a Town in
Champagne; where the Duke of Burgundy (the sworn Enemy of the House of Orleans)
was basely murdered, September 10. 1419. It stands seven Leagues from Melun
toward Sens, at the conjunction of the River Yonne with the Seine: and had
heretofore a Palace Royal to adorn it.

Montesia, a Town in the Kingdom of Valentia; which gave Name to an Order of
Knights, founded in 1317. (after the abolishing of the Templars) at this Town.

Monte-verde, Mons Viridis, a small City in the Further Principate, in the
Kingdom of Naples, in the Confines of Terra di Bari; which is a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Consa. This See in 1531. was united with the titular
Archbishopric of Nazareth. It stands upon the River Ofanto; thirteen Miles
from Consa to the East, and twenty three from Acerenza.

Montferrat, Montisferrat, Monferrat, Monferato, Mons Ferratus, a Province of
Italy: Honored with the Title of a Dukedom, in 1570. It is bounded on the East
with the Dukedom of Milan; the States of Genoua on the North, with the
Territories of Vercelli, Biella, and Canavese; on the West by Piedmont, (cut
off from it by the Apennine;) and on the South, the Dukedom of Milan. So very
fruitful, and well cultivated, (tho it be Hilly) that it is thought to have
its Name a Feracitate, from its Fertility. It has been ever since 1535, under
the Duke of Mantoua; to whom it came by the Marriage of Margaret, Sister of
Boniface, the last Earl of this Country. Heretofore the Territory of Canavese
was a part of it: which by the Treaty in 1631, was together with the rest of
this Dukedom, beyond the Po to the North, granted to the Duke of Savoy. The
chief places under the Duke of Mantoua, are Casale, Arqui, Nizza, and Paglia.
Under the Duke of Savoy, Turino, Alba, and Verua. Valenza and Bassinia, did
together with Mondovi belong to it: but now dismembered, and annexed to the
Dukedom of Milan.

Montgatz, a Town in the Upper Hungary, in the County of Pereczas; and an
Episcopal See here^ofore under the Greek Church: so strongly fortified with
Ditches, and three Castles upon a Hill, where nothing can command them, that no
Army without very great loss is able to approach it. The Princess Ragotski, a
Roman Catholic Lady, Wife to Count Teckely, and Relict of the Prince Ragotski
(the last of that ancient and noble Family of Batori, which has furnished
Kings to Poland, and Princes to Transylvania) held out this place in the behalf
of her Husband against the Emperor in 1687; till after a Blockade of seven
Months, she was necessitated to surrender; Jan. 25. 1688, upon these Conditions
amongst others; that she should deliver up all the Ensigns of Sovereignty, in
her custody, wherewith Count Teckely had been invested by the Turk, as Prince
of Hungary; and take the City of Vienna for her Prison, not to remove thence
without the Emperor's leave.

Montgomery, Mons Gomerici, a small Town in Lisieux in Normandy; the Count of
which unfortunately slew Henry II. King of France, with a Lance in a Just, in
1559: who afterward joining with the Rebels against the Crown, was beheaded
more on the score of this old Misfortune, than on the account of that
Rebellion. This Town stands two French Leagues and an half from Lisieux to the
South, and above three from Argentan to the North.

Montgomeryshire, Comitatus Montgomeriensis, one of the Twelve Shires of Wales,
called by the Welsh Sire Trefaldwin. Bounded upon the North with Denbigh, on
the East with Shropshire, on the South with Radnor and Cardigan, and on the
West with Merionethshire. Very Mountainous, but being well watered with Rivers
and Springs, nevertheless very fruitful. The ancient Inhabitants were called by
the Romans, Ordovices; a valiant and warlike People, hardly subdued in the
Reign of Domitian. Nor were they conquered by the English before the Reign of
Edward I. This County takes its Name from a Town seated upon a high Hill, in
the Eastern Border toward Radnor; between the Severn (which rises in this
County) and the Kemlet: it has been walled; on the North of it stands a fair
Castle, which (says Mr. Speed) is now well repaired. This Town was built by
Roger de Montgomery, a Norman Earl; and from him had its Name. Philip Herbert,
second Son of Henry Earl of Pembroke, was by James I. in the year 1605, made
Earl of Montgomery; which Honor is now possessed by Philip III. who is the
fourth Earl of this Family, and succeeded William his half Brother, in the Year
1674. It returns one member to the House of Commons.

Monthelon or Montolon, a Town in the Dukedom of Burgundy, near Autun, which
gives name to a family of honor.

Montignac, Montiniacum, a small Town in the Province of Perigord, in Aquitain
in France, upon the River Vezere^ (here covered with a Bridge, four or five
Leagues from Sarlat, and a little more from Perigeux. The Castle of it used to
be the Seat of the ancient Counts of Perigord; for which reason they commonly
surname it, Montignac le Comte.

Montigni le Roy, a Town in the County of Bassigni, in Champaigne, upon the
Meuse, which has its source near it: in Latin, Montiniacum Regium.

Montilli or Monteil. Some apprehend this place to be the same with Montelimar
in Dauphine. Some situate it in Languedoc, and others upon the Rhosne. And the
reason, there is this notice taken of it, is, a Council Assembled at it in
1208. against the Albigenses: wherein it was resolved, that Raymond VI. Earl of
Tolouse (the supporter of their cause) should be cited to appear in Person at
Valence, before the Popes Legate, to answer to the disorders objected against
him.

Mont le Herry, a Town in the Isle of France, upon a Hill, with a Castle built
in 1015; and a Chastellaine belonging thereunto: together with the title of an
Earldom near Paris, by the banks of a little River; falling soon after into the
Orge. In the Year 1465. Jul. 16. Lewis XI. King of France, and Charles Duke of
Berry, his Brother, (whom the Dukes of Bretagne and others of the Nobility had
set up against King Lewis,) fought a very equal Battle here.

Mont de Marsan, Mons Martiani, the Capital Town of a Territory of the same
name, in the Province of Gascoigne in France, upon the River Midon, where it
receives the Douse; in an excellent soil for Corn. The Huguenots were Masters
of this Town in 1569. before the Battle of Moncontour: But the Roman Catholic
Party forced it soon after. See Marsan.

Mont Martre, a Mount near Paris, on the North side; where there is a
remarkable Abbey, so called, either from the adoration of Mars or Mercury in
ancient times there, as some; or from the Martyrdom of S. Dennis and his
Companions upon it, as others say.

Montmelian, a strong Castle in Savoy; the only place the Duke had left him by
the French in Savoy, in the Year 1630. In vain attempted by the French in 1690;
but taken the year after.

Montone, Bedesis, a River of Romandiola in Italy, commonly called il Bedese,
or Ronco. It springs from the Apennine; and running through the Dominions of
the Church, waters Meldola, and some other Castles; then falls into the Gulf
of Venice beneath Ravenna.

Montone, Vitis, a River in Italy, which rises out of the Apennine; and
watering Forli, falls into the Gulf of Venice beneath Ravenna. Upon the Banks
of this River, five Miles above Ravenna, Lewis XII. (King of France) slew
eighteen thousand Spaniards in a set Battle, in 1512.

Montpellier. See Mompellier.

Montpensier, a small Town in the Lower Auvergne in France, upon an Hill,
betwixt Aigueperce and Gannat; adorned with the title of a Dukedom and Peerdom,
by K. Francis I. in 1538. It had formerly a Castle: But this was destroyed in
the Reign of Lewis XIII. Lewis X. dyed here in 1226.

Montreali. See Monreale, an Archbishops See in Sicily.. Petra Deserti in
Arabia has sometimes gone by this name: and also a Town in Spain, where
Alphonsus VI. K. of Spain, established the order of the Knights Templars.

Montrevil l' Argille, Monasterium Argille, a strong Town in Picardy, in the
County of Ponthieu, seated upon an Hill; two Leagues from Eastaple to the East,
upon the River Canche; three from Hesdin to the West, and the same distance
from the British Sea. It has a strong Castle belonging to it, and two ancient
Abbeys of the Order of S. Benedict for Men and Women. Philip I. K. of France,
after his divorce from Queen Berthe his Wife, banished her to this place, where
she dyed in the Year 1093. It is also called Montreuil sur le Mer, to
distinguish it from Montreuil-Bellay, a Town in the Province of An^ou, upon the
frontiers of Poictou, at the conjunction of the Touay and the Thon.

Montrose, Mons Rosarum, a small Town in the North of Scotland, in the County
of Angus; twenty five English Miles from S. Andrews to the North-East; upon the
Mouth of a River which there falls into the German Ocean. This place (tho
small) deserves to be remembered on the account of James Graham Earl of it: who
did Wonders for Charles I. in the lowest of his Misfortunes; and suffered Death
for Charles II. with the same undaunted Bravery, in 1650. Whose dispersed Limbs
by the Order of that Prince were Collected, May 11. 1661, and decently Buried
in the Monument of his Ancestors: and the Head of the Marquess of Argile (his
bitter Enemy) set up in the same place where his had stood.

Mont-Saint-Marie, Mons Sanctae Mariae, a Territory in the Diocese of Soissons
in France, otherwise called Nostre Dame de Tartenois; and mentioned by the
French Geographers upon the account of two Synods there assembled in 97^. and
983.

Montserrat, a small Island in the North America, in the Possession of the
English; so called by the Spaniards, from the Mountain of that name near
Barcelona in Spain: it is about ten Miles long, and nine broad; in 17. Degrees. Lat

Monza, a small Town in the Milaneze in Italy, upon the River Lambro, toward
the Lake of Coma; in a great Plain, ten Miles from Milan. The Emperors
heretofore used to receive the Iron Crow here.

Mopsuestia, an ancient City of, Caramania, in the Lesser Asia; which has
formerly born the honor of a Bishops See, and likewise of an Archbishops under
the Patriarch of Antioch. Pliny, Ptolemy, and Strabo mention it. A small Synod
was assembled at it in 550. against Theodorus, the Bishop of the place. Now
called Malmistra.

Morat, Murat or Mourat, Muratum, Moratum, a small Town in Switzerland, in the
Canton of Friburgh, and the County of Romont; two Leagues from Friburgh to the
North, and three from Bern to the West; called by the Germans, Murten; it
stands upon a Lake of the same Name. In this place the Swiss first overthrew
the Forces of Charles the Hardy, Duke of Burgundy, in 1476. then besieging it.
In memory whereof, they, in a Chapel upon the banks of the Lake, advanced this
Inscription; Invictissimi atque fortissimi Caroli Ducis Burgundiae Exercitus
Muratum obsidens, contra Helvetios pugnans, hi^ sui Monumentum reliquit, Anno
1476.

Morato, Tigris.

Morava, Moravus, Morus, Marus, a River in the Kingdom of Bohemia; heretofore
called Marus; ^ow by the Inhabitants, Morawa; by the Germans, Marh. It arises
in the Confines of Bohemia near Altstadt; and bending Southward, waters and
divides the Province of Moravia (which takes its Name from it) and the City of
Olmutz; then in Austria falls into the Danube over against Haynburg; five
German Miles beneath Vienna, toward Presburg.

Morave, Moravus, Margus, Margis, a River of Servia; which arises in the
Borders of Macedonia, toward the Fountains of Orpheus; and being augmented
with many smaller Rivers, falls into the Danube beneath Senderinum, eighty
Miles from Belgrade to the East. There is another called by the same Name,
which falls into this beneath Nissa: Which last is called Morava in Bulgaria,
to distinguish it from the former.

Moravia, a well peopled Province in the Kingdom of Bohemia, called by the
Inhabitants Morawa; Morawska Zemia by the Slavonians; Mahren by the Germans;
Moravie by the French. It lies between Silesia to the North, and East; Bohemia
properly so called to the West; Austria, and Hungary to the South: in the form
of a triangle; about forty five Leagues from East to West, and thirty from
North to South; under the Emperor as King of Bohemia. This was anciently the
Seat of the Quadi, a warlike People, and the Marcomani. It bore the honor, for
some time, of the title of a Kingdom; afterward of a Dukedom, and then a
Marquisate. It now makes a part of the Kingdom of Bohemia, and is supposed to
take its name from the River Morawi, Morave, or die Mahr, ( Morus or Marus,)
arising near to Altstadt in Bohemia and joining with the Danube at Haynbourg in
Austria; being the same River with the precedent Morava. The Capital of it is
Olmutz; and the other principal Towns are, Brin, Iglaw, and Znaim. It is a
fruitful and pleasant Country; extremely well improved.

Morbiban, Morbibanum, a large Haven on the North side of the Lesser Bretagne
in France; seven Leagues from Port Lovis to the East, and near Vannes. Above
thirty small Islands lie in the Gulf of this harbor.

The Morduates, a Province in the North-Eastern Parts of the Empire of Russia,
toward the River Rha; between the Czeremisses to the East, and Wolodimera to
the West. It is a Country of great Extent; and made terrible by its vast
unpassable Woods and Forests.

More or Moore, an Episcopal City in the County of Mayo, in Connaught in
Ireland.

Morea, Peloponnesus, a celebrated, great, and fruitful Peninsula of Greece; of
about five hundred and fifty Miles in circuit. Its extent from Corinth in the
North-East to Cape Sapienza in the South, is one hundred and fifty Miles: its
breadth from Cape di Schilli, to Cape Tornese on the West, one hundred and
seventy five. Containing the Provinces of Romania, Sacania, Belvedore, and
Clarentia; and the famous Cities of Corinth, Coron, Clarenza, Patras, Misitra,
Nauplia, etc. Its principal Rivers are the Orfea, and the Iris or Basilipotamo.
Its Mountains Mynthe, Stymphalis, Pholoe, Lyceus, etc. are mentioned in the
Writings of the Ancients. This Country was first entirely conquered by the
Macedonians, after the Death of Alexander the Great: then by the Romans, under
L. Mummius, about one hundred and forty six years before the Birth of our
Savior; when Corinth, the then Capital of this Province, was entirely ruined.
In the later times of the Greek Empire, it had Despotes (or Princes of its own)
who were subject to the Emperors of Constantinople; the last of which, Thomas
Palaeologus, was driven out of his Dominions by Mahomet II. in 1543. Ever since
it has been in the Hands of those Destroyers of Mankind. But in 1685, the
Venetians began the Reconquest: and in 1687, were entirely possessed of it
(excepting only Malvasia) by a wonderful Revolution. And in September, 1690.
they recovered Malvasia also.

Moret, Murittum, a Town in the Territory of Gastinois, in the Isle of France,
upon the River Loing; adorned with the title of an Earldom. A Synod was held
there in 850.

Morga^, Margus, a River of Bactria, a Province of Persia; which springing from
the Mountains of Chorazan, and flowing through the Country called by their
Name, falls into the River Obengir, which ends in the Caspian Sea.

Morin, Muera, a River of France, in the Province of Le Brie; which waters
Colomiers [ Co^lumbaria] and Cressy; then falls into the Marne beneath Meaux:
this is called the Great Morin, to distinguish it from another which falls into
the Marne in the same Province, beneath La Ferte sous Jovare to the West of
Meaux.

Morini, a People of Gallia Antiqua, mentioned by Pliny and Virgil. The latter
styles them, Extremique hominum Morini, etc. It is supposed with greatest
probability, that they dwelt in the (now) Dioceses of S. Omer, Boulogne, and
Ypres.

Morlaix, Morlaeum, Mons relaxus, a City in the Province of Bretagne; upon a
River of the same Name, which has a Harbor on the North Shore of that Province.
It stands about two Leagues from the British Sea, and forty from Rennes to the
West, over, against Plymouth. There is ^ Fort built to secure the Passage of
the River, in an Island of the River. The Town stands upon an Hill, betwixt two
Plains, and shows the Ruins of an old Citadel.

Mormandes, Milmandra, a River of France, in Le Berry.

Morpeth, a considerable Market and Borough Town in the County of
Northumberland, upon the River Wensbeck: The Capital of its Ward; fortified
with a Castle; returning two Members of Parliament, and giving the Title of
Viscount to the Earl of Carlisle.

Mortagne, Moritania, a small Town in the Territory of Tournaysis in Flanders,
at the Confluence of the Rivers Escaut* and Scarpe, toward Valenciennes, two
or three Leagues from Tournay. It has formerly been fortified. Also a large,
handsome, and populous Town in the Upper Perch, in France, toward the borders
of Normandy, upon a Stream which there begins to form the River Huisne. This
Mortagne is now adorned with a Castle. There is a third of the Name in the
Province of Poictou, toward the Confines of Bretagne, at the reception of the
Loing by the River Se^^re Nantoise.

Mortain, Moritonium, Moritolium, a small Town in Normandy, near the River
Ardee, toward the Confines of La Main, betwixt Auranches and Domfront: which
by Henry I. King of England and Duke of Normandy, was given, with the Title of
an Earldom, to his Nephew Stephen Blois, afterward in 1135. King of England,
whose second Son william enjoyed the same Title in the next Succession. But
William died without Issue. This Town by ancient Custom, in public
Processions, carries a naked Sword in the place of a Standard.

Mortan^, Mortana, a River in Lorain.

Mortara, or Mortare, Mortaria, Pulchra Sylva, a strong, great, populous Town
in the Dukedom of Milan, upon the River Gogna; four Miles from Vigevano to the
North-West, ten from Novara to the South-East, and twenty four from Pavia to
the West. Anciently called Bella, or Pulchra Sylva, the Beautiful Wood; but
upon the great Slaughter of the Lombards, by the Forces of Charles the Great,
(when he took Desiderius, their King, Prisoner, in 774,) it took the Name of
Mortara, which signifies Slaughter, or Death. This Town was taken by the French
in 1658. and put under the Duke of Modena. In 1660. it was upon a Peace
restored back to the Spaniards. It is the Capital of the Territory of Lumellina.

Le Moruan, Morundia, Morvinus tractus, a mountainous Tract or Territory in the
Dukedom of Burgundy, of small extent; and its Limits not well known.

Mor Verridh, the Welsh name of the Irish Sea.

Mosa, the Meuse. See Maes.

Mosambich, Mosambica, a City of Zanguebar; on the Eastern Coast of Africa, in
an Island near the Continent; at the Mouth of a River of the same name; which
there falls into the Aethiopick Ocean* To this City belongs a strong Castle,
and a safe Harbor, all in the Possession of the Portuguese. Long. 63. 40.
South. Lat. 14. ^^.

Moscow, Moscoua, Moschia, the Capital of the Empire of Moscovy, or Russia;
called by she Inhabitants Mosqua; by the European Strangers, Moscow; by the
Poles, Moscouf; by the Germans, Moscaw. One of the greatest Cities in Europe;
extremely frequented on the score of Trade, and the common Residence of the
Great Duke, or Czar of Moscovy. It stands upon a River of the same name; (which
a little more to the East falls into the Occa or Aka; which at Novogorod falls
into the Wolgh:) one hundred and seventy Miles from the Borders of Lithuania to
the East, fifty four Polish Miles from Smolensko, and two hundred and fifty
from Belgrade to the North-East. Long 66. 00. Lat. 55. 36. This City is three
German Miles in compass; and no doubt (says Olearius) has been greater; yet in
his time it had forty thousand Houses. In general, it looks like a mass of
diverse Towns, rather than one City. The Streets are broad, but very miry; the
Houses generally low, built all of Deal, covered with Bark and sometimes with
Flag over the Bark, which makes them extremely subject to be destroyed by Fire.
The Houses of some great Lords and rich Merchants are built with Brick and
Stone. In 1571. the Crim Tartars made an Inroad and burnt this whole City,
except the Castle: in 1611. the Poles burnt it in the same manner. About 1636.
the third part of it was burnt by Accident. In 1668. it was almost totally
destroyed by Fire. The Castle (or Great Duke's Palace) is fortified with three
strong Walls, and a good Ditch; well mounted with Cannon. In the midst of it is
a Steeple covered with Copper; there is in it a Stone Palace built for the
Prince after the Italian manner: before it is the great Marketplace, well
stored with all sorts of Merchandise; and the Traders have their particular
Places assigned them. The Province of Moscow is bounded on the North by Rostow
and Susdale; on the East by Rhezan, on the South by Vorotina, and on the West
by Bielkia: the Capital of it is Moscow. This Province is very fruitful, well
peopled: and the Dukes of it having by Marriages and Wars subdued and brought
in all the other, this whole Empire is commonly called by that Name: but I
shall represent it under the word Russia.

Moselle. See Moesel.

Moseniga, Messene, once a famous City of Peloponnesus; now a small
contemptible Village on the South-West part of the Morea, upon the River
Pirnaza: eight German Miles from Coron to the North, six from the Mouth of that
River, and thirteen from Misitra to the West.

Moska, a River which passes through the City of Moscow: it arises in the
Province of Tuere; and receiving the Occa near Columna, about a Mile lower
falls with it into the Wolga. Olearius.

Mosul, Assyria, a Region of Asia, the Seat of the first General Empire. Till
of late it was under the King of Persia; but now almost entirely under the
Turks. It has this name from Mosul, a City upon the Tygris; thirty five Miles
from Amida to the North-East: thought to be Ninive.

Motir, Motira, one of the Molucca Islands in the East Indies, under the Line;
betwixt Gilolo to the East, Tidor to the North, Machian to the South, and
Celebes to the West. It is in the Possession of the Hollanders.

Motola, Motula, a small City in the Province of Otranto, in the Confines of
Bari; which is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Taranto. It stands at
the foot of the Apennine; seven Miles from the Bay of Taranto, thirteen from
that City to the North-West, twenty five from Bari to the South-West: and not
much better than a Village.

La Mothe, a Village and Fortress in Lorain, upon the Borders of Champagne;
which endured a Siege of five months; but being at last taken by the French,
was dismantled in 1645.

Moulins, Molinae, a great City in France; the Capital of Bourbonnois; seated
upon the River Allier, which watering Nevers also, falls into the Loir; sixty
two Leagues from Paris toward Lion, twelve from Nevers, and twenty from
Clermont. This City grew up out of the Ruins of Sylviniacum, an ancient City
not far off; and used to be the ordinary Residence of the Princes of Bourbon,
who built a Castle in it, where the Kings of France have often taken their
Diversion. The Tomb of Henry 2. King of France, is to be seen here. Charles IX.
held a great Assembly of the Nobility and Chief men of the Kingdom at this
place in 1565; passing at the same time the famous Edict of Moulins. It affords
good medicinal Waters, and here the Allier receives the River Daure.

Moulon, Molo, a River of France, near Bourges en Berry; which flowing by the
Monastery of S. Sulpicius, falls into the Greater Aveyron. Hoffman in Biturix.

South Moulton, a Market Town in Devonshire. The Capital of its Hundred.

Mounster, Momonia, one of the four Provinces of the Kingdom of Ireland. On the
North it is separated from Connaught, by the River Shannon; on the East it has
Leinster, on the South and West the Vergivian Ocean. It is in length from North
to South ninety Miles, in breadth one hundred: divided into six Counties; viz.
Limerick, Kerry, Cork, Waterford, Desmond, and Tipperary. The chief City is
Limerick. The rest are Cashell, Cork, Kinsale, and Waterford. The Irish call
this Province Mown.

The Mountains of the Moon, Montes Lunae, are a Ridge of Mountains which run
cross Africa from East to West; separating the Kingdom of Gojame to the North,
from the Lower Aethiopia to the South. The Ancients supposed the Nile to spring
out of these Mountains; which is found to be a mistake: that River rising in a
Plain, on the North side of those Mountains.

Mountserell, a Market Town in Leicestershire, in the Hundred of Goscote, near
the Stower, over which it has a Bridge; and formerly a Castle, that stood upon
a steep and craggy Hill; but long since demolished.

Mouson, or Mouzon, Mosomum, a City in Champagne in France, upon the Maes; in
the Confines of the Dukedom of Luxemburgh; between Sedan to the North, and
Stenay to the South; three Leagues from either, and eleven from Verdune. Often
taken and retaken of latter times; and particularly famous for a brave Defense
it made against the Imperialists under the Command of Picolomini, one of the
greatest Captains of his time. It was finally recovered out of the hands of the
Spaniards in 1653, and is still under that Crown. Two small French Synods were
assembled at it in 948. and 995.

Mowcop-Hill, a noted Hill in Staffordsh. in the Confines of Cheshire, where
Millstones are procured.

Mozambick. See Mosambick.

Mscislaw, Mscislavia, a City in Lithuania, of great strength; seated upon the
River Sosz, in the Confines of Moscovy; sixteen Polish Miles from Smolensko to
the South, and eighteen from Mohilow to to the East. This Place was besieged in
1386. by Swentoslaus, Duke of Smolensko without any Success. But taken by the
Russ some few years since; who in the Reign of Sigismond I. (King of Poland)
had received a great Deseat under the Walls of it. It has the honor of the
Title of a Palatinate.

Muer, Mura, Savaria, Darus, a River of Stiria; which arises in the Bishopric
of Saltzburgh: and flowing through Stiria, waters Gratz, (the Capital of this
Province) and Judenburgh; and a little beneath Kanischa, falls into the Drove
in the Lower Hungary. On the Banks of this River Count Serini defeated an Army
of the Turks; and slew ten thousand of them, in 1663.

Muers, Murocincta, a Town in the Lower Germany, mentioned by Ammianus
Marcellinus; now called Moers by the Germans; and Muers by the French: the
Capital of an Earldom and a County of the same name; between the Dukedom of
Cleves, and the Bishopric of Cologn; under the Dominion of the Prince of
Orange. It lies in the middle between the VVesel to the North, and Neuss or
Nuys to the South; nine Miles from Cologn to the North.

Muiaco, Muiacum, a Kingdom of great extent in the Higher Aethiopia.

Muiacheu, a great City in the Province of Suchuen in China.

Mulbach, Miliare, a River of Transylvania.

Muldaw, Mulda, a River of Bohemia, called by the Inhabitants Multava. It
arises in the Borders of Bavaria, five German Miles from Passaw: and flowing
North, waters Budweiss, a City of Bohemia; then taking in the Sazawa and the
Miza, it passes through Prague the Capital of that Kingdom: and three Miles
lower falls into the Elbe.

Mulgrave, an ancient Castle in the North Riding of Yorkshire, near the Sea,
and not far from Whitby: first built by Peter de Mauley in the time of Rich. I.
and continued in the line of its Founder for seven Generations. Afterward,
through other Families, it came to the Sheffields. Edmund, Lord Sheffield of
Butterwick, Lord President of the North, being created Earl of Mulgrave by K.
Charles I. in 1625. whose Great Grandson by Edmund Earl of Mulgrave is the R.
Hon. John Sheffield, the present Earl of Mulgrave.

Mulhausen, Mulnhausen, Mulhusia, a City of Germany in Thuringia, at the foot
of a Mountain, upon the River Vnstrutt; seven German Miles from Erford to the
West, and four from Eysenach to the North. It is a fine City; under the
Protection of the Elector of Saxony; being otherwise Free and Imperial.

Mulhausen, Arialbinum, Atalbinum, Mulhasia, a City in the Upper Alsatia,
called by the French Milause; seated upon the River Hellel. Once an Imperial
and Free City; but in 1515. leagued with the Swiss, and united to Suntgow. It
stands three Leagues from Ferrette to the North, and Basil to the South-West;
but heretofore belonged to Alsatia.

Mulheim, Limiris, a Town in Saxony in Germany.

Mullon, Nauilubio, a River of the Asturia's in Spain; which separates Galicia
from the Asturia's, and then falls into the Bay of Biscay.

Multan, Multanum, a City of the Hither East Indies, upon the River Indus; in
the middle between Lahor to the East, and Candahar to the West; under the
Mogul. Once great and well peopled; but now declining; yet it is the Capital of
a Province of the same name. Long. 104. 55. Lat. 31. 05.

Multaw, the same with Muldaw.

Mulvia, a River of Africa, which springs from Mount Atlas; and separates the
Kingdom of Fez and Telesin, then falls into the Mediterranean Sea.

Munch, the Carpathian Mountains.

Munchen, Monachum, Monachium, Campodunum, the capital City of Bavaria in
Germany; called by the French, Munich; by the Italians, Monaco; and of old
Isinisca. It stands upon the River Isere, (here covered with a Bridge): and has
a magnificent Palace belonging to the Elector of Bavaria, which in 1675.
suffered something by Fire: five German Miles from Frisingen to the South,
fifteen from Ratisbon toward Inspruch, and eight from Ausburg to the East.
First walled by Otho, Duke of Bavaria, about the year 1156. Gustavus Adolphus,
King of Sweden, took it in 1632. and being advised to ruin the Ducal Palace,
said, he should be sorry to deprive the World of so admirable a Piece.

Munda, an ancient Town in the Kingdom of Granada, in Spain; which Mariana
admits to be the same with the modern Ronda la Vieja. It was at this Town, that
Julius Caesar put a period to the Civil Wars betwixt Pompey and him, by a
Victory obtained over the Sons of Pompey, in the year of Rome 709.

Munfia, Apollinis Vrbs magna, an ancient City in Egypt, upon the West side of
the Nile; one hundred and sixty English Miles South of Grand Cairo: now in a
good condition.

Munghoa, a City in the Province of Yunnan in China.

Munia, Lycopolis, a City on the Western Shore of the Nile; one hundred and
five English Miles South of Grand Cairo: now in a flourishing State.

Munick, the same with Munchen.

The Muzamudims, a Tribe of the ancient Bereberes, in Africa. See Bereberes.

Munster, Mimingroda, Monasterium, a City of Westphalia in Germany; called by
the French, Mounstre. The Capital of Westphalia; a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Cologne, founded by Charlemaigne; and a great, rich populous
City. It stands upon the River Aa; seven German Miles from Osnaburg to the
South, twenty two from Bremen toward Cologne, (from which it stands eighteen,)
and twelve from Paderborne to the West. It has a strong Castle; and was once an
Imperial and Free City, but since exempted. Particularly remarkable for the
great Calamities it sustained in 1533. when seized by the Anabaptists: who set
up here John of Leiden for their King; perpetrating horrid Villainies, under the
pretense of Enthusiastic Zeal; and could not be suppressed, till this City had
endured a years close Siege. No less famous for a general Peace here treated in
1648. In 1661. it was taken by Bernard its Bishop, (a man wholly addicted to
War and Bloodshed) after a long Siege: ever since, it has been subject to the
Bishops of this Diocese.

The Bishopric of Munster, called by the Germans, das Bisthum buon Munster; is
a Province in the Circle of Westphalia, in the German Empire; which has its
name from its Capital. Bounded on the West with Overyssel, on the North with
the Earldoms Embden and Oldenburgh; on the South with the Dukedom of
Westphalia, and the County of Marck: on the East by the Bishopric of
Osnaburgh, and the Counties of Diepholt and Ravensperg. Almost an hundred Miles
in length from North to South; but not of equal breadth: and divided into
thirteen Bailiwicks. The principal Cities, are Munster, Meppen, Vecht, and
Varendorp. It is extremely full of Woods and Marshes: fitter for the production
of Cattle, than Habitation of Men.

Munster, Monasterium, is a small City in the Valley of S. George, in the Upper
Alsatia; upon the River Fach, at the foot of Mount Vauge; five Leagues from
Brisach to the West: called im Gregorienthall, to distinguish it from the other
Cities of the same name. It was an Imperial Free City; but now exempted, and
subject to the Crown of France.

Munster Eyffel, a Town in the Dukedom of Juliers, upon the River Erst; in the
Territory of Eyffel, in the Borders of the Bishopric of Cologne; six German
Miles from that City to the South, and seven from Aquisgran to the North-East;
under the Duke of Newburgh.

Munster Meinfeld, a Town in the Bishopric of Trier or Treves, upon the
Moselle; three German Miles from Coblentz to the North-West: under the
Archbishop of Trier.

Munsterberg, Munsterberga, a City of Silesia; heretofore subject to its own
Duke, with the Territory belonging to it. This City stands upon the River Olaw;
seven German Miles from Vratislaw to the South, and the same distance from
Oppeien to the West.

The Dukedom of Munsterberg, lies in Bohemia in the Upper Silesia: now in the
possession of the Emperor. Bounded by the Dukedom of Grotkaw to the East, that
of Schweidnitz to the North, and Bohemia to the West and South.

Munsterthal, Vallis Monasterii, a small Territory in the Canton of Gottespunt,
amongst the Grisons.

Munzarrum, Taurus, a Mountain in the Losser Armenia.

Muradal, or El puerto de Muradal, Saltus Castulonensis, a passage over the
Mountains of Morena, leading to New Castile, Andaluzia, and the Borders of
Portugal: where Alphonsus King of Castile with the King of Navarre, obtained so
great a Victory over the Moors, as to leave two hundred thousand of them dead
upon the place. There was heretofore, nigh to it, a Town called Castulo (now a
Village, by the name of Caslona,) which gave it the Latin Name, of Saltus
Castulonensis.

Murat, a small Town in the Province of Auvergne, in France, upon the River
Alagnon, at the foot of the Mountains; three or four Leagues from S. Flour:
adorned with the Title of a Viscounty.

Murrana, Crabra, a River in Italy, which arises in Campagnia di Roma; and
dividing into two Branches, one falls into the Teverone, (two Miles above
Rome,) the other runs through Rome into the Tiber.

Murcia, a City and a Kingdom in Spain. The Kingdom is very small: lies on the
South of New Castile, (to which it is now united) which bounds it on the North.
The Kingdom of Valentia on the East, the Kingdom of Granada on the West, and
the Mediterranean Sea on the South. It is called a Kingdom, because during its
being under the Moors it had distinct Kings for many Ages. The chief Cities in
it, are Carthagena, and Murcia, (the Capital of this Kingdom.) It is seated on
the River Segura, in a pleasant Plain, in the Confines of the Kingdom of
Valentia; three Leagues from Orihuela to the West, six from Carthagena to the
North-West, eight from the Mediterranean Sea. Retaken from the Moors in 1265.
and being a considerable and pleasant place, injoys the presence of the Bishop
of Carthagena, for the most part.

Muret, Muretum, a Town in the Province of Gascoigne, in Aquitain in France;
upon the Garonne, two Leagues from Toulouse: near which, Simon, Earl of
Monfort, in 1213. obtained a great Victory over the Albigeois and Arragonois.
Peter (the King of Arragon) being there slain, together with the Earl of
Toulouse; and above twenty thousand of their men. Also a small Town in the
Province of Limosin, in the same Kingdom.

Muro, Muru, a small City in the Basiilicate, in the Kingdom of Naples; which
is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Cosenza. It is seated at the foot of
the Appenine, in the Confines of the Principate; twelve Miles from Cosenza to
the North-East, and twenty from Acerenza to the West.

Murray, Moravia, one of the North-Eastern Shires of the Kingdom of Scotland;
of great extent from East to West: on the North it has the German Ocean, and
Murray Fyrth; on the East Buchan; on the South Athole and Mar; and on the West
Loquaber. It is in length ninety Scotch Miles, and in its greatest breadth
thirty. The principal Town is Elgin, which is a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of S. Andrews: but he is styled Bishop of Murray, not of Elgin.

Murray Fyrth, Vara, a great Arm of the German Ocean; which pierces the
Eastern Shore of Scotland. On the North and West it has the County of Ross, and
on the South Murray and Buchan. There is no Town of any consideration upon it,
except Chaurie.

Muscovy. See Russia.

Mussidan, a Town in the Province of Perigord in France, upon the River Lille,
four or five Leagues from Perigeux: famous in the Civil Wars of Religion, in
the last Age.

Mut, Vidua, a River of Ireland.

Muya, Mulcha, the Niger, a vast River in Africa.

Mycone. See Micoli.

Mygdonia, a Country of the ancient Macedonia, betwixt the Rivers Strymon
(Stronona,) Axius (Vardari,) and the Gulf of Aiomana. Apollonia, Antigonia,
Amphipalis, etc. were its principal Cities. The same name was anciently also
given to a Country in Mesopotamia, lying along the course of the River
Mygdonius, which waters the Walls of the City Nifibin, and thence runs to the
Bed of the Tigris.

Mycenae, an ancient City of the Peloponnesus, betwixt Argos and Corinth.
Otherwise called Agios Adrianos.

Mylaen, Mylias, a City of Pamphylia, in the Lesser Asia; now ruined.

Myra, the ancient name of the City Strumita in Lycia. See Strumita.

Myrbach, a small Town in the Upper Alsatia, in Germany; remarkable for a
famous Abbey, which before the possession of this Country by the French, had
the honor to be an Ecclesiastical Principality, immediately dependent of the
Emperor.

Myrlaea, Apamia, a City of Bythinia, in the Lesser Asia, upon the South Shore
of the Propontis; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Cyzicum; and
still called by its ancient name.

Mysia, a Country of Asia Minor, according to the ancient Geography; divided
into the Greater and Lesser Mysia; the former lay betwixt Phrygia, Bythinia,
the Aegean Sea, and Mysia the Less; as this latter did betwixt Troas and the
Hellespont. Now wholly contained in Natolia, and under the Turks. Its principal
ancient Cities, were Pergamus, Trajanopolis, Adramyttios, Cyzicus, Lampsacus,
etc.

N O.
NAB, Nabus, a River of Nortgow, which arises out of the Mountains of
Sultzberg, near the Fountains of the Main; and flowing Northward through
Nortgow, or the Upper Palatinate, is increased by several smaller Rivers; at
last ends in the Danube, a little above Ratisbone.

Nabathaei, an ancient people of the Stony Arabia, descended, in the judgment
of Isidore, from Nabath the Son of Ismael. Their Country was bounded by Arabia
Deserta on the East, Palestine on the South, and Arabia Foelix on the North.
Their Capital City, Petra. Being the same people, who, as Josephus writes, were
defeated once in a great Fight by Paulus Gabinius, sometime Governor of Syria.

Nadder, a River of Wiltshire, joining with the Willy at Wilton, near
Salisbury; and there falling into the Avon.

Nadin, a Fortress in the County of Zara, in Dalmatta; taken from the Venetians
by Solomon II. but since retaken by them, and kept.

Naerdem, or Narden, Nardenum, a strong Town in Goeland, (whereof it is the
Capital,) in Holland; upon the Zuyder Sea; almost four German Miles from
Amsterdam to the East. In 1572. suprised, and much defaced by the Spaniards. In
1672. it fell into the hands of the French; but being recovered, is now very
strongly refortified.

Nagaia, the Kingdom of Astracan, in Tartaria Deserta, in the Czar's Dominions.
Some describe it to be a Kingdom, or a Hord of Tartars there, distinct from
Astracan.

Nagera, Nagara, a City in Old Castile, in the Province of Rusconia; by a River
of the same name: once a Bishops See, now translated to Calzada; yet honored
with the Title of a Dukedom. This City lies thirty Spanish Leagues from
Saragoza to the North-West, and eighteen from Burgos to the North-East. Near it
was a Bloody Fight between Peter King of Portugal, and Henry King of Castile,
in 1365. in which the latter prevailed; and in memory of that Victory,
instituted the Knights of the Flower de Lys; the French joining with Peter
against Castile, and being beaten in that Battle.

Nagibania, a Town in Transylvania, in which are Mines of Silver: six Miles
from Bistirz to the West, in the Borders of the Upper Hungary: called by the
Latin Writers, Rivuli Puellarum.

Naha, Nava, a River of Germany.

Najac, a small Town in the Province of Rovergue, in France, upon the River
Aveirou, betwixt Ville Franche, and S. Antonin. It is a famous place for
Vicriol; and in the Civil Wars of Religion, it attained to a considerable name.

Najara, one of the principal Towns in the Province of Rioga, in Old Castile,
in Spain; betwixt Logrono and Calahorra: adorned with the Title of a Dukedom.

Naim, a small City in Galilee, in Palestine, four Miles from Nazareth to the
West, and near Mount Tabor; where our Savior raised a person from the dead.
Now in the condition of a despicable Village, with only some houses of Wild
Arabs in it.

Namptwich, a Market Town in Cheshire: the second in beauty and largeness, in
that County; and of particular note for the White Salt here made in great
plenty. It stands upon the Banks of the Weever, and is the Capital of its
Hundred.

Namur, Namurcum, Nemetocerna, a great and strong City in the Low Countries;
the Capital of one of the seventeen Provinces; and a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Cambray, by the Order of Pope Paul IV. This City stands betwixt
two Hills, on the West Shore of the Maes, where it receives the Sambre; nine
Leagues from Louvain to the South, ten from Brussels to the East, and seven
from Philippeville to the North. Adorned with diverse Churches, Monasteries, and
handsome Buildings. It has a strong Castle, and was under the Spaniards, till
the beginning of the year 1692. that it was taken by the French.

The Earldom of Namur, is a small Province; included by the Bishopric of Liege
on the East and South, by Hainault on the West, and Brabant on the North. There
are only three places of Note in it; Namur, Charlemont, and Charleroy; besides
some good Abbeys, and about one hundred and eighty Villages. It is Mountainous
and Barren, but not unprofitable; there being great plenty of Iron and Lead
Mines, and Quarries of Marble. We read of its being an Earldom ever since the
year 924. It is about twelve Leagues long, and a little less broad.

Nancang, or Nangan, a City in the Province of Quansi in China, almost ruined
in the late Wars of the Tartars.

Nancy, Nasium, Nancaeum, Nancium, the Capital City of the Dukedom of Lorrain;
seated upon the River Meurte, (which falls into the Moselle) five Leagues from
Toul to the East, fourteen from Bar le Duc to the same, and ten from Metz to
the South. In 1476. Charles Duke of Burgundy was slain in Battle, by Rene Duke
of Lorrain, near this City. In 1587. it was first fortified. In 1633. taken by
Lewis XIII. King of France. In 1661. dismantled. But in 1673. the French began
to refortifie it; and have since made it very strong.

Nancyam, a City in the Province of Chiamsi, in the Kingdom of China.

Nandor Alba, Belgrade.

Nangazachi, a City of Japan, in the Island of Ximo and the Province of Figyn,
with a very convenient Port. Pope Sixtus V. advanced it to the Dignity of an
Episcopal See, under the Metropolitan of Goa. But at present it abides without
a Bishop.

Nanhiung, a City of China, in the Province of Quansi.

Nankanga, a City of China, in the Province of Quansi.

Nanni, a City in the Province of Chiamsi, in China, at the Confluence of the
Rivers Puon and Si, toward the Borders of the Kingdom of Tunquin.

Nanning, a City of China, in the Province of Quansi.

Nanquin, a great City in the Kingdom of China, upon a Bay, and in a Province
of the same name; once the Capital of this Kingdom, and the Seat of the Court,
and now vastly great and populous: But its Palace Royal was ruined by the
Tartars: One of the most celebrated Ports in the East.

The Province of Nanquin, (which was once the greatest in this Kingdom) is
bounded on the North by Xantum; on the West by Honan and Huquam; on the South
by Chekiam; and on the East by the Chinian Ocean. It contains fourteen great,
and an hundred and ten small Cities; one hundred ninety six thousand eight
hundred and sixteen Families: Being divided into fourteen Parts, to each of
which there belongs a great City.

Nansa, Nesna, a River in Biscay in Spain.

Nanterre, Nemptodurum, Nemetodurum, a Town in the Isle of France, near the
River Seine, betwixt Paris and S. Germain, from the former distant two Leagues.
S. Genevieve, the Patroness Saint of Paris, was born at it. In the year 591. a
grand Assembly of the Prelates and Nobility of the Kingdom was held here, about
the baptizing of King Clothaire II.

Nantes, Corbilum, Nannetes, Nannetum Condovicum, a City in the Upper Bretagne
in France; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tours; also an
University, and the Capital of the County of Nantes: seated upon the Loire,
where it receives the Ardre, at the soot of some Hills; twelve Leagues from its
Mouth to the East; seventeen from Angers, and twenty from Rennes to the South.
It has a strong Castle and a Bridge over the Loyre, Some of the ancient Dukes
of Bretagne lie entombed in the Cathedral. There are many Churches, and
Religious Houses in it; and one of the 4 Suburbs is walled round. In the year
1342. the English besieged it without success. But in 1355. they took it by
surprise. Henry IV. King of France passed the famous Edict, in favor of the
Huguenots, called the Edict of Nantes, here in 1598. Diverse French Synods have
by times been assembled here also.

The County of Nantes, is divided by the Loir into two parts: bounded on the
East by Anjou, on the South by Poictou, and on the West and North by the
British Sea. This retains the name of its most ancient Inhabitants, who were
called Nannetes by the Romans.

Naples, Neapolis, by the Italians called Napoli, by the Spaniards Napoles, is
an ancient, great, rich, populous City: the Capital of a Kingdom in Italy;
called by the Turks, Anobolu. It is seated in the Terra di Lavoro, on the
Tyrrhenian Sea; one hundred twenty five Miles from Rome to the South-East; in a
fruitful pleasant Plain, being very well watered; and has a large safe Harbor,
much frequented by the Merchant Ship of all Nations. The Viceroy of this
Kingdom does always reside in this City; and has a noble Palace, which belonged
to the Kings of Naples. It is also a Bishops See, instituted by Gregory I.
adorned with an hundred and ten magnificent Churches, and a vast number of
public and private Buildings of great beauty and expense: so that all
considered, it is one of the greatest, richest, and most populous Cities of
Italy; containing no less than seven Miles in compass: and besides the Security
the Sea gives it, and the Neighboring Mountains, (which serve instead of
Ramparts) it has four strong Castles or Citadels for its security, which were
built at several times by William III. a Norman, Charles I. Brother to S. Lewis
King of France, Ferdinand King of Aragon, and the Emperor Charles V. In the
Metropolitan Church, dedicated to S. Januarius, they preserve the Blood of that
Saint in a Glass, congealed; which, they pretend, melts and bubbles, when the
Head of the same Saint is brought near it. And in the Church of the Dominicans,
they show the Crucifix, which you are told spoke these words to S. Thomas
Aquinas; Ben^ de me scripsisti, Thoma, quamnam mercedem habebis? whereunto he
made answer, Nullam, domine, praeter teipsum. The Italians give Naples the name
of la Gentile, for its beauty and neatness; it attracting all the Nobility of
the Kingdom to it. But their Proverb goes further, Ma la gente cativa: tuttavia
un paradiso habitato da diavoli. The people are bad: it is altogether a
Paradise inhabited by Devils. This City is so very ancient, it is reported to
be built by Hercules, about the year of the World 2725. in the times of Thola,
Judge of Israel. The Chalcidians rebuilt, or enlarged it; and instead of
Parthenope, (its old Name) called it (...), that is, the New Town. The Romans
took it from the Samnites about the year of Rome 463. after three or four
bloody Wars. Being subjected to that State, the Inhabitants of this City are
much celebrated for their Fidelity to Rome; and ever after the Battle of
Cannae, would not submit to Hannibal, till he made use of force against them.
In the year of Rome 537. (together with Rome, and the rest of Italy, in the
fifth Century) this City became a prey to the Goths, and other Barbarous
Nations: amongst them to the Lombards; from whom it passed to Charles the
Great. After this, it fell under the Saracens. In 1008. the Normans began under
Tancred to enter upon this Stage; whose Children drove out both the Greeks and
Saracens, and possessed this City and Kingdom under the Title of Earls of
Calabria. in 1216. there was an University opened here by Frederick II.
Emperor of Germany. The rest of its Fate depends on the Changes in the
Kingdom; except that prodigious Revolution in 1647. when one Masanello, a poor
Fisher Boy, appearing against the Spaniards, (who had overmuch oppressed this
populous City by their Impositions,) raised such a storm against them, as bid
fair for the excluding them for ever out of that Kingdom. In June 1688. Naples
suffered extraordinarily by an Earthquake, several days.

The Kingdom of Naples, ( Nepolitanum Regnum) has its name from its principal
City; but was at first called the Kingdom of Sicily, as it is still in all the
Public Acts. It is bounded on the West with the Lands of the Church; and on
all other sides surrounded with the Mediterranean Sea. Under the first Kings it
was divided into four parts: at present into twelve Provinces or Counties: it
has about thirty Cities, great and small. Its length from North to South,
ninety German Miles; (that is from the River of Tronto to the Cape of
Spartivento:) and its breadth from Cape Massa, not far from Naples, to Cape
Gargani, (or ^^onte di S. Angelo,) on the Venetian Gulf, thirty. About the
year of Christ 1000. this Kingdom was miserably harrased by the Saracens and
Greeks, then expelling the Children of Charles the Great. The Normans drove out
first the Saracens, and then the Greeks. In 1125. Pope Anacletus II. gave this
Kingdom to Roger Earl of Sicily; excluding the Children of William, his Elder
Brother. In 1196* another Usurper dispossessed this Line; and called in Henry
VI. Emperor of Germany. His Posterity enjoyed it till 1261. when Charles Earl
of Anjou entered and slew Manfred IV. the last of the German Line. His
Posterity enjoyed it four Descents more; when Charles IV. in the year 1371.
entered and slew Joan Queen of Naples. In the year 1434. Alphonso, King of
Arragon, partly by Adoption, and partly by Conquest, got this Kingdom from
another Joan, the third of the Caroline Descent. His Posterity enjoyed it five
Descents; till Ferdinand III. King of Castile and Arragon dispossessed them in
1503. In this Family it is at this day; Charles, the present King of Spain,
being the sixth from Ferdinando.

Napo, a River of the Kingdom of Peru in South America, passing by Avila in the
Province of Quiros, to join it self with the River of Amazons.

Napoli di Barbaria, a Town near Tripoli in Barbary: called also Lebeda and
Lepe.

Napoli di Nalvasia. See Malvasia.

Napoli di Romania, Nauplia, Anaplia, a City on the Eastern Shore of the Morea,
in the Province of Romania; anciently a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Corinth; but that City being ruined, it became an Archbishopric it self. This
City stands upon the River Inachus; sixty Miles from Misitra to the North-East,
fifty five from Athens to the North-West, and thirty six from Corinth to the
South. Surrounded on all sides, but the North, with the Sea; its Shoars are so
very high and steep, that an Enemy can neither land, nor batter its Walls with
their Cannon. On the West it has a large and safe Haven, secured by a Fort
built upon a Rock in the midst of its Mouth; and shut up on both sides by two
Chains: which from this Fort reach to the Town on the North side, and to
another Fort on the Continent to the South. The Mountain of Palamede on the
North commands the Town: in all other points, it is situated as well for
Defense as Commerce, equal to any place in Europe. Said to have been built by
Nauplius, a Son of Hercules; and to have been one of the most ancient Towns in
the Morea. It was first taken from the Greeks by the Venetians and French, in
1205. But it did not long remain in their hands, before it was retaker, with
the slaughter of all their Garrison and Governor. In the thirteenth Century it
fell into the hands of Mary d' Erigane, Relict of Peter, Son of Frederick
Cornar Piscopia. This Lady not being able to preserve it from the Turks,
resigned it to the Venetians in 1383. who fortified it: the Turks however
frequently attempted it. Mahomet II. sent Machmut, a Bassa, with a potent Army
to reduce it by force; which design miscarried in 1460. After him, Solomon the
Magnificent, in 1537. again besieged it; and lost a great part of his Army, to
no purpose, before it: but about two years after upon a Treaty, the Venetians
surrendered it, to purchase a Peace of him In 1686. the Venetians again came
before it with a considerable Fleet and Army; and having beaten the Serasquier
of the Morea, and possessed themselves of Mount Palamede, forced the Town to
surrender. It was the ordinary Residence of a Sangiack, and inhabited by a
great number of Greeks, with others.

Golfo di Napoli, in which this City stands, was of old called Sinus Argolicus.

Napolouse, Neapolis, an ancient Town in Palestine, at the foot of the Mountain
Gerizim* otherwise called Sichar, Sichem* Nabartho and Mrothia. in the year
1120. the Patriarch of Jerusalem assembled a Council at it. It is misplaced, by
Eusebius and Epiphanius, near Jericho.

Narbarth, a Market Town in Pembrockshire. The Capital of its* Hundred.

Narbon, Narbo, Narbona, Narbo Martius, Civitas Aracinorum, Colonia
Decumanorum, an ancient Roman City in Languedoc, in France; built by the
Romans, (as Polybius says,) in the one hundred and sixtieth Olymp. one hundred
and thirty eight years before the Birth of our Savior; an Archbishops See,
seated upon a Branch of the River Aude, (which was made by the Romans,) and
commonly called la Robine; twelve Miles from the Shoars of the Mediterranean
Sea to the North, ten from Carcassone to the East, and sixteen from Mompellier
to the West. Julius Caesar, Crass^s and Tiberius, obliged this City with
considerable Privileges. The Proconsuls of Gallia Narbonensis made it their
Residence, built a Capitol, an Amphitheatre, Schools, Baths, Aquaducts, with
all the Marks of the Majesty of the Romans, in it. In 435. the Wisigoths*
besieged and and took it. In the times of the first Kings of France, Toulouse
it self was a Suffragan to this Archbishop. In 733. this City was taken by the
Moors or Saracens, and much ruined, till Charles Martel recovered it again out
of their hands. To prevent this for the future, its Fortifications are
carefully kept: which, with the number of its Inhabitants, give it a sufficient
security. Yet taken by the Black Prince, in an Inroad he made with a small Army
from Bourdeaux in 1355. It contains five Parishes; was heretofore governed by
its own Viscounts and Dukes; and some write, that Paulus Sergius, the Proconsul
converted by S. Paul, was its first Bishop. Several small French Synods have
been assembled at it.

Narden* See Naerden.

Nardo, Neritum, a City in the Province of Otranto, in the Kingdom of Naples;
which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Brindisi; but exempt from his
Jurisdiction. Built in a Plain; four Miles from the Bay of Taranto, and nine
from Gallipoli to the North. Pope John XXIII. instituted this Bishopric in
1413. Pope Alexander VII. was Bishop thereof, before his Elevation to the Sea
of Rome. It also gives the Title of a Duke.

Narenta, Naro, a City of Dalmatia, upon a River of the same Name; thirty five
Miles from Dolcigno to the North, fourteen from Ragusa to the North-East, upon
a Bay of the Gulf of Venice of the same Name. Heretofore the Capital of
Dalmatia, a great and populous City; but being taken by the Venetians in 987.
and deprived of these Advantages, it began to decay: and although now a Bishops
See, under the Archbishop of Ragusa, in a fruitful Plain; yet it is but small
to what it has been. Baudrand says, it is in the Hands of the Turks: but when
it came into their Power, or whether it is not since retaken by the Venetians,
I know not.

Narni, Narnia, a City under the Pope, upon the River Nera; forty Miles from
Rome: which is a Bishops See, under the Pope only; and was the Birthplace of
Nerva, the Roman Emperor. Six Miles from Terni also. Pope John XIII. was a
Bishop of this See.

Narova, a great Lake in New France in America.

Narsinga, Caramania.

Narsinga, Narsinganum, a City and Kingdom on this side the Ganges, in the
East Indies: subject to the Kingdom of Bisnagar, and sometimes called by the
same Name with it. The City is* great and populous, and stands upon a River,
thirty five Miles from the City Bisnagar. See Bisnagar.

Narsingipatan, a City in the Kingdom of Golconda, in the East Indies; on the
Western Shore of the Bay of Bengala.

Narva, a City of Livonia, upon a River of the same Name; which separates
Livonia from the Dominion of the Duke of Moscovy: over against which, on the
Eastern Bank of the River, lies the Castle of Ivanowgorod: both under the
Swedes. The City is very strong; thirty Swedish Miles from Reval to the East,
and about one from the Bay of Finland. The Castle was built by the Russ; and
being founded on a Rock in the River, was thought Impregnable till taken by the
Swedes in 1617. ever since which time they have been possessed of it. Wolmar
II. King of Denmark is said to have built this City in 1213. John Basilovitz,
Duke of Moscovy, took it in 1558. Pontus de la Guard, General of the Swedish
Forces, retook it September 6. 1581. Ever since, the Swedes have kept it. About
1654. all the Trade of Moscovy was driven by this Port, by reason of a War
between England and Holland; which hindered the Navigation to Archangel. It
stands in Lat. 60. 00.

The River of Narva rises out of the Lake of Peipis; and falls into the Gulf
of Finland: in a manner as broad as the Elbe, but much swifter: about half a
League above Narva, it falls from a steep Rock, which breaks the Water into
small Particles and throws them into the Air; so that when the Sun shines, they
form a pleasant kind of Rainbow. But this hinders the bringing Goods by Water
to the Town, and inforceth the unlading the Boats above this Cataract.

Nasacepha, Selucia, Bagdat.

Nasamones, an ancient People of Libya in Africa, mentioned by Herodotus,
Strabo, Pliny, etc. They are diversely placed by them; sometimes near the
Atlantic Ocean, sometimes by the Sea of Marmora, and again toward the Syrtes
Magna of Barbary.

Nascaro Si^is, a River in the Further Calabria, in the Kingdom of Naples.

Nassaw, Nassovia, a small Town in Weteraw, upon the River Lhone; two Miles
from the Rhine to the East; five from Bingen to the North, and twelve from
Cologne: under its own Prince. From whence the Family of Nassaw has i^s Rise.
The Principality of Nassaw, is a Territory in the Upper Circle of the Rhine;
which lies partly in Westerwaldt, and partly in Weteraw; between the Dukedom of
Westphalia, the Upper Hassia, and the Bishopric of Trier beyond the Rhine. It
was at first a County; but made a Principality by Ferdinand III. in 1653.
Adolphus (the Emperor) was of this Family, chosen in 1462. and the Earls of
Sarbruck. But the Noblest Branch is that of Orange: in whose Honor, the Dutch
have given the Name of Nassaw, to two of their Forts in Foreign Parts: the one
in Guinee, the other in the Island Motir amongst the Moluccaes: also to a small
Island they call Nass^^^ Eylandt, in the Indian Ocean, belonging to Asia; and
to Weigatts Streights, otherwise called the Streights of Nassaw.

Nascivan, Naksivan, or Naxivan, Naxuana, a a City of the Greater Armenia,
mentioned by Ptolemy; which is an Archbishops See; at the Foot of Mount Ararat,
(or Taurus) between the Caspian Sea, and the Lake of Exsechia, ( Lychnitis.)
The Archbishop is ever since 1300. chosen out of the Dominicans, and confirmed
by the Pope. This City is under the Persians; but has been wretchedly harassed
by the Turks who, as they prevail over the Persians and the Persians over them,
lay each others Mosques in Ruins. Here is a stately Tower, said to be of the
Building of Tamerlane. The Armenians pretend that Noah, after the Deluge, dwelt
and was buried in this City. It stands about seven Leagues from the River
Araxes. Long. 81. 34. Lat. 38. 40. in a fertile Country. The Capital of
Armenia, the Seat of a Persian Kan, or Governor. Sir John Chardin says, they
have generally thrown off the Roman Rites; and are returned to their ancient
Religion: tho the Pope, by an Ambassador sent to Persia in 1664. obtained great
Favors from that Court for his Followers, by which they are rather damnified
than benefited.

Naseby, a memorable Town in the County of Northampton, in the Hundred of
Guilesborough, not far from Rothwell; near to which the Rivers Avon and Nen
derive their Springs; it standing upon a high Ground. But more especially
remarkable, for the Battle here fought, June 14. 1645. betwixt the King's and
the Parliamentarian Forces. The first commanded by Prince Rupert, the other by
their General Fairfax. The King's Forces were totally routed.

Natarone, Vulturnus. See Voltorno.

Natissa, or Natisone, Natisa, a small River in Friuli; which arising above
Aquileja, and washing it, beneath that City is divided into two Branches: both
fall into the Ionian Sea near Grado, a City in that Province. This River was
once Navigable up to Aquileja, and served that City as a Port; but now, not.

Natolia, Asia Minor, is the most Western Part of Asia, of great extent; in the
Form of a Peninsula: called by the Turks, (its Masters) Nadulu; and by the
French, Natolie. It is bounded on the North by the Euxine, or Black Sea; on the
West by the Propontis, and Archipelago; on the South with the Mediterranean
Sea; and on the East by Armenia. The principal Cities, at this day, are Amasia,
Ancyra, Cutaige, Cogni, Tocat, Isnich, Bursia, Smyrna, and Tarabosan, (or
Trapezunt.) It reaches from Long. 51. to 72. and from Lat. 36. to 45. from the
Hellespont to the Euphrates supposed to be six hundred and thirty Miles long;
and its breadth two hundred and ten. The Air is very healthful, the Soil as
fruitful; before it fell into the Hands of the Turks, it was very populous,
Rich, Civil, and Learned; but now in a manner desolate; lamenting the Ruins of
four hundred Towns destroyed by Earthquakes, and the Barbarous devouring Turks.

Navagret, Paropamisus, a part of Imaus, a vast Mountain in Asia.

Navareins, Navaresium, a City in the Province of Bearn in France; which has a
strong Castle: seated on the River Gave d' Oleron; four Leagues below Oleron to
the North, and six from Pa^ to the West.

Navarino, Abarinus, Pylus Messeniaca, a great populous City, on the Western
Shore of the Morea, in the Province of Belvedore; called by the Turks, Iavarin.
It stands ten Miles from Modon to the North, and fifteen from Coron to the
West. This is one of the most ancient Towns in the Morea; and yet in a
flourishing Condition; being seated in the most pleasant and fruitful part of
the Morea, and having the best and most convenient Port. Accordingly, whilst it
was in the Hands of the Venetians, they built two Castles and a strong Wall to
defend it. In 1498. it sustained a surious Siege; and repelled the Ottoman
Forces with that Bravery, that they were forced to retire. About two years
after, it fell twice in a short time into the Hands of the Turks, through the
Consternation of its Inhabitants, after the Turks had taken Mondon: and in
their possession it continued till 1686. when the Venetians retook it.

Navarre, Navarra, a Kingdom in the North of Spain: bounded on the North by
France and the Pyrenean Hills; on the East and South by Arragon; and on the
West by old Castile: yet was there a small part of this Kingdom which lay on
the North Side of the Mountains on the side of France. The Country, the
encompassed with vast barren Mountains, is said to be very fruitful, and
tolerably level within. The Kingdom, (one of the first that was set* up against
the Moors,) began in the person of Garzia Ximenes, in 716. and continued under
thirty seven successive Princes of its own, till 1512. when John de Albert,
(King of Navarre,) being excommunicated by Pope Julius II. Ferdinando, King of
Arragon, taking the advantage of the little affection his Subjects bore to him,
seized this Kingdom; and drove the miserable Prince over the Alps into France.
Baudrand averrs, that the Spaniards had no Authority from the Pope to usurp
this Kingdom; but owns they had a Bull to justify the keeping of it, which
needs no great Debate. Since that time, the Upper Navarre has been under the
Crown of Spain: the Lower (which is the least,) in the person of Henry IV. was
united to the Crown of France; and by Lewis the Thirteenth, in the year 1620.
incorporated for ever into the said Crown. Panipelune, in the Upper, is the
Capital of the Kingdom. In the Lower, the principal Town is S. Jean Pie de Port.

Naucratis, an ancient City of the Kingdom of Egypt. It stood near the Mouth of
the most Western Branch of the Nile, in a Division of its own Name; and was the
Birth Place of Athenaeus, the Deipnosphista, who, together with Herodotus,
relates diverse Customs of its ancient Inhabitants.

Naugracut, Naugracum, a Territory under the Great Mogul, in the North Part of
Indostan, toward Tartary; which reaches to Mount Caucasus. It has also a City
of the same Name, upon the River Ravee, which afterward falls into the Lahor,
two hundred and twenty Miles from Lahor to the East.

Naumburgh, Neoburgum, a City of Misnia, in the Upper Saxony; which is a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Magdeburgh; and once an Imperial Free
Town. It stands upon the River Saal, where it receives the River Vnstrut. The
Bishopric was Translated to this place from Zeitz, in 1028. This City was in
latter times under its own Bishop; now under the Administrator of the
Bishopric of Newburgh, (who is of the House of Saxony,) with a small District
belonging to it; being yielded to the House of Saxony by the Treaty of Passaw,
in 1552. It is seated in the Confines of Thuringia; eight German Miles from
Erford to the East, and six* from Leipsick to the West. The Bishops have been
of the Augustane Confession ever since 1564. This City was taken by the United
Forces of France and Sweden in 1638.

Naxia, Naxus, called Nascia also, Naxos and Strongyle, one of the Cyclades, is
an Island in the Archipelago, great, populous, fruitful; eighty four Miles in
compass; having a City of the same Name, (which has in it a Greek and a Latin
Bishop,) and eighteen Villages. It belonged to the Venetians, and was a
Dukedom; but now under the Turks. The Maps call it Nixia. The Ancients
dedicated it to Bacchus, for the excellency of its Wines; to whom they built a
Temple of Marble, (which also abounds in this Island) upon a Rock, very near
the Shore, joined by a Stone Bridge to it; the Foundations whereof, and a Gate
about thirty Foot high and fifteen broad, remain to be seen to this day. The
Venetians enjoyed it from the year 1210. to 1516. when Selim I. made himself
the Master of it. It pays six thousand Piasters Tribute to the Turk. There are
diverse Monasteries of the Greeks and Latins. They find of your Emrods in this
Island. But there is no Port or Harbor in any part of its Coasts.

Naxio, Acone, a Port in Bithynia, in the Lesser Asia, upon the Euxine Sea;
which was the Port to Heraclea Pontica; and stands upon a River called Acone of
old.

Nazareth, A City of Galilee in Judea, in the Tribe of Zabulon, thirty Leagues
distant from Jerusalem to the South, upon the ascent of a Mountain. The same,
in which Joseph with the young Child and his Mother dwelt, after their return
from Egypt, Matthew. 2. 21, 23. It is said, the Virgin here in the House of
Joachim and Anne (her Parents) conceived, by the Operation of the Power of the
Highest; and that she her self also either was born or was conceived in the
same place. Helena, the Mother of Constantine the Great, built a stately Church
in Nazareth, in Commemoration of these Passages: which the Christian Kings of
Jerusalem, after the Conquest, in 1099. erected into an Archiepiscopal See, and
adorned with a Chapter of Canons. But this Edifice was so defaced in 1291. by
the Sultan of Egypt, who retook the Holy Land and exterminated the Christians
thence, that now only some Ruins remain to be seen of it. And for what became
of the miraculous Chamber of the Virgin, see Loretto. At this time, the
Franciscans have a Monastery and a Church at Nazareth, which Pilgrims visit:
you are shown the rests of the Synagogue, in which our Savior explicated the
Passage of Isaiah concerning himself; together with the place where Joseph kept
his Shop; to whom in the Chapel there is an Altar dedicated, and another to
Anne his Spouse. But Nazareth is a poor Village. There is a Titular Archbishop
continued by the Sea of Rome, at the City Barletta, in Apulia Peucetia in
Italy: and the Title particularly was born by Pope Urban VIII. before his
Elevation to the Pontificate. The Turks call all Christians Nazarenes, from
this place: as Christ himself, ( Matthew. 2. 23.) was called.

Nazianze, an ancient City of Cappadocia, in the Lesser Asia; and an Episcopal
See heretofore under the Archbishop of Cesarea, which had the Honor to be
farther advanced to an Archiepiscopal one, under the Patriarch of Antioch. This
was the Birth* place of Gregorius Nazianzenus, whose Father had been the Bishop
here.

Neath, a Market Town in Glamorganshire, in ^ales; the Capital of its Hundred.

Neaugh, Neaugus, a very great Lake in the Province of Vlster in Ireland.

Nebio, Nebium, Censunum, a ruined Episcopal City in the Island of Corsica. The Sea was a Suffragan to the Archbishop of Genoua. It stood about the place where
the Town Rosoli now is.

Nebrisso, or Lebrixo, a Town in the Kingdom of Andaluzia, in Spain; betwixt
Sevill and the Mouth of the River Guadalquivir: mentioned by Pliny and Ptolemy.

Necastro, Neocastrum, a small City in the Further Calabria; almost ruined by
an Earthquake in 1638.

Necker, or Neckar, Nicer, Neccarus, Neccanus, Nicerus, a River of Schwaben in
Germany, which arises in Swartzwalt; scarce seven Miles from the Fountains of
the Danube; and passing Rotweil, it enters the Dukedom of Wirtemberg,
waters Elsing and Hailbrun; and so passing by Heydelburgh, in the Palatinate,
falls into the Rhine.

Necropolis* an ancient City of the Kingdom of Egypt, four Miles from
Alexandria; where Cleopatra poisoned her self with Asps.

Neda, Nedina, a River of Arcadia in the Morea.

Nedham Point, a Fortess in the Barbados, which sustained an Attack of four
hours continuance made upon it by De Ruyter, the Dutch Admiral; sent with a
Squadron of Ships to conquer this Island in 1665. but was repelled.

Needham, a Market Town in the County of Suffolk, and the Hundred of Bosmere:
which drives a Trade in Blew and Broad Clothes for Russia, Turkey, and other
Foreign Parts.

Neers, Nabalia, a River of Germany, which aariseth in Juliers, twelve Miles
from Juliers; and flowing through the Bishopric of Cologne, and Gelderland, by
the Castles of Gelders, a little below Genep, falls into the Maes: three
Leagues above Nimeguen to the South.

Negapatan, a City of Coromandel, in the Hither East Indies; now under the
Dutch, formerly under the Portuguese.

Negombo, a Town in the Island of Zeilan, in the East Indies, in the Possession
of the Hollanders.

Negrepelisse, a small Town in the County of Quercy in Guienne, in France; upon
the River Aveirou, betwixt Bourniquet and Albias, two or three Leagues from
Montauban. Lewis XIII. sent a Garrison of four thousand Men hither in 1621. who
were in one night massacred by the Inhabitants, during the Civil Wars of
Religion. Therefore in 1622. the said King besieged it; and taking it, it was
laid in Blood and Ashes by the Fire and Sword of the Conquerors.

Negro, Tanager, a River in the Kingdom of Naples: it arises near a Lake of
the same Name, in the Borders of the Basilicate, but in the hither Principate;
thirteen Miles from Policastro to the East, at the Foot of the Apennine. And
flowing North, waters Atena; and after it has buried it self for four Miles
under ground, comes up again; then falls into the Bay of Amalfi, near
Cappachio, twenty Miles from Salerno to the South.

Negropont, Euboea, an Island in the Archipelago; of old called by the Poets,
Chalcis and Abantis; now by the Turks, Egriponte, or Egribos; and sometimes
Euriponte: because the Wonder of the famed Euripus, by the natural situation of
the Rocks, the Promontories, the Channel, etc. is made here. It lies upon the
North of Achaia, (or Livadia) being separated from it by a narrow Channel: one
hundred and twenty Miles from East to West, thirty broad; three hundred in
circuit; joined to the Continent by a Bridge of Stone built by the Venetians.
It is extraordinary fruitful, but little inhabited. The principal Town was
called formerly Chalcis, now Negropont; and stands on the South Side of the
Island, at one end of the Bridge: its Walls are two Miles in compass. None but
Jews and Turks are suffered to reside within those: the Christians dwell
altogether in the Suburbs, the whole of which may be about five thousand,
exceeding far in number the other: and amongst these the Jesuits have a
College. There are four Mosques in the Town, of which the principal has been a
Cathedral Church dedicated to S. Mark, and the Seat not only of a Bishop under
the Archbishop of Athens, but of an Archbishop. The Town is separated from the
Suburbs by a deep Ditch of equal breadth from top to bottom: both stand on a
plain level Ground: the Channel between the City and the Continent being not
above thirty Paces, and the Bridge being secured by a Tower. This Town and
Island was granted to the Venetians by the Latin Emperors of Constantinople,
(in consideration of their Services,) about 1204. Though they fortified it to
the utmost, yet Mahomet II. took the principal City with the loss of forty
thousand Men in 1463. or 69. (for I find various Accounts) after he had
besieged it with one hundred and twenty thousand Men, thirty days; putting all
above twenty years of Age to the Sword; which amounted (when the Siege began)
to eighty thousand. In 1660. the Venetians retook it: and relost it. Wherefore
the Turks have fortified it with so many new strong Works, that tho the
Venetians laid Siege to it with an Army of twenty four thousand Men, commanded
by Morosini* (then Doge,) which stormed it October 12. 1688; Yet it was left in
the Enemies Possession. The most noted Promontories of the Island are the.
ancient Caphareus, now called Capo Figera or Capo d'Oro, and the Capo Lithar.
Its two Rivers are the Similio and the Cerco. The City Caristo, which the
French call Chateau-roux, near Capo Figera, is a Bishops See under the
Archbishop of Negropont: and Rocco, betwixt that City and Negropont, another.
Here is Cotton in abundance, and Marble, dug out of the Mountain Caristo
near the City of the same Name.

Negroes, a general Name for all the Black People of Africa; as well those upon
the Western Seacoasts, and toward Nubia and Abyssinia, as those who dwell on
both sides the River Niger.

Neiss, Nissa, a River of Bohemia; which arising in Lusatia, flows through
Silesia; and a little beneath Guben falls into the Odir.

Neisse, Nissa, a Town in Silesia, in the Dukedom of Grotkaw, upon the River
Neiss; two Miles from Grotkaw to the South: in which the Bishop of Wratislaw
resides. Hofman makes it a City.

Neites, a small River which falls into the Rhine near Anderpach, in the
Bishopric of Trier.

Nieva, Nebis, a small River in Enter Douro, a Province of Portugal.

Nekrakin, Ormus, an Island in the Persian Gulf.

Nemea and Nemeus, a River of the Morea, now called Langia; where Pericles, the
Athenian General, defeated the Sicyonii in the year of Rome, 301. Also a great
Forest in the Province of Romania; and an ancient City, Nemaea, in the same
made memorable by the Nemaean Games instituted in the fifty first Olympiad in
the Honor of Hercules.

Nemours, Nemosium, Nemoracum, a great and pleasant Town in the Isle of France
in Gastinois, upon the River Loing: made a Dukedom in 1414. by Charles IV. King
of France, and then first walled. It stands seventeen Miles from Paris to the
South.

Neocaesarea. See its Modern Name Tocat

Nepi, Nepita, Nepet, a small, but ancient City, which is a Bishops See in S.
Peter's Patrimony, under the Pope; upon the River il Pozzolo; between Viterbo,
and Rome, six Miles from Sutri to the East.

Nera, Nar, a River in the States of the Church in Italy; which springs out of
the Apennine, and flowing Westward waters Narni;; and a little lower falls
into the Tiber.

Nerac, Neracum, a City in Aquitain, in Gascogne, upon the River Baise; the
Capital of the Dukedom de Albret; not two Miles from the Garonne to the South,
three from Condom to the North, and four from Again to the West. It is in a good
condition, tho its Walls came to be rased in the last Civil Wars. In 1579.
Queen Katharine de Medicis held a Conference with the King of Navarre here,
wherein they made a League with the Huguenots, on whose side this Town stood.
King Henry IV. resided a considerable time at it; and the ancient Lords of
Albret built it a Castle.

Nerk, Nericia, a Province in the Kingdom of Sweden; between Westmannia and
Sudermannia to the East, and Westrogothia to the West. The Capital of which is
Orebro, by the Lake Hielmer.

Nermonster, an Island upon the Coast of Poictou in France.

Nero, an ancient Name of the delightful Village of Daphne.

Nerva, See Narva.

Nervii, an ancient People amongst the Galls, whom Caesar mentions with an
Elogium of their Courage and Conduct. They are thought to have dwelt in the
(now) Diocese of Cambray.

Nes^e, Nigella, a small Town in the Tract of Santerre, in Picardy. It stands
upon the Rivulet Ignon, which falls in the Sum, two Leagues from Ham, almost
betwixt Peronne and Noyon; having the Honor to be a Marquisate. Charles the
Hardy, Duke of Burgundy, took it by Assault in 1472. and because the
Inhabitants had murdered a Herald, sent to summon them, with two Men more in
the time of a Truce, he suffered the Execution of the utmost Severity upon them.

Nester Alba, or Neister Alba; a Town in Bessarabia, on the Euxine Sea.

Neuf Chastel, Novum Castrum, a Town in the Paix de Caux, in the Dukedom of
Normandy, upon the River Arques; eight Leagues from Dieppe to the South-East.

Neuf Chastel sur Meuse, a Town of Lorrain, upon the Maes; in the Borders of
Champagne; five Leagues from Mirecourt to the West, and seven from Toul to the
South.

Nevers, Nivernum, a Fine, Great, Rich, Populous City; a Bishops See under the
Archbishop of Sens; and a Dukedom, since the year 1457. when Charles VII. King
of France, advanced it to that Dignity: whereas it had been before an Earldom:
it has a Bridge over the Loyre, and a Castle, built by its ancient Earls: five
Leagues from Baris and Lions; twelve from Moulins. John Casimir, King of
Poland, died in this City, December 16. 1672. Caesar speaks of it in his
Commentaries, under the Name of Noviodunum in Aeduis. The Latin Writers
variously call it Nivernium, Vadicassium, Noviodunum, Augustonemetum, etc. It
is the Capital of the Territory of Nivernois; which is about twenty Leagues
long, and broad; lying betwixt Berry, Gastinois, Bourbonnois and Bourgogne: of
the latter of which it makes a part, and has other considerable Towns standing
in it.

Neuf-Marche, Novus Mercatus, a Town in Normandy, upon the River Eure; by which
it is separated from Beauvais. Heretofore very much regarded. Lewis VII. took
it after a sharp Siege, in 1151. It was restored to the English in 1154. In
1161. there was a Parliament held in it, under Henry II. King of England, in
which the Title of Pope Alexander III. to the Roman Chair was recognized; and
Victor, the Antipope, rejected. This Town stands twenty Miles from Roan to the
South, and the same distance from Paris to the West.

Nevern, a Market Town in Pembrokeshire, in the Hundred of Kemmes.

Nevin, a Market Town in Caernarvanshire, in in Wales, the Hundred of Tinllain.

Nevis, or Mevis, one of the Leeward Chariby Islands in America, very near to
S. Christopher. It is the Residence of the chief Governor of all the Leeward
Islands. In Charlestown (which is the principal Settlement) almost all the
Houses of Brick and Stone were levelled by an Earthquake, April 1690. At the
same time the Sea left its accustomed Bounds a great part of a Mile; the Earth
vomited hot and fetid Waters; its motion, Pulses, and Openings also all over
the Island, being such, as nothing can be more terrible.

Neure, a River of Kilkenny, in Ireland, which waters Ross; then falls into
the Sewer, (which separates Leinster from Mounster;) and falls beneath
Waterford into the Ocean.

Neusidlersee, Peiso, a Lake between Austria and the Lower Hungary; bteween
Raab to the East, and Vienna to the West.

Neustria, the Name of a part of the Kingdom of France, in use amongst the
Writers of the Times of Charlemaigne and his Son, to denote the Country from
the Saosne and the Meuse, to the Loyre and the Ocean: It has been since changed
into that of Normandy, tho the present Dukedom of Normandy makes no more than a
part of the ancient Neustria.

New Albion, California, an Island on the West of America, in North Lat. 38.
discovered by Sir Francis Drake in 1578.

Newark upon Trent, is a fair, rich Town in Nottinghamshire; seated on the East
Bank of the Trent, where it divides into two Branches, and makes an Island
before the Town; eleven Miles from Nottingham to the North, and in the high
Road to York: which took its Name from a Castle here built by Alexander Bishop
of Lincoln, (in the Reign of Henry II.) which was seized by King Stephen. King
John died in this Town in 1216. Edward VI. incorporated it, and gave it the
Privilege of sending two Burgesses to the Parliament. It suffered a Siege for
its Loyalty in 1643, 1644. which was raised by Prince Rupert, March 22. It
stood firm to the Royal Interest till May 11. 1646. and then was forced to
surrender; the King being in the Hands of the Scots, and all his Forces
dissipated. This Town gives the Title of Viscount to the Earl of Kingston: and
is the Capital of its Hundred.

Newbury, Novum burgum, a Town on the South of Barkshire upon the River Kennet,
which at Reading falls into the Thames. Called by Antoninus, Spinae; tho not
built now in the same place; a fine, rich, Clothing Town; seated in a Champain
Plain Country. Made famous by a signal Victory obtained here by Charles I.
September. 20. 1643. over the Forces of the Parliament. October 27. 1644. there
was a second Fight; in which, tho the King's Forces, (which were much divided)
had at first the good Fortune to drive the Enemy out of the Field; yet being
overpowered by Numbers and fresh Supplies, they were at last Routed; and the
King in great danger of being taken. This Battle, tho short, was the sharpest
that was fought in all that War. Charles II. added a great Honor to this Place;
when in 1675. he created Charles Fitz-Roy, Duke of Southampton, Earl of
Chichester, and Baron of Newbury.

New Castle upon Tine, is a strong, rich, populous Seaport Town in
Northumberland, upon the North Bank of the River Tine; but on the Borders of
Durham; six Miles from the Sea. The River is very deep, the Haven secure and
large: the Town stands upon a rising Ground; and has a fair Bridge over the
River on the South side, with an Iron Gate upon it, which divides the County of
Northumberland from the Bishopric of Durham; near which stands the Castle, and
over against it the Marketplace, and more to the North upon a sleep Hill, the
Body of the Town; fenced with Towers and strong Walls. It contains four
Parishes; amongst which St. Nicholas's Church, upon the top of the Hill, has
the gracefulness of a Cathedral. Ships of good burden come up to the very
Bridge: But the Newcastle-fleet commonly stays at Sheales, near the Rivers
Mouth. This Town for Wealth and Commerce, by Sea and Land, for all Commodities,
may well be esteemed the Bristol of the North. Mr. Cambden does suppose it to
have been called Garbosentum by the Romans; afterward, Monkchester; and to
have taken the name of Newcastle, when it was rebuilt by Robert, Eldest Son to
William the Conqueror; and Newcastle upon Tine, to distinguish it from
Newcastle under Line. In the Reign of Edward I. a Rich Man being taken Prisoner
in the Town by the Scots, after his Ransom began the Fortifications of it; and
the rest of the Inhabitants finished this Work, which made it both safe and
rich. Richard II. made it a Mayor Town. Long. 21. 30. Lat. 57. 34. Thus far Mr.
Cambden: The Scots in 1640. seized this strong Town; and thereby began the
Calamities of England, which lasted twenty years. In 1644. after a long Siege,
the Scots took it the second time. October 19. Lewis Steward (Duke of Lenox,)
was created Earl of Newcastle, in 1604. by James I. He dying without Issue,
William Cavendish Viscount Mansfield, and Baron Ogle, was by Charles I. created
Earl of Newcastle in 1627. Marquess of Newcastle, in 1643. and Duke of the same
in 1664. by Charles II. to whom succeeded Henry his Son in 1676. The
Corporation Elects two members of Parliament.

Newcastle under Line, a large Market Town in Staffordshire, in the Hundred of
Pirehill, upon the rivulet, Line. It is a Borough Town, and has the honor of
electing two Members of the English Parliament.

New England, a large Country in North America; first discovered by Sebastian
Cabot, under English Colors, in 1497. Entered upon for the English by Mr.
Philip Amadas in 1584. It lies in forty and forty one degrees. of North Lat.
seventy Miles upon the Ocean, which affords it plenty of Harbors. The Air is
healthful, but the Weather very uncertain. This Country was first begun to be
Planted in 1606. In 1610. one Robinson, an Independent Preacher, struck in with
the Design, and much promoted that Plantation. It is well watered with Rivers;
has great variety of Wild Fowl, Wild Beasts; Timber in abundance, Flax, Hemp,
Corn of all sorts, Furrs, Amber, and Iron; wherewith the Inhabitants drive a
gainful Trade with the other English Plantations in America. This Colony is
very strong. They have built seven great Towns; the chief of which is Boston;
which in 1670. had fifty Sail of Ships belonging to it. They would never submit
to any Governor sent from England, but lived like a Free State; till a Quo
Warranto being sent against them in 1683. by K. Charles II. they submitted to
Henry Cranfield Esquire and in 1686. accepted Sir Edward Andrews as Governor for
King James II.

The Dukedom of Newenburg, Neoburgum, called by the French Neubourg; is a Tract
in Germany in Nortgow, upon the Danube; part of which lies in the Circle of
Bavaria, and part in Schwaben. Heretofore a part of the Dukedom of Bavaria;
till Maximilian I. granted it to the Children of Rupert, Prince Palatine. This
Line ended in 1559. in the Person of Henry; after whom Succeeded Philip Lewis,
Duke of Deuxponts, (or Zweybrucken) in which Family it still is. It takes its
name from Newburg ( Neoburgum,) a City in Bavaria upon the Danube; four Leagues
from Donawert in Schwaben to the East, three from Ingolstad, and the same
distance from Aichstadt to the South. The Duke of Newburg is lately become
Elector Palatine, by the Death of Charles the last Elector without Issue.

Newenburg, Newburg, Neopyrgum, a small City in Schwaben; in the Dukedom of
Wurtsburg, upon the River Entz; in the Borders of the Marquisate of Baden: six
German Miles from Stugart to the West, and as much from Spire to the South.

Newenburg, Newbourg, Neoburgum, a Town in Brisgow, upon the Rhine; between
Brisach to the North, and Basil to the South: heretofore a Free Imperial City,
but in 1410. exempted; and granted to the House of Austria. Since that, in
1675. it was much damnified, and in part destroyed.

Newenstad, Neustad, Neostadium, a City in Austria, which is one of the
principal Cities in that Dukedom; built in a Marshy low Ground, upon a small
River; six German Miles from Vienna to the North. The Town is of a square Form,
with a Piazza in the middle; encompassed with two Walls and a Ditch. The
outward Wall is not high; the inward is of no great strength, yet has defeated
two Attempts of the Turks against it: in the latter of which, Solomon the
Magnificent, (in 1529.) Stormed this Town seven times in one day, and was every
time repulsed. In this City the Emperor has a Palace of a square building, with
four Towers; which may be seen a great way off. There is another City of the
same name in Bohemia, in the Dukedom of Oppelen; near the Borders of the
Dukedom of Grotkaw, five Miles from Oppelen. There is a third in the Palatinate
of the Rhine; four German Miles from Spire to the West, and two from Landaw to
the North: once an Imperial City, but now exempt. A fourth in the Dukedom of
Wurtsburg; two Miles from Wimpfen to the East, and a little more from Hailbrun.
A fifth in the Dukedom of Brunswick upon the River Leyne, six Miles from Zell
to the West; which is under the Duke of Hannover.

Newent, a Market Town in Gloucestershire, in the Hundred of Botlow.

The New Forest, a Forest in Hampshire, in compass about thirty Miles; in which
Richard, the second Son of William the Conqueror was killed by a Deer: William,
his third Son, was accidentally slain by Sr. Walter Tyrrel; and Robert
Curtoyse, his Grandson, was struck into the jaws by the bough of a Tree and
dyed. Which fatalities have been the more remarked, because, to make this
Forest complete for game, William the Conqueror caused no less than thirty
Parish Churches, with many Towns and Villages, to be levelled to the ground.

Newhausel, Neoselium, a strong but small Town in the Upper Hungary; called by
the Hungarians Owar: it stands upon the River Nitria, two German Miles from the
Danube to the North, and eleven from Presburg to the East. It is sented in a
Marsh, which is its greatest strength. It has six Bastions made in the form of
a Star, and walled up Breast height, above the Level within; the Dike not broad
or deep. The Grand Vister sat down before this Town August 14. 1663. and took
it the 27. with the loss of fifteen thousand Men. He immediately endeavored to
strengthen it, by bringing the River to run round: but however July 7. 1685.
the Duke of Lorrain sat down before it; and took it by Storm August 19.
following; putting all the Garrison to the Sword.

Newmarckt, Novomarchia, a City of Transylvania, called by the Hungarians
Masserhely. It stands upon the River Merisch, at the foot of the Carpathian
Mountains; thirty five Miles from Clausenburgh to the South-East. In this City
the Assemblies of the States of Transylvania are most usually held.

New Market, a Town in the Borders of Suffolk and Cambridgeshire; in a plain,
yielding a large prospect; ten Miles from Cambridge to the East. It consists of
two Parishes, the one in Suffolk, the other in Cambridgeshire. Famous for Horse
Races, and a House belonging to the Kings of England. A Fire in this Town saved
the Life of Charles II. by necessitating his return before the time appointed;
which prevented the designs of the Rie-House Conspirators.

Newnham, a Market Town in Gloucestershire, in the Hundred of Fauseley.

Newport, Medena, Novus Portus, a Town in the Isle of Wight; which is the
Capital of the Island. Well seated, much frequented, and very populous. It has
a small Haven; and is a Corporation, which sends two Burgesses to Parliament,
by the Grant of James I. Charles I. honored it also by Creating Mountjoy
Blount, Earl of Newport, in 1628. This Honor is now enjoyed by Henry his Son,
who is the third Earl of this Family. Long. 19. 14. Lat. 50. 40.

Newport upon the Usk, a considerable Seaport Town in the County of Monmouth;
seated between the Ebwith and the Vsk; with a fair Bridge over the latter; two
Miles from the Severn to the North. As the Vske discharges it self into the
Severn, it makes a good haven, which bears the name of this Town.

Newport Pagnel, a Market Town in Buckinghamshire, upon the Ouse; over which it
has two Bridges. The Capital of its Hundred.

Newport, in Pembrokeshire, is a considerable Town in the North-West part of
that County, upon the Irish Sea; built at the foot of an high Mountain, by the
side of the River Neverns. By Martin of Tours, and the procurement of his
Posterity, made a Corporation also, returning one member to the English
Parliament; in which afterward they built a Castle for their Habitation.

Newport in Shropshire, a handsome Market Town in the Hundred of S. Bradford,
South of Drayton; and upon a long plain, adjoining to Staffordshire.

Newport, Novus Portus, a strong Seaport Town in Flanders, of old called
Santhoft, that is, the Sandy Head. It has a competent Haven upon the German
Ocean, at the Mouth of the River Yperle; five Leagues from Dunkirk to the East,
and three from Ostend to the West. Still in the Ha^nds of the Spaniards. Near
this place Prince Maurice of Nassaw, gave the Spaniards a great overthrow, Feb.
25. 1600.

Newton, a Market and Borough-town in Lancashire, in the Hundred of Salford,
privileged with the Election of two Parliament Men.

Newton-Abbot or Newton-Bishops, a Market Town in Devonshire, in the Hundred of
Heyter.

Newtown, a Market Town in the County of Montgomery in Wales, in the Hundred of
Kidriorn.

Neyland, a considerable Market Town in the County of Suffolk, in the Hundred
of Babergh, upon the River Stower. It stands in a rich bottom, and drives the
clothing Trade.

Neytracht. See Nitracht.

Niancheu, Niancheum, a considerable City in the Province of Chekram in China.

Niaren More, the Russian Name of the North Ocean or Frozen Sea; called Mare
Scythicum.

Nicaragua, a Region in New Spain, in North America, of great extent; between
the North Sea to the East, the South Sea to the West, the Province of Hondura
to the North, and La Costa Rica to the South. Also called New Leon, from Leon
de Nicaragua, the principal City in it: which is a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Mexico; and is entirely in the hands of the Spaniards. In this
Region, there is a Lake, one hundred and thirty Leagues long; which ebbs and
flows, and discharges it self into the North Sea called the Lake of Nicaragua:
The City Leon stands upon it. The riches and fertility in sine of this Province
has given it the name, with some, of Mahomets Paradise.

Nicaphtach, Oxus, a great River in Persia.

Nicaria, an Island in the Archipelago, toward Asia; which has Samo to the
East, Naxia to the West, Sio to the North, and Patmos to the South. There is a
City in it of its own name, formerly a Bishops See under the Archbishop of
Rhodes, before the Turks took the Island from the Genouese in the fourteenth
Century, and subjected it to the Sangiack of Gallipoli. It enjoys a good and
improvable Soil. The passage betwixt Samo, and it is dangerous. Upon the
Eastern Coast therefore, in a very high Tower, they keep a light for a signal
to Sailours. The first and eldest names of this Island, says Pausanias, were
Macris, Pergamus, and Icaria. It is about forty Miles in circumference, the
length much exceeding the breadth; and anciently it was honored with a
Tauropolion, a famous Temple dedicated to Diana.

Nicastro, Nicastrum and Neocastrum, a small City at the foot of the Apennine,
in the Further Calabria, in the Kingdom of Naples, within five or six Miles of
the Sea. Honored with a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Reggio.

Nicaea, a City of Bithynia, which is an Archbishops See; of old called
Antigonia, (from its Builder); in Pliny Olbia, and in Stephanus Ancore; and
named Nicaea by Lysimachus in honor of his Wife; now called Isnich, from a
neighboring great Lake, Nichor, and Nichea. This City is particularly famous
for the first General Council here held against Arrianism, and touching the
time of the celebrating of Easter with some points of Church Discipline, in the
Imperial Palace, by the Command of Constantine the Great, in 325: which had
three hundred and eighteen Bishops in it. There was another designed here in
359. for the promoting Arianism; but it was disappointed by an Earthquake,
which ruined a great part of the City. There was a second General Council here
in 787. consisting of three hundred and fifty Bishops; where Image Worship was
approved; which Charles the Great censured in a Council at Franckford, in 794.
consisting of three hundred Bishops. This City was taken by Godfrey de Bovillon
in his Passage to Jerusalem, in 1097. out of the Hands of the Infidels; by whom
it was restored to the Greek Emperor. In 1329. it was besieged by Orchanes II.
of the Ottoman Line. Andronicus, the Greek Emperor, coming up to its Relief was
wounded, and forced to retire; yet the City held out, and was taken by a
Stratagem rather than force the year following. It stands forty four Miles from
Nicomedia to the North, twenty five from Prusia to the West; in Long. 57. 30.
Lat. 42. 25.

Nice, Nicaea, a City in Provence in France; called also Nizza, Nicia, and Nice
de Provence; which is a great, splendid, populous City; and a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Ambrun; seated upon the Shore of the Mediterranean Sea,
furnished with a large Haven, and a Castle; two Miles from the Mouth of the
River Var or Varo, and seven from Port Monaco to the West. This City was
subject to the Earls of Provence, till 1365; when it was left by Qu Joanna to
Lewis II. Duke of Savoy, with the County belonging to it; it is still subject
to that Family; and is the most Western Town in Italy, in the present esteem.
Built at first by the Marsilians, in Commemoration of a Victory they had
obtained over the Ligurii. Next it became subject to the Kings of Burgundy, and
then to the Earls of Provence. Long. 30. 20. Lat. 43. 45. In 1538. Pope Paul
III. had an enterview here with Francis I. King of France, and the Emperor
Charles V. at which they agreed to a truce of ten years. In 1545. The French
and Turks together, (the latter, commanded by their Admiral Barberousse) took
the City, but could not take the Castle. It has besides the Cathedral, three
Parishes, one College, and diverse religious Houses; and it gives sufficient
marks of its antiquity in Inscriptions, ruins, etc. The County of Nizza,
whereof it is the Capital, includes the Counties of Tend and Bueil; together
with the four Vicariates of Nice, Barcelonette, Sospello and Puerin.

Nice, Nicaea, once a City and a Bishops See in Macedonia, now a Village;
inhabited by Turks and Bulgarians. Thirty four Miles from Ocrida, (or
Giustandil, as the Turks call it) toward Heraclea; its Ruins show it to have
been a vast City.

Nichor, Nicaea.

Nicomedia, the ancient Capital City of Bithynia, in Asia Minor; called
vulgarly Comidia, and by the Turks Ismid, and Isnigimid. It stands upon the
ascent of a delicious little Hill, (embellished with Fountains, Vines, Corn,
and Fruits,) toward the Coast of the Propontis, or the Sea of Marmora; upon a
Gulf of its own name, about half a League in breadth, convenient for the
building of Ships. In ancient times it was one of the most considerable and
important Cities of the East. Built by a King of Bithynia of the same name,
says Strabo. Hannibal poisoned himself here, in the Reign of Prusias King of
Bithynia, to avoid his being delivered to the Romans. Constanstine the Great
dyed in or very near this City; which received the Christian Religion early,
and became honored with diverse Martyrdoms. In 358. a violent Earthquake,
described particularly by Ammianus Marcellinus, almost entirely ruined it, at a
time, when the Emperor Constantius was to celebrate an Arrian Council at it. A
number of Greek and Latin Inscriptions appear there yet to be seen: And some
relations tell us, it is now inhabited by about thirty thousand People, Greeks,
Armenians, Jews and Turks, who have their respective Mosques and Churches, and
trade much in Linen and Silks.

Nicoping, Nicopinga, a City of Sweden, which is the Capital of Sudermannia,
upon the Shoars of the Baltic Sea; thirteen Miles from Stockholm to the
North-West, and seven from Norkop to the South-East. It has an Haven and a
Castle; the ancient Seat of the Dukes of this Province, and the Residence of
Charles the last Duke, before he was advanced to the Crown of Sweden.

Nicoping, a Town of Denmark, in the Isle of Falster; over against Laland;
eleven Danish Miles from Copenhagen to the South: in which Christopher II. King
of Denmark, died in 1333. A small, but a fine Town.

Nicopolis, in the Lesser Armenia. See Gianich. In Bulgaria, see Nigeboli. In
Epirus, see Preveza. In Judaesa, the same with Emmaus.

Nicosia, Leucosia, Nicosia, a City in the Isle of Cyprus; which is an
Archbishops See: strong, populous, and seated in the midst of the Island. It
was the Seat of the Kings of this Island; and after that, of the Venetian
Governors; till in 1571. taken by the Turks, whose Governor still Resides in
it. This City is three Miles in compass, and stands in a fruitful well watered
Plain.

Nicotera, a City in the Further Calabria, upon the Tyrrhenian Sea; which is a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Regio: little, and not well inhabited;
having suffered very much by an Earthquake in 1638. Long. 40.00 Lat 38. 25.

Nicoya, a City and County in Nicaragua in New Spain, in America.

Nicsia. See Naxia.

Nidrosia, a River of Norway, which falls by Drontheim into the Virgivian
Ocean: the City Drontheim is called by the same name in Latin Writers. In Lat.
64. 36.

Nied Teutsche or Alleman, Nita Germanica, a River which arises in the Forest
of Loraine; and taking in the Nied Fransois, (Nitam Romanam), which waters
Haudonville, Estangs, and Niedburg; they thus united have to Bosonville; and
there fall into the Sear or Sare, a little above Trier.

Niemeca, Germany.

Niemen. See Memel.

Nienhuis, Nienhusium, a Castle near Paderborn, upon the confluence of the Alme
and the Lip; built by Theodore Furstemberg, (Bishop of Paderborn) for the
Residence of his Successors. Nero Claudius, and Charles the Great, had before
built Castles in this very place; the first against the Sicambri, the second
against the Saxons.

Nieper, Borysthenes, a River of Poland, very well known to Ptolemy, and the
Ancien's: it arises in Moscovy, in the Palatinate of Bielki, near Dnieprisco;
and flowing Westward, enters Lithuania, (a Province of Poland) waters
Smolensko and Orssa; then turning South, passes by Mohilow, Rohaozow and
Rezozyca; above which last it receives the Berezina from the West, and passes
South-East to Lojoworod; beneath which it takes in the Peripecz, a vast River
from the West. So hastes to Kiovia, above which it admits the Deszna, a vast
River from the East; from hence it runs South-East by Risszow, Czyrcassy, and
as far as the Rocky Stones; where it turns South-West by the Zaporavia Islands,
and falls into the Euxine Sea almost four English Miles East of Bialogrod; a
few Miles above its Outlet it takes in the Bog, a vast River from the West. It
has seventy five Miles above its Outlets thirteen Cataracts called by the
Inhabitants Porowys; which make it impossible to carry any Boat higher up its
Stream.

The Niester, Tyras, a River of Poland: called also the Turla: it springs out
of a small Lake in Red Russia, nine Polish Miles from Premysle to the East, and
four from Lemberg to the South; running East through Pokutie and Podolia, it
separates Braclaw from Walachia; and in Bessarabia falls into the Euxine Sea,
sixty Miles from the Mouth of the Danube to the North. Baudrand. But the latter
Maps make it not much above twenty English Miles.

Nigeboli, Nicopolis, a City built by Trajan, after the Conquest of Decebalus,
King of the Dacians, (who was a valiant and wise Prince) at the Confluence of
the Isacar and the Danube in Bulgaria. It was at first a Bishopric; but now an
Archbishops See; commonly called Nigeboli; but by the Turks, Sciltaro. Ten
Hungarian Miles from the Borders of Servia to the East, and three from
Silistria to the North. Near this City the Christians received a great
Overthrow from the Turks, in 1393; under Sigismund the Emperor. Long. 50. 20.
Lat. 45. 15.

Nigir, Niger, the greatest River of Africa; called by the Inhabitants Huid
Nijar; it arises in Aethiopia, from a Lake of the same Name; and turning
Westward, divides Nigritia into two parts, to the East and West, the space of
eight hundred Leagues. It increases in the middle of June like the Nile, and
overflows the Country. This continues twenty four days; and the decrease the
same. After a long Course, and the Reception of many Rivers, (whose Names are
unknown to us) it falls into the Atlantic Ocean by six great Outlets; which
are all (but one) South of Cape Verde.

Nigritia, a large Country of Africa, extended on each side the River Niger
which divides it from East to West into two parts; lying and bounded betwixt
Guinee to the South, the Atlantic Ocean to the West, and the vast deserts of
Zaara to the East and North. The Kingdoms of Borno, Agades, Cano or Ghana,
Tombut, Gualata, Guenehoa, Gaoga, and diverse others of note and great extent,
are contained in this division of Africa. The Inhabitants are the Negroes,
abovementioned; who make a Trade of selling not only the Prisoners they steal
or force from their Neighbors, but even their own Wives and Children, for
Slaves, to the Europeans.

Nile, Nilus, a vast River in Africa; which arises from two Fountains in the
higher Aethiopia, in the Abyssins Empire; in a Country called Sacahala, amongst
high Mountains; and being enlarged by the Gema, Kelti, and Branti, it passes
through the South part of the Lake of Dambea, to the greatest Cataracts. Before
it enters Nubia, it takes in the River Meleg, and afterward the Tacaze at
Jalac; and entering and traversing the Upper Egypt, four Miles beneath Grand
Cairo, it divides first into two, and after into more Branches; which anciently
made the number of seven, but are now reduced to four; the rest being stopped
up by the Sands of the Mediterranean Sea, and those brought down by the River;
the Mohammedan Princes (who have been many Ages Lords of Egypt) taking no care
to keep them open. The Eastern Branch falls into the Mediterranean Sea by
Damiata, and was of old called Os Pelusiacum. The Western was then named
Canopus, and falls into the same Sea below Rosetto. These two make the Delta an
Island, which is the richest portion of Land in Egypt. There are two other
Outlets between these, but poor in Waters, says Mr. Sandys. This River is the
only cause of the Fertility of Egypt; beginning every year to rise with the
Rising Sun, June 17. and swelling sometimes to twenty four Cubits. About the
middle of September it begins to decrease: about a Month after they sow their
Grounds; and in May reap them. The Cause of this Inundation is now known to be
the Rains, which fall in Aethiopia for three Months together in their Winter,
and the Egyptian Summer. They of Egypt owe not only their Food, but many of
them their Lives to the swellings of this River: insomuch that when five
hundred die of the Plague at Grand Cairo the day before, not one dies the day
after. These Waters are sweet to the taste, cool and wholesome; and extremely
Nutritive both to Plants and Animals. It has plenty of Fish, and too many
Crocodiles; some of which live to be thirty foot long; but rarely come so low
as Grand Cairo. Mr. Thevenot begins the increase of the Nile, May 16. or 20.
and says, the Publication is made June 28. or 29. He says, they give no
account of its increase beyond September 24 tho it often swells to the
beginning of October, and gradually abates till the Month of May. He gives also
this account of the Head of the Nile, from the Report of an Ethiopian
Ambassador he met at Grand Cairo. The Head of Nile is a Well that springs out
of the Ground in a large Plain, called Ovembromma, in the Province of Ago;
which casts up the Waters very high; the Well being twelve days Journey from
Gouthar, the Capital of Aethiopia. These Waters running Northwards, pass by
seven Cataracts before they enter into Egypt; and he says, there are no
Mountains near its Head by three weeks journey. If the River does not rise
sixteen foot, a Famine follows for want of Water: if it swells to twenty four,
there is a Dearth; because the Seed time is lost. The Abyssines entitle the
Nile, the Father of Rivers.

Nimmeghen, Noviomagum, a City of the Low Countries, mentioned by Antoninus in
his Itinerary; called now by the Inhabitants Nimeguen; by the French Nimegue;
by the Spaniards Nimega. It is the Capital of the Dukedom of Guelderland, under
the United Provinces; seated upon the Wael, between the Rhine and the Maez; two
Leagues from Arnheim to the South, six from Vtrecht to the East, three from
Cleves to the West, and twenty from Cologn to the same. Anciently a Free
Imperial City, but afterward exempt, and subject to the Dukes of Guelderland;
being Mortgaged to one of them by William Earl of Holland, who was then chosen
Emperor of Germany. About the Year 1585, this City was much inclined to the
Interest of the Roman Catholic Religion. In the Year 1589, the Hollanders
endeavored without any good success to reduce it; when Skenkius (their
General) was drowned in the Wael. In the Year 1591, Prince Maurice took it
after a sharp Siege. In the Year 1672, it was taken by the French; the only
Town in all those Provinces which fought for its Liberty: the year after the
French deserted it. In 1678, there was a Peace agreed here between the French
and the Spaniards. In the Year 1679, between the Germans and the French. This
City is said to have been first built by the Catti, and the Castle by Julian
the Apostate, whilst he was in France; Charles the Great built here a Noble
Palace; which together with this City was burnt by the Normans. The Germans
prevailing against the Normans, rebuilt the City; and gave it many Privileges;
several of the Emperors residing in it, till at last it was mortgaged to Otho,
Duke of Guelderland; and became the Capital of that Dukedom.

Ningive, Ningiva, a City in the Province of Leotunin, in China. Baudrand.

Ningque, Ningqua, a City in the Province of Nankin in China.

Ninive, Ninus, an ancient and most celebrated City of Assyria; mentioned in
the Sacred and Profane Stories. Built by Ashur, the second Son of Shem,
according to Josephus, and the vulgar translation of Genesis 10. 11. But Bochartus
transposes that verse, and endeavors to prove, that Nimrod was its Founder,
going forth out of the Land of Ashur. Others say, Ninus built, or at least
augmented it, and gave it his own name. Diodorus Siculus has left us a stately
description of it. In the time of Jonas, we read, it was an exceeding great
City of three days journey: Jon. 2. 3. that is, in St. Jerome's construction, in
circuit. The Prophets foretold its destruction; which accordingly happened
under Merodach and Nebuchadonosar, Kings of Assyria. It lies now in Ruins. Out
of it is sprung a new City, called Mosul, built on the other side of the
Tigris, which is under the Turks; an hundred Miles from Bagat to the North.

Ninove, Niniva, a small City in Flanders, in the County of Alost; not above
two Leagues from Alost to the South; in the middle between Brussels to the
East, and Oudenarde to the West.

Niort, Noverogus, a Town in Poictou, thirteen Leagues from Rochelle to the
North-East.

Niphates, the ancient name of that part of the Mountain Taurus, which runs
betwixt Armenia and Mesopotamia. Now called Curdo. It gives source to a River
of the same name, passing through the same Countries to fall in the Tigris.

Niphonia, or Niphon, a great Island belonging to Japan, the principal Province
of that Empire; in which are Jedo and Meaco, the Royal Cities, where the King
resides. It is divided into five Territories or Provinces Jamaisoit, Jetsegen,
Jesten, Ochio and Quanto: being about sixty Leagues in Circuit.

Nisa, Nyssa, a City of Lydia in the Lesser Asia, which is a Bishops See. Long.
59. 10. Lat. 40. 50.

Nisibin, Nisibis, the principal City of Mesopotamia, of great Antiquity;
mentioned by Pliny and Strabo. It is now an Archbishops See; and the Capital of
Diarbeck; under the Turks. It stands upon the River Zaba, which falls into the
Tigris, under Mount Taurus; thirty five Miles from the Tigris to the West,
fifty from Amida to the South, and seventy five from Taurus to the South-West.
In 1338. Sapores, King of Persia, besieged it in vain.

Nisi, Coron, a City in the Morea.

Nisi, Nysa, a City of Armenia the Lesser; and a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Caesarea; from which it stands sixty Miles to the East. Long. 66.
30. Lat. 40. 20.

Nisi, Enisis, a small River on the East of Sicily; which falls into the Sea
between Messina to the North, and Cap di S. Alescio to the South, by the Town
of Scaletta.

Nisita, Nesis, an Island in the Tyrrhenian Sea, upon the Coast of the Terra di
Lavoro in Italy, three Miles from Pozzuoli.

Nismes, Nimes, Nemausium, Volcarum Arecomicorum Nemausus, a City of France, in
the Lower Languedoc; which was a Roman Colony, of great Antiquity; now a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Narbone; in which there is an
Amphitheatre, very perfect, and many other Roman Antiquities; it is now in a
flourishing State; in the middle between Avignon to the East, and Montpellier
to the West; seven Leagues from either. This City was, in the late Civil Wars,
one of the Bulwarks of the Huguenots; has had its Counts and Viscounts; and in
ancient times some Synods have been assembled at it. Long 25. 05. Lat. 43. 6.

Nisau, Nissa, Nisi, Naisum, one of the principal Cities of Servia; seated upon
a River of the same Name, which falls into the Morava; fifteen German Miles
from Scopia to the North, and twelve from Giustandil to the West, and forty two
from Thessalonica to the North-West. On September 24. 1689, the Imperialists
defeated entirely an Army of forty thousand Turks near this place; and the next
day took possession of it without any Opposition. Again, September, 1690, the
Turks recovered it from the Imperialists, after a three weeks Attack

Nithe^dale, Nithia, a County in the South of Scotland, near the Borders of
England; which has Cluydesdale on the North, Anandale on the East, Solway Fyrth
on the South, and Galloway on the West. The River Nyth, which denominates it,
runs through it: Its Capital Town is Dunfreis.

Nitracht, or Neytracht, Nitria, a City of the Upper Hungary; which is a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Gran; and stands upon a small River of the
same Name. Ten German Miles from Presburgh to the East, the same distance from
Gran to the North, and five from Newhausel to the same. It is the Capital of a
small County of the same Name; and in the Hands of the Emperor, whilst
Newhausel was under the Turks.

Nitria, see Nitracht. Also a Mountain in Egypt, which has been sanctified by
the retreat of diverse Anchorites.

Nirt, the Residence of the Dukes of Curland.

Nivata, a City and Province of Japan, in the Island Niphon, and the Region of
Quanto.

Niuche, Niucanum, a Kingdom in the Asian Tartary; the King of which has lately
conquered China. This is called by others Tenduc.

Nive, Nivus, a River of France in Aquitain; called by the Inhabitants, Errobi.
It arises in the Borders of the Kingdom of Navarr; and watering the Town of S.
Jean de Pied Port, falls into the Adour, through Bayonne.

Nivernois, Ambarri, Nevernensis Comitatus, is a Province in France, of great
extent upon the Lorre. It has the Dukedom of Burgundy on the East, that of
Bourbone on the South, Berry on the West, and Orleance on the North. The
Vadicasses were the ancient Inhabitants of this Province. Nevers is its Capital
City: the rest of any note are La Charity, Cosne, Clamecy, Decize, and
Corbigny. This Province has the honor of the Title of a Dukedom.

Nizza della Paglia, a Town in the Dukedom of Montferrat in Italy, betwixt Ast
and Aqui; which has partaked of the sufferings of the Civil Wars of its
Country.

Nizza. See Nice.

Noailies, a Town in the Province of Limosin, in Aquitain, in France: giving
name to a Family of Honor.

Nocera, Nuceria, a City of S. Peter's Patrimony, in Italy, of great Antiquity;
which is a Bishops See, immediately under the Pope; seated at the Foot of the
Apennine, in the Borders of the Marchia Anccnitana, at the Fountains of the
River Topino: sixteen Miles from Spoleto to the North, and fifteen from
Camerino to the West. Some are of opinion, that this is the same place with
that which Livy calls Alphaterna.

Nocera, a City in the Kingdom of Naples, in the hither Principate; which is a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Salerno; and a Dukedom belonging to the
Family of Barberino. Called for distinction from the Precedent, by those of the
Country, Nocera di Pagani, because it has been taken formerly by the Saracens.
The ancients in many places speak of it. It stands eight Miles from Salerno to
the South-West, and twenty two from Naples to the South. There is a Town of
this Name in Calabria; eight Miles from Amantea to the South, and three from
the Tyrrhenian Sea.

Noere, Notra, a River of Angoumois in France.

Noesenstad Bistritia, the same with Bestercze.

Nogar ^or Nogarol, the Capital Town of the County of Armagnac, in the Upper
Gascony, in France; upon the River Modou, below Monlesun. The Latin Writers
call it Nogariolum and Nugariolum. It has a Collegiate Church, and in the Years
1290. 1303. 1316. there were Synods assembled here.

Nogent l'Artaud, a Town in the Province of Champagne in France, upon the
Marne; below Chastean Thierri.

Nogent le Retrou, Nonigentum Rotrudum, the fairest Village in France; the
Capital of the County of La Perch; seated upon the River Huyna. Fourteen
Leagues from Chartres, (the Capital of La Beausse) and honored with the Title
of a Dukedom. The English heretofore took it under the Earl of Salisbury.
Charles VII. King of France retook it in 1449. The little River Run falls
into the Huisne here.

Nogent le Roy, a Town in la Beausse in France, upon the Eure, betwixt Dreux
and Chartres.

Nogent sur seine, a Town in Champaigne, upon the River Seine, which it covers
with a Stone Bridge.

Nola, a City and Colony in Campania Foelix, (now Terra di Lavoro) in the
Kingdom of Naples; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Naples; in a
tolerable State, and shows many Footsteps of its great Antiquity. Hannibal
besieged it without any success, in the Year of Rome 540. In or near this City
Augustus (the first Roman Emperor) died, Anno Christi, 14. Not less famous for
being the Birthplace of S. Paulinus, who was afterward Bishop of it. It
stands fourteen Miles from Naples toward the East, near the River Agno, Clanis.

Noli, Naulum, Naulium, a small City in the States of Genoua; which is a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Genoua. It stands in a Plain, on the
Shoars of the Ligurian Sea; but it has no Harbor, as I have often seen, (says
Baudrand.) Once a Free State; now subject to the State of Genoua; from which
City it stands thirty one Miles to the West, betwixt Savonna and Albengua.

Nombre de Dios, Nomen Dei, Onomatheopolis, a City of Terra firma, a Province
upon the Streights of Panama; twenty five Leagues from Panama to the North;
which has a noble and safe Harbor, to the North Sea: Built by the Spaniards,
but since forsaken, for its unwholesome air.

Nomentum or Nomentano, the Capital Town of the ancient Nomentani in Latium,
frequently mentioned by the Classicks. It has sometime been a Bishops See, but
now is only a Village, in the Duchy of Monte-Rotundo, in the States of the
Church.

Nomeny, Nomenium, a City or great Town in the Dukedom of Lorain, in the
Territory of Messin, upon the River Seile, Salia; five Miles from Nancy to the
South, and seven from Marsal to the South-East.

Nona, Aenona, a City of Dalmatia, mentioned by Ptolemy; which is now a Bishops
See, under the Archbishop of Zara or Zadar; well fortified: ten Miles from Zara
to the North. It is under the Venetians, and has a Port to the Adriatique. The
Sclavonians call it Nin. Some admit it to be the Aenona of the ancients.

Nonsuch, a Palace Royal in the County of Surrey, not far from Epsham:
delightfully situated, and magnificently built by K. Henry VIII.

De Noordtshe Be, Mare Germanicum, the German Ocean.

Norcia, Nursia, a small City in the Dominions of the Church; placed by Livy,
Pliny, and the rest of the Ancients, in Vmbria. It stands amongst the Hills,
near the Apennine, by the River Fredda; six Miles from the Marchia Anconitana
to the South; between Aquila to the East, and Spoletto to the West; thirteen
from either. This was the Country of S. Benedict, the Father of the Western
Monks; as also of Sertorius, the great Roman Commander, slain in Spain. It has
been an Episcopal See.

Norden, Nordenum, a City in Westphalia in East-Friesland, upon the German
Ocean; to which it has a considerable Port: under the Prince of
East-Friesland, sixteen Miles from Embden to the North.

Nordlingen, Norlinga, a City of Schwaben, in the Year 1251, made a Free
Imperial City: it stands upon the River Eger; four German Miles from Lawingen
to the North, ten from VVerden to the South-West, and from Ingolstad to the
West: between the Territories of the Duke of Newburgh, and the Count of
Oetingen. Famous by a Defeat of the Swedes in 1634, and a Victory of the Swedes
and French in 1645, tho otherwise small, and in a decaying condition. This
place is called by the French, Norlingue; and by the Germans also written
Norlinghen.

Norfolk, Norfolcia, a County on the Eastern Coast of England. Bounded on the
North with the German Ocean; on the East in part by the same Ocean, in part by
Suffolk; on the South by the Rivers of VVaveney and the little Ouse, which part
it from Suffolk; on the West with the great Ouse; and toward Lincolnshire with
that part of the Nene, which passes from Wisbech to the Washes. It contains
in length from Yarmouth to Wisbech fifty Miles, in breadth from Thetford to
Wells thirty; in circuit about two hundred and forty. The Southern parts,
which are Wood Lands, are fruitful; the Northern or Champain, barren and dry.
In the whole are six hundred and sixty Parishes, and thirty one Market Towns;
and besides the VVaveney and the Ouse, watered by the Rivers Yare and Thryn.
Its Capital City, Norwich. The largest County next to Yorkshire, in England;
and surpassing even Yorkshire in populousness. In the time of the Heptarchy, it
was a part of the Kingdom of the East Angles. The first Earl of Norfolk was
Ralph de VVaet, Created in the Year 1075. After whom succeeded the Bigots from
1135, to 1270, in six Descents. In 1313, Tho. de Brotherton, a Son of Edward I.
was made Earl of Norfolk: Margaret his Daughter, in 1398, was made Duchess;
whose Son Thomas Mowbray, (and his Descendents) continued the Honor to the Year
1461. In 1475, Richard Duke of York was made Duke of Norfolk. In 1483, John
Lord Howard was vested with the same Honor, in whose Family it now is. Henry
the present Duke of Norfolk being the ninth Duke of this Race.

Norimburgh. See Nurenberg.

Norin, a fort of Dalmatia, betwixt the River Narenta, and the branch thereof
called Norin, which returns into the bed of the Narenta again. Under the
Venetians.

Norkoping, Norcopia, a small City in Sweden, between two Lakes; five Miles
from the Baltic Sea; in the Province of Ostrogothia, by the River Motala: ten
Miles from the Lake Veter, East.

Normandy, Neustria, Normannia, is a great and fruitful Province in France,
which has the Title of a Dukedom. It has this name from the Normans; who, under
Rollo their first Duke, settled here in the time of Charles the Simple, King of
France. Bounded on the North and West by the British Sea; on the East by
Picardy; on the South by le Perch, and le Maine. It lies sixty six Leagues
from East to West, and from North to South about thirty; the principal City in
it is Roan or Roiien. This Province is divided into twelve Counties; but more
usually into the Upper and Lower Normandy: the former containing the Bailywicks
of Roiien, Eureux, Caux, and Gisors: the other those of Alenzon, Caen, and
Constantin. Its principal Rivers are the Seine, Eure, Risle, Dive, Soul, Ouve,
etc. A cold Climate, plentiful in Corn, Cattle, and Fruits; but generally
wanting Wine. It yields some Mines of Iron and Brass, together with Medicinal
Waters: Is better inhabited by Gentry, than almost any other Province of
France; and reckons above a hundred Cities, and a hundred and fifty great Towns
standing in it. Rollo the first Duke, (under whom the Normans besieged Paris
three times) obtained that Title in 912. from Charles the Simple, (who gave his
Daughter in Marriage to him,) upon condition to hold Normandy in homage to the
Crown. William the base Son of Robert (the sixth Duke) Conquered England in
1066: by which means it was United to the Crown of England till 1202: when King
John was outed of it. Henry V. about 1420. reconquered this Duchy: His Son lost
it again about 1450. ever since which time it has been annexed to the Crown of
France.

De Noort Caep, Rubaea, Rubeae Promontorium, is the most Northern Point of
Finmark; and indeed of all Europe. There is a Cape of the same Name in Guiana,
in South America.

Nortgow, Nortgovia, a Province of Germany; between Bohemia to the East, the
Danube to the East and South, (which parts it from Bavaria;) Schwaben and
Franconia to the West, and Voigtland to the North. The Capital of it is
Norimburg. This name, in the German Tongue, signifies the North Country. It was
the Seat of the ancient People, Narisc^.

North-Allerton, A Market Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire, near the
Stream Wisk, which falls into the Swale. The Capital of its Hundred.

Northamptonshire, Northantonia, is seated almost in the midst of England: on
the North it is parted from Lincolnshire by the River Weland; on the East from
Huntington by the Nene; on the South it has Buckingham and Oxford; and on the
West Warwickshire, separated by Watlingstreet, a Roman way. From North to South
it is forty six Miles in length; but not full twenty in breadth where broadest.
In the whole, there are three hundred twenty six Parishes and thirteen Market
Towns. The Rivers Nen and VVeland have their rise in this County, together with
the Ouse. The Air is temperate; the Soil rich, fruitful, champain; full of
People. The chief Town is Northampton, pleasantly seated on the Bank of the
River Nen, where two Rivulets from the North and South fall into it; which for
its Circuit, Beauty, and Buildings, may be compared with most of the Cities of
England. It was burnt by the Danes. In the Wars in King John's time it suffered
much from the Barons. Near this City in 1460. Henry VI. was overthrown; and
first taken Prisoner by Edward IV. In 1261* the Students of Cambridge are said
to have removed hither by the King's Warrant, with Intentions to have settled
the University here. In the Reign of King Charles II. Sept. 1675. it was
totally destroyed by Fire; but by the favor of that gracious Prince, and the
cheerful Contributions of good People, soon rebuilt. Long. 19. 40. Lat. 52. 36.
To omit the more ancient Families; William, Lord Compton, was created Earl of
Northampton, by King James I. in 1618. The present Earl, George, is the fourth
of this Noble Family.

Northausen, Northusia, an Imperial Free City of Germany, in Thuringia, upon
the River Zorge; between Erford to the South, and Halberstad to the North;
eight German Miles from either. This City is under the Protection of the
Elector of Saxony; and said to have been built by Meroveus I. King of the
Franks, in the Year of Christ 447.

The North Foreland, Cantium, a Cape of the Isle of Tha^^^^ in Kent; famous for
a Sea Fight between the English and the Dutch, in 1666. When the brave Duke of
Albemarle, with only two Squadrons of the English Fleet, maintained a Fight
against the whole Dutch Fleet of an hundred Sail, two days together: Prince
Rupert coming up in the Evening of the second day, the English fell again (the
third) on the Dutch Fleet, and beat them home: which, all things considered,
was the most wonderful Naval Fight that ever was fought upon the Ocean.

Northumberland, Northumbria, is parted on the South by the Derwent and the
Tyne from the Bishopric of Durham: on the East it has the German Ocean; on the
North Scotland: on the West Scotland and Cumberland: it has the form of a
Triangle or Wedge, containing in length from North to South about forty Miles,
in breadth where it is the broadest, thirty: in the whole, four hundred and
sixty Parishes, and only six Market Towns. The Air is cold and sharp; the Soil
barren and rugged, but much improved by the Industry of its Inhabitants; and
chiefly toward the Sea, fertile. The Bowels of the Earth are full of Coal
Mines, whence a great part of England ^s supplied with that Fuel. The
principal Places in ^^ are Newcastle and Berwick* George Fitz-Roy a Natural Son
of Charles II. was created Duke of Northumberland in 1674. Which Title had been
once before enjoyed by John Dudley, Earl of Warwick, created Duke of
Northumberland by K. Edward VI. in 1551. and beheaded by Q. Mary. After the
death of the said John, the Title of Earl of Northumberland returned to the
Percies: in whose Family, as it had heretofore belonged to them from the Year
1337, when Henry Piercy, Lord Constable, possessed it under K. Richard II. and
was succeeded in it by five of his Name and Family, with little interruption;
so it continued till the Year 1670, when Joceline Piercy died at Turin without
Issue Male.

North-Curry, a Market Town in Somersetshire, upon the River Tone: and the
Capital of its Hundred.

Northwich, a Market Town in Cheshire, upon the River Dane, which runs into the
Weeve: the Capital of its Hundred. Its Salt Pits render it remarkable.

Norway, Norvegia, Nerigon, Basilia, is a Kingdom of great extent on the
North-Western Shore of Europe; called by the Inhabitants Norricke, and by
Contraction Norke; by the Germans, Norwegen. Heretofore esteemed the Western
part of Scandinavia; and called Nerigon, as Cluverius says: it reaches from
the Entrance of the Baltic Sea, to almost the North Cape: but not of equal
breadth. On the East a long Ridge of Mountains, always covered with Snow,
(called Sevones,) separate it from Sweden. Barren and Rocky; or overgrown with
vast and unpassable Woods. Its length is about one thousand and three hundred
English Miles; and two hundred and fifty its breadth. Divided into five
Provinces; Aggerhus, Bergensus, Dronthemhus, VVardhus, and Bahus. The
Inhabitants traffic abroad with Dried Fish, Whales Grease, and Timber. Of the
same Religion with the Danes; and some of them inclined to Magic, like the
Laplanders. The Glama is the only River in this Kingdom that is sufficient to
carry Vessels of great burden. In 1646. a discovery was made of a golden Mine,
near Opslow; which was quickly exhausted. Bahus was resigned to the King of
Sweden in 1658. There depend upon this Kingdom several Islands; as Iseland,
Groenland, Spitzberg, the Isles of Feroe, and those of Orkney; the latter
whereof were resigned to James VI. of Scotland. The principal Cities are
Drontheim, and Berghen. This had Kings of its own from very ancient times; but
in 1326. it was first united to Denmark in the Person of Magnus III. In 1376.
they became so united, that they were never since separated.

Norwich, Nordovicum, Norvicum, is a rich, populous, neat City; in the middle
of the County of Norfolk; seated at the confluence of the Venster (or Vensder)
and the Yare, over which it has several Bridges. This City sprung up out of
the Ruins of Venta Icenorum, now called Caster, in which not many years since
was found a vast number of Roman Urns. When or by whom Norwich was built, is
not known: it seems to be a Saxon City; it was certainly the Seat of some of
the Kings of the East Angles. In its Infancy Sueno, a Dane, burnt it in 1004.
In the Reign of William the Conqueror it was besieged, and taken by Famine.
Herbert, Bishop of this Diocese, contributed to its growth; by removing the
Bishops Chair from Thetford hither, about 1096. In the seventeenth year of King
Stephen's Reign, it was refounded and made a Corporation. The Castle is thought
to have been built in the Reign of Henry II. Taken by the French in the Reign
of King John. In the Reign of Edward I. it was walled by the Citizens. Henry
IV. in 1403. granted them a Mayor. Afterward it began to decay, till Queen
Elizabeth sent the Dutch Stuff Weavers (who sled over into England, from the
cruel Government of the Duke d'Alva) hither: whereupon it grew very populous,
and rich. There was great need of this supply: one Kett (a Tanner of Windham)
having almost ruined this City about 1548. in the Reign of Edward VI. The
present* Bishop of Norwich is the seventy first from Bedwinus of Elmham, the
seventy fifth from Foelix, (the first Bishop of the East Angles) who began the
Bishopric in 636. Long. 24. 55. Lat. 52. 40. This City, being about a Mile and
a half in length and half as much in breadth, contains twenty Parishes; well
walled, with several Turrets, and twelve Gates for Entrance; and so pleasantly
intermixed with Houses and Trees, that it looks like an Orchard and a City
within each other. It gives the Title of Earl to the Duke of Norfolk; whose
Palace, with that of the Bishop, the Cathedral, the Hospital, etc. are the
principal Ornaments of its Buildings.

Noto, Netum, Nea, Nectum, Neetum, a City of Sicily, of great Antiquity; and at
this time great, well inhabited, the Capital of the Province called by its
name. It is encompassed with high Rocks, and sleep Valleys; being seated on the
South side of Iseland. Eight Miles from the Sea, fifteen from Pachy* no to the
South-West, and twenty five from Syracuse to the South.

Il Val di Noto, Netina Vallis, the Province in which the last mentioned City
stands, is the second Province of Sicily; and lies on the South side of the
Island. On the North it has Il Valle di Demona, on the West il Val di Mazara,
and on the South the African Sea.

Notteberg, Notteburgum, a Town in Ingria in Sweden; seated on an Island in the
Lake Ladoga: toward the Confines of Moscovy. Called Oreska by the Russ. A very
strong Town by its Situation; yet Gustavus Adolphus, King of Sweden, took it
from the Moscovites, in 1614. It takes its name from Nutts.

Nottinghamshire, Nottinghamia, is bounded on the North and West by Yorkshire;
on the East by Lincolnshire, (divided from it by the Trent;) on the South by
Leicestershire, on the West by Darbyshire. It is in length thirty eight English
Miles from North to South; in breadth from East to West not above nineteen; and
in Circuit about an hundred and ten, containing 168 Parishes, and nine Market
Towns. The Air is good and pleasing; the Soil, rich Sand and Clay: so that for
Corn or Grass it may compare with any County of England: it abounds equally
with Wood and Coals; and is watered with the Rivers Trent and Iddle, besides
several small Streams. This County takes its name from its principal Town,

Nottingham, Rhage, a delicate pleasant Town, seated on a high Hill; full of
fine Streets, and good Buildings; upon the River Line; toward the South
Borders of this County: and about a Mile from the Trent, to the West. Over the
Trent and the Line it has two Bridges, besides two others over two Ponds,
called the Cheney Bridges. It has three Churches, and a strong and goodly
Castle; built on a steep Rock on the West side of the Town. In the Reign of
Burthred King of the Mercians, and Aethelred King of the West Saxons, the
Danes having got the Possession of this Castle, kept it against three Kings,
(united against them) and forced them to a Peace. After this Edward, the Elder,
walled the Town: the South part of which was standing in Mr. Cambden's time.
The Castle, which is now standing, was rebuilt by William the Conqueror, to
curb the English. Edward IV. repaired it. In 1^75. it was besieged by Henry II.
but could not be taken. In the Barons Wars it was surprised by Robert de
Ferrariis, an Earl; otherwise it was never taken by force, as the same Author
observes. Long. 22. 14. Lat. 53. 00. Charles Lord Howard, descended from the
House of Norfolk by the Mowbrays (Earls of this County, from 1377. to 1475.)
was in 1597. created Earl of Nottingham. This Family ending in Charles Lord
Howard, the third in that Line; the Honor was conferred May 12. 1681. upon
Heneage Lord Finch, Baron of Daventry, (then Lord Chancellor of England;) and
it is now enjoyed by Daniel, Son of the said Heneage.

Nova Antequera, a City of New Spain in America, in the Province of Oaxaca;
eighty Spanish Leagues from Mexico to the East, seventeen from the North Sea to
the South, and seventeen from Vera Cruz. It is little, and not much inhabited;
though a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Mexico, ever since 1535.

Nova Guinea, a large Country in the Western part of the Pacifick Ocean, which
is a part of the Terra Australis: on the East of the Molucco Islands. First
discovered by Andrew Ardaneta a Spaniard, in 1528. and then thought to be an
Island, but since to be a part of the South Continent.

Novara, Novaria, a City of Italy, which in Pliny's time was the Capital of
Insubria. It is now a part of the Duchy of Milan; and a Bishop's See, under
that Archbishop; the Head of a small Territory, called by its name. Very
strong, and can show many ancient Roman Inscriptions as Testimonies of its
Antiquity. It stands twenty five Miles from Milan to the West, and ten from
Turin, in a well-watered and fruitful Soil, and upon an Eminence well
fortified. Near this, Lewis Sforza Duke of Milan was taken by the French in
1500. But twelve years after, the Swiss gave the French a great Overthrow in
this Place, to abate their joy for their former Success. Peter Lombard, the
Master of the Sentences, (and sometime Bishop of Paris) was a Native of this
City; and Pope Innocent XI. Bishop of it, when he was chosen.

Novellara, a fine Town in the Lower Lombardy, between the Territories of the
Dukes of Mantoua and Modena; subject to a Count of its own, who is of the
Family of Gonzaga; ten Miles from Regio toward the North. It has a Castle
called Bagnuollo.

Novibazar, Novus Mercatus, one of the principal Cities of Servia; upon the
River Oras^a; fifty Miles from Nissa to the West.

Novigrad, Novigradum, Argyrutum, a Town in Dalmatia, which has a Castle:
seated upon a Bay of the same name; twenty Miles from Zara to the East, and
twenty five from Sebenico to the North. It belonged to the Venetians; but was
taken by the Turks in 1646.

Novigrad, a small City in the Upper Hungary, which gives name to a County; one
German Mile from the Danube, five from Gran to the North-East, and four from
Vaccia. It has a Castle which is seated on a Rock; and a Dike thirty four foot
deep, cut in the same Rock; which makes it almost inaccessible: yet the Turks
took this strong Place, in 1663.

Novogorod Velki, Novogardia Magna, a City of Moscovy; called by the Germans
Neugarten; which is very great, and an Archbishops See; the Capital of a
Principality of the same name: seated in a spacious Plain upon the River
Wolkow, (where it issues from the Lake of Ilmen) an hundred and five German
Miles from Mosco to the North-West, forty six from Pleskow to the East, and
forty from Narva to the South East. Long. 50. 00. Lat. 58. 23. The River
Wolchou or Woldga, (says Olearius) falls by Notteburgh, and the Gulf of
Finland into the Baltic Sea: this River is the chief cause of the Wealth and
Greatness of the City; being Navigable from its Fountains almost to the
Baltic: which has made this City the chief for Trade in all the North.
Vithold, (Great Duke of Lithuania) was the first, who in 1427. obliged this
City to pay a vast Tribute. John Basilowitz Grotsden, Duke of Muscovy,
overthrew an Army raised by this City in 1477. Thereupon he made himself Master
of it, and carried thence to Mosco three hundred Wagons laden with Gold,
Silver, and rich Goods. John Basilowitz, another of their Princes, in 1569.
slew two thousand seven hundred and seventy of its Inhabitants, and cast them
into the River, upon a bare groundless suspicion; besides a vast number trodden
to death by a Party of Horse. This City was taken by the Swedes in 1611. and
restored to the Russ in 1634. It has formerly been so puissant, that it passed
for a common Proverb, Who is there that can oppose himself to God, and the
great City of Novogrod? They reckon about seventy Monasteries in it. Its
largeness has been set in the parallel with that of Rome: but its Walls are of
Wood, and the Buildings mean.

Novogorod Nisi, that is, the Lower; is a vast City of Moscovy, seated upon the
Wolga, where it takes in the Occa: an hundred German Miles from Mosco to the
North-East, and forty from Wologda to the South-East.

Novogrod, Novogroda, surnamed Litawiski, is a City of Lithuania, under the
Crown of Poland; the Capital of a Palatinate of the same name; in which the
Diet of Lithuania ought by turns with Minsko to be holden. It stands scarce
four Polish Miles from the River Niemen or Memel, and twenty from Vilna to the
South.

Novogrodeck Seviersky, a strong City of Russia; which has been attributed to
Lithuania, when under the Poles; but now it is under the Russ again. It stands
upon the River Dezna; seventeen Polish Miles from Czernichou to the North-East,
forty six from Kiovia to the same, and the same distance from Smolensko to the
South. This is also the Capital of a Palatinate.

Noyon, Novomag^s, Noviodunum, a City in the Isle of France; near the Borders
of Picardy (of which it was a part) upon the River Vorse, which two Miles lower
falls into the Oise; eight Leagues from Soisons to the South-West, fifteen from
Amiens, six from Reims to the West, and twenty two from Paris to the North. It
is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Reims: the Bishop of it is one of the
three Earls, and a Peer of France; the Diocese which belongs to it, is called
Le Noyonois.

^^bia, a great Tract in the Eastern part of Africa and the River Nile:
encompassed on the North and We^^ with Mountains: by which it is separated from
Egypt to the North; Guoga, Borno, Zanfara, and Biafara to the West; on the East
it has the Ni^e, which parts it from Barnagasso; and on the South Abassinia, or
Aethiopia. It lies three hundred French Leagues in length, and not much less in
bread^^; the Capital of it is Dancala; the other Cities C^^a, Guala, Jalac, and
Sula. This was the Country of the ancient Nubae or Nubaei, and Numides. It is
rich and fertile enough, toward the Nile.

Nuis, or Neus, Novesium, a Town in the Archbishopric of Cologne, upon the
Rhine, in Germany, where that River receives the E^pt; adorned with a
Col^^Sapn^^rch. It is ancient, strong, and memorable (...) resistance it made
against Charles the H^^^^* Duke of Burgundy, who besieged it a whole year. The
Emperor Frederick III. granted it great Privileges It was often taken and
retaken in the last German Wars.

Nuis, or Nuits, a small Town in the Dukedom of Burgundy, upon the River
Armanson, betwixt Mombard and Tonnere. Some are of opinion, that it was the
Work of the ancient Nuithones, a people of Germany.

Tland van Pieter Nuitz, The Land of Peter Nuitz, is a part of New Holland, in
the North America, discovered by a Dutchman of the Name, in 1625.

Numantia, an ancient and celebrated City of Spain. It sustained a Siege
against an Army of forty thousand Romans, for fourteen years together; and by
its Courage and Conduct, did reduce Aemilius Lepidus, and C. Hostilius
Mancinus, (the two Roman Consuls, in the year of Rome 617.) to such a
dishonorable Treaty, that the latter was ordered by the Senate to be delivered
to the Enemy by a Herald at Arms, naked, with his hands tied, in indignation at
the Conditions of Peace passed by him. But Numantia refused to take him. Scipio
Africanus, afterward undertaking the Siege, made himself Master of the place
in fifteen Months: and the Inhabitants in despair burnt whatever was most dear
to them, even their Wives and Children, and cast themselves naked upon the
Swords of the Conquerours.

Numidia, the Country in the ancient division of Africa, which is now called
Biledulgerid. There was also a Numidia propria. This latter had the honor to
be a Kingdom, famous in the Persons of Masanissa, who a^^isted the Romans in
the last Punick War; and of his Grandson Jugurtha, taken Prisoner and carried
to Rome, after a long War he had maintained against the Romans.

Nura, Nicia, a River in the Dukedoms of Parma and Placentia.

Nuruberg, Nuremberg, Norimberga, Nurimberga, Noricorummons, a great Imperial
Free City, in Germany, in Franconia; upon the Confluence of the Regen and
Pegen, two German Rivers; seated at the foot of an Hill of the Hyrcinian
Forest; and fortified with a Castle, and an Arsenal: Frederick I. made the
Capital of Nortgow. It has belonging to it a Tract which lies between the
Marquisate of Holach to the West; Culenbach to the North, the Upper Palatinate
to the East, and the Bishopric of Aichstad to the South. This City was the
Birthplace of Wenceslaus the Emperor, and now in a flourishing condition. It
stands nine Miles from Bamberg to the South, fourteen from Ratisbon, thirteen
from Wurtsberg, and nineteen from Amburg to the North. It bought its liberty of
its Princes; and has carefully preserved it, ever since 1027. The Emperor
Henry V. ruined it: but Conradus III. Henry VI. and Charles VI. re-established
and augmented it. In 1427. it bought the Castle of the Burgrave, which is since
employed as a Granary. It borrowed its form of Government (which is
Aristocratic,) from Venice. In 1506. it embraced Luther's Doctrine in his time;
but tolerated the Calvinists. In 1649. here was a general Peace concluded
amongst the Princes of Germany.

Nusco, Nuscum* an Episcopal City in the Further Principate in the Kingdom of
Naples. The Sea is a Suffragan to the Archbishop of Salerno.

Nyd, a River in Yorkshire, falling into the Ouse: upon which Ripley and
Knaresborough are situated.

Nyth, a River of Scotland, which flows through Nithisdale or Nythesdale.

Nyenburg, Novoburgum, a small City in Westphalia, in the County of Hoyen upon
the River Weser; four German Miles above Perden to the South, and eight from
Zell to the West.

Nylandt, Nylandia, a Province of Finland, upon the Bay of Finland; between
Carelia to the East, Tavastbia to the North, and Finland (properly so called)
to the West; over against Livonia: from which it is separated by the Bay. There
are but three Towns of Note in it; Borgo, Helsingfors, and Raseborg.

Nyms, Nemesa, a small River in the Bishopric of Trier; which waters
Scheineck and Bitberg, then ends in the Saur.

Nine, Aufona, a River which watering the Town and County of Northampton, and
Wisbich; falls into the German Ocean, between Norfolk and Lincolnshire.

O A.
OAkre, Obacer, a River in the Lower Saxony, and Lunenburg; called Ovacra in
the middle times.

Oanus, See Frascolari. Stephanus makes mention of an ancient City, Oanus, in
Lydia, in Asia the Less. But we have no account thereof at this day.

Oasis. The name of two ancient Solitary Recesses, in the Deserts of Barca, in
Lybia, in Africa; whither Eugenius and Macarius, both of them Holy Priests of
Antioch, were banished by the Emperor Julian the Apostate: and S. Hilarion
retired, to avoid the fury of the Emissaries of the same Prince. The famous
Nestorius died in his Banishment there also.

Oaxes and Oaxus, a River of the Island of Candia, now called Armiro. Virgil
epithets it -- rapidum veniemus Oaxem. Other Ancients speak of a City or Town
there, of the same name.

Obb. See Oby.

Obdora, a Province in the North of Moscovy, on the Frozen Sea; between the
River Oby to the East, and Petzora to the West. There is never a City or Town
of Note in it. The Dutch who have lately discovered its Sea Coasts, have
presumed to call it Niew West Frieslandt: but they have not settled any
Colonies here, and probably never will.

Obeck, Gir, a River of Lybia in Africa.

Obengir, Ochus, a River of Persia; which waters the Provinces of Balach and
Tocharestan; the Cities of Balach, Varvalin, Talecan, Badhascian, Ariander; and
then falls into the Gehun or Oxus, above Bichende, bringing with it the Balcan.
This River is the North-Eastern Boundary of Persia, toward Tartary.

Ober Baden, Thermae Superiores. See Baden.

Ober-Wesel, Ficelia, Vosavia, a City in Germany, upon the Rhine; once an
Imperial Free City, but in 1312. it fell into the hands of the Elector of
Trier: it lies between Baccharach to the South, and Boppart to the North. S.
Werner was here slain by the Jews, in 1287. in the time of Lent. Mammaea, the
Mother of Alexander (the Roman Emperor,) was also assassinated in this place,
as the Inhabitants report.

Obi^ Raptum, a River of that part of Aethiopia next Egypt; which flowing
Eastward toward Quilmancy, waters the City of Quiloa in Zanguebar; then falls
into the Ethiopian Ocean.

Obtricht, Ob^rick, the same with Maesstricht.

Oburg, Oburgum, a City in Finland.

Oby, Obb, Ovis, Obius, a vast River on the East of Moscovy; which arising out
of the Lake of Kataysko, and running Northwards, parts Europe from Asia.
Between the Province of Obdura to the West, and the Samoiedes to the East, it
falls with a vast Current into the Frozen Sea. It has been sometime called
Carambn^.

Occa, a River which rises in the Borders of Crim Tartary; and running
North-East, waters Bulgo^^ and Colomna; ten German Miles West of Mosco: and
taking in the Cleusma and the Mooxa at Nisi Novogorod, falls into the Wolga.

Ochums, Tarsuras, a River in Mengrelia; which rises out of the Mountains of
Colchis, and falls into the Euxine Sea.

Ochrida. The same with Giustandil.

Ochsenfurt, Bosphorus, Ochsenfurtum, a Town or City in Franconia, upon the
Maine; in the Bishopric of VVurtsburg; three Miles from the Capital City to
the South.

Ockley, a Town in the County of Surrey; where King Ethelwolf, Son to King
Egbert, fought a successful Battle against the Danes.

Oczakow, Axiace, a City of Podolia, seated at the fall of the Nieper into the
Euxine Sea; thirty Miles from Czircassia. Near this City the Poles gave the
Tartars a fatal overthrow in 1644.

Odensee, Odensche, Otonium, Othonia, Ottonia, a City of Denmark; the Capital
of the Island of Fionia, almost in the Center of it: fourteen Miles from
Sleswick to the North, and eighteen from Coppenhagen to the West. Built by
Harold King of Denmark, and called so in Honor to Otto I. Emperor of Germany:
it was made a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Lunden, in 950. S. Kanute,
King of Denmark, was slain here in 1086. whose Body was found in 1582. and much
honored. In this City also are Tombs of the Kings of Denmark. In 1257. the
Ecclesiastics assembled a Council here, which had the honor to be confirmed
by Pope Alexander IV.

Oder, Odera, a Town in Silesia, in the Dukedom of Troppaw, in the Borders of
Moravia; at the Fountains of the River Oder; four German Miles from Olmutz.

Die, Oder, Odera, Suevus, Guttalus Viadus, Viadrus, one of the greatest Rivers
in Germany. It arises in Silesia, a Province of Bohemia, by a Town of the same
name, in the Borders of Moravia: and taking with it the Oppa, it waters
Ratisbon, VVratislaw, and the Greater Glogaw in Silesia: then entering Germany,
it passes the Marquisate of Brandenburg, and Franck fort ad Oderam: at Custrin
it admits the VVarta; then entering Pomerania beneath Stetin, it makes a Lake
called das Gross Haff, out of which by three Mouths it passes into the Baltic
Sea.

L'Oder, Oder, Odera, a small River in Bretagne in France, which waters
Quimper-Corantine, and falls into the Bay of Aquitain.

Odernheim, a small Town in the Palatinate of the Rhine; which was once an
Imperial and Free City, but since exempt, and now under the Elector Palatine.
It stands two Miles from Oppenheim, and the Rhine to the West.

Odiaa, the Capital City of the Kingdom of Siam, in the East Indies.

Odiham, a Market Town in Hampshire. The Capital of its Hundred; belonging
formerly to the Bishops of Winchester. The ruins of that old Castle, so strong
in the Reign of King John, as with thirteen English to hold out against the
Dauphine of France and his Army fifteen days, stand near this Town.

Odria, Tedanium, a River which divides Croatia from Dalmatia; then falls into
the Gulf of Venice. Called also Zermagna.

Oeaso, a Promontory in Guipuscoa, in Spain; toward the Cantabrian Ocean, near
the Mouth of the River Bidassoa; commonly called the Cape of Fontarabia or Cape
Figuier, as the Town Fontarabia has had anciently the name of Oeasopolis.

Oebalia, the same with the modern Sacania, in the Morea. Also a City of the
ancient Latium, near Tarentum.

Oechalia. Diverse ancient Cities in Thessalia, Laconia, Arcadia, and Euboea are
mentioned by Strabo, Pausanias, and Mela, under this name. But we have now no
further knowledge of them.

Oedenburg, or Odenburg, Sempronium, a City of the Lower Hungary, called by the
Inhabitants Sopron. It stands upon the Borders of Austria, near the Lake of
Newsidlersee; and is very well fortified by the Imperialists, who have a great
while possessed it.

Oeland, Oelandia, an Island in the Baltic Sea, belonging to Sweden; on the
Coast of the Province of Smaland, over against Calmar; from whence it is
separated by the Streights, called Calmard Sund by the Natives. It is sixty
nine Miles long from North to South; but scarce twenty over, where it is
broadest; the Capital of it is Borckholm.

Oenoe, an ancient Town of Attica, in Greece.

Oesel, or Eusel, Osilia, an Island in the Baltic Sea, at the Mouth of the Bay
of Livonia; which has been under the Swedes ever since 1646. Not above three
Miles from the Coast of Curland, and five from Esthonia to the West: its
Circuit is eighty. The chief places of Strength, are Arensburg, and Sonneburg;
besides which, it has eighteen Parishes. Some think it was of old called Latris.

Oestricher Quadi, the People of Austria in Germany.

Oestrick. Austria.

Oestfrisen, Oostfrisen, East-Friesland.

Oeta, a Chain of high Mountains in Thessalia; reaching as far as to the Coast
of the Aegean Sea; upon the Borders of Achaia, betwixt the Mountain Pindus to
the North, and Parnassus to the South; including the Thermopylae toward the
East; and now called Bunina. Extremos ad Orientem Montes Oetam vocant, says
Livy of them. The Latin Poets frequently quote them, as the first, which, by
their height and situation upon the extreme limits of Europe Eastward, behold
the rising Sun. Covered in many places with Woods, and fruitful in Hellebore:
giving the name of Sinus Oetaeus heretofore to the Gulf, now called the Gulf
of Zeyton, upon the Archipelago.

Oetmarsen, Marsi veteres, a Tract in Over-Yssel.

Oetigiasac, Quinque Ecclesiae.

Off, Curia, a City in Voigtland, a Province of the Upper Saxony.

L'Offanto, Aufidus, a River of Apulia in Italy, the only River that cuts the
Appennine: yet it rises out of that Mountain in the Further Principate, six
Miles above Conza; and running Eastward, waters Conza, and Monte Verde; then
separating the Basilicate from the Capitanate, (and this last from Terra di
Bari,) and watering Canosa with some other small Towns, it falls into the
Adriatic Sea; four Miles from Barletta to the West, twenty five from
Manfredonia to the South-West.

Offen, the same with Buda.

Offenburg, Offemburgum, a City in Schwaben in Germany, the Capital of Ortnaw:
seated upon the River Kintzig: an Imperial and Free City, but under the
Protection of the House of Austria: it stands one Mile from the Rhine, and not
full two from Strasburg to the East.

Offtown, a Town in the County of Suffolk: where Offa, King of the Mercians, in
the time of the Saxon Heptarchy, having at an Entertainment treacherously
murdered Ethelbert, King of the East Angles, in 793. erected a Castle, whose
Ruins are apparent by the name of Offton-Castle. The name signifies, Offa's
Town.

Ogle-Castle, a Castle upon the River Pont, near Belsey, in the County of
Northumberland: giving the Title of Earl to the Duke of Newcastle, and its name
to the Ward it stands in. It did formerly belong to the Barons Ogle.

Oglio, Ollio, Ollius, a River in the States of Venice in Italy; it springs
from the Mountains above Edulum, in the Borders of Switzerland, in the
Valteline; and flowing through Brescia or Brexa, into the Lake de Iseo, it
leaves it at Calepio: a little lower separating the Territory of Brescia from
that of Cremona, (or the State of Venice from the Dukedom of Milan,) and
watering part of the Dukedom of Mantoua, it falls into the Po at Burgoforte.

Oie, a County in Picardy. It is extended from Calais, as far as to Graveling
and Dunkirk, and has a Town in it of the same name. The Spaniards, during the
Civil Wars of the League, possessed themselves of this County; till by the
Treaty of Vervin, in 1598. it was surrendered again to the Crown of France. The
English heretosore held it above two Ages. There is a small Island, Oie, near
that of Re, upon the Coast of Saintonge, in Aquitain.

L'Oise, Osesia, Isauria, Oesia, Aesia, a River of France, which arises in
Picardy, in the Confines of Hainault and Champagne; and washing Guise, Lafere,
and Noyon at Compeigne, it takes in the Aysne, (a bigger River than it self:)
so by Pont S. Maxiente, Beaumont, and Pont Oyse, falls into the Seyne six Miles
below Paris, toward Roan.

Okeham or Oakham, the Capital Town of the County of Rutland; seated in the
rich and pleasant Vale of Catmoss, and said to derive its name from the plenty
of Oaks growing in its neighborhood. It has a Castle where the Assizes are
kept, a Frecschool, and a Hospital. And by an ancient Privilege belonging to
its Royalty, a Nobleman entering on horseback within its Precincts, pays the
homage of a Shoe from his Horse. Therefore upon the door of the Shire-Hall,
there are many Horse-shooes nailed; and over the Judges Seat in the same, one
curiously wrought, five foot and a half long, with a breadth proportionable.
But this Homage or Forfeiture may be commuted for money.

Okehampton, a Borough and Market Town in Devonshire, in the Hundred of
Black-Torring: It returns two Members of Parliament.

Old, or Old, Olitis, a River in Quercy in France.

Old, or Oude, Vlda, a River in Bretagne.

Oldenburg, Oldenburgum, Brannesia, a small City in Westphalia; the Capital of
a County of the same name; seated upon the River Honta; twenty five Miles from
Breman to the West, and forty from Embden to the East. Built by Otho the Great;
and almost totally ruined by Fire in the year 1676. that very day the Citizens
were to have taken the Oath of Allegiance to the King of Denmark.

The County of Oldemburg, is a small County in the Circle of Westphalia;
between East-Friesland to the West, the Dukedom of Bremen to the East, the
Bishopric of Munster to the South, and the German Ocean to the North. Very
fruitful, especially as to Pasture and Cattle; the Air is cold and Foggy. This
for a long time was under Counts of its own; who are derived from VVittikindus
the last King, and first Duke of the Saxons: VValepart, one of his Nephews, in
850. being the Earl of Oldemburg. This Line continued with some small variation
for twenty three or twenty four Descents: and in 1676. failed. Since which, it
has been annexed to the Crown of Denmark; that King being descended of the
Eldest Branch of the Earls of Oldenburg.

Oldenborg, a Town in Holstein, in the Territory of Wageren; once a Bishops
See, but removed long since to Lubeck: it stands not above three Miles from the
Baltic Sea, and thirty from Lubeck, to the North.

Oldenpo, Oldenpoa, a Tract in Esthonia, in Livonia; between Lettonia to the
South; Esthonia, (properly so called) to the West; Alentak to the North, and
Moscovy to the East: under the Swedes; the chief Town in it is Tonspat.

Oldenzeel, or Oldensel, Odesalia, a strong Town in Overyssel, in the United
Netherlands; taken and dismantled by the Hollanders in 1626.

Oldeslo, Oldensloe, Oldesloa, a Town in Holstein, in Wageren; upon the River
Trava, in the Borders of Lavemburg; three German Miles from Lubeck to the West,
and five from Hamburgh to the South-East. The King of Denmark erected here a
spacious Fortification in 1688. At which Lubeck was not a little alarmed.

Oleron, Vliarus, an Island on the Coast of Aquitain belonging to the Duchy
thereof, upon the Shore of Saintonge; against the Mouth of the River Charente,
two Leagues from the Continent. Six from North to South, two from East to West:
strengthened by a very strong Castle on the South Side; and universally famous
for the Sea-Laws, here Published by Richard I. King of England, at his Return
from the Holy Land, in the fifth year of his Reign: at which time this Island
lay under the Dominion of the Kings of England. This is the same Island with
the Olarion of Sidonius Apollinaris, which, he says, yields plenty of Rabbets.

Oleron, or Oleron sur le Gave, Oloronensis urbis, Huro, Hurona, Elarona,
Loronensium Civitas, a City of Bearn, in the South of France; which is a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Aux. Destroyed by the Normans in the year
1080. and rebuilt by Centulus, (one of the Earls of this Province upon a Branch
of the Gave, thence called Le Gave de Oleron; ten Leagues from Tarbes to the
West, eighteen from Dax to the South, and twenty four from Pampelona to the
North. It stands upon an Eminence, having an old Tower.

Olika, Olica, a City in Volhinia, a Province of Poland; five Miles from Lucko
to the South-East: which in 1651. sustained a Siege against the Cossacks, and
preserved it self out of their Hands.

Olinde, Olinda, a Maritim City of Brasil, in America; the Capital of the
Province of Pernambuc. Taken by the Hollanders in 1629. and fortified; but
afterward deserted, and returned under the Crown of Portugal. This City stands
upon a Hill, near the Mouth of the River Bibiribe; has a Castle called S.
George, and a large Haven. In 1676. it was made a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of S. Salvadore.

Olivenza, Evandria, Oliventia, a strong City of Portugal, upon the River
Guadiana; three Leagues from Elvas to the South-West, and twelve from Evora to
the East. Taken by the Spaniards in 1658. and restored to the Portuguese by the
Treaty of Peace at Lisbon, in 1688.

Olivero, Oliverio, Helicon, a River on the North of Sicily.

The Mount of Olives, Mons Olivetus, a Mount in the Vicinage, to the East of
the City Jerusalem, in Palestine; which has the Valley of Jehosaphat lying
betwixt Jerusalem and it, and the Brook Kedron gliding at its Foot. About two
thousand Paces in length; from North to South, and six hundred in height,
affording a delightful Prospect not only over Jerusalem, but toward the
Mountains of Arabia, toward Jordain and the Dead Sea, Hebron and Samaria. It
breaks into three Points or little Hills, whereof the lowest to the South is
called the Mountain of Scandal, that to the North Mons Viri Galilaei; the other
in the midst is the highest. And upon each of these Hills, in the times of the
ancient Moabites and Ammonites, stood a Tabernacle of the Idols Ashtaroth,
Chamosh, and Melchen, which were adored by Solomon's Concubines. Hither our
Savior retired to pray the Night preceding his Passion, as before often; and
from hence he ascended into Heaven, leaving the Print of his Foot upon a Rock,
which is shown to Pilgrims to this day. Helena, the Mother of Constantine,
built a Noble Church here, whose Ruins are extant; together with others of the
Temple of Moloc, the Village Shiloah, the Garden of Gethsemani, and the
Sepulchers of the Prophets Haggai and Zechariah, severally scattered up and
down the Mountain. The Turks have now two or three small Mosques upon it. It is
of a fruitful Mould, yielding Corn, and plenty of Olives according to its Name.

Oliveto, a Principality toward the middle of the Basilicata, in the Kingdom
of Naples.

Olmitz, Olmutz, Olomutium, a small, but neat, strong, populous City; once the
Capital of Moravia, a Province in Bohemia; and a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Prague. Taken by the Swedes in 1642. and defended by them against
the Emperor, till the Peace of Munster: it stands seven German Miles from Bryn
to the South-East, twenty from Vienna to the North, and twenty six from
Cracovia to the West, in a fruitful Soil. The Poles call it Olomoniec; the
Germans Ulmitz.

Olt, Aluta, a River of Transylvania, called by the Germans Alt; flowing
Southward through Transylvania, and watering Cronstad, Mergenburg, Fogaras, it
leaves Hermanstat to the West; and crossing the Mountains of Eysenthorn, and
the Western Part of Moldavia, falls into the Danube above Nigeboli.

Olympia, an ancient City of Elis (now the Province of Belvedore) in the Morea;
where Jupiter (thence surnamed Olympius) had a magnificent Temple dedicated to
him, which the Oracles therein delivered, and the Olympic Games every five
years celebrated in his Honor, rendered immensely rich. Famous moreover for a
Statue and Throne of Jupiter, made by Phidias of Gold, Ivory, and Precious
Stones with that Art and Grandeur, as to be accounted amongst the Wonders of
the Old World. Pausanias delivers a particular Description thereof. Strabo
remarks a Fault in the Proportion. The Emperor Caligula would have taken it
away, but was diverted from his Enterprise by strange Prodigies, according to
the Histories of Dion, Suetonius, and Josephus. In the same Temple, amongst
many other Altars, there was one dedicated to the Unknown Gods: which gave the
occasion to the like Inscription at Athens.

Olympus, a high Mountain of Thessalia, betwixt the Mountains Pelion and Ossa;
well known in the Writings of all Greek and Latin Poets. It is now called Lacha.

Om, Lar, a River of Arabia Foelix, which falls into the Gulf of Persia.

Ombla, Arjona, a River of Dalmatia, which falls into a Harbor of the same
Name; two French Leagues from Raguza to the North. This seems to be the Port
belonging to Raguza.

Ombria, or l'Vmbra, Vmbria, was in ancient Times a considerable part of Italy:
Bounded on the North by the Adriatic Sea: on the South by the River Nera, Nar;
on the West by the Tiber; and on the East by Picenum, the Apennine dividing it.
This, in ancient Inscriptions and Authors epitheted according to its several
Provinces, Vmbria Thuscia, Vmbria Sabina, Vmbria Crustomina, Vmbria Fidenata,
Senonia, etc. contained the Dukedom of Vrbino; a part of the Marchia
Anconitana, and of Romandiola; the Dukedom of Spoleto; and the greatest part of
what is now from the ancient name called Ombria; which is bounded on the North
with the Dukedom of Vrbino, and the Marchia Anconitana; on the West with the
Dukedom of Florence; on the South with S. Peter's Patrimony, and on the East
with Abruzzo: all under the Pope except S. Sepulcro, which belongs to the Duke
of Florence: the Capital City of Ombria is Perugia.

Ombrone, Vmbro, a River of Italy; which arises ten Miles from Siena to the
East, and flowing Southward by Buonconvento, takes in Mersa and Orcia: and five
Miles beneath Grosseto, falls into the Tyrrhenian Sea; seven from Talamont to
the North West. There is a Castle called by the same name at its fall into the
Sea.

Omland, a part of the Province of Groeningerlandt, in the United Netherlands;
well Peopled with Villages and excellent in Pasturage. It did belong heretofore
to Friseland.

Omme. See Trero.

Onega, a vast Lake in Moscovy; between the White Sea to the North, Ladoga
(another great Lake) to the West, Kargapolia to the East, and Megrina to the
South: It parts the Dominions of the Swedes from the Moscovites to the North
and South; and transmits its Waters by the River Suri into Ladoga. The Natives
call it Onega Ozero. It is computed to be fifty Leagues in length, eighteen in
breadth, and one hundred and twenty in circumference.

Onar, a City on the Promontory of Malabar, in the East Indies; eighteen
Spanish Leagues from Goa to the South: which has a strong Castle, a large
Haven; heretofore in the hands of the Portuguese; but now subject to the King
of Canara, with the Kingdom depending on it, called by the same name.

Oneglia, or Oneille, a Valley upon the Borders of the States of Genoua, in
Italy, under the Duke of Savoy. It has the honor to be a Marquisate, and is
extremely commended for its Vines, Olives, and Fruits.

Onspach, or Anspach, Onoldum, Onspachium, Anspachium, a Town and Castle in
Franconia, upon a River of the same name in Franconia; six German Miles from
Norimburg to the East, and ten from Bamberg. This is the Capital of a
Marquisate, belonging to a Prince of the Family of Brandenburg; between the
Bishoprics of Bamberg and VVurtsburg to the North, and that of Eichstad to the
South.

Ophiophagi, an ancient People of Aethiopia, whom the Classicks characterize
under this name, because of their Eating of Serpents.

Oppelen, Oppolia, a City of Bohemia in Silesia, upon the River Oder; the
Capital of a Dukedom. It has an ancient Castle, which together with the Dukedom
was mortgaged to J. Casimir King of Poland. The City is well fortified; yet
taken by the Swedes, and kept till the Peace of Munster. It stands seven German
Miles from Ratisbon to the North, nine from VVratislaw, and six from the
Borders of Poland.

The Land of Ophir. When Christopher Columbus first discovered the Island of
Hispaniola in America, in 1492. he was confident he had found the Ophir of K.
Solomon, to see the vast Mines of Gold there. Peru, and Mexico, have had the
same judgment passed upon them; as in Africa, the Kingdoms of Angola, Melinde,
and Sofala, together with Carthage; and in Asia, Arabia, the Islands of Ormus;
Zeylan, Java, Sumatra; the Kingdoms of Pegu, Siam, Bengala and Malaca: But the
American Voyages, of all, sound the most improbable, because of the immense
distance of that Country from Palestine, and the want of the Compass in those
times, which made Men scarce dare to lose the sight of Land. Joktan, of the
Posterity of Shem, had two Sons, called Ophir and Havilah. Genesis 10. 29. Havilah
is the name also, in Genesis 2. 11. of a Country, where there is Gold, the
Bdellium and the Onyx Stone: which being the same product with that of the Land
of Ophir, (procured by David and Solomon), may signify the Lands of those two
Brothers to compose but one and the same Country, to wit Arabia, variously
called by each others name. And Bochartus allows, that the three thousand
talents of the Gold of Ophir, prepared by King David, (1 Chronicles. 29. 4.) were
fetched from Arabia. It is true, Josephus says, Solomon's Fleet went to the
Indies, to a Land called, the Land of Gold, meaning the Chersonesus Aurea (now
Malaca:) and S. Jerome, that Ophir of the po^terity of Shem gave his name not
only to that Chersonesus, but also to the Isles of Java and Sumatra, and the
Kingdoms of Siam, Pegu, and Bengala: Whereby, the three years time, said to be
spent in the Voyage, may be the better accounted for. But this is no place to
controvert opinions.

Oppaw, the same with Troppaw.

Oppenheim, Oppenhemium, a small German City in the Lower Palatinate of the
Rhine; heretofore an Imperial and Free City, but granted to Rupert Prince
Elector by Lewis the Emperor in 1402, with its Territory. It stands upon a Hill
three German Miles from Mentz to the South. Rupertus King of the Romans died
here in 1410. The French put a Garrison into it in 1688. and have demolished it
since.

Oppido, Oppidum, a City of the Kingdom of Naples, in the Further Calabria*
which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Regio; seated at the foot of
the Apennine, at the Rise of the River Marro; twelve Miles from the Tyrrheniam
Sea, thirty from Messina to the North-East, and twenty from Mileto to the
South. Cluverius believes it is the old Mamertum.

Opus or Opuntum, an ancient City of Boeotia, in Greece, near the Gulf of
Negropont. Ptolemy, Strabo, Ovid, etc. mention it. Since the times of
Christianity, there has been an Episcopal See placed in it, under the
Archbishop of Athens.

Oran, Icosium, Oranum, Orano, a small City in Barbary; called by the Moors
Guharan; which has a very strong Castle. Seated upon the Shoars of the
Mediterranean Sea, in the Kingdom of Algier. Taken in 1509. by the Cardinal of
Ximenes for the Spaniards, in whose hands it still is. In 1556. the Turks
unprofitably besieged it. The Spaniards in 1687. sent thither a greater
Garrison than it formerly had. A numerous Army of Moors encamped very near it
for some months in 1688. and retired without any Action considerable. It has a
safe and large Haven; seated over against Cartagena in Spain, and attributed to
the Diocese of Toledo there. It has been heretofore called by the name of Quisa.

Orange, Auranche, Arausio, Colonia Secundanorum, Arausio Cavarum, Arausica
Civitas, in Sidonius Apollinaris Arausionensis Vrbs, a City of Provence in
France; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Arles; and an
University; tho of small extent, seated near the River Ligne; three Miles from
the Rhosne, and from S. Esprit to the South-East; four from Avignon to the
North, and near ten from Montlimart to the South. This City is the Capital of
the Principality of Orange; and (says Baudrand) under the Prince of Orange;
but the Castle strongly built upon an Hill by Prince Maurice of Nassaw, in
1622. (which should have defended it) was destroyed in 1660. There is in it the
Ruins of a Roman Amphitheatre; and of a triumphant Arch, without the walls,
erected by Caius Marius and Luctatius Catulus, after their Victory over the
Cimbri and Teutones. The Principality of Orange is a very small Territory, not
exceeding six French Leagues in Circuit: surrounded by the County de Venascin
on all sides; and contains besides its Capital fifteen Villages. It has
belonged to the Illustrious House of Nassaw, ever since 1559. The Right and
Title of it belonging now to K. William, the most Illustrious Prince of Orange.
It is of a fertile Soil for Wine, Corn, Saffron and Fruits. The University of
Orange was founded by Raymond V. of the House of Baux, Prince of Orange, in
1365. In 1562. and 1571. during the Civil Wars of Religion, under the Reign of
Charles IX. K. of France, this City, addicted to the Protestant Interest,
severely suffered by Plunder, and Fire, and Sword. In the Year 441. S. Hilarious
Bishop of Arles, presided at a Council here touching the regulation of
Ecclesiastical Discipline. In 529. Caesarius Bishop of the same See presided at
another, which determined the controversies about Predestination, Grace and
Free Will, according to S. Austin's discourses; having their Cannons afterward
approved by P. Boniface II. In 1228. there was a third celebrated against the
Albigenses.

Orba, or l' Orba and Vrba, Vrbs, a River of Liguria, which rising from the
Apennine, and flowing toward the North, (through the Territory of Alessandria)
falls into the Bormia; four Miles from Alessandria: and Bormia falls into the
Tenaro, two Miles beneath the same City. There is a Town and Bayliwick in
Switzerland, under the Cantons of Bearn and Fribourg, of this name; in Latin
Vrba, Vrbigenus. Also a River of the Province of Languedoc in France; arising
from the Mountain les Sevennes, near S. Pons de Tomieres; and passing by
Besiers into the Ocean, below Serignan. In Latin, Orbis or Orobris. The French
write it l' Orb.

Orbego, Vrbicus, a River of the Kingdom of Leon; which arises from the
Mountains of Asturia; and flowing South, takes in the River Asia near Astorga:
then falls into the Esla, which by the City of Leon conveys it into the Douro;
between Miranda to the West, and Samora to the East: upon the Banks of Orbego,
Theodorick (King of Spain) obtained a signal Victory over the Suabians, as Ado
Viennensis relates.

Orbitelle, a Town upon the Borders of Tuscany in Italy, in the Territory
called Stato delli Presidii by by the Inhabitants. It is a strong Town; under
the Emperor Charles V. it resisted the Turks. In 1646, the French: Anciently
the Sienese were Masters of it: but now the Spaniards; as of the whole
Territory where it stands.

Orbo, Hierus, a River in Corsica.

The Orcades, now commonly called the Isles of Orkney, are a Knot of Islands
about thirty in number; lying at the North Point of the Kingdom of Scotland. In
Solinus his time not inhabited, but overgrown with Wood and Weeds; now
inhabited; have no Wood, and bear no Corn but Oats and Barley. The Romans are
thought to have possessed them first in the days of Hadrian; and to have lost
them to the Saxons in the days of Honorius, from those words of Claudian the
Poet, -- Maduerunt Saxone fuso Orcades. -- From these they came into the hands
of the Norwegians, by the Grant of Donald ban, one of the Kings of Scotland. In
1266. they were re-conquered by Alexander King of Scotland. This Title was
confirmed by Haquin King of Norway, and Robert Bruce King of Scotland, in 1312.
In 1498. Christian I. King of Norway matching his Daughter to James VI. of
Scotland, renounced all his Right for ever to them; which was Confirmed by the
Pope. The Inhabitants being a Colony of Norway, speak the Gothic Tongue. The
principal of them is Mainland; in which the Bishop of the Northern Isles keeps
his Residence. They have the commendation of being very healthful places.

Orchomene and Orchomenus, an ancient City of Boeotia, in Greece; where there
was a famous Temple of old, dedicated to the honor of the Graces. It retains
its appellation, amongst the Turks, at this day. Antiquity tells us of another
City, Orchomene, in Arcadia; and likewise calls a River of Thessalia by this
name.

Orco, Morgus, a River in Piedmont, which falls into the Po at Chivaso, ten
Miles beneath Turin.

Ore, a River in the County of Suffolk, upon which Orford is situated; and
Framlingham near its Head.

Orebro, Orebroa, a small City in the Province of Nerke in Sweden.

The River of Orellan. The same, with the River of Amazons.

Orenoque, Orenochus, a vast River in South America; called Yuyapari: It
divides Paria from Guiana; and after the reception of many Rivers, falls with a
vast mouth into the North Sea; near the Island of S. Trinidada, in degrees. 4. of
North Latitude.

Orense, Auria, Amphilochia, Aquae Calidae, Aquae Colinae, a City of Gallicia
in Spain; upon the River Minho; fourteen Miles from Compostella to the South,
and twenty from Braga to the North-East; which is a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Compostella; and much Celebrated for its Natural Bathes.

Orestae, an ancient People of Macedonia, toward the Adriatique Sea, and the
Kingdom of Epirus; mentioned by Lucan with the Epithet of Extremos Orestas.

Oresund, the Sound.

Orfa, the same with the City Rhoa.

Or^ea, Alpheus, a River in the Morea, which falls into the Ionian Sea, over
against the Isle of Strophad.

Orford, a Corporation in the County of Suffolk and the Hundred of Plumsgate,
between the River Ore on the East, and a small stream on the West; distant from
the Sea about two Miles. It elects two members of Parliament, and is remarkable
for a Lighthouse at the Ness, called Orford Light-house. Sir Rich. Baker
reports a Story of a Fish, shaped like a Man, that was taken near this place in
the Reign of King Henry II.

Orge, Orgia, a small River in the Isle of France. There is another in the
Province of Vendosme, more commonly called Sorgue.

Oria, Vria, a City in the Province of Otranto, in the Kingdom of Naples; which
is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Brindisi: placed at the foot of the
Apennine, 16 Miles from Brindisi to the West. Once a considerable City, but now
inhabited by few; and has scarce any thing worthy of regard, but an old Castle.

Orihuela Oriola, a City in the Kingdom of Valentia; which is a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Valentia. It is seated on the River Segura, five Miles
from the Mediterranean Sea, seven from Cartagena to the North, and three from
Murcia to the East.

Oria, Menluscus, a River of Spain; which arises in the Confines of Alava,
from Mount S. Adrian; and flowing West through Guipuscoa, washes Segura,
Franea and Tolosa; at Orio falls into the Bay of Biscay, seven Miles from S.
Jean de Luz to the West.

Oristano, Oristanum, a City of Sardinia, seated on the Western side of that
Island; which is an Archbishops See. Heretofore called Arborea and Vsellis: In
1639. the French besieged it. It denominates the Gulf of Oristano, and is the
Capital of a County of the same name. In the latter Maps, written Oristagni.

Orixa, a City in the Hither Indies; with a Kingdom on the Eastern Shore of the
Promontory of Malabar, on the Gulf of Bengala; in the Possession of the King
of Golconda. Called sometimes the Kingdom of Orixa, and at others of Golconda.

Orkney. See Orcades.

Orleans, Aurelia, Aurelianum, Genabum in Caesar, a City of France, in a
Province of the same name; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Paris, since the Year 1622. having been before under the Archbishop of Sens.
One of the noblest Cities of France; seated on the Loyre, in the midst of this
Kingdom: Honored with the Title of a Dukedom, belonging to the second Son of
France; and an University sounded by K. Philip le bell. Said to be built by
Marcus Aurelius the Emperor, in the Year of Christ 163 and to have had its
name from that Prince; Or, as another derives it, Aureliana quasi Ore
Ligeriana, because it is situated toward the mouth of the Loyre ( Ligeris), to
which it enjoys a convenient and safe Port. It is a delicate City, seated in a
fruitful Country, which yields a generous sort of Wine; and planted with a
Civil and Ingenuous People. Attila, King of the Hunns, unsuccessfully besieged
it in 450. Under the Merovignian Line, it was the Seat of a distinct Kingdom
for some time. In 1428. being besieged by the English, and in great distress,
it was relieved by the Valor of Joane de Arc, that Female General; whom the
English afterward took and burnt for a Witch. Upon the Bridge over the Loyre
(which is very large and beautiful, with sixteen Arches,) you have a lively
Portraicture in Brass of the Virgin Mary in a sitting posture, with the dead
Body of our Savior laid a cross her lap. On the right hand at a little
distance, there is the then French K. ( Charles VII.) upon his Knees praying
toward the Virgin. And on the left this Lady of Arc, done all in Man's Armor,
in the same posture. She continues to this day in great Veneration amongst the
People; and is commonly called by the name of Pucelle D'Orleans, the Maid of
Orleans. In 1312. the Hall for Reading Law was opened here by Philip le Bell,
King of France. In 1551. Hen. II. opened here a Court for the determining small
Cases. This City, especially the Cathedral, suffered very much in the Civil
Wars of France. It stands thirty four Leagues from Paris to the South, upon the
ascent of an Hill, in the form of a bow, encompassed with a Wall of eight Gates
and forty Towers, containing twenty two Parishes, and four Collegiate Churches,
besides a rich and noble Cathedral. In the Years 511. 533. or 536. 538. 541.
549, there were Councils celebrated here, touching the regulation of
Ecclesiastical Discipline. In 645. the opinions of the Monothelites were
opposed in a Council; as those of the Manichaeans in 1017, or 1022. in the
presence of Robert K. of France and Constance his Queen. In 1411. John Duke of
Burgundy, with his adherents, was excommunicated in another Council here: not
to mention inseriours.

Orleanois, Aurelianensis Ager, is a part of the Presecture of Orleans: bounded
on the North with la Beause, on the East by Gastinois, on the West by Blaisois,
and on the South by Sologne: from which last it is divided by the Loyre; though
some attribute several Villages to it, beyond that River. The Cities of it are
Orleans, Baugency, and Chartres.

Ormus, Armuzia, Ormuzium, Organa, a small Island on the Coast of Persia; known
to the Greeks and Romans; with a City of the same name. This Island is seated
at the Mouth of the Persian Gulf, upon the Province of Schiras, over against
the Mouth of the Drut; nine Spanish Miles in compass, and twelve from the
nearest Shoars of Persia. The City, which was once so potent and rich, fell
into the Hands of the Portuguese in 1517: and was re-conquered by the Persians,
assisted by the English, April 25. 1622. Whereupon this so famous Mart,
presently became desolate and forsaken: so that there is now little of it left
but the Castle, that the Portuguese built, which has deluded the Forces of the
Turks and Arabians. Out of the ruins of it is sprung up Gambron, on the
continent. Long. 91. 20. Lat. 27. 30. This Island wants fresh water. It has
formerly sustained the title of a Kingdom. The Tartars call it, Necrokin. The
Portuguese were thought to lose six or seven Millions, at the retaking of it by
the English and Persian Forces.

Ormond, Ormondia. The North part of the County of Tipperary, in the Province
of Munster; called by the Irish, Orwowon, that is, the front of Munster. A lean
Mountainous barren Country; which gives the Title of a Duke to one of the best
and most Loyal Families in that Kingdom: the first of which was James Butler,
Created Earl of Ormond by Edward III. James the late Earl, was for his signal
services in the old Rebellion in Ireland in 1643, Created Marquess of Ormond.
In 1660. he was by Charles II. made Duke of Ormond in Ireland; and in 1661. in
England.

Ormokirk, a Market Town in Lancashire, in the Hundred of Darby, not far from
Merton Mere.

Ornano, a Signory in the Isle of Corsica.

Orne, Orna, Olina, a River in Normandy, which waters Argentan, Caen; and at
Estreban falls into the British Sea.

Orne, Odorna, a River of Lorrain, which falls into the Moselle, between Mets
and Thionville; it has a Town of the same name upon it, between the Moselle and
the Maes; but nearest to the last. Hofman.

Orontes. See Farfar. The same is also the name of a Mount, near the City
Tauris in Persia.

Oropus or Orope, an ancient City of Attica in Greece: called now Zucamini and
Suzamino. Aulus Gellius speaks of it. There was a second in Macedonia, the
Birthplace of Seleucus Nicanor. A third in the Island Euboea, in Aristotle's
time, who remembers it. And Stephanus places a fourth in Syria, called also
Telmissus.

Orsoi, Orsoium, Orsovium, a small, but strong and an important Town in the
Duchy of Cleves, in Germany, upon the Rhine. Taken for the Hollanders by the
Prince of Orange in 1634: and in 1672 by the Duke of Orleans, for the French.

Orssa, a strong Town in the Dukedom of Lithuania, in Poland; seated at the
Confluence of the River Orsca with the Nieper, eighteen Polish Leagues from
Smolensko to the West and twelve from Mohilow to the North, toward VVitepski.
It is defended by a good Citadel. Sigismond I. King of Poland, defeated the
Muscovites before it in 1514; taking Prisoners four thousand, and leaving dead
upon the Place forty thousand. It has heretofore been in the hands of the
Muscovites.

Orta or Orti, Hortanum, a small City in the Ecclesiastical State, upon the
Tiber; near its Confluence with the Nera, and upon an Ascent. It belonged
formerly to the Dukedom of Toscana. Pliny takes occasion to mention it. It is
an Episcopal City, thirty four Miles from Rome to the North.

Ortonbourg, Ortemburgum, a Town in the Province of Carinthia, in Germany, upon
the Drove: having the honor to give a Title of a Count of the Empire.

Orton, a Market Town in the County of Westmorland, in East Ward, amongst the
Heaths; much wanting Wood.

Ortona, a City of the Hither Abruzzo; and a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop
of Trivento; which has a safe Port on the Adriatic; twelve Miles from Trivento
North-East, eight from Lanciano to the same, and eleven from Pescara to the
South-East. It is now called Ortona a Mare, to distinguish it from Ortona di
Marsi, in the same Province. Made a Bishop's See by Pope Pius V. in 1570. The
Revenue of this Town belongs to the Papacy.

Orvieto, Oropitum, Vrbiventum, Herbanum, a City of Italy, of great antiquity;
called in several Ages by various names. It was heretofore included in the
Province of Toscana, now in S. Peter's Patrimony; the Capital of a Territory
denominated from it, and a Bishop's See; seated upon the River Pelia, (which a
little higher takes in the Chiana, and three Miles lower falls into the Tiber;)
twenty Miles from Viterbo to the North, sixty from Rome, and thirty from
Perugia. Very strong by its Situation; being fenced on all sides by Rocks, and
steep Valleys or Precipices.

Orwell, a River in the County of Suffolk: upon whose Banks not only Ipswich,
but Stow Market and Needham are also situated.

Osaro. See Serchio.

Osbor, or Olbor, Osborium. The Geographers do not determine whereabouts in
Germany it was, that this Place stood. But they omit not to mention it, upon
the account of a Council there assembled, in the presence of the Emperor Henry
IV. which condemned the Antipope Honorius II. and confirmed the Election of
Pope Alexander II.

Oseau, Ossavus, a small River in Bearn.

Osenburgh, Osnaburgum, Osnabrugum, Osnabrucum, a City of Westphalia in
Germany: which is a Hanse Town, and a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of
Cologn; instituted by Charles the Great in 776. It is seated upon the River
Hasa; eight German Miles from Munster to the South-East, and fifteen from
Oldenburgh to the South. Famous for a Peace concluded here between the Emperor
and the Crown of Sweden in 1648. This City is under the Dominion of its own
Bishop, who keeps his ordinary residence at Patersbourgh: and called sometimes
Osnabruck. Not only the Parochial Churches are divided here amongst the Roman
Catholics and Lutherans; but the Lutherans also have the Possession of three
Prebends in the very Cathedral, with a Voice ( Active) in the Election of
Dignitaries. The Roman Catholic Prebendaries have Voices Active and Passive,
electing and to be elected. The Bishopric of Osenburgh is a Tract of Germany,
under the Bishop of this Diocese; by the Order of Charles the Great. Bounded on
the West and South with the Bishopric of Munster; on the East by the
Principality of Minden, and the County of Ravensperg: from North to South forty
Miles, from East to West twenty five. The Bishop of this Diocese is to be a
Roman Catholic and a Lutheran by turns; according to the Treaty made in this
City, in favor of the House of Brunswick.

Osero, Absirtum, Absortus, Absorus, Civitas Ausarensis, an Island and City of
its name upon the Coast of Dalmatia; under the Venetians. The City is a
Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Zara in Dalmatia.

Osinio, Auximum, a City in the Marchia Anconitana in Italy, upon the River
Muzo; ten Miles from Ancona to the South. It is a Bishop's See, under no
Metropolitan but the Pope; in whose Dominion it is: and in a Consumptive
Condition. Lucan calls it Auximon. A Synod was held at it in 1593.

Osma. or Osmo, Oxoma, Vxama, a ruined City in Old Castile, upon the River
Douro; which is yet a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Toledo: eighteen
Leagues from Burgos to the South. This City was ruined by the Moors. The Avion
and Vxero fall both near this City into the Douro. In 1550. there was a small
University opened here.

Osmanili, Bithynia, a Province in the Lesser Asia.

Osnaburgh. See Osenburgh.

Osrhoene, Osroene, and Osdroene, an ancient Province of Mesopotamia in Asia,
near Comagena, upon the Euphrates. In the year 197. an early Synod was
assembled here, about the Celebration of Easter.

Ossa, a Mountain of Thessaly, near the River Peneus and the Mountains Pelion
and Olympus; equally with them famous in the Writings of the ancient Poets.
Since, otherwise called Monte Cassovo and Olira. Strabo writes of another
Mountain, Ossa, in the Peloponnesus; and Ptolomy of a City, so called, in
Macedonia. The River Ossa is the same with the modern Fiore.

Osset, an ancient City of Hispania Boetica, now in the Kingdom of Andaluzia,
near Sevil, in Spain; with the name of Triana. In the sixth Century there was a
flourishing Roman Catholic Church in this City, whose Cause against the
Arrians was pretended to be favored by Miracles.

Ossona, Ansa, a small ruined City in Catalonia in Spain; which is yet a
Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Tarragona. Seated in a Plain not far from
the River Tera: eight Leagues from Girone to the West, and seventeen from
Barcinona to the North: and inhabited by few.

Ossery, Osseria, a Tract in the Province of Leinster, in Queens-County; which
is both an Earldom and a Bishopric. The Bishop resides at Kilkenny, being a
Suffragan to the Archbishop of Dublin. The Earldom belongs to the Duke of
Ormond, and deserves a particular regard on that account.

Ossuna, Orsona, a small City in Andalusia, thirteen Leagues from Sevil to the
East; which is a Dukedom.

Ostende, Ostenda, a Seaport Town in Flanders, seated in a Marsh at the Mouth
of the River Geule; well fortified, and still under the King of Spain. It
stands three Leagues from Newport to the South-East, and four from Bruges. This
Town was besieged from July 5. 1601. to September 22. 1604. by the Spaniards;
being then in the Hands of the Hollanders. And at last was taken for want of
Ground to defend it, by Albert Archduke of Austria, upon good Articles.

Osterlandt, Ositia, a Tract in Misnia; between Thuringia to the West,
Voigtland to the South, Leipsick to the North, and Ertzeburgisce to the East.
The greatest part of it is under the Duke of Saxony VVeymar; and the chief Town
is Altemburgh.

Ostia, an ancient City, built by Ancus Martius King of the Romans, upon the
Sea of Thuscany, at the Mouth of the Tiber (where it formerly had a famous
Port), in the Ecclesiastical State. It is a Bishop's See, continually
attributed to the Dean of the College of Cardinals. S. Monica, the Mother of S.
Augustine, died at it. In 1556. the Duke of Alva took it: but the Pope's Forces
retook it soon after. It had the Fortune to be destroyed by the Saracens in
their times.

Ostioug, a City and Province on the East of Russia. The City stands upon the
River Suchana, where it receives the Jug; a hundred and eighty Miles from
Wologda to the East, and fifty from the Dwina.

Ostrogothia, Ostrogothland, or East Gothland, a Province in the Kingdom of
Sweden. Bounded on the North by Sueonia, on the West by Westrogothia, on the
South by Smaland, and on the East by the Baltic Sea. The principal Cities are
Norkoping, Soderkoping, and Stegeborg. The ancient Ostrogathi and Wisigothi had
this distinction in their names from their living, the one in Italy, the other
on this side the Mountains.

Ostrovizza, a Fort in the County of Zara, in Dalmatia; surrounded with
delightful Forests, Pasturage, and Springs, in so good an Air withal, as
renders its Situation charming. About a hundred years ago the Venetians took it
from the Turks and burnt it. And after the latter had again rebuilt it, the
Morlaques of Croatia in 1682. set, a second time, fire to it. But in 1683. the
Venetians entered upon a settled Possession of it, and secured it with a
Garrison.

Ostuni, Ostunum, a City of the Province of Otranto, in the Kingdom of Naples;
which is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Brindisi; toward the Shoars
of the Adriatic: sixteen Miles from Brindisi to the West, and twenty two from
Taranto to the South-East.

Oswestree, a Market Town in Shropshire. The Capital of its Hundred: near the
Borders of Wales.

Otford, a Town in the County of Kent, in Sutton Lath, near the River Darent:
where Canutus the Dane, in a Battle with King Edmund Ironside, was put to
flight with the loss of five thousand Men. It is a Town of good Antiquity.

Otley, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of
Skirack upon the River Wharfe.

Otranto, Hydruntum, Hydrus, a City in the Kingdom of Naples; which is an
Archbishop's See, and the Capital of a Province of the same name; on the Shoars
of the Adriatic, to which it has a Port; forty five Miles from Brindisi to
the South, twenty four from Gallipoli to the East. This City was taken and
miserably ruined by Mahomet II. (Emperor of the Turks) in 1480. But he dying
soon after, Alphonsus Duke of Calabria, ^ate down before it; and took it before
the Turks were in condition to relieve their Garrison. There is now in it a
strong Castle, situated upon a Rock. In 1567, a Provincial Synod was assembled
here.

La Terra d'Otranto, (the Province which takes its name from the City last
mentioned) is bounded on the East, South and West, with the Mediterranean Sea;
on the North by Bari, and the Basilicate. This was a part of the ancient
Calabria; and has many Greeks living on the South side. The principal Places
next Otranto, are Lecca, Brindisi, Gallipoli, Matera, and Taranto.

Ottenwalt, Otthoma Sylva, a Forest in the Palatinate of the Rhine; between the
Maine and the Necker; which has been under that Elector ever since 1465. It
lies in the Confines of Franconia, toward Gerawer and the Earldom of Erpach.

Ottercy S. Mary, a Market Town in Devonsh. The Capital of its Hundred.

Otthen, Ottonium. See Odensee.

Oudenarde, Aldenarda, Aldenardum, a Town in Flanders of great strength;
divided by the Scheld into two parts, and strengthened by a Castle called
Pamele, which is joined to the Town by a fair Bridge over the Scheld. It lies
five Leagues from Gaunt, and six from Tournay. Taken by the French in 1658. and
1667. Besieged without success by the Spaniards in 1674, but by the Treaty of
Nimeguen restored to them in 1679. Some derive its beginning from a Fortress
built by the Hunns upon the Schelde in 411.

Oudon, Olda, a River in France, in the Province of Anjou. Another in Aquitain,
called le Lot more commonly: and a third in Beaujolois.

Over-Yssel, Over-Issel, Trans-Issalana, a Province of great extent in the
United Netherlands, toward Germany; which was a part of the Bishopric of
Vtrecht from the year 1046, and called so because it lay beyond the Issel. It
is divided into three parts; the Drente, the Sallant, and the Twente. Bounded
on the East by the Bishopric of Munster; on the North by Friesland and
Groningen; on the West and South by the Zuyder Sea, and Guelderland. It was
granted from the Bishopric to Charles V. in 1527. In 1582. it revolted from
Spain, and united with the Hollanders. In 1672. it was overrun by the French;
who were forced two years after to draw off: so it returned to its former
liberty. The principal Places are Deventer, Campen, Zwol, and Coevorden.

Ovessant, Vxantis Insula, an Island on the West of Britany in France.

Oviedo, Ovedum, Ovetum, a City in the Kingdom of Leon in Spain; the Capital of
a Territory called les Asturies d'Oviedo; and a Bishop's See, under the
Archbishop of Compostella; between the Nora and the Nalona. Once the Capital of
a Kingdom, begun in the Person of Pelagius in 717. and continued in his
Successors till the year 913, when Ordenno II. took the style of King of Leon.
This City stands five Spanish Leagues from the Shoars of the Ocean to the
South, eighteen from Asturia, and sixteen from Leon, betwixt the Mountains.
There was a small University opened here in 1580, which never much improved. In
901. a Council was assembled at this City, under Pope John VIII. which advanced
the Sea to the Dignity of an Archbishopric. But it has lost again that Dignity
since.

Oulney, a Market Town in Buckinghamshire, in the Hundred of Newport, upon the
River Ouse.

Oundle, a Market Town in Northamptonshire, in the Hundred of Polbrooke;
pleasantly seated on the Banks of the Nen, over which it has two Bridges. It is
beautified with a fair Church, a Free School, and an Almshouse.

L'Ourt or Ourte, Vrta, a River of the Low Countries, springing near the
Frontiers of the Dukedom of Luxembourg, and passing by Offalize, Rochefort,
Durbui, it receives the Albe with the change of its name into Vrt Ourt, and
falls into the Maese at Liege.

Ourtes or Orthez, Ortesium, a Town in the Canton of Bearn, in Switzerland,
upon the Gave de Pau, betwixt Pau and Bayonne. Remarkable for an ancient
Castle, and a Protestant School.

Ousche or L'Ouche, Oscaris, a River of the Dukedom of Bourgogne in France,
passing by Fleuri and Dijon, and after the Reception of some Rivulets joining
with the Saosne, near S. Jean de Lone.

Ouse, Isis, a River in Glocestersh. which arises in the South Border of that
Shire, near Toorleton; at Crekelade, it takes in the Churne; at Lechlade, the
Colne; and beneath it the Leche. This is properly the Head of the Thames; tho
it has not that Name, till its conjunction with the Them in Oxfordshire.

Ouse, Garryenus, a River called Ure, and Your; which parts the West, from
the North Riding of Yorkshire; waters the City of York; and then falls into
the Wherfe at Cawood Castle.

Ouse the Great, arises in the County of Hertford, in a place called Dane End
above Lutton: and running North-West, enters Bedfordshire, and waters the
principal Town of it: from thence it passes to Huntington by Ely; above which
joining with the River Granta from Cambridge, and beneath Little Port taking in
the Little Ouse (which arises at Loppham Ford, in the County of Suffolk; and
dividing Suffolk from Norfolk, passes by Thetford, into the Great Ouse) by
Downham and Kings Linn, falls into the German Ocean. This is one of the
greatest Rivers of England.

Ourque, a Town in Portugal; made famous by a Victory obtained by Alfonso,
against five Kings of the Moors, in 1256.

Ouste, or L'Aust, Ousta, Austa, a River in Bretagne. It takes its source in
the Forest of Laudeac, near Avangour; then passing by Rohan, Jocelin,
Malestroit, Pont-Corbin, augmented with the Ars and the Claye, it unites with
the Vilaine near Redon.

Owar, Ovaria, a Town in the Upper Hungary, upon the River Vag, at the foot of
the Mountains which part that Country from Poland. It stands below Transchin.

Oxfordshire, Oxoniensis Comitatus, is bounded on the North by Warwick and
Northampton; on the East by Buckingham, on the South by Barkshire, and on the
West by Gloucestershire. The Air of it is mild, sweet and pleasant; the Earth
fruitful both in Corn and Grass, by reason of the great abundance of Rivers and
fresh Springs. It is of a triangular Form: forty Miles from North-West to
South-East in length, scarce twenty in breadth, and in circumference an hundred
and thirty; containing two hundred and eighty Parishes, and fifteen Market
Towns. Watered by the Them and Isis, the Cherwell, the Windrush, and the
Evenlode. The Dobani were the old Inhabitants of it, during the times of the
Romans. It takes its Name from the principal City. See the Natural History of
this County, fully and curiously written by the Learned Doctor Robert Plott.

Oxford, Oxonium, Oxfordia, Calleva, Rhydicina from the Welsh name Rhidychen,
is seated in the Southern Border of the County of Oxford, toward Berkshire:
having the Cherwel on the East, and the Isis (or Ouse) on the South. It is a
very fair and substantial City, seated in an excellent Air, and enjoying so
delightful a Prospect, that the Country adjacent has thence long ago contracted
the Title of Bellositum, amongst the Ingenious. One of the noblest and
ancientest Universities also in the World. Begun, or rather (after the
Desolations it had suffered, in common with the rest of England, under the
Saxons and Danes) restored by King Alfred, a Saxon, anno Christi, 806, the
great Civilizer of the English Nation: who sending his Son Ethelward hither,
encouraged the Young Nobles to come to it from all Parts. In the time of
William the Conqueror, it was a considerable City: having then seven hundred
seventy and four Houses; five hundred of which paid yearly Customs to the King.
In this Prince's time Robert d' Oily, a Norman, built the Castle on the West
side of the Town. In 1074, King Stephen closely besieged Maude the Empress,
(Daughter of Henry I. and Mother of Henry II.) in this Castle. Stephen Langton,
Archbishop of Canterbury, celebrated a Council here in 1222. There have in
process of time by several Princes and Noble Benefactors been founded and
liberally endowed here, eighteen Colleges and seven Halls; of which University,
Baliol and Merton Colleges, were the first endowed in all Europe: of latter
times by Sheldon Archbishop of Canterbury, a noble Theater: and at the Charge
of the University, a stately Musaeum was finished in the year 1683. Then the
Bodlean Library, (contending with the Vatican it self), the Public Schools,
and Physic Garden are admired by all. By the Charter of K. Edward III. the
Mayor of the City stands bound to obey the Orders, and live in Subjection to
the Vicechancellour of the University: which, from the time of its Restoration
under K. Alfred, has been all along accounted one of the four principal
Universities of Europe; the three other being Paris, Salamanca, and Bologna.
Henry VIII. added in the year 1541. the Honor of a Bishop's See. Aubrey de
Vere, the present Earl of Oxford, is the twentieth of his Family; which has
been honored with this Title ever since the year 1155, (or as others say in
1137.) It is certain he is the first Earl in England. Long. 19. 20. Lat. 52.
01. This City having suffered very much with and for Charles the Martyr, after
a Siege from May 2. to June 24. 1646, was surrendered to the Parliamentarians.

Oxirynchus, or Oxgrynchus, an ancient Town in the Kingdom of Egypt, mentioned
by Evagrius. He says, the Inhabitants were almost all Monks or Nuns; and that
it had then twelve Churches, besides the Monasteries.

Oyse, Aesia, a River of France, which arises in Picardy; and running
Southward by Guise, and la Fere, takes in there the Serre; then entering the
Isle of France at Compeigne, it takes in the Aysne; and between Clermont and
Senlis, passes to Pont-Oyse; beneath which it falls into the Seyne, eight
Leagues below Paris.

Ozaca, a great City of the Kingdom of Japan, in the Island of Niphonia; with a
splendid Castle belonging to the King, built some few years since. The Island
is in a very large Bay of the Province of Jetsesena. The City stands in the
middle of the Island, fifty Leagues from Meaco to the North-East.

Ozsurgheti, Ozurietum, the Capital City of the Kingdom of Guriel, in Georgia;
where the King of Guriel resides.

Ozwieczin, Ozviecinum, a Town in the Lesser Poland, in the Palatinate of
Cracovia; upon the Vistula, where it takes in the Sala: scarce three Polish
Miles from Silesia, and about seven from Cracovia to the West. It has a Timber
Castle, seated in a Morass: Honored with the Title of a Dukedom. In the year
1654, it returned to the Crown of Poland, after it had for many years been
annexed to Silesia. This Town is called by the Germans, Ausch-Wits.

P A.
PAchacama, a famous, fertile, and pleasant Valley in the Kingdom of Peru, four
Leagues from Lima: where stood, in the times of the Yncas or Indian Emperors of
Peru, a most magnificent Temple by them built to the honor of the Creator of
the Universe, says Garcillasus; not of the Sun, as others misrepresent their
Devotion. Its Ruins are yet apparent. This Temple was immensely rich with the
Treasures especially hidden in it, when Pizarro became Master of the Country.
It is said, himself drew thence above nine hundred thousand Duccates.

Pacamores, a People of Peru near the Confluence of the Maranio, and the River
of Amazons.

Pacca, the Moorish Name of Beja, a City of Portugal.

Pactolus, a River of the Lesser Asia, which arises in Lydia from the Mountain
Tmolus, and passes by the City Sardis into the Hermus (now Sarabat); whence it
is also by the Moderns called by the same Name of Sarabat. The ancient Poets
often quote its golden Sands.

Padeborn, Paderborn, Paderborna, Padeburna, a City of Westphalia; which is a
Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Mentz, by the Institution of Charles the
Great, who held a Diet or Parliament here in 777. In 799. Pope Leo III. took
refuge in this City. In 999. it happened to be burnt. In 1002. the Empress
Cunegonda was crowned at it. Of old an Imperial and Free City; but since
exempt, and in the Hands of its own Bishop ever since 1604. It is seated near
the Rise of the River Lip; twelve Miles from Munster to the North-East, and
ten from Cassel to the South-West: about two Miles from it lies the Castle of
Newhaus, built by Theodore Furstemberg, Bishop of this Se^, in the year 1590,
for the Residence of the Bishop. Long. 30. 30. Lat. 51. 45. The Bishopric of
Paderborn, is a Tract in the Circle of Westphalia; bounded on the North by the
County of Lipp^, on the East by Munster, on the South by Hassia, and on the
West by the Dukedom of Westphalia. It is from North to South forty Miles. The
principal Places in it are Paderborn, Brackel and Warburgh. Ferdinand
Furstemberg, Bishop of this Diocese, has written a History of it.

Padoua, Patavium, a Ci^y of Italy, in the States of Venice; upon the Rivers
Brenta, and Bachiglione; twenty four Miles from Venice to the West, eighteen
from Vicenza, and forty eight from Ferrara to the North. All the ancient
Writers agree this City was built by Antenor a Trojan, (particularly Virgil
speaking of Antenor says, Hic tamen ille urbem Patavi, sedesque locavit,) soon
after the Ruin of Troy: They pretend to show his Tomb here; upon which there is
an Inscription in Gothic Letters, that cannot be equally old. In this City was
brought into the World Livy, the great Roman Historian. About the year of
Christ 452, it was ruined by Attila, King of the Huns; rebuilt by the
Inhabitants of Ravenna. About an hundred years after the Lombards destroyed it,
and Charles the Great refounded it. In 1140. it came into the Possession of the
Carrarii. In 1221, Frederick II. Emperor opened the University here. In 1403.
John Galeatius, Duke of Milan, put an end to this Family; and three years
after, the Venetians took it from him. In 1509 it was taken from them by
Maximilian I. Emperor of Germany; but being soon after recovered, has ever
since continued under that State. It is great and strong, but not very
populous; and a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Aquileja. Long. 33. 58.
Lat. 44. 54. The Country it stands in is so fruitful, as to give occasion to
this Italian Proverb to prefer Padua before either Venice or Bologna, Bologna
la grassa, Venetia la guasta, ma Padoa la passa. It is made a strong place by
its Castles, Towers, Walls and Ditches. The Palaces and public Buildings are
noble; the University is particularly famous for the Faculty of Physic. It is
the Capital of the Territory, called the Padouan; which comprehends Este,
Arqua, Poluerara, Castelbaldo, Montagnana, Mirano, etc. There are two Academies
of the Ingenious established in it, under the Titles of gli Recoverati, and gli
inflammati. It shows the ruins of a Roman Amphitheatre; And in the year 1350.
a Synod was assembled in this City.

Padstow* a Market Town in the County of Cornwall, in the Hundred of Pider,
with a Haven to the North Sea.

Pag^ts ^romley, a Market Town in Staffordshire, in the Hundred of Pirehill,
upon the River Blithe.

Paglion, ^au^on, a small River which washes the City of Nice in Piedmou^;
then falls into the Mediterranean Sea.

alamos, a Seaport Town in Catalonia.

The Palatinate of Bavaria. See Bavaria.

The Palatinate of the Rhine, Palatinatus Rheni, Palatinatus Inferior, is a
Province of Germany, in the Circle of the Rhine; called by the Germans, Nider
Pfaltzische Landt; under the Electoral Prince, who has his Title from it. The
Rhine divides it into two unequal parts; on the North it is bounded by the
Bishopric of Ment^* and in part on the East; the rest of that side is enclosed
by Gerawer; on the South it has the Lower A^satia; on the West the Bishopric
of Trier, and the Dukedom of Bipont. This Country is now divided into thirteen
Bailywicks. The chief Towns of it are Heydelberg, Manheim, Franckenthall,
Oppenheim, Kaisers-Lautern, and Creutznach. These Countries, or at least a part
of them, have been enjoyed by the Palatinate Family ever since 1195.

Palazzulo, Herbessus, a City of Sicily; twenty Miles from Syracuse to the
West, and sixteen from Lentini to the South.

Palencia, Palantia, Pallantia, Palentia in Vacexis, a City of the Kingdom of
Leon in Spain, with a Bishop's See heretofore under the Archbishop of Toledo,
now of Burgos. Mela, Livy, Strabo, etc. often mention it. In 1388. a Council
was celebrated here under Pope Clement VII. It has been in former times a
strong and considerable Pl^ce: but in that part of its Character it is
deficient now.

Palermo, Panormus, a City in the Valley of Mazara, in the Island of Sicily;
which is an Archbishop's See, and the present Metropolis of that Kingdom. It is
great, populous, and rich; built by the Phoenicians before the Greeks entered
this Island. Under Roger Earl of Sicily it became the Capital of the Island. It
is pleasantly seated on the North-West Shore, at the mouth of the River
Olestis, where it has a Port: four Miles from Montreal to the North, and
fourteen from Messina to the South-West. Baudrand says, the French beat the
Dutch and Spaniards, near this City, June 2. 1676.

Palestina, Palaestina, a small, but celebrated and noble Country in Asia;
extended from North to South; between Syria to the North, the Deserts of Arabia
to the East, the Stony Arabia to the South, and the Mediterranean Sea to the
West. This was that spot of Ground allotted by God to his own People the
Children of Israel; and divided at first into twelve Tribes. About the time of
our Savior's Birth it was divided into six Provinces. Now commonly called the
Holy Land; and in the Hands of the Turks ever since the year 1517. See
Jerusalem.

Palestrina, Praeneste, Polystephanos, a City of Latium in Italy, of great
Antiquity; of a Colony made a Municipium by Augustus. It is in Campagna di
Roma, under the Dominion of the Pope; twenty two Miles from Rome to the
South-East. Of old it stood upon a high Hill, where the Castle is now: but also
built down as far as the Plains. This ancient City was pulled down by Pope
Boniface VIII. and rebuilt in the Plain, upon the River Vetesis: it is a
Bishop's See, which belongs to one of the six Senior Cardinals; and a Dukedom
born by the Family of Barberini. Suaresius, a French Man, has published a
particular account of it. In the Roman times it had standing in it a Temple,
dedicated to Fortune and much resorted to upon the account of Lots: Many of the
Ruins thereof are yet apparent.

Palicenus, a Fountain near the City Catania, in the Island of Sicily; where
the Romans sacrificed to the Dii Palisci.

Palimban, a City in the Island of Sumatra, in the East Indies.

Palmela, a Town near S^^uval in Portugal.

Palma la Pova, a strong and fortified City in Friuli in Italy; under the
Dominion of the States of Venice; built by them in the Year 1593, in the
Confines of their Territories, and those of Austria; eleven Miles from the
Shoars of the Venetian Gulf, and fifteen from Goritia to the North-West. Dr.
Brown, who saw this place, says; It is the largest Regular Fortification I
have seen: having nine Bastions, bearing the Names of so many noble Venetians.
The Ditch is thirty paces broad, twelve deep; and is kept dry, in order to make
the place the more healthful; but it may be filled upon occasion. It has three
Gates, and about an hundred Cannon, always mounted; and there are many more
upon occasion. In the Center of the Town there is a Well, and over it is fixed
a Standard. The Venetians believe this the strongest Fortification in the
World. But the Doctor wishes they may never know a Complete Turkish Army
before it, when they are in no good condition to relieve it. Travels, page 84,
85.

Palma, or la Palma, one of the Canary Islands, in the Atlantic Ocean: twenty
six Leagues in compass. Conquered by the Spaniards in 1491, and now well
inhabited. The principal Town of it is Santa Cruz de la Palma. There is a
Volcanoe* Mountain in this Island, which in Nov. 1677. raged with a mighty
vehemence, accompanied with Thunder, Earthquakes, and Rivers of Fire.

Palma, the same with Zadaon.

La Cividad di las Palmas, Palmarum Civitas, the principal City of the Island
of Canaria; which has an Harbor on the Atlantic Ocean, and is placed on the
East side of the Island. Sometime called Canaria, but Palmas is its true Name;
and it is under the Spaniards.

Palmyra, an ancient City of Syria, near the Arabia deserta: the Capital
heretofore of the Kingdom and Country of the Palmyreni, and the Sea of an
Archbishop. The Emperor Adrian augmented it, and called it Adrianople. Some now
give it the name of Amegara; and others, Faid.

Palipoli, Celendris, a City of Cilicia, in the Lesser Asia; which is a bishops
See, under the Archbishop of Sele^cia; and has a tolerable Haven.

Palos de Moguer, Palus, a small Town in Andaluzia; at the mouth of the River
Odiel, (Luxia) or Tinto, (as Baudrand explains the Latin Name in another
place;) upon the Bay of Cadiz; fifteen Leagues from Sevil to the West, and nine
from the Mouth of the Guadiana to the East; in a declining State. From this
Town Columbus set Sail in 1492, when he went to discover America.

Palotta, Paloda, a Town in the Lower Hungary, in the County of Alba Regalis,
near the Confines of Austria; and about three Miles from Alba Regalis to the
North: which was in the Hands of the Turks till 1687. And then taken by the
Imperial Forces, after the Battle of Mohatz.

Palus Maeotis, a great Gulf, or Marsh, made by the Euxine Sea, betwixt Europe
and Asia; having the Crim Tartary on the West, Sarmatia Europaea or Moscovia to
the North, and Circassia to the North and East. About six hundred Miles in
Circuit, and passable in some places by boats. Now called Limen, the Sea of
Zabache, and the Sea of Tana. See Limen.

Pamiers, Pamiae, Apamiae, Epaunum, Fredelacum, a City in the County de Foix;
which is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Tolouse by the Institution of
Pope Boniface VIII. having been heretofore a part of the Diocese of Tolouse. It
stands near the River Ariege; three Leagues from Foix to the North, and nine
from Tolouse. A late Bishop of this Diocese has made it much taken notice of,
by his opposing the present King of France in the Business of the Regalia. The
Counts of Carcassone built it an Abbey in the eighth Century, which in 1296.
Pope Boniface erected into the aforesaid Bishopric. This See was at first a
Suffragan to the Archiepiscopal Throne of Narbon, till Pope John XXII. made
Tolouse an Archbishopric, and then it became subject to Tolouse. Pope Benedict
XII. was a Bishop of Pamiers.

Pampelune, or Pamplona, Pampelona, Pompelo, Pompelon, the Capital of the
Kingdom of Navarr; supposed to be built by Pompey the Great, or rather perhaps
rebuilt, and from him called Pompejopolis. It stands upon the River Arga;
called by the Natives in their proper Tongue Iruna, that is, the Good Town; in
a fruitful Valley, surrounded on all sides with aspiring Hills and Mountains:
twenty French Leagues from Bayonne to the South, and forty from Saragosa to the
North. Taken by Charlemaigne in 778. in his Passage into Spain. This was the
Seat of the Kings of Navarr, till in the year 1512, it fell into the Hands of
the Spaniards. Philip II. built a Citadel in it, to secure his Possession. It
is also a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Burgos since the time of Pope
Gregory XIII; having been heretofore under the Archbishop of Saragoza, by the
Institution of Pope John XXII. Some private Synods have been held here. Long.
19. 50. Lat. 43. 58.

Pamphylia, a Province of the ancient Asia Minor, now included in Caraman, and
called Settalia: Its principal Cities were hereto^ore Perga, Aspendus, and
Attalia. See Settalia.

Panama, a City and Seaport in South America, of great Fame and Resort; in the
Province called Terra Firma; on the Shoars of the South Sea, seated in an
unhealthful Air. It was built by Petrus Ario, in the year 1515. for the
Reception of the Effects brought from Peru; as Nombre de Dios was on the
opposite side of the Isthmus, for those brought from Spain. Soon after honored
with the Birth of a modern Saint, called Rose of Panama; whose Sanctity was so
conspicuous, that the Gnats and Flies in her Cell observed and reverenced it;
as Father Oliva (the late General of the Jesuits) informs us in her Life. But
alas! this Saint has not been able to protect the Town from another sort of
Flies; for January 25. 1671. it was taken and plundered by the French: and in
1686. by Captain Lawrence a Buccaneer. The City, though small, and built of
Wood only, is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Lima; eighteen Leagues from
the North-Sea. Long. 294. 30. Lat. 8. 30. The Isthmus, or Straight of Panama,
is a Neck of Land eighteen Leagues over from East to West; by which the
Northern and Southern America are tacked together.

Panaro-Scultenna, a River of Italy; which arising from the Apennine, in the
Territory of Frignana, in the Dukedom of Modena; and being called at first
Scultenna, (after it has taken in the Dardagna, and some others) takes the Name
of Panaro* and dividing Modena from Bononia, twelve Miles above Ferrari, falls
into the Po.

Panarucan, a City in the Isle of Java, in the East Indies, by the Streights of
Balambuan; thirty Miles from Passarvan to the East, and forty five from
Balambuan to the North; on the East Side of the Island. It is the Capital of a
small Kingdom there. Near it, stands a Sulphurous Mountain, which in 1586.
destroyed above ten thousand persons in a Rupture that happened to it.

Pancalieri, Pancalerium, a small City in Piedmont, in Italy, upon the Po; nine
Miles from Turin to the South.

Pandataria. See Sancta Maria.

Pand^sia, an ancient City in the Country of the Brutii, in the present Kingdom
of Naples, in Italy. Taken by the Romans at the same time with Consentia (
Cosenza,) in Calabria, according to Livy: and more especially remarkable for
the ruin of Alexander King of Epirus here, into which he was deceived by an
Oracle. The Town Castle Franco is supposed to stand now near the remains of
this City.

Paniza, a River in Bulgaria, which falls into the Euxine Sea; four German
Miles North of Mesember, and about five from the Borders of Thrace. In Latin
Panyasus.

Pannonia, a great Country in the ancient Division of Europe: comprehended
betwixt Illyricum, the Danube, and the Mountains Cethi. It was disposed into
two parts, called Prima and secunda Consularis; or the Upper and Lower
Pannonia. The prima Consularis, or Upper Pannonia, lay Westward; containing the
modern Provinces of Stiria, Carniola, Carinthia, Croatia, VVindisch-Marck, and
the greatest part of Austria. The other, to the East; where are now Bosnia,
Sclavonia, and Hungary; as much as is enclosed betwixt the Danube, the Raab,
and the Drove. There was also Pannonia Riparia, and Valeria. The first made a
part of the present Sclavonia and Bosnia; the second, of Stiria. This Country
first beheld the Roman Arms under Julius Caesar. After him, Tiberius rendered
it Tributary; next the Goths, Hunns, and other Barbarians, possessed themselves
of it. Its most celebrated ancient Cities, were Sigesta or Siscia (now Sisseg;)
Petavium (Pettaw,) Nauportus, (Labach;) Vindobona, (Vienna;) Sirmium,
(Sirmish;) Taurum, (VVeissenbourg;) etc. Its ancient Inhabitants were a Nation
of the Celtick Gauls.

Panorm^, Panormus, a Seaport in Epirus.

Pantiro, the same with Heraclia.

Panuco, a City and Province of New Spain in America. The Province lies upon
the Gulf of Mexico, toward New Biscay, within the Prefecture of Mexico. The
City, its Capital, is otherwise called S. Estevan del puerto.

Paoking, or Pooking, a City in the Province of Huquam, in the Kingdom of
China, at the foot of Mount Lungus.

Paola, a Town in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Hither Calabria; where S.
Francis de Paola, the Founder of the Order of the Minimes, was born.

Paoning, Paoganum, a great City in the Province of Suchem, in the Kingdom of
China, upon the River Kialing.

Paoting, Paotinga, another great City in the Province of Suchem, in the
Kingdom of China, upon the River Kialing.

Papa, a small, but very strong City of the Lower Hungury, upon the River
Marchaltz; in the County of Vesprin; in the middle between Javarin to the
North, and Vesprin to the South; scarce three Hungarian Miles from the Turkish
Conquests. This Town in the year 1683. with Dotis, Vesprim, and ^^ewentz,
yielded to Count Teckely: But after the raising the Siege of Vienna, they
returned under the Obedience of the Emperor.

Papalopa^, a River in New Spain, in the Province of Guaxaca; which is called
also the River of Alvarad; and is the biggest in that Province. It arises from
the Mountains of Zonoholiuchan; and receiving Quiyo^epec, Huitzilan, C^inantha,
Quauhquet-Zpalt^pec, (...), and Tey^ciyucan, falls into the North Sea.

Paphlagonia, an ancient Country or Province of the Lesser Asia, betwixt
Galatia and the Euxine Sea, extended along the Coast; now called Flagania,
Bolli, and Roni. Its principal Cities, in those days of Antiquity, were Sinope
and Theuthrania.

Paphos, a celebrated ancient City in the Island of Cyprus, where Venus had a
Temple in her honor. It became a Bishops See. in Christian times: but now
ruined, under the Tarks; and called Bassa.

Papous, or la Tierra dos Papoas, as the Portugueze call it; and Terre des
Papous, as the French; is a Country in the Terra Australis; to the East of the
Islands Ceram and Gilola in the East Indies, near the Equinoctial Line; by
some, made to be a part of New Guinee; by others, separated from it by a small
Straight. The Princes of the neighboring Islands have the Natives in Esteem
for Courage and Fidelity.

Pappenheim, a Town in the Circle of Schwaben in Germany, upon the River
Altmul; adorned with the Title of a Barony formerly, now an Earldom. It gave
its Name and Title to the famous General Pappenheim, in the late German Wars.

Para, a City in the North part of Brasil, upon the River of Amazons; under the
Dominion of the Portuguese; forty Miles above the fall of that River. Long.
328. Lat. 01. 30. There belongs to this City a Province of the same Name,
called Capitania de Para.

Paragoja, an Island of the East Indies, called likewise Puloan and Calamianes;
between Borneo to the South-West, and Manilla to the North East; an hundred
Miles in length, twenty in breadth, and two hundred in circuit. It is one of
the Philippine Islands, which was never conquered by the Europeans. Not very
fertile, or well peopled.

Paraguay, Paraguaia, a vast Country in the South America, the greatest part of
which is subject to the Spaniards. Bounded on the East by Brasil; on the South
by Magellanica; on the West by Peru, and the Kingdom of Chili. It is divided
into seven Counties, which are sruitful in all things, with Mines and Sugars.
Not many Spanish Colonies are settled in it; yet it has one Bishop at l'
Assumption, and another at Buenos Airs. This Province takes its Name from the
River Paraguay; which signifies the River of Feathers. It arises from the Lake
of Xaraies; and going South receives the River of Plata and many others; and at
last by a vast Mouth falls into the Sea of Magellan. This is one of the
greatest Rivers of America.

Paraiba, a strong City in Brasil, which has a large Haven, and gives name to a
Province, called the Government or Capitania de Paraiba. Not above eight Miles
from the North Sea, upon a River of the same name. It was long since inhabited
by five hundred Portuguese, besides Slaves and Negroes; and being unwalled, its
best security was the Fort of S. Francis built by the French, and taken by the
Portuguese, in 1585. In 1634. both the City and Fort were forced to submit to
the Dutch Valor, who new named them Frederickstadt. But the Portuguese have at
last recovered the Possession of it. These latter have sometimes called the
City, Nostra Sennora das Nieves.

Parana, a River and Province of Paraguay. The Spaniards have about four
Colonies in this Province.

Paranaiba, Paranayba, a River and a Province on the Consines of Brasil. The
River falls in that of the Amazons; on the South Side of which, the Province
lies.

Paray-le-Moineau, Pareium Moniacum, a Town in the Dukedom of Burgogne, in
France; in the Territory of Charolois, upon the River Brebinche; two Leagues
from the Loyre.

Pardiac, Pardiniacum, a County in Aquitain in France.

Parenzo, Parentum, Parentium, a small City in Histria, under the Venetians;
which is a Bishops See, under the Patriarch of Aquileja. It stands seven Miles
from Citta Nuoua, to the South; twenty eight from Gapo di Istria, and eighty
from Venice to the East; upon a Peninsula, well sortified, having a convenient
Haven: But not much inhabited, by reason of the unhealthfulness of the Air.

Paria, a Province in the Terra Firma, in South America; near the Shoars of the
North Sea, and under the Dominion of the Spaniards; between the River Orinoque
to the East, and the Venetola to the West. This is a principal Member of New
Andalusia, from hence often called Paria. There are some few Colonies of
Spaniards in it, and a Gulf of its Name.

Parimao, a Lake in South America, which which bounds the Country of Guiana on
the South; under the Line. Some call it Roponouvini. It has not hitherto been
fully discovered by the Europeans.

Parinacocha, a Province of Peru, toward the Andes, under the Spaniards.

Pario, Parium, a City of the Lesser Asia, upon the Propontis; twenty Miles
from Lampsaco to the East, and thirty from Cyzicus, now Spinga. It has a large
Haven, and is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Spinga.

Paris, Leutetia, Luotetia, Lucetia, Leucotetia, Parisii, and Lutetia
Parisiorum, the Capital City of the Kingdom of France; boasted by Baudrand, to
be the greatest City of Europe; with a Nemine reclamante, no body denying it to
be so. This was a celebrated City in the Times of the Roman Empire. Julian the
Apostate (whilst he was Caesar only) resided here in the Reign of Constantius:
and adorned it with Baths and a Palace. But its greatest Rise was from the
Franks: Clodoveus settling the Royal Throne in this City, about the year 458.
Julius Caesar is the first that mentions it; it was then very small; being
wholly contained in an Island in the Seyne, not exceeding forty Acres, which
had then a Wooden Bridge over the River. In this Isle the Cathedral Church now
is, and the Palace of the first French Kings. From the times of Clodoveus the
first Christian King, as long as that Race lasted, it grew mightily, and became
very considerable. But under the Caroline Line it was very little improved;
those Princes not fixing here, or in any other place. In the year 585, it
happened to be almost all burnt. In 845, 856, 886, and 890, the Normans, by
Sieges and Incursions, did extremely endamage it. In 896, it was very hardly
preserved out of the Hands of the Normans, as to the Island; what stood out of
the Island was redeemed from Ruin by Money. The Posterity of Hugh Capet on the
other side fixed here; and bestowed great Sums of Money in enlarging and
adorning this City. Charles the Great, about the year 796, at the Request of
Alcuinus, a Saxon, opened an University here; to whose further Grandeur King
Lewis the Seventh, and Philip the August, contributed very much. The College of
Sorbonne holds the first place therein. In the year 1034, it suffered another
Fire; and in 1206, a terrible Inundation of the River Seine. In 1420, Henry V.
of England, possessed himself of this City, by marrying Catharine the Daughter
of Charles VI. of France. In the year 1422, Henry VI. (Son of this Victorious,
but short lived Prince) was crowned King of France in Paris. And again in 1431.
After this it remained in the Hands of the English till the year 1435. The
Divisions of England under Henry VI. made way for the l^ss of France. The year
1572 brought great and unparalled Infamy and Calamity upon this potent City;
10000 Gentlemen being assassinated within her Walls who came thither upon the
Public Faith to the Celebration of a Marriage) in cold, Blood, and in a time
of Peace. In 1588, the Inhabitants became almost as infamous by the Baracades
against Henry III whereby the Life of that Prince was endangered, and he driven
out of his Royal Palace by a Seditious Subject, who made himself the Head of a
Faction under the Pretense of Preserving the Religion of his Country. In 1589,
Henry III. was stabbed by James Clement* a Dominican Friar, under the Walls of
Paris; just as he was upon the point of revenging the Insolence of the
Baracades. The year 1590 was no less miserable: this City being by a Siege
reduced by Henry IV. to so dreadful a Famine, as is scarce any where else to be
read of. In the year 1610, the same Streets were stained with the Blood of
Henry IV. slain by R^villac, another Enthusiastic Monk, on the same Pretense
that his Predecessor was. In the year 1649, they suffered the Calamities of
another Siege; and were forced to comply with the Queen Mother of France by
Famine. In the year 1622, at the request of King Lewis XIII. Pope Gregory XV.
raised the Bishop of Paris to the Honor of an Archbishop, with three
Suffragans under him; the Bishops of Chartres, Meaux, and Orleans. In 1674, the
Diguity of a Dukedom and Peerdom was added to the Archbishopric by the present
King Lewis XIV. This great City is seated on the Seyne; forty five Leagues from
the British Sea. Long. 23. 20. Lat. 48. 38. Charles V. Emperor (others write
Sigismond) used to say, he had seen in France, one Village, Poictiers; one
City, Orleans; and one World, Paris. The City-Walls have eight Gates; those of
the University, nine. The Houses are computed to about fifty thousand: there is
a great number of Hospitals, Abbeys, Monasteries, Ecclesiastical Seminaries,
Churches, and Palaces; amongst which latter the Louvre obtain^ the Preeminence,
begun by King Philip the August, in 1214; and since by times, gloriously
enlarged and adorned by Charles V. Francis I. Henry II. Charles IX. Henry IV.
Lewis XIII. and XIV. Many Councils have been celebrated here; whereof the
eldest, and one of the most remarkable, is that about the year 362, against the
Arrians, held by S. Hilary Bishop of Poictiers. The Territory about this City
has the name of Parisis: reaching heretofore as far as to Pontoise one way, and
to Claye toward la Brie another. And our Author reports, that the Villages and
Castles in the space of ten Leagues round, amount to the number of ten thousand.

Parita, a Town of New Spain, with an Harbor on the South Sea, in the Province
of Veragna, which gives Name to the Bay on which it stands.

Parma, a River of Lombardy in Italy, which springs out of the Appennine, in
the Borders of the States of Genoua, toward Pontremali; and running North
through the Dukedom of Parma, waters the Capital City of it; and ten Miles
lower falls into the Po.

Parma, a City and Colony of the Boii, as it is called by Strabo and Pliny; now
a Bishops. See, under the Archbishop of Balogna; having been under the
Archbishop of Ravenna. It stands upon a River of the same Name, in a fruitful
and well watered Country; ten Miles from the Po to the South, thirty five from
Modena to the East, and from Pidcenza to the West. A great, rich, populous
City, adorned with a strong Castle, and a Noble Palace; in which the Duke of
Parma resides. In the year 1599, there was an University opened here. The
Emperor Frederick Barberousse besieged this City two years together without
success. It is about three Miles in compass: Has an Academy of the Ingenious
settled in it, called Gli innominati; and in 1602, there was a Synod assembled
here.

The Dukedom of Parma, Parmensis Ditio, Lo Stato del Duca di Parma, or il
Parmegiano, is a part of Lombardy: bounded on the North and West by the Dukedom
of Milan; on the East by that of Modena, and on the South by the States of
Genoua. The Dukedom of Piacenza, the Val di Taro, and the Estates di Busseto
are contained in the Estates of this Duke. The principal Cities in it are
Parma, Borgo S. Donino, Fiorenzuola, Piaenza, and Briscello. This Dukedom was
erected by Pope Paul III. (in in favor of Peter Lewis Farnese his Son, whom
the Emperor Charles V. disturbed in the Possession thereof for some time,) in
the year 1545. called before his Elevation Alexander Farnese.

Parnassus, a celebrated Mountain in Phocis in Achaia, (now Livadia;)
consecrated to Apollo, and the Muses; near to Citheron and Helicon. It is now
called by the Inhabitants Liacoura: about twelve English Miles from the Gulf
of Lepanto to the North; between Leucadia to the East, and Delphi to the West;
fifty Miles from Corinth to the North-West. There ^has also been in Cappadocia,
in Asia Minor, an Episcopal City of this Name.

Parnaw, Parnavia, a City in Livonia, subject to the Crown of Sweden, in the
Province of Esthonia: seated at the Mouth of a River of the same Name, upon the
Bay of Riga; fifty five Miles from Revel to the South, and from Riga to the
North. The Maps place it twenty German Miles from each of them. It is little,
but well fortified; has a Castle, and an Haven: It belonged at first to the
Poles; but in the last Century was often taken, and retaken; till 1617, the
Swedes finally possessed themselves of it, and have kept it ever since. Long.
46. 00. Lat. 57. 20. There belongs to it a small Territory, or District, called
by the Poles, Woiewodz two Parnawskie; which together with the Town, is now in
the Hands of the Swedes.

Paropamisus, Paropanisus, and Paropanissadae, a Country and People of the
ancient Persia, which lay betwixt Bactriana, Aria, India, and Arachosia.
Ptolemy calls them by diverse Names, and makes them an extremely savage People.
Curtius adds, they had no Communication with other Nations; and that
Alexander's Army suffered very much in their Country, which was cold and
barren. It is placed by Moderns, in part in the Province of Candahar in Persia,
and in part in that of Cabul in the East Indies. A Mountain in this Country did
anciently bear the same Name; which the Writers of Alexander's Life miscall
Caucasus.

Paros, Paro, or Pario, one of the Islands, Cyclades, in the Aegean Sea; which
has been in all times of paricular Renown for its White Marble. The Ancients
give it the several Names of Demetrias, Pactya, Minoa, etc. It was heretofore
in the Possession of the Venetians; and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of
Rhodes. But in 1470, the Turks became Masters of it.

Parret, a River in Somersetshire: the most considerable next to the Avon in
the whole County. Bridgewater, South-Petherton and Crokehorn stand upon it; and
Longport near it.

Parshore, or Pershore, a great Thorough-fare Market Town in Worcestershire,
upon the River Avon, which it covers with a Bridge. The Capital of its Hundred.
Enriched heretofore with an Abbey.

Parthenai, Partheniacum, a City in Poictou in France, upon the River Tove; in
the middle between Tours to the North, and S. Maxence to the South: six Leagues
from each.

Parthen, Alisus, a City of Pomerania, toward the Shoars of the Baltic Sea:
under the Dominion of the Swedes, near the River Bart: two German Miles from
the Borders of the Dukedom of Magdeburg to the East, and four from Gripswald.

Partherberg, the German Name of the Apennine Hills in Italy.

Parthia, a Kingdom of the Ancient Persia: established about the year of Rome,
508; of the World, 3808; two hundred and fifty years before Christ; in the
person of Arsaces, from whom all the succeding Kings were called Arsacides; and
ended with the Death of Artabanus, King of Parthia, slain by Artaxerxes King of
Persia, about two hundred twenty seven years after Christ; when it had enjoyed
a Duration of above four hundred years. It rendered it self sometime so
puissant, as to dispute the Empire of the East with the Romans. Situated
betwixt Hircania, Media, Aria, Carmania, and the Modern Province of Fars, i. e.
Persia, properly so called. A Country not at all fruitful; yet nevertheless
then inhabited by a fierce, warlike, indefatigable People; particularly famous
for a Dexterity in shooting one way, (behind them,) as they fled another.
Ptolemy reckons, in his time, in this Kingdom, twenty five Cities; whereof the
Capital was Hecatompolis, which is understood to be the Modern Haspaam in the
Province of Hierach, Arach, or Erak-Atzem in Persia; as that Province, together
with Khoemus and a part of Corasan, are understood to comprehend now the
ancient Parthia.

Le Partois, Pagus Pertensis, a Tract in the Province of Champagne in France;
between Champagne to the West, and the Dukedom de Bar to the East; toward the
River Marne. The principal Town of which is Vitri le Francois.

Pas, a Town and Bailywick in the Earldom of Artois, upon the River Authie;
which gives Name to one of the ancientest and best Families there. It had
heretofore a Castle and a Collegiate Church. The Bailywick is of a considerable
Extent, adorned with the Title of a Barony, and united to the Crown of France
by the Treaty of the Pirenees.

Pas de Calais, Fretum Britannicum, the Straight between Calais and Dover.

Passage, a Port Town in Biscay.

Passarvan, a City and Port on the East of the Island of Java in the
East Indies, betwixt the Cities Panarucan and Jortan, toward the Cape of
Balambuam. Heretofore the Capital of a Kingdom of its Name there.

Passaw, Patavia, a City of the Lower Bavaria in Germany; which is a Bishops
See, under the Archbishop of Saltsburg; of old called Batava Castra. It stands
at the Confluence of the Inn, and the Danube; by which it is divided into three
pa^ts, called Paslaw, Ilnstat, and Innstat. An Imperial and Free City; but
under the Protection of its own Bishop, (whose Revenue is about forty thousand
Crowns,) with the Territory about it: which lies between the Dukedom of Bavaria
to the West, and the Upper Austria to the East; having the strong Castles of
Obernberg and Ebersberg standing in it. This City suffered very much by a Fire
of late, in 1661, being mostly built of Wood* Over against it lies Oberhuis,
the Residence of the Bishop. That which makes this City most regardable, is the
Peace of Religion here Established by Ferdinand I. Emperor of Germany, in 1552:
whereby the free Profession of Lutherainsm in Germany, upon equal Terms with
the Roman Catholic Religion, was declared and confirmed.

Passava, a Fort in the Province of Laconia, in the Morea; upon the Cape
Matapan, near the Banks of the Bay of Colochina: taken and demolished by
General Morosini in 1685, because of a narrow Passage hard by, where a handful
of Men might make head against an Army.

Passo di Cane, Climax, a Mountain of Phoenicia, twenty Miles from Tripoli to
the South.

Pastrana, a Town in Old Castile, upon the River Taio; thirteen Miles from
Madrid to the East, and eighteen from Toledo. Honored with the Title of a
Dukedom.

Pata, a City and Kingdom upon the Borders of Zanguebar in Africa.

Les Patagons, Patagones, a People of Magellanica, near the Shoars of the North
Sea, toward Brasil. This County was first discovered by F. Magellane, and yet
not much known.

Patane, Patana, a City and Kingdom in the Further Indies, under the King of
Siam, and near the Kingdom of Malaca: in a healthful and fruitful Clime. The
City stands upon the Bay of Siam.

Les Patans, a Mohammedan People possessing the Mountains about the River
Ganges, in the Empire of the Great Mogul. They heretofore dwelt toward the
Kingdom of Bengale; whence making a Transplantation of themselves into Delly,
they became so puissant there, as to render many Princes and Places tributary
to them. But when the Tartars conquered India, about the year 1401, being no
longer able to maintain their Power or Residence in the open Country, they took
Refuge in the Mountains; fortifying, and abiding in, them ever since.

Patay en Beausse, Patavium, a Town in Beausse in France; seated five Leagues
from Orleans to the North, toward Chartres; nine to the South. Near this Place
the French (under the Command of John Duke of Alanzon) got a great Victory over
the English, under Talbot; the Terror of the French Nation.

Patera, Patara, or Paterea, a City of Lycia, in the Lesser Asia; once called
Arsinoe, as Strabo says; it stands upon a Hill, at the Mouth of the River
Xanthus, (now called Il Scamandro;) eighty Miles from Rhodes to the East: a
Bishops See under the Archbishop of Myra: Famous in the person of S. Nicholas,
who was both a Bishop and a Native here. Apollo had an Oracle in this City in
the Times preceding Christianity; which observed to make its Responses the
space of six Months in the year.

Pathmos, or Patmos, an Island in the Aegean Sea; of signal Fame for the
Banishment of S. John the Evangelist, and his Writing the Book of the
Apocalypse there. Now called variously by Writers Palmosa and Petina.

Patras, Patrae, a City of the Morea, in the Duchy of Clarentia, of great
Antiquity; called by the Turks Badra, and Balisbadra; that is, the Old Patrae:
as Leunclavius expounds their Name. The Italians used to call it Neopatria. It
is an Archbishops See; and now in a flourishing Condition: Seated at the
Entrance of the Gulf of Lepanto; about seven hundred Paces from the Shoars of
the Gulf of Patras to the East, and ninety from Corinth to the West. Chosen by
Augustus for a Station for his Fleets, and on that account much honored by him.
Under the latter Greek Emperors it had Dukes of its own; till the year 1408,
when the last of them resigned it to the Venetians, not being able to defend it
against the Turks. When it came first into the Hands of the Turks I do not
find; but Mahomet III. received a great Defeat near this Place, in the year
1602. Doria the Christian Admiral took it from the Turks in 1533. They then
soon after recovered it; but in the year 1687, it sell again into the Hands of
the Venetians after the Battle of the Dardanells. In the times of ancient
Paganism, this City was honored with the Oracles of Mercury and Vesta; and with
diverse Temples dedicated to Minerva, Cybele, Atys, Jupiter, and Diana, as
appears by their ^ Ruins. The Apostle S. Andrew preached and suffered his
Martyrdom here. Its Citadel stands upon a high Mount, so strong, that in 1450,
it held out against Constantius Palaeologus, the Western Emperor, a year. They
compute about four or five thousand Inhabitants in this City, Greeks, Turks,
and Jews: whereof as the first possess the Cathedral, so the second before the
late Conquest had six Mosques, and the other four Synagogues. Near a thousand
Churches are said to be contained in the extent of the Archbishops Province.
And not only the Greeks of the Neighboring Isles, but the English and French
are accustomed to traffic to this Port.

S. Peter's Patriomony Patrimonium, Sancti Petri, called by the Italians La
Provincia del Patrimonio; is a considerable part of the Ecclesiastical State in
Italy; under the Papacy; which was a part of the Old Hetruria. Bounded on the
North by Ombria, on the East by Sabina, on the West by the State of Siena, and
on the South by the Tyrrhenian Sea. The Capital of this Province is Viterbo;
and the other Cities are Aquapendente, Civita Vecchia, Civita Castellana,
Cornetto, Toscanella, and Orvieto.

Pattesi, Patsi, Timethus, a River on the North Side of Sicily.

Patti, Pactae, Pacta, a City on the North Shore of Sicily, at the Fall of the
River Pattesi, into the Tyrrhenian Sea; forty eight Miles^rom Messina to the
West, eighty from Palermo to the North-East, and fifty from Catania to the
North. This City was built by Roger, Earl of Sicily, after the Expulsion of the
Moors; made a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Messina, by Pope Eugenius
III. and now in a good Estate.

Pau, Epaunum, Palum, the Capital of the Province of Bearn, in Aquitain in
France; seated upon the River Gave, (thence called le Gave de Pau;) four
Leagues from Oleron to the East, nine from the Borders of Arragon to the North,
and eighteen from Dax to the South-East. Henry IV. King of Navarr was born in
the Castle belonging to this City, December 13. 1557. A Castle, of the
Foundation of Henry d' Albert, King of Navarre and Prince of Bearn; who in 1519
established also a Parliament here; which Lewis the Thirteenth, King of France,
reestablished in 1621, together with the Roman Catholic Religion, that had
been thence expelled by the Huguenots in the Civil Wars.

Pavia, Ticinum, a City in the Dukedom of Milan, in Italy, of great Antiquity;
called in latter times Papia, Papia Flavia, and now Pavia. It stands upon the
River Tesino, Tecinum; twenty Leagues from Milan to the South, fifty from
Genoua, and thirty four from Piacenza to the West. Built by the Ligurians, and
thought more Ancient than Milan: Attila ruined it, and Odoacer besieged Orestes
in it. The Lombards took it, not without great difficulty, under Alboinus their
first King, in the Year 569. After this it became the Capital of the Kingdom of
the Lombards; and continued such, till in the Year 773. Charles the Great took
this City, and Desiderius their last King therein. Afterward it became the
Seat of the Kingdom of Italy; to which Otto I put an end in the Year 951. by
the Expulsion of Berengarius and his Son. In 1004. it suffered very much by a
fire. About the Year 1059, it had a sharp War with the City of Milan. In the
Year 1361. here was an University opened by Charles IV. Emperor of Germany,
under Galeatius Duke of Milan, under whom this City then was. Francis I* of
France, in 1525. attempting to take it, was defeated by the Spaniards, and
himself taken Prisoner. In 1527. it was taken by the French under Lautrech; but
soon after returned under the King of Spain, as Duke of Milan: and being again
attempted by the French in 1655. they were the second time defeated by the
Spaniards; it continues under Spain to this day. Next Milan, the best City in
that Dukedom; a Principality, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Milan;
but exempt from the Jurisdiction of that Metropolitan: It has one of the
greatest and fairest Stone Bridges in Italy, and many pieces of Antiquity; the
Castle amongst them; which was the Royal Palace of the Kings of Lombardy. The
body of S. Austin is deposited in a Monastery of Religious here of the order of
his name. There have been several Ecclesiastical Councils assembled at this
City: Particularly that in 1076 held by the Partisans of the Emperor Henry IV.
is remarkable, for its condemning Pope Gregory VII. who had excommunicated them
before at a Council in Rome. The Territory belonging to it is called the Pavese.

Pavosan, Pavoasanum, a City in the Island of S. Thomas.

Pautzkerwick, the German name of the Bay of Dantzick.

La Paz, Pax, a City of Peru, between the Mountains of Brasil to the East, and
the Lake Titiaca to the West: which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Lima; situate upon the River Cavane.

Pazzi, Pachya, a City of Thrace, which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop
of Heraclia.

The Peak in Derbyshire, lies in the North-west parts of the County amongst the
Mountains: And is a famous place as well for its Lead and Quarries, as for the
three Caves, whose height, length and depth, with the just tides of water
ebbing and flowing from them, and the strange irregularities of the Rocks
within, appropriate to them the character of so many Wonders. To which must be
added Buxton Wells; where out of the same Rock in the compass of eight or nine
yards, arise nine several medicinal Springs, eight warm, the ninth very cold;
which at the distance of three hundred foot receive another hot Spring from a
Well, near the Ebullition of another that is cold again.

Pedena, Petina, a small City in Histria in Italy; which is a Bishops See,
under the Patriarch of Aquileja: and the Head of a Territory of the same name,
under the Dominion of the Emperor. Twenty two Miles from Pola to the North, and
sixty from Laubach to the South; near the Head of the River Arsa, which divides
Italy from Illyricum.

Pedeo, Pedaeus, a River on the East of the Isle of Cyprus.

Pedir, Pedira, a City in the North of the Island of Sumatra, which has a
Haven: under the King of Acem.

Peelandt, a Tract in Brabam.

Pegian, the Lesser Armenia.

Pegu, Peguum, one of the Principal Cities in the Further East Indies, called
by the Inhabitants Bayon; and by the Europeans Pegu. It has a Noble Palace
belonging to the King of Pegu, which is fortified in the manner of a Castle and
stands upon a River of the same name, which falls a little lower into the Bay
of Bengala. Long. 126. 05. Lat. 19. 55.

The Kingdom of Pegu was once a most Potent Empire in the Further East Indies,
containing twenty six Kingdoms in subordination to it: but now much diminished,
having been often ruinated by the Kings of Arracam, Tungking and Siam.
Nevertheless a fertile Country, much visited by the Merchants of Europe. In the
Year 1568. the King of Pegu knowing the King of Siam to have two white
Elephants, desired by his Ambassadors to purchase one of them at any price
required; but was refused. He therefore enters in revenge into Siam with a
powerful Army, and takes the Capital City; so that the King of Siam fearing to
fall into the hands of his Enemy, poisoned himself: from which time the Kings
of Siam have acknowledged the Sovereignty of the Kings of Pegu. This Kingdom
belongs now to the King of Ava. The frontiers both of Siam and it suffer the
greatest misery by the continual Wars betwixt the two Crowns: it lies between
the Kingdom of Tungking to the East, and that of Arracam to the West.

Pein, Peina, a Town in Lunenburg; famous for a Fight between Albert Duke of
Brandenburg, and Mauricius Duke of Saxony, July 9. 1553. Maurice got the
Victory, but died within two days of the Wounds he received. Albert being
driven out of Germany, died in 1557. in France, in the XXXV. year of his Age:
having lived much longer than was consistent with his Inconstancy and Perfidy,
says Brietius. This Town is seated upon the Weser.

Peiseda reca, Peisida, a River in the Asian Tartary, East of the River Ob;
whose Fountains are not known, as arising in desolate and unfrequented
Countries: it falls into the Frozen Sea above Nova Zembla.

Peking, Pechinum, the principal Province in the Kingdom of China. Bounded on
the East by Leaotum, and Xantum; on the North by Tartary, and the great Wall;
on the West by Xansi, and on the South by Honan. The principal City is,

Peking, Pechinum. A vast and populous City; which in 1404. became the Royal
City of China, instead of Nanquin. The Inhabitants are innumerable, though it
has been often taken and plundered in the late Tartarian War. It is now
recovering those losses and ruins under the King of Tartary; who is become the
Master of it.

The Province of Peking contains eight Capital Cities; one hundred and thirty
five lesser Cities; four hundred and eighteen thousand nine hundred eighty nine
Families.

Petlecas, Aliacmon, Haliacmon, a River in Macedonia; which falls into the Bay
of Thessalonica, over against Thessalonia to the South-West, thirty three
English Miles. Called Platamona, Bistrisa, and Aliagmo from Aliagmon the name
it bears in Claudian.

Pelion. See Petras.

Pella, an ancient City of Palaestine, in Asia; sometime dignified with a
Bishops See under the Patriarchs of Jerusalem, who for many years kept their
Residence here. A second in the Kingdom of Macedonia, made famous by the Births
of Philip King of Macedon, and Alexander the Great his Son, thence surnamed
Pellaeus. Some call it now Janizza, others Zuchria; It being hitherto extant,
and noted for excellent Works in Marble. The Ancients mention a third in Achaia.

Peloponnesus, the ancient name of the Morea, then divided into these eight
parts; Achaia properly so called, Arcadia, Argos, Corinthus, Elis, Laconia,
Messene, and Sicyonia. See Morea. The famous Peloponnesian War, which lasted
from the Year of Rome 323 in the 87th Olympiad to the taking of Athens in the
Year 350, rather chose to be named from the People of this Country, who
maintained it against the Athenians, than from the Athenians their Enemies.

Pelorus, Pelorias or Pelorum, the same with Capo di Faro.

Pelusium. See Belvais.

Pelysz, Pelysia, a Town in the Lower Hungary, which is the Capital of a County
of the same Name. It lies fifteen Miles from Vaccia to the South-West, twenty
six from Alba Regalis, and twenty from Buda to the North-East.

Pembridge, a Market Town in Herefordshire in the Hundred of Stretford, upon
the River Arrow.

Penbrokeshire, Penbrochium, one of the Shires in Wales. Bounded on the North
by Cardigan, (separated by the Rivers Tyuy, and Keach:) on the East by
Caermarthenshire, on the South and West by the Irish Sea. From North to South
it is twenty six Miles; from East to West twenty; in Circuit ninety five. This
County affords Corn and Cattle in great plenty; and has a mild and pleasant Air.

Penbroke, the Town which gives Name to this Shire, is one direct Street; upon
a long narrow Point of a Rock in Milford Haven; the Sea every Tide flowing up
to the Town-Walls. It has a Castle, though now ruined; and two Parish Churches
within the Walls; and is a Corporation, represented in Parliament by one
Burgess. The first Earl of Pembroke, was Gilbert de Clare, Created in 1138. In
1201. it came into the Family of Martial by Marriage: this Family enjoyed it
six Descents; and by Females it continued till the Year 1390. After which it
became very unsteady, till Edward VI. in 1551. Created William Herbert Lord
Steward, Earl of Pembroke; whose Posterity still enjoy that Honor in the
seventh Descent.

Pendennis, a strong Castle in Cornwall.

Pene, Suevus, one of the Branches of the Oder in Pomerania.

Peneus, a River in the Province of Thessalia, in Macedonia; which greatned
with the Rivers Ion, Pattisus, and Apidanus, passes betwixt the Mountains Ossa
and Olympus to surrender it self into the Bay of Thessalonica, having first
watered the pleasant Fields of Tempe. It is now called Salampria. The Fiction
of the Metamorphosis of Daphne into a Laurel in this River, gives it a place in
the Writings of the Poets.

Pengeab, the same with Lahor, a City in the East Indies.

Pengick, Penica, a City in Misnia, upon the River Muldaw; between Altemburg to
the West, and Chemnitz to the East, seven German Miles: and the same distance
from Leipsick to the South.

Peniel, or Penuel, an ancient City of the Holy Land, in the Tribe of Reuben,
beyond the Brook of Jabbov, at the foot of Mount Libanus, near Tripoli, and
upon the Frontiers of the Amorites. So called from Jacob's Vision of an Angel
wrestling with him, according to his own Interpretation thereof, that he had
seen God face to face, Genesis 32. 30. Gideon broke down the Tower, and slew the
Men of this City, because they refused to give his Army Bread. Judge. 8. 8. 17.
But Jeroboam rebuilt it.

Penk, a River in Staffordshire, near to which stands Penkridge; a Market Town
in the Hundred of Cudleston of good Antiquity.

Penna, or Civita di Penna, Penna S. Joannis, Pinna in Vestinis, a City in
Abruzzo, in the Kingdom of Naples: and a Bishop's See, over which there is no
Archbishop who has any Jurisdiction. This is very frequent in Italy. In 1585. a
Synod was assembled here.

Penna-Fiel, Penna fidelis, a Town in Old Castile in Spain, near the Duero, six
Leagues from Valadolid. It had the honor to give the Title of Duke to Ferdinand
the Just, King of Arragon, from the year 1395. to 1412, before his Ascension to
the Crown: which Title afterward was enjoyed by his Son John, who succeeding
to the Crown also in 1458. changed this Duchy into a simple Seigniory; which
degradation of it, Philip II. King of Spain in part retrieved again, by making
it a Marquisate.

Penon de Uelez, a Fortress of the King of Spain, upon the Coast of Barbary;
between Tetuan to the North-West, and Alcudia to the North-East; sixty two
English Miles from either; over against Malaga in Spain.

Penrise, a Market Town in the County of Glamorgan in Wales, in the Hundred of
Swansey.

Penrith, a Market Town in the County of Cumberland, in Lethward Wapentake,
betwixt the Rivers Eamont on the South, and Lowther on the West: large, well
built and peopled: The second Town of note in the County.

Penryn, a Market and Borough Town in the County of Cornwall, in the Hundred of
Kerryer; which elects two Members of Parliament.

Pentapolis, a Region with five Cities standing in it: of which kind Antiquity
delivers two especially, that were notified by this name. 1. The Plain of
Sodom, Gomorrha, Adama, Seboim and Segor, in the Land of Canaan; being the five
Cities consumed by Fire from Heaven, Genesis 19. 2. The Pentapolis Cyrenaica in
Libya. See Cairoan.

Penzanse, a Market Town in the County of Cornwall, in the Hundred of Penwich.

Pera, Peraea, Cornu Byzantii, Chrysoceras, a City of Thrace, or rather a
Suburb of Constantinople; from which it is parted only by a narrow Channel. By
reason of the frequent and easy Passage between these two Places by Boats, it
may well seem a part of that City. The Ambassadors of the Christian Princes,
and the Latin Christians for the most part reside in it. The same with Galata,
and there more at large described.

Le Perch, Comitatus Perticus, a County in France; between la Beausse to the
East and South, Normandy to the North, and Leinaine to the West. About eighteen
or twenty Leagues in length, and the same almost in breadth. The Rivers Eure,
Loirs, Haisne, and Aure derive their Sources from it. Divided into the Upper
and Lower Perch, of which the first makes properly the County; the other bears
the name of Perche-Gouet, and contains the five ancient Baronies of Auton,
Monmirail, Alluye, Bazoche, and Brou. The ancient Inhabitants in Caesar are
called Aulerci Diablintes. The Capital of it is Nogent le Retrou: besides
Mortagne, Bellesme and Montmirail, are considerable Places.

Pereaslaw, Pereaslavia, a Town in the Vkraine, in the Palatinate of Kiovia,
beyond the Nieper: upon the River Truhicz (which two Miles lower falls into the
Nieper) ten Miles from Kiovia to the North-East. A populous, strong, and
fortified Town.

Pereczaz, Peregia, a small City in the Upper Hungary; which is the Capital of
a County of the same name. Five Miles from the Tibiscus to the North, forty
five from Cassovia to the East, and as many from Tokay. This Town and County
has all along been in the hands of the Emperor, and never under the Turks.

Pergamo, Pergamus, a City of Mysia in the Lesser Asia, upon the River Caicus:
now called Pergamo and Bargamo. At first a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Ephesus; but that City being ruined by the Turks, it became the Metropolis; and
is now it self almost ruined. This was the Royal City of the Attalick Kings;
whose Estates were called the Kingdom of Pergamo. A Kingdom founded about the
year of Rome 470; and after a duration of a hundred and fifty two years, ended
in the Person of Attalus III. dying without Issue in the year of Rome 621, and
instituting the Romans his Heirs. This was also the Country of Galen, the
celebrated Physician. Thirty five Miles from Smyrna, sixty six from Sardus, and
fifty five from Adramy^tium to the South-West. One of the Seven Churches
mentioned in the Apocalypse. The River divides it, being seated in a Plain, at
the foot of a Mountain: in this City Parchment was first invented. Long. 55.
30. Lat. 41. 51. It shows the Ruins of the Palace of the Attalick Kings, of a
Theater, and an Aquaduct: Peopled by about three thousand Turks, and twelve or
fifteen Families of Greeks, to whose use there remains one Church in the room
of the Cathedral entirely ruined.

Pericop. See Precop.

Perigord, Petrocoriensis Provincia, a Province in Aquitain in France, of great
extent; between Limosin and Quercy to the East, Angoumois to the North, Agenois
to the South, and Saintonge to the West. The principal City is Perigueux, the
rest are Sarlat and Bergerac. Some divide it into the Upper Perigord, which is
Mountainous; and the Lower, Woody. The one lying along the River Lille, the
other toward the Dordogne and the Verzere. It affords many Medicinal Springs,
with Mines of Steel and Iron.

Perigueux, Petrocorium. Petrigorium, Vesuna Petrocoriorum, the Capital of
Perigord, is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bourdeaux; seated upon the
River Lille: twenty Leagues from Bourdeaux to the North-East, and ten from
Angoulesme. An ancient City, as appears by the Inscriptions, the Ruins of a
Temple of Venus, of an Amphitheatre, and other stately Works. Near to it King
Pepin the Short obtained a signal Victory over Geofry Duke of Aquitain in 768.

Peristasi, Peristacium, a City of Thrace upon the Propontis; which is a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Heraclia; sixteen Miles from Heximili to
the North. In the latter Maps called Peraste.

Permaweliky, Permia Magna, a City in the Province of Permsky in Russia;
between the Dwina to the West, and the Obb to the East; seated upon the River
Kama.

Permessus, a River of Baeotia, in Greece; springing from the Mountain Helicon,
and consecrated amongst the ancient Poets to Apollo and the Muses.

Permie, or Permsky, a Principality in the Empire of Moscovia; very marshy and
uncultivated; inhabited by a Salvage People with some few Christians, to whom
about 1550. Duke John Basilowitz granted a Bishop, since changed into an
Archbishop residing at Wologda, and taking his Title from Perm or Prems, the
capital City of Permsky.

Pernambuco, Pernambucum, a City in Brasil; which is the Capital of a Province
of the same name, above sixty German Miles long, upon the North Sea; and a
Bishops See. Seated upon the River Bibiribe, which makes a large Haven. Long.
346. 00. Lat. 9. 15. This was made a Bishops See in 1676, after it was
recovered out of the Hands of the Hollanders: who in 1629. took it from the
Portuguese. Otherwise called Olinde.

Pernaw. See Parnaw.

Peronne, Perona, a strong City upon the River Sum in Picardy, in the
Territory of Sansterre: eight Leagues from Amiens to the East, seven from
Cambray to the South, and twenty five from Paris to the North. Often attempted
by the Spaniards without any Success. Charles the Simple, King of France, died
here in 926. It is one of the Keys of France.

Perpignan, Perpignano, Perpinianum, Paperianum, a City which is the Capital of
Rousillon, (a Province of Spain, but Conquered by the French,) upon the River
Tet, three Leagues from the Sea. It was built in 1068. by Isnard Count of
Rousillon: and in 1642. taken by the French. In 1285. Charles the Bold, King of
France, died in this Town. In 1604. the Bishop of Elna settled his See here. It
stands not above three Miles from the Mediterranean Sea, and ten from Narbon to
the South. Peter, King of Arragon, opened here an University. The Antipope
Peter de la Luna, called Benedict XII. celebrated a Council at this City in
1408.

Persepolis, a noble City of the ancient Kingdom of Persia: built upon the
River Rhogomane, as Ptolomy calls it, in 91. degrees. of Long. or the Araxes, as
Strabo and Curtius. It had been the Capital of the Kingdom, adorned with a
Palace of Cedar; till taken by Alexander the Great and at the Persuasion of
Thais, the Alexandrian Courtesan, burnt in the year of the World 3624.

Persia, Persis, one of the most Ancient, Great, and Celebrated Kingdoms of
Asia; called by the Inhabitants, Farsistan; and otherwise, the Empire of the
Sophy. At this day it is bounded on the North by the Caspian Sea and
Mauralnahalria, or Trans-Oxiana: on the East by India Propria, or the Empire of
the Great Mogul; on the South by the Indian Ocean, and the Persian Gulf; on
the West by Arabia Deserta, the Turkish Empire, and Georgia: so that it extends
from the River Indus in the East, to the Tygris in the West: that is from 82.
degrees of Longitude to 120, (which is thirty eight degrees); and from 23 to 43
degrees of Latitude. The Earth in so vast an extent being very different; but
the Air pure and healthful throughout. This vast Kingdom is divided into these
Provinces; Fars or Persia, (properly so called,) Kirman, Makeran, Send,
Chustusan, Sitsistan, Sablistan, Dilemon, Khoemus, Tabarestan, Gordian,
Chorasan, Erack-Atzem (or Jerack,) Agemy, Kylan (or Gilan,) Candahar, Schirvan,
and Aderbeitzan. The Cities are Ardevil, Caspin, Cassian, Com, Erivan, Herat,
Hispaham, Lar, Mexat, Schiras, Sitsistan, Schamachie, Sauster, and Tauris. It
did anciently comprehend the Countries of Media, Hyrcania, Margiana, Assyria in
part, Susiana, Parthia, Aria, Paropanisus, Chaldaea, Caramania, Drangiana,
Persia properly so called, Arachosia and Gedrosia: which were most of them
powerful Kingdoms. This People were at first subject to the Assyrians and
Medes. In the year of the World 3406. Cyrus vanquishing Astyages, King of the
Medes, made Persia the Seat of the General Empire: which continued in this
Nation, till it was transferred to the Grecians by Alexander the Great, in the
year 3635. In the year of the World 3718. Arsaces, (the Founder of the Parthian
Family) assumed the Royal Diadem; which in time expelled the Greeks, and
obtained the Kingdom of Persia. This Family continued four hundred and seventy
years: succeeded by Artaxerxes a Persian: whose Line after twenty eight
Descents ended in Hormisda, vanquished by Haumar the Saracen, in the year 634.
It continued under the Saracen Caliphs till the year 1030. when Tangrolipix, a
Turk, invaded this Kingdom. This lasted but three Reigns; Cassanes the last of
them in 1202. being slain; and Haalon made King of Persia by Occata the Great
Cham of Tartary. This Prince exterminated the whole Race of the Caliphs of
Bagdat; and his Posterity reigned till 1337. When it also fell under the
Tartarian fury, to which it owed its Rise. In 1405. after almost an hundred
years of Confusion, Mirza Charock IV. (Son of Tamerlane) ascended the Throne of
Persia: whose Family lasted till the year 1472. Then Vsan Cassanes began
another Line; which ended in 1505. when Hysmael, (the Founder of the present
Line of Persia) began his Reign. Solomon, the present King of Persia, is the
Tenth of this Line, and succeeded in 1666. The principal Commodity of this
Country now is Silks; whereof it is reported to produce yearly twenty thousand
Bales, at two hundred and sixteen pound weight a Bale. Arabic is the Learned
Language there, as Persian (which has a great mixture of Arabic) and the
Turkish, the Vulgar. But the Persians, though Mahometans, differ as to Religion
from the Turks so professedly, in explaining the Alcoran, and in their Saints,
and Ceremonies, that each, as they conquer, destroy the very Churches of one
another.

The Persian Sea, or Gulf, Persicus Sinus; commonly called Mar de Elcatiff, or
de Bassora; is a Branch of the Indian, or Ethiopick Ocean: beginning at Cape
Raz, (the most Eastern Cape of Arabia, in Long. 96. 45.) and running into the
Land to 81. having Persia to the North and East; and Arabia and Persia to the
South and West. In the most North-West Point, the Euphrates and Tigris fall
into it with a vast Current. It receives also the Rivers of Arabia and Persia,
which lie near it: but they are not of any consideration, being neither many,
nor great. Some others have counted the beginning of this Gulf, at the Isle of
Ormus and the Straight of Bassora; which will make it much shorter, than the
length I have given it.

Pertois, Pertensis Ager, a Tract in Champagne in France; between Champagne,
(properly so called,) to the West, the Dukedom de Bar to the East, and the
River Marne.

Perthe, Perthia, a County in Scotland; which has Angus to the North,
Stratherne to the West, Fife to the South, and the German Ocean to the East:
divided into two parts by the Fyrth of Tay. It is a small County; and takes it
name from Perth, (or S. John's-Town) the Capital of it. One of the principal
Cities in the North of Scotland, upon the Tay; in which the Kings of Scotland
have commonly been crowned. It lies thirty Miles from Edinburg to the North,
and twelve from Dunkeld. This Town was totally ruined by an Inundation in 1029.
and rebuilt by William King of Scotland, where it now stands. Long. 16. 8. Lat.
58. 00.

Peru, Peruvia, Perua, a large Country in South America; affording great plenty
of Gold and Silver Mines; and at the Discovery of the New World, the most
Potent Kingdom in South America. Its length from North to South is six hundred
Spanish Leagues: its breadth in some places ninety, in others less. Bounded on
the North by the Prefecture of Popian; on the South by the Kingdom of Chili; on
the West by the Pacifick Ocean, (or South Sea;) and on the South it has
undiscovered Countries. It is at this day divided into three Provinces; los
Reyes, Quito, and los Characas; or, de la Plata. The old Capital was Cusko; the
present is Lima. This Kingdom was discovered by the Spaniards in 1529. under
Francis Pizarro, a Spaniard. Who finding two Brothers of the Royal Family, (
Huascar and Atabalipa, betwixt whom their Father had parted the Kingdom) in
disagreement, made use of their divisions to both their ruins: and taking
Atabalipa (the last King of Peru,) Prisoner, (who before had surprised his
Brother, defeated his Forces, put to death all the Princes of the Royal Family,
and caused Huascar to be drowned in the River of Andamarca;) after he had
extorted a vast Ransom in Wedges of Gold, the perfidious base born Villain
hanged him May 1533. contrary to his faith given. What the Spaniards report of
the Fertility, Wealth, and Government of this Kingdom, is scarce credible: yet
all fell into the Power of Pizarro, an exposed Bastard, and a Hog-driver; who
fled from Spain, because he had lost a Hog out of his Herd and durst not return
home without it. He afterward and his Partner in the Discovery, Almagro,
quarrelling; they formed their Parties, and made War with one another for some
years: at length Pizarro was killed at Lima by Almagro's Party; Almagro came to
be taken and executed by Gonzalo Pizarro, the others Brother: And Gonzalo
Pizarro, warring against Pedro de la Gasca Viceroy for the King of Spain,
suffered the same fate to be taken and executed like a Criminal in Guaynanima.
So both the Pizarro's and with Almagro lost their lives, the Government of all
that Country they had conquered for the King of Spain. The ancient Emperors of
Peru were called by the Natives, Yncas. They began their Reign about the year
1125. four hundred years before the coming of the Spaniards hither. Garcilassus
de la Vega has published a noble History of them. In diverse parts and Provinces
of their Empire, they had erected Palaces and Temples the richest in Gold and
Silver as perhaps ever the Sun beheld. There being so prodigious a quantity of
those Metals here, that in less than fifty years, the King of Spain's fifth
part out of only one of the Mines of Potosi, amounted to above a hundred and
eleven Millions weight of pieces of thirteen Reales and a quarter weight a
piece. It lies mostly betwixt the Equator and the Tropic of Capricorn.

Perugia, Perusia, by the French called Perouse, a City of Hetruria, (now in
Ombria) in the States of the Church: a Bishops See, and an University: the
Capital of a Tract of the same name; seated upon a Hill near the Tiber: forty
Miles from Vrbino to the South, sixty one from Rome to the North-East, and
thirty from Nocera to the West. This is one of the most ancient Cities of
Hetruria. Made famous by the besieging of L. Antonius, (Brother of the Great
Antonius) by Augustus, till he was forced to yield by Hunger; so that Perusina
fames became a Proverbial Expression. Totila, a King of the Goths, besieged
this City seven years before he took it. Narsetes retook and repaired it: The
Lombards were the next Masters of it. Charles the Great gave it to the Sea of
Rome. In the Wars betwixt the Guelphs and the Gibelines, it suffered very much:
two or three small Synods have been assembled at it. It gives its name to the
famous Lake, where Hannibal defeated the Romans under Flaminius, Consul, in the
year of Rome 537. P. Paul III. built in it a Castle, which added to the natural
strength of the Place; its pleasant Situation, magnificent and spruce
Buildings, and the great plenty of all things, have made it one of the most
considerable Cities in the Popes Dominions.

Pesaro, Pisaurum, a City and Roman Colony in Vmbria, of great Antiquity: now a
part of the Dukedom of Vrbino, and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of
Vrbino: built near the Mouth of the River Foglia (Pisaurus) upon the Shoars of
the Adriatic Sea; forty five Miles from Ancona to the West. A fine, great, and
populous City; the Seat of the Popes Legate, and of old the Residence of the
Dukes of Vrbino. Totila did heretofore ruin it, and Bellisarius repair it.
There is now a Fortress standing for its security.

Pescara, Aternum, a City in the Hither Abruzzo, in the Kingdom of Naples; of
old a Bishops See. Seated at the Mouth of a River of the same name; forty five
Miles from Termoli to the North-West, and near an hundred from Ancona to the
South. The River, upon which it stands, arises out of the Apennine in the same
Province; and waters Aquila, Tocco, and Perugia; then falls into the
Adriatic Sea.

Pescha, Argiruntum, a City of Liburnia in Dalmatia; now a Village over against
the Island of Pago, in the Borders of Croatia; on the Shoars of the Adriatic
Sea.

Peschiera, Piscaria, a small, but strong City in the States of Venice, in the
Territory of Verona; upon the Lake di Garda, where the River Menzo flows out of
it; fifteen Miles from Verona to the West, and twenty five from Brescia to the
East.

Pescia, Arnine, a River of Hetruria; which has a great and a populous Town
upon it of the same name; in the Territory of Pisa. Twelve Miles from Lucca to
the East. The River falls a little lower into the River Arno.

Pessinus, an ancient City of Galatia, in the Lesser Asia; near the Mountain
Ida, and on the Confines of Phrygia; where the Goddess Cybele had heretofore a
famous Temple and Statue: which latter being by Attalus King of Pergamus
presented to the Romans, in the year of Rome 649. they instituted the
Megalesian Games in the honor of the Goddess. It is now a small Town, in the
Province of Chiangare, under the Turks. Cybele was thence entitled Pessinuntia.

Pest, Pestum, a great Town in the Upper Hungary, seated upon the Danube, over
against the Lower Buda. It is a square Town in a pleasant Plain; and gives the
beholder from Buda a very delightful Prospect, by reason of its Walls, Towers,
and Mosques. The Country about it is called the County of Pest, from this Town.
Between it and Buda, there is a fine Bridge of Boats, almost a quarter of a
League long, or half an English Mile. In 1541. Solomon the Magnificent took it
without Resistance: and though the next year after, it was attempted by a
Potent Army under the Marquess of Brandenburgh, a Breach made and a brave
Assault given by Vitellius, an Italian; yet the Germans cowardly left the
Siege. In the year 1602. whilst the Turks were busy in the Siege of Alba
Regalis; the Germans took Pest and the Lower Buda: after which, many sharp
Rencounters passed between the two Garrisons; especially when the River was
frozen. In 1604. Jagenreuter (a base Coward) being entrusted with the
Government of it, without any force or so much as the appearance of an Enemy,
upon a bare report the Turks were coming to besiege it, deserted the Town and
fled. It continued in the hands of the Turks till 1684. when it was taken by
the Duke of Lorrain, and kept all that Summer; but deserted, when he drew off
from the Siege of Buda. In 1686. it was retaken; and by the acquisition of
Buda, assured to the Imperialists.

Pesto, Pesti, Paestum, Posidonia, a City and Colony of Lucania; and a Bishops
See in the Hither Principate, in the Kingdom of Naples; upon a Bay of the same
Name, twenty two Miles from Salerno to the South, and three from Capaccio. This
City in 930. was taken by the Saracens, and entirely ruined. All its
Inhabitants slain, or carried into Captivity: It never recovered this blow; but
the Bishops See was thereupon removed to Capaccio.

Petacal, Patala, a City of the Hither Indies, at the Mouth of the River Indus;
which is of great Antiquity.

Peterborough, Petroburgum, Petuaria, a City in the County of Northampton;
seated on the River Aufon or Nen, over which it has a Bridge; in the Borders of
Huntington, Cambridge, and Lincolnshires; five Miles from Crowland to the West.
This place sprung up out of a Monastery here built, and dedicated to S. Peter
by Penda the first Christian King of the Mercians, about 546. Wolpher his
Successor finished it in 633. In 867. it was destroyed by the Danes. In 960.
Ethelwold, Bishop of Winchester, began to rebuild it with the assistance of
King Edgar and Adulph the Chancellor. In the Reign of William the Conqueror,
it was plundered by Herward a Saxon; but it recovered in aftertimes. When Henry
VIII. dissolved this House, there belonged to it a Revenue of one thousand nine
hundred seventy and two Pounds the year. This Prince in 1541. founded a
Bishopric in this Monastery; and annexed to it a Dean and six Prebends: John
Chambers, the last Abbot, becoming the first Bishop; from whom, the present is
the thirteenth. Charles I. of Blessed Memory, added another Honor to this
place; when in 1627. he created John Lord Mordant, Baron of Turvy, Earl of
Peterborough. In which Family that Honor now is. See the Antiquities of this
Church, published by Dr. Patrick. Before it took the name of Peterburgh or
Peterborough from the dedication of its Monastery to S. Peter, this Town was
called Medanshede.

Peteril, Petriana, a River in Cumberland; which rises five Miles from Keswick
to the North-East; and by Penreth, and Hesket falls into the Eden above
Carlisle.

Petersfield, a Market Town in Hampshire, in the Hundred of Finchdean,
privileged with the Election of two Parliament Men. The Lady Louisa de
Querouaille Duchess of Portsmouth, bears the Title of Baroness of Petersfield,
by the Creation of King Charles II. 1673.

Petherton, North and South; two Market Towns in Somersetshire, the Capitals of
their Hundred. The last is situated upon the Bank of the River Parret.

Petigliano, Petilianum, a fortified strong Town, in the Borders of the
Ecclesiastical State, and the Dukedom of Florence: five Miles from Savona to
the East, and thirty from Orbitello. This is the Capital of a Sovereign County
or Earldom; belonging heretofore to the Family of Sforza, but lately purchased
by the Great Duke of Tuscany in whose Territories it lay.

Petra, or Petra Deserti, Cyriacopolis, Mons Regalis, a City of the Stony
Arabia; which was of old the Capital of the Kingdom of Ammon, and called
Rabbah. Taken by King David, in revenge of the Injuries offered to his
Ambassadors. In the times of Christianity, it became an Archbishops See under
the Patriarch of Jerusalem: at this day called by the Arabians, Krach and
Kelaggeber. Long. 66. 45. Lat. 30. 20.

Petras, Pelius, Pelion, a Mountain in Thessalia-Dicearchus Siculus, (one of
the Scholars of Aristotle) found this Mountain to be the highest in Thessalia,
by 1250 Paces, as Pliny says.

Petrina, a strong Castle in Croatia; seated upon a River of the same name,
which there falls into the Kulp; eight Miles from Zagarab, (or Agram) a Town of
Sclavonia. This was once in the Hands of the Turks: but retaken by the Germans,
and now in the Possession of the Emperor.

Petrikow, or Pietrikow, Paterkau, Peotrkow, and Petrilow, Petricovia, a Town
in the Palatinate of Sirackie, in the Greater Poland; two German Miles from the
River Pilcza, four from the Confines of the Lesser Poland, and twelve from
Sirackz to the East. It is a neat populous Town, seated in a Morass: often
honored with the Diets of Poland; but in 1640. almost entirely burnt down by a
Fire. The Kings of Poland had formerly a Palace Royal near it; which also
happened to be burnt. There have been, upon several Occasions, Councils of the
Clergy celebrated here.

Petro-Waradin, Acuminium, Petro Varadinum, a Town in Sclavonia; called by the
Inhabitants Petro War; by the Germans, Peter Wardein. It stands upon the
Danube; between the Save and the Drove; six Hungarian Miles from Belgrade to
the North-West, and about twelve from Esseck to the South. This Place has been
very famous during the present War. The Turks made it their common Passage into
the Upper Hungary, after Buda fell into the Hands of the Emperor; and to that
end maintained a Bridge of Boats over the Danube. The Revolt and Mutiny against
the Prime Vizier, after the Battle of Mohatz, of the Turkish Army (whereby that
General in 1687. was forced to fly for his life to Belgrade, and afterward to
Constantinople; upon which followed the Desertion of Esseck, Possega, and
Walcowar) happened here. It has been since taken and abandoned by both sides.
The Imperialists blew up its Fortifications in 1688. and the Turks afterward
quite burnt it down.

Petschen, the same with Quinque Ecclesiae.

Pettaw, Petavium, Petovia, a City and Roman Colony of Pannonia; mentioned by
Tacitus and many other ancient Historians; now called by the Germans, Pettaw;
and made a part of Stiria; upon the Drove; in the Borders of Sclavonia, under
the Dominion of the Archbishop of Saltzburgh; whereas it was once a Bishop's
See, under the Archbishop of Lorch. It stands nine Miles from Cilley to the
North, and as many from Gratz to the North-East, and Canisca to the West.

Petworth, a Market Town in the County of Sussex, in Arundel Rape: pleasantly
situated near two Parks, by the River Arun; and further remarkable for a noble
Seat belonging formerly to the Earls of Northumberland, now by Marriage to the
Duke of Somerset.

Petz, the same with Vienna.

Petzorcke, Petzora, a Province in the North of Moscovy, toward the Frozen
Ocean. The principal Town and River is of the fame name. The River falls into
the White Sea, by six great mouths; between Pustejezero, (a Town and Castle)
and Ziemnoipoias a Ridge of Mountains: which name signifies in the Russ
Language, the Girdle of the World.

Pevensey, for shortness called vulgarly Pensey, is a Town in the County of
Sussex, which denominates a Rape there. But deserving to be mentioned upon
another and a higher account: for this was the very Harbor, where William the
Conqueror landed from Normandy with his Fleet of 896 Sail.

Pezln, See Peneus, a River of Thessalia.

Pfaltz, the German name of the Palatinate of the Rhine.

Pfaltzbourg, Phalseburgum, a Town in Lorain, in the Borders of the Lower
Alsatia; at the foot of Mount Vauge, by the River Zinzel. Which name signifies
the Palatinate Castle; having heretofore been under the Palatinate Princes of
Velden, of whom it was purchased by the Dukes of Lorain: it is now a
Principality, very well fortified by the King of France, in whose hands it is.
It stands seven Leagues from Strasburgh, and sixteen from Nancy.

Pfeullendorft, a Town in the Circle of Schwaben in Germany. in the Territory
of Hegow, upon the Lake of Zell, betwixt Constance and Tubingen. It is an
Imperial City.

Pfirt or Ferrette, one of the principal Cities in the Province of Suntgaw in
Germany, under the King of France. Three Leagues from Mulhausen.

Pfortsheim, Phorcena, Phortzemum, a small City in the Marquisate of Baden;
upon the River Entz, where it takes in the Nagold. Two Miles from Durlach,
seven from Heydelberg to the South, and six from Spire. This belongs now to the
Family of Durlach; but was heretofore under the Duke of Wurtembergh.

Pharia. See Lesina.

^haris, an ancient City of Laconia, in the Peloponnesus: where there stood, in
the times of the Heathens, an Oraculous Statue of Mercury, much consulted and
admired, together with another of the Goddess Vesta.

Pharmacusa, a small Island of the Aegean Sea, toward the Province of Ionia in
Asia the Less: now called Fermaco. Julius Caesar here fell into the hands of
Pirates; and Attalus, a King of Pergamus, was killed.

Pharos, a small Island at the Entrance of the Port of Alexandria in Egypt;
about a Mile distant from Alexandria, to which it is now connected by a long
Bank. Alexander the Great, not succeeding in his Attempt to build a City here
because of the streightness of the Place, thereupon founded Alexandria upon the
Continent over against it. But it became afterward extraordinarily famous by
the Light Tower erected upon it in the year of Rome 470. and the 124. Olymp. by
Ptolemeus Philadelphus King of Egypt. A Tower of so prodigious a Mass and
Structure, of the Contrivance of the great Architect Sostratus Cnidius, as to
be esteemed one of the Wonders of the World. Ptolemy bestowed eight hundred
Talents in the building of it. Statius mentions it with the Elogium of

Lumina Noctivagae tollit Pharos aemula Lunae. It gave Light into the Sea a
very great space: Was dedicated in an Inscription to the Gods, the Conservators
of Sailors; and all the like Light Towers since have been called Phari from it.

Pharsalus. See Farsa above. Only let it be added, that this City since
Christianity was first a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Larissa, and
afterward an Archbishop's under the Patriarch of Constantinople.

Phaselis. See Fionda.

Phasis, a River of the Province of Mengrelia in Georgia; It arises from a
part of the Mountain Caucasus; and passing by Cotatis, the Capital of the
Kingdom of Imiretta, and the City Phasis in Mengrelia (which is a Bishops See
under the Archbishop of Trebisonda), it runs to discharge it self into the
Black Sea; where its Mouth is above half a League in breadth, and sixty Fathom
depth. Upon this River, Amurath III. his Fleet of Galleys, employed to make a
Conquest of the North and East Coasts of the Black Sea, was surprised and
defeated by the King of Imiretta. Toward the Mouth of it, stand diverse
agreeable little Islands, covered with Wood. The principal of them had a
Fortress built upon it by the Turks in 1578: which in 1640. the King of
Imiretta, assisted with the Princes of Mengrelia and Guriel, took and
demolished; carrying away thence twenty five Pieces of Cannon to Cotatis. The
ancient Historians speak of a Temple dedicated to the Goddess Rhea, upon an
Island of the Phasis: But we see no remains thereof at this day; as neither of
the City Sebaste, placed at the mouth of the Phasis; by the ancient
Geographers. In the beginning of this Rivers course it is very impetuous: but
having gained the Plain, it runs so smoothly and its Waters are so light, that
they swim, its said, above the Euxine for some considerable Space. Now called
Fachs and Fasso.

Phazzeth, Phasis, the Capital of Mengrelia; a City of great antiquity,
mentioned by Pliny and Strabo. It stands upon the Euxine Sea; at the Mouth of a
River of the same name; and was heretofore a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop
of Trebesonde. Sir John Chardin (who entered this River, and took great pains
to find this City) could not find the least remainder or token of the City: he
says the Channel of the River is at its fall into the Sea a Mile and half
broad; and sixty Fathom deep; called by the Turks, Fachs; by the Mengrelians,
Rione; and that it arises out of Mount Caucasus. See Phasis.

Pheneum, an ancient City of Arcadia, in the Peloponnesus, at the foot of the
Mountain Cyllene: which heretofore disputed the Pre-eminence with Tegea, the
Capital of the Country. It stood near a Lake of the same name; the different
Qualities whereof in the Night and in the Day are thus described by Ovid,
Metham. 15.

Est locus Arcadiae, Pheneum dixere priores,
Ambiguis suspectus aquis: has nocte timeto;
Nocte nocent potae, sine noxa luce bibuntur.
Phictiaid, Picti, the most ancient Inhabitants of Scotland; who lived in that
Kingdom, when the Romans Conquered Britain: and by their Inroads upon the
Britains, (after the Romans withdrew), occasioned the calling in the Saxons.
See Picti.

Phidari, Euenus, a River of Aetolia; which rises out of Mount Callidromus,
and pursues its course Southward to the Ionian Sea; which it enters not far
from the Gulf of Corinth, or Lepanto.

Philadelphia. See Filadelphia, in Lydia. The Ancients mention a second in
Cilicia, a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Seleucia; and a third in
Coelesyria, a Bishops See likewise under the Archb. of Bussereth. But there
have been Alterations in those Sees in following times. The latter Place,
according to S. Jerome, should be the same with the Hebrew Rabath, or the modern
Petra, in the Stony Arabia.

Civtad del Re Philippe, a Town built by the Spaniards in 1585. in South
America, purposely to preclude the passage into the Streights of Magellan, from
the English and Dutch. Since, ruined by the Indians; and the place called Porto
Famine.

Philippeville, a Town in Hainault, of great strength: fortified by Mary Queen
of Hungary, (Governess of the Low Countries) in 1555, and so named from Philip
II. King of Spain: by the Pyrenean Treaty in 1660. granted to the French. It
stands thirteen Miles from Brussels, seven from Namur, and ten from Mons.

The Philippine Islands, Philippinae, called also the Islands of Lusson and les
Manilhes from the principal of them, are a knot of Islands belonging to Asia;
which took this name from Philip II King of Spain; in whose times, (in 1549.)
they were viewed, and carefully observed by Ruy Lupo a Spaniard. Some apprehend
them to be the Barussae of Ptolemy. In 1564. Michael Lupo, another Spaniard,
was sent to people and reduce them. They lie between China to the North, and
the Molucco Islands to the South; between thirteen and fourteen degr. of
Northern Latitude. The exact number of them is not known; but they are supposed
to be above ten thousand: the greatest of them is Manilia, or Luconia. The
Spaniards were once Masters of the greatest part of these Islands, and built
some considerable Cities in them; but their Affairs growing less prosperous in
Europe, and the Dutch East India Company having ruined their Trade here, many
of them have defected from the Spaniards; who have been forced to leave others;
so that they do with some difficulty keep their possession in the Island of
Manilia, the greatest and most Northern of them, the Seat of the Governor and
a Bishop. These Islands were at first subject to the King of China; who
abandoned them, about 1520. First discovered by Ferdinando Magellanes, who
perished in one of them. The Air of them is very mild and temperate; the Soil
is very fruitful, and produces whatever is needful to the Life of Man. The
Names of the principal of them are Mindano, Peragoja, Calamianes, Mindora,
Tandaja, Cebu (in which Magellanes was slain,) Pintados, Parraja, Masbat,
Sabunra, Matan, Luban, Capul, Abilyo, Banton, B^hol, la Verde, dos Negous, and
San Juan.

Philippo. See Filippopoli.

Philippstadt, Philippopolis, a City in Sweden, in Vermelandia, a County of
Gothland: built in the Fens. Twenty five Miles from the Lake of Wener, and the
same distance from Carlstad to the South-East.

Philippopolis, an ancient City of Phaenicia in Syria: mentioned in the
Ecclesiastical Histories of Socrates and Sozomen, upon the occasion of a Statue
erected there, in the Primitive Times, of our Savior Jesus Christ; together
with the Statue of the Woman he cured of an inveterate Bloody Flux by the touch
of his Garment, placed at his Foot: The same Historians relating, that an Herb
of an unknown Species, of so sovereign a Virtue as to heal all sorts of
Diseases, sprung up close by them: and when the Emperor Julian the Apostate in
the year 362. commanded them to be broken down, and a Statue of himself to be
advanced in their rooms, a Fire from Heaven destroyed Julian's Statue.

Philipsbourg, Philippoburgum, a strong Fort or Castle upon the Rhine; which
before was called Vdenheim. First walled in 1343. by Gebhard Bishop of Spire.
And afterward took its present name from Philip Christopher de Soeteren,
Bishop of Spire; who in 1615. refortified it for the defense of that
Bishopric. George Count Palatine of the Rhine, a former Bishop of Spire, had
built in this place, in 1513, a noble Castle, (or rather Palace;) which was
much improved in 1570, by Marquardus ab Hatstein, another Bishop. Being thus
improved and made very considerable, it was reduced by the Swedes in 1634. by
Hunger. Surprised by the Spaniards by a Stratagem in 1635. Taken by force by
the French in 1644. The French bestowed very much, during the time they were
possessed of it, in adding to the Fortifications: but in the year 1676. the
Duke of Lorrain retook it, though the French came up with a great Army to
relieve it. By the Treaty of Nimeguen in the year 1679, it was consigned to the
Bishop of Spire. The French began the present War with the Siege of it, and
obliged it to surrender November 1. 1688. This Town stands three German Miles
from Heydelberg to the South, one from Spire to the North, and three from
Durlach.

Philips-Norton, a Market Town in Somersetshire, in the Hundred of Wello, near
the River Froume.

The Philistines, a part of the most ancient Inhabitants of the Land of Canaan,
disposed along the Sea Coast, toward the Borders of the Kingdom of Egypt;
whose frequent Wars with, and Victories over the Israelites, their taking and
remitting of the Ark, and all their valiant Actions at various times conquering
and conquered, with Sampson, David, Saul, Ely, etc. are recorded in the History
of the Old Testament.

Phocaea. See Fogie.

Phocis, an ancient City and Country of Greece, betwixt Baeotia and Aetolia.
Honored heretofore with the Cities Delphos, Anticyra, Cirrha; the Mountain
Parnassus, and the River Helicon, situated in this Country. In the Year of Rome
399. and the hundred and sixth Olymp. the Phocenses pillaging the Temple of
Apollo at Delphos, and defeating the Locrenses their Neighbors in a Battle
under Philomelus, drew upon themselves the Vengeance of Greece to such a
measure, that a Holy War, to punish their Sacrilege, was presently commenced
against them: which, tho the Athenians and Lacedaemonians became their Allies,
ended with the total rasure of the City Phocis, in the Year of Rome 408. Olymp.
108.

Phortskeim. See Pfortsheim.

^hrygia, a Country of the Lesser Asia, divided in ancient times into Phrygia
Magna or Major, and Phrygia Minor. Phrygia Major lay betwixt Bithynia, Galatia,
Pamphylia, Lydia, and Mysia. Its principal Cities were Synnada and Hierapolis.
Sometime called Pacatiana; Now, as it is under the Turks, Germian. The other
was famous for the Rivers Xanthus and Simois, and the City Troy standing in it:
the ancient Troas being in this Phrygia contained by the general accounts. This
Phrygia had the name also of Hellespontiaca, from its situation upon the Aegean
Sea, toward the Hellespont.

Piacenza, Placentia, a City of Lombardy, of great Antiquity; called by the
French Plaisance. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bologna; and the
Capital of a Dukedom of the same name, which ever since 1557. has been in the
Hands of the Dukes of Parma. It is a neat, populous City; said to have twenty
five thousand Citizens within its Walls, and to be five Miles in Circuit: full
of fine Buildings; and blessed with an ingenuous Race of Men, fit either for
Arts or War. One Mile from the Po, forty from Milan to the East, and thirty
five from Parma to the North-East; in a pleasant place, surrounded with
fruitful fields, Meadows, and Pastures; having many Channels cut for the
watering their Ground, and the bringing in Merchandises. It has several
Salt-Springs, Mines of Iron; plenty of Wine, Oil, Corn; and Fruits of all
sorts: the best Cheese in the whole World is made here in great quantity. Nor
does it want Woods and Forests for Hunting; so that all things considered, it
is one of the pleasantest situated Cities in the World: and thought to have
taken its name from thence. It was one of the first Colonies the Romans settled
in Gallia Cisalpina against the Gauls. They fortified it so well, that though
the Insubres and Boii out of discontent Revolted and joined with Hannibal, (who
made the Siege of this place one of his first Attempts) yet he was not able to
take it. Nor had Asdrubal who followed him any better success: so that Livy
informs us, this was one of the twelve Colonies which in the second Punick War
saved Rome. In the Year of Rome 553. Amilcar a third Punick General, took this
City with the help of the Gauls; and in a great degree ruined it by Fire and
Sword. Caelius, a Thuscan General, not being able to defend it against the
Siege of Cinna and Marius, rather than he would be taken, desired his friend
Petronius to give him his sword in his heart; who did so, and afterward
executed the same to himself. Spurina, a Commander under Vitellius, defended
this City with great Gallantry against Cecina, (one of Otho's Generals;) who
yet at last took and burnt it, Anno Christi 69. In 269. M. Aurelianus received
a great overthrow from the Marcomanni near it. In 542. Totilas King of the
Goths, took it by a Siege: which reduced them to the necessity of eating Man's
Flesh. About 1335. it fell first into the Hands of the Viscounts of Milan.
About 1447. they called in the Venetians, and endeavored to shake off the
Dominion of the Milanese: which had like to have ended in their Ruin; the City
being taken and sacked, and a most cruel Slaughter made of the Inhabitants. It
continued after this under the Dukes of Milan; till together with Milan, it
fell into the Hands of Lewis XII. King of France, in 1499. Pope Julius in 1512,
got the Possession of it. In 1545. Pope Paul III. Created Lewis (his Natural
Son) Duke of this City: who was slain for his Cruelty and wickedness by some
Gentlemen hereof; and the place put into the Hands of Charles V. in 1547.
Philip II. his Son, ten years after this, granted it to the Duke of Parma;
whose Posterity of the House of Farnese enjoy it now. This was the Country of
Pope Gregory X. Pope Urban II in 1094, or 95. celebrated a Council here, in
which the divorced Empress, Wife to Henry III. presented her Complaints. There
have been other small Councils held here. The Territory, il Piacentino or il
ducato di Ptacenza, has some considerable Towns and Springs in it, with Mines
of Iron and Brass.

La Piave, Anassus, Plavis, a River of the Marquisate di Treviso in Italy;
which springs out of the Carnick Alps, in the Borders of Germany and
Carinthia; near the Fountains of the Drove. And flowing Southward through this
Marquisate, to water the Cities of Cadorino, Belluno, and Feltria, it takes in
the Bceto, Calore, and the Cordevolio: then falls into the Adriatic Sea,
thirteen Miles from Venice to the East.

Picardie, Picardia, a Province on the North of France, toward the Low
Countries; between Champagne to the East; Hainault and Artois to the North; the
British Sea, and Normandy to the West; and the Isle of France to the South.
Heretofore much greater than now; part of it being now taken into the Isle of
France (to wit, le Beauvoisis, le Noyonois, le Laonois and le Valois:) there
remaining to it le Boulenois, le Ponthieu, le Sansterre, le Vermandois, la
Tierache, and l' Amienois. But it has also had some additions made to it by the
Conquests in Artois. The Capital of this Province is Amiens. The other good
Towns are Abbeville, Boulogne, Calais, Doulens, S. Quintin, la Fere, Guise,
Ham, Monstrevil, Perone, and Roye. The Rivers watering it are the Sum, the
Oyse, the Authie, the Canche, etc.

Piceni and Picentini, two distinct Tribes or Regions of the ancient People of
Italy. The one, contained now in the modern Marcha Anconitana, in the Dominions
of the Church: the other, the latter, in a part of the Hither Principate in the
Kingdom of Naples. Both subjected under the Romans about the year of Rome 480.

Pichtland Fyrth, Fretum Picticum, the Straight between the North of Scotland
and the Isles of Orkney.

Picighitome, Piceleo, a strong Town in the Milanese in Italy, upon the River
Adda, betwixt Cremona and Lodi: where Francis I. King of France remained a
Prisoner, after his being taken by the Army of the Emperor Charles V. at the
Battle of Pavia. Its Citadel was heretofore built by one of the Dukes of Milan.

Pickering, a Market Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire. The Capital of its
Hundred; upon a small River falling into the Derwent: Not far from the Sea.

Pico, or Pica, one of the Islands of the Atlantic Ocean, which is one of the
Azores; extending twelve Miles from East to West; under the Portuguese.

Picolmaio, a River of Paragua in South America; which arises in Peru, near
the City of La Plata; and falls into the River of the same name after a long
Course, and the addition of many smaller Rivers.

The Picts, Picti. It is not very certainly concluded, whether this ancient
Nation of Barbarians first came into the Isles of Orkney, then Scotland, out of
Scythia or out of Denmark. But having by force established themselves in the
Counties of Fife and Lothaine, they grew in the descent of time by
enter-marriages and contracts with the Scots to make one People with them. And
it is supposed, their name comes from their custom of painting their Bodies.
See Phictiaid.

The Picts Wall, Vallum Hadriani, Murus Picticus, was the most ancient Boundary
between England and Scotland; begun by Hadrian the Emperor to separate the
Picts (or Barbarous Northern Nations) from the Civilized Roman-Britains, in
123. It reached from Eden in Cumberland to Tine in Northumberland: first made
only of Turf, supported by Stakes, and strengthened by Pallisadoes. Severus the
Emperor repaired it, and made it much stronger in 207. Before these times,
there had been one made in the narrowest part of Scotland; first by Agricola,
and after by Lollius Vrbicus, under Antonius Pius; but these Countries being
not thought worth the keeping, Severus fixed the Bounds finally where Hadrian
had at first se^led them; and erected this Wall of solid Stone, with Towers at
the distance of a Mile from each other, from the Irish to the German Sea eighty
Miles in length This Wall was repaired by Carausius, under Dioclesian the
Emperor, about 286. Having been ruined by the Picts in several places about
388, it was again repaired by the Britains, (after the defeat of the Picts) by
the assistance of the Romans, about 404. In 406. it was beaten down by the
Picts. Aetius (a Roman General) rebuilt it the last time of Brick, about 430.
So left the British to defend it. The Scots ruined it again the next year:
after which it was never more regarded, but only as a Boundary between the two
Nations by Consent. It ran on the North side of the Tine, and the Irthing, two
considerable Rivers. The Tract appears at this day in many places in
Cumberland, and Northumberland; so many hundred years not having been able to
deface entirely that great Roman Work.

Pidanemo, Apidanus, a River of Thessalia; it arises from Mount Gomphos; and
watering Pharsalus and taking in the Enipeus, the Melax, and the Phoenix, falls
into the Peneus above Larissa with a very swist Current.

Piedmont, Piedmontium, Pedemontium, is a Province of Italy, toward France and
Switzerland; called by the French Piedmont; by the Spaniards Piamonte; by the
Germans Das Pemund; by the English Piedmont; which signifies the foot of the
Hills. It has the honor to be styled a Principality: under the Duke of Savoy;
having been of old called Gallia Subalpina. Great, well watered, fruitful, and
populous; extended between the Dukedoms of Milan and Montferrat to the East;
the States of Genoua, and the County of Nizza to the South; the Dauphine and
Savoy to the West; the Dukedom of Auostor, (Osta) and a small part of Milan to
the North. It contains the Marquisate of Saluzzo, the County d' Asti, the
Territories of Verellese, Biellese, Albesano, and Piedmont (properly so
called,) together with a part of the Dukedom of Montferrat. The Capital of this
Province is Turin, Torino: the other Cities are Asti, Biela, Jurea, Fossano,
Mondovi, Pignerol (under the French), Saluzzo, Susa (lately taken by the
French) and Verelli. Under the Lombards this was called the Dukedom of Turin.
The History of it belongs properly to Savoy; of which this is but a Province.
The Taurini, Salassii, Segusiani, etc. were the ancient Inhabitants thereof in,
and before the Roman times. Now the eldest Sons of the Dukes of Savoy are
styled Princes of Piedmont.

Pienza, Pientia, Corfinianum, a City of Hetruria, now in the Territory of
Siena: and a Bishops See (by the Institution of Pope Pius II. in 1462. who was
born at it) under the Archbishop of Siena. It is little, but well Peopled; six
Miles from Monte Pulciano to the West, ten from the Popes Dominions, and twenty
five from Siena to the North-East: under the Duke of Florence. Baudrand in
another place states the distance thus; three from Monte Pulciano, and twenty
two from Siena.

Piergo. See Polina.

Pieria and Pierius. By these names in ancient Histories we find mentioned, a
River of the Peloponnesus in Achaia. A sountain in Elis in the same Country. A
Mountain of Thessalia in Macedonia, consecrated to the Muses by the Poets, who
therefore give them the name of Pierides. An entire Province of the ancient
Macedonia, toward the Sinus Thermaicus, and the Borders of Thessaly; the
Inhabitants whereof were called Pieres. As likewise a part of Syria, near
Cilicia.

Pifar, Phiternus, Tifernus, the same with Biferno, a River in the Kingdom of
Naples; it arises out of the Apennine in the Province of Molise near Boiano;
and flowing to the South-East, waters Guardia Alferes, and passes by Larina:
at last by Termini, (a City of the Capitanata) falls into the Adriatic Sea;
between il Fortore and Trigno, two other Rivers of that Kingdom.

Pignerol, Pinarolo, Pinarolium, a City of Piedmont, upon an Hill; which has a
strong Castle, upon the River Cluso; at the foot of the Alps. Twelve Miles
from Turin to the North-West, nineteen from Suse to the South, and ten from
Saluzes. This City belonged to the Dukedom of Savoy; but was ravished from that
Prince by Cardinal Richelieu in 1630: and by Lewis XIII, United March 31. 1631,
to the Crown of France for ever, according to the Articles of the Treaty of
Querasque betwixt him and Victor Amadaeus D. of Savoy. There are diverse
Churches and Religious Houses here: And the Castle is very strong both by art
and nature.

Pilaca, Ajax, a River of Calabria, which falls into the Ionian Sea.

Pilau, Pilaua, a strong Fort or Castle in the Ducal Prussia; at the Mouth of
the Bay of Koningsperg; three German Miles from that City to the West. Taken by
the Swedes in 1626: but now under the Duke of Brandenburg; and has a very good
Harbor belonging to it.

Pilsen, Pilsenum, a City of Bohemia, upon the River Mies; nine German Miles
from Prague to the West, six from the Borders of the Upper Palatinate, and
eleven from Eger or Heb. This is a great and strong City: besieged
unsuccessfully by the Hussars, but taken by the Count de Mansfeldt in 1118. The
Mies below it receives a small River in that form, as makes this place seem to
stand in a Peninsula.

Pilsno, Pilsna, a City of the Lesser Poland, in the Palatinate of Sandomir,
near the Vistula: the Capital of a Territory of the same Name.

Pinco, Pincus, a River in the Isle of Candy, or Crete.

Pindus, a vast Mountain now called Mezzovo, ascribed by Strabo to Macedonia;
by Ptolemy to Epirus, (it passing between it and Macedonia;) by others to
Thessalia. It stretches from East to West from the Acroceraunian Hills, (now
called Capo della Chimera in Albania) to the Thermopylae, now Bocca di Lupo: in
the midst of this Course it brancheth out to the South the Parnassus and
Helicon; which has occasioned the confounding these three Names. The Enacho and
Eas, (two Rivers) spring from this Mountain.

Pingiam, a great and rich City of the Province of Xansi, in China; said to be
the Capital over thirty others in the same Province.

Pingive, a City in the Province of Queicheu, in China.

Pingleang, a City in the Province of Xensi, in China; upon the River Kiang, at
the Foot of the Mountains.

Pinglo, a great City in the Province of Quamsi, in China, upon the River Li.
The Capital over several other Cities.

Pinhel, Pinelum, a small, but strong City in the Kingdom of Portugal; in the
Confines of the Kingdom of Leon, upon a River of the same Name: four Leagues
from the Duero to the South, and six from Guarda.

Pi^sk, Pinscum, a Town in Lithuania, in the Palatinate of Brescia; upon a
River of the same Name. Once a very considerable place, and now the Capital of
a District called by its Name: but being taken by the Cossacks, they burnt and
plundered it: by which Devastation it is reduced into a mean Condition. It
stands nineteen Miles from Brescici to the East.

Piomba, Helvinum, Matrinas, a River of Abruzzo; flowing between the Cities of
Adria and Penna, (in the Further Abruzzo,) into the Adriatic Sea.

Piombino Piumbinum, a great and strong City in the Territory of Siena in
Italy; on the Tyrrhenian Sea: under the Dominion of a Prince of its own, but
has a Spanish Garrison for its Protection: It lies in the midst between
Orbitello and Ligorne, fifty Miles from either, and from Siena. This City
sprung out of the Ruins of Populonium, which stood not far from it.

Pir, Orontes.

Pirgi, Perga, once an Archbishops See, now a small Village in Pamphylia, in
the Lesser Asia.

Pirn, a Town in the Province of Messen ( Misnia) in the Upper Saxony, in
Germany, upon the Elbe: three Leagues from the Borders of Bohemia, near
Dresden. Remarkable for a Treaty concluded at it in 1635, betwixt the Elector
of Saxony and the Emperor Ferdinand II. As also for the Protection given here
in 1628, to the Refugee Protestants of Bohemia and Austria. In 1640, the Army
of the King of Sweden took this Town.

Pisa, Pisae, a Town of Hetruria, of great Antiquity; built by the People of
Peloponnesus, as Strabo averrs: now an Archbishops See, upon the River Arno,
which divides it, and is covered with three Bridges. Great, but not well
peopled. It has an University, which was opened here in 1349, and a strong
Citadel. Also once a potent Commonwealth; which recovered Sardinia out of the
Hands of the Saracens, mastered Carthage and Majorca, and gave great assistance
to the Christians of the East: but being it self first overpowered by the
Florentines, and restored to its former Liberty by Charles VIII. of France, it
fell the second time under their Power; and together with Florence subjected to
the House of Medices; under whom it now is. This City stands six Miles from the
Mouth of the Arno to the East; and forty five from Florence, ten from Lucca to
the South, fifteen from Ligorne. In a numerous and splendid Council here held
in 1400, Alexander V. was chosen Pope, and the two Antipopes, Benedict XIII.
and Greg. XII. declared to be Schismatics and Heretics, and as such deposed.
It is famous for many other noble Councils. One in 1134, under Pope Innocent
II. excommunicated the Antipope Anacletus. Another in 1511, acted against the
person and Government of Pope Julius II. Whereunto add the Treaty in 1664,
betwixt Pope Alexander VII. and Lewis XIV. King of France, touching the Estates
of Castro and Ronciglione, the Restitution of Avignon and the County of
Venaissin into the Hands of the Pope. The Archbishops See was settled by Pope
Urban II. Anno Christi 1092. Pisa is the Name also of an ancient City of Elis,
in the Peloponnesus: near to which, the Olympic Games were celebrated in the
Honor of Jupiter.

Pisano, or the Pisantine, Pisanus Tractus, is a part of Hetruria in Italy;
between the States of Florence, and Siena to the East; the States of Lucca to
the North, the Tyrrhenian Sea to the West, and Tuscany to the South. Once a
Commonwealth, but now under the Duke of Florence. The Capital is Pisa. The
other considerable places are Ligorn, and Volterra.

Pisatello, Rubicon, a River of Romandiola in Italy; small, but of great Fame;
having been the ancient Boundary between Gallia Cispadana and Italy; and on
that account mentioned by many of the ancient Historians. The passing of it by
Julius Caesar was the first Act of Hostility against the Commonwealth of Rome.
It is now called toward its Falls, il Pisatello; at its Rise, Rico; before it
reaches the Seas, il Fiumicello di Savignano. This River runs near Cesene and
Savignano; and falls into the Adriatic Sea, ten Miles from Rimini. In this
place there was a Marble Inscription erected in 1546, to perpetuate the memory
thereof; yet some Learned Men have rather thought it to be Luso, (a River in
the Territory of Rimini), than this which was the ancient Rubicon.

Pistoia, Pistoria, a City in the State of Florence; which is a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Florence; built upon the River Stella, at the Foot of
the Apennine: now in a flourishing State. Twenty two Miles from Florence to the
North-West. Pope Clement IX. was born in this City. The Italians speaking of
it, call it, Pistoria la been Strutta, The well built Pistoria. The Statues of
Pope Leo X. and Clement VII. are erected in one of the principal Churches.

Pistres, or Pistes. This place is remarked in the Tomes of the Councils, for a
Council assembled at it by Charles le Chauve, King of France, in 863, or 864;
called Concilium ad Pistas. But the French Writers diversely situate it; some
upon the Seine; some upon the Andele near Pont de l' Arche in Normandy, in the
Diocese of Roiien.

Pistrina, Philistinae Fossae, one of the Mouths of the Po.

Pisuerga, Pisoraca, a River of Spain; which arises out of the Mountains of
Old Castile; and running South, separates the Kingdom of Leon from that of Old
Castile. It admits the Car^^on, (another of its Boundaries) and the Arlantion;
and watering Duennas and Valladolid, falls into the Duero above Simaucas.

Pitane, an ancient City of Mysia, in the Lesser Asia, toward the Aegean Sea.
A Second, in Troas. A third in Laconia, in the Morea: Whose Names had even
perished with them, if not preserved by Pliny, Strabo, Ptolemy, etc. A River of
the Morea, and another in the Island of Corsica (the latter, now called
Fiuminale d' Ordano,) did heretofore go by this Name also.

Placentia, Placencia, a City of the Kingdom of Leon, in the Province of
Extremadura; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Compostella. Built
in 1180, by Alphonsus VIII. King of Leon, out of the Ruins of Deobriga, (a City
of the Vettones in Lusitania:) and the place where it stands was called The
Village of Ambrosio. It is seated in a very fertile Plain, called La Vera de
Placentia, upon the River Xexte; twelve Miles from Coria to the East, twenty
six from Salamanca to the South, and as many from Merida to the North: and was
once honored with the Title of a Dukedom. There is another Placentia in Old
Castile, amongst the Mountains: secured with a strong Castle, and honored with
a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Toledo.

Plaisance. See Piacenza.

Plaisance en Armagnac, a Town of France, in the County expressed in its name,
in Aquitain: a second in Rouergne, in Gascony: and a new Fortress in New
France, in North America.

Plaitz, Celius. See Hensterberg.

Planizza, Inachus, a River on the East of the Morca: which falls into the
Mediterranean Sea, near Napoli di Romania.

La Plata, Argenteus Fiuvius, a River of South America; called by the
Spaniards, El rio de la Plata; by the Americans Paranaguazu; by the English and
French, The River of Plate. Thought to be one of the greatest Rivers in the
whole World. It arises in Paragua, above the Lake de Los Xaraies; and running
a vast Course to the South, and separating Paragua from Chaco, (beneath the
City de Buenos Airs;) It enters the Sea of Paraguay; by a Mouth of sixty
English Miles in breadth, or forty Spanish Leagues. This River was first
discovered in 1513, by John Diaz, a Portuguese.

La Plata, Argentea, a City in Peru, in the Government of Characa, or los
Charcas; built by the Spaniards in the Valley of Chuquisaca, upon the River
Picolmaio; an Archbishops See, (by the Institution of Pope Paul V. having
before been a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Lima;) and the Capital of
the Province of Characa, otherwise called Provincia de Rio de la Plata by the
Spaniards: one hundred and sixty five Spanish Leagues from Cusco to the South,
eighteen from Potosi, and one hundred and ten from the Pacifick Ocean. This is
one of the richest, most populous, and best built Cities in America; and stands
near the Silver Mines.

Platamona, Aliacmon, a River of Macedonia; which arises from the Cambuvian
Hills; and running Eastward by Pidna (now Chitro, or Platan), falls into the
Gulf of Salonica. It is called Pelecas by Sophianus; Platamona by Moletius;
Bistrisa by Holstenius; in the latter Maps Aliagmo, and Injacovi.

Platano, Lycus, a River on the South of Sicily; which falls into the Sea
eighteen Miles from Gergenti to the West.

Plataeae, an ancient City of Baeotia in Greece: famous for a Temple in those
times, erected in the Honor of Jupiter Liberator. Near to it, the two Athenian
and Lacedaemonian Generals, Pausanias and Aristides, defeated Mardonius General
of the Persians in the year of Rome 275, and the seventy fifth Olympiad. It was
surprised by the Thebans, anno Romae 323: who for their Fact were massacred by
the Inhabitants. In 381, the Thebans and the Lacedaemonians together quite
ruined it.

Platsee, Platzee. See Balaton.

Plaven, Plaun, Plava, a City of Voightland, a Province of the Upper Saxony in
Germany; or as others say, in Misnia; seated upon the River Eister; between
Zwickaw to the South-East, and Curow or Curen to the North-West; four Miles
from the Borders of Bohemia. Under the Duke of Saxony.

Plawe, Plava, a Town in the Dukedom of Magdeburg, upon a Lake of the same
Name; near the Efflux of the River Elde; six German Miles from Gustrow, and ten
from Havetberg to the North.

Pleseow, Plescoviensis Ducatus, the most Western Province of Moscovy. Bounded
by Ingria to the North, Lithuania to the South, Livonia to the West, and
Novogard to the East. It is great, populous and fruitful: was a Sovereign
Dukedom, till John Basilovitz conquered it in 1509. The principal City is
Pleskow, Pleskovia; which stands upon the River Veliki; forty Miles from the
Confines of Livonia to the East, sixty from the Lake of Ilmen, and forty from
Riga to the North-East. This City was betrayed into the Hands of the Russ by
the Priests, in 1509, upon a Religious Pretense: who were severely punished for
their Treason, by that perfidious, bloody, cruel Tyrant. In 158^, it was
besieged, and taken by Stephen, King of Poland. Again in 1615, by Gustavus
Adolphus, King of Sweden; out of whose Hands the Russ were forced to redeem it,
by the Payment of a vast Sum of Money. The Russ call it Pskouwa.

Plessis, a Seigniory in the Province of Poictou, in France: giving Name and
Origin to an Honorable Family, which produced the late famous Minister of
State in that Kingdom, the Cardinal of Richlieu.

Plymouth, Plymuthum, a Noble Seaport Town in the most Western part of
Devonshire, on the South of England. It takes its Name from the River Plyme;
between which and the Tainer (a much greater River, and the Western Boundary of
Devonshire) this Town is seated; and has one of the largest, safest, and most
convenient Havens in the World. It was anciently called Sutton; and (says Mr.
Cambden) of late times was a poor Fishermens Town; but within the compass of a
few years become equal to some of the best Cities in England. Fortified both to
the Seaward, by a Fort built on St. Nicolas Isle; and to Landward, by two Forts
upon the Haven, and a Castle on a Hill; besides which it has a Chain for the
Security of the Haven in time of War. Henry IV. granted it a Mayor. From this
Town Sir Francis Drake set Sail in 1577; when he went that Voyage in which he
sailed round the Terrestrial Globe. Out of this Haven the English Fleet was
Towed by Ropes (the Winds being contrary), when in 1588, Charles Lord Howard,
Admiral of England, went to fight the Spanish invincible Armado, as they
unwisely called it. Charles II. added to the Strength of this Place, by
building a stately Citadel on a Hill near it; and to its Honor, by creating
Charles Fitz-Charles, (one of his Natural Sons) Baron of Dartmouth, Viscount
Totnes, and Earl of Plymouth, July 9. 1675, who afterward died at Tangier.

Ploen, Plona, a small City in the Dukedom of Holstein, in the Province of
Wagaren; between a double Lake of the same Name: six German Miles from Lubeck
to the North. It has a splendid and noble Castle; which together with the City
is under the Dominion of a Prince of the Family of Holstein.

Plotzko, Ploczko, or Plosco, Plocum, Ploscum, a small City in the Greater
Poland; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Gnesna; the Capital of
a Palatinate of the same Name, in the Dukedom of Mazomiekie, or Masovia; to
which there belongs a Castle. It is seated upon the Vistula, fourteen Polish
Miles from Warsaw to the West.

Pludents, a small Seigniory in Tyrol, belonging to the King of Spain.

Plusa, Aprusa, a small River in Romandiola, which springs out of Mount
Titam; and running Southward, falls into the Adriatic Sea near Rimin^. Also
called L' Avesa.

Pluviers, Aviarium, a City in the Province of La Beause, upon the River l'
Oeuf; ten Leagues from Orleans to the North, and as many from Montargis to the
East: it is a spruce City, and by the Writers of the middle Times called
Pithuria.

Plurs, or Pleure, Plura, an Italian Prefecture, belonging to the Grisons; by
the Gift of Maximilian Sforza, Duke of Milan, in 1513. It takes its Name from
the chief Town of the same Name; once seated at the Foot of the Alps, near
Chiavenne, upon the River Maira; (the chief of sundry Villages, lying in the
same bottom;) now nothing but a deep and bottomless Gulf. For on April 26.
1617. a huge Rock falling from the top of the Mountains, overwhelmed it; and
killed in the twinkling of an Eye fifteen hundred people; left no sign or ruin
of a Town there standing; but in the place thereof, a great Lake of about two
Miles in length. Heylyn. There were eight Religious Houses in it; yet scarce
one person of all the Town escaped alive. The day before this, a roaring noise
was heard from the Mountain.

Po, Padus, Eridanus, the greatest River in Italy; which arises in Piedmont;
and dividing Lombardy into two parts, falls into the Adriatic Sea by many
Mouths. Called by the Italians, French, and English, Po; by the Germans, Paw.
Its Head is in Mount Viso, ( Vesulus), one of the Cottian Alps; in the Borders
of Dauphine, in the Marquisate of Saluzzo, from a Spring called Visenda, in the
midst of a Meadow; and running East by the Castle of Paisand, it hides it self
in the Earth again. So dividing Piedmont at Villa Franca, it takes in the
Chisone; and at Pancalieri, the Veraita and Macra; by the addition of which, it
becomes capable of bearing a Boat. Then it waters Turin (the Capital of Savoy)
where it takes in the Doria: so continuing his Course to the East by Chivas and
Casal, he takes his leave of the Duke of Savoy's Dominions, and enters Milan:
leaving Pavia five, and Milan twenty Miles to the North, it passes on the
South of Piacenza, and the North of Cremona; leaving Parma four Miles to the
South, and Mantoua six to the North, he passes to Fichervolo; where he divides
his vastly improved Streams into two great Branches. The Northern waters the
State of Venice, and by five Mouths enters the Gulf of Venice: the Southern
passes to Ferrara, and is there subdivided into three other Branches; the most
Southern of which, runs within four Miles of Ravenna. This River receives about
thirty Rivers in all from the Alps, and the Apennine; and being by far the
greatest River in Italy, is mightily magnified by the Latin Poets: who would
have it no less than the Nile, and the Danube; call it the King of Rivers, and
the greatest in the World. It must be confessed, that it is a noble Flood; and
the only one which has sound a place in Heaven too, or has the Glory to be
made a Constellation. But (says the Learned Dr. Brown, who saw it) there are
many Rivers that exceed it in Greatness. The Names of the most considerable of
its Branches, are, il Po grando, il Po di Ariano, il Po di Volana, and il Po di
Argenta.

Poblet, a Monastery in Catalonia, where the Kings of Arragon were anciently
buried.

Pocevera, Porcifera, a River in the States of Genoua, which takes its rise
from the Appennine; and by a Valley ten Miles long, makes it passage by Genoua
into the Ligustick Sea.

Pocklington, a Market Town in the East Riding of Yorkshire, and the Hundred of
Harthill; upon a small River, falling into the Derwent.

Pocutie, Pocutia, a small Tract in the South part of the Kingdom of Poland,
called by the Natives Poconk, or Pocouth. It is a part of the Territory of
Halitz; between the River Tyra, (now the Neister,) and the Borders of
Transylvania and Walachia: the principal Town is Sniatim upon the Pruth: the
rest, Colomey and Martinow.

Podgarim, Babylonia, a Province in Asia.

Podolia, Bodeni, Budini, Patzinacae Populi, a Province of the Kingdom of
Poland; comprehended under the Red Russia, of which it is a part; and subject
to a Palatine of its own. Bounded on the North by Volhinia, on the East by the
Palatinate of Braslaw, on the South by Wallachia, and on the West by Russia
(properly so called), or the Black Russia. This Country extends Eastward
through vast uninhabited Countries, as far as the Euxine Sea. They divide it
ordinarily into the Upper Podolia to the West, and the Lower to the East. The
people are Russians by their Original; conquered by the Poles, and in the year
1434. admitted to the same Privileges with the rest of Poland, by Vladislaus
then King of Poland. It is fruitful to a wonder; yet more accommodated to the
life of Beasts, than Men. Could it enjoy a steady Peace, it should not need to
envy the Fertility of Italy, or any other Country: but being a Frontier against
the Turks and Tartars, and always exposed to their devouring Incursions, it is
but meanly inhabited, and not much improved. In the year 1672. it was yielded
to the Turks; a part of it has been retrieved since. The principal place is
Caminieck, in the Upper Podolia; the rest are Tzudnow, Bratzlaw (in the Lower,)
and Orczakow, which last is in the hands of the Tartars.

Poictiers, Pictavium, Augustoritum, Pictava, Pictavorum Vrbs, a City which is
the Capital of the Province of Poictou in France; a Bishops See under the
Archbishop of Bourdeaux, and a celebrated University founded by Charles VII. in
1431. It stands upon the River Clain, at its Confluence with another small
River, which there makes a large Lake; fourteen Leagues from the Loyre to the
South, thirty from Saints to the North, and thirty five from Bourges to the
West. Famous for many Battles sought near it; especially that of the Black
Prince, in the year 1356. In which, John King of France was taken Prisoner,
together with many Lords, and two thousand Knights and Esquires. Fifty two
Lords, one thousand seven hundred Knights and Gentlemen, were slain of the
French. Three French Battalions, (the least of which exceeded the English) were
entirely routed, and in great part destroyed. In the Reign of Charles VII. King
of France, whilst the Victorious English were Masters of the Capital of the
Kingdom, the Parliament of Paris for some years sat here. The old Castle by the
Gate of S. Lazare is thought to have been the Work of the Romans; who built
besides an Amphitheatre and other Edisices, yet apparent in their remains. This
City contains twenty four Parishes, five Abbeys, and diverse Monasteries. The
Episcopal See became famous in the Primitive Times by the Person of S. Hilary.
Diverse Councils have been celebrated at it. In one Anno 1075. Berengarius
appeared; whilst the Doctrine of the Presence, in opposition to his, was
received, recognized, and established. Another under Pope Paschal II.
excommunicated Philip I. King of France. The Roman Catholics took Poictiers
from the Huguenots, and plundered it in 1562. In 1569. the Huguenots under
Admiral Coligny besieged it, but were forced to rise without success.

Poictou, Pictaviensis Provincia, is a large Province in France; which was a
part of Aquitain, whilst under the Romans; and called by the Italians, Poitu.
Its greatest extent is from East to West: being bounded on the East by
Touraine, and la March; on the North by Anjou, and Bretagne; on the West by
the Bay of Aquitain, or the British Sea; and on the South by Saintonge and
Angoulesme. This Province was pillaged in the fifth Century by the Vandals,
Huns and Germans. The Romans in the Reign of the Emperor Honorius, left it to
the Wisigoths; whom Clovis the Grand expelled about the year 510. Then from the
time of Charlemaigne, it was under Sovereign Counts of its own, till 1271: when
upon a failure of the Line, it was united to the Crown of France. These Counts
had, for about nineteen several Successions, attained the Title of Dukes of
Guyenne. Not to omit, the the Descent of the Provinces of Guyenne and Poictou,
upon the Crown of England in 1152. by Eleanour, Wise to Henry II. Nor the
attempt made in 1242. (though without success) by Richard Earl of Cornwall,
Brother to King John, to reduce Poictou under the Obedience of England again,
after the French pretended K. John had forfeited his Rights by the Death of
Arthur. The principal Towns next Poictiers, are Chastelleraud, Thouars, S.
Maxient, Fountenay, Loudun, Niort, Parthenay, and Richelieu.

Poissy, Pisciacum, a Town in the Isle of France, which has a Stone Bridge over
the Seine; six Leagues above Paris to the East. S. Lewis King of France was
born here in 1215. The heart of King Philip le Bell was interred in a Church
here of his own foundation. It has diverse Religious Houses. And in the last Age
was more especially famous, upon the account of a Conference of Religion
betwixt the Roman Catholics and Huguenots from September 4. 1560. to November
25. held in the presence of Charles IX. King of France, and Catherine de
Medicis, the Queen Regent; assisted with the Princes of the Blood, a great
number of Cardinals, Bishops, Counselors, and Grandees of the Kingdom, and
Learned Men of both Religions. Beza, as the Head of the Reformed, chiefly
managing, and bending his utmost force, against the Doctrine of the Presence.

Pola, Polia, Julia Pietas, a City and Colony in Istria, mentioned by Strabo
and Pliny; still called by the same Name: being one of the strongest Cities in
Istria, and a Bishops See under the Patriarch of Aquileja. Seated on a Hill
near the Shoars of the Adriatic Sea, upon which it has a large Haven: twenty
eight Miles from Parenzo to the South, sixty from Trieste, and an hundred from
Ancona to the North. Said to have been built by the Colchi. Now under the
States of Venice; but small, and not much inhabited; it having not above seven
or eight hundred Inhabitants. The Venetians send a Governor however to it, who
takes the Title of a Count. It has a small Citadel. In the time of the Roman
Empire, this City, as a Free State, dedicated a Statue to Severus the Emperor:
it has several other noble Remains, which speak its Greatness and Antiquity; as
Mr. Wheeler acquaints us in his Travels, page 5. Long. 37. 00. Lat. 45. 04.

Polan, Bollia, a River of Stiria.

Polana, Monalus, a River in the North of Sicily; written in Baudrand, Polina.

Poland, Polenia, is one of the principal Kingdoms in Europe; called by the
Natives Poloska; by the Germans, die Polen; by the French, Pologne; by the
Spaniards and Italians, Polonia; by the English, Poland. A part of the old
Salmatia Europaea; and has its Name from Pole, which signifies a Plain in the
Sclavonian Tongue. Bounded on the North by the Baltic Sea, the Swedish
Livonia, and Russia; by the last, and the Deserts of Tartary, on the East; on
the South by the Upper Hungary, Transylvania, and Walachia; on the West by
Germany. This Kingdom is of a round Figure, two thousand six hundred Miles in
compass. The Earth plain, but full of Woods; which do in some degree rectify
the Coldness of the Air. They have no Wine; as for Barley and Pulse, they have
more than they spend. The People are Industrious and Learned; good Soldiers,
proud and prodigal. The Christian Faith was first settled in Poland, under
Miceslaus, in the year 963. by one Meinardus. The Reformation about 1535. crept
into these Countries; but never generally embraced, nor persecuted. The Greek
Church has some footing here too; but the most general, is the Roman Catholic.
This vast Kingdom is divided into thirty four Palatinates, most of which I
shall mention in their proper places. The principal Cities are Belzko, Braclaw,
Braslaw, Briescie, Kaliss, Kaminiec, Chelmo, Krakow, Elbing, Dantzick, Gnesna,
Kiow, Lenzycze, Lwow, Lublin, Lucko, Malbork, Mscislawau, Minsko, Novogrod,
Plocko, Pozan, Przemisl, Konigsberg, Sendomiers, Siracz, Thorn, Trocko,
Warzawa, (commonly called Warsaw, the Capital of Poland), Wilna, Witebsko, and
Wlodzimiers. The first Duke of this Kingdom was Lechus, who began his Reign in
694. His Posterity in eleven Descents continued till 800. when Priastus was the
first elected Duke. In the year 1000. Boleslaus (Son of Mieceslaus) received
the Title of King, from Otho III. Emperor of Germany. The present King is the
forty sixth Prince, and the thirty second King of Poland; who has had the
Honor to be the Preserver of Christendom by the Relief of Vienna, and many
other brave Actions. Though this Prince has the Name of a King, and the first
Dukes were in truth Kings without the Title; yet at present he is nothing less:
being not allowed to make Peace or War, to impose Taxes, make Laws, alienate
any of his Demeans; or in short, to do any thing of Importance, which concerns
the Public, without the consent of the Diet. He does not only swear to do all
this; but allows their Disobedience, in case he violates his Oath: which makes
the Subjects the Princes Judges, and this Kingdom a mere Aristocracy; or knot
of petty Kingdoms under one Head. Whence the Tartars and Muscovites have reaped
great advantages; and the King of Sweden once, with forty thousand men, reduced
this Country to the last extremity, which otherwise accounts two hundred
thousand men a small Army to be sent into the Field by Poland. Socinianism has
been a prevailing Sect here: it owes its denomination to the two Socinus's (
Laelius and Faustus,) Natives of this Kingdom: who in the last Century, amidst
the distractions of people about Religion, revived the ancient assertions of
Arius, Nestorius, etc. called Heresies, under their own Names. There is besides
a general mixture of Roman and Greek Catholics, Jews, Calvinists, Lutherans,
Anabaptists, etc.

Polaquie, Polachia, a small Province in the Kingdom of Poland; between Mazovia
to the West, Lithuania and Polesia to the East. The principal Town of which, is
Bielka.

Pole, Pola, a Province on the East of Moscovy, toward the River Tanais;
between Mordua, Rezania, and the Kingdom of Astracan; in which there is no City
or Town of Note.

Polesie, Polesia, a Province of Poland, in the great Dukedom of Lithuania;
extended from East to West between Red Russia, Volhinia, Mazovia, and the
Palatinate of Novogrod. The principal Town is Brescie; twenty five Miles from
Lublin, and thirty from Warsaw to the East. This Province is extremely overrun
by Woods, and full of Bogs and Marshes.

Policastro, Policastrum, Polaeocastrum, a City in the Kingdom of Naples, in
the Hither Principate; on the Shoars of the Tyrrhenian Sea; fifty five Miles
from Salerno to the North-East. It is now almost desolate; yet a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Salerno; and gives Name to a Bay, formerly called Sinus
Laus.

Polignano, Polinianum, Pulinianum, a small City in the Province of Bari, in
the Kingdom of Naples; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bari.

Polina, Aous, one of the principal Rivers of Albania; it arises ten Miles
above Apollonia, an ancient City, (now called Pollina;) and falls into the
Adriatic Sea. Others call it Piergo. Near this River, Philip King of Macedon
received a great Overthrow from the Romans; on which account it is mentioned by
diverse Historians.

Polizzi, Politium, a great Town in Sicily; built upon an Hill; six Miles from
Nicosia, and twenty from Palermo.

Pollina, or Periergo, Apollonia, a City of Macedonia, (now in Albania,) upon
the Adriatic Sea. Heretofore a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Durazzo:
but now a Metropolitan See it self. Seated thirty five Miles from Durazzo to
the South; and inhabited by a small number of Men, under the Dominion of the
Turks. In this place Octavianus, (afterward Augustus) was at his Studies; when
Julius Caesar, his Uncle, was Murdered in the Senate. Long. 45. 06. Lat. 40.
19.

^oloczko, or Polloczki, Poloczka, Polocia, Polotium, a City of Lithuania, in
the Kingdom of Poland; the Head of a Palatinate, which was once a Dukedom. It
stands upon the Dwina, where it receives the Polotta; having upon each River a
Castle: seventy five Polish Miles above Riga to the South-East, and fifty five
from Vilna to the North-East. Taken by the Russ in 1563; retaken by Stephen
King of Poland in 1579. Of later times it changed its Master again; but is now
under the Poles.

Pologne. See Poland.

Pomeiok, an Indian Town and River in Virginia, upon the North Sea.

Pomerania, a Province of Germany, called by the Inhabitants, Pomeren; by the
Poles, Pomerska. It lies in the Upper Circle of Saxony; bounded on the North by
the Baltic Sea, on the East by Prussia, on the South by the Marquisate of
Brandenburgh, and on the West by the Dukedom of Mecklenburgh. Extended upon the
Baltic Sea from East to West two hundred English Miles. A plain and fruitful
Country, yielding great plenty both of Corn and Grass, Butter and Cheese, etc.
full of People of a vigorous Constitution. This Country in 1295, was given by
Mestovius, the last of its Princes, to Primislaus King of Poland; who enjoyed
all the Eastern part as far as Prussia, and the River Weyssel or Vistula. The
rest continued under Princes of its own, till 1637: when Bugius (the last of
them) dying without Heirs Males, this great Country, by the Treaty of Munster,
was divided between the Swedes and the Duke of Brandenburgh. All that lay on
the West of the Oder, and the Dukedom of Stetin, being left to the Swedes;
together with Rugen, an Island in the Baltic Sea; and Dam and Golnow, two
Towns beyond the Oder. The further or more Eastern Pomerania, and Prussia, was
granted to the Duke of Brandenburgh. There is in this vast Country under the
Swedes these Cities; Anclam, Gripswald, Stetin, Stralsund, and Wolgast: and
under the Brandenburgh, are Camin, Colburgh, and Stratgard.

Klein Pommeren, Pomerania Parva, the Little Pomerania, or the Palatinate of
Pomerania; is that part of Pomerania, which long since was given to the Crown
of Poland; called by the Poles, Woiewodztwo Pomorskie, and for the most part
included in Prussia. Bounded on the West by that part of Pomerania which is
under the Duke of Brandenburgh; on the North by the Baltic Sea; the River
Vistula to the East, by which it is separated from the rest of Prussia; and the
greater Poland to the South. The principal City in it is Dantzick.

Pommerelle, or the Dukedom of Pommeren, is a part of the Eastern Pomerania,
which is under the Duke of Brandenburgh. Bounded on the East by Cassubia, and
the Marquisate of Brandenburgh; by the Baltic Sea on the North; the Oder on
the West; and the Dukedom of Stetin on the South. The Great Towns in it are
Stargart, Camin and Treptow.

Pompeiopolis, an ancient City of Cilicia, in Asia Minor; to which Pompey the
Great imparted his name; as Trajan afterward also did, that of Trasanopolis. It
has been honored, since Christianity, with a Bishops See under the Archbishop
of Seleucia. But now, become a miserable Town; called, according to some,
Palesali. There was a second in Paphlagonia, which received Pompey's name,
after his defeat of Mithridates King of Pontus; having before been called
Eupatoria. This latter became an Archbishops See under the Patriarch of
Constantinople: Now wholly ruined.

Pons, a Town of France, in the Province of Saintonge, upon the River Seugne,
which falls in the Charante below Saints. It gives its name to a Neighboring
Forest, and likewise to an honorable Family of France. In Latin, apud Pontes.

Pont a Mouson, Mussipontum, Mussipons, a Town in Lorain, in the Dukedom of
Bar, upon the Moselle; five Leagues from Nancy to the North, six from S.
Michael, and five from Toul: it has been well fortified; but at present
dismantled, and made an University; in which there is a Scotch College of the
foundation of Pope Gregory XIII. It gives the Title of a Marquess; has two
Abbeys and diverse Churches.

Pont de l' Arche, Pons Arcus, Pons Arcuensis, a City in Normandy, in the
Bishopric of Roan; which has a strong Castle, and a Stone Bridge upon the
Seine (which here receives the Eure and the Andele) built by Charles the Bald.
It stands three Leagues above Roan to the South; and was the first Town, that
surrendered it self to Henry IV. after his advancement to the Crown of France.

Pont Andemer, or Ponteau-de-Mer, Pons Audomari, a small City in Normandy, upon
the River Rille; two Leagues from its Mouth, and ten from Roan to the West:
surprised by the Leaguers in 1592. but soon after returned to the King. In
1279, a Council was assembled here.

Pont Beauvoisin, Pons Bellovicinus, a Town in Dauphine, upon the River Guyer;
here covered with a Bridge, which gives it this name; and separates the
Province of Dauphine from Savoy.

Pont de Ce, Pontes Caesaris, a Town in the Dukedom of Anjou, upon the Loyre;
over which it has a very long Bridge: and had once a very strong Castle. One
League from Angiers to the South. At this Town the Troops of Lewis XIII. under
Marshall de Crequi defeated those of the Queen Mother ( Maria de Medicis) in
1620.

Pont du Guard, Pons Vardonis, or Gardonis, three Bridges built one over the
other, over the River Gardon, for the continuing an Aquaduct to Nismes. The
lowest having six Arches, the second twelve, and the highest thirty four; a
thing of great Antiquity. It stands in the middle between Avignon to the East,
and Nismes to the West; four Leagues from the latter. The Learned Dr. Brown in
his Travels, gives the Figure of this wonderful Work; and assures us, that the
top of it is one hundred and eighty six Foot above the Water of the River.

Pont Eau de Mer, a Town in Normandy, the same with Pont Audemer.

Pont l' Eveque, Pons Episcopi, a Town in Normandy near Caen, upon the River
Leson, three Leagues from Lisieux, and two from the Sea. It is noted for good
Cheese.

Pont-Oise, Pontesium, Pontisara, Aesiae pons, and Pons ad Oesiam, a Town in
the Isle of France; which has a Stone Bridge over the River Oise; and an
English Nunnery: six Leagues from Paris to the North-West toward Roan. Taken
by the English in the Year 1417, and recovered by the French in the Year 1442,
after a Siege of six weeks. It was also taken and retaken in 1589.
successively, by King Henry III. and the Duke of Mayenne. In 1561. in the
beginning of the Reign of Charles IX. the Estates of the Kingdom were assembled
here. It has a Castle, with diverse Churches and Monasteries; giving the title
of a Viscount. Situated in the Territory of Vexin Francois, at the Confluence
of the Oyse and Seine.

Pont Orson, Pons Vrsonis, a Town in the Confines of Normandy and Bretagne in
France; upon the River Couesnon, which a little lower falls into the British
Sea; between Auranches to the East, and Dole to the West; two Leagues from
Mount S. Michael.

Pont S. Esprit, Pons Sancti Spiritus, a City of France in the Lower Languedoc:
which has a Castle, and a Stone Bridge over the River Rhosne, of an
extraordinary structure. Three Leagues from Viviers to the South, and seven
from Avignon to the North.

Pont S. Maixance, Pons Sanctae Maxentiae, a Town in the Government of the Isle
of France, in the Duchy of Valois; upon the Oyse, (here covered with a Bridge):
three Leagues from Senlis.

Pont-Pool, a Market Town in Monmouthshire, betwixt the Hills; of chief note
for Iron Mills.

Pontefract or Pomfret, a pleasant, neat, Borough and Market Town in the West
Riding of Yorkshire, and the Hundred of Osgodcross: situated upon a stream, a
little below the confluence of the Warfe and the Are. Formerly ennobled with a
Castle Royal, mounted on an ascent, with Ditches and Bulwarks; which was in the
long Rebellion demolished. K. Richard II. after his resignation of the Crown
was murdered in that Castle. The Borough returns two Parliament Men.

Pontieu, or Ponthieu, Ponticum, Pontinia, a County in Picardy, which lies
toward the Mouth of the Sum; between the Chanche, and the County of Bologne
to the North; and the Sum to the South. The chief Towns in it are Abbeville,
Monstrevil, Rue, Pont S. Remi, and Cleri. This County was confirmed to the
Crown of England, by Eleanor of Castile (Countess of Ponthieu, Daughter to
Ferdinand III. King of Castile,) her Marrying to Edward I. King of England:
Being afterward enjoyed by K. Edward II. and III. and never finally reunited
to the Crown of France, till the Reign of Charles VII. when the English quite
lost their Dominions in that Kingdom.

Pontion, or Pont-Yon, Pontigo, an ancient Royal House, belonging to the Kings
of France, in the Territory of Parthois in Champaigne; two Leagues from Vitri
le Brule: where Charles the Bald assembled a Council in 876. Some have mistaken
it for Pont sur Jonne, three Leagues from Sens; and for Pontroy or Pongoin in
la Perch, upon the Eure.

Ponte Mole, Milvius Pons, an ancient Bridge belonging to the City of Rome,
over the Tiber. It lies two Miles above the City to the East. Near this Bridge
Maxentius was defeated; and in his passage over the River drowned in the Year
312. By which Victory, Constantine the Great obtained the Empire of the World.

Pontus, an ancient Kingdom in the Lesser Asia, betwixt Bithynia and
Paphlagonia; extended along the Pontus Euxinus or Black Sea: and famous
heretofore in the Person of Mithridates the Great, its King; who upon the News
of the revolt of his Son Pharnaces against him, killed himself in the Year of
Rome 691. after a Reign of fifty seven years. Heraclea Ponti was its Capital
City. The Romans reduced this Kingdom into a Province.

Ponza, Pontia, an Island of the Mediterranean, upon the Coast of the Kingdom
of Naples: known by the banishment of diverse famous Romans to it.

Ponzone, a small Town in the Duchy of Montferrat in Italy. It suffered very
much in the Wars; till the Peace at Quieras in 1631.

Pool, a Market and Borough Town, and Port, in Dorsetshire, in the Hundred of
Cogdean: enclosed on all sides, except Northward, with an out let of the Sea,
called Luckford Lake; and admitting an entrance into it by one Gate only. Henry
VI. first granted it the privilege of a Haven, and leave to the Mayor to Wall
it. In this Haven, the Sea ebbs and flows four times in twenty four hours. It
elects two Parliament Men, and has the honor besides to be a County Corporate.

Potremoli, Pontremulium, a Town and Seigniory in Italy, anciently called Apua;
at the Foot of the Apennine, in the Eastern Borders of the States of Genoua;
fifteen Miles from Genoua to the East, and eleven from Massa to the North. This
Town and Seigniory in the Year 1650, was sold by the Spaniards to the Duke of
Tuscany; under whom it now is: and has belonging to it a strong Castle.

Popayan, Popaiana, a great Province in South America, in the Terra Firma,
toward the Mountains; which on the West is bounded by the South Sea, on the
South by Peru, on the East by New Granada, and on the North by New Carthagena.
Its greatest extent is from North to South. The Capital City of it is Popayan;
seated near the rise of the River of S. Martha; one hundred and forty Miles
from the South Sea to the East. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop de
Sancta Fe d' Antiquera. The other Cities are Caramanta, Arma, Sancta Anna d'
Anzerma, Carthagena, Cali, Amaguer, and Agreda. Under the Spaniards.

Popfingen, Popfinga, a small City in the Circle of Schwaben in Germany, in the
Tract of Riess; upon the River Eger. One Mile from Norlingen to the West. An
Imperial and Free City.

Porentru, Brundusia, a Town in Switzerland; called by the Inhabitants,
Brontrut; by the French, Porentru. The Seat of the Bishop of Basil, and subject
to him. It stands in the Borders of Suntgow, and the Higher Alsatia; upon the
River Halle; three German Miles from Ferrette, (or Pfirt) to the West, and six
from Basil. The Tract in which it stands is called Elsgaw.

Pormon, Thermodon, a River of Cappadocia, which falls into the Euxine Sea.

Poros, an Island in the Gulf of Corinth, (or d' Engina) between the Morea and
Athens: eighteen Miles in compass, and very fruitful and populous. Now under
the Venetians.

Portalegre, or Porto-Alegre, Portus Alacris, Amaea, a City in Portugal in the
Province of Alentejo, toward the Borders of Extremadura: which is a Bishops
See, under the Archbishop of Evora; fourteen Miles from that City, and twenty
eight from Lisbon to the East: thirty three from the Atlantic Ocean, East.
Well fortified, upon a River; and giving the Title of a Count.

Port-au-Prince, a Town upon the South Coast of the Isle of Cuba, in the
West Indies; with a Port, which drives a great Trade in Hides.

Port aux Prunes, a Country in the North of the Isle of Madagascar.

Il Portatore, Vfens, a River in Campagna di Roma, in the States of the Church;
which arises at a place called Casenoue, two Miles from Sezze, (a Town in the
same Province,) and falls into the Tyrrhenian Sea, near Terracina; sixty Miles
from Naples to the West.

Portland, Vindelis, a small Peninsula in Dorsetshire; which shoots into the
British Sea, about nine Miles from North to South. The principal place in it is
called Portland Castle, built by Henry VIII. Opposite to which, toward
Weymouth, on the Land side, stands Sandford Castle; and these two together
command all Ships that pass into the road here. This Island belongs to the
Church of Winchester, by the Gift of Edward the Confessor. It has one Church,
on the South East side near the Sea; affords Corn in good plenty, and excellent
pasture for Sheep: but its Quarries of Stone, of late much used in Building,
are its most remarkable Commodity. Charles I. in 1632, Created Richard Lord
Weston of Neyland, Lord High Treasurer of England, Earl of Portland: which
Title continued in the same Family for three successions in the Persons of
Jeremy, Son to Richard; Charles, Son and Heir to Jeremy; and Thomas Weston,
Uncle to Charles.

Porto, Puerto, ein Port, un Port, a Port, or Haven, is a part of the Sea, so
enclosed and deep, that Ships may safely ride in it; Load and Unload; whether
it be made by Art or Nature. All which vulgar Names in Italian, Spanish,
German, French, and English, are derived from the Latin Word Portus, signifying
the same thing.

Porto, Portus Augusti, Portus Romanus, an Episcopal City, which once stood at
the Mouth of the Tiber, in the States of the Church; and had a considerable
Port to it, built by the Emperor Claudius; then repaired by Trajan. But both
that and the City, for the unwholsomeness of the Air, have been deserted and
destroyed; tho giving a title to one of the six Senior Cardinals.

Porto, Port a Port, and Cividad de Puerto, Portus Cale, is a great City, and a
considerable Mart in the Kingdom of Portugal; at the Mouth of the Douro, on the
North Side of that River: which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Braga; and has a large, safe, and convenient Haven upon the Western Ocean;
within one League of which this City is built: eight from Braga to the South,
and forty seven from Lisbon to the North. This City took its Name from Cale, a
Village near it; and gave the Name of Portugal to the Kingdom (before called
Lusitania:) it being one of the first and most frequented Ports of that
Kingdom. Long. 11 15. Lat. 41. 10.

Porto de Acaxutla, a great and celebrated Port, in New Spain in America; in
the Province of Guatimala, upon the South Sea; near Sancta Trinidada.

Porto Belo, Portus Belus, a new City in South America, upon the Shoars of the
North Sea: which has a celebrated Haven, secured by two strong Forts; eighteen
Leagues from Panama to the North, in the Province of Terra Firma. This City was
taken and plundered by the Buccaniers.

Port en Bessin, Portus Bajocensis, a Port in Normandy, on the British Sea; one
League North of Bajeux.

Porto Betto, Portus Gazaeorum, Majuma. See Gazara.

Porto Bon, Achaeorum Portus, Portus Bonus, a Haven on the Euxine Sea, at the
Mouth of the Nieper.

Porto di Coruna, Portus Brigantius, a large Port in Gallicia in Spain; ten
Leagues from Compostella to the North.

Porto desire, a Port in Magellania; between the River of Plate, and the Terra
de Fuogo in South America. It is otherwise called Baya de los Trabaios. The
entrance into it is about half a League over: where stand two small Islands. It
affords fresh Water.

Porto Ercole, or Hercole, Portus Herculis, a Seaport in the States of Siena;
on the Tyrrhenian Sea; five Miles from Orbitello to the South, and twelve from
Talamont to the same. In the Hands of the Spaniards: it has a Fort and a small
Haven.

Porto di Gorio, Carbonaria, a Haven at the Mouth of the Po; which takes its
Latin Name from a black Tower. It is the Southern Branch of the North Branch of
that River: in the Dukedom of Ferrara, under the Dominion of the Pope: within
six Miles of the Borders of the States of Venice to the South. And made by that
Branch of the Po, which is called Il Po di Ariano, or the Right Hand Branch.

Porto di Gruaro, Portus Romatinus, a Town in Friuli; upon the River Lemene, (
Romatinum) under the Venetians: two Miles from Concordia, a ruined City to the
North. The Bishop of which resides in this Town: forty Miles from Venice to the
East, and twenty five from Aquileja.

Porto di Lione, Piraeus, the Port of Athens in Achaia, 5 Miles South of the
City; joined to it by a double Wall, built by Themistocles, in the year of Rome
276; which was ruined by the Victorious Lacedaemonians, in the year of the
World 3546, and of Rome 350, after the taking of Athens: being rebuilt, it was
afterward ruined by Sylla. This Haven would then contain four hundred Ships;
and was both as to Peace and War, one of the most frequented Ports in the
World. In aftertimes it took the Name of Port Lione, from a huge Marble Statue
of a Lion, of admirable work, placed at the bottom of the Bay in a sitting
Posture, but erect upon his fore Feet, ten Foot in height. This Harbor would
not hold above thirty or forty of the Ships of our Times, as Mr. Wheeler judged
Nor is there any one House or Habitation in this Place, except a Warehouse for
the receiving of Merchandise. The true Long. of it is 53. 00. Lat. 38. 05. as
Mr. Vernon found it. This Port, and Athens it self submitted to the Venetian
General Morosim, Sept. 1687. Vid. Athens. It is also called Porto di Setines.

Porto Famine. See Civdad del Re Philippe.

Porto Fino, Portus Delphini, a small Town and Port of Italy, about twenty
Miles from Genoua to the East; toward the Gulf of Ripallo.

Porto Longone, Portus Longus, a large safe Haven in the Isle of Ilua, or Elve;
under the Spaniards, ever since 1577. Fortified by them in 1606. Taken by the
French in 1646. Retaken by the Spaniards in 1650. It stands over against
Piombine, twelve Miles to the South; fifty four from Ligorne, thirty seven from
the Isle of Corsica to the East. Before under the Princes of Piombino.

Porto Lovis, Lewis, or Blavet, Portus Ludovici, Blabia, a strong Town in
Bretagne in France; at the Mouth of the River Blave: which has a large Haven.
Twelve Leagues from Vannes to the West, and fifteen from Quimper to the East.
This Town sprung up out of the ruins of Blavet, an old Town near it.

Port Lovis, a new built Town in the Lower Languedoc, on the Mediterranean Sea,
near Mount de Sete. This Haven and Port was made by a vast Artificial Mount,
raised out of the Sea with a mighty expense. It stands two Leagues from
Frontignan to the South, and five from Agde to the East.

Porto Moriso, Portus Mauritius, a pleasant Town in the State of Genoua; upon
the Mediterranean Sea, well Peopled: it stands near Onelia, upon a Hill; in the
midst between Savona to the East, and Nizza to the West, thirty six Miles from
either: but it has now no Port, as Baudrand assures us on his own knowledge.

Il Porto di Paula, Portus Paulae, a Seaport in the State of the Church, in
Campagna di Roma; near Mount Circello; into which the Lake of Sancta Maria
vents it self. Able to contain two thousand Ships: it has every where the marks
of a Roman Port, but being neglected fills up with Sand.

Porto de la Paz, Portus Pacis, a Port at the North end of the Island of
Hispaniola; where there is of late a French Colony settled.

Porto di Primaro, a Town and Port in the Duchy of Ferrara in Italy, where a
branch of the Po, called Po di Primaro, delivers it self into the Gulf of
Venice. It has a Tower for its defense.

Porto di san Pedro, a Port in South America, toward the Mouth of the Rio
Grande, and East of the River Plata: upon the Sea of Paraguay.

Porto Ravaglioso, Portus Orestis, a Port in the Province of the further
Calabria; in the Kingdom of Naples, upon the Tyrrhenian Sea: at the Mouth of
the River Marro, near La Palma. Thirty Miles from Regio to the North, and
twenty from Tropea to the South. It is of great Antiquity, but no great use.

Porto Ricco, or S. Jean de Porto Ricco, or Puerto Rico, Portus Dives, a City
in South America; seated at the North end of an Island of the same name in the
North Sea; which is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of S. Dominico. Taken
and plundered by the English in 1595. and by the Hollanders in 1615. The Island
lies eight Leagues from Hispaniola to the East, at the entrance of the Gulf of
Mexico, about a hundred thirty six Leagues from the Continent of America to the
South: thirty or thirty five long from East to West, and twenty in breadth.
First discovered by Chr. Columbus in 1493; who dedicated it to S. John Baptist;
and called this Place Porto Ricco, because the greatest Galleons ride in its
Port in Safety. The Spaniards began to plant their Colonies here in 1510. They
have secured this Port with two strong Castles, beside two little Forts. The
whole Island enjoys a temperate Air, a fruitful Soil for Sugar, Ginger, Cassia,
and Cattle: but the ancient Indian Natives have all been barbarously murdered
by the Spaniards.

Porto Royal, Portus Regius, a Port of North America, in the Province of
Tabasca; in the Confines of Yucoatan, upon the Bay of Mexico: called by the
Spaniards, El Puerto Real. There is another Porto of the same name in the
Kingdom of Andalusia, over against the Isle of Cadis; which of old was called
Portus Gaditanus.

Port Royal in New France, in North America, in the Province of Acadia, was
taken by the English, and restored to the French by the Treaty of Breda in
1667. It stands at the bottom of the Bay of France, and has a safe and large
Harbor.

Port Royal, a Port in Florida, near Virginia.

Port Royal, a celebrated Nunnery near Cheureuse in France, six Leagues from
Paris.

Port Royal, a Port on the South of Jamaica, in the Hands of the English: by
whom the Town was built. Which (before the late dreadful Earthquake 1692,
ruined the greatest part of it), had in it above one thousand and five hundred
Houses; and extended twelve Miles in length; extremely populous, it being the
Scale of Trade in that Island. It is seated at the end of a long point of Land
which makes the Harbor, and runs into the Main about twelve Miles; having the
Sea on the South, and the Harbor on the North. The Harbor is about three
Leagues broad; and in most places so deep, that a Ship of one thousand Tun may
lay her sides to the Shore of the Point; Lead and Unload at pleasure; and it
affords good Anchorage all over. For the security of it there is built a very
strong Castle, always well Garrisoned with Soldiers; and has sixty pieces of
Cannon mounted. Yet this Town stands upon a loose Sand; which affords neither
Grass, Stone, fresh Water, Trees, nor any other thing that could encourage the
building of a Town, besides the goodness and convenience of the Harbor.

Porto Sabione, Edron, a Port on the Gulf of Venice, near Chiosa, ( Fossa
Clodia) a City in that State; twenty five Miles from Venice.

Porto di Salo, Salorius, a Port in Catalonia; four Miles from Tarragona
toward Barcinone.

Porto Santo, Cerne, one of the Azore Islands; discovered by the Portuguese in
1428, and by them called Ilha de Puerto Santo: Not far from the Madera; about
eight Leagues in Circuit.

Porto Seguro, a City, Port, and Prefecture in Brasil in South America, upon
the Sea Coast; under the Portuguese. The Prefecture lies betwixt that called
los Isleos, and the other of Spiritu Santo.

Port Uendres, Portus Veneris, a large Port in the County of Russilion, upon
the Mediterranean Sea: in the Borders of Catalonia. Seventeen Miles from
Perpignan to the North-East. It has this name from a Temple dedicated to Venus,
in the times of Paganism; which stood near it.

Porto Uenere, Portus Venerii, Portus Veneris, a Town in the States of Genoua;
which has a Haven and a Castle, built by the Genouese in 1113: seated over
against the Isle of Palmaria. Sixty Miles from Genoua, and three from the Gulf
del Spezza to the East.

Porto Uiejo, a Town and Port in Peru in South America, upon the Pacifick
Ocean; in the Province, and not far from the City, Quito.

Porto Zora, Pisidon, a City of Africa Propria, mentioned by Ptolemy; now
called Zora by the Europeans, and Zuarat by the Moors. It is a strong Place,
which has a large Harbor belonging to it, in the Kingdom of Tunis; one hundred
and twenty Miles from Tripoli to the West: taken and plundered by the Knights
of Malta not long since.

Portsmouth, Portus Magnus, a Town in Hampshire, in the Hundred of Ports down,
of great Antiquity; called by Ptolemy (...) the Great Haven; the Old Town then
stood higher up. The New Town is built upon an Island, called Portsey; (which
is about fourteen Miles in Circuit, and at a full Tide floats in Salt Water);
by a Bridge on the North joined to the Continent. The Town is fortified with a
Timber Wall, covered with Earth: on the North-East, near the Gate, it has a
Fort; and two Block-Houses at the entry of the Haven; built of hewn Stone, by
Edward IV. and Henry VII. To which Qu. Elizabeth added other Works, and a
Garrison to watch and defend the Place. The latter Princes have built
Storehouses for all sorts of Naval Provisions, and Docks for the building of
Ships. In Mr. Cambdens time it was more resorted to on the account of War, than
Commerce; and had little other Trade than what arose from the boiling of Salt.
But since, its Trade is much increased. It is grown populous; a good Nursery
for Seamen; and a Corporation, represented by two Burgesses in the Lower House
of Parliament. Giving also the Title of Duchess to the Lady, Louisa de
Querouaille Created by K. Charles II. 1673. Baroness of Petersfield, Countess
of Farnham, and Duchess of Portsmouth.

Portugal, Lusitania, Portugallia, a Kingdom on the West of Spain: bounded on
the West by the Atlantic Ocean, on the South by Algarve, (which is annexed to
this Kingdom); on the East by Andalusia, Extremadura and Leon; and on the North
by Gallicia. It lies on the Sea Coast from North to South four hundred Miles;
not above one hundred where broadest, and eighty in the narrower places; eight
hundred and seventy nine in Compass. Divided into five Provinces, to wit, Enter
Douero e Minho, Tra los Montes, Beira, Estremadura, and Alentejo or Enter Tejo
e Guadiana; whereunto was added Algarve, under Alphonsus III. with the Title of
a Kingdom. The principal Rivers are those four expressed in the Names of the
Provinces, Douero, Minho, Tajo and Guadiana, which furnish the Kingdom with
very convenient Ports. It was anciently called Lusitania, from the the Lusitani
its first Inhabitants; and took the present Name about the fifth Century, from
Poriocale, a celebrated Mart. The Air is generally healthful; the Earth Hilly
and Barren, especially as to Corn, which is much of it imported from France.
But it yields Wine, Fruits, Fish, Game, Salt, Horses, and Mines. And is so very
populous about Spain, especially toward the Sea, that they reckon more than
four hundred Cities, or great privileged Towns; three Archbishopricks, ten
Bishoprics, and above four thousand Parishes. This Kingdom is said to be
founded by one Henry Earl of Lorain about 1099. For this Prince having shown
much Gallantry in the Wars against the Moors, was by Alphonsus VI. King of
Castile, rewarded with the Marriage of Teresia (a Natural Daughter of his,) and
a part of this Kingdom, with the Title of an Earl. The Son of this Henry, (
Alphonsus I.) having in 1139. in the Battle of Obrique defeated five Moorish
Kings, assumed the Title of King. This Prince assembled the Estates of his
Kingdom at Lamego, in the Province of Beira: who there passed a Law called the
Law or Statute of Lamego, for the exclusion of Strangers from the Crown, which
remains in full force to this day. His Posterity enjoyed this Kingdom; and very
much enlarged it by Victories against the Moors at home, and by the Discovery
of several unknown Countries abroad, for seventeen Descents. Amongst which,
John I. styled the Father of his Country, succeeded in 1385. tho only the
Natural Son of Peter I. the King, save one, immediately preceding his
ascension. But Sebastian a young Prince (who succeeded King John III. in 1557.)
perishing in a Battle in Africa, in 1580. and Henry dying soon after, (who was
a Churchman, very old when he came to the Crown;) Philip II. King of Spain
obtained this Kingdom by force, and a pretended Title in 1584. After whom
Philip III. and IV. successively enjoyed it. But in 1640. John Duke of
Braganza, who had a better Title, encouraged by the unsupportableness of the
Spanish Government to the Portugueze, by an universal Revolt of the people in
all parts, ejected the Spaniards and assumed the Kingdom: succeeded in it by
two of his Sons; the youngest of which, Peter, is now King of Portugal, and the
second of his Name.

Porzevera, a River of Italy, which falls into the Sea by Genoua.

Posega, or Possega, the Capital City of Sclavonia, upon the River Oriawa;
eight Miles from the Save to the North, thirty from Gradisca to the East; it
consists of about ten thousand Houses. They are mean and small, after the
manner of the Buildings in this Country. It is seated in a very fruitful Earth,
which produces Fruits of all sorts, of a more than ordinary size; and gives
its name to a County lying betwixt the Save and the Drove. This Town fell into
the Hands of the Turks, under Solomon the Magnificent, about 1544. together
with Walpo and Quinque Ecclesiae: and continued so till 1687. when the Turkish
Army after the Battle of Mohats revolting from, and mutinying against the Prime
Vizier their General; the Garrison which was laid in this City to defend it,
(of a sudden, no Enemy being near them) deserted, and carried many of the
Inhabitants with them, and slew others. Whereupon General Dunewalt, (who had
then crossed the Drove to besiege Zygeth,) returned and took Possession of it,
without force, or any opposition: and immediately took care to secure it, by
raising new Works and Forts. Four hundred Villages depend upon this City.

Posnan, Posnam, or Posen, Posnania, a City in the Greater Poland; the Capital
of a Palatinate, called by the same Name; built upon the River Warta, amongst
the Hills; seven Miles from Gnesna to the West, twenty from Franck fort upon
the Oder to the East, and as many from Wratislaw to the North: it is little,
yet a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Gnesna; and has an excellent and
well built Castle. The Palatinate of Poznanskie, is bounded on the West by the
Marquisate of Brandenburg; on the North by the Further Pomerania; on the East
by the Palatinate of Kaliski; and on the South by Misnia.

Poson. See Presburg.

Potenza, Potentia, a City of Italy, ascribed by Ptolemy to Lucania; now seated
in the Basilicate, in the Kingdom of Naples; at the foot of the Apennine:
fifteen Miles from Acerenza to the North-West, and eighteen from Venosa (
Venusia) to the South. This is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Acerenza;
and now in a tolerable good condition.

Pothereus, a River of the Island of Crete, mentioned by ancient Writers, as
passing by the City Gortis, or Gortyna, there.

Potosi, Potosium, a great City in South America, in the Kingdom of Peru; on
the South part of that Country; in a Province called Los Charcas: seated at the
foot of a Mountain of the same Name, and divided in two by a Rivulet from a
Lake that stands about a quarter of a League off. Eighteen Spanish Leagues from
La Plata to the East, eighty from the Pacifick Ocean to the East, one hundred
and sixty from Cusco to the South. Mostly regarded on the account of rich Mines
of Silver here discovered in 1544. by the Spaniards; who built this City, and
call it an Imperial one: which is since become one of the greatest, richest,
and most populous Cities in America: adorned with diverse Magnificent Churches
and Monasteries; and inhabited by above twenty thousand people, Spaniards,
Strangers, Indians, Moulates, etc. almost every one appearing in Gold and
Silver.

Potton, a Market Town in Bedfordshire, in the Hundred of Bigleswade, bordering
upon Cambridgesh.

Pouges, a Village in the Province of Nivernois in France, betwixt Nevers and
la Charity; much frequented upon the account of two Medicinal Springs at it,
which have long been in great esteem for the curing of the Dropsy.

Pouligny, or Poligny, Polichnium, a Castle in the Franche Comte, which was
heretofore a place of great strength. It stands seven Leagues from Dole to the
South.

Poulton, a Market Town in Lancashire, in the Hundred of Amounderness, upon the
River Irwell.

Powhatan, or James River, the principal River in Virginia, dividing that
Country by the middle. It denominates an Indian Kingdom there, in which Captain
Smith in his Voyages made large Discoveries. The Capital Town of it was Pomeiok.

Powis, or Powisland, a Sovereign Principality, in the former times, in Wales;
whereof Mathraval in the County of Montgomery was the Capital.

Pozzuoli, or Pozzuolo, Puteoli, Dicaearchia, a City of Italy, in the Province
of Campania; built by the Samians; and called Flavia by Vespasian; now in the
Terra di Lavoro, (a Province of the Kingdom of Naples) and a Bishops See, under
the Archbishop of Naples: It stands upon an Hill, by the Shoars of the
Tyrrhenian Sea; upon which it has a large and safe Haven, and a Bay of the same
name; eight Miles from Naples to the West. There are within the bounds of this
City, thirty five natural Baths: which have their different sorts of warm
Water, wonderously useful for the Cure of several Diseases. This City was the
place, to which the Roman Emperors retreaed (for the most part) for their
divertisement and pleasure: at this day a great, populous, fine City: in which
the Spaniards have built a Citadel. There are very many Roman Antiquitios, and
natural Rarities in it, not easily to be found elsewhere: Some Remains
particularly of Caligula's Bridge, of three thousand nine hundred Paces, over
the Gulf, reaching from Pozzuoli to Bajae; which he proudly passed and
repassed in triumph. Mr. Sandys in his Travels has largely described others of
these.

Prague, by the Inhabitants called Prag, Praga, Casurgi^, Marobudum, Bubiemum,
the Capital City of the Kingdom of Bohemia; an Archbishopric, kinstituted by
Pope Clement VI. and the Royal City; or rather three Cities within one Wall;
which together make it undoubtedly the greatest City in Germany. It stands upon
the River Muldau, (called by the Inhabitants Vetaue) a large rapid River,
covered by a Stone Bridge of sixteen great Arches, seventeen hundred foot long,
and thirty five broad. This City is divided into three parts; the Old, the New,
and the Little City. The Old lies on the East of the Muldau; very populous,
full of Buildings; and in this the University was founded by the Emperor
Charles IV. about the year 1370. 2. The New is very large; separated from the
former by a large Ditch or Trench. 3. The Klein Seitten, or Lesser Prague, for
pleasantness, beauty of Buildings, and fair Palaces, far exceeds the other two:
this lies on the West of the Muldau: in this is the Royal Palace, the Cathedral
Church (dedicated to S. Veit) built by S. Wenceslaus Duke of Bohemia, in 923.
The Circuit of the City is very great: there are many Hills and void spaces in
it; yet it is more populous than Florence, and the Streets larger. Dr. Brown in
his Travels, has given an exact account of it. It seems to be a Place of great
Antiquity; and to be the Marobudum of Ptolemy. John King of Bohemia took it
from Henry Duke of Carinthia, in 1311. The Inhabitants imprisoned Winceslaus
their King in 1392. George Podiebrach, the Revenger of the Perfidy of the
Council of Constance, took it in 1441. The University was opened here by
Charles IV. Emperor of Germany, in 1370. which has had above forty thousand
Students at once in it; especially in the time of John Hus, about 1409. (whose
Doctrines were condemned in a Council, assembled by the Archbishop of Prague
here in 1405. according to the German Writers.) But it is most famous for the
Defeat of the Protestant Forces near its Walls, November. 8. 1620. by Maximilian
Duke of Bavaria; which was after severely revenged in the Swedish Wars. And in
this City May 26. 1635. a Peace was made between the Emperor and his
Protestant Subjects. It lies fifteen German Miles from Budweiss to the North,
eighteen from Dresden, and thirty eight from Vienna to the North-East. A Fire
endammaged it June 21. 1689. to the value (as they computed it) of two
Millions. Long. 36. 38. Lat. 50. 06.

Pragoca, Lithoproscopus, a Mountain of Phoenicia; between Tripoli and Botryn.

Prasobo, Haemus, a Mountain in Thrace.

Prato, a small Town in the Province of Toscana in Italy, upon the River
Bisentio: betwixt Florence and Pistoia.

Precop, Pericop, Procopias, Procopiana, Taurica Chersonesus, Tartaria
Precopensis, Taphrae, a City, and strong Fort in the entrance of the Neck of
Crim Tartary: from whence that Peninsula is sometimes called Precopska: and the
Tartarian Inhabitants, the Precopensian Tartars. After the Muscovites obtained
that great Victory over the Tartars in 1689. (wherein they slew thirty thousand
of them, with one of the Han's Sons, upon the place); the Tartars retiring into
the Crim, abandoned Pericop to the Conquerours; which is a most important Pass.

Premislaw, Premislia, a great and strong City in the Province of Russia,
properly so called, in Poland: which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Lemburgh: standing upon the River San, toward the Borders of Hungary.

Presburg, Posonium, Pisonium, Flexum, the Capital City of that part of
Hungary, which remained to the Emperor before his late Conquests; called by
the Hungarians Poson; by the Germans Presburg; by the Poles Prespurg. It is
seated upon the Danube; eight German Miles from Vienna to the East, and as many
from Newheusel and Comora to the North-West; seventy from Raab. The Capital of
a County of the same name; between Austria, Moravia, and the Danube. It has a
considerable Castle, built of White Stone, on the top of an Hill, (a stately
and beautiful Pile) to preserve it from the Inroads of the Turks. After Gran
fell into the Hands of the Turks, the Archbishops See was removed hither: the
Assemblies of the States of Hungary, have been of late ever held in this City.
After Newheusel in 1662. fell into the Hands of the Turks, it was fortisied:
being then a Frontier. Prince Joseph Archduke of Austria (the present
Emperor's eldest Son) was crowned King of Hungary here, December. 9. 1687. That
Clause in the one and thirtieth Article of King Andrew's Decrees in 1222
(consented to by Ferdinand I.) which makes it lawful for the Subjects to rise
up in Arms against their Prince, in the case of his acting contrary to Law,
being particularly excluded out of the Coronation Oath by the Consent of the
States of that Kingdom: And the Crown thence forward to descend by Inheritance.
A Council was celebrated here in 1309. which Pope Clement V. confirmed.

Prerustine, a Valley in Piedmont; famous for a defeat of the Savoyards, in
1663. by the Protestants of that Valley, in the defense of their Lives;
contrary to the Faith given assaulted by sixteen thousand Horse and Foot; which
they forced to a Retreat, with the loss of one thousand of the Assailants.

Prescot, a Market Town in Lancashire, in the Hundred of Darby.

Presteign, a Market Town in the County of Radnor in Wales, in the Hundred of
Radnor.

Prester John's Kingdom, the same with Abyssinia in the Upper Aethiopia: But the
Origin of this appellation of it, is not so easily determined: As whether
coming from one Johannes Presbyter, a Nestorian, who in 1145. usurped the Crown
of Tartary, and might leave his Successors his name. Or, from Pretiosus
Johannes, which is the Latin Interpretation of the Title, Belul-Gian, that the
Abyssines give their King. Or, from Priest Cham in the Persian Language,
signifying a Christian Emperor, etc. For we find no agreement either in
Travelers, or the Learned Etymologists, about it. And some moreover attribute
this Kingdom not to Aethiopia, but Tartary.

Preston, a handsome, large, and populous Borough in Lancashire, in the Hundred
of Amounderness: represented in the Lower House of Parliament by two Burgesses;
and honored with the Court of Chancery, and the Offices of Justice for
Lancaster, as a County Palatine. It is seated upon the River Rible, having a
fair Stone Bridge over the same.

Preveza, Nicopolis, a City of Epirus; called by Ptolemy and others,
Cassiopesa. It is seated at the Mouth of the Gulf of Larta, or Prevesa; near
the Shoars of the Ionian Sea; between the Islands of Corfu, and Sancta Maura: a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Lepanto. This City took the name of
Nicopolis in the time of Augustus Caesar; being built and so called by that
Prince, in memory of his Victory obtained at Actium, near it, over Antonius and
Cleopatra, in a Sea Fight. In 1539. the Pope's and King of Spain's Galleys
endeavored to surprise it from the Turks, but failed in the attempt. In 1684.
Morosini took it, upon a surrender, for the Venetians. Long. 46. 20. Lat. 39.
25.

Principato Citra, Principatus Citerior; the Hither Principate; a Province in
the Kingdom of Naples: bounded on the North by the Further Principate, and part
of Terra di Lavoro; on the West and South by the Tyrrhenian Sea; and on the
East by the Principate. It is seventy Miles in length from the South-East to
the North West. The Capital of it is Salerno; the other Cities are Amalfi,
Nocera, Marsico, Nuovo, and Sarno. A part of the Country of the ancient
Picentini, and Lucania, lies contained in this Principate.

Principato Oltra, Principatus Vlterior; the Further Principate; is a Province
of the Kingdom of Naples. Bounded on the East and North by the Capitinate; the
Terra di Lavoro to the West, and the Hither Principate to the South. Benevento
is the Capital of it: it has besides Conza, Avellino, Ariano, and Cedogna; in
ancient times the greatest part of this Province belonged to the Church. See
Benevento.

Il principato di Val di Taro, a Valley and small Province of Lombardy in
Italy, under the Duke of Parma: through which the River of its own name, Taro,
takes its course to the Po. The Towns Campiano and Borgo di Val di Taro stand
in this Principate.

Pristina, a large City in Bulgaria, situated in the midway between Nissa and
Vscopia. Taken by the Imperialists in the year 1689.

Prochita, or Procida, an Island three Miles in compass, on the Coast of Terra
di Lavoro; near the Bay of Naples: which has a fine Castle, and a Monastery.

Propontis, the Sea betwixt Asia Minor and Thrace: now called the Sea of
Marmora. See Marmora.

La Provence, Provincia, one of the Southern Provinces of France. The first
part of France which the Romans conquered, and reduced into the form of a Roman
Province; from whence it has its Name, ( Provincia Romana.) In those times it
was bounded on the East by the Maritim Alps; on the South by the Mediterranean
Sea; on the West by the Rhosne; and on the North by the Vocontii, Caturiges,
and Ebroduntii, three Gallick Tribes or Nations: within which bounds it
contained all these other Tribes; the Cavares, the Salii, Desviates, Albici,
Mimeni, and Oxybii. It is now much less than it was then: but still one of the
greatest Provinces in France: bounded on the North by the Dauphine; on the East
by the Alps, and the County of Nizza; on the West by Languedoc, cut off by the
Rhosne; and on the South by the Mediterranean Sea. From East to West, from the
Rhosne to the Var, forty four Leagues: from North to South thirty two: in
Circuit one hundred fifty eight; as Honorate de Bouche has shown in a very
exact Description of it, lately published. The Capital of this Province is Aix;
the other Cities are Antibe, Arles, Avignon, Carpentras, Digne, Dragugnan,
Frejus, Grass, Marseille, Orange, Sisteron, Tarascon, Toulon, Voison. The
Rivers Rhosne, Var, Durance, Verdon, Argens, etc. water it. This Province was
conquered by the Romans, before Julius Caesar entered France, upon the
complaint of the Marsilians against the Salians. M. Fulvius Flaccus was sent
with an Army against them in the year of Rome 627. one hundred twenty three
years before the Birth of our Savior: and the War was ended by Fabius Maximus
in 632. It continued under the Romans till the year of Christ 411. when it was
granted to Atholphus (King of the Goths) with Placidia a Sister of the Emperor
Honorius, by that Prince. Theodorick expelled this Nation in 462. and brought
it under the Ostrogoths, or Goths of Italy: from whom it passed to Theodobert
King of Metz, a Frank, about 549. by the Grant of the Emperor Justinian. From
these it passed to Rodolph Duke of Burgundy: and in 876. Hugh de Arles obtained
this Province of Boson King of Burgundy, by the Title of Earl of Provence. It
continued under Earls with the changes of Families, till 1481. when Charles
Earl of Maine (the last Earl of Provence) gave it to Lewis XI. King of France,
his Cousin German; from which time it has been united to the Crown of France.
There were in this Province three other small States, not subject de Jure to
the Crown of France: as Avignon under the Pope; Nizza under the Duke of Savoy;
and Orange under the Prince of Orange.

Provins, Provinum, a Town, sometime the Capital, of la Brie in France, upon
the River Vousie; whence the Province-Roses take their denomination. It has
been understood by some, to be the Agendicum of the Ancients.

Prusa, See Bursa. Besides which, two other ancient Episcopal Cities in
Bithynia, in the Lesser Asia, have their Names remembered by Strabo, Pliny, and
Ptolemy. Said to be now called Cheris and Barech.

Prussia, Borussia, Pruthenia, a great and fruitful Province of the Kingdom of
Poland: (which is a Dukedom) called by the Inhabitants Prouss; by the Poles
Prussy; by the Germans Preussen, and by the Italians Prussia. Bounded on the
North by the Baltic Sea; on the West by Pomerania; on the South by Poland and
Mazovia; and on the East by Lithuania and Samogitia. This Province was at first
under Sovereign Dukes of its own; after that, under the Knights of the
Teutonick Order, who in 1228. began a long and bloody War toward the Conquest
of it: in 1454. the Western part was lost from that Order, being subdued by the
Poles: In 1500. the Grand Master of the Order triumphed over the Moscovites,
that had fallen upon Prussia and Lithuania. In 1525. the Eastern part submitted
to the Crown of Poland too. Albert Marquess of Brandenburg (the thirty fourth,
and last Master of that Order) doing Homage, and obtaining from that Crown the
Eastern part, with the Title of Duke of Prussia. It stands now divided into two
parts, called the Regal and the Ducal Prussia: in the first are Dantzick,
Marienburg, Elbing and Thorn: in the second are Koningsberg, and Memel. The
Regal Prussia, ( Dantzick excepted) was yielded by a Treaty in 1655. to the
Crown of Sweden. The Ducal is under the Duke of Brandenburgh, who farms the
Amber-Fishery along the Coast of the Baltic Sea, in this Province, at eighteen
or twenty thousand Crowns a year.

Pruth, Porata, Hierasius, a River of Moldavia; which arising in Red Russia,
enters Walachia; and waters Jaczy, (the Capital of that Province;) and at
last falls into the Danube.

Pruym, or Prume, Prumia, a Castle, Town, and Monastery in Germany, of the
Order of S. Benedict, in the Forest of Ardenne; built by Pepin King of France,
in the year 760. It stands upon a River of the same Name; which falls into the
Saar, betwixt the Electorate of Trier and the Duchy of Luxemburgh: seven
Leagues to the North from Trier, and six from Limburg to the South. Lotharius
the Emperor, Son of Lewis the Debonnaire, resigning the Imperial Dignity, died
a Monk in this Monastery, in 855. In 1576. the Territory belonging to the Abbey
(which till then had been subject to the ^bot of this House only) fell under
the Elect of Trier; whose Successors are ever since the pectual Administrators
of this Jurisdiction, (confirm therein by the Diet at Ratisbone in 1654.) which
extends to some Villages about this Monastery.

Przemysl, Premislia, a City of the Kingdom of Poland, upon the River san, in
Red Russia; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Lemburg, and
sixteen Polish Miles from Sandomir to the South, and eighteen from Lemburg to
the West. It stands upon an Hill, well peopled, and in a flourishing state.

Psylli, an ancient people of Libya in Africa: described by Suetonius,
Herodotus, Gellius, etc. to have had a particular art at expelling and
mortifying of Poisons; whence Augustus Caesar, desiring to preserve Cleopatra
for a Triumph, caused these Psylli to suck the Poison out of her: But too late.

Ptolemais. See Aca.

Ptolemais Cyrenaica, one of the five Cities of the ancient Pentapolis in the
Kingdom of Egypt; which was a Bishops See, of great note heretofore in the
Person of Synesius, its Bishop; who in 411. assembled a Council at it for the
excommunication of Andronicus, Prefect of the Country. The modern Name of it is
Tolometa.

Ptolemais Ferarum, See Suachen. The Ancients mention another Ptolemais, in the
Thebais, in Egypt; near the Nile.

Puerto. See Porto.

Pugan, Puganum, a City in the Province of Queycheu in the Kingdom of China.

Puglia. See Terra di Bari, Apulia, and Capitanata.

Pulhely, a Market Town in Caernarvanshire in Wales, in the Hundred of
Gyslegion.

Le Puy, Podium, Anicium, Avicium, Vellavae, Vellaunorum Vrbs, a great and
populous City in the County of Velay in Languedoc, upon the River Loyr; which
is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bourges; but exempt from his
Jurisdiction; and the Bishop is Earl of Velay. It is the Capital of the County
in which it stands; adorned with many Parishes and Religious Houses: twenty two
Leagues from Lion to the North-West, twenty from Clermont to the North, and
eighteen from Vienne. In 1130. the Bishops of Aquitain assembled in Council
here; condemned Anacletus, an Antipope, in favor of the Election of Pope
Innocent II.

Puy-en Anjou, Podium Andegavense, a Town in Anjou in the Borders of Poictou;
three Leagues from Salmur to the South, and eight from Poictiers to the
North-East; near the River Thoue.

Puy Lawrens, Puteum Laurentii, a small Town in Languedoc, which has been
dignified with the Title of a Dukedom; two Leagues from Chartres to the West,
and three from Lavaur.

Puyg de Cerden, Jugum Carretanorum, a Town in Spain, in the County of
Cerdaigna; upon the River Segre, in the Pyrenean Hills, in the Borders of
France; fourteen Leagues from Perpignan, and six from Vrgel, a City of
Catalonia. This Town is the Capital of the County in which it stands; and was
lately in the hands of the French; but by the Treaty of Nimeguen, restored to
the Spaniards. The French call it Puycerda.

Puzzuolo, Puteoli, See Pozzuoli.

Py, a small River in the Bishopric of Reims in France, which falls into the
Suippe; and with it into the Aisne at Neufchastel.

Pylus. The Ancients mention several Towns and Mountains of this Name. The most
eminent of them, now extant, is Navarino in the Morea. See Navarino.

The Pyramides of Egypt. These, as it were, ^^ortal Buildings, accounted
amongst 7 the Wonder of the World, stand the distance of about ten Mile^om
Cairo in Egypt. Pliny says, three hundred seventy thousand men were employed
upon the largest of them, twenty years: whose height amounted to five hundred
and twenty foot, the breadth six hundred eighty two square; ascended (being the
only open one) by two hundred and eighteen steps, of about three foot deep.
Within, Caverns for the reposal of dead Bodies; a Hall, a Chamber, and an empty
Tomb made of a single Stone of the likeness of Porphyry. Without, before it, as
before two others of the chiefest, appear the Rests of certain square Edifices
like Temples: and hard by, a vast Pile, representing the Face and Breast of a
Woman, twenty six foot high; which Pliny calls Sphynx, because there was then a
contrivance to utter Oracles from it. The ancient Egyptians believed, that
Pharaoh and Amasis, Kings of Egypt, lay entombed in these Pyramides. The Bases
of them, as far as to the sixteenth step upwards, to the North, by time, have
been covered with Sand.

The Pyrenean Hills, Mons Pyrenaeus, one of the greatest Chains of Mountains in
Europe: called by the Spaniards, les Montes Pyreneos; by the French, les Monts
Pyrenees; by the Italians, li Monti Pirenei. They lie between France to the
North, and Spain to the South; extending from East to West eighty Spanish
Leagues; that is, from Port Vendres (in Rousillon, on the Mediterranean Sea),
to S. Sebastian on the Bay of Biscay: in various places called by different
Names.

Pyraeus. See Porto di Lione.

QA.
QUadalquivirio, See Guadalquivirejo.

Quadi, the old Inhabitants of Moravia, and the North of Austria, as far as the
Danube: who maintained a perpetual War with the Romans, till the year of Christ
565: when they were conquered first by Lechus Duke of Poland. In the time of
the Emperor Valentiman, they advanced as far as to Aquileja: and though the
Marcomanni dwelt in Moravia too, yet the Quadi and them were two as distinct
people, as the present Moravians and the Trans-Danubian Austrians; which latter
possess the Seats of the Quadi.

Quancheu, Quangcheu, Quancheum, the Capital City of the Province of Quamsi, in
the Kingdom of China; sometime called Jangching and Quangtung; and by
Foreigners, Canton. It stands upon the River Ta, which a little lower falls
into the Ocean; and affords it a large and safe Harbor, defended by two
Castles. It is surrounded with Hills, in Circuit four German Miles. Besieged
twelve Months by the Tartars; and a last taken more by fraud, than force; to
the great ruin of it, and the slaughter of its Inhabitants in 1650. Long. 140.
30. Lat. 26. 25. according to the last and best Maps.

Quangan, Quanganum, a City in the Province of Yunnan, in China; in the hands
of the King of Tunkim.

Quangping, a City of the Province of Pekim in China.

Quangsi, one of the principal Cities of the Province of Yunnan in China.

Quangte, a City in the Province of Nanquin, or Nankim.

Quamsi, or Quansi, Quansia, a Province in the Kingdom of China: bounded by
Yunnan on the West, Queycheu on the North, Cochin China on the South, Quantum
on the East. The Capital of it Queilin. It contains eleven Cities, ninety nine
great Towns; 186719 Families: the last Province which the Tartars Conquered.

Quanto, a Province in the Isle of Niphon, in the Kingdom of Japan.

Quantum, Quangtung, a vast Province in China; bounded on the North by Kiamsi,
and Huquam; on the East by Fokien; on the West by Quamsi, and the Kingdom of
Tumkim, or Cochin China; and on the South by the Ocean. It contains ten Cities,
seventy three great Towns, and 483360 Families. One of the best watered, and
most fruitful Provinces in this Kingdom.

Quaquacust, la cost des Dents, a part of Guinea in Africa; which extends
eight Spanish Leagues in length from East to West. See Guinee, and Cost de
dents.

Quarentan, Vadicasses, or Carentan; a Seaport Town in Normandy; seventeen
Leagues from Caen to the West, and eight from Coutances to the North-East.

Quars. See Carin.

Quebec, the Principal French City in New France in America: taken from the
Indians in the Conquest of this part of their Country by French Men, and very
strongly fortified.

Queda, a City of the East Indies, upon the Promontory of Malacca, over against
Sumatra. Long. 125. 31. Lat. 5. 50. It has an excellent Port, and a very great
Trade, being much frequented by the European Merchants and the Capital of a
Kingdom of the same name; which was subject to the King of Siam, but has now a
Prince of its own.

Quedelinburgh, a Town in the Upper Saxony in Germany. Once a Free Imperial
Town, but being afterward exempted, became (together with its Territory)
subject to its own Abbess, whose House here was of great fame. It lies two
German Miles from Halberstad to the South: now (with its Territory) subject to
the Duke of Saxony. In the year 1085. Hermannus, elected King of the Romans by
the Partisans of Pope Gregory VII. to oppose the Emperor Henry IV. assembled a
Council at this Town; in which sentence of Anathema passed upon the
Henrycianes, called Heretics; and the Antipope, Guibertus, set up by the
Emperor. There was another in 1103. remarkable for its giving absolution to
Henry, Son of the Emperor Henry IV. for revolting against his Father; tho
others place this latter sometime to Northausen in Thuringia.

Quedenau, a Village in the Dukedom of Prussia in Poland. Of great note amongst
the Seafaring People, for a Church there dedicated to S. James; whither they
repair to perform their Vows and Devotions.

Queens County, a County in the Province of Leinster in Ireland; called by the
Irish, Cunntae Loighsaigh. Bounded by Kildare to the West, Kilkenny to the
South, and Kings County to the East. The chief Town of which is Queens Town,
sixteen Miles from Kildare to the West, and twenty two from Kilkenny to the
North

Queicheu, Queichea, a Province on the South-West of China; bounded on the
North with Suchuen; on the East with Huquam; on the South with Quamsi, and on
the West with Yunnan. This Province is extremely Mountainous: It has eight
Cities, ten great Towns, and forty five thousand three hundred and three
Families. The Capital City is Queiyan.

Queicheu, a City in the Province of Suchuen, in the Kingdom of China, upon the
River Kiang; built in a very fruitful and well watered Plain. This is the
Capital of twelve Towns.

Queilin, a City in the Province of Quamsi in China, upon the River Quei.

Queilloa, Quiloa, Kiloa, a Kingdom of Zanguebar, in Africa; between Mosambique
and Melinde; on the Eastern Shore of Africa: the King of which is a Tributary
to the King of Portugal. It has a City of the same name, seated in an Island;
which is 1509. was taken by Francis Almaida, the Portugal Viceroy of Africa.
Long. 63 25. South Lat. 9. 18. This Island, called also Queilloa, has a strong
Citadel for its defense, together with a famous Port; and is honored with the
Residence of the King. Some place another, an old City, Queilloa, upon another
quarter of it.

Queite, Queitum, a City in the Province of Honan in China.

Queiyang, a great City in the Province of Queicheu in China.

Quercy, Cadurcensis Tractus, is a County in Guienne^ in Aquitain, in France;
great, populous, and fruitful in Corn, Wine, Cattle, etc. B^^nded on the North
by Limosin; on the East by Auvergne and Rovergne; on the South by Languedoc;
and on the West by Agenois and Perigort. The Capital of it is Cahors; the other
Towns are Montauban, Figeac, Gordone, and Martel. This was the Country of the
ancient Cadurci in Caesar, who furnished the Gauls with twelve thousand Men in
their League against the Romans. It became united with the Crown of France in
the Reign of Philip the Hardy.

Querimba, an Island toward the North-East of Madagascar.

Quernfurt, a small Town, which is yet the Capital of an Earldom of the same
name, in the Upper Saxony; in the County of Mansfeld; under the Duke of Saxony
ever since 1635: but it belonged before to the Bishop of Magdeburg.

Quesnoy, Quercetum, a small but very strong Town in Hainault; three Leagues
from Landrecy to the North, two from Valenciennes, and five from Cambray: In
the Hands of the French ever since 1654.

Queximi, Aphana, an Island in the Gulf of Persia; by others called Quetumi.

Quiansy, or Kiangsy, Quiansia, a Province in China, toward the South of that
Kingdom; bounded on the East by Chekiam, on the South by Quantum, on the West
by Huquam, and on the North by Nankim. The Capital of which is Nanchang. It
contains thirteen Cities, sixty seven great Towns, and one hundred thirty six
thousand six hundred and twenty nine Families.

Quibriche, the same with Bernich in Barbary.

Quieras, a strong Town in Piedmont, upon an Hill and the Banks of the River
Tanaro: where the famous Treaty betwixt France, Spain, the Empire, Savoy, and
Modena was celebrated in 1631.

Quimper, Corisopitum, a City in the Province of Britagne, in the Territory of
Cornvaile; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tours; upon the
Oder. Three Leagues from the Ocean to the North, ten from Breast, and forty from
Rennes. Called commonly also Quimper-Corantine, from Corantinus, the supposed
Tutelar Saint of the Diocese: to whom is Dedicated here the Cathedral Church.

Quimperlay, a Town in Britagne, upon the River Isotte; two Leagues from the
Sea, and ten from Quimper to the East.

Quinborongh or Queenborough, the chief Town of the Island of Shepey in Kent,
in Scray Lath; which has the honor to be represented by two Burgesses in the
Lower House of Parliament; and to be secured by a Castle Royal.

Quinque Ecclesiae, a City of the Lower Hungary; called by the Inhabitants,
Otegiazae; by the Germans, Funfkircken; by the Turks, Petscheu; by the French,
Cinq Eglises. It stands in the County of Baran, upon the River Keoriz, not far
from the Drove: six German Miles from the Danube, twenty three from Belgrade to
the North-West, fourteen from Alba Regalis, twelve from Buda to the South. It
has this name from five noble Churches which were heretofore in this City.
Stephen King of Hungary established the Bishopric here, (in 1009,) under the
Archbishop of Gran. Solomon the Magnificent took it with great difficulty, in
1543: and died in it after, whilst his Army lay before Sigeth, in 1566. Count
Serin II. burnt it and the Bridge of Esseck in 1664. Having been surprised and
plundered by the Croatian Army, in 1685. the year following after the taking of
Buda, it was surrendered without resistance to the Imperialists. The Turkish
Governor saying; Now the old Hen was escaped out of their Hands, the Chickens
would follow her. Long. 42. 08. Lat. 46. 09.

Quinsay, Kingsai, Kingsa, or Kangcheu, and Quisay, a vast City in the Province
of Chequin; which in 1300. was the Capital, and Royal City of China, the
Residence of the Emperors: said then to be ten Leagues in length, five broad,
and thirty in Circuit; containing about a Million of Families: to have twelve
hundred and sixty Stone Bridges, a Lake in the midst of it about thirty Miles
in circumference, four hundred and seventy Gates, with a Wall thirty Leagues in
compass of that breadth at the top, that twelve Horsemen might Ride a breast
without any inconvenience upon it. This City stands upon the River Cientang,
about sorty Leagues from the Eastern Ocean. Some confound it with Peking. The
Cham of Tartary is said to keep a Garrison in it of thirty thousand Men.

S. Quintin, Quintinum, a City in the Province of Picardy in France; which is
the Capital of Vermandois; and sprung up out of the ruins of Augusta
Veromanduorum, a Roman Town. Famous for a great defeat of the French Forces;
upon which it was yielded to the Earl of Pembroke, who besieged it in 1557. But
the getting of this Town was the loss of Calais: the Garrison of which was
drawn out by King Philip to manage this Siege; two years after, the French
recovered S. Quintin by a Treaty, and kept Calais too. It stands upon the River
Sum; six Leagues from Perronne to the East, and seven from Cambray to the
South.

Quir, a part of the unknown Terra Australis; discovered by a Spaniard of the
Name, but uncultivated as yet by Europeans.

Quiscon, or Quiscun, Ionia, a Province of the Lesser Asia.

Quiso, Cissa, a River of the Colchi; which falls into the Euxine Sea; seventy
six Miles South of the Mouth of the Phasos; now called il Fazo.

Quiess, Quissus, a River of Bohemia, in the Lower Silesia; which in the
Borders of Lusatia falls into the Borber, near Sagan; seven German Miles from
Glogaw to the West.

Quiteva, or Quieteva, a City and Kingdom in Africa, on the South of Aethiopia;
heretofore a part of the Kingdom of Monotapia; toward Zanguebar.

Quito, a Province of Peru, in South America, in the North part of that
Kingdom: between the Province of Quixo to the East, and the Pacifick Ocean to
the West; eighty Leagues long, and thirty five broad. It had at first Kings of
its own; but before the arrival of the Spaniards, was Conquered by the King of
Peru; and together with it, fell under the Dominion of Spain.

El Quito, the Capital City of the Province called by its name; a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Lima; in a fruitful Valley, at the foot of a Mountain
called Volcano Pinta; near Machangara, and Machangavilla, two Rivers almost
under the Line. It is likewise called S. Francisco del Quito. Two hundred and
fifty Spanish Leagues from Lima to the North, and six from the Pacifick Ocean
to the East. In 1586. there was an University opened here.

The Government of Quito, is a considerable part of South America; and one of
the three principal Provinces of the Kingdom of Peru; on the North it is
bounded with Popian; on the East with the Rivers of Pulumaio, and Amazons; on
the South with the rest of Peru, and on the West with the Pacifick Ocean. The
Andes divide it into two parts; besides Quito, it contains Canela, Quixos, and
the South and middle Popian; with some other Territories of small Note. This is
a fruitful, populous, and well watered Province.

Quivira, a Province in North America; between New Mexico, Mount Sual, and
Florida; which was never Conquered by any of the European Nations, nor indeed
thoroughly Discovered. It affords good pasturage along the Sea Coast.

Quixos, or los Quixos, Quixorum Provincia, la Province in the North of Peru;
between Quito to the West, and Canela to the East; first Discovered in 1557. by
the Spaniards, who have only four Colonies in it.

R A.
RAab, Jaurinum. See Gewer:

Raab, or le Rab, Arrabo, a River of Hungary; which arises in the Lower
Stiria, near Gratz: and running Eastward through the Lower Hungary, by the
Counties of Salawar and Gewer, it entertains the Lausnitz, the Binca, and the
Guntz; and watering S. Gothard, and Kerment, beneath Sarvar it divides into two
Branches: the right Hand Branch is called Rabnitz, the other Rab: these two
make the Isle of Rab, seven German Miles in length. At Rab or Javarin, they
reunite into one Stream again; and fall into the Danube. This River is
particularly memorable for a great Defeat of the Turkish Forces, by the French
and Germans, in 1664. upon the Banks of it near Kerment. See Ricaut's State of
the Ottoman Empire, page 207.

Rabasteins, Rapistanium, a Town in the Upper Languedoc in the Diocese of Alby,
in France, upon the River Tarn: whose Coat of Arms is, three Turnips suitable
to the Derivation of its Name from both the French and Latin, Rave, and Rapa, a
Turnep.

Rabath, Oppidum Novum, a City in the Kingdom of Fez; sixty two Miles from
Tangier, and seventy four from Fez.

Rabath. See Petra.

Racanella, Cylistarnus, a River of the Hither Calabria, in the Kingdom of
Naples; which flowing by Cosano, falls into the Bay of Taranto.

Rachelburgh. See Ratzburgh.

Rackelspurg, Polentium, Raceburgum, a City of Germany, in the Lower Stiria;
upon the River Muer; under the Emperor, as Archduke of Austria; four German
Miles from the Borders of Hungary to the West, and six from Gratz to the East.
This City is a Roman Town, ascribed by Antoninus to the Upper Pannonia.

Radicofani, a Castle and Seigniory in Tuscany, between Stena and Rome.

Radini, the same with Strymon; a River which parts Thrace and Macedonia.

Radnorshire. Radnoria, one of the twelve Shires in the Principality of Wales:
Bounded on the North by Monmouth; on the East by Shropshire and Herefordshire;
on the South by Brecknock, cut off by the Rivers of Clarwen and Wye; the
Western point falls upon Cardiganshire. Its form is Triangular; the sides
almost equal; the whole Circumference being about ninety Miles. The Air is
sharp, the Soil barren. The Silures were the ancient Inhabitants of this
County. The Town of Radnor, which gives name to it, was by the Romans called
Magi, or Magnos: pleasantly seated under an Hill, which bears upon his top a
large and strong Castle; from whose Bulwarks there is a Trench drawn along the
West of the Town* on which has stood a Stone Wall: it is represented by one
Burgess in the English Parliament. Its Long. is 17. 00. Lat. 52. 45. John
Roberts, Lord Roberts of Truro, was by Charles II. July 23. 1679. Created
Viscount Bodmyn, and Earl of Radnor: the first Earl of this County. This County
proved fatal to Vortiger, (the last Monarch of the British Blood) here slain by
Lightning: and to Llewellin, (the last Prince of the British Race) in 1282,
found hid in the vast Mountains of this County, and slain by one Adam Francton:
his Head being Crowned with Ivy, was set upon the Tower of London; in whom the
British Race of Princes ended.

Radom, a Town in the Lesser Poland, in the Palatinate of Sendomir; which is
the Capital of a District of the same name. Twenty Polish Miles from Warsaw to
the South, and fifteen from Sendomir to the North.

Raglins, Ricina, an Island on the North of Ireland, on the Coast of the County
of Antrim; which has a Castle; sometimes reckoned amongst the Hebrides, though
it lies but eight Miles from the Continent.

Ragusa, Ragusium, Epidaurus, Rhanzium, a City of Dalmatia; which is an
Archbishops See, and a Free State; called by the Sclavonians Dubrounich; by the
Italians, Ragusi. It stands in the Confines of Albania, on the Shoars of the
Adriatic Sea, to which it has a Port: at the foot of a Mountain, called by the
Greeks, Lau; upon a Rock: in so disadvantageous a situation, that the Turks by
rouling down great Stones from the Mountain might have overwhelmed it and so
have become absolute Masters of it, if they had ever desired to be so. This
City is about a Mile in compass: has large Suburbs beside; populous, rich, well
Traded, and Fortified. About a League from it lies the Harbor of Santa Cruz of
great Capacity; secured by the Island of Lacroma. The City out of which this
sprung, was called Epidaurus, from its Founders; six Miles more to the East:
where the place of its ruins is called Ragusi Vecchio, the Old Ragusa. It did
pay a Tribute of twelve thousand five hundred Hungarian Ducats to the Grand
Seignior; but had several Privileges in recompense by way of Trade; and ten
Colonies in Servia, Bulgaria, and Thrace besides; so that this was no hard
Condition. Yet in 1686. they sent Ambassadors to the Emperor, and desired to be
received into his Protection. About the Year 1634. and in 1667. this City
suffered much by an Earthquake. The Territory of Ragusano belonging to it is
about a hundred Miles in length, from the North-East to the South-West: but not
above twenty five Miles broad: having only two or three Towns more in it.
Granted to this City by Stephen King of Bosnia, in 1333. Long. 42. 52. Lat. 42.
50. The Senate of this Republic is constituted of sixty Senators, under one
Rector or Duke; of whom and of their liberty they are so exceeding jealous,
that our Accounts tell us, they change him every month; not suffering the
wearing of a Sword, or a Man's lying from his own house, without advising the
Senate; nor opening the City Gates above three or four hours in the day in
Summer; and in the Winter, the half thereof: and for strangers, especially
Turks, they secure them all the Night in their Lodgings. They fear the Turks,
hate the Venetians; honor the Pope, Emperor and King of Spain; and pay tribute
to all.

Il fume di Ragusa, Hirminius, a River on the South of Sicily; so called from a
Town it washes: it falls into the African Sea; between Camerino to the West,
and Cape Passaro to the East; sometimes called il Mauli.

Raithe, a desert near the Mountain Sinai, in the Stony Arabia; or as others
place it, in the Kingdom of Egypt: much visited and inhabited by the religious
Anchorites of the 13th Century.

Rain, Raina, a strong Town in the Dukedom of Bavaria, in the Borders of
Schwaben; at the Confluence of the Lech, and the Danube; two German Miles from
Donawert to the East, and a little more from Newburgh. Often taken, and retaken
in the Swedish War; and now rebuilding. There is another Town of the same name
in Stiria; in the Borders of Carniola, and Croatia, upon the Save; twenty five
Miles from Cilley to the East, and twenty two from Metling to the North.

Rakouick, Raconicum, a City of Germany, near the River Miza; seven German
Miles from Prague to the West, thirteen from Egra, and seven from Litomierske,
or Leutmeritz.

Rama, or Ramia, the name of the Kingdom of Bosnia, in the Royal Title of the
Kings of Hungary; which has been used by them ever since 1138: when Bela
Caecus, King of Hungary, Possessed that Kingdom, or at least a part of it.
There is still a River in that Kingdom of this name; which falls into the
Narenta, and gives the same name to a small Territory as it passes.

Rama, or Ramatha, a City of the Tribe of Ephraim, afterward a part of
Samaria; now called Ramola by the Turks. It stands ten Miles from Joppe to the
East, and thirty from Jerusalem: almost entirely ruined.

Ramoth, or Ramath-Mispeh (as it is written Josh, 13. 26.) was one of the three
Cities of Refuge, appointed by Moses in the Case of accidental Manslaying,
Deuteronomy. 4. 43. It belonged to the Tribe of Gad; standing near the Mountain, and
in the Territory of Gilead; in the Region of Trachonites in Palestine, as the
Romans named that Country.

Rampano, Biandyna, a Town formerly, now only a Castle on the South of the
Morea; at the Mouth of the River of Eurotas. It gives name to a Bay formerly
called Sinus Laconicus, now the Gulf de Castle Rampano, on the East of Cape
Malio.

Ramsey, Limnos, a small Island in the Irish Sea; called by the Welsh, Lymen.
It lies upon the Coast of South Wales, three Miles from St. David's.. Also, a
Market Town in Huntingdonshire, in the Hundred of Hurstington, toward
Cambridgeshire: near a mere of its own name, and another called Whitlesey, each
affording plenty of Fish and Fowl, together with the Rivers watering them. It
stands amongst the rich grounds of the Fens; and had heretofore an Abbey of
vast wealth to boast of, till its dissolution by King Henry VIII.

Ranals, Ocetis, one of the Isles of Orkney, ten Miles from the Coast of
Scotland.

Rangnitz, Ragnitia, a City in the Kingdom of Poland, in the Ducal Prussia;
upon the River Russe, in the Borders of Samogithia; sixteen Polish Miles from
Komingsberg to the East. Under the Elector of Brandenburgh.

Raolconda, a City in the Kingdom of Golconde in the Hither East Indies, on
this side the Bay of Bengala; five days journey from the City Golconde.

Raon, a River of Germany, which falls into the left Branch of the Moselle.

Raperswyl, Rapersvilla, a Town in Switzerland, which has a very ancient
Castle; on the Lake of Zurich, between it and the Upper Lake; five German Miles
from Zurich to the North-East. So seated that it is only approachable by a
Timber Bridge: and having been taken in 1458. by the Swiss, (though often
attempted) could never be recovered out of their Hands.

Rapin, Rapidus, a small River in Lorain.

Rapin, a Town and Earldom in Germany of the same name; eight Miles from
Havelberg to the East, and nine from Berlin to the North.

Rapoe, Rapa, once a City, now a Village, in the Province of Vlster in the
County of Dungal: which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Armagh; but
united to that of Derry; from which it stands twelve Miles to the West, forty
from Dungal, and forty five from Armagh to the South-West.

Rapolla, Rapalla, or Rapello, a small ill-peopled City in the Basilicate, in
the Kingdom of Naples; twenty Miles from Conza to the East. It was anciently a
Bishops See; but in 1528. Pope Clement VII. united this See to that of Melfi
for ever. There is another Town, and a Bay, upon the Coast of Genoua of this
name.

Raschit, the same with Rosetto.

Rascia, the same with Servia, a large Province under the Turk; or rather a
part of that Province, as others say; which takes its name from a River that
passes through this District into Moravia. The principal Towns of it are
Belgrade, Semendria, and Columbach. Brietius, (cited by Baudrand,) says, this
was once a distinct Kingdom. I am sure the Rascians have suffered very much in
the present War: and when the Turk in 1687. deserted Possega, they put some
thousands of these Rascians to the Sword, for resusing to go with them; and
Plundered all the rest. These were the ancient Scordisci.

Raseborg, Raseburgum, a small City in Finland, under the Swedes, in the
Province of Nyland: which has a large Haven on the Bay of Finland; and seated
on the Borders of South-Finland.

Rasen Market, a Market Town in Lincolnshire, in the Hundred of Walshcroft: so
called for its distinction from three other Rasens in the same Hundred, which
have not the privilege to be Market Towns.

Rasino, Erasmus, a River on the East of the Morea, which falls into the
Inacho; and with it into the Bay di Napoli Romania.

Rathal Alhaga, Arabia Petraea; the Stony Arabia.

Ratibor, Ratibora, Ratisboria, a small but spruce City in Silefia in Bohemia;
which is the Capital of a Dukedom, upon the Oder. Four German Miles from Karnow
to the East, seven from the Borders of the Lesser Poland, and the same distance
from Oppolen to the South. This place was Mortgaged to Casimir King of Poland.

Ratispon, Ratisbon, Augusta Tiberii, Ratispona, Ratisbona, Castra Regina,
Reginum, Rhaetobonna, Rhetopolis, a City of Germany, (called by the
Inhabitants, Regenspurgh) in the Circle of Bavaria; and a Bishop's See, under
the Archbishop of Saltzburgh. It was first a Roman City or Colony, built by
Tiberius Caesar: afterward the Seat of the Kings of Bavaria; and after that of
the Dukes of the same Title. Frederick I. made it a Free Imperial City. Henry
the Lion proscribed and degraded it; and put it under the Dominion of Otho
Wittelspach, Duke of Bavaria. It stands upon the Danube, (which is here covered
by a Stone Bridge, built by Hen V. in 1135) at the Confluence of the River
Regen; fifteen Miles from Munick to the North, seventeen above Passaw to the
West, and sixteen from Ausburgh to the North-East. Said to have been Converted
to the Christian Faith by Lucius Cyrenaeus, a Disciple of S. Paul, in 69. The
Bishopric was Instituted by Charles the Great; who held a Council in this City
in 792. There have been many German Diets held here; which for brevity I must
omit. This City has embraced the Augustane Confession. Long. 34. 18. Lat. 49.
00.

Ratzburgh, Ratzemburg, or Ratzebourg, Raceburgum, a City of Germany, in the
Lower Circle of Saxony; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Breme.
It is little, and subject as to the City, to the Duke of Meckelburgh; but the
Castle is in the Hands of the Duke of Lawemburgh. Before the Peace of
Westphalia, in 1648. they were both subject to the Bishop: by that Treaty they
were thus settled, and made a Principality. This City embraced the Augustane
Confession in 1566. by the procurement of Christopher the thirtieth Bishop of
this See; who was of the Family of Meckelburgh. It stands upon a Lake of the
same name; three Miles from Lubeck to the South, four from Lawemburgh, and six
from Swerin to the West.

Rava, a City of Poland, which is the Capital of a Palatinate of the same name:
seated upon a River called Rava too; eleven Polish Miles from Plocko to the
South, and fifteen from Warsaw to the West. The houses are all of Wood. It has
a Fortress.

Ravello, Rebellum, Ravellum, a City in the Further Principato, in the Kingdom
of Naples; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Salerno. But in
1086. freed from his Jurisdiction by Pope Victor III. In 1603. the Bishopric
of Scala was for ever united to this; from which it stands only two Miles, and
ten from Salerno to the West.

Ravenglass, a Market Town in the County of Cumberland, in the division of
Allerdale; encompassed on three parts of it by the Sea, and the two Rivers,
betwixt which it stands.

Ravenna, a City of Romandiola in Italy, of great antiquity; which is an
Archbishops See, and the Capital of that Province. It stands on a marshy
Ground; forty five Miles from Bononia to the East, thirty from Rimini, forty
two from Ferrara; near the Shoars of the Adriatic Sea, upon which it had a
great Harbor; now filled up with Sand. Built by the Sabins, as Pliny says; as
others, by the Vmbrians about four hundred and ten years after the Flood A. M.
1766. In the latter times of the Roman Empire under Honorius, it became the
Seat of the Emperors: fortified with new and strong Walls for that purpose.
Augustus had before made it the Station of his Fleets, on the Adriatic Sea;
and made a noble Haven here, which may be supposed to have contributed
something to its growth and this change. Theodorick, King of the Goths, in 493.
took it after a Siege of three years; and made it the Seat of his Kingdom. In
539. Belisarius, General under Justinian the Emperor, recovered it to the
Empire. In 569. it became the Seat of the Exarchs, or Viceroys of Italy, under
the Constantinopolitan Emperors. In 725. it was Sacked by Luitprandus, King of
Lombardy, upon the Emperors Edict against Images; but recovered by the Exarch,
by the assistance of the Pope and the Venetians, two years after. In 752.
Aristulphus, King of the Lombards, took it from the Greeks; and drove out the
Exarchs. In 774. Charles the Great took it from the Lombards, and gave it to
the Church of Rome. This City maintained a War against the Venetians, in 1140.
In 1441. the Venetians took it and kept it till 1509: when it was forced from
them by a League of the Emperor, King of France, Pope, the Duke of Milan, and a
joint War of all these Princes upon them. But the Pope salling out with the
French King, Lewis XII. lost the City to him again and an Army of sixteen
thousand Men in 1512: they were soon after sorced to desert it. The Archbishops
See was founded by Valentinian the Emperor, about 425: and never subject to the
Pope till 684: when the Pope after a great contest obtained this point from
Constantinus Pogonatus, (Emperor of Greece), who was a great admirer of the
Sanctity of Benedict II. and with respect to that, subjected this See to Rome.
There was a Council held here in 901. which confirmed all the proceedings of a
Council at Rome under Pope John IX for the cassating of Pope Stephen VI. his
Acts against the memory of Pope Formosus. And another in 967, in the presence
of Pope John XIII. and the Emperor Otho I. touching the reformation of
Ecclesiastical Discipline; with diverse others, of the same subject. The City is
now in a declining condition, and decays sensibly. Long. 34. 53. Lat. 43. 54.

Ravensberg, Ravensberga, a small Town which gives name to an Earldom in the
Circle of Westphalia. It stands upon an Hill; eighteen Miles from Osnaburgh to
the South, thirty two from Paderborne to the North, and thirty from Munster to
the East.

The Earldom of Ravensberg, is a small Territory between the Bishoprics of
Minden and Osnaburgh, to the North and West; that of Munster to the South, and
the County of Lip to the East. The Capital of which is Bifeld. This was
subject to the Dukes of Juliers; and now under the Duke of Brandenburgh, in
their Right.

Ravensburgh, a small German City, in the Circle of Schwaben, in Algow, upon
the River Schuss: six Miles from Constance to the East, and three from Lindaw
to the North: an Imperial Free City. It is sometimes written Ravenspurg; and is
of great antiquity.

Ravestein, a Town upon the Maes, in the Dukedom of Brabant, in the Borders of
Guelderland; four Leagues from Bosleduc. Which belongs, with its Territory, to
the Duke of Newburgh; but in the custody of the United Netherlands. The
Citadel, that did stand here in the times of the Dukes of Cleves, its former
Masters, was demolished by the Articles of a Treaty passed betwixt William Duke
of Cleves and Juliers, and the Emperor Charles V.

Rayleigh, a Market Town in the County of Essex, in the Hundred of Rochford.

Re, Rea, Reacus, an Island on the Coast of Saintonge in Aquitain, near the
Pais d' Aunis, in the Diocese of the Bishop of Rochelle: three Leagues from
Rochelle to the West. The principal Town of it is S. Martin; once a place of
great strength: near which the English received a great defeat from the French,
in 1627: whilst they attempted the Relief of Rochelle. There is now a
considerable Fort standing, to secure it: a high Watchtower upon the Coast,
built by Lewis XIV. called la Tour des Baleines, to lighten the road, and
prevent the dangers of the Shelfes adjacent, of that name. It yields vast
plenty of Wine yearly.

Rea, a Stream in Shropshire.

Reading, the best Town in Berkshire; seated upon the Thames, where it receives
the Kennet, with several Bridges over those two Rivers: which had anciently a
Castle, and a noble Church, both ruined in Mr. Cambden's time. The Danes about
845. made this place the Seat of their Rapines; and were hardly expelled by
Aethelwolph, King of Mercia. Being Garrisoned for the King in the beginning of
the late Troubles, it was taken by the Earl of Essex, April 26. 1643, after a
Siege of ten days: and was ever after a great vexation to the City of Oxford,
then the Kings Head Quatters. The County Assizes usually are here kept. It is a
well inhabited Town, contains three Parishes: the Capital of its Hundred, and a
Corporation besides represented by two Members in the House of Commons.

Recanati, Recinetum, Recina Nova, a City in the Marchia Anconitana in Italy,
which has sprung out of the ruins of the ancient Helvia Recina; and whose See
was united with that of Loretto in 1591.

Recif, a strong Fort in Brasil; called by the Portuguese, Reciffa; it stands
near the City of Olinda, in the Province of Pernambuck: for some time in the
Hands of the Hollanders, till the Portuguese in 1654. retook it.

Reculver, a Sea Town in the County of Kent, in Augustine Lath, some Miles
North of Conterbury. Deserving to be particularly taken notice of for the
Palace and Residence of Ethelbert, the first Christian Saxon King of Kent,
here, in former times. The high Spire of the Church makes a good Sea mark.

The Red Sea, Mare Rubrum, Erythroeum, Azanium, and Arabicus Sinus; is a Branch
of the Indian, or Ethiopian Ocean; which parts Arabia from Africa and Egypt;
running from North to South above twelve hundred Miles. The Arabians call this
Sea, Buhriel Calzem, (the Sea of Calzem,) from a City of that name: toward the
North it is not above eight or nine Miles over, as Mr. Thevenot observes; who
Traveled on its Shoars five days. It is narrow and full of Rocks; therefore
dangerous to Sailers: for which and other reasons, now not much frequented,
since the way to the Indies was discovered by the Ocean. This Sea will be
famous to all Ages, upon the account of the Children of Isreal's passing it on
dry Ground; when they went up out of Egypt.

Redford East, a Market Town in Nottinghamshire, in the Hundred of Northclay,
upon the River Iddel.

Rednitz, Radiantia, a River of Franconia; which arises in Nortgow, in the
Borders of the Upper Palatinate, near Weissenburgh; and besides some smaller
Rivers beneath Norimburgh, it receives the Pegnitz; and a little beneath
Bamberg falls into the Mayn or Meyn.

Rees, Reesium, a small City, formerly well fortified; in the Dukedom of
Cleves, upon the Rhine; and Garrisoned by the Hollanders, tho it belonged to
the Duke of Brandenburgh. Being taken by the French in 1672, in 1674. it was
restored to that Duke, but dismantled by the French: it stands three German
Miles from Wesel to the North, and the same distance from Cleve to the East.

Regen, Reginus, a River in Germany, which arises in Nortgow, in the Borders
of Bohemia; and flowing through the Upper Palatinate falls into the Danube at
Ratisbon in Bavaria; which City is from this River sometimes called Reginum.

Regenspurg, the same with Ratisbon.

Reggio, Regium Lepidi, a City in the Dukedom of Modena; which is a Bishops
See, once under the Archbishop of Ravenna; but now under the Archbishop of
Bononia. It stands between Parma to the West, and Modena to the East; fifteen
Miles from either: The Capital of a Dukedom, now possessed by the Duke of
Modena; and the second City of note in the estate of that Duke: being great and
strong, accompanied with a good Citadel. The Goths and other Barbarians ruined
it diverse times. But Charles the Great repaired it.

Reggio, or Regge, Rhegium Julium, or Rigio, a City of the Further Calabria, in
the Kingdom of Naples; called d' Rijo by the Spaniards; which is an Archbishops
See, upon the Shoars of the Streights of Sicily, at the most Southern point of
Italy, in a fruitful Plain. Built by the Chalcidians in the year of the World
3279. eighty two years after Rome: it flourished many years in the condition of
a free State; till at last it fell into the Hands of the Sicilian Tyrant
Dionysius, after a Siege of eleven Months. This Prince began his Reign in the
year of Rome 360. and Reigned thirty eight years; but I cannot assign the year
of this Action. The City lay little regarded from that time, till Julius Caesar
rebuilt it; and made it a Roman Colony, calling it Rhegium Julium: after which
it is frequently mentioned in the Latin Historians. At this day it is very
considerable, though it has been several times surprised and Plundered by the
Mahometans; particularly in 1552. Long. 40. 12. Lat. 37. 05.

Regillus, a Lake in the Territory of the ancient Tusculum, in Latium; now in
the Campagna di Roma, in the States of the Church, by the name of Castiglione;
betwixt the City Tivoli, and la Cava deli' Aglio. The Victory of Aulus
Posthumous over King Tarquin, the last King of the Romans, after the deposition
of him, was obtained near this Lake.

Reims, Remi, Durocortorum Civitas, Remensis Civitas, Duricortora Remorum, is a
very ancient, great, fine, populous City of France, in the Province of
Champagne; and an Archbishops See, a Dukedom, and an University; which latter
was Instituted by the Cardinal of Guise, in the Reign and by the permission of
Henry II. King of France. The Archbishop is always the first Duke and Peer of
France: claims the Right of Anointing the King: accordingly the Holy Ampoul or
Viol of Oil, (which an Angel brought from Heaven at the Coronation of the first
Christian King of France,) is ever kept in the Abbey of S. Remy here. This City
stands upon the River Vesle; in the midst of an agreeable plain: thirteen
Leagues from Soissons to the East, twenty four from Verdun, ten from Chalons to
the South-West, and five from the Marne to the North; adorned with four Abbeys,
a great number of Collegiate and Parochial Churches, Religious and
Ecclesiastical Houses. Pope Sylvester II. was sometime Archbishop of this
Church. Pope Urban II. a Canon. Pope Adrian IV. an Archdeacon; and P. Adrian V.
Archdeacon and Chancellor. Pope Leo XI. held a Council here in Person, in 1049,
against the Vices of the times. Pope Calixtus II. did the same in 1119, in
which the Emperor Henry was excommunicated. Pope Innocent II. the same in 1131:
and Pope Eugenius III. accompanied with S. Bernard, in 1148. In 1595. a part of
a Roman Triumphal Arch, bearing a Tablet of Romulus and Remus fed by a Wolf;
and in 1677. two more parts of the same, one representing the Story of Leda,
the other the year with all its Months and Seasons, were dug out of the
ground here, and esteemed as famous Monuments of Antiquity. But whether first
erected by Julius Caesar, or Augustus, or Julian the Apostate, the Learned make
but uncertain Conjectures. The Territory of this City is called R^mois.

Reinfrew, a City of Scotland, in the County of Cuningham; upon the Irish Sea,
or Dunbritan Fyrth; not above five Miles from Glascow to the West.

Reinsbourg, a Village one League distant from Leyden in Holland: celebrated
formerly for an Abbey of Benedictine Dames, successively founded by two Earls
of Holland and two noble Ladies; who all lie interred in the Church: where
there is besides a number of stately Tombs of the Counts and Countesses and
others of the old Nobility of Holland.

Remirmont, Romaricus Mons, a Town in Lorain; at the foot of Mount Vauge, upon
the Moselle; five Miles from Fontenay to the East, and eleven from Colmar to
the West: in which is a noble Nunnery.

Los Remolinos, Tarraconensis Juga, a Mountain in Arragon.

Remorantin, Romorantin, a Town in Sologne in France.

Rendlesham, an ancient Town in the County of Suffolk, and the Hundred of
Looes, upon the River Deben: in which the first Christian King of the East
Angles, Redwald, kept his Court.

Renelle, Ranula, Marronel, a small River in Normandy; which falls into the
Seyne to the West of Roan.

Rennes, Renes, Vrbs Rhedonum, Condate, Rhedones, Redonae, Condate Redonum, the
Capital City of the Dukedom of Britagne in France; and a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Tours: The Seat of the Parliament of the Province by the
establishment of K. Henry II. It stands upon the River Vilaine, which divides
it in two; twenty two Leagues from Nantes to the North, and the same distance
from Angers to the South-West. A place of great antiquity, being mentioned by
Caesar and Ptolemy. The ancient Dukes of Britagne made it their Residence.
About the years 1069 and 1263. there were two French Councils assembled here.
It has diverse Churches, and Religious and Ecclesiastical Houses.

Renty, Rentica, a Town in Artois; heretofore of great strength; which in 1554.
repelled the Forces of Henry II. King of France; but in 1638. was ruined. It
lies five Leagues from Bologne to the East, and four from Aras, upon the River
Aa; which falls into the British Sea below Graveling, in Flanders. The late
Baron de Renty, so famous for his application to the actions of piety, and his
family, originally derive their name from hence.

La Reole, Regula, a Town of France, upon the Garonne, in the Province of
Guyenne: adorned with a good Monastery.

Repeham, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk, in the Hundred of Eynesford.

Rerone, Rero, a small River in Lombardy, in the States of Venice; which
waters Vicenza, and then falls into the Lesser Malamoco.

Reschet, a City of Persia, called by the Arabians, Husum; the Capital of the
Province of Kilania.

Rescow, Rescovia, a City of Moscovy, near the Borders of Lithuania, and the
Fountains of the River Wolga: forty Miles from Tuver to the North-West, and
fifty from Bielka to the East. The Capital of a Dukedom of the same name; and
has two Castles: the Russ call it Rshewa.

Retel, Retelium, a City of Champagne in France, upon the River Aisne: the
Capital of Retelois. Eight Leagues from Reims, and ten from Sedan to the West.
Near this place the Spaniards received a great Defeat from the French in 1650,
under the Marshall de Turene. But in 1652. this Town was put into the Hands of
the Spaniards by the Prince of Condy: and three years after was retaken by the
French. It is honored with the Title of a Dukedom.

Retelois, Retelensis Ager, is a Territory in the Northern Parts of Champagne;
which was heretofore a Dukedom. It lies between the Aisne, the Bishopric of
Liege, and the Dukedom of Luxemburgh; the chief Towns of which are Retel,
Meziers, Charlville, and Donchery.

Retz, Radesia, a Duchy in the County of Nantes in Bretagne in France; in the
Borders of Poictou, at the Mouth of the River Loyre; the chief Town of which is
Machecou, ten Leagues from Nantes to the North-West.

Re^el, Revalia, a great City and Seaport in Livonia; called by the Russ,
Roliva. The Capital of the Province of Esthonia. It stands upon the Bay of
Finland; thirty three German Miles from Narva to the West, and thirty seven
from Riga to the North. This City was an Hanse Town, and a Bishops See, under
the Archbishop of Riga; subject to the Crown of Poland till 1558: when being
affrighted with the Threats of the Russ, it was forced to fly to Christian III.
King of Denmark for Protection. (Having been built by Waldemar or Walmar II.
King of Denmark, in 1223.) This Prince not willing to engage in a War in his
old Age, refused their proffered submission. But the next year Erick King of
Sweden accepted it: whereupon in 1563, there followed a sharp War between him
and the City of Lubeck. In 1569, the Swedes receiving a great Defeat, a Peace
was made at Stetin in 1570. Magnus Duke of Holstein being employed by the Russ
in the same year, laid close Siege to Revel, but with no success. In 1577, the
Rusi did likewise attempt it, with the same success. So that ever since it has
been in the Hands of the Swedes. This City, as Olearius says, was built in
1230. Sold together with Narva and Wesemberg by Walmar III. King of Denmark, in
1347, to Gosvin d' Eck, (Great Master of the Order of Livonia) for nineteen
thousand Marks of Silver. About 1477, it began to be a place of great Trade; by
reason of its very excellent Haven, and convenient Situation for the Trade of
Russia: and being thereupon grown great, rich, and insolent, it broke with the
other Hanse Towns in 1550. But the Russ taking Narva in 1558, and settling the
Staple there, and threatening Revel with a Siege, they submitted to Sweden; who
have abated some of their Privileges, to secure their Obedience. Yet is it
still a place of great Commerce, and enjoying many Privileges: fortified after
the modern way, and has a Castle upon a Rock. The Religion professed is the
Augustane Confession. The Government, democratical, in the likeness of the
Customs of Lubeck. Long. 48. 30. Lat. 50. 25. In others Lat. 60. 07. Revel, a
Town in the Upper Languedoc in France, in the Diocese of Lavaur: called
anciently Bastida Vauri, and Rebellus by K. Philip le Bell, who caused it to be
Walled.

Reutlingen, Reutlinga, a small City in the Province of Schwaben in Germany;
within the Borders of the Dukedom of Wirtemburgh; made an Imperial Free Town in
1215, or as others say in 1240. It is of a square Form, built in a Plain; upon
the River Eche^z, (which a League beneath it falls into the Necker) at the Foot
of Mount Alchameck; one Mile from Stutgard, ten from Vlm, and five from
Tubinghen. Under the Protection of the Duke of Wirtemburgh.

Reux, Rodium, a Town in Hainault; two Leagues from Monts to the East.

Reygate, a large Market and Borough Town in the County of Surrey. It stands in
the Vale or Dale, called Holmes Dale; where Fullers Earth is dug up in
abundance. Showing the ruins of an ancient Castle; and under ground a long
Vault, with a spacious room at the end of it; said to be the secret Chamber in
which the Barons met in Council in their War against K. John. The Danes fought
several unsuccessful Battles near this Town. It is the Capital of its Hundred,
and a Corporation represented in the Lower House of Parliament by two Burgesses.

Reyme, the present Name of Capernaum in Palestine.

Los Reyos. See Lima.

Rezan, the Capital City of a Dukedom in Moscovy; which was heretofore a
Sovereign Principality of great extent. It stands thirty six Miles from Mosco
to the South-East, and twelve from the Fountains of the Tanais arising within
this Dukedom. It is an Episcopal City. The Province of Rezan lies between the
Don and Occa; having on the West Moscovy, which is divided from it by the River
Aka. It is the most fruitful Province in this Kingdom: besides the chief City,
(which lies upon the Occa) it has Corsira and Tulla, upon a River of the same
Name. Olearius.

Rha. See Wolga.

Rhade, Rhaeda, an inland City of Arabia Foelix. Long. 83. 20. Lat. 14. 15.

Rhaiadergwy, a Market Town in the County of Radnor in Wales. The Capital of
its Hundred.

Rhamnus, an ancient Town of Attica in Greece: Famous in its time for a Temple
dedicated to the Goddess Nemesis; and an admirable Statue therein of her, made
either by Phidias or Agoracritus a Scholar to Phidias. She therefore gained the
Title of Rhamnus^a.

Rheine, Rhenus, a vast River in Germany, which is one of the greatest in
Europe. Called by the Germans, das Rhyn; by the French, le Rheine; by the
Poles, Rhen; and by the Spaniard, Rhin. Next the Danube, the greatest River in
Germany. It springs out of the Alps in the Western Borders of Switzerland,
and the Northern of the Grisons, (near the Fountains of the Rhosne, the Aar,
and the Tesino) from two Fountains; the Northern of which is called Vorder
Rhyn, the Further Rheine; the Southern, Hinder Rhyn, and lies more South. These
being united into one Stream near Chur, it passes into the Lake of Constance;
and separating Schwaben from Switzerland, waters Constance, and Schafhausen;
then taking in the Aar, it passes to Basil; and between Alsatia and Brisgow,
by a Northern Course it runs to Newburgh, Brisach, and Strasbourgh: then taking
in the Ill, it waters Stolhoffen, Philipsburgh, and Spire; beneath which it
admits the Necker at Manheim; and so proceeds to Worms and Oppenheim. At Ments
it is covered by a Bridge of Boats; and beneath it takes the Main, a great
River: so by Ingelheim, hastes to Trier; beneath which the Lohn and the
Moselle come in at Coblentz, where there is another Bridge of Boats: so
dividing the Dukedom of Monts from the Bishopric of Cologne, it waters
Bonne, Cologne, and Duseldorp: at Duisdrop in the Dukedom of Cleves, the Roure;
at Wesel, the Lip comes in to augment his Stream: soon after in Guelderland,
this Torrent grows too great for one Channel; and divides into two Branches,
and forms the Island of Schenken. The lest or Southern Branch is called the
Wael; which by Nimeguen, and Bommel goes to Worcum; above which the Maez out of
Brabant comes in; at Dort it divides again, and forms the Isle of Yssel. The
Northern Branch goes by Arnhem, Vtrecht, and Newport to Roterdam, and
Vlaerding; where it unites with the Southern Branch; and both fall into the
British Sea by the Briel. Above Arnhem there is another Branch, derived from
the North Branch of the first Division: which by Doesburg* Zutphan, Deventer,
Hatten and Campen, falls into the Zuyder Sea: this last Branch is called by the
Dutch the Yssel. There can be nothing greater said of this River, than that it
was for many Ages the Boundary of the Roman Empire.

Rheineberg, or Rhimb^rg, Rhenoberga, a City in the Bishopric of Cologne; in
the Borders of the Dukedom of Cleves, upon the Rhine; which is little, but very
strong. Taken from the Spaniards by the Hollanders, in 1633: and continued
under them till 1672; when it was taken by the French, and restored to the
Elector of Cologne, the proper Owner. It stands two German Miles from Wesel to
the South, and three from Guelders to the East.

Rheinfelden, or Rheinsfeld, is a small, but strong City of Germany: in the
Province of Schwaben; which has a Bridge upon the Rheine; under the House of
Austria. It lies about two Miles above Basil to the East. Often taken in the
Swedish War, and suffered very much in 1678, by the French. Once a Free
Imperial City; but in 1410. granted by Lewis of Bavaria, to the Archduke of
Austria. Also the more famous for a Defeat of the Imperialists; and the taking
of John de Were, by the Duke Bernard Waymor, in 1638.

Rheinsfeld, a strong Castle upon the Rheine; above S. Gewer; in the County of
Caltimeliboch, under the Landtgrave of Hesse. Built by one Dieter, a Count of
this Country, in 1245: between Coblentz to the North, and Bingen to the South,
in the Borders of the Bishopric of Trier.

Rhene, Rhenia, Rhenica, Rhenis, one of the Islands called plurally (...) by
the Greeks, and by Mariners corruptly Sdille. See Delos. At a distance it seems
to make one Island with Delos: in the Aegean Sea, amongst the Cyclades.

Retimo, Rhetimo, Rhitymna, a City in the Isle of Candy or Creet, mentioned by
Ptolemy; and called at this day by the Greeks, Rytimni. It is a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Candia; has a large Harbor at the North end of the
Island; and now strongly fortified. Taken from the Venetians, by the Turks, in
1646, under whom it is now; also the Capital of a County of the same name in
that Island.

Rhiphaei Montes, the Mountains in the Province of Petzorcke, in the North of
Moscovy: running toward Obdora and the River Oby, upon the Borders of the
Asiatick Tartary: and called by the Russ, Ziemnoipoias, that is, the Girdle of
the World in their Language.

Rhoa, Edessa, a City of Mesopotamia, mentioned by all the ancient Geographers;
famous for the Story of King Abgarus: very great, and an Archbishops See, under
the Patriarch of Antioch. It has had anciently many other Names; at this day it
is the Capital of Diarbeck, (or Mesopotamia) under the Turk. It stands in the
middle between Aleppo to the West, and Amida to the East. In the times of the
Holy War it had Counts; but falling into the Hands of the Mahometans again,
they have reduced it into the State in which it now is. Thus described by Mr.
Thevenot, who saw it. This City is about two hours march in circuit; the Walls
are fair; and pretty entire, and form a Square; within there is hardly any
thing but Ruins to be seen, and yet it is very populous: on the South Side is a
Castle upon an Hill, with large and deep Ditches, tho they are cut in the Rock:
this Castle is of a large circumference; has little within it, but Ruins; and
some pitiful old broken Guns. Long. 72 30 Lat. 37. 30.

Rhodes, Rhodus, a celebrated Island in the Mediterranean Sea; upon the Coast
of the Lesser Asia, near its South-West Point; over against Caria: having
Cyprus to the East, Egypt to the South, and Candia to the West. Of old it had
very many names; and is now called by the most remarkable of them. About an
hundred and thirty Miles in compass; or as others say, an hundred and ten. The
principal Place in it is Rhodes: an Archbishop's See; seated upon an insensible
Ascent of a Hill, near the North-East part of the Island; and environed with
diverse other little Hills, full of Springs and Fruits: it sprung out of the
Ruins of Jalissi, an ancient City near it. It has a delicate Harbor to the East
and North; formed by two strong Moles approaching each other demicircularly, so
as to leave a Passage betwixt them for no more than a single Vessel: and of old
much famed for a vast Coloss, (or Statue of Brass of the Sun) made by Chares, a
Lydian, a Scholar of Lysippus of Sicyon; seventy Cubits high: which stood
a-stride over the Mouth of this Harbor, upon two Rocks; so that the Ships
failed between his Legs; and this was then thought one of the seven Wonders of
the World. The Brass of this Statue in 654, (one thousand four hundred and
sixty one years after it was built), when Muhavia the Saracen Sultan of Egypt
had conquered the Island, was carried to Alexandria in Egypt by the Saracens,
upon the backs of seventy two Camels: having, it is said, been thrown down in
an Earthquake: which verifies the Prediction of the Oracle long before, That
Rhodes should be lost, when that Colossus broke. This Island is seated twenty
Miles from the nearest Coast of Asia to the South; one hundred and thirty four
from Crete or Candy to the North-East; and five hundred from Constantinople to
the South: of a most fertile Soil, and so serene and pleasant an Air, that as
the Ancients dedicated both it and the Colossus to the Sun, because not a day
passes without the full displaying of his beams here; so many of the chief
Romans chose it for the place of their Retreat. First peopled by Dodanim, the
Son of Javan (Grandchild of Japhet), before he peopled Greece. After these, the
Empire of this Island passed to the Phaenicians; who made the Inhabitants so
very expert in Navigation, that for some Ages they gave Law to the World, and
were Sovereigns of the Sea: their Constitutions and Judgments in Affairs
concerning the Sea being withal so just, as to become incorporated afterward
into the Roman Pandects. Their fear of the Macedonians made them sue to the
Romans for Protection; whom they served very effectually to the Ruin of the
former: after which they helped on the Ruin of Antiochus; and withstood the
flattering Fortune of Mithridates King of Pontus, till at last the Roman
Greatness became undisputable by this small Island; and under Vespasian they
were made a Roman Province. It continued under the Greek Empire, (to which it
fell in the Division) till 652: when it was conquered by Muhavia, the Saracen
Sultan of Egypt. It returned under the Greeks again during the Civil Wars of
the Saracens; and in 1124. was taken by the Venetians. The Greeks recovered it
under John Ducas, about 1227. About 1283. it fell together with the Lesser
Asia, under the Turks. In 1310. the Knights of S. John of Jerusalem (when
Jerusalem and all the Holy Land was lost from the Christians) retook it, after
a Siege of four years under Fulk Villares, Great Master of that Order. The
Turks, 'ere it could be re-fortified, again besieged it: in which Conjuncture,
Amadaeus IV. Duke of Savoy bravely succored it; and to eternalize the Memory
of his Victory, changed the Eagles, the Arms of his Predecessors; into the
Silver Cross of the Order of the Knights; with these four Letters F. E. R. T.
to signify, Fortitudo Ejus Rhodum Tenuit. After this it was one of the
Bulwarks of Christendom against the Turks. Mahomet II. the Great, attempted the
Reduction of it in 1457. Again in 1480, with 100000 Men, and the greatest Art
and Obstinacy imaginable for 3 Months, but without Success: in commemoration
whereof, Peter d'Aubusson, the then Grand Master, built the Church of S. Maria
della Victoria; with a Chapel to the Honor of S. Pantaleon here; it being
upon his day that the Turks in their last Assault were defeated. Nor had
Solomon II. the Magnificent, had any better Success in 1522; if he had not met
one Andrea Amarato a discontented Traitor, a Portuguese; (discontented at the
Elevation of another to the dignity of Grand Master before him) within the
place; who was Chancellor of the Order, and betrayed their Counsels to that
Prince: who yet spent six Months before it, and lost an infinite number of Men.
And Amarato, his Treason being (before the Surrender) discovered, had his Head
cut off on Oct. 30. Mr. Knolls in his Turkish History, p. 391, has well
described the Situation of the principal City in this Island. Bellonius says,
it was seated in a Plain; fenced with double Walls, thirteen Towers, and five
Bastions; of great Strength and Beauty. The Turks have to this day so great a
Veneration for the Valor of those Knights of S. John of Jerusalem, that they
preserve (says he) their Houses as they left them; with all the Arms,
Paintings, Statues and Inscriptions; and the Walls of the City are put into the
same state they were before the Siege. From hence these Knights passed to
Sicily; and in 1530. obtained from Charles V. the Isle of Malta. Two small Bays
accompany the Harbor on the North and South sides. The former is locked up by
a Mole, which enters into the Sea above 300 Paces; bearing a Fort, called The
Tower of S. Nicholas; built by the Order in 1464, and worthy of remembrance,
for its withstanding the repeated furious Assaults of the Turks in the Siege in
1480. Long. 58. 00. Lat. 37. 50.

Rhodope. See Rulla.

Rhoetia: This ancient Country, which some denominate the Western Illyricum,
was of that extent, as to comprehend a part of what we now call the Circles of
Schwaben, Bavaria, and Austria in Germany; the Country of the Grisons, and
something of Switzerland. Of which the Grisons, who are more properly called
the Alpine Rhoetians, are the only People at this day retaining the memory of
its Name: where, as one remarks of their Country, you have Mountains of Pride
and Valleys of Misery. See Grisons.

Rhosne, Rodanus, one of the most celebrated Rivers in France; called by the
Germans Der Rogen; by the Fronch, Rhosne. It arises from a double Spring, in
Mount de la Fourch; in the Borders of Switzerland; two German Miles from the
Springs of the Rhein. And running Westward through Vallais (or Wallisserland),
it divides that Tract; watering Sion, or Sitten, and Martinach, (the principal
Places in it;) then entering the Lake of Lemane, it divides Savoy from
Switzerland: five Leagues beneath Geneva (says Baudrand), it burieth it self
for some time in the Earth, as I have often seen. Then turning South, and
dividing Savoy from Bugey, at Bellay it becomes great enough to bear a Boat;
then turning West, and dividing Dauphine from Bugey, at la Bresse it entertains
the Ain; at Lions it is covered by a Bridge of Stone, and improved by the
Addition of the Saone, (a great River;) here turning South, it parts Lyonnis
from Dauphine; waters Vienne and Condrieu; divides the Viverais from
Dauphine, and salutes Andasse: at S. Vallier, (over against Tournon) receives
the Isere above Valence; beneath it the Erico, the Drome, and the Ardosche; at
S. Esprit it is again covered by a noble Stone Bridge: so dividing Languedoc
from Provence, and increased by the Sorgue, it waters Avignon, where there is
a third Bridge: then receiving in the Durance, and the Gardon, and watering
Beaucaire, at Arles it divides into two Branches. The Western Branch divides
into two more; at last it falls into the Mediterrantan Sea by five Mouths: each
of which has its proper Name; to wit, Gras du Midi, Gras de Paulet, Gras d'
Enfer, Grand Gras, and Gras de Passon. Some adding thereto, Gras Neuf. Which
Word Gras is understood to be taken from Antoninus's Gradus, where he speaks of
the Entrance of the Rhosne into the Ocean. But there is no Town built upon any
of them, of any note, beneath Arles; which stands about eight Miles into the
Land. This is a rapid River.

Rian, Abravanus, a Lake and River in the South-West of Galloway in Scotland;
of which Cambden says, that they are exceeding full of Herrings and
Stone-Fishes.

Richelieu, Richelaeum, a City in the Province of Poictou; built by the
Cardinal of that Name, who was born here in 1585; and for some time under Lewis
XIII. of France, governed that Kingdom as he pleased. Amongst other of his
Actions, he built or rebuilt at least this place, to perpetuate the Memory of
his Name and Family; and procured it to be honored with the Title of a
Dukedom. It stands four Miles from London to the East, five from Mirebeau, and
one from Tours to the North-West. Now in a flourishing State.

Richensee, Verbigenus, a Lake in the Canton of Argow in Switzerland.

Richmond, a Town and County in Yorkshire; lying on the North West of that
County, toward Lancashire; which bounds it on the West. It is a mountainous
and desolate Place; yet produces Grass in reasonable quantity. This County
took its Name from Richmond; a Town built by Alane, Earl of Bretagne in France
(the first Earl of this County, after the Conquest; Nephew to William the
Conqueror;) upon the River Swale, over which it has a Stone Bridge: thirty two
Miles from York to the North-West, and twenty from the Sea to the South-West.
The Town is indifferently well frequented, and populous. It was anciently
walled, and fortified with a Castle by the said Alane, for the greater security
of these Parts against the English: the Gates are still standing, but in the
midst of the Town; its Situation being shifted. Before it was thus rebuilt, it
was called Gilling. Oswy, King of Northumberland, was basely murdered here in
659; ever after reputed a Martyr. It is now a Corporation, represented by two
Burgesses in the House of Commons; and containing two Parish Churches; in the
Hundred of Gillingwest. Long. 18. 15. Lat. 55. 17. This Earldom continued in
that Family till 1171: when it came to Geofrey Plantagenet, the fourth Son of
K. Henry II. (by the Marriage of Constance, Daughter of Conan, Duke of
Bretagne.) In 1230. Peter de Dreux, was Earl of Richmond; one of whose
Descendents ( John de Montford) was created Duke of Richmond in 1330, the
sixteenth Earl, and first Duke: to whom in 1342. succeeded John of Gaunt,
afterward Duke of Lancaster. The twenty second Earl of Richmond was Henry VII.
King of England. The twenty third was Henry Fitz-Roy, a Natural Son of Henry
VIII. The twenty fourth was Lewis Duke of Lenox, created Earl of Richmond by
King James I. in 1613, and Duke of the same in 1623. Which Family ended in
Charles, the fourth of that Line, who died without Issue, Ambassador in
Denmark, in 1672. In 1675, Charles Lenox was created Duke of Richmond by
Charles the Second, his Natural Father by the Duchess of Portsmouth.

Richmont, a Place in Saintonge in France.

Richmond, a Town in Surrey, upon the Thames; between Kingston and London;
heretofore called Shene, but by Henry VII named Richmond. There is an ancient
Palace, or Royal House in it, belonging to the Kings of England; in which
Edward III. died in 1377. Henry the Seventh rebuilt this Pile twice; it being
burnt in his Reign; and afterward he died here, April 22. 1409. Also Queen
Elizabeth of blessed Memory, left this World in this place, March 24. 1602. And
before her Ann, Daughter to the Emperor Charles V. and Wife to King Richard II;
esteemed a very beautiful Lady. The Civil Wars in the Reign of King Charles I.
left some of its effects upon this Palace. This Town stands pleasantly and
healthfully, upon an easy Ascent; fair, large, well built, and well inhabited;
in the Hundred of Kingston.

Rickmansworth, a Market Town in Hartfordshire, in the Hundred of Cashio, near
the River Coln.

Ries, or Riez, Rejus, Rejensis Civitas, Albecum Rejorum Apollinarium, Colonia
Rejorum, Civitas Regiensium, Rogium, a City in Provence in France; which is a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Aix; from which it stands twelve Miles to
the North-East, and six from Davignan to the North-West; eight from Sisteron to
the South: little, but populous; built on a Hill by the River Auvestre, which
falls into the Verdon. S. Hilary Bishop of Arles presided at a Council here in
439: in which Armentarius Bishop of Ambrun, ordained by two Bishops only
without the Authority of the Metropolitan, was therefore reduced to the quality
of a Chorepiscopus. In 1285. when Charles II. King of France was a Prisoner in
the hands of the Arragonese, another Council here assembled passed a Canon to
command public Prayers to be made for his Deliverance.

Rieti, Reate, a City in the Ecclesiastical State in Italy, in the Province of
Vmbria; which is a Bishops See, immediately under the Pope; upon the River
Velino, in the Borders of the Kingdom of Naples; between Aquila to the East,
and Narni West: twenty eight Miles from each, and forty from Rome to the South.
Tho this City stands in a bad and unhealthful Air, yet it is populous, in a
thriving State; and of great Antiquity, being mentioned by Strabo, Ptolemy, and
Pliny.

Rieux, Ruesium, Rivi, a small City in the Upper Languedoc; which is a Bishops
See, under the Archbishop of Tolouse; upon the Garonne (where it takes in the
Rize), in the Borders of Gascony: seven Leagues from Tolouse to the South,
eight from de Foix to the South-West, and eight from Lions to the South-East.
Made a Bishops See by Pope John XXII. in 1318, having been heretofore enclosed
in the Diocese of Tolouse. There is a Seigniory in Bretagne, called also Rieux,
which gives name to a Family of Honor there.

Riga, Rigen, a City of Livonia; called by the Inhabitants Riig: one of the
Hanse Towns, great, strong, rich, and populous; being the Capital of Livonia,
and an Archbishops See. It has a large and safe Haven at the Mouth of the River
Duna, (where it enters the Baltic Sea;) seven German Miles from Mittaw to the
North, twenty nine from Revel to the South, and forty eight from Vilna; in the
Borders of Curland. Built by Albert the Third, Bishop of Livonia, in 1196:
others say in the year 1186, by one Bertold an Abbot. In the year 1215, it was
made an Archbishops See by Pope Innocent III. and the Metropolitan of all
Livonia, Prussia, and Curland. A great while the Seat of the Masters of the
Knights of the short Sword in Livonia, and afterward of the Grand Master of
the Teutonick Order in Prussia; who divided the Sovereignty and Administration
of Justice with the Archbishop in this City, till the Reformation, which
excluded both of them. In the year 1561, it willingly submitted to the Crown of
Poland. In the year 1605. it was in vain besieged by Charles IX. King of
Sweden; nor had he better success in the second Siege, in 1609. Charles
Gustavus Adolphus, his Son, in the year 1621, took it; and ever since the
Swedes have possessed it: neither were the Moscovites, sitting down before it
some years ago, able to take it. It is seated in a spacious, pleasant, fruitful
Valley; a quarter of a League over; fortified to Land with six Regular
Bastions, Counterscarps, Palisadoes, and Half-Moons by the Swedes in the year
1633. Its Traffic with the English, Dutch, Germans, and Moscovites, is so
great, that it has almost as many Ships as Houses; and so abounding with
Provisions, that an Ox may be bought for three Crowns. Their Religion is the
strict Lutheran, and no other allowed: they speak both the Curland and
Sclavonian Tongue; tho they generally understand the High Dutch too; their
Public Acts and Statutes being expedited in that letter Language. Thus far
Olearius. Long. 47. 57. Lat. 57. 35.

Rigi, Volerius, a River in the Island of Corsica.

Rignano, Arinianum, a Town belonging to the Falisci, an ancient People of
Hetruria; which is now only a Castle, in S. Peter's Patrimony, on an Hill; one
Mile from the Tiber, and twenty one from Rome to the North. It is honored with
the Title of a Dukedom, tho there are but few Inhabitants in it.

Rille, Risela, a small River in Normandy; which arising by Seez, and flowing
North, waters Aigle, Rugles, Lyre; and at Beaumont le Roger, takes in the
Charante; and separating Lisieux from the County of Roanois, falls into the
Seyne, above Honfleur; three Leagues to the East.

Rimini, Ariminum, a City in Romandiola; which is a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Ravenna. It is a neat, populous City; in a fruitful Plain, upon
the Shoars of the Adriatic Sea; at the Mouth of the River Mareochia
(Ariminus;) over which it has a Bridge, built with great Art, by Augustus
Caesar: but the Haven is almost choked with Sand. This City stands between
Bononia to the West, and Ancona to the East; twenty five Miles from Ravenna to
the North-East, and a little more from Vrbino to the North. The Via Flaminia
made by the old Romans with so much Expense, ended at the Bridge of this City:
and the Aemilian began here, which went to Piacenza. The Inhabitants were very
faithful to the Romans, under the Distresses brought upon them by the
Victorious Arms of Hannibal, in the second Punick War. The taking it by Julius
Caesar, was the first Act of the Civil War between him and Pompey. Being
destroyed by the Dalmatians, it was rebuilt by Dioclesian. In the times of
Justin it sustained a Siege from the Goths. In the year 359, here was a famous
Arrian Council, of above four hundred Bishops, held under Constantius the
Emperor; who found means to gain a general Subscription to the (...), and the
Arrian Opinions, even from those who were not Arrians. In after times it was
subject to the Family of Malatesta; who adorned it with noble and magnificent
Palaces. Before this it had been subject to the Lombards and Franks. The first
of the Malatesta's obtained it from Otho the Third, in the year 1002. This
Family is no more mentioned till the year 1348, which is on another occasion
too. The same continued till about the year 1522: when Pandulfus, the last of
this House, being hardly laid at by Pope Alexander VI. sold it to the
Venetians: out of whose Hands Pope Julius II. recovered it the last mentioned
year. In the year 1527. it was again surprised by Pandulphus; whilst Pope
Clement was besieged by the Forces of Charles V. But this Possession was short,
and Pandulphus dying in great Poverty at Ferrara, that noble Family (which had
produced so many learned Men, and good Generals) was extinct. The Church has
ever since enjoyed this City: it has many remains of Roman Antiquity; and
amongst them a rare Triumphal Arch, built in Honor of Augustus: beside the
Ruins of a sine Theater. Long. 35. 37. Lat. 43. 51.

Ringwood, a Market Town in Hampshire, upon the River Avon. The Capital of its
Hundred.

Rio Grande, a vast and rapid River in Castile d'Or in South America; made by
the Conjunction of Rio Cauca or Rio grande de Santa Martha, (which arises in
the Province of Popayan in the Terra sirma: with the Rio grande de la Madalena,
which springs out of the new Kingdom of Granada) having this name given it by
the Spaniards, because they discovered the mouth of it upon S. Magdalen's Day:
as the other, that of Santa Martha, from its flowing along the Province of the
same name These two Rivers unite in one Channel near the City Teneriffa in the
Province of S. Martha; falling afterward into the North Sea. Also a Government
in Brasil.

Rioga, Rivogia, a Province in Spain, which was a part of Navarre, but now
annexed to Old Castile: it is divided from Alava, by the Douro; and lies
between Old Castile and Navarre. The principal Towns of which are Calzada,
Legrono, Najara, and Belorado.

Riom, Riomum, Ricomagum, a City in the Lower Auvergne in France; two Leagues
from Clermont to the North: in a flourishing State. The Capital of Auvergne:
adorned with a College of Oratorians of the Foundation of Lewis XIV. an ancient
Abbey built in the beginning of the seventh Century, two Hospitals, and diverse
Churches and religious Communities. Genebrard, and Sirmondus the learned
Jesuit, were produced by this Place.

Ripa de Transona, a small but elegant City in the Marquisate of Ancona; under
the Pope: and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Fermo. It stands five
Miles from the Shoars of the Adriatic Sea, the same from the Borders of the
Kingdom of Naples, and ten from Fermo. Pope Pius V. made it a Bishops See in
1571.

Ripaille, a Town in Savoy, upon the Lake of Geneva.

Ripen, Ripa, a City in the Kingdom of Denmark, in South Jutland; which is a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Lunden: and has a convenient Harbor upon
the German Ocean, at the Mouth of the River Nipsick; and a Fortress; five Miles
from Hadersleben to the West, and eight from Flensburgh to the South-West. This
Bishopric was founded by Balatand King of Denmark, in 950. Christopher I. King
of Denmark, died here in 1259. The City was taken by the Swedes in 1645: but
since recovered by the Danes.

Ripley, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of
Claro, upon the River Nyd.

Rippon, Rhidogunum, a Town in Yorkshire in the West Riding, in the Hundred of
Claro, of good Antiquity; near the Your, over which it has a Bridge. Adorned
with a Collegiate Church, with three lofty Spires; and anciently with a stately
Monastery built by Wilfride Archbishop of York, till the Danes destroyed it
with the Town. Yet Odo Archbishop of Canterbury repaired it again, and
translated the Relics of the holy Founder to Canterbury. There is a narrow
hole in a Vault under ground in the Church, called S. Wilfride's Needle. It is
one of the best Towns in the County, well inhabited, and of note particularly
for making good Spurs. Having the Privilege to be a Corporation also,
represented by two Members in the House of Commons.

Risano, Formio, a River of Carniola; the upper part of which is called by the
Germans, Alben; the lower by the Italians, Risano. It springs out of the
Alps from Mount Ocra, in Carniola; toward the Lake of Lugea, or
Czirknitzerzee; and flowing Westward through Istria, falls by the Bay of
Trieste into the Adriatic Sea; six Miles from Trieste, and two North of Capo
di Istria.

Risano, Rhizana, a City of Dalmatia, mentioned by Ptolemy, Pliny, and
Polybius: which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Raguza; under the
Dominion of the Turks: and accordingly much depopulated and ruined. It stands
forty Miles from Raguza toward Scodra; from which, thirty. Long. 45. 15. Lat.
42. 00.

Risborough, a Market Town in Buckinghamshire, in the Hundred of Aylesbury.

Risenbergh, a Mountain in the Eastern parts of Bohemia, out of which the Elbe
springs.

Rivadava, or Rivadeo, a City of Gallicia in Spain, called by the French,
Rivedieu: it stands upon the Bay of Biscay, in the Borders of Asturia; at the
bottom of an Hill, and the Mouth of the River Navius; which affords it the
convenience of a Port: fourteen Spanish Leagues from Oviedo to the West, and
four from Mondonedo.

Rivera di Genoua, Liguria Littorea, is a Country in Italy: bounded on the West
by the Maritime Alps, (by which it is divided from France;) on the East by the
River Magra, (by which it is divided from Hetruria, or Tuscany;) on the North
by the Apennine; and on the South by the Mediterranean Sea, here called the
Ligurian Sea. In the middle of it stands the City of Genoua, which divides it
into the Eastern and Western. This is now under the States of Genoua; by whom a
great part of the Western Division is destinated more to pleasure than profit:
the rich Genoueses having filled it with Country-Houses, where they spend the
pleasant time of the Summer and Autumn in noble Palaces, and delightful
Gardens. The Eastern Division supplies them with as much Wine as they need, and
an extraordinary plenty of good Oil. The principal Place in the Western is
Aranza; once an inconsiderable Village; lately a Place of great Trade and
Wealth, having sixty Sail of Ships trading into all parts of the World: but
their Shipping is now declining. The principal Place in the Eastern, is
Sarazana; a Town of great strength.

Rivoli, Rivolium, a small Town in Piedmont, called by the French, Rivoles. It
stands upon the River Doria; eight Miles from Turin to the West: and has one of
the most sumptuous Castles in Piedmont.

Roan, Rotomagus, the Capital City of Normandy: called by the French, Rouen; by
Caesar, and the other ancient Historians, Vrbs Velocassium. It is an
Archbishops See, and the Seat of the Parliament of Normandy. Great, rich,
populous, well built, in all respects one of the best Cities in France; and
thought by some to be the greatest, next to Paris. It stands upon the Seyne;
(which affords it a noble Harbor, and a great Trade) at the foot of an Hill;
twelve Miles above Dieppe, and twenty eight beneath Paris: with a Bridge upon
the Seyne, for the convenience of a Land Trade. It has an old Castle called the
Palace, in which the Dukes of Normandy kept their Court; and is about seven
Miles in compass, having (besides what lies within the Walls) six very great
Suburbs; and containing in the whole thirty five Parishes, with thirty four
Monasteries for Men and Women. The Castle on S. Catharines Hill is now entirely
ruined. This City is said by Vitalis, lib. 5. to be built by Julius Caesar.
Valesius proves it one of the most ancient Cities of France; and that in the
times of Theodosius the Great, it was esteemed as a City of the highest rank.
Taken by the Normans in 889, and assigned to Rollo (first Duke of Normandy) in
912, when Rollo became a Christian. It continued under his Posterity fourteen
Descents. In 1019. it suffered very much by fire. Taken from John King of
England, by Philip the August, King of France, in 1204; after it had been in
the Hands of the Normans three hundred and sixteen years. This City continued
under the French till 1418: When the English under Henry V. retook it, after a
bloody Siege. Charles VII. of France recovered it to that Crown in 1449. In the
times of the late Civil Wars of France, it was taken and sacked by the Hugonots
in 1562: but recovered after the Battle of Dreux, and plundered by the Royal
Party; Anthony of Bourbon, the King of Navarre, being slain before it. It fell
after this into the Hands of the Leaguers. Henry IV. besieged it in 1593. but
was prevented from taking it by the Prince of Parma; though in the year
following it willingly submitted to him, after he had embraced the Roman
Catholic Religion. The Parliament in this City was instituted by Philip the
Fair, in 1286. Established by Lewis XII. in 1499. and re-established by Francis
I. in 1515. Pope Clement VI. was sometime Archbishop of the Sea: Pope Martin
IV. and Gregory XI. Archdeacons. There have been diverse provincial Councils
here assembled. Particularly in 1074. one against the Concubinage of the Clergy.

Roane, or Rovane, Rhodumna, an ancient Town in France, in the Dukedom of
Bourbonne, and the County of Foretz, upon the River Loyre, (where it becomes
first capable to bear a Boat:) Very great and populous, tho not walled. It
stands twelve Leagues from Lions to the South-West, and eighteen from Moulins.
The Territory belonging to it, is called le Roanez or Roannois; and has the
Honor of being a Dukedom, by the Creation of King Charles IX.

Rober, Erubris, a River in Lorain, which falls by Trier into the Moselle.

Robil, Robel, Rebellio, a City or Town in the Dukedom of Mecklenburgh; in the
Lower Saxony, by the Lake of Muritz, in the Borders of Brandenburgh: two German
Miles from Var, and seven from Gustro.

Robogh, a Village in the County of Tyron; upon the Sea Shore against Scotland,
in the Province of Vlster; which has preserved the memory of the Rhobogdii, (an
old Irish Clan,) that possessed the Counties of Antrim, Colran, and Tyrone, in
this Province; from whom that Cape now called the Fair Foreland; by the
English, was then called Rhobodium; being in the County of Antrim, scarce
fifteen Miles South of the nearest Shore of Scotland.

Rocca Nova, a Town in the Terra di Otranto, in the Kingdom of Naples; honored
with the Title of a Dukedom.

Rocca Romana, a Town in the Terra di Lavoro in the Kingdom of Naples, near
Alifa: honored with the Title of a Principality.

Rochdale, a Market Town in Lancashire, in the Hundred of Salford, upon the
River Roche; in a Dale or Vale; which together compound its name.

La Roche, Rupes, a Town in the Territory of Genevois, in Savoy; five or six
Leagues from Geneva, little less from Anneci, and one from the River Arve: at
the foot of the Mountains. It has a Collegiate Church, and two Religious
Houses.

Roche-chouart, a Seigniory in the Province of Poictou, toward the Borders of
Angoumois; giving name to a Family of Honor.

La Roche-En-Ardenne, a fortified Town in the Dukedom of Luxemburgh in the Low
Countries, upon the River Vrt; twelve Leagues from Luxemburgh and nine from
Liege. Honored with the Title of an Earldom.

Rochefort, a Town and Port at the Mouth of the Charante, in the Pais d'Aunis
in France: Heretofore no more than a Village; but now become a Magazine,
enlarged with diverse Buildings; and more daily.

La Roche-sur-Yon, Rupes ad Yonem, a Town in the Lower Poictou in France,
toward Lusson; upon the River Yon, which after joins with the Lay. Honored
some Ages since with the Title of a Principality; which is enjoyed by the House
of Bourbon.

Rochelle, Portus Santonum, Rupella, Rupella Santonum, Rupella, a City and
famous Port of France, upon the Bay of Aquitain; the Capital of le Pais
d'Aunis, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bourdeaux. Seven Leagues
from Brouges to the North, two from the Isle of Re, and thirty from the Mouth
of the Loyre to the South-East. It takes its name from the Rock on which it
stands; supposed to be built about the Sixth Century (because not mentioned
before) against the Incursions of the Normans. At first it had Princes of its
own. After this it was under the English from the times of Henry II. who
possessed it as Duke of Anjou. And that Prince granted this City its first
Charter and Privileges, which were confirmed by Richard and John his Sons. King
John Landed here in 1206. when he went to the Siege of Mountauban; and after,
in 1213. In 1224. it was taken from the English by Lewis VIII. King of France;
but recovered the next year, and continued under the English till 1453. And
then finally taken by Charles VII. In the beginning of the Civil Wars of
France, this Town fell under the power of the Hugonots: who very much improved
its Fortifications. It was their principal place of refuge, under Charles IX.
After the Massacre of Paris it was besieged by all the Forces of France;
defended it self to a wonder; and at last forced that Prince to a Peace in
1573. It continued after this in their hands till 1628. and then was taken by
Hunger; (in order to which, the Ocean was bridled with a prodigious Bank, begun
in 1627. and carried the length of 747. toises;) the English having twice
unsuccessfully attempted to relieve it. After the taking of it, Lewis XIII.
King of France, visited it in person; re-established the Roman Catholic
Religion, destroyed its Fortifications, (saving two Towers built heretofore by
Charles the Fifth, for the Defense of the Port); and took away its former
Privileges. In 1649. it first became a Bishopric; the Chair being removed
hither from Mallezais, a small Place in Poictou, by Pope Innocent X. at the
request of Lewis XIV. Long. 19. 25. Lat. 45. 56.

Rochester, Rossa, Durobius, Dorobrevis, Rutupiae, a City in the County of
Kent; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Canterbury; upon the Medway;
over which it has a stately Stone Bridge, one of the fairest in England; five
Miles from the Thames, twenty five from Canterbury to the East, and London to
the West. This was a Roman Town, or rather Castle, as William of Malmsbury
styles it: much enlarged to the East, West, and South. In 676. it was ruined by
Aetheldred King of the Mercians; and after this, several times by the Danes.
Aethelbert King of Kent erected here a sumptuous Church; and caused one Justus
to be made the first Bishop of it in 604. Gundulphus the Norman, about 1080.
rebuilt this Church, and brought in Monks; which are since changed into a Dean
and six Prebendaries. It has a Castle built by William the Conqueror which in
the Reign of William Rufus, (and twice after in the Barons Wars) has been
besieged. Dr. Sprat, the present Bishop, is the eighty third of this Diocese.
Charles II. added an Honor to this Place; when he created Henry Viscount Wilmot
of Athlone in Ireland, Baron of Alderbury in the County of Oxon, and Earl of
Rochester, December 13. 1652. Whose Son, John Wilmot, succeeded him in 1659.
Which Family failing, Laurence Hide, (second Son to Sir Edward Hide, Earl of
Clarendon, and Lord Chancellor of England) was by the same Prince created Earl
of Rochester, November 29. 1682. But before these, it gave the Title of
Viscount to Sir Robert Carr, created Anno 1611. by K. James I. Viscount
Rochester, and afterward Earl of Somerset.

Rochford, a Market Town in the County of Essex. The Capital of its Hundred.

Rochitzerbergh, Claudius, a Mountain in Stiria, called by various names.

Rockingham, a Market Town in Northamptonshire, in the Hundred of Corby, upon
the River Weland: giving the Title of Baron to the Right Honorable Edward
Watson Lord Rockingham, to whom belongs the Castle here; which has lost its
strength long since.

Rocroy, Rupes Regia, a strong Town in Champagne, in Retelois; in the Borders
of Hainault; twelve Leagues from Retel to the North, four from Mariebourgh to
the South. Near this Place the Spaniards received a great Defeat from the
French, under the Duke D'Anguien May 19. 1643. six days after the death of
Lewis XIII. King of France. But afterward the Spaniards took this Town, under
the Prince of Conde's Conduct, in 1653. It is since returned under the Crown of
France.

Rodaun, Erodanus, a River in Prussia in Poland; which rises out of a Lake
twenty five Miles above Dantzick; and falling into the Vistula not much above
this City, a little beneath it enters the Baltic Sea.

Roden, a small River in Shropshire.

Rodez, or Rhodes, Segodunum, Rhuteni, Rutenae, Segodunum Retunorum, a City of
Aquitain; the Capital of the County of Rovergne, and a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Bourges: The Bishop takes the Title of an Earl: a great and
beautiful City, seated upon the River Veronium; fifteen Leagues from Mende to
the West, thirty two from Narbone to the North, and twenty two from Cahors to
the East. A very ancient City, and mentioned by Julius Caesar. The Goths,
Saracens, and Franks successively ruined it in their times. It served
heretofore under its own Counts: till it became united with the Crown of France
in the Person of Henry IV.

Roding, a Stream in the County of Essex.

Rodosto, Redcestum, a City of Thrace; which is a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Heraclea: it stands upon the Propontis, twenty Miles from
Heraclea to the South; at the foot of an Hill by a Bay of the same name, which
affords it a convenient and very large Haven: so that it is now a Place of
considerable Trade, and reasonably populous. Pliny calls this City Resiston. It
is beautified with many great Mosques, some Grecian Churches, and two
Synagogues: and much frequented by the Merchants of Romania, the Sea of
Marmora, and the Black Sea.

Roer, Rura, in Trithemius Rera, Adrana, a River of Germany; called by the
French, Roure. It arises in Eifel, in the Dukedom of Juliers; and watering
Juliers and Linnich, at Roermonde it falls into the Maes.

Roermonde, Ruremunda, a City of the Low Countries, in the Province of
Guelderland: called by the French, Ruremonde. It stands upon a River of the
same name, and the Maes; having the first to the South of it, the second to the
West: three Leagues from Venlo to the South, twelve from Liege to the North,
Cologne to the West, and Wesel to the East. Made a Bishops See by Pope Paul IV.
under the Archbishop of Mechlin in 1559, (he changing its Collegiate Church
into a Cathedral); and was an Hanse Town till 1635: when it fell into the Hands
of the Hollanders, from whom it is since recovered by the Spaniards. In 1665.
it suffered much by a Fire.

Rohaczow, Rohaczovia, a considerable Town; the Capital of a Territory of the
same name in Lithuania; upon the Nieper, where it takes in the Odrucz; twenty
Polish Miles from Mohilow to the South, and forty from Kiovia to the North.

Roham-Thaura, Antitaurus, a Mountain in the Lesser Armenia; which lies to the
North of the Great Taurus; between the Euphrates and the Arsanius: separated
from the said great Mountain, and therefore by the Ancients called Antitaurus.
In the Valleys beneath it stands the City of Comdna, now called Tabachasa.

Roia, Rodium, a City of France, in the Province of Picardy; upon the River
Auvergne, in the Territory of Santerre; four Leagues from Noyon to the West,
nine from Amiens, and seven from Compeigne to the North. A small City, but
populous.

Roll-rich-stones, a Monument of vast unwrought Stones, circularly set, near
Ensham in Oxfordshire: supposed to have been erected in Commemoration of some
great Victory in ancient Times.

Rom, one of the Names of the Lesser Asia.

Rom, Roma, a small Island in the Baltic Sea; upon the Coast of the Dukedom of
Sleswick, about two English Miles from the Shore: under the King of Denmark.

Romagna, Romandiola, a great Province in Italy, in the States of the Church:
of old called Aemilia Regio. Bounded on the West by Bononia, on the North by
the Dukedom of Ferrara, on the South by the Dukedom of Vrbino, and on the East
by the Adriatic Sea: a small part of it toward the Appennine is subject to
the Duke of Florence, and therefore called Romandiola Florentina: The rest
(which is the far greatest part) is under the Pope, as a Temporal Prince. The
principal Places in it are, Ravenna, (the Capital), Faenza, Imola, Forli,
Bertinoro, Rimini, Cervia, Cesena, Sarsina, and some others.

Romania, the same with Thrace.

Romania, Argia, the Eastern Province of the Morea; the Capital of which is
Napoli di Romania. The other Places are of small importance.

Romans, Romantium, Romany, a spruce fine City in Dauphine in France; seated
in a pleasant Plain upon the River Iseure; over which it has a Bridge; four
Leagues from Valence to the South-East, toward Grenoble ten Miles, and the same
distance from Vienne to the South. It is thought to represent Jerusalem in its
Situation and Figure; insomuch that in 1520. there was a Building added to it,
made in the fashion of the Holy Sepulcher that stands upon Mount Calvary;
Francis I. King of France himself laying the first Stone: And also a Convent
founded, under the Name of the House of Mount Calvary; now in the possession of
the Recollects, but first given to the Religious of the Order of S. Francis.
The Huguenots sacked and ruined this City in 1562. It has been often taken and
retaken in the Civil Wars.

Rome, Roma, the Capital City of Italy, once the Sovereign and Mistress of the
whole World; the more immediate Capital now of Campagna di Roma. The Emperor
Commodus desired to fasten his own Name upon it, by calling it Commodiana; as a
Gothish King, called it Gothia; and other Princes the like: But the Name of
Rome still has been always preserved by it. This City is seated upon the Tyber;
twelve Miles above its fall into the Tyrrhenian Sea to the North-East; one
hundred and twenty from Naples to the North; three hundred from Genoua to
South; one hundred thirty five from Ancona, and one hundred and forty from
Florence. Long. 36. 30. Lat. 40. 40. Though there are great Controversies
concerning the Time and the Founder of it, yet the most received opinion is,
that it was built by Romulus and Remus; in the first year of the seventh
Olympiad, Anno Mundi 3198. seven hundred and fifty years before the Birth of
our Savior. Its Foundations were small and obscure; and not above two Miles in
compass; with four Gates, enclosing only the Capitoline and Palatine Mountains.
It continued under seven Princes two hundred forty five years: when Sextus, the
Son of Tarquinius, ravishing Lucretia a Roman Lady, it so incensed them, that
thereupon they not only dethroned Tarquinius; but for many Ages they would not
endure the Name, much less the Authority of a King; but lived under Temporary
accountable Magistrates, Consuls; two together, yearly elected; with Praetors,
Tribunes, Quaestors, Censors, Praefects, and other Magistrates under them. And
when extreme necessity required it, they created a temporary Dictator with
Supreme Authority over all. At this time their Empire was not above fifteen
Miles in length: and this Change greatly hazarded the Ruin of the Insant City.
In the year of Rome 365. (during the Consular Government), it was taken by
Brennus King or General of the Gauls; and all but the Capitol burnt down to
the ground: yet it continued a Free State, though sorely shaken by Hannibal
about the year five hundred thirty seven; and by their own Domestic Broils
under Marius and Sylla, between the years 665. and 672. But, the fatal time
being come, Julius Caesar (in the year of Rome 705.) by the Battle of
Pharsalia, put an end to that Commonwealth, forty six years before the Birth of
our Savior: making himself to be declared Perpetual Dictator and Emperor; and
the Name of the Commonwealth of Rome to be changed into, the Roman Empire. And
though the Civil Wars broke out again to the great hazard, not only of their
Empire, but Being; yet Augustus, in the Battle of Actium, put a happy Period to
them, in 721. and prepared the World to receive the Prince of Peace, by an
Universal Peace. He was born under this Prince in the year of Rome 753. and of
the World 3950. The times that followed were fatal to Rome; which double dyed
her Purple in the Blood of Holy Men, who endeavored to reduce her from the
Vassalage of Doemons to the Knowledge and Service of the True God. To these an
end was put by Conslantine the Great, by the Defeat of Maxentius under the
Walls of Rome, in the year of Christ, 312. of Rome 1064. This great Prince laid
soon after the foundation of the Ruin of Rome, by removing the Seat of the
Empire to Byzantium or Constantinople, in the year of Christ 330. which
afterward brought on the Division of the Empire, into the Eastern and Western.
Alaricus King of the Goths in 410. (of Rome 1162.) took and spoiled this City.
Gensericus, the Vandal, followed him; and in 455. took it the second time.
Odoacer took it in 465. Ricimere in 472. Totila in 547. So that in the space of
one hundred thirty seven years, it was taken and spoiled by these Barbarous
Nations four times. In 580. it was besieged by the Lombards; and preserved by
the Emperors Forces, which were sent to relieve it. Leo IV. in 593. bestowed
something in the repair of it. Rome was now recovered by the Eastern Emperors.
Justinian by Narses his General in Italy, having slain Totila in 553. and three
years after, by the taking of Capua, having put an happy end to the Gothic War
in Italy. This City continued under those Princes, till 726. when under Gregory
II. Italy (by the procurement of that Pope) revolted, because Leo the Emperor
had by an Edict prohibited the Worship of Images. The Lombards were very
instrumental in this Change. Neither could they and the Popes long agree: but
Aistulphus in 753. besieged Rome; and Pope Stephen III. (obtaining no relief
from the Emperor against the Lombards) sends for Pepin King of France; who
came and delivered him for that time. Desiderius the next King of the Lombards
got Rome by a Stratagem in 770. and using his Power tyrannically, Charles the
Great (in 774.) was called in; who put an end to the Kingdom of the Lombards,
and made the Western Empire once more considerable. The Lombards and these
French Princes in order to oblige the Popes by the Ties of Gratitude to them,
had at several times bestowed several Territories upon the Sea of Rome. Charles
the Great reserved to himself and his Successors the Approbation of the future
Popes; which was confirmed by a Council held at Rome, in 773. This in
aftertimes embroiled the Popes and the Western Emperors, as much as ever the
Eastern and the Lombards were. For Charles the Great being crowned at Rome in
800. his Posterity had frequent quarrels with the Popes, (the Clergy and City
of Rome) about the Elections of the Popes. The first Invasion was made by
Stephen VI. about 817. under Lewis the Gentle; who is pretended to have granted
away that Right of electing the Pope, which had been acknowledged in Charles
the Great. In 819. Paschal I. a Roman, was chosen Pope against the Will of this
Prince. But in 823. Lothaire coming to Rome to receive the Crown, put this Pope
to purge himself by Oath; and slew many of the Nobility, for setting him up
against the Emperors Will: for which that See bore him no kindness. Gregory
IV. in 833. finding Pepin his Son in rebellion against him, and pretending to
reconcile them, when he came into Germany, he took part with his Son against
the Father; and Pope-like, threatened to excommunicate the Emperor, if he did
not resign the Empire to his Son: which Treachery of his, in 839: was severely
revenged by Lothaire the Emperor, by taking many Places from him in Italy. In
839. the Saracens sorely distressed the Papacy; which necessitated the Pope to
have recourse to the Emperor for Protection, and he had it: In this Invasion,
the Saracens wasted the Suburbs of Rome, as they did in 846. which occasioned
the building of the Castle of S. Angelo by Pope Sergius II. The Empire being
translated from the Franks to the Germans, in the Person of Arnulph (a Natural
Son of Carloman;) against him Formosus crowns Guido a Rival, in 891. And in
893. sends for Arnulph to come and free Rome from the oppressions of this
Guido. Arnulph comes into Italy, and in 906. took Rome. A Schism being about
this time in the Church of Rome, there was little done by the Popes, till
Berengarius (growing Potent in Italy) necessitated them to seek to Otho I. who
being crowned at Rome, in 962. a Council there held in 964. acknowledged the
same Right in him, that had been in Charles the Great. Gregory VII. on this
account begins a quarrel with Henry IV. Emperor; sets up Anti-Emperours, and
excommunicates the Emperor, in 1076. whereupon that Prince thus provoked,
besieged Rome in 1081. took it in 1084. and burnt it: and soon after, this
Turbulent Pope died in Banishment in great misery. In 1242. Pope Gregory IX.
(having excommunicated Frederick II. Emperor, for refusing to give the Sea of
Sardinia to Rome;) and proclaiming a Croysade against the Emperor; that Prince
defeated his Army: and following his blow, took Ravenna, Siena, and Faenza
(with diverse of the Cardinals,) and reduced the Sea of Rome to a mean
condition. Innocent IV. insolently renews the Excommunication against the
Emperor in 1242. Whereupon arose the famous Factions of the Guelphs for the
Pope, and the Gibelines for the Emperor; which made Italy extremely miserable
for some Ages. During part of which times, in 1305. Pope Clement V. removed the Sea to Avignon in France; where it continued to 1376. upon which arose a Schism
between the Popes of Rome and Avignon; not ended, till the Council of
Constance; which begun in 1414. In 1408. Ladislaus King of Naples took Rome,
and laid its Walls in the dust. In 1494. Charles VIII. of France took Rome. In
1526. Cardinal Pompeius Columna; and in 1527. the Forces of Charles V. took and
sacked Rome. Philip II. besieged it, and had certainly taken it, if the Pope
had not complied about 1557. Yet after all these Changes and Calamities, this
City at this day is said to be fifteen Miles in compass; very populous; and
full of magnificent Buildings, as well Ancient as Modern. They reckon in it
above three hundred thousand Souls: besides eight thousand Jews, who are
enclosed in a particular quarter by themselves; and obliged every Saturday to
hear a Christian Sermon. Houses and Palaces twenty two thousand; Parishes
ninety two: forty one National Churches; sixty four Religious Houses for Men;
above forty for Women; thirty Hospitals; one hundred and six Societies of
Penitents; and diverse Colleges. It has eighteen Gates; three hundred and sixty
Towers flanking the Walls; six Bridges over the Tiber; three principal
Fountains; and eight Obelisks remaining out of about forty five, it formerly
had, rehearsed in the Writings of Antiquaries. The Church of S. Peter, (in
which the Body of that Apostle is deposited) built within and without of
Marble, in the Figure of a Cross; near one hundred Toises long, sixty six broad
in the Branches; with a Dome fifty five Toises high, a Portail twenty four,
erected in 1612. by Pope Paul V. to a Portico of the same largness; together
with all its Riches, Paintings, Columns, Statues, Altars and Galleries;
surpasses the greatest Idea that the mind can well form of Beauty and Grandeur.
Then the Library in the Vatican Palace obtains the pre-eminence of all other
Libraries in the World. Anciently this City Walls were 50 Miles in compass;
with seven hundred and forty Towers in them; and thirty Gates, leading to, and
denominating as many broad Highways, which were paved and adorned with
wonderful Magnificence: where the Rests of Tombs yet appear; it being by the
Law of the Twelve Tables (in Vrbe ne sepelito, neve urito) forbidden to bury in
the City. It had anciently eight Bridges; of which Pons Sublicius built by the
King Ancus Marcius, and repaired by Aemilius Lepidus, where Horatius C^cles
sustained the Effort of the Thuscanes who would have re-established the deposed
Tarquinius upon the Throne; and where afterward the Emperor Heliogabalus was
precipitated into the Tiber, is ruined. But Pons Milvius, without the City, is
no less remarkable, for the Victory there obtained by Constantine the Great
over Maxentius, and the drowning of that Tyrant in the Tiber also. It had
anciently eighteen Fountains; eight hundred Baths; an unknown number of
Statues, Columns, Colossusses, Obelisks; (the Columns of Trajan and Antoninus
are still standing;) and Temples for no less than thirty thousand Gods, by the
accounts that Varro and others make of the Gods of the Romans. The Censors have
sometimes sold the Common Sink to Gardiners for six hundred thousand Crowns.
The number of Inhabitants in Tiberius's time was computed to sixteen hundred
thousand, two hundred ninety and one: In Augustus's, much more. Their Army,
under the Emperors, ordinarily consisted of two hundred thousand Foot, and
forty thousand Horse: their Fleets, of fifteen hundred Galleys, and two
thousand Ships. There were one hundred and sixty Granaries in their Empire: And
in fine the Empire it self had for its Bounds to the East, Euphrates, the
Mountain Taurus, and Armenia; to the South, Aethiopia; to the North, the
Danube; and to the West, the Atlantic Ocean. For the Councils that have been
celebrated here since Christianity, by Popes and Anti-Popes against one
another, against the Schismatics and Heretics (so called) of all Ages, and
against Emperors and Princes, or the Abuses committed and occasioned by them
and any of them; it is not for this place to rehearse so vast a number:
Themselves have sometimes proved the greatest Abuse. Of late, the Prosecution
of Dr. Michael Molinos, (Author of the Doctrine of Quietism,) and his pretended
Abjuration, September. 3. 1687. may be adjudged one of the most remarkable
Occurrences that has for many years happened in Rome: of which See the
Supplement to Dr. Burnet's Letters. After Pope Innocent XI. the Election fell
upon Cardinal Ottoboni, a Venetian, October 6. 1689. who took the Name of
Alexander VIII. After him, upon Cardinal Pignatelli: who is called Innocent XII.

Rome, Roma, a small Island in the Kingdom of Congo, in the River Zaire; twenty
Leagues from its Fall into the Ocean; in which there was some few years since a
French Colony.

Romechi, the Turkish Name of Greece.

Le Romois, the Territory of the City of Roan; beyond the Seyne, in Normandy.

Romont, Rotundus Mons, a small County in the Province of Vaac or Vaud; which
was under the Duke of Savoy, but now a part of the Canton of Freiburg.

Roncevaux, a Town in Navarre, where the French received a great Defeat under
Charlemagne in 792.

Ronches, Aronches, Arunci, once a City of Lusitania; now a small, but strong
Town in the Province of Extremadura; between the Rivers of Caja and Elva; three
Leagues from Albuquerque to the West.

Ronciglione, Roncilio, a Town in S Peter's Patrimony; the Capital of a
Territory of the same Name, seated upon the River Fatiscus: thirty Miles from
Rome, and ten from Viterbo; heretofore under the Dukes of Parma, but now under
the Pope; and the Territory belonging to it, is called Lo Stato di Ronciglione.

Ronda, Arunda, an ancient City in Spain; called also Ronda la Vieja; in the
Kingdom of Granada in the Borders of Andalusia, upon the River Guadiaro; not
far from the Goza and the Guadalqua Virejo; twelve Leagues from Gibralter to
the North, and thirteen from Malaga to the West; it has a Castle, and is the
Capital of a Territory; and in a thriving State. Long. 15. 00. Lat. 36. 10.

Roni, Paphlagonia, a Province in the Lesser Asia.

Roschild, Roschilda, a City in the Island of Zeland, in the Baltic Sea, under
the King of Denmark; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Lunden;
and ennobled by the Bones of the Kings of Denmark here buried. Often mentioned
also on the account of a Peace here concluded between the Danes and Swedes in
1658. It stands four German Miles from Koppenhagen to the West, and seventy
five from Kroonburg to the South-East. The Bishopric was founded by Sweno King
of Denmark, in 1012.

Roscomen, Roscomenum, a Town and County in the Province of Conaught. The
County is bounded on the North by the Curlew Mountains, dividing it from Slego;
on the East by the River Shannon, dividing it from the Counties of Lotrim,
Longford, West-Meath, and Kings County; on the South by Kings County and
Galloway; and on the West by the River Suck, which parts it from Galloway and
Mayo. It is of a considerable length; viz. sixty English Miles from North to
South, but not above nineteen where broadest; the Soil is level and extremely
fruitful; so that it abounds with Grass and Corn, produced by very little
Husbandry. Roscomen, the principal Town (which gives name to it,) stands upon
the River Suck; toward the Western Border, but near the middle of the County;
twelve Miles from Athlone to the North-West, and thirty three from Galway to
the North-East.

Rosas, Rhoda, Rhode, Rodopolis, once a City, now only a Castle, and a small
Town in the County of Roussillon in Catalonia in Spain; which has a large
Harbor on the Mediterranean Sea; very strongly and well fortified: taken by
the French in 1645. but restored by the Pyrenean Treaty to Spain. It stands ten
Spanish Leagues from Perpignan to the South. This place was first fortified by
Charles V. before which, it was only a Monastery; though in the time of the
Romans, it had been one of the most considerable Cities in Spain; supposed to
have been built by the Rhodians, before the Romans were Masters of this
Kingdom; and from them to have taken this name.

Rosetto, Metelis, a City of Egypt; called by the Turks Raschit; by the
Italians Rosetto: it stands with a Port upon the Mediterranean Sea, upon the
Mouth of that Branch of the Nile, which was anciently called Canopicum; now one
of the principal Cities of that Kingdom. Monsieur Thevenot, who traveled from
Alexandria hither, tells us, that it is sixty short Miles. This City, says he,
was anciently called Canopus; it lies five Miles up the River from the Sea; and
is next to Cairo, one of the best Cities in Egypt; and still increasing; being
a place of great Traffic, very pleasant, surrounded by lovely Gardens, and
full of well built tall Houses; and in which there is great plenty of Victuals
very cheap; but in the Months of July and August, they have none but
Cistern-waters to drink. Many pieces of ancient Money have been found in the
Sand betwixt Alexandria and this City. The Country about it yields Sugarcanes
in plenty. Long. 60. 45. Lat. 31. 6.

Roseveque, a small Town in Flanders; famous for a Battle, which Charles V. won
against the Rebellious Gante-men; of whom were slain forty thousand, and their
General Philip d' Artevill taken and hanged.

Rosieme, Rosima, a City in Poland; the Capital of Samogithia, upon the River
Dubissa; twelve Polish Miles from Corona to the North, thirty from Riga to the
South, and twenty seven from Vilna to the West; this place is little and ill
peopled. Baudrand writes Rosienie.

Ros^, Russia, a County in the North of Scotland; bounded on the North by
Naverina and Sutherland, on the South by Murray and Abria, on the East by the
German, and on the West by the Irish Sea. Charles I. was Earl of this County in
the Life of his Father.

Rossano, Roscianum, Ruscianum, a City in the Hither Calabria, in the Kingdom
of Naples; which is an Archbishops See, and a Principality; built upon a Rock,
encompassed on all sides by Rocks; and seated scarce three Miles from the
Shoars of the Bay of Taranto; sixteen from Bisignano to the East; thirty five
from Cosenza to the South-East, and twelve from Thurium to the South; which
last, being an old City, was formerly the Bishops See. This Place is great,
well peopled, and was the Birthplace of Pope John VII.

Rosse, Rossa, a Town anciently in the Province of Mounster in the County of
Cork; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Cashell; it stands upon the
British Channel, at the Mouth of a small River called Fin; thirty Miles from
Cork to the South-West, and twenty two from Kinsale to the West. The Bishops
See in 1618. was united to that of Cork; the Town being reduced to a mere
Village. There is a Market Town of this name in Herefordshire, in the the
Hundred of Greytree, upon the River Wyc.

Rossetto. See Rosetto.

Rossillon, Ruscinonensis Comitatus, a County of Catalonia, called by the
French Roussillon, by the Spaniards Rossillon: bounded on the East by the
Mediterranean Sea, on the North by Languedoc, on the West by Ceretania, and on
the South by Catalonia: The Capital of it is Perpignan. There are besides in it
Leucate, Villa Franca, Rodes, E^na, and some other Places of note; it extending
from East to West eighteen Spanish Leagues. This Country was anciently a part
of Gallia Narbonensis; annexed to Spain in the Times of the Goths: had then
Earls, which were Sovereign Princes of it; and on the Death of Gerard the last
of them, under Alphonsus II. added to Arragon. By James I. annexed to the
Kingdom of Majorca; and recovered back again to that Crown by Pedro IV. By King
John II. sold to Lewis XI. of France, in 1462. and by Charles VIII. of France,
returned back freely to Ferdinando, on condition he should not obstruct his
Conquest of the Kingdom of Naples in 1493. It continued under that Crown till
1659. when Lewis XIII. retook it by his Arms. and had the Possession confirmed
by the Pyrenean Treaty. There are three considerable Rivers watering it, the
Tet, the Tech, and the Egli.

Rostock, Rostocium, Rostochium, Raciburgum, Rhodopolis, Rosarum or Rosarium
Vrbs, a City in the Lower Saxony upon the Baltic Sea; in the Dukedom of
Meckleburg in Germany: which is a Free Imperial City, and has an Harbor made
by the River Warna, on which it stands eight Miles from Wisemar to the East,
and eleven from Stralsundt to the West. It is under the Protection of the Dukes
of Meckleburg, by whose Ancestors it was built about 329. and walled by another
about 1160. Its Ancient Name was Rostzoch or Rotzoch, which signifies a Miry
Ground. Ericus King of Denmark conquered this Territory about 1286. Christopher
III. his Successor in 1322. restored it to the Duke of Meckleburg. Waldemarus
IV. granted this City and its Territory to Albert Duke of Meckleburg, in 1360.
A^bert another Duke in 1416. founded an University here, which was opened three
years after. It is about five Miles in compass, and almost equal to Lubeck. A
Sedition arising in this City in 1573. against the Duke, he entered it in Arms,
and treated the Senate with great severity. In 1629. it was with the whole
Duchy of Mecklenburg taken by the Imperialists: out of whose hands it was
recovered by the Swedes, October. 16. 1631. Long. 34. 20. Lat. 54 20.

Rostow, Rostovia, a great City in Russia; which is the Capital of a Dukedom of
the same Name, and an Archbishops See. It stands upon the River Cotorea, having
a Fortress of Wood: twenty six Miles from the Wolga to the South, and thirty
four from Mosco to the West. The Dukes of this Province were next Novograd in
the greatest Esteem of any in this Kingdom; till John Basilovitz, in 1565.
totally extirpated the Family; and since that time it has been given to the
second Son of the Czars.

Rotenburg, Rotenburgum, a City of Franconia in Germany, upon the River Tauber;
ni^e German Miles from Norimburg to the West, and a little more from Wurtsburg
to the South. Made a Free Imperial City by Frederick Lin 1163. There is another
Town of the same name in Schwaben, upon the Neckar: one Mile from Tubingen to
the West, which is under the Emperor.

Roterdam, Roterdamum, a great, strong, rich, polous City; the Capitalos the
Province of Schielandt, and one of the most celebrated Seaports in Holland. It
stands on the North side of the middle Branch of the Rhine; four German Miles
and an half from the Sea, and eight from Amsterdam to the South-West.
Trithemius says, it was built in 89. by Ratherius the twentieth King of the
Franks. Erasmus, the great Restorer of Learning, was born in this City. They
have taken care to preserve the memory of it by an Inscription let upon the
House; and placed his Statue on the Bridge besides: which was erected in 1564
and very injuriously treated by the Spaniards in 1572. The greatest convenience
of this Town is. that Ships of great Burden are taken into the middle of many
of the Streets without difficulty; their Channels being deep and large. It was
small, when the Spaniards were ejected; and therefore not mentioned as to the
time of its conjunction with the States.

Rother, a River which arises in Sussex; and passing between it and Kent,
falls into the British Sea at Rye. A^pledore in Kent is seated upon it: And
Ox^ey-Isle, encompassed with it.

Rotherham, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, and the Hundred of
Strafford; upon the River Dun, over which it has a fine Stone Bridge. Of note,
for giving Name and Birth to Themas of Rotheram, Archbishop of York, one of the
Founders of Lincoln College in Oxon: who expressed his kindness to this Town by
founding likewise a College in it; with three Schools for Grammar, Writing and
Music.

Rothsaye, a Castle in an Island in Dunbritton Fyrth or Bay on the West of
Scotland; which has annexed to it the Title of a Dukedom; and belonged
heretofore to the Prince, or Eldest Son of the King of Scotland. It is said,
the Royal Family of the Steuarts came at first from this Castle; which was
their most ancient Seat.

Rothwell, or Rowell, a Market Town in Northampto^shire. The Capital of its
Hundred.

Rota, Ebora, a Castle in Andalusia, upon the Bay of Cadiz; at the Mouth of the
River Quadalquivir; three Leagues from Cadiz to the North; mentioned by Strabo,
Mela and Stephanus, as one of the Cities in that part of Spain.

Rotta, Rutuba, a small River in Liguria in Italy; which rises out of the
Appennine; and flowing through the County of Nizza, and dividing it from the
States of Genoua, falls into the Mediterranean Sea at Vintimiglia.

Rotwyl, or Rotweil, Rubea villa, Rotevilla, a small, but Imperial and Free
City in Schwaben in Germany; upon the Necker, under Mount Abenow; from which it
stands three Leagues to the South, ten from Brisach to the East, and six from
Schafhouse to the North. In this City Conrad III. Duke of Schwaben, in 1147.
instituted a Chamber of Justice for that whole Duchy. It has its Name from
Rott a German word, which signifies a Troop; built at first on the opposite
side of the Necker; and removed to the place it now stands in, upon the account
of frequent Inundations. In 1643. it was taken by the French. Monsieur
Guebrande, the French General, died in the City soon after of the Wounds he had
received in the Siege; by the Treaty of Munster it was restored to its former
state, and is united now with the Swiss Cantons for its Preservation.

Roucy, a Town of France in Champagne, upon the River Aisne: giving its Name
and the Title of Earl to an Honorable and Ancient Family there.

Rouen. See Roan.

Rovergue, Rutenensis Provincia, a Province in France, under the Generalite of
Gascony: bounded on the South by Languedoc, on the East by Givaudan, on the
North by Auvergne, and on the West by Quercy; the Capital City of it, is Rodez;
Ville Franche de Rovergue, is another principal place. Caesar and Lucan mention
its old Inhabitants by the Name of Rutheni. The Riches of it consist in Cattle
and Wool, Mines of Iron, Brass, Alum, Brimstone, etc. It is watered by the
Tarn, the Lot, the Aveiron, etc.

Rovigo, Rhodigium, a small City in Italy; heretofore under the Dukes of
Ferrara, but now under the Republic of Venice; and the Residence of the Bishop
of Adria; from which it stands twenty Miles to the West, and twenty five from
Ferrara to the North, the same from Padoua to the South. The Learned Caelius
Rhodiginus was a Native of this City. It is the Capital of Rovigno, a small
Province in Lombardy, surrounded by the River Adige: which was anciently a part
of Romandiola; but in 1500. in the disorders of Italy seized by the Venetians.

Rousillon. See Rosillon.

Roxburg, Marchenium or Marchidun, a strong Castle, both by its Situation and
Art; seated upon the Twede, (where it receives the Trefe) almost twenty English
Miles from Berwick to the West. James II. of Scotland, a ^rince of great Virtue
and Goodness, was slain at the Siege of this Place by one of his own Cannon,
which accidentally broke in firing it against the Castle, in 1459. The next
year the Castle was surrendered to the Scots; who entirely ruined it, in revenge
of the Death of their Prince; so that it can searce now be seen where it sto^d.

Royan, Royanum, a Town in Saintonge, at the Mouth of the Garonne; heretofore
strongly fortified.

Royaumont, an Abbey in the Government of the Isle of France, eight Leagues
from Paris, toward the River Oise: which in 14^9. suffered much by Thunder and
Lightning.

Roye, a considerable Town in Picardy: adorned with a Collegiate Church, and
some Religious Houses: upon one of the Sources of the Moreuil. It gives Name to
an Honorable Family also.

Royston, a Market Town, divided betwixt Cambridgeshire and Hartfordshire: at
the bottom of an Hill, in the Hundred of Odsey.

Rubicon. See Pisatello, the Modern Name.

Rudolfswerd, Rudolphi-verda, a new and very strong City in the Borders of
Carniola, upon the River Gurk; three Miles from the Save to the South, six from
Cell, and five from Carolstadt to the West.

Ruffach, Rubeacum, a small City in the Upper Alsatia, in the Territory of
Mundat, upon the River Rottback: once an Imperial and Free City: but taken by
Turene, in 1675. after a great Defeat of the Imperialists; and now under the
Bishop of Strasburg. It is one of the ancientest Towns in Alsatia; and was for
the rare fertility of its Soil, (for five hundred years) the Seat of some of
the Roman Nobility. Conradus Pellicanus was born in this City. It stands three
Miles from Brisach to the West, and two from Mulhuse to the North.

Ruffec, Rufeacum, Roffiacum, a small Town in the Diocese of Poictiers five or
six Leagues from Angoulesme, in France: pleasantly situated; and honored with
the Title of a Marquisate. Pope Clement V. before his elevation to the
Pontificate presided at a Council here in 1304. There have been others
celebrated at it in other times.

Rugby, a Market Town in Warwickshire, in the Hundred of Knightlow, upon the
River Avon.

Rugen, Rugenlandt, Rugia, an Island in the Baltic Sea, upon the Coast of
Pomerania; which has the Title of a Principality; about seven German Miles
square; but the Sea breaks in and covers a considerable part of the middle of
it from the West, and almost divides it into several Islands. This was caused
by an Outrageous Tempest in 1309. A part of this Island at the same time, which
lay to the South-East as far as the Isle of Ruden (then conjoined with this,)
was torn away; and sunk so deep into the bottom of the Sea, that the greatest
Ships may Sail over it: what remains, affords Corn and Cattle in great plenty;
serving as a granary to the parts adjacent. The best Town in it is Bergen: the
others of note are Sogart, Hick, and Bingst. This Island is able to Arm about
seven thousand Men in case of necessity. About 1066. it was subject to Buthen,
Son of Godescalck King of the Heruli. Christopher II. King of Denmark, in 1322.
subjected it to that Crown. VVratislaus IV. Duke of Pomcrania, in 1325.
becoming Heir of it, by the death of VVizlaus the last Prince, drove out the
Danes and became Master of it: after this the Danes regained the Possession of
it. Erick King of Denmark in 1438. resigned it the second time to the Duke of
Pomerania; and under them it was in 1630. when Gustavus Adolphus began the
German War with the Conquest of this Island. By the Treaty of Munster in 1648.
it was confirmed to the Swedes. In 1678, the Danes attempting to recover it out
of the Hands of the Swedes, received at first a great overthrow; but in a
second attempt in the same year prevailed; and kept the Island till the Peace
of S. Germane, in 1679; by which it was restored to the Swedes, who now have
it. The Christian Faith was first Preached in it by the Monks of Corby in
Saxony; in 875. They built a Chapel here for the Service of God, which was
after abused to the Pagan Idolatry; till VVaidemarus a Dane, (about 1161)
destroyed the Idol they Worshipped, and thereupon they became generally
Christians.

Rugoso, the same with Rubicon. See Pisatello.

Rulia, Rhodope, one of the greatest and best known Mountains in Thrace; out of
which the River Hebrus arises: it stretches from West to East, at this day
little Inhabited; the Turks call it Rulia, that is the Queen of Mountains; the
Italians Argentario, the Greeks Basilissa; it divides Thrace, and ends at the
City of Apo^loma.

Rumelia. See Greece.

Rumford, a Market Town in the County of Essex, in the Hundred of Havering.

Rumney, a Market Town and Corporation in the County of Kent in Sheway Lath,
which returns two Members of Parliament. Also a River in Monmouthshire, falling
into the Severn.

Rumsey, a Market Town in Hampshire, in the Hundred of Kingsomborn, upon the
River Test.

Rupel, Rupera, Rupela, a small River in the Dukedom of Brabant; made by the
Demera Dila, Senna and Neth; which falls into the Scheld at,

Rupelmonde, Rupelmunda, a Town and ancient Castle in Brabant; which has its
name from the last mentioned River; between the Scheld and Rupel; two Miles
from Antwerp to the South. Mercator the great Geographer was born in this Town,
in 1512.

Ruremond. See Roermond.

Russ, Vrsa, a River in Switzerland, which arises from the Alps and Mount S.
Godard; and running Northward by Altorff and the Lake of Lucern, waters the
City of Lucern; and being improved by some smaller Rivers, finally buries it
self in Aa.

Russe, Rusna, a River of the Ducal Prussia, which has been called Chronus. It
arises in Lithuania. where it is called Niemen; and entertaining the Sezara,
and Vilia, it waters the Southern parts of Samogitia: after which it takes
the name of Russe; and at last ends in the Bay of Memel by five Out-lets;
having watered Grodno and Kowna, two considerable Cities of Poland in his
Progress.

Russia, a vast Country in the North-East part of Europe; called by the
Inhabitants Rusz; by the Germans Russandt; by the English Russia and Muscovy;
by the Poles Moskwa and Russenlandt; by the Turks Russ; to the Ancients, known
by no other name than that of Sarmatia Europaea: It is bounded on the North by
the frozen Ocean; on the East it is separated from the Asiatick Tartars, by the
Rivers of Obb and Jaickz; on the South it is divided from the Crim Tartars by
the Tanais Minor, or the Donetz, as it is now called; on the West the Nieper
and Narva divide it from Poland. Its length from North to South is three
hundred and eighty German Miles; its breadth from East to West three hundred of
the same. So that it is by far the greatest Kingdom in Christendom; if it were
equally Civilized, Fertile, and Peopled, as it is not. For the dispatch of
Business and the Management of Affairs, it is divided into forty Provinces; the
names of which, (and of about thirty three Cities, that are to be found in it)
would take more room than this small Work will allow. This Nation in 861. made
an Invasion into Greece; and besieged Michael the Emperor in Constantinople,
but could not take it. The Captives they carried home with them, and made them
partakers of a greater blessing by teaching them the Christian Religion; which
was after this in 866. promoted by B^si^ius the Emperor. In 944. they made a
second attempt upon Constantinople, which miscarried also. In 980. Viodomir
Duke of Russia, (Marrying Anna Daughter to Basilius Emperor of Greece,)
embraced the Christian Religion, and settled it entirely in this Country: from
whence it comes to pass, that they embrace the Tenets, Rites, and Ceremonies of
the Greek Church; and have the utmost Aversion for the Latin Church and
Service. About 1058. Boleslaus King of Poland Conquered Russia; which was
reduced to obedience after a Revolt by another Boleslaus in 1123. In aftertimes
they had frequent Wars with the Poles; who prevailed so far as about 1342 they
entirely Conquered the red Russia; the Nobility of which, (in 1434) were
received into the same state with the Nobility of Poland; allowing them at the
same time the Exercise of the Greek Religion, which they from their first
Conversion to this day follow. They are as well by Interest as Conquest united
to that Crown; and never to be separated from it, but by another Conquest.
About 1205. the black Russia (now called Muscovy) was Invaded by Batton Son of
Ghangius King of the Tartars, who lived to the North-East of this Country: they
oppressed this Nation for many Ages, and so harrassed them, that no account can
be given of the times, when the Reigns of their Princes began or ended. John
XI. was the first who began to enfranchise these Countries from the Servitude
of the Tartars, which they had so long groaned under. John Basilovitz the 4th.
of this Race (who began his Reign very young) in 1540. ended it by the Conquest
of the Tartars and all the petty Princes, which had till then reigned in
several parts of this Empire. This was the cruellest Tyrant that any Age has
produced; and died as wretchedly as he lived, in 1584. Foedor Juanovits his Son
succeeded him at the Age of twenty two years; he was a perfect natural Fool.
There was another Brother called Demetrius of nine years of Age, which had more
sense. But Boris (who managed all this under Foedor) caused Demetrius to be
Murdered. In 1597. Foedor dying suddenly without Children, Boris was Elected;
and soon after Deposed, in favor of a Counterfeit Demetrius brought in by the
Poles: after which followed nothing but Calamities and Confusions; till in
1615. (or as others say in 1612) one Michael Fedrovizt, Son of Foedor Nikitis
(a Kinsman far removed, of John Basilovitz) was chosen by the Body of this
Nation Emperor of Muscovy. This Prince settled this vast Empire; governed it
with more Justice, Clemency, Prudence and Piety than all his Predecessors had
used; and at last died in great Honor July 12. 1645. To him Succeeded Alexius
his Son. The two Princes, which some few years since ascended the Throne
together, are of the same Race.

Red Russia, is a Province under the Crown of Poland; sometimes called the
Proper Russia and Roxolania; it lies extended toward the South, between Poland
(properly so called) and Muscovy. This contains the Palatinates of Russia
(properly so called,) Podolia, Volhinia, Belza, Braslaw, Kiovia, and the
Territory of Chelm: being that part of Russia, which (as I said before) was
Conquered by the Poles; and by Casimir II. in 1342. united for ever to Poland.

White Russia, is a very confiderable Province under the Crown of Poland; and
so called, because it was of old a part of Muscovy or Russia: it is divided
into six Palatinates; which are Novogrod, Miscislaw, Witebsko, Minskie,
Polokie, and Smolenskie. This last Palatinate has been recovered in latter
times by the Russ, and is not now under the Poles.

Russia, properly so called, Russi, Rutheni, is a Province of Poland, and a
part of Red Russia; which has Poland on the West, Volhinia and Podolia on the
East, the Territories of Culm and Belsia on the North, and the Carpathian
Hills, (dividing it from Hungary and Transylvania) to the South: the Capital of
it is Lemburgh. Some give this Province the name of Black Russia.

Rustan, Rustanus Ager, a small Territory in the Province of Bigorre in
Aquitain in France; near the River Arroux and S. Severe.

Ruthen, a Market Town in Denbyshire in Wales. The Capital of its Hundred.

Rutlandshire, Rutlandia, is the least of all the Counties of England. Bounded
on the North by Lincolnshire, on the East and South by Northamptonshire,
(divided from it by the River Weland) and on the West by Leicestershire: its
greatest length is from North to South, not full twelve Miles; from East to
West hardly nine; and its circumference about forty. The Air is temperate,
serene and healthful; the Soil rich, and fruitful in Corn and Pasturage,
especially about the Vale of Catmoss. Woods and pleasant Springs are plentiful
enough; (of the latter, the Weland and the Wash are the principal:) so that it
wants nothing. This County was a part of the Lands possessed by the Coritani,
before the Roman Conquest: and was Conquered by P. Ostorius, in the Reign of
Claudian the Emperor. Afterward it made a part of the Kingdom of Mercia; and
now is in the Diocese of Peterborough. There are but forty eight Parishes, and
two Market Towns in it. Okeham being the Shire Town, and Vppingham the other.
In 1390. Edward Plantagenet, eldest Son of Edmund Duke of York; In 1326,
Richard, second Brother of the said Edward; and in 1450. Edmund Plantagenet.
second Son of Richard Duke of York; (all of the Royal Family) successively were
Earls of this County. But in 1525. Thomas Manors, Lord Roos of Hamlake,
Tresbut, and Belvoir (Descended by the Lady Ann his Mother, from the said
Richard, Duke of York) was Created Earl of Rutland, by Henry VIII. in 1325.
whose Posterity enjoy this Honor to this day. John the twelfth of this Family,
succeeding John his Father, in the year 1679.

Rutuli, an ancient People of Latium in Italy. Ardea was their Capital City.

Ruvo, Rubi, a City in the Province of Bari, in the Kingdom of Naples; which is
a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bari; a small, but spruce and populous
City: about seventeen Miles from Bari to the West. Horace mentions it in his
Satyrs; Inde Rubos fessi pervenimus, etc.

Rye, a member of the Cinque Ports, upon the edge of the County of Sussex,
toward Kent, in Hastings Rape; situated at the fall of the Rother into the
Sea; where it has a convenient Haven, especially for a ready passage to Diepe
in Normandy. It returns two Members to the Lower House of Parliament. The
Fishermen take excellent Herrings here.

S A.
SAada, a City in the Happy Arabia, perhaps of old called Sabatha: it stands in
the inland parts of that Country; three hundred Miles from Aden to the North.
If it is Sabatha, its Long. is 76. 00. Lat. 16. 56.

Saal, Sala, a River in Germany, called by the French, Sale. It arises in
Franconia; over against the Nab and the Mayn; and flowing through Thuringia, it
waters Saalfeld and Jena; then entering Misnia, and passing by Naumburgh,
Mersburgh, and Hall, (and being in this passage swelled by many smaller Rivers)
it falls at last into the Elbe; beneath Bernburgh, in the Upper Saxony; four
Miles from Magdeburgh to the South.

Saan, Savaria, a River of Stiria.

Saare. See Sare.

Saba, supposed to be the same with Meroe in Aethiopia.. One of the Charibye
Islands in America, under the Hollanders, and near S. Christophers, is likewise
called by this name.

Sabaro, Sybaris, a River in Calabria, in the Kingdom of Naples; others call it
Cochile; and say it falls into the Bay of Taranto, near Morano.

Sabaria, a Town of the ancient Pannonia in Hungary, the native place of S.
Martin of Tours. It is not certainly known where it is: some conjecturing it to
be one place, and some another.

Sabini, an ancient People of Latium, in Italy; whose memory is still preserved
in the name of a Province, now in the States of the Church, called Terra
Sabina; which contains a part of the Territory heretofore belonging to them;
the Capital whereof was Cures. There is a Monastery in this Territory honored
with a Bishop's See, under the Title of the Bishop of Sabina: and in the years
1590. 1593. 1595. etc. Synodal Constitutions were published by the (then)
Bishops, bearing the same. It is sufficiently known, how the first Romans under
Romulus procured themselves Wives from this People, their Neighbors.

Sabionetta, Sabuloneta, a strong Town in Lombardy, which has a strong Castle
Garrisoned by Spaniards. It is the Capital of a Sovereign Dukedom; belonging
heretofore to the Caraffa's, and now to the Gusman's, a Spanish Family; between
the Dukedom of Mantoua to the East, and the Territory of Cremena to the West;
twenty five Miles East of Cremona, and fifteen North of Parma.

Sable, Sabolium, a small City in the Province of Maine, upon the River Sarte;
ten Leagues from Angers to the North, and from Man's to the South.

Sablestan, Sablistania, an inland Province in the Kingdom of Persia; toward
the East, in the Mountains; between Chorazan to the North, and Khermon, (or
Caramania) to the South. The Cities of which are Zarans, Bost, and Nebesaet.

Sacae, an ancient People of Scythia, betwixt the Mountain Imaus, and the
Sarmatian Alani; represented by Dionysius Africanus and others, as a wild and
cruel Nation.

Sacania, Laconia, the most Southern Province in the Morea; containing that
part which was anciently under the Lacedaemonians, and Argia. The Capital of
which is Misitra.

Sacay, Sacaia, a City in Japan.

Sacca, Siacca, Saxa, Xacca, a City on the South Shore of Sicily, in the Valley
of Mazara; called by the Ancients, Thermae Selinuntiae. It stands at the foot
of a Mountain; and has an Harbor, twenty two Miles from Mazara to the East,
and forty from Gergenty. Cluverius says, it has an ancient Castle; which is
now carefully upheld and repaired. A Synod was held here in 1579.

Sachsen. See Saxony.

Sadodela, Edus, a River of Liguria in Italy, now in the States of Genoua;
which falls into the Porcevera.

Saffay, Savus, a small River of Barbary; which falls into the Mediterranean
Sea, in the Kingdom of Argier; between Accharara and Metafus.

Sagabria. See Zagabria.

Sagan, Saganum, a City in Silesia, in the Kingdom of Bohemia; the Capital of a
Dukedom of the same name; called by the Germans, Zeigan. It stands upon the
Bober, (where it receives the Queiss) seven German Miles from Glogaw to the
West, and six from Crossen to the North. Now in the Hands of the Emperor, as
King of Bohemia; whose Predecessors in 1548. redeemed to out of the Hands of
the Elector of Saxony; to whom it was Mortgaged together with its Dukedom.

Sagone, a ruined City in the Island of Corsica; which is yet a Bishop's See,
under the Archbishop of Pisa in Italy: the Bishop keeping Residence at a
neighboring Town.

Sagriano, Sagra, a small River in the Farther Calabria.

Saguenay, a River, Town, and Province in New France. The River discharges it
self into the Gulf of S. Lawrence.

Saguntum, a noble and famous City of the ancient Spain; whose memory is
recorded with honor for their fidelity to their Allies the Romans; when
Hannibal desieg'd them nine months together in the year of Rome 535. Choosing,
rather than betray the one, or fall into the Hands of the other, in one vast
fire made in the middle of the City to destroy themselves, their Wives and
Children, with every thing that was dear and valuable to them. Hannibal razed
the place. Which fact of his became the Subject of the second Punick War. Flor.
2. 6.

Sahid, Delta, an Island made by the divided Branches of the Nile, and the
Mediterranean Sea; which is the best part of the Lower Egypt. See Delta.

Saille, or Haute-Saille, Alta Sylva, a Monastery of the Cistercian Order in
the Pais de Vauge, in the Dukedom of Lorain: first established about the year
1140. in the midst of a great high Forest: and therefore called Saille by a
corruption of the word Silva.

Saint, Santo, Santa, Saint, Is a Word frequently put before the Names of
Places, since Christianity prevailed in the World: of which those that are
omitted under their proper Names are as follows.

S. Agatha di Gotti, Agatha, or Fanum Sanctae Agathae, Agathopolis, a City in
the Kingdom of Naples, in the Further Principate; which is a Bishops See, under
the Archbishop of Benevento; nine Miles from Telese to the South, and fourteen
from Capua and Benevento.

S. Aignan or Agnan, a Town of the Dukedom of Berry, in France; which stands at
the reception of the River Saudre by the Cher: adorned with the Title of a
Dukedom and Peerdom now, of an Earldom before; and so called in honor of a
Bishop of Orleans of this name, its tutelar, whose relics they preserve here.
Its more ancient name was Hagand.

S. Alyre, a Town and Abbey in the Province of Auvergne in France, near
Clermont; by which the River Tiretaine passes.

S. Amand, Elno, a Town in the Earldom of Flanders, and Confines of Hainault;
in the Hands of the French, and heretofore very strong, but now dismantled. It
stands upon the River Scharpe, (which a little Lower falls into the Schelde)
four Leagues from Tournay to the South, and three from Valenciennes. The Lands
lying between the Scharpe and the Schelde, are from this place called the Isles
de St. Amand; but its greatest glory is a celebrated Monastery, Abbatia S.
Amandi Elnonensis, where the Saint of that name dyed. This Town was taken by
the French in 1667. The Forest, beginning upon the Frontiers of Flanders and
extending nigh to Valenciennes in Hainault, has the name also of the Forest of
S. Amand.

S. Amor, a small Town in the County of Burgundy, in France, and the Diocese
of Lions. Honored of late with a Collegiate Church.

S. Andero, Andreapolis Antiqua, Flavionavia, a Town and Port in the
Principality of Biscay in Spain: lately advanced to the Dignity of a Bishop's
See. Some place it in the Asturias.

S. Andiol, a Town in the Province of Vivaretz in France, upon the Rhosne;
adorned with diverse Ecclesiastical and Religious Houses, and a College of the
Barnabites. Its ancient name in Latin was, Gento, Gentibo, Gentibus. This of S.
Andiol, and Fanum S. Andeoli, descended upon it by the Martyrdom of S.
Andeolus, a Grecian Subdeacon here, in the Reign of the Emperor Severus, about
the year 190: who with others had been sent to serve the Gauls by S. Polycarp
from the East. It has the Latin name also of Vivariense Monasterium, being
under the Bishop of Viviers.

S. Andre, or Fort de Saint Andre, a strong Citadel in the Duchy of
Guelderland in the Low Countries; situated betwixt the Maze and the VVael,
about two Leagues from Bosteduc. Built in 1599. by Andrew Cardinal of Austria;
and the year after taken by the Dutch, who remain the Masters of it. Only in
1672. the French gained it, and soon after ruined and abandoned it. A Town near
Buda in Hungary, supposed by Bonfinius to be the Quarta decima legio Germanica
of Ptolemy, bears this name also.

Capo di S. Andrea, a Promontory of the Island Cyprus; the same which Pliny
calls Dinaretum.

Capo S. Andrea, a Promontory of the Peloponnesus, in Achaia: the same with the
ancient Antirrhium of Ptolemy and Pliny.

S. Andres, Lavantum, Flavia, a City of Germany, in the Lower Carinthia; which
is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Saltzburgh. It stands upon the River
Lavant, or Lavanthal, (which two Miles Lower falls into the Drove) from which
it has its Latin Name; and it is under the Archbishop of Saltzburgh. This City
stands seven Miles from Indenburgh, and eleven from Clagenfurt to the East
toward Marpurg. The Bishopric was instituted by Eberhard, Bishop of
Saltzburgh, in 1221. who reserved to himself and his Successors the Right of
Electing, Investing, and Swearing the Bishops of it: Therefore they were not
numbered amongst the Bishops of the Empire, nor had any Voice or Place in the
Diet.

S. Angelo, Angelopolis, a City in the Capitanato; which is small, but strong;
five Miles from Manfredonia, and four from the Adriatic Sea.

S. Angelo de Lombardi, Fanum S. Angeli Longobardorum, Angelopolis, a small
City in the further Principate; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Cosenza; from which it stands eight Miles toward Benevento.

S. Angelo in Vado, Fanum S. Angeli in Vado, Tiphernum Metaurum, a small City
in the Dukedom of Vrbino, in the States of the Church; made a Bishops See in
1635. by Pope Urban VIII.

S. Antonin, a Town in Rovergne in France; situated at the Confluence of the
Aveirou and Bonnete, and encompassed with high Mountains. The Huguenots
fortified it in the late Civil Wars. But it was taken from them in 1622.

S. Aubin, Fanum Sancti Albini, a Town in Bretagne in France; five Leagues from
Rennes to the North, and as many from the Borders of Normandy to the South;
upon the River Covesnon. Made famous to all Ages by a Victory here obtained by
Lewis de Fremoville, (General for Charles VIII. King of France) against the
Duke of Bretagne, and his Confederates; in 1488.

S. Augustine, the most Eastern Cape of Africa. Likewise a Promontory in the
Government of Pernambuco in Brasil, in South America; upon which the Portuguese
have built a Fortress, once taken by the Hollanders, but retaken by the
Portuguese. In Latin, Caput Sancti Augustini. A Town and Port in Florida, in
North America, was formerly called by this name too; before the Spaniards took,
and newnamed it S. Matthew.

S. Bartholomew, one of the Charibye Islands in the North Sea, in America:
furnished with a good haven, and yielding the Indian Bread in plenty.

S. Basil, an Abbey in the Province of Champagne, three Leagues from Reims in
France; near Verzi: in which the Council of Reims of the year 991 or 92.
(commonly so called) was assembled; that installed Gerbert in the
Archiepiscopal See of Reims, who became afterward Pope by the name of
Sylvester II.

S. Baume, a famous Rock and Town near S. Maximin in Provence; upon a Mountain,
three Leagues high and ten in extent; betwixt Aix, Marseille and Thoulon. This
Rock is imagined to be the grotto, where S. Mary Magdalen abode many years;
whence Petrarch in verse, and many others of the ingenious, have made elaborate
Descriptions of it. Her body is said to be there yet preserved.

S. Bennet in the Holme, a Village in the County of Norfolk and the Hundred of
Tunsted; not far from Hickling: receiving its name, and probably its beginning
from an ancient Abbey so called, of the Foundation of K Canutus the Dane. An
Abbey, afterward fortified like a Castle with Walls and Bulwarks by the Monks:
one of which betrayed it to William the Conqueror. And tho since decayed and
impoverished, yet the Title of Lord Abbot of S. Bennet is said to remain to
this day to the Bishops of Norwich.

S. Borendon, an Island on the West of the Canaries; supposed to be unacessible
by reason of the Clouds, which perpetually obscure its Coast.

S. Brieu, or S. Brieux, Briocum, Fanum S. Brioci, a City in Bretagne in
France, on its Northern Coast; which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of
Tours, founded or re-established about the year 844. by one of the Dukes of
Bretagne, in the time of Charles the Bald K. of France. The ancient Biducesii,
mentioned by Ptolemy, it is believed, dwelt in this place. It stands betwixt
the Rivers Trieu and Arguenon (of which Ptolemy makes also mention) in a
pleasant fruitful plain, at the foot of a Rock; well built, peopled and
fortified; and having a good Harbor on the British Sea in half a League of it,
with diverse Religious Houses: twenty Miles from Rennes to the North-West. There
was a Synod held at it in 1233.

S. Catherine, an Island in the North Sea, upon the Coast of the Province of
Honduras in New Spain in America: twenty Leagues distant from the Continent.
Formerly under the Spaniards; but the English have twice dispossessed them, and
new named the place the Island of Providence. It has a convenient Port and a
Citadel. Also a Monastery at the foot of the Mountain Horeb (or Sinai) near
the Mountain of S. Catherine, (which makes a part of Sinai) in the Stony
Arabia. The Repository of the Relics of a Saint of the same name; which are
pretended to have been brought by Angels hither from Alexandria in Egypt, after
the martyrdom of her there. The Archbishop of Mount Sinai, who acknowledges no
Patriarch, resides at this Monastery. One of the Greek Emperors built it for
the use of the Caloyers of the Order of S. Basil: and the Ottoman Port savours
it with great privileges.

S. Christopher, one of the Caribbe Islands on the Coast of America: in North
Lat. 17. 25. Seventy five Miles in Circuit; by the Natives heretofore called Ay
ay, and Liamaiga. This Island is planted by French and English. Desnambuck for
the French, and Sir Thomas Warner for the English, taking Possession of it the
same day, in 1625. by mutual agreement of the two Nations. In 1629. Don
Frederick de Toledo had Orders from the Spaniards to force the English and
French out of it, with a Navy of twenty four great Ships. The French retired
for a time; but the English eluded this Storm, by an Accommodation: and the
French returning soon after, resetled here. The English being constantly and
plentifully supplied from London, are in the better Condition: The French were
a long time too much neglected by their Countrymen; which contributed very much
to the forcing them then to submit to the hard usage of the Spaniards. The
English are more in number than the French: The French to Counterbalance this
have four Forts, and the English but two. One of which commands the great
Haven, the other a Descent not far from Point de Sable: and to prevent
differences between the two Nations, each of them have a Guard upon the
Frontiers of their Divisions, which is renewed every day. It is one of the most
delightful Islands in the World; swelling in the midst into high Mountains,
which afford upon the Descents several Stages, planted one above the other: the
higher Plantations enjoying the pleasure of the prospect of the lower. All made
more lovely by rows of Trees always Green, and fair Houses covered with glazed
Slate. The Soil is light and sandy; apt to produce all sorts of Fruits; as
Sugar, Tobacco, Cotton, Ginger, Indico, and the like: it wants not Springs, and
some hot Waters sit for natural Baths. This Island was discovered by
Christopher Columbus, the finder out of the New World; and either called by
this Name to preserve the Memory of his own, or because the Island at a
distance seems to represent the usual Picture of S. Christopher upon a Giants
Shoulders. The English have so increased, that they have sent Colonies from
thence to Barbuda, Monserrat, Antego, and Barbados. The French have built a
Town of good bigness, called le Basse-Terre, by the English Back-starr; and a
College of Jesuits. The Houses of Back starr are of Brick, Freestone, and
Timber; well inhabited by Tradesmen and Merchants: But in a great measure
destroyed by an Earthquake, April 1690. the Earth opening in many places nine
foot. The English have taken all this Island to themselves, in this War, June
and July 1690; under the Command of Capt. Codrington, Capt. Wright, and Sir
Tim. Thornhill.

S. Claude, Fanum Sti. Claudii, a Town in the Franche Cempte in Burgundy,
fortified: in the Borders of la Bresse; formerly called S. Oyen de Joux: it has
a very celebrated Monastery; five Leagues from Geneva to the West, three from
the Rhosne: from this Town the Mountain de Joux is sometime called S. Claude.

S. Clou, Fanum Sancti Clodoaldi, a remarkable Town in the Isle of France; on
the Seyne, over which it has a Stone Bridge; and a magnificent Palace belonging
to the Dukes of Orleans. It stands upon an Hill two Leagues below Paris to the
West. Hen. III. King of France died in this Town, in 1589. of the Wounds he
received from a Friar. It has lately been honored with the Title of a Dukedom,
which is annexed to the Bishopric of Paris.

S. Croce, Stauropolis, an Inland City of Caria, in the Lesser Asia; which is
an Archbishops See, who has a very large Jurisdiction; there being under him
twenty seven Suffragan Bishops.

Sancta Crux, a Town upon the North Coast of the Island of Cuba, in America.

Sancta Cruz, a small but strong City in the Kingdom of Susa, upon the
Atlantic Ocean; built by the Portuguese in 1536. but since taken by the King
of Susa, under whom it is. It is also called Cap d' Aguer.

Sancta Cruz de la Sierra, a small City in the Kingdom of Peru; a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of la Plata; from which it stands one hundred Spanish
Leagues to the East.

S. David's, Menevia, a City and Bishopric in the extreme corner of
Pembrokeshire, in Wales; upon the Irish Sea; and the Promontorium Octapitarum
of the ancients, the same that is now called S. David's Head. Often heretofore
spoiled and ruined by the Danes, Norwegians, and other Pirates. The Cathedral
now standing was the work of Peter the 49th Bishop of S. David's, in 1176. who
dedicated it by the joint names of S. Andrew and S. David: this latter person
being the Founder of the Sea. For he, in the time of the Saxons fury, under
King Arthur, being Archbishop of Caerleon upon Vsk, translated the
Archiepiscopal See of Caerleon to Menew, the ancient name of this City, (whence
the Bishops style themselves Episcopi Menevenses:) so that Menew became an
Archbishopric; and had seven Suffragans under it at S. Augustines coming into
England: it afterward continued so for twenty six Successions: till Sampson, an
Archbishop of it, in the time of a plague transferred the Pall and Dignity to
Dole in Brittany. Whereby his Successors at S. David's lost their Name of
Archbishops. Yet Bernard, B. of S. David's, in 1115. was the first that
submitted himself to the Sea of Canterbury. This Diocese contains the whole
Counties of Pembroke, Cardigan, Caermarthen, Radnor, Brecknock; with some small
parts of Monmouth, Hereford, Montgomery, and Glamorganshires.

S. Dizier, a strong Town in Champagne in France, upon the River Marne; in the
Borders of the Dukedom de la Bar: six Leagues from Bar le Duc to the
North-East, and forty two from Paris to the East. The Capital of the Territory
of Valage, betwixt Joinville and Chalon. Besieged and taken by Charles V. in
1544: and after restored to France by the Peace of Crespy.

S. Domingo de la Calcada, a small Town in Old Castile in Spain, near Najara.

S. Donato, Forum Appium, a Town in the Campagnia di Roma in Italy.

S. Eustacia, one of the Leeward Islands in the West Indies, otherwise called
the Carribys. It was planted by the French: but taken from them by the English
under Sir Tim. Thornhill, and Capt. Wright, July 1690. A very small Island,
with one only Fort is capable of about eighty Men. Near to S. Christophers.

S. Fe, Fanum Sanctae Fidei, a Town in Granada, upon the River Xenil; built by
K. Ferdinando, in 1491. in a Plain; two Leagues from Granada to the West.

S. Fe, a City i^ South America in Paragua, in the Province of la Plata; two
hundred and forty Miles from the City de Buenos Airs to the North.

S. Fe de Bogota, a City of South America, in the Kingdom of New Granada; the
Capital of which it is, and an Archbishops See. It stands upon the River Pati,
by the Lake Guaravita; at the foot of a Mountain called Bogota, (from which it
has its Name:) a vast distance from the Sea every way.

S. Fiorenza, Fanum Sancti Florentii, a Town on the North Coast of the Island
of Corsica, under the Genouese, with a Port and considerable Fortifications.
Understood by some to be the Canelata of Ptolemy.

S. Flour, Floriopolis, Fanum Sancti Flori, a City in the Upper Auvergne; built
on an high Hill, commonly called la Planese; and a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Bourges, ever since 1317. (being then Founded by P. John XXII.)
upon the River Ladir. Twenty Leagues from Clermont to the South, and eight from
le Puy to the West. Some take it to be the Indiacum of the ancients.

S. For, a Town in Aquitain, upon the River Dordogne; in the Province of
Agenois, in the Borders of Perigort; four Leagues from Bergerac to the West.

S. Foy, a Town in the Province of Guyenne in France, upon the Dordogne,
betwixt Bergerao and Libourne. Taken by the Protestants in 1563.

S. Gall, Fanum Sancti Galli, a Town in Switzerland; which has a famous and
rich Benedictine Abbey, of greater Antiquity, and much greater extent and
jurisdiction than the Town; being able to levy above six thousand Men of its
own Subjects. The Abbot is a Prince of the Empire, since the year 1226. It
stands in the Territory of Torgow, betwixt the Cantons of Zurich and Appenzel,
and the Diocese of Constance; and is one of the principal Cantons: one Mile
from the Lake of Constance, and four from Lindaw to the West. Heretofore an
Imperial and Free City, but now exempt. The Abbey owes its Beginning either to
an Irish or Scotch Devote of the name; who preached in the 7th Century the
Gospel in diverse Places in Switzerland, especially in the Territory of Torgaw:
where having refused an Offer of the Bishopric of Constance made to him, he
retired at length to his Solitudes in this place; which became the Seat of an
Abbey from him: enriched since vastly by the Donations of the Kings of France,
and the Emperors. The City stands upon an Eminence; not great, but well built;
and much traded for its fine Linen Works, called Galls or Gawse from it.
Betwixt the Abbey and the City there is a common Gate, fastened by the Burgesses
on the one side and the Abbot on the other. The City anciently did depend in
many things upon the Abbey, as having received its total rise from it: but at
present, they each enjoy their separate Sovereignties.

S. Galmier, a small Town in the County of Foretz, in the Government of
Lionnois: remarked for a Fountain of Allum-Water there.

S. Georgio de Mina, Arx Sancti Georgii, a Castle upon the Cost d'Or in
Guinee, in Africa: betwixt the Cape of three Points and Cape Corso; which has a
Town built by the Portuguese in 1481, and a large and safe Port or Haven;
within a few years past taken by the Dutch.

S. Germain on Lay, Fanum Sancti Germani in Laya, a Town and Royal Castle in
the Isle of France; seated upon an high Hill by the Seine: having two
magnificent Palaces: one new, of the foundation of Henry le Grand; the other
ancient, built by Charles V; continued under the English in the time of their
French Conquests, and repaired by Francis I. King of France: whither the Kings
of France frequently retire. The Court of K. James II. of England and Qu. Mary
his Consort is kept here. It is four Leagues from Paris to the West. Henry II.
King of France, was born here in 1518. Charles IX. in 1550. Lewis XIV. (now
King of France) in 1638, who has added diverse great Ornaments to i^. And it is
no less famous for a Peaco made here in 1679, between the Kings of France and
Sweden, and the Elector of Brandenburgh.

S. Germain Lembrum, a small City in Auvergne, near the River Allier; in the
Tract de Lembrun; two Leagues from Issoire; eight from Clermont to the South,
and the same from S. Flour to the North-East.

S. Germains, a Corporation in the County of Cornwall in East Hundred;
represented by two Burgesses in the House of Commons.

S. Gewer, S. Gower, Fanum. Sancti Goari, a Town upon the Rhine; in the County
of Catzenellobogen; in the Borders of the Bishopric of Trier; four Miles above
Coblentz to the South: which belongs to the Landgrave of Hassia Rhinefeld.

S. Gilles, a Town in the Lower Languedoc in France, one League from the
Rhosne, betwixt Beaucaire and Arles, upon a Rivulet. In Latin, Fanum Sancti
Aegidii, and Palatium Gothorum in some Authors. It has been taken for the
Anatolia of Pliny, and likewise for the Heraclea of the same Pliny and
Antoninus. The Huguenots gave the Roman Catholics a Defeat near it in 1562.

S. Gothard, Adula, the highest part of the Alps; between the Switzers and the
Dukedom of Milan. The French call it S. Godard. Also an Abbey of the Lower
Hungary, upon the River Raab and the Frontiers of Stiria, two Miles from
Kerment: betwixt which and Kerment the Turks received a bloody Defeat in 1664.

S. Hubert, a City and Bishopric in the Dukedom of Luxembourgh.

S. Jago, a City of Africa, in an Island of the same Name; well fortified, and
made a Bishops See by the Portuguese, under whom it is: taken and plundered by
Sir Francis Drake in 1585. This is one of the Islands of Cape Verde. About
forty five Leagues long, ten broad, and ninety five or a hundred in
Circumference. It produces great quantities of Salt.

S. Jago, a City on the South Shore of the Isle of Cuba, which has a safe Port;
and is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of S. Domingo.

S. Jago de Compostella. See Compostella.

S. Jago de Chili, Fanum Sancti Jacobi, a City in South America, at the foot of
the Mountain Andes; built by the Spaniards, by the River Maipus; fifteen
Leagues from the South Sea. Made a Bishops See under the Archbishop of la
Plata. It is the Capital of the Kingdom of Chili.

S. Jago del Estero, the capital City of Tucumania, a Country in South America;
seated upon the River Estero: a hundred and seventy Leagues from Potosi: which
is a Bishop's See, under the Dominion of the Spaniards.

S. Jago de Guatimala, a City of New Spain in North America; which is a Bishops
See, under the Archbishop of Mexico.

S. Jean de Angely, or D'Angery, Angeracum, Ageriacum, Engeriacum, fanum S.
Johannis Angeriaci, a celebrated Town in Saintonge in France; upon the River
Boutonne; two Leagues from the Borders of Poictou, and seven from Saints to
the North. Heretofore very strongly fortified; and in 1562. desended against
the Huguenots: who taking it in a second Attempt, increased its strength by
adding more regular Fortifications to it. In 156^. it surrendered to Charles IX.
by a Siege of two Months, with his loss of ten thousand Men before it: but
falling into the hands of the Huguenots again in 1620. Lewis XIII. dismantled
it in 1621, after he had by sorce of Arms and a Siege taken it from them.

S. Jean de l'Aune or Losne, Fanum S. Johannis Laudonensis, Laudona, a Town in
Burgundy, in France; upon the Saosne, betwixt Auxone and Bellegarde. Famous for
repulsing an Army of the Imperialists in 1636.

S. Jean de Leon, a Town in Burgundy upon the Soane.

S. Jean de Luz, Fanum Sancti Johannis Luisii, or Luisium: a Town of Aquitain
in France, in the Pais des Basques, and the Territory of Labor, with a Port
upon the Ocean, at the Fall of the River Vrdacuri into it: two Miles from the
Borders of Spain. Lewis XIV. now King of France, was Married in this Town in
1660.

S. Jean de Maurienne, Fanum Sancti Johannis Mauriensis, a very considerable,
but unwalled, open City in Savoy; upon the River Arco, in the Valley de
Maurienne, (which is a County); three Leagues from the Borders of the Dauphine
to the South, and ten from Grenoble to the East. This is a Bishops See, under
the Archbishop of Vienne. And the Cathedral shows the Tombs of diverse of the
Dukes of Savoy.

S. Jean Pie de Port, Fanum S Johannis Pede-Portuensis, a very strong Town in
the Lower Navarr; in the Mountains, upon the River Nive, which falls into the
Adoure; eight Leagues from Baionne to the South: This Town is yet in the Hands
of the K. of France, as King of Navarr.

S. John's Point, Isamnium, one of the most Eastern Points of Ireland: in the
Province of Vlster, in the County of Down.

S. Johnston, Fanum Sancti Johannis ad Tavum, the same with Perth.

S. Juan de Puerto Rico, Fanum Sancti Johannis de Portu divite, a City of North
America; in an Island of the same Name, in the North Sea. It stands on the
North side of the Island; has a safe Port and Castle; and is a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of St. Domingo. Taken by the English in 1599; and being
plundered, left to the Spaniards.

S. Juan de Vlva, Fanum Sancti Johannis de Vlva, a triangular Fort in a small
Island in the North Sea; on the Coast of New Spain, over against the Port of
Vera Cruz; erected by the Spaniards for its security and defense. It stands
eighty Miles from Mexico to the East. Vera Cruz was at first called by this
Name; but the Spaniards changed it of latter years.

S. Ives, a Market Town and Corporation in the County of Cornwall, in the
Hundred of Penwith: having a Haven upon the Irish Sea, and the Election of two
Parliament Men. There is a second S. Ives in Huntingtonshire, in the Hundred of
Hurstington; upon the River Ouse, with a fair Stone Bridge over it; which is a
Market Town of good Antiquity. Said to have received this name from a holy
Bishop, Ivo, who labored in the Conversion of the Saxons about the year 600,
and died here. But his Body was removed afterward to Ramsey Abbey.

S. Lawrence, a great River of New France, in North America; taking its Source
toward the Lake des Hurons, and running from West to East, falling into the
North Sea over against Newfound Land: making a great Bay or Gulf there, called
the Gulf of S. Lawrence. See Canada.

S. Leo, Fanum Sancti Leonis. The same with Monfeltro.

S. Leonhart, a Town in the Lower Carinthia, in the Valley of Lavanthal; near
the River Lavant, in the Borders of Stiria; two Miles from S. Andre, a City of
Carinthia. This Town is under the Bishop of Bamberg.

S. Licer, or S. Lizier. See Conserans.

S. Lucar de Barameda, Fanum Sancti Lucae Luciferi, a City in Andaluzia in
Spain; called by the French, S. Lurques. Some will have it to be the Lux Dubia
of Strabo. It has three Castles; and a large and safe Port at the Mouth of the
River Guadalquivir, upon the Atlantic Ocean.

S. Lucia, or Alouzia, one of the Charibye Islands in America; under the French.

S. Macaire, a Town in the Province of Guyenne in France, upon the Garonne: ten
Leagues from Bourdeaux, and thirty from the Ocean; which rises no further than
to this Town.

S. Maixent, a Town in the Province of Poictou in France, upon the River Seure
Niortoise; which has an ancient Abbey: noted for a Council held at it against
Berengarius in 1073 and another in 1075. The Emperor Lewis the Debonnaire
repaired this Abbey in his time.

S. Malo, Maclovipolis, Aletha, Maclovia, Maclopolis, Maclovium, a City in
Bretagne in France; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tou^s;
seated in a small Island called S. Aron, but very little removed from the
Continent; to which it is joined by a Bridge. It grew up out of the Ruins of
Aletha. Though its Circuit is not great, yet it is well peopled, rich, strong;
and by reason of the goodness of the Haven much frequented. It stands four
Leagues from Dole to the South-West, and fourteen from Rennes to the North.
Fortified and well Garrisoned, in consideration that its great importance
renders it one of the Keys of the Kingdom. James Cartier, the French Discoverer
of Canada in America, was a Native of this City. A Synod was held here in 1618.

S. Mango, a Town in the ` Hither Principate, in the Kingdom of Naples in
Italy: bearing the Title of a Principality.

S. Marco, Argentanum, Fanum Sancti Marci, a small City in the Kingdom of
Naples, in the Hither Calabria; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Cosenza; but exempt from his Jurisdiction. It stands ten Miles from the
Tyrrhenian Sea, and sixteen from Cosenza to the North. There is a Town of this
name in the Island of Sicily: the same with the Calacta of the Ancients.

S. Margarita, Gorgon, an Island of the Tyrrhenian Sea, under the Grand Duke of
Tuscany: betwixt the Province of Toscana and the Island of Corsica. Called also
by the Italians La Gorgona.

S. Marie, an Island in the Aethiopick Ocean, toward the Bay of Anthongil and
the Eastern Coast of the Island of Madagascar: at the distance of two Leagues
from the latter; where the French have planted ten or twelve Villages. It is
eighteen Leagues in length, three in breadth; fruitful in Rice, Sugar, Gums,
Tobacco, Fruits, and Cattle: White Coral and Ambergrease are found here. The
Climate continually rainy. The Natives repute themselves to be of the Line of
Abraham; calling the Island in their Language, The Island of Abraham.

Les Saints Mary's, Delphicum Templum, a small Town at the Mouth of the Rhosne
in Provence, in France: Honored heretofore with a Temple built by the
Marseillians, in honor of Apollo Delphicus: and said to be the Place, where
the Vessel came safe a-shoar, with Lazarus, St. Mary Magdalen, Mary the Mother
of James, and others, which the Jews exposed to Sea to the mercy of the Winds
and Storms, without Sails or Oars. And that the Bodies of the St. Mary's were
found hidden here in 1448.

S. Maria di Leuca, a City and Bishops See in the Terra di Otranto in the
Kingdom of Naples.

Sancta Maria, Pandataria, an Island in the Tyrrhenian Sea; upon the Coast of
Terra di Lavoro (a Province of the Kingdom of Naples), thirty Miles from
Puteoli. It is small, desolate, and uncultivated. Agrippina, the Mother of
Caligula the Roman Emperor, was banished into this wretched Place by Tiberius
the Emperor; according to the Roman Custom.

S. Maria de Finis terre, Artabarnm, a Promontory in Gallicia, which is the
most North-Western Cape of Spain; called by the Spaniards, El Cabo de Finis
terre; by the French, Le Cap de Fine terre. It has the name of S. Mary also
from a near Town, which stands ten Leagues from Compostella to the West.

S. Marino, Marinum, Mons Titanus, Fanum Sanctae Mariae, Acer Mons, a City in
the Dukedom of Vrbino, in Romandiola; scarce four Leagues from the River
Rimini, twenty two from Pesaro to the West, and five from S. Leo to the
South-East: which is the Capital of a small Republic. ( Republichetta, the
Italians call it) of the same name: established in the year 600, and containing
about six thousand People: who bought the Fortress of Pennarosta in the year
1000; the Castle of Casolo in 1170; and in 1463 received four other Castles
with the Town of Piagge by Donation, from Pope Pius II. This City stands upon a
high Hill, well fortified; under the Government of two Military Officers, whom
they change in every year twice. There is likewise in the Montouan and the
Modenese, in Italy, two Towns of this name; each adorned with the Title of an
Earldom: a Fortress in the Province of Toscana near Florence, and a little
Principality in S. Peter's Patrimony. Not to omit the Island, S. Marino de Vaz,
near the Cape of Good Hope, upon the Coast of Africa: so called by the
Portuguese: an uninhabited Place, almost wholly covered with Mountains. Nor the
Charriby Island in America; which first the Spaniards possessed, and was
afterward divided betwixt the French and Dutch.

Sancta Martha, Fanum Sanctae Marthae, a City in the Terra Firma, (a Province
of South America) on the Shore of the North Sea; which has an Haven, and a
Castle in the Hands of the Spaniards: Also a Bishops See, under the Archbishop
of S. Fe de Bogota. It has been taken and plundered both by the English and
Hollanders; and therefore not much peopled. Yet it is the capital City of S.
Martha, a Province in Castile D'or in South America, of the same name. The
Province abounds in Oranges, Citrons, Pomegranates, Vines, Maze, Mines of Gold,
Precious Stones, etc. Partly under the Spaniards, and partly under a Race of
unconquered Natives; who with Kings of their own make vigorous opposition to
the Spaniards. It has some Mountains in it covered with Snow, though the
Maritime Parts are hot. The City stands with a large Port upon the North Sea;
honored with the Residence of the Governor of the Province. In 1595. Sir
Francis Drake set fire to it. In 1630. the General of the Dutch West India
Company took it: but the Spaniards ransomed it again. The French have had their
turns likewise of pillaging of this City. The Mountain, Sierras Nevadas, in
Castile D'or, passes also by this name.

Sancta Maura, Leucadia, Leucas, Neritum, an Island in the Ionian Sea, on the
Coast of Epirus; to which it is joined by a Timber Bridge; nine Miles from
Cephalonia. It has a City of the same Name; very strong, seated on the East
side, in the middle of the Channel; where it is a League over. This Town is a
mere Nest of Pirates: which though they live in the Turkish Territories, are yet
by their own Masters persecuted for this infamous Trade: the Bassa of the Morea
making a Voyage thither to burn their Galliots, as Mr. Wheeler acquaints us.
There belongs to it an Aquaduct, which now serves instead of a Bridge, to those
that go on Foot to this Place. It is not at the top above a Yard broad, and
about a Mile long; and so very high, that if two should meet upon it, their
Lives would be endangered; there being no Stairs, and scarce room to pass. This
City has about six thousand Inhabitants, Greeks, Christians, and Turks. It is
also a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Lepanto. The Island was under the
State of Venice, till Mahomet II. took it from them. In 1684. the Venetians
under Morosini retook it. It is fruit ul in Corn, Oranges, Limons, and Almonds;
its Pasturage very good; and though about forty Miles in compass, yet has it
not above thirty poor Villages, inhabited by such as Till the Ground, and Fish.
So that the Bishop has apparently a small Revenue.

S. Maximin, a Town of Provence, in the Diocese of Aix; in which Charles II.
King of France, in the thirteenth Century, founded a famous Monastery of the
Dominicans. It was also adorned with a College in 1476. The common Opinion, as
to its ancient Name, speaks it to be Villa Lata.

S. Menehould, Fanum Sancti Menehildis, a Town in Champagne, in the Territory
of Argonne, (the Capital of which it is) upon the River Aisne; nine Leagues
from Chaalons to the East, and the same distance from Virdun: it has a strong
Castle built on an Hill: taken twice within the compass of a few years.

S. Michael, the chief Town in Barbados, at the bottom of Carlisle Bay, in the
South part of the Island; which has an Harbor able to secure five hundred
Vessels at once. This Town is long, containing several Streets, and beautified
by many well built Houses. Also very populous; being the Seat of the Governor,
(or his Deputy) and of the Courts of Justice for the whole Island; the Scale of
their Trade, where most of the Merchants and Factors have their Houses and
Storehouses; from whence the Inhabitants are supplied with the English
Commodities, by way of Exchange; yet is the Town liable to be floated by the
Spring Tides, and by that means made unhealthful. For its defense it has two
strong Forts, with a Platform in the middle; which command the Road, and are
well stored with Cannon.

Mount S. Michel, Mons Sancti Michaelis in periculo Maris, a Town built with
great art upon an inaccessible Rock in the Sea; between Bretagne and Normandy;
whence came the first Institution of the Knights of the Order of S. Michel. It
belongs to Normandy, and is seated at the Mouth of the River Lers; at a low
Water it may be approached by Land; besides the Castle, it has an Abbey and a
Church built by Aubert (Bishop of Auranches) in 706, in the Reign of
Childebert, King of France. The Rock had been chosen for a Retreat by Hermites
in the times foregoing. This Town stands four Leagues from Auranches to the
West, and the same distance from S. Malo to the East. The Sand here is good for
making of Salt. In Mounts Bay in the County of Cornwall, there is of this name a
Hill, called S. Michael's Mount; separated by a sandy Plain from the Main Land;
but at Ebb water accessible on foot. This Mount rises to a good height, and
bears an old Fort upon the top of it.

Ilha de S. Miguel, one of the Tercera Islands in the Atlantic Ocean, under
the Portugueze; betwixt Tercera to the North and S. Maria to the South. The
principal Settlements in it are S. Antonio; Villa Franca, and Punta del gada.
The Venetians are Masters of an Island of the same name upon the Coast of
Dalmatia, near Zara, in the Adriatic; which they call, Isold di san Michele:
others, Vgliana. There is a third, Isla de S. Miguel, in the East Indian Ocean;
betwixt Calamianes or Paragoia to the North, and Borneo to the South.

S. Miguel, Fanum Sancti Michelis, Michaelopolis, a City of South America, in
the Kingdom of Peru, and Presecture of Quitoa; seated in the Valley of Piura;
twelve Miles from the South Sea. The first Colony the Spaniards settled in this
Province. The Indians used to call it Chila. There is a Town of the same Name
in New Spain, in the Province of Guatimala; at the Mouth of the River Lempa;
sixty Miles from Guatimala to the East. Another in New Granada. A fourth called
S. Miguel del Estero, in Tucumania; twenty eight Leagues from San Jago del
Estero; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of la Plata.

S. Mihel, a City in Lorain, upon the Maes; in the Dukedom of Bar; between Toul
to the South, and Verdun to the North.

S. Miniato al Tedesco, Miniatum Teutonis, a City of Hetruria, in the Dukedom
of Florence; built upon an Hill by the River Arno; between Florence to the
East, and Pisa to the West; twenty Miles from either. Heretofore a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Florence.

S. Morris, a Town in the County of Vallesia.

S. Neots, or S. Needs, a Market Town in the County of Huntingd. in the Hundred
of Toseland: Deriving its Name from a learned Monk of Glastenbury, called
Neotus; whose Body being translated hither from S. Neots or Neotstoke in
Cornwall, the Palace of Earl Elfride in this Town was in honor thereof
converted into a Monastery.

S. Nicolas, Fanum Sancti Nicolai, a pleasant Town upon the Meurte in Lorain;
two Leagues above Nancy to the South; much addicted to the Honor of S. Nicolas
Bishop of Myra, whose Relics it reserves. There is another Town of the same
Name in Flanders, three Miles from Antwerp toward Gant; from which it stands
five Miles.

S. Nicolas, a City of Moscovy, upon the White Sea; on the Western Shore of the
River Dwina, over against Archangel, from which it stands ten German Miles to
the North-West. A Place of so considerable a Trade, that the White Sea is from
it frequently called the Bay of S. Nicolas; into which the Dwina falls.

S. Omers, Audomarensis Vrbs, a City in Artois; heretofore called the Abbey of
Sithieu; upon the River Aa, which beneath Gravelin falls into the British Sea;
eight Miles from Bologne to the East, three from Arras to the North, six from
Dunkirk to the South-East, and five from Gravelin to the East. It has this Name
from Audomarus, a holy Bishop, who died here in 695. Made a Bishops See, under
the Archbishop of Cambray, (in 1559.) in the stead of Terouanne, a ruined City,
which stands three Miles from it to the North. Fulco, Abbot of S. Bartin, began
to wall it about the year 880. Baldwin II. Earl of Flanders, perfected that
Work in 902 There was a Council held here in 1099, under Robert Earl of
Flanders; and another in 1583. About 1595, Philip II. King of Spain, sounded
here a College for English Jesuits, to which he gave a good Annuity. That House
has since purchased Watton Cloister; a pleasant Place belonging before to the
Benedictines, two Leagues from S. Omers; which is worth five hundred pounds a
year. In 1639, the French besieged this Place without any good success* But in
1677, the Spanish Forces being much weakened after the Battle of Cassel, they
took it; and by the Treaty of Nimeguen in 1678, it was yielded to them. Long.
23. 22. Lat. 50. 47. It is a handsome, large City, strongly sortified; near a
great Lake, with the River and a Marsh on one side of it, and a Castle and
Fosses on the other.

S. Palais, Fanum S. Palatii, the capital Town of the Lower Navarre, under the
French: situated upon the River Bidouss^, near Grammont.

S. Papoul, Fanum Papuli, a small City in Languedoc; which is a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Tolouse, by the Institution of Pope John XXII: who
changed its ancient Monastery, that had been sounded about the end of the
eighteenth Contury, into a Cathedral in the year 1317. Five Leagues from
Carcassone to the South-West, and nine from Tolouse.

S. Paul de Leon. See Leon, or Leondoul.

S. Paul de Trois Chasteaux, Augusta Tricastinorum, Sancti Pauli Tricastinorum
Civitas, an ancient City; ascribed by Pliny to Gallia Narbonensis, now in the
Dauphine; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Arles. but formerly of
Vienne. It is a flourishing Town, built upon an advanced Cliff; one Mile from
the Rhosne; four from Montelimart to the South, and from Oranges to the North.
The Huguenots had the possession of it near fifty years in the last Age, till
1599. It is the Capital of the Territory, called Tricastin; which preserves the
name of the ancient People, Tricastini, mentioned by Ptolemy.

S. Pierre le Moutier, Monasterium Sancti Petri, a Town in the Province of
Nivernois; in which the Law-Courts of that Province are fixed. It stands
between Nevers to the North, and Moulins to the South; seven Leagues from
either.

S. Pons de Tomiers, Tomeria or Pontiopolis, Sancti Pontii Tomeriarum Vrbs, a
City of Languedoc; which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Narbonne;
from whence it stands eight Leagues to the North, and a little more from Alby
to the North-West. It is a small City, seated amongst the Mountains, not much
peopled; and honored with this Bishops See by Pope John XXII. in 1318: who at
the same time changed its Benedictine Abbey, that had been founded in the year
936. by Raymond, surnamed Pons ( Pontius) Earl of Tolouse, into a Cathedral:
The Bishop is Lord of the Place.

S. Quintin, Augusta Nova Veromanduorum, Quinctinopolis, Samarobrina, Quintini
Fanum, a City of Picardy upon the River Sum (or rather between it and the
Oyse); which sprung out of a Roman Town called Augusta Nova, etc. two Miles
from this Place. It stands six Leagues from Peronne to the North-East, and
seven from Cambray to the South. Taken by the Spaniards in 1557, after a great
Defeat of the French Forces upon S. Quintin's day, Aug. 10: and restored by the
Treaty of Cambray, in 1559. The French sometimes write it S. Quentin. It is the
Capital of the County of Vermandois in Picardy; has been honored with the
Sessions of French Synods in the years 1235. 1237. and 1271. and now contains
diverse Monasteries and Churches, besides a Collegiate Church.

S. Semi, a small Town in Provence, four Leagues from Arles: adorned with a
Collegiate Church of the Foundation of Pope John XXII. about the year 1330. Its
ancient Name was Glanum. There are Urns, Medals, and Inscriptions frequently
discovered here, which prove its Antiquity, And near it, a triumphal Arch, with
a stately Mausoleum illustrated with Trophies, is observed with admiration.

S. Semo, Fanum S. Remuli or Remigii, a Sea-Town upon the Coasts of Genoua in
Italy: in a fruitful Country for Oranges, Citrons, and Olives.

Santa Saba, so called by the Italians; or the Province of Arcegovina; lies
between Dalmatia, Bossinia, and the Quarter of Montenegro; seventy Miles long,
thirty broad; inhabited by about fifty thousand Families, of which the Turks
make not the tenth part. Castlenovo stands in this Province. The Inhabitants
were very forward to put themselves under the Protection of the Venetians, in
1688.

S. Salvador, Soteropolis, the Capital City of the Kingdom of Congo in Africa;
seated one hundred and forty Miles to the East from the Ocean, and sixty from
the River Zaire to the South. The Inhabitants call it Banza; but the devout
Portuguese gave it this Name.

S. Salvador, Soteropolis, a City in South America; which is the Capital of
Brasil, an Archbishops See; the Seat of the Viceroy, and of the Courts of
Justice for that Kingdom. It stands on the Eastern Shore of Brasil; has a
capacious Harbor on the Ocean; strongly fortified; and defended by three Forts;
yet the Hollanders took this City in 1624. The year following, the Portuguese
recovered it, and are at this day in the Possession of it. The Archbishops See
was erected in 1676, by Pope Innocent XI.

San Salva^o^, a ^^^ll City in North America, in the Province of Gua^i^^ala;
called by the Natives Cuzcatlan. It stands ^orty Miles from S. Jago to the
North-East, by a small Lake.

S. Sebastian, Fanum Sancti Sebasliani, a City of great strength, seated at the
foot of an Hill, on the Shoars of the Ocean; at the Mouth of the River Orio, in
the Province of Guipusc^a in Spain; not above three Leagues from the Borders of
Gallicia to the West, twelve from Bayonne to the West, and the same distance
from Pampelona to the North.

S. Sehastian, a City in Brasil in America; which is a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of S. Salvador; and the Capital of a Province; it has also a large
Haven secured by two Forts: in the Hands of the Portuguese.

S. Sever, Severopolis, a City of France; which is the Capital of Gascoigne,
properly so called; upon the River Adour; six Miles beneath Air to the West,
eight above Dax to the East, and twenty three from Bourdeaux to the South.

San Severo, a small City in the Kingdom of Naples; which is a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Manfredonia; but exempt from his Jurisdiction. It
stands in the Capitanate in a Plain; eleven Miles from the Adriatic Sea to the
South, and twenty four from Manfredonia to the West. This Bishopric was settled
here by Pope Gregory XIII. it being a flourishing populous City.

S. Severina, Siberina, a City in the further Calabria in the Kingdom of
Naples; which is but small, yet an Archbishops See. It stands upon a steep Rock
by the River Neeto; ten Miles from the Ionian Sea, twelve from Crotone, and
forty from Cosenza.

San Severino, Septempeda, a City in the Marquisate of Anconitana; which is a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Fermo. It is small, tho of great
Antiquity. In 543. Septempeda, the Roman Town, was burnt by the Goths. In 1498.
there was a Castle built, which in time, and by degrees, produced this City: in
1598, first made a Bishops See by Pope Sixtus the Fifth. It is built by the
River Potenza; six Leagues from Tolentino to the West, and sixteen from
Macerata to the South-West.

S. Simon, a Town in the County of Vermandois in Picardy* upon the River Sum,
betwixt S. Quentin and Ham; Honored with the Title of a Dukedom, and giving
name to an ancient Family there.

S. Thierry, an Abbey near Reims, in the Province of Champaigne: founded about
the year 525; and after being ruined by the Saracens, repaired again in the
ninth Century. A Council was held at it in 953.

S. Thomaso, Melange, a City of the hither East Indies, called by the Natives
Maliapur. It is a City of Coromandel, on the Bay of Bengala; two hundred Miles
from the Island of Zeilan or Ceilan to the North. This Town which has been a
long time in the Hands of the Portuguese, had the Name of S. Thomas given it by
them. In 1671. the French took it: but two Years after they were forced to
leave it, and the Portuguese recovered their Possession.

S. Thomas, is an Island of a considerable bigness in the Atlantic Ocean; said
to be thirty Spanish Leagues in compass, or one hundred and thirty English
Miles round. It was found by the Portuguese the twenty third of December (being
S. Thomas's day) and therefore so called, in 1405. When they thus found it, it
was one continued Forest, never before inhabited by men. The Portuguese have
tamed those (till then) untouched Forests, and since well peopled it: The
Negroes live longer, and thrive better than their Masters; some of which have
died here at an hundred and ten years of Age. The Air is excessive hot; so that
no Wheat will come to any perfectior* nor any Stone-Fruit, Sugar Canes thrive
excessively; forty Ship Loads have been brought from thence in one Year. In the
midst there is a Mountain, always shadowed with Clouds, and covered with Trees,
which occasions those Dews which nourish the Sugar Canes in the hottest
Seasons. The principal City is called Pavoasan, or S. Thomas, built of Wood;
yet adorned with the Title of a Bishops See, and a strong Citadel; and makes
about seven hundred Portuguese Families. This Island was taken by the
Hollanders in 1599, and abandoned: and again in 1641. But then the Portuguese
having used all fair means to recover it the second time in vain, they entered
it with their Swords; and by sorce of Arms recovered what was their just Right.
This Island lies exactly under the Line, in Long. 27. one hundred and eighty
Miles from the Coast of Africa, in nigh a Circular Figure.

S. Trinidad de Buenos Airs, Fanum Sanctae Trinitatis, a City of South
America, in the Province of Paragua; and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of
La Plata; the Seat of the Courts of Justice of La Plata; a celebrated Seaport,
and Emporium, seated on the South side of the River of Plate, where it enters
the Ocean. The Spaniards (under whom it is) have added Buenos Airs, Good Air,
to its Name, to show its greatest Excellence.

S. Tropez, Fanum Sancti Torpetis, a small but very strong City of Provence in
France: which has a Seaport or Haven upon the Mediterranean Sea; five Leagues
from Frejus or Fregiu to the South, and twelve from Toulon to the East.

S. Truyen, or S. Tron, as the French call it; Fanum Sancti Trudonis; a Town in
the Bishopric of Liege, in the Borders of Brabant; the Capital of the County
of Hasbain or Haspengow; five German Miles from Maestricht to the West, and
from Liege to the East. It was walled, but dismantled in 1673.

S. Venant, Fanum Sancti Venantii, a Town in Artois in the Low Countries;
seated upon the River Lise, two Leagues from Arras: formerly a Place of great
strength; but now neglected by the French, who have possessed it ever since
1659.

S. Veit, Candocilla, Fanum Sancti Viti, a City of Carinthia; at the
Conjunction of the Wiltz, and the Glac; two German Miles from Glagenfurt toward
Girkaw; built in a very fruitful Valley.

S. Veit am-Flaum, Fanum Sancti Viti F^omoniensis, a strong Town in Carniola;
which has a Castle and an Haven on the Gulf of Venice; in the Borders of
Croatia; in subjection to the Emperor.

Saints, or Saints, Mediolanum Santonum, Santona, Santones, Vrbs Santonica,
a City in Aquitain: the Capital of the Province of Saintonge, and a Bishops
See, under the Archbishop of Bourdeaux. It stands upon the River Charente;
twenty Leagues from Bourdeaux to the North, eleven from Rochelle to the
South-East. Great, but not equally rich and populous. This City was in the
times of the Romans built upon an Hill; where there appears the Ruins of a
Roman Theater, and many other Antiquities: this first Pile being ruined by the
Goths, Franks, and other Barbarous Nations; the present was built nearer the
River, and in a lower Ground. In the times of the Civil Wars of France in the
last Age, this City had also a great share; the Hugonots for a long time being
Masters of it. It has now diverse religious Houses. In 563. a Council here
deposed Emeritus Bishop of the Place, for having entered upon the Sea by the
Regal Authority, against the Consent of the Metropolitan and the Bishops of the
Province: which Decree drew upon the Authors of it a fevere Pr^secution from
the Crown.

Saintonge, or Xaintonge, Santonia, a great and fruitful Province of France:
bounded on the North by Poictou, on the East by Angoumois, on the South by the
Garonne, (which separates it from Guienne,) and on the West by the Bay of
Aquitain. This was the Seat of the Santones, an ancient Nation of the Galls:
its Capital is Saints: the other Cities of Note are Brouges, S. Jean de
Angely, and Taillebourg. The Rivers Garonne; Charante, Seudre, etc. water it.
They make great quantities of Salt in this Province. The Romans had their
Colonies in it: who often deride the short Cloaks or Gowns worn by the ancient
Gauls here; as Martial, Gallia Santonico vestit te Bardocucullo:
Cercopithecorum penula nuper erat. The same habit toward the Sea Coasts, is in
use with the common People to this day. This Province fell to the Crown of
England, together with Gascoigne, Guienne, etc. by the Marriage of Eleanor of
Guienne with K. Henry II. of England.

Sala, the same with Saal.

Salado, Salsum, a River of Spain: in Anddlusia, called Guadajox; which between
Sivil and Corduba falls into the Guadalquivir.

Salamanca, Salmantica, a City in Spain; called Vrbs Vettonum by Ptolemy, and
perhaps the same with Polybius his Elmantica; it stands in the Kingdom of Leon,
upon the River Tormes; a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Compostella; and
an University, founded by Alfonsus IX. King of Leon, in the year 1200, which is
one of the most considerable in that Kingdom, adorned with noble Schools and a
large Library. About ten Leagues from Zamora to the South, fourteen from the
Borders of Portugal to the East, and two and twenty from Valladolid to the
South-West: upon several Hills, in a very unequal Situation; of a small
circuit, ill built, worse repaired: most of the Houses being falling down; and
besides its Churches, Monasteries, and Colleges, has nothing that deserves
Regard. Long. 14. 45. Lat. 41. 15.

Salamis, Salamine, an ancient Archiepiscopal City in the Island of Cyprus:
which boasted of the honor of having its Church founded by the Apostle S.
Barnabas; whose Body was discovered to lie here, in 485. It afterward took the
name of il Porto Costanzo or Constantia. The Philosopher Anaxarchus suffered in
this City the pounding to death in a mortar, by the order of Nicocreon King of
Cyprus, with a singular constancy. It is now utterly ruined.

Salamis, an Island. See Coluri.

Sa^andra, Salandrilla, or A^alandra, a River in the Basilicate in the Kingdom
of Naples; passing by Risetto (and thence called also Piume di Rosetto) to the
gulf of Taranto.

Salawar, Zalawar, or Zalad, a County in the Lower Hungary, upon the Borders of
Stiria: with the Drove to the South, and the County of Vesprin to the North.
Kanisa stands in this County* upon the River Sala. But the Capital Town of it
bears the same name of Salawar.

Sale, Sala, a City ascribed in ancient time by Ptolemy to Mauritania
Tingitana; seated at the Mouth of a River of the same Name; on the Shoars of
the Kingdom of Fez, on the Atlantic Ocean. A place of great Trade, and has a
noble Habor; but it is an infamous Nest of Pirat^. It was heretofore a
Commonwealth; now under the King of Fez, who is Master of the Castle. It
stands one hundred Miles from Fez to the West, and Tangier to the South.
Almanesor one of the Moorish Kings much beautified it, and was after buried in
it. The Spaniards took it in 1287; who lost it in ten days again: in 1632. King
Charles I. sent a Fleet against this City; which blocked it up by Sea, whilst
the King of Morocco besieged it by Land; and by this means brought it under:
the Works being levelled and those Rogues Executed; for which King Charles had
three hundred Christian Captives sent him as a Recompense, a Reward worthy of
that Holy King. Long. 6. 40. Lat. 33. 50.

Sale, the same with Saal.

Sale, Sala, a River in Quercy, a Province of France.

Sale, Sala, a Province of the Kingdom of Bosnia.

Salefica, Saleucia, a City in Cilicia, in the Lesser Asia; which is a Bishops
See, under the Patriarch of Antioch. It stands seventy Miles from Tarsus to the
West, and twelve from the Shoars of the Mediterranean Sea to the North: called
by Niger, Seleschia. Long. 64. Lat. 38. 40.

Salentini, the ancient Inhabitants of Terra di Otranto, in the Kingdom of
Naples; in the Roman times.

Salerno, Salernum, Salerna, a City in the Kingdom of Naples, which was a Roman
City and Colony; called by Strabo and Livy, Vrbs Picentinorum. Now an
Archbishops See, a Principality, and the Capital of the Hither Principato. It
stands upon the River Busanola; upon the Shoars of the Tyrrhenian Sea, upon
which it has a Bay called by its own Name, and a safe and large Haven; twenty
four Miles from Naples to the South-East, and thirty from Benevento to the
South. Long. 38. 44. Lat. 40. 33. This Archbishopric was founded by Pope
Boniface VII. in 974. The Body of S. Matthew the Apostle is said to be in this
Place. Pope Gregory VII. died here in 1085. It has a Castle and many
Antiquities, which are the Remainders of the Roman Works. When Naples had
distinct Kings, the Title of this place belonged to the eldest Son of that
Kingdom. In the years 1615. and 1579. there were two small Councils held at it.

Salettes, a Carthusian Nunnery of great note and quality, upon the frontiers
of Dauphine in France; toward la Bresse.

Salfe^^d, an Abbey in Thuringia in Germany.

Salii, an ancient People of Provence in France: who, as we find in Strabo,
Mela, etc. extended themselves from about Aix as far as to Nice. There was
another Nation of the Salii, in the Tract now called Sallant from them, in
Overyssel in the Low Countries.

Saline, Didyme, one of the Liparee Islands, belonging to Sicily; twelve Miles
in circuit, and fruitful in Alum. Near this place the Dutch received a great
Defeat from the French at Sea, in 1676. Baudrand. The Italians call it Didimo.

Salino, Suinus, a River in the Kingdom of Naples; which springs out of the
Ap^^hine; and ^inning through the Further Abruzzo, watering Penn^, (a City of
that Province) and Pescara, falls into the Gulf of Venice.

Salingstede, Salin^stadium, a Town in Franconia upon the Maine; four Miles
above Franck fort to the East. By Charles the Great made a Bishap's See; but in
780, this Chair was removed to Hailb^une. It was then a very great City: since
become subject to the Bishop of Mentz.

Salins, Salinae, a strong City in the Franche Comte, upon the River Forica;
eight Loagues from Dole to the East, and fifty eight from Geneva to the North.
It is seated in a fruitful Valley (betwixt two Mountains) called Scoding; which
has been the reason, why this City in the Latin Writers of the middle Ages is
called Sc^dingum; there belong to it two Castles and several Salt-Springs,
which are boiled up to an excellent white Salt. This City was taken by the
French in 1668, and again in 1674: ever since which last Date, it has continued
in their Hands, by the peace of Nimeguen. It has four Parishes and diverse
religious Houses.

Sall, Sala, a Town in Westmannia in Sweden; between Vpland and Nericia; five
Swedish Miles from Vpsal to the W. which has been much celebrated on the
account of some silver Mines it had heretofore.

Sallant, Sallandia, that is, the Land of the Salii; a considerable part of the
Province of Overyssel; and one of the three parts of that Province; toward the
Yssel and Zuider Sea: in which are the Towns of Deventer, Zwol, Campen and
Steenwick.

Salisbury. See Sarisbury.

Salme, Salmona, a small Town in Lorain; the Capital of a Territory, called the
Principality of Salme; which ever since 1460, has belonged to a Branch of the
Family of the Rhine-graves. It lies in the Borders of Alsatia, within Mount
Vauge; twenty Miles from Nancy to the East.

Salnich, Celidnus, a River which in Pliny's time was the Southern Boundary of
Macedonia: it falls into the Adriatic Sea, on the North side of the Crosfo
della Valona in the Kingdom of Albania; over against Ot ranto in Italy.

Salo. See Xalon.

Salon, Salum, a Town in Provence in France, betwixt Aix and Arles; which has
the honor of a Collegiate Church, and diverse religious Houses. Being the more
remarkable also for giving birth to the two famous Michael and Caesar
Nostradamus's.

Salona, a City of Dalmatia; formerly a place of great Esteem, and a Bishops
See, under the Archbishop of Spalatro. The Emperor Dioclesian retreated hither,
after his resignation of the Empire. It espoused Caesar's interest in the Civil
Wars betwixt him and Pompey: and, when besieged by Octavius, it repulsed all
his attempts with the greatest obstinacy and bravery. That old City being
ruined by the Sclavonians, lies now in its Ruins; near which the Venetians have
built a Castle, at the Mouth of a River, both of the same Name; five Miles from
Spalatro to the North. This Castle is in the Hands of the Venetians.

Salonichi. See Thessalonica.

Salses, or Sausses, Salsulae, a strong Castle in the County of Rousillon;
built on an Hill by a Lake of the same Name, in the Borders of Languedoc: four
Leagues from Perpignan to the North, and two from the Mediterranean Sea West.
This Castle was built by the Spaniards against the Inroads of the Castle of
Leucate; but taken by the French in 1640, and confirmed to them by the Treaty
of the Pyrenees. The derivation of its name is taken from the Salt-Springs near
it.

Saltfleet, a Market Town in Lincolnshire, in the Hundred of Loutheaske, upon
the Sea: much frequented in the Summer Season for its good Fish.

Salwarp, a River in Worcestershire, falling into the Severn. Droitwich and
Bromesgrove stand upon the Banks of it.

Saltzburg, Juvavia, Salisburgum, Poedicum, Hadriana, a great City in the
Circle of Bavaria in Germany; which is an Archbishops See, upon the River
Saltzor; and has a very strong Castle, built on an advanced ground, under the
Dominion of its own Archbishop; together with a very large Territory called the
Bishopric of Saltzburg. This City stands nineteen Miles from Inspruck to the
North-East, seventeen from Munchen to the East, and thirteen from Ilstadt to
the South. Historians do generally believe, that it was at first the Capital of
Noricum; in which the ancient Geographers place it. Made an Archbishops See, in
the year 798, in the times of Charles the Great; having before been a Bishop's
See, in the fifth Century: but the Goths sacking the City, and destroying the
Christians, the succession to that See suffered an interruption nigh two Ages.
It was also for some time an Imperial and Free City, but since exempted. In
1195. the Emperor Henry VI. reduced it into ashes: but being reedified, it
carries the name at present one of the best and strongest Cities in Germany.
Made lately an University too, by an Archbishop of it, under the Regency of the
Benedictines; and adorned with a new Cathedral, in 1628 which passes for one of
the most magnificent Piles in Christendom.

The Archbishopric of Saltzburg, Salisburgensis Ditio, is a Province in the
Circle of Bavaria in Germany; between Carinthia and Stiria to the East, the
lower Bavaria, and the Earldom of Tirol to the West; Austria to the North, and
the Bishopric of Brixen and Carinthia to the South. The Bishopric of Chiemzee
is incorporated with this Archbishopric. The Archbishop besides is a Prince of
the Empire, and a Legatus Natus from the Roman See in Germany.

Saltzor, Saltzach, Juvavius, a River of Germany which arises from Mount
Taurus in the Earldom of Tirol; and washing Saltzburg (which has its Name from
this River,) falls into the Inns between Oetingen and Branaw; below Burehausen,
a Town of Bavaria.

Les Salvages, two barren and desert Islands toward the Coast of Africa, of the
number of the Canaries: only they swarm with Fowl.

Saluces, Saluzzes, or Saluzzo, a Marquisate in Piedmont, at the Foot of the
Alps; heretofore a Fife of Dauphine, and annexed to France; but granted by
Henry IV. to Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy in exchange for la Bresse, Beugey,
(and some others on this side the Alps) about the year 1601. It is bounded by
Piedmont on the North and East; by the Dauphine on the West; and by the County
of Nizza on the South. The River Po owes its head to Mount Viso in this
Marquisate; and the strong Fortress of Carmagnole is one of its dependencies.
It takes its Name from Saluzzo, Salutiae, the principal Town: which ever since
the year 1511, has been a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Turin. It stands
upon an Hill at the Foot of the Alps; about one Mile from the Po, ten from
Fossano to the West, and twenty four from Turin to the South; secured by a
strong Castle, and adorned with a most magnificent Cathedral. This City was
anciently called Augusta Vagiennorum.

Samachonitis, or Semechonitis, the Lake of Meroz: made by the River Jordan in
Palestine, on the North of the Sea of Galilee. About sixty Greek Stadia in
length, and thirty in breadth. In the Winter, swelled with the Snow from the
Mountain Libanus.

Samandria. See Spenderobi.

Samarchand, Samarchanda, Marchanda, a vast City in the Asiatick Tartary; one
hundred Miles beyond the River Oxus; the Capital of that Kingdom, and the Royal
City of that great Prince Tamberlaine, who styled himself Flagellum Dei, the
Scourge of God: who about the year 1402, took Bajazet the Emperor of the Turks
his Prisoner, and died in the year 1406. This Prince bestowed his utmost care
in adorning, beautifying, and enlarging this City: built in it a very strong
Castle, and instituted an University. But in what state it now is, is not
easily known.

Samaria, a City of Palestine, mentioned by Ptolemy and Strabo, as well as by
the Sacred Writers. It was seated upon a Mountain in the Tribe of Ephraim;
built by Omri King of Israel, as is recorded 1 Kings 16. (about the year of the
World 3112, or as others 3^19.) and becoming from thenceforward the Royal City
of that Kingdom, it became one of the greatest, strongest, and most populous,
as well as most beautiful Cities of the East. Benhadad, King of Syria, besieged
it first, about 3146. with a vast Army; and reduced it to great Extremities: it
was then delivered by a Miracle. Salmanazar, King of Assyria, was the next that
attempted it, and took it after a Siege of three years in 3314. He carried the
Israelites into Captivity, and peopled it with a new Colony, composed of diverse
Nations and Religions; who were the implacable Enemies of the Jewish Nation;
especially after the building of a Temple in Samaria (after the manner of that
of Jerusalem) about the times of Nehemiah, by one of the Sons of Joida the High
Priest; who had married a Daughter of Sanballat (the Horonite, Governor of
Samaria under Darius King of Persia), for whom his Father-in-law built a Temple
on Mount Gerizim. Hyrcanius the High Priest of the Jews about the year of the
World 3941. took, and entirely ruined this City; which lay desolate, till Herod
the Great rebuilt it about 4033. and called it (...) in Honor of Augustus. The
Temple of Samaria was standing in our Savior's time, as appears in S. John's
Gospel: after our Savior's Passion, this City received the Christian Faith, by
the Preaching of Philip the Evangelist, about the year of Christ 35. Simon the
Father of Heresy, was one of these new Converts, and the Founder of the
Gnostics. About 42. Herod Agrippa obtained this City as an Addition to his
Kingdom from Caligula. In the first ruin of the Jewish Nation, (under
Vespasian) this Nation and City had no great share of the Calamity; because I
suppose, they sided with the Romans in this first Revolution against the Jews.
But in the second, under Adrian the Emperor, they acted otherwise; and about
the year of Christ 135. were, together with the Jews, extirpated by the Arms of
that Prince. This City has ever since lain buried in its Ruins; though there
are some few remainders of the Samaritan Nation to this day in Palestine and
Grand Cairo, where they keep their Synagogues and their ancient Sacrifices:
Especially at Sichem, now called Naplouse, in Palestine; (the residence of
their High Priest, who pretends to be of the Race of Aaron.) But following Laws
and Rites, different from those of the Pentateuch, they have nevertheless the
esteem of Heretics amongst the Jews. The Samaritans of Mount Gerizim were
mortal enemies to the ancient Christians there, till the Emperor Justianian
took and burnt their King Julian, and curbed them from time to time by very
severe Edicts. See Gerizim. It stood thirty five Miles from Jerusalem to the
North. Long. 66. 40. Lat. 31. 30. or as Mr. Fuller says. Long. 69. 10. Lat.
32. 30.

Sambales, the little Islands near the Peninsula of Jucatan in New Spain, in
America; where good Amber-Greese is fished up with great dexterity by the
Indians.

Sambas, Sambasum, a City on the North side of the Island of Borneo in the
East Indies, which has an Harbor upon the Ocean; though it lies thirty Miles
from the Shore up into the Land.

Sambia, a Province of Prussia, called by the Poles Szamlandt; one of those
twelve Counties, into which Prussia was divided by Venodotius (one of its
Princes) in 733. Also a Bishops See under the Archbishop of G^^sna, whose Seat
was at Coningsperg; but now united with the Bishopric of Ermeland or
Warmerland. It lies between the Bay of Curland to the North, the River Pregel
to the South; and was a part of the Circle of Natingen; now under the Duke of
Brandenburg.

Sambre, Sabis, Saba, a River of the Low Countries; which a^iseth in Picardy;
and soon after entering Hainault, divides it; watring Landrecy, Berlamont, and
Maubeuge. It passes by Charleroy to Namur, the Capital of the Province; and
there falls into the Maes.

Samnites, an ancient and powerful people of Italy: who inhabited the Countries
now contained in the Terra di Lavoro, the Capitanata, the Abruzzo, the Dukedom
of Benevento, etc. and made War with the Romans a long time before they could
be entirely reduced.

Samo, Samos, Parthenia, Cyparissa, an Island belonging to the Lesser Asia, in
the Ionian Sea, near Ionia; as being but five Miles from the nearest Shore of
Ephesus, and sixty from Chius, (now Sio) to the South. It is about eighty in
compass. It has a City on the East side, which is a Bishops See under the
Archbishop of Ephesus; so poor, that it will scarce find its Bishop Bread: yet
is this Island so fruitful, that almost nothing can be planted, which the Earth
will not bring to maturity. The Wines of it are exceeding pleasant; but for
want of a Trade and encouragement, the Inhabitants plant little more than they
use. The Inhabitants were so powerful in ancient times, that they managed a
prosperous War against the Ephesians; and afterward against the Athenians and
Milesians, about the year of Rome 313. and the eighty fourth Olympiad: till
Pericles about the year of the World 3510. reduced them. Upon his departure,
they reassumed their Liberty; and forced him to besiege their City nine Months
before he could take it; to invent the Battering Ram, and several other Engines
for that purpose; and even after this, they sustained some other Wars. Their
greatest Glory was Pythagoras, the Father of Philosophy. Juno was their
principal Patroness and Goddess, in whose honor there was a famous Temple
erected by them. This Island once so powerful, rich and populous, is by the
Turks (who are Masters of it) reduced to that mean and depopulated condition,
that a few Pirates dare land and plunder it as they please. So that ever since
1676. no Turk durst venture to live upon it, lest he should be carried into
Captivity by these Rovers; as four of them were then by Monsieur Crevellier, a
famous Privateer.

Samogithia, a Province of the Kingdom of Poland; called by the Inhabitants
Samodzka-Zembla; by the Poles Samudska-Ziemia; by the Germans Samaiten, by the
French Samogitie. It is a very large Province; bounded on the North by Curland,
on the East by Lithuania, on the South by Prussia Ducalis, and on the West by
the Baltic Sea; its length from East to West is thirty five German Miles, but
not of equal breadth. The principal Towns in it are Midniky (or Womie), Kowno
and Rossienie; which last, is the Capital of this Province. It was anciently
divided into twelve Counties, now into three; and overspread with dark thick
Woods. Yet it is a Bishopric under the Archbishop of Gnesna, the Bishop having
his Residence at Womie; and this Province is very often included in Lithuania
largely taken; the Fortunes of which it has always followed.

Samoiede, or Samoyedes, Samoieda, a Province in the North-East of Muscovy,
upon the Frozen Sea; lying on both sides of the River Obb, which is subject to
the Czars; but in such manner, that the People are almost free. This is a part
of the Ancient Scythia or Sarmatia; and had this Name given them by the Russ,
which signifies Self-Eaters: it being their Custom to eat Man's Flesh, even that
of their nearest Relations, (mixed with Venison) to this day. They have no
Cities, yet they are no wandering Nation: their Cabbins or Huts are built one
half above, and the other beneath the Earth; with an hole at the top, which
serves both, for a Door and a Chimney; the Snow rising sometimes the depth of a
Pike above the Earth: they have also Passages under the ground, to go from
Caban to Caban at such times; for six Months of the year they have a perpetual
Night, and the rest perpetual Day. They have neither Wool nor Corn; their Food
is Fish dried in the Wind and Sun, Honey and Venison; their Clothes are the
Skins of Beasts dressed with the Plair on; and sewed with the Nerves of Beasts,
instead of Thread; which by mixing various Colors, they will so diversifie, as
to represent Forest Works and Flowers as they please. They are low o^ Stature;
have large flat Faces, small Eyes, short Legs, and wear their Hair very long.
Till of late they were Pagan Idolaters. When the Dutch in 1595. discovered
these Coasts, there were great numbers of Idols upon the Shore; of which they
would not suffer the Hollanders to carry any one away; they have been since
converted to Christianity, and baptized by one U^adimer (a Bishop), who was
sent to them by the Russ. Ol^arius.

Samosata, the Capital City of the ancient Comagena in Syria: which since the
times of Christianity, has been a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Edessa.
A noted place for giving Birth to Lucian, and Paulus Samosat^nus the condemned
Patriarch of Antioch. Now called Schems^^.

San, Sanus, a River of Poland, which arising from the Carpathian Mountains in
the Borders of Hungary; and running through Red Russia by Przemislaw, and
Jaroslaw, two Cities of that Province; and being by this time augmented by some
other Rivers, enters the Lesser Poland; and at Sendomir falls into the Vistula.

Sana, Sanaa, the Capital City of the Happy Arabia, equal to Damascus; and
being seated upon a Mountain, said to enjoy a very temperate Air. It stands
fifty Miles from the Red Sea. Hoffman supposes it to be the same with Pliny's
Saphar.

Sanbich, or Sanabach, a Market Town in Cheshire, in the Hundred of Northwich,
upon the River Welock.

Sancerre, Sacrum Cereris, Sacro-Caesarinum, a Town in the Dukedom of Berry in
France, upon the Loyre. It stands on an advanced ground, fortified heretofore
with a Castle and other Works; till it was taken from the Huguenots in 1573. by
Famine, and demolished.

Sandeez, Sandecium, a City of the Lesser Poland, in the Palatinate of
Cracovia; upon the River Dunaick, toward the Mountains; ten Polish Miles from
Cracow to the South. It stands at the foot of the Carpathian Hills; well
fortified, and the Capital of the Territory in which it stands.

Sandham, a Town in the South-East parts of the Isle of Wight, upon a Bay of
its own name: fortified with a Castle.

Sando, Sandum, a City in Japan, on the North side of the Island of Niphonia.

Sandwich, Rutupiae, is now a small Corporation on the Eastern Coast of Kent;
above eight Miles from Dover to the North, and the same distance from
Canterbury to the East. This Town sprung up out of the Ru^s of Rutupiae, an old
Roman City; which falling into decay under the Saxons, was entirely ruined by
the Danes. Sandwich (the Daughter) also felt the fury of the Danes; but she got
up again, and in the Norman t^^es was one of the Cinque Ports. Lewis Dauphine
of France, burnt it in 1217. Edward III. recovered it from Christ-Church in
Canterbury; (to which it had been given by Canutus the Dane, when he was
crowned King of England, by exchange,) and reunited it to the Crown of England.
In the Reign of Henry VI. it was burnt by the French. But its greatest
Calamity, was the sinking of a great Ship belonging to Pope Paul IV. in the
very entry of the Haven, which proved an incurable Mischief. The Dutch in some
degree contributed to the Consolation of these Misfortunes, by settling a Trade
of Bay-making in it. Charles II. honored it, by creating Edward, Baron
Montague of S. Neots, Viscount Hinchinbrook and Earl of Sandwich, July 12.
1660. who was slain in a Sea Fight, May 28. 1672. and succeeded by Edward his
eldest Son.

Sangari, Sangarius, Angarius, a River of the Lesser Asia, which arising out of
the Mountain Dindymus, and flowing through the Greater Phrygia falls into the
Euxine Sea in Bithynia. Now called also Zagari, Sacari, and Acada: its outlet
is thirty seven Italian Miles West of Nicomedia, and sixty two East of
Heraclea, as Strabo says.

Sanglayes, the Chinese of the Philippine Islands.

Sangro, Sarus, Sagrus, a River and a Castle in Abruzzo, in the Kingdom of
Naples.

Sanguesa, Oppidum Suessitanorum, Sangossa, a small City in the Kingdom of
Navarr, upon the River Aragon; thirteen Spanish Leagues from Calahorra, (a City
of Old Castile to the East;) and eight from Pampelune to the North-East. It was
a Roman Town.

Sanguinara, Alesus, a small River in S. Peter's Patrimony, in the States of
the Church in Italy; which arising near the Lake di Bracciano, and running
South, falls into the Tyrrhenian Sea; twenty Miles from Rome toward Civita
Vecchia.

Santen, Santae, Castra Vetera, Trajana Colonia, Xanthus, Santena, a small Town
of great Antiquity, in the Dukedom of Cleve; not far from the Rhine; two German
Miles from the Wesel to the West, Nimeguen to the East, and Gelders to the
North. This was the Birthplace of S. Norbert, the Founder of the Order of the
Praemonstratenslan Monks.

Santerini, an Island of the Archipelago toward Europe; sixty Miles from
Candia, and about thirty in Circumference. Called by the Ancients Thera,
Philatera, and Calistus. By Italians, Santa Irene; whence come Sainterini and
Santerini. It has the name besides of Gozi. Inhabited by Latin and Greek
Christians, each under their respective Bishop: but the former are far the most
numerous. It affords no Springs nor Rivers, nor Corn, and not much Wine: being
a dry parched Soil, troubled with Subterraneous Mines of Sulphur, which
sometimes break out into Flames, and cast up Stones into the Air with wonderful
violence. Barley, Hirse, Melons and Cucumbers, are its ordinary product; and
Linen its Manufacture: for Water, it depends upon the Rain. The principal
Castles in it, are S. Nicholas, Scaro, Pirgo, and Crotiri.

Santerno, Vatrenus, a River in Tuscany in Italy; which springing out of the
Apennine, and flowing Northwards by Imola, falls into the Po beneath Argenta;
twenty Miles above Ravenna to the West.

Santerre, Sanguitersa, a Tract in Picardy in France; between Vermandois to the
East, and Amiens to the West; in which are the Towns of Peronne, Roye, Neste,
and Mont de Dier.

Santo, Xanthus, a City and River in Phrygia, in the Lesser Asia; it arises
from Mount Ida, and washing the famous City of Troy, falls into the
Archipelago. Called also by the Europeans, Il Scamandro; as it was Scamander by
the Ancients.

Sanctors, the same with Santerre.

^ahia de ^o^^s los Santos, Sinus omnium Sanctorum, a Gulf in Brasil in South
America: which gives name to a Government or Province there, called Capitania
de la bahia de todos los Sants; betwixt the Province of the Isles ( Capitania
dos Ilheos), and that of Seregippe del Roy. The Capital of All Saints is S.
Salvador: under the Portugueze.

Santuliet, or Sanflit, Sanflita, a small, but strong Town in Brabant, upon the
Schelde; between Antwerp to the South, and Bergen op Zoome to the North, three
Leagues.

Soane, Savo, a small River in Campania di Roma, in Italy; which flowing
through the Terra di Lavoro, (a Province of the Kingdom of Naples) falls into
the Tyrrhenian Sea, between Sinuessa a ruined City, and Volturno.

Saosne, or Saone, Arar, Savona, Sangona, a great River in France; called by
the Italians, Sona; it arises out of Mount Vauge in Lorain, near Dornay; about
twelve Miles from the Fountains of the Moselle to the North-West; or as
Baudrand says, within five; and running Southward, through the upper part of
Franche Comte, it waters Gray; and beneath it, takes in the Loughon, (a great
River) from the East. So it passes by Auxone to Verdun; above which the Doule
(a great River) comes in from the East. So passing by Challon, Tornus, Mascon,
and Ville Franche, it enters and divides the City of Lions; and soon after
falls into the Rhosne, which conveys it into the Mediterranean Sea. Some derive
its Latin Name Sangona, from the Blood of the Christians, coloring its Waters
at Lions in the Massacre that was committed upon them there in the Reign of
Marcus Aurelius, the Emperor.

Sapienza, an Island over against the City Modon in the Morea: which gives the
name of the Sea of Sapienza to that part of the Mediterranean, which waters
its Coasts. It was anciently called Spagia or Sphragia. The Corsaires of
Barbary lie in Ambuscade behind this Island for Vessels, that come from the
Gulf of Venice, or the Coast of Sicily.

Sara, a City of Armenia Major; and another of Illyricum; remembered in the
ancient Geographies.

Sarabat, Hermus, a River of the Lesser Asia; which arises in the Greater
Phrygia; and receiving the Rivers anciently called Crya, Hillus, and Pactolus,
falls into the Bay of Smyrna.

The Saracens. Some, deriving the original of this people from Hagar and
Ismael, call them Hagarenes and Ismaelites. Others make them to be descended
from Cham; and that they were the Inhabitants of the ancient Saraca in Arabia,
(mentioned by Ptolemy;) and of the Country whereof that City was the Capital.
It is certain, they were an Arabian people: and withal, that their Name in
Arabic signifies Robbers, according to the common practice of their lives;
which they first began to discover in the fifth Century. Attaining in the
course of time to such an universal puissance, as to overrun Syria, Persia,
Palestine, Egypt; part of Sicily, Italy, France, and most of the Islands of the
Mediterranean, under Kings of their own; and to withstand the united Forces of
Christendom in the eleventh and twelfth Ages: till the Turks, the Caliphs of
Egypt, and the Sophyes of Persia, breaking severally into their Estates; the
very name of Saracen became abolished, only as it is sometimes now applied to
Mahometans; because the Saracens were Mahometans.

Saragora, Caesar Augusta, Vrbs Edetanorum, Salduba, the Capital City of the
Kingdom of Aragon in Spain; called by the Inhabitants, Zaragosa; by the
Italians, Saragoza, It is an Archbishops See, of the Creation of Pope John
XXII. the Seat of the Courts of Justice for that Kingdom, of an Inquisition and
an University. It stands upon the River Ebro, which is here covered with a
Bridge; a little above the Confluence of the Guerva, and beneath that of the
Xaleon. Nonius might justly say of it; If the fertility of the Soil, the
pleasantness of its Site, the beauty and elegance of the Buildings of this City
be duly considered; there can nothing be desired toward the improvement of
it, which is wanting. The Houses are for the most part of Brick, the Streets
large and open; so that for use and beauty, it is equal to the best City in
Spain. It has a strong Wall, four Gates, a great number of Towers, one
Citadel, seventeen great Churches, fourteen Monasteries, and about three Miles
in Circuit: the Air is very clear and healthful, but inclining to too much
heat. It is a City of great Antiquity; having been a Roman Colony, and in those
times one of the principal Cities in Spain. In 381. there was a Council
celebrated here; in which Priscillianus was condemned, who had a great number
of followers in Spain. There were also other Councils held here in 516. 592.
and 691. Prudentius, (one of the ancientest Christian Latin Poets) was a Native
of this place, who flourished in the fourth Century. This City was recovered
out of the hands of the Moors in 1118. The Archbishops See was renewed in 1318.
It stands forty two Spanish Miles from Valencia to the North, twenty six from
Pampelune; and thirty eight from the Shoars of the Mediterranean. Long. 20. 10.
Lat. 42. 30.

Saragossa. See Syracusa.

Sarbruck, or Sarbrucken, Sarrae Pons, a Town of Germany, upon the River Sar;
in the Borders of the Dukedom of Lorain, over against S. Jean. Three German
Miles from Deux-Pontz, and nine from Metz to the East. Heretofore an Imperial
and Free City of Germany; but fell afterward under the Duke of Lorain, and now
in the hands of the French; although not great, yet it is a fine Town; of great
antiquity; being mentioned by Antoninus in his Itinerary.

Sarcelle, Rusicibar, an ancient Town of Mauritania Caesariensis; mentioned by
Ptolemy, and Antoninus; and now in the Kingdom of Argier in Barbary. Twenty
eight Miles from the Capital of that Kingdom to the West. It is a considerable
Town; has a large Haven on the Mediterranean Sea, and a Castle.

Sarch, Assyria, a Province of Asia, under the Turks. See Assyria.

Sardinia, Sandalioris, Ichnusa, a great Island in the Mediterranean Sea;
called by the Inhabitants, Sardenna; by the Spaniards, Sardegna; and by other
Nations, Sardinia. In length from North to South one hundred and seventy Miles;
in breadth from East to West ninety; in circuit five hundred. It has eleven
Harbors, ninety four Watch-Towers to preserve it from the Turkish Pirates; and
in the Roman times it had forty two Cities: (in the former Ages of Christianity
eighteen Episcopal ones) which are now reduced to eight. The first Nation that
became Masters of it, were the Carthaginians; from whom it was taken by the
Romans, in the first Punick War, about the year of Rome 493. two hundred fifty
seven years before the Birth of our Savior. In the Fall of the Roman Empire,
it fell into the hands of the Saracens; who in the seventh and eighth Century
possessed most of the Islands in the Mediterranean Sea. In 809. Pepin; Father
of Charles the Great, recovered this Island out of their hands; which after
this was the subject of a long War between the States of Genoua and Pisa; till
at last Pope Boniface VIII. granted it to James II. King of Arragon, about
1296. who after many Wars obtained the quiet possession of it in 1326. (or as
Hoffman says, in 1409). Ever since, it has been in that Family; Frederick II.
has also given it the Title of a Kingdom. The Soil is very fruitful; but the
Air equally unhealthful, or pestilential rather; insomuch that the
Commonwealth and the Emperors of the Romans banished such persons to this
Island, as they desired to have dead without Sword or Poison. The Rivers Cedro
and Tirso divide it into two parts, called the Cape de Lugodori and Cap de
Cagliari: for its sertility, it was called the Nurse of Rome by Valerius
Maximus; yet those parts of the Island to the North and East are mountainous
and barren. The rest are Algher, Castle Aragonese, Bosa, Ostagni, Terra Nova,
Sacer and Iglesias. A Viceroy for the King of Spain governs this Island.

Sardica. See Sofia.

Sardis, the ancient Metropolis of Lydia in the Lesser Asia. Not to speak of
its being the Capital of the Kingdom of the famous Gyges, Cyrus we find took it
in the fifty ninth Olympiad, and with it submitted all Lydia to his Empire. In
the sixty ninth Olympiad, about the year of Rome 250. Aristagoras with twenty
Athenian Ships took and burnt it. After this, it was rebuilt; and passed under
the Empire of the Greeks. In the year of Rome 540. Antiochus conquered it. In
S. John the Apostle's time it received Christianity; but for its inconstancy
therein, became one of the Subjects of his Revelations; and now utterly ruined.
It was a Bishops See.

Sarduni, Planasia, an Island on the Coast of Provence, in the Mediterranean
Sea.

Sare, Sarvus, a River of the Low Countries: called Sara by Venantius
Fortunatus; by the Germans, die Saare; by the French, Sare; it arises in Mount
Vauge, in the Borders of Lorain and Alsatia; near the Town of Salme: and
running Northward, it waters Sareck, Serwerdon, S. Jean, Sarsberg: and a
little above Trier from the South-East falls into the Moselle.

Sarepta, an ancient City of Phoenicia, in Syria: which was a Bishops See under
the Archbishop of Tire: Now called Sarafends or Saphet. The Prophet Elias
miraculously augmented the Widows Oil, and raised her dead Son to life at this
place, according to the History of the Old Testament.

Sargasso, or Mar do Sargasso, is that part of the Ocean, which lies betwixt
the Islands of Cape Verde, the Canaries, and the Continent of Africa: so called
by the Portugueze.

Sargathia, the Asiatick Tartary, a vast Country in Asia.

Sarisbury, or Salisbury, or New Sarum, Sarisberia, Sorviodunum, Sarviodunum,
Severia, is the principal City of Wiltshire: seated in the North-West part of
that County, near the Borders of Hampshire and Dorsetshire; upon the Rivers of
Willey, and Alan, united into one Stream; and falling presently into the Avon
in such sort, as that most of the Streets of this City have a Stream
commodiously running through the midst of them. This was anciently a Roman
Town, by the name of Sorbiodunum: seated on a high Hill, and therefore
destitute of Water. Kinrick (King of the West Saxons) was the first of that
Race who possessed it, after a Defeat of the Britains in 553. Canutus the Dane
much damaged it by Fire, in 1003. In the Reign of William the Conqueror it
recovered, after Herman Bishop of Shirburn had removed the Sea hither; whose
next Successor Osman built the Cathedral. William the Conqueror summoned
hither all the States of England, to take an Oath of Allegiance to him. Since
those times the City is removed Northward, and come down into the Plains nearer
the Avon. Here there was a second Cathedral begun by Richard Poor, Bishop of
this See, in 1218. Finished by Bridport the third Bishop from Poor, in 1258.
which is one of the greatest and most beautiful Churches in England. Having
twelve Gates, fifty two Windows, three hundred sixty five Pillars great and
small, answering to the Months, Weeks, and Days of the year. The glory of this
Diocese was the most Learned and Industrious Bishop John Jewel; consecrated
Jan. 21. 1559. died Sept. 23. 1571. In 1153. Patrick d'Eureux was created Earl
of Salisbury, and his Son William succeeded in that Honor. In 1^97. William
Long-espee, (a Natural Son to Henry II. by the beautiful R^samond) marrying
Ella, the Daughter of William d' Eureux, had this Honor. In 1333. William d'
Montacute, King of Man, became the fifth Earl; whose Male Line in four Descents
enjoyed the Honor till the year 1428. when it passed to Richard Nevil, who
married Eleanor, the Daughter of Thomas Montacute, Lord Chancellor. In 1472.
George Duke of Clarence, (second Brother to Edward IV.) had it in Marriage with
Isabel, Daughter of Richard Nevil, the second Earl of that Line. In 1477.
Edward (eldest Son of Richard III.) married Ann, the second Daughter of the
said Richard; and had this Honor. In 1514. Margaret Daughter of George Duke of
Clarence, was by Henry VIII. created Countess of Salisbury. In 1605. Robert
Lord Cecil, was by James I. created Earl of Salisbury: in which Line it still
is.

Sarlat, Sarlatum, a City of Aquitain in France, in the Province of Perigort;
which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Bourdeaux. It stands upon a
River of the same Name; one League from the Dordonne, (betwixt the Dordogne and
the Vezere, as it were in an Island;) eight from Perigueux to the South-East,
and thirty from Bourdeaux to the North-East. Made a Bishops See, by Pope John
XXII. in 1317. by the change of its ancient Benedictine Abbey into a Cathedral;
having before been a part of the Diocese of Perigueux. It is so strongly
situated, as to withstand two Sieges in the Civil Wars in 1652.

Sarmatia, and Sauromatia. This vast Region, in ancient Geography, was divided
into Sarmatia Asiatica, Europaea, and Germanica. Sarmatia Asiatica, lay
properly toward the Borders of Europe and Asia; with the Northern Ocean to the
North, the Pontus Euxinus to the South, Scythia to the East, and Sarmatia
Europaea to the West: now contained in the Northern Muscovia, in the Provinces
of Samoyeda, Duina, Permski, Lucomeria, etc. Sarmatia Europea had for Bounds,
both the other Sarmatia's, with the Euxine Sea; making now Russia. And Sarmatia
Germanica took up the greatest part of the present Kingdom of Poland: being
divided from the European Sarmatia, by the Nieper to the East; from the Borders
of Germany by the Vistula to the West; from Dacia by the Neister and the
Carpathian Mountains to the South, with the Baltic Sea and the Gulf of
Finland to the North.

Sarnagans, Sarnagan, Sargans, Serlandt, a Town and County in Switzerland,
subject to the seven Senior Cantons. The ancient Sarunetes dwelt here.

Sarno, Sarnum, a River and a City in the Hither Principato in the Kingdom of
Naples; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Salerno; and a Dukedom
belonging to the House of the Barberini. It is seated partly in a Plain, partly
on an Hill; and has a very ancient Castle belonging to the said Family: its
distance from Salerno, is thirteen Miles to the North, eight from Nola to the
South, and five from Nocera. This City stands in the Borders of the Terra di
Lavoro, near the Fountains of the River Sarno; which divides that Province from
the Principato, and then falls into the Bay of Naples; five Miles from Castel'
a Mare to the North.

Saronieus sinus, the Gulf of Engia. See Engia.

Sarsina, a City in the States of the Church in Italy, upon the River Savio;
which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ravenna; small, and almost
desolate. It stands in Romandiola, in the Borders of the Dukedoms of Florence,
and Vrbino; twenty four Miles from Rimini to the West. The ancient Poet Plautus
was a Native of it. There was a Synod held here in 1592.

Sartre, Sarta, a River of France, which arises in the Borders of Normandy,
(which it separates from le Perch) and running South, waters Alenson: then
entering Maine, and passing Man's, (the Capital of it) the Huy comes in. So
passing into Anjou, the small Loire falls into it from the East above Angers; a
little beneath that City, they fall in^he Mayenne; which last falls into the
great Loire at Ingrande, twelve Leagues above Nantes. It is written by
Baudrand, Sarte.

Sarum old, a Corporation in Wiltshire in the Hundred of Alderbury: honored
with the Election of two Members of Parliament.

Sarwicze, or Zarwiza, Vrpanius, a River of the Lower Hungary; which arises
near Wesprin, or Weisbrun; and running South-East, according to our later Maps,
passes through the North end of the Lake of Balaton: then through Alba
Regalis: so by Dombe, Simathorn, and Sarhadel, it passes beneath Pataseck into
the Danube, five German Miles below Colocza.

Sarzana, Luna Nova, Sergianum, Serezana, a City of Hetruria in Italy; in the
Borders of the States of Genoua, toward Lucca; near the Mouth of the Kiver
Magra, and under the States of Genoua; which is a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Pisa, but exempt from his Jurisdiction. This City sprung up out
of the Ruins of Luna, an ancient Roman City; seated three Miles from it to the
South: the Bishopric of which was by Pope Nicholas V. removed to Sarzana in
1450. It is defended by a Ditch and a Wall, with an ancient Castle, slanked
with sour Towers: upon an adjoining Hill, is a Fort called Sarzanella, which
wholly commands Sarzana. Built by Castruccio, who made himself Master of the
City of Lucca: after his death, it passed to Charles VI. of France, from him to
the Dukes of Milan, and so to the Florentines: from whom Charles VIII. of
France recovered it; whose Governor sold it to the Genouese. It lies thirty
four Miles from Lucca to the North-West, and almost sixty from Genoua to the
South-East.

Sas, Sacae, a Tribe, or Horde, of the Asiatick Tartars; within the Mountain
Iamus: now called Chazalgita.

Sas van Gant, Gandavensis Ager, a strong Fort built by the Spaniards, four
Leagues from Gant to the North; and taken by the Hollanders in 1644. who still
have it.

Sassari, Sassaris, Piubium, Turris Libysonis nova, a City in the North part of
the Island of Sardinia, called by the Inhabitants Sacer. It is a great and
pleasant City, but not strong; seated in a Plain, and defended by a Castle: it
sprung up out of the Ruins of Turritana, an old Roman Town, twelve Miles from
it to the South. In 1441. Pope Eugenius IV. removed the Archbishops See, from
Turritana, to Sassari; it stands eighty five Italian Miles from Calori to the
North-West.

Sassenage, a Village in Dauphine in France, at the foot of the Alps, near the
Confluence of the Isere and the Drac: remarked for some Curiosities in the
Caverns of a Rock there.

Sassuolo, Saxulum, a Town in the Dukedom of Modena in Italy; ten Miles from
Modena to the South, which has a very strong Castle. Called by the French,
Sassevil.

Sassum, Sasima, a City of Cappadocia, mentioned by Antoninus; which is a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Cesarea; between it to the North, and
Tyana to the South thirty two Miles; two hundred from Ancyra to the East. S.
Gregory Nazianzen was Bishop of this See: who contributed (under Theodosius the
Great) so very much to the Establishing the Catholic Religion, then oppressed
by Arianism, both by his Learning and Piety.

Satalia, Attalia, a Maritim City in Pamphylia, a Province in Asia Minor,
mentioned by Ptolemy; It is an Archbishops See, and the Metropolis of that
Province: by the Turks called Satalyah, by the Italians Satalia. Built by
Attalus (a King) at the Mouth of the River Cestrum or Cataractus; on the
East Side of Mount Masicytus, to the North of the Isle of Cyprus, upon a Bay of
the same Name. The Turks are at this day careful to repair the Fortifications
of it and the Castle, in which their Governor resides; having a good Haven,
and being frequented by the European Merchants: But notwithstanding all their
care it fell into the hands of the Pirates, in the beginning of this Century;
who treated it very severely, Long. 60. 50. Lat. 38. 56. The present City
stands a few Miles more to the East than the old Attalia; which was nearer the
Mountains, and farther from the River to the West: whereas the present stands
at the very mouth of the River. The Ancients preferred Health before Riches,
and built on high grounds: the latter Ages preferring Trade and the convenience
of water, have generally removed their dwellings nearer the great Rivers and
Sea shoars.

Satarchae, an ancient Warlike People of the Scythia Europaea: mentioned by
Solinus, and described to have despised the use of Gold and Silver.

Satcama, a Kingdom in Japan, on the South Side of the Island Ximoa; which has
a City of the same Name.

Satriano, a ruined City in the Basilicate, in the Kingdom of Naples, in the
Borders of the Hither Principate; which has yet left its Name to the River
Cecinum, now called il Cacino and di Satriano.

Sava, a great City in Persia, built in a barren Plain; within sight of Mount
Alouvent; two Miles in compass, well Walled, thinly peopled, and for want of
Inhabitants much decayed. It was built by the Saracens, as the Persians report;
and since rebuilt by them. Long. 85. 00. Lat. 35. 50. See Sir John Chardin's
Travels. Page 386.

Savatopoli, Sebastopolis, Dioscurias, Giganaeum, an ancient City of the
Province of Mengrelia in Asia: upon the Euxine Sea.

Saude, Salda, a River of France, which falls into the Marne.

The Save, Savus, a great River, placed by Ptolemy in Pannonia; now called by
the Germans Die Saw, by the French and English the Save. It arises out of the
Julian Aspes, in the Upper Carniola; scarce three German Miles from Volzana to
the North: and flowing Eastward through Carniola, waters Craineburg; where it
is a considerable River, though not far from its Head. It waters Labach,
Cilley, and Raia. Then entering Sclavonia, (which it divides from Croatia,
Bosnia, and Servia;) and passing by Zagrab, Graditzka, Possega, (at four
Hungarian Miles distance to the South) to Belgrade, it there falls into the
Danube; after a Course of about three hundred Miles, as Dr. Brown says: it has
several considerable Islands made by its Stream; in some of which the Romans
had considerable Towns; particularly in Sisseck near Zagabria. The Waters of
the Danube appear white, and troubled: those of the Save on the contrary are
black and more clear: This and the Drove enclose between them that most
fruitful Country called Sclavonia.

Saverne, or Zabern, Tabernae Alsatiae, a Town in Alsatia; called by the
Germans Elsas Zabern, and by the French Saverne; under the Bishop of Strasburg,
and his usual Residence. Antoninus mentions this Place in his Itinerary: It is
a strong and populous City; had heretofore a very strong Castle, which is now
demolished; and it is seated upon the River Sorr, near the Borders of Lorain:
four Miles from Strasburg to the West, and from Hagenaw toward Nancy. The
Lutherans were defeated before this Town in 1525. by Anthony Duke of Loraine.
It yields very good Wine. There is a second, Saverne, in the Palatinate of the
Rhine in Germany, upon the River Erlbach: called by the Natives Berg Zabern, to
distinguish it from Rhein Zabern; a Town in the same Province, situated at the
Confluence of the Rhine and the Erlbach.

Savigliano, Savilianum, a great Town in Piedmont, upon the River Magra; under
the Duke of Savoy: between Fossano to the East and Saluzzo to the West, five
Miles from either.

Savio, Isapis, Sapis, a River of Italy; which springs out of the Apennine,
in the Florentine Romandiola, twelve Miles from Sarsina; and flowing through
Romandia properly so called, washes Sarsina and Sesena; and falls into the
Adriatic Sea five Miles from Cervia to the West.

Sauldre, Sodera, a River of France, mentioned by Venantius Fortunatus; which
arises in Berry, and flowing through Sologne and Blaisois, (four Leagues
beneath Romorentin) falls into the Cher.

Sault, Saltus, a Castle and a County in France. The Castle is seated in the
Borders of the Dauphine and Vendosmois; seven Leagues from Carpentras to the
East, and four from Apt in Provence to the North; from this Castle the
adjacent Country is called the Comte de Sault.

Saumont, Saluas Mons, a Town in the Diocese of Paris in France.

Saumur, Salmurium, a City of France, which has been called Truncum: it is
seated in Anjou upon the River Loyre, over which it has a long Stone Bridge;
eight Leagues from Angiers to the East. The Tuede a small River falls near it
into the Loyre. It is a pleasant City upon an Hill; having a strong Castle, and
not built above six hundred years since. This, whilst the Protestant Religion
was suffered in France, was employed by them as an University. The Oratorians
have now a College at it. It has been anciently honored with four or five
Synods. Taken from the Huguenots in 1684. An Image of the B. Virgin there now
is said to do Miracles.

Sauna, Sapina, a River of Romandiola.

Saunoi, Salonensis Ager, a Territory between the Seile, and the Nita, in the
Diocese of Metz in France.

Savolax, Savolaxia, a County in Sweden in Finland; between Kekholm to the East
and Tavasthia to the West, Carelia to the South, and Muscovy to the North: in
which there is no place of note.

Savona, Savo, Saona, a City of Liguria; called by the Inhabitants Sana, by the
Spaniards Saona. It is seated in the States of Genoua; and is a Bishops See
under the Archbishop of Milan; very populous, defended by two strong Castles,
with five Gates, and diverse fine Churches: the second City of note in the
States of Genoua. The Popes Gregory VII. Julius II. and Sixtus IV. were all its
Natives. It had a very convenient Harbor, (which the Genouese have designedly
ruined;) and stands in the Bay delle Spetie, which makes the best Harbor in
all the Mediterranean. This Port of Savona was ruined by the States, because
the French demanded it to make it a Magazine for Salt: Andrew Doria had before
begun this Work, by sinking two great Vessels in the Mouth of it loaded with
Earth: and since, they have walled it up with Masons Work to make it for ever
useless. This City stands twenty five Miles from Genoua to the West, and from
Albenga to the East.

Savonnieres, an ancient Town, one League from Toul in Loraine: where in the
year 859. in the Reign of Charles the Bald K. of France, and P. Nicholas I, a
Provincial Council was celebrated, called by the name of Concilium ad
Saponarias.

Saur, Sura, a Village, and a River which falls into the Moselle. See Sour.

Saura, Isauria, a City in the Lesser Asia; which is a Bishop's See, under the
Archbishop of Iconium; and stands in South Galathia near Psidia.

Saustia, Sebastia, an Episcopal City in Cappadocia in the Lesser Asia. Long
67. 30. Lat. 42. 30.

Savoy, Allobroges, Sapandia, Sabaudia, a celebrated Sovereign Dukedom in
Europe; called by the Natives Savoy, by the Germans Saffoy, by the Spaniards
Saboya. It was of old a part of Gallia Narbonensis; and the North part of the
Country possessed by the Allobroges: on the North bounded by Vallais, (or
Wallisserlandt), Switzerland, and Gex; on the West by Beugey, separated from it
by the Rhosne; on the South by Dauphine; on the East by Piedmont and the
Dukedom of Milan; a part of it reaching beyond the Alps. The whole is covered
by vast high Hills and Mountains: and as it is thereby made healthful, so it is
generally barren; the Valleys excepted. There are some Mines in it, and a great
deal of game. Divided ordinarily into six parts; viz. Savoy properly so called,
Genevois, Maurienne, Tarantaise, Fossigm; and Chablais. The Inhabitants are
dull of apprehension, and no great Soldiers: the chief City, Geneva, is a Free
State: the best under the Duke of Savoy is Chambery or Cameraci. The Conquest
of this Country for the Romans was begun by Cn. Domitius Ahenobarbus, in the
Year of Rome 631: one hundred and nineteen Years before the Birth of our
Savior. Nero first made it a Roman Province. At the fall of the Roman Empire,
it became a part of the Kingdom of Burgundy; and under Rodolph the last King
was united to Germany. In the year 999, Berald of Saxony fled hither and
settled; whose Son ( Humbert) was by Conradus Salicus made Earl of Maurence, a
Town in this Country, in the year 1027. From this beginning by Conquests and
Marriages, this Family became so considerable, that Sigismond the Emperor
Created Amadee (the eighth in the Line,) Duke of Savoy, in the year 1397. (or
as others, in the year 1416.) Victor Amadee II. (the present Duke of Savoy)
succeeded Charles Emanuel his Father, in the year 1675: being then a Child of
nine years of Age; the thirtieth in this Line, and of the Roman Catholic
Religion; his usual Residence is at Turin in Piedmont: where he declared War
against France Jun. 4. 1690; in Conjunction with the Confederate Princes. But
has since lost a considerable part of his Dominions.

Sauve, or Saulve, Salvia, a Town and Viguerye or Provostship in Languedoc; in
the Diocese of Nismes, upon the River Vidourle; adorned with an Abbey of the
Benedictines since the year 1020.

Saw, the Save.

Sax-mundesham, a Market Town in the County of Suffolk, in the Hundred of
Plumesgate: upon a small River, not far from the Sea.

Saxony, Saxonia, by the Germans called Sachsen, in the several Ages that are
past since the Roman Empire, has had very different Bounds: but the Brevity of
this Work will admit only of its present State. To take it in its largest
Acceptance, it contains two of the Circles of the German Empire; called the
Upper and the Lower Circles of Saxony: the Lower Saxony contains the Dukedoms
of Brunswick, Luneburg, Magdeburg, Breme, Mecklenburg, Holsatia and Lauenburg;
the Principalities of Ferden, and Halberstad, and the Bishopric of Hildesheim:
which Countries lie between Westphalia to the West, the Upper Saxony to the
East and South, and Jutland and the Baltic Sea to the North; all described in
their proper Places. The Upper Circle of Saxony contains the Marquisate of
Brandenburg, Pomerania, Thuringia, Misnia, the Dukedom of Saxony properly so
called, the Principality of Anhault: Bounded on the East by Lusatia and Poland;
on the North by the Baltic Sea; on the West by the Lower Saxony; and on the
South by Franconia and Bohemia. The Electorate of Saxony is a Province of
Germany, in the Upper Circle of Saxony: bounded on the East by Lusatia; on the
North by the Marquisate of Brandenburg, and the Principality of Anhault; on the
West by the Dukedoms of Brunswick and Hassia, and on the South by Franconia and
Bohemia. The principal Town of it is Witteburg. This Electoral Prince has the
sixth Place amongst the Electors, and his Residence at Dresden. In the year
1652. John George I. Elector of Saxony, divided this Duchy between his four
Sons. The Ancient Inhabitants were the Lombards: As these and the Franks went
South upon their Conquests made in the Roman Empire, so the Saxons followed
them; and took Possession of their Ancient Seats as far as the Rhine. They were
with great difficulty Conquered by Charles the Great, about the year 785. after
thirty years of War with them. Wittikindus their last King being made by
Charles the Great the first Duke of Saxony, upon his embracing the Christian
Faith. From him are descended all the Kings of France, since Hugh Capet; the
Kings of Denmark, of the House of Oldenburg; the Dukes of Burgundy and Savoy;
the Marquesses of Montisferat, and many other Noble and Illustrious Families of
lesser Note; so that this Person seems to have inherited Abraham's Blessing as
to this. This Dukedom is still in the same Family: tho there was an
Interruption of two hundred years, beginning in the year 1180. and ending in
the year 1423. To this Illustrious House, Germany in a great degree owes the
Reformation; which begun by Luther here but for John Frederick (the thirtieth
Duke) had been stifled in its Rise. John George III. the present Elector is the
thirty seventh Duke from Wittikindus: and the twelfth since the Restitution of
the Line. The Richest as well as the most Ancient of the Princes in the
Electoral College next the Emperor. He also is by Birthright Great-Marshal or
Gentleman of the Horse in the Empire; and by Religion of the Augustane
Confession. The principal Branches of the House of Saxony, are those of
Saxe-Hall, Saxe-Mersbourg, Saxe-Naumburg, Saxe-Weymar, Saxe-Eysenach, and
Saxe-Gotha.

The Saxon-Heptarchy. The ancient Britains under Vortiger, in their Wars with
the Picts and Scots, calling unto their assistance (after the Roman Forces were
totally withdrawn) the Saxons and Angles out of Germany about the year 428, or
as others 449: These Saxons under Hengist, their General, not only completed
the Work they came for by chasing away the Northern Invaders; but made
themselves in time Masters of the Country of the Britains too; suppressing the
names of the Provinces and People that had been before assigned by the Romans,
and dividing their own Conquests into the seven Kingdoms of Kent, the South
Saxons, West Saxons, East Saxons, East Angles, Mercia and Northumberland. The
first of which, Kent, was set up by Hengist in 455. containing the County of
Kent. That of the South Saxons contained Sussex and Surrey; and began in the
Person of Aella, who arrived in Britain a little before the death of Hengist in
488. The Kingdom of the West Saxons took in Cornwall, Devonshire, Somersetshire,
Dorsetshire, Wiltshire, Berkshire, and Hampshire: commencing about the year
519. in the Person of K. Cerdicus. The Kingdom of the East Saxons advanced
next, about the year 527. under K Erchenweme; taking in Middlesex, Essex, and
part of Hartfordshire. Toward 547, Ida, Governor of Northumberland under the
King of Kent, set up for himself; and extended his Kingdom over Yorkshire,
Lancashire, Durham, Westmorland, Cumberland, and Northumberland; with the
Southern parts of Scotland, as far as to Edinburgh. About 575. Vffa, King of
the East Angles, established a Kingdom in Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridgshire.
And lastly toward 580. began the great and inland Kingdom of Mercia, under K.
Cridda, whose extent is already expressed under the word Mercia. This Heptarchy
by the successes of Egbert the 18th. King of the West Saxons, (who had followed
abroad the Wars of Charles the Great, and began his Reign about the year 801.)
united in one Monarchy under him, by the year 819. Whereupon the name of
Heptarchy was suppressed; and K. Egbert by a special Edict, with the
concurrence of the states of the whole Realm convened at Winchester in 819,
ordained, that the Kingdom and Country should be called Anglelond or Englelond,
(whence England) by reason himself was descended from the Angles: So Egbert was
the first King of England.

Scafato, the lower part of the River Sarno in Italy.

Scagen, Scagense Promontorium, the most Northern Cape of Jutland; in fifty
eight degrees of Latitude over against Gottenburg in Sweden; ten Danish Miles
from Alberg to the North-East, and from Gottenburg to the West. There is a
Village near this Cape called Skune.

Scala, Scalis, a City in the Kingdom of Naples, in the Hither Principato;
which is a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Amalfi; but this Bishopric is
united for ever to that of Ravello, from which it stands one Mile, and two from
Amalfi: it is very small and has not above one hundred and fifty Houses;
standing on an Hill at the Foot of Mount Cama; and heretofore from that called
Cama.

Scala Marmorea, Amycli, Daphne, a Port of Bithynia in the Lesser Asia; upon
the Thracian Bosphorus or Streights of Constantinople, beyond Chalcedon to the
North: now also sometimes called Lamia.

Scalambri, or Scaramis, Caucana, a ruined City and Port on the South of
Sicily; near Cape Passaro, the most Eastern Point.

Scalona, Ascalon, a City in the Holy Land, on the Mediterranean Sea; between
Azotus to the North, and Gaza to the South eighteen Miles. It was one of the
Regal Cities of the Philistines: after this it was a Bishop's See, under the
Patriarch of Jerusalem: now reduced to a poor Village, and a few Cottages, as
Leunclavius says: and the Sea is united to that of Bethleem.

Scamandro, Scamander, a small River in Phrygia in the Lesser Asia; mentioned
by Homer. It falls into the Archipelago near Cape Janisary; at the very
entrance of the Hellespont, North of the New Dardanells. The River arises out
of Mount Ida, and has but a short Course.

Scandalor, Pamphylia, a Province in the Lesser Asia.

Scanderone, Alexandria, a City of Syria; called by the Italians Alexandretta;
heretofore a Bishop's See, and a celebrated Seaport; at the Mouth of the River
Belum (now Soldrat,) upon the Bay of Laiazzo ( Issicum;) fifty Miles from
Aleppo to the West, twenty five from the Consines of Cilicia to the East. The
beginning of it is owing to a Castle, built by Alexander the Great for a
retreat, whilst he besieged Tire, at the distance of four or five Miles from
Tire, upon the same Coast, to the South. A Castle which Alexander called by his
own name: but time and corruption first changed it to Scandalion, and now to
Scanderoon. Pompey destroyed it in his Conquest of Phoenicia. And in 1116.
Baldwin I. King of Jerusalem, whilst be besieged Tire as Alexander had done
before, rebuilt it: from which time it became a strong place, an honorable
Government, and a safe retreat to the Christians, during their possessions in
the Holy Land. Now (says Baudrand) there is scarce any mention of it
remaining; except a few Cottages for the use of the Merchants, and a
Stone-House for the Captain of the Janisaries; who collects the Grand Seigniors
Customs. But I have been informed by some Masters of Ships that have been
there, that this Place of late years is much improved by the Trade the English
and Dutch drive in it. Long. 68. 00. Lat. 38. 10.

Scandinavia, a vast Peninsula in the North of Europe; containing the Kingdoms
of Sweden, Norway, and Lapland. Scandia, or South Gothland, by some Geographers
is represented as the Southern part of it; and Lapland the most Northern.

Scania. See Schonen.

Scarborough, a strong Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire, and the Hundred
of Pickering; not very large, but well built and inhabited; standing to the
Sea, with a convenient Port for Trade; upon a craggy, steep, and almost
inaccessible Rock, which the Sea washes on all sides but the West, where the
passage is narrow, yet has a strong Wall to secure it. This Rock upon the top
of it presents us with a fair Plain of sixty Acres of ground, a Castle Royal
garrisoned, and a Spring of fresh Water. Formerly a high stately Tower stood
upon it, which served as a Landmark to Ships at Sea: but this in the last Civil
Wars was demolished. Scarborough besides is made a noted place by its Spaw, and
the Herring Fishery upon its Coasts: Between which and Whitby to the North lies
the Bay of Robin Hood, the famous Robber in the Reign of K. Rich. 1. It has
the honor to be a Corporation also, represented by two Burgesses in the House
of Commons.

Scardo, Scardona, a City ascribed by Ptolemy to Liburnia, (now in Dalmatia:)
and a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Spalato ever since 1120: called by
the Sclavonians Scardin. It is now but small; lies upon the Adriatic Sea, near
the Lake of Prochlian, at the Mouth of the River Titius; and has a small Castle
on an Hill, in the Hands of the Turks. This Place was taken by the Venetians,
and ruined in the year 1570. After this, the Turks repossessed it, and were
re-expelled by the Venetians in 1647. In 1683. the Morlaques of Croatia drove
the Turks away from it and garrisoned it. Baudrand places it thirty five Miles
from Zana to the East, and nine from Sibenico to the North: and says the
Venetians bought it of the Wayvode of Bosnia, in the year 1411. for five
thousand Ducats of Gold.

Scardonia, an Island of Dalmatia, mentioned in the Writings of the ancients:
but now unknown.

Scaren, Scara, a small City of Westrogethia, a Province of Sweden; which is a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Vpsal; and heretofore the Seat of the
Kings of Gothland, but now in a declining Condition: it stands ten Miles from
the Lake of Venner to the South, and twenty from Falcop to the North.

Scarlino, Scapris vel Scabris, a Town in Italy; in the Territory of Siena, and
Principality of Piombino; ten Miles from Massa to the South. Before which was
slain the famous Strozzi (Prior of Capoua,) in the French Quarrel.

Scarpanto, Carpathus, an Island near Rhodes, betwixt that and Candia, in the
Archipelago; toward the Coast of the Lesser Asia, belonging to the Turks. It
had heretofore four considerable Cities, which are now reduced to one of the
same name with it self; but half ruined. The former Knights of Rhodes (or
Malta, as they are now called) fortified it so, as to reap great advantages by
it, both over the Sultans of Egypt and the Turks; its situation rendering it
considerable in relation to Egypt and Syria. The present Inhabitants generally
follow the Greek rites. The Mountains have been thought to contain Mines of
Gold and Silver: but none have hitherto undertook to open them. The Soil yields
plenty of Wine and Fruits: and here are delicate Patridges.

Scarpe, Scarpa, a River in Artoise; it arises three Leagues above Arras; and
watering it and Douay, and dividing Hainault from Flanders, falls into the
Schelde near Mortagne, a great Town in Flanders; six Leagues above Tournay to
the South-West.

Scarsdale, a Dale or Valley in Derbyshire, encompassed with Rocks and
Mountains, according to the sense of the word Sca^re in the Saxon Language,
signifying a Craggy Rock. It contains one of the parts, into which the County
is divided. Chesterfield stands in it. And K. Charles I. did it the honor to
make an Earldom of it in the Person of Francis Leak, Lord Deyncourt of Sutton,
created Earl of Scarsdale in 1645. which Title descended to his Son Nicholas,
and now is enjoyed by his Grandson the R. H. Robert Leake.

Scatono, a small Town in the Province of Toscana in Italy, near a Lake. Noted
upon the account of certain stones found thereabouts, which do not Calcine by
fire.

Scenitae, see the Bedovins of Arabia.

Schaffhausen, Probatopolis, Scaphusia, Schafusia, a City of Switzerland;
called by the French Schafhouse; the Capital of one of the Cantons. It stands
upon the Rhine four Miles beneath Constance to the West, two beneath the Lake
of Zell, (or das Zeller see, as the Germans call it) six from Basil, and four
from Zurich to the North. This is a new City, and took its Rise from an Abbey
of Renediclins; built here by Eberhard Count of Nellenburg, in the Reign of the
Emperor Henry III. about 1052. About 1090. here was also a Nunnery built. The
Abbats and the City not agreeing, it was made an Imperial and Free City. Sold
by Lewis of Bavaria to Frederick Duke of Austria, about 1330. It continued
under that House eighty five years. In 1351. the Inhabitants of this City
besieged Zurich, though against their Wills: in 1372. it was almost destroyed
by Fire. John Duke of Austria being proscribed for withdrawing Pope John XXII.
from the Council of Constance, during the War which ensued, this City returned
to the Empire; and by their Money obtained great Privileges from the Emperor.
The better to assure these Liberties, in 1424. it joined in the League with
Zurich and S. Gall: and in 1454. renewed this League with these, and took in
the other Cantons. In 1501. they joined in the perpetual League. About 1529.
they embraced the Reformation; and burnt a vast Statue, which was called the
Great God of Schafhouse. Long. 30. 25. Lat. 47. 25.

Schalholt, Schalholtum, a City in Iseland; which is a Bishops See, and the
University of that Island.

Scham, Damascus, a City of Syria.

Schelling, Schellinga, an Island and Seaport Town upon the Coast of Holland
and Friseland; of about twelve Miles over; and the same distance from
Harlingen, a City of West Friseland to the West. The principal Town in it is of
the same Name: taken and burnt by the English the Seventh of August 1666.
together with one hundred and fifty Sail of Ships, most of them richly laden:
the Town is by some called Bandaris, and said to consist of one thousand
Houses. That Squadron of Ships which performed this Action, was Commanded by
Sir Robert Holmes.

Schelde, Scaldis, one of the most noted Rivers in the Low Countries; mentioned
by Caesar, Pliny and others of the Ancients. Called by the Hollanders the
Schelde; by the French L' Escaut; and by the Spanish Schelda. This River
arises in Picardy in Vermandois near Chastelet; four French Miles from S.
Quintin to the North-West; and flowing North, it waters Cambray; then
entering Hainault, it passes on the East of Bouchain to Valencienne; and being
augmented by many lesser Streams, becomes there first Navigable by Boats: then
taking in the Huisne above Conde from the West, and the Scarpe beneath S.
Amand, it divides Tornay (or Dornick) and Oudenaerde; and hastes to Gant,
where it is augmented by the Lys: hither also the Tides of the Ocean reach:
from hence it goes to Dendermonde, where it takes in the Dendre, and a little
lower the Rupele; and separating Brabant from Flanders, it washes the Walls of
Antwerp; and forms for it a noble, large, and safe Harbor: three German Miles
lower, it divides into two vast Branches at S. Villier: That to the South
separating Flanders from Zeeland by Vlissing falls into the Ocean, being here
called the Honte: The other parting the Islands of Zeeland, falls into the
Ocean between Walcheren to the South, and Schouen to the North; retaining its
first name to its fall.

Schening, a Town in the Province of South Gothland in Sweden: in which a
Council was held in 1247. by a Legate from the Pope.

Schenken-schans, Schenk, or the Fort of Schenk, Munimentum Schenckii, a strong
Fort in the Dukedom of Cleve, in the Borders of Guelderland; in a small
District called S' Gravenwert, (where the Rhine divides it self into two
Branches, and the Wael begins;) one German Mile from Emmerick to the West, and
from Cleve to the North: which has this name from the Builder of it, Martin
Schenkius. It was taken from the Hollanders, in 1635. by the Spaniards: they
retook it the next year, after a Siege of eleven months. In 1672. it was taken
by the French in two days. In 1674. it was consigned to the Duke of
Brandenburg, and in 1679. by him Mortgaged to the United Provinces, who are now
Masters of it.

Schesburg, Sandava, a City in Transylvania, upon the River Cochel; between
Clausenburg to the East and Cronstad to the West. The Inhabitants call it
Segeswar; the Germans Schesburg.

Schetland, Armoda, Aemoda, Amodae, Schetlandia, an Island or knot of small
Islands lying to the North-East of the Orcades; over against Bergen in Norway;
but at a considerable distance from it. under the King of Scotland: by Mr.
Cambden supposed to be the Thule of the Ancients: these Islands are also called
Hetland, and lie sixty nine Miles beyond the Orcades.

Schiampua, the same with Chiampana.

Schiatti, one of the Islands of the Archipelago, separated from the Cape
Magnesia (now Verlichi) in Macedonia, by a Channel not above a League over; It
is furnished with several safe Harbors, which give the Christian Corsaires too
much encouragement to infest it. The Principal of them is (...) or S. George,
which is attended with a Town o^ the same name, showing the ruins of a
splendid Place in ancient times.

Schiavoni, Sclavi, the Sclaves or Sclavonians, which Inhabit Dalmatia; from
them called Schiavonia.

Schiras, or Scherazz, Schirasium, a great City in the Kingdom of Persia, in
the Province of Fars (or Persia properly so called) upon the River Bendimir;
two hundred Miles from Ormus to the North, two hundred and fifty from Hispahan
to the South. This City sprung out of the ruins of Persepolis, about nine Miles
in compass; the Country about it producing excellent Wine. It is largely
described by Monsieur Thevenot in his Travels, Part. II. page 124. He says it
is the Capital of Persia; seated in a pleasant and fertile Plain extending from
North to South; and encompassed with lovely Cypress Trees and Gardens: the City
is but two hours walk, has no Walls, nor any other defense but a scurvy Dike.
It has a College in which Theology, Philosophy, and Physic are taught; and
about five hundred Students. Lat. 29. 40. Mr. Herbert says, the Plain it
stands in, is twenty Miles long, and six broad; encompassed with great Hills;
under one of which this City is placed. And others tell us, it has a hundred
thousand houses: believing it may be the Marasium of the Ancients.

Schirwan. See Servan.

Schlesien, the same with Silesia.

Schlestadt, Selestadium, a City of Germany in the Lower Alsatia, upon the
River Ill; in the Territory of Hagenaw; four German Miles from Brisach to the
South-West, a little further from Colmar to the North, and the same distance
from Strasburgh. Heretofore an Imperial and Free City; but now under the French
by the Westphalian Treaty; who in 1673. dismantled it; and two years after
began to refortifie it: it is now a very strong place.

Schenberg, a Part of the Carpathian Hills; the same with that which Latin
Writers call Cetius; and the Germans Kalenberg, Dewsberg, and Heritzberg;
varying its name in the different Countries it passes through.

Schiro, Scyros, an Island in the Archipelago; called by the Greeks, Schiros;
by the Italians, Schiro; by the French, Squire. It is eighty Miles in Circuit,
fruitful and populous: forty from Negropont to the North, and seventy from
Macedonia to the East; West of Scio. It has a small City called Skiro; which is
a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Athens, and four other small Villages.
The City has a Port to the South-West; in subjection to the Turks. Called also,
San Georgio di Sciro.

Schonen, Sconia, Scania, a Province of Sweden; called by the Inhabitants
Schaane, by the Swedes Skone, by the Germans Skonen. It lies upon the Baltic
Sea over against Zeeland, from which it is divided by the Sownd: it has the Sea
on all sides but the North; being almost an Island; on the North it is bounded
by Haland and Westrogothia; and it is its self the principal part of South
Gothland. This County was sold to Magnus King of Sweden, in 1330: by John Duke
of Holstein, for seventy thousand Marks of Silver; Christopher II. King of
Denmark having Mortgaged it before to these Dukes. Waldemarus King of Denmark
redeemed it from the Swedes in 1341: but in 1658. the Swedes recovered the
Possession of it by the Treaty of Roschild. This Country was Converted to the
Christian Faith, by Othingar, (a Bishop) about 980. The principal places in it
are, Lunden, Landskroon, Matmuyen and Helsingborg.

Schoonehoven or Schonaw, a Town in the South of Holland, upon the River Leck,
with a capacious Port; where they take amongst other Fish a great number of
Salmons. Agnian 2. Bishop of S. Asaph in Wales in 1268, a Dominican, was a
Native of this Town.

Schorndorff, Schorndorfium, a small City, well fortified, in the Dukedom of
Wurtemberg in Germany; upon the River Remms (which gives name to the District
in which this City stands:) four German Miles from Stutgard to the East, and
six from Hailbrune to the North-East. It has a Castle; and obtained its Charter
from Frederick II. in 1230. In 1647. it was taken by the French; but after
restored to the Duke of Wurtemberg, under whom it now is.

Schowen, or Schouwen, Scaldia, an Island of Zeeland, (one of the United
Provinces,) near the East Mouth of the Schelde: heretofore much greater than
now. There are three places of Note in it, Ziriczee, Brouwers, and Bommene. It
is six French Leagues long from East to West, and above two broad. So near in
former times to North Beveland, another Island of Zeland, that the Inhabitants
of each could discourse from them with another. But the passage has been
mightily since enlarged by tempests.

Schut, Cituorum Insula, a great Island in the Lower Hungary, made by the River
Danube; called by the Hungarians, Chalokewz; by the Germans, Schut. It extends
from Presburgh to the North-West, to Comora East, nine German Miles: about four
broad, and in circuit twenty four. It has three hundred Villages: its principal
place is Comorza; beneath which the Danube again unites in one Stream. It is
wonderfully fruitful, well peopled, and watered; affording good Gardens,
Warrens, and Pasturage; and was the cause of the present War between the
Emperor and the Turks. The latter demanding it to be put into his Hands about
1682. (or 1683.) and the Emperor denying it (as he could not part with it
without exposing all his other Dominions to their Ravage,) Thereupon the Turks
besieged Vienna. This Island, called the Great Schut, has another very near it,
which is accounted a part of it by the name of Little Schut.

Schwaben, Suevia, a great Province or Circle in Germany; called by the
Germans, die Schwaben; by the French, Souabe; by the Italians, Suevia; by the
Poles, Szwabska. Bounded by Bavaria on the East; the Rhine dividing it from
Alsatia on the West; Switzerland to the South, and Franconia to the North. It
had heretofore Dukes of great Name and Power: but now divided into several
lesser Territories under several Princes; the chief of which are the Dukedom of
Wurtemburgh, the Bishoprics of Ausburgh and Constance; the Marquisates of
Baden, Schwartzwalt, Burgow, and Ortnaw; the Principalities of Furstemberg, and
Zollern; the Counties of Ettingen, and Hohenburgh; the Territories belonging to
the Abbat of Kempten and Algow. There are also in it many Imperial and Free
Cities; the Capital City of this Circle being Vlm. The others are Augsburgh,
Kempen, Constantz, Hailbrun, Hall en Souabe, Lindaw, Memningen, Nordlingen,
Stugard, Tubingen, and Vberlingen.

Schwauberg, the present name of the Norick-Alpes.

Schwartwatter. See Vecht.

Schwartzwaldt, Martina Sylva, Bacenis, the Black Wood or Forest; a Province in
the Circle of Schwaben, in Germany; toward Mount Abenow, and the Fountains of
the Danube and Necker; between the Dukedom of Wurtemburgh to the East, and
Brisgow to the West: it lies extended from North to South, from the Marquisate
of Baden to the Cities of Seckingen, Rheinfelde, and Ortnaw. This Country is a
part of the vast Hercynian Forest; which in ancient times run through the whole
Body of Germany, (and perhaps through Moscovy) and ended at the Frozen Ocean,
or White Sea.

Schwartz-Zee, the German name of the Euxine* or Black Sea.

Schwartzembourg, a County in the Province of Thuringia in Germany. And a Town
and Bailywick under the Cantons of Bearne and Fribourg in Switzerland.

Schweidnitz, Suvidnia, a City of Silesia, upon the River Westritz; thirty
Miles from Wratislaw to the West, twenty five from Lignitz to the South, and
twelve from the Borders of Bohemia. It is the Capital of a Dukedom of the same
name; and a very strong place: yet taken and retaken several times in the great
Swedish War. Near this City the Swedes defeated Albert Duke of Brandenburgh, in
the year 1642: by which Victory they made themselves Masters of the greatest
part of Silesia.

Schweinfurt, Schuinfurtum, a City in Franconia in Germany, upon the Mayn;
within the Dominions of the Bishop of Wurtzburgh; almost seven German Miles
from Bamberg to the West, and five from Wurtzburgh to the South-East. It
belonged formerly to the Counts of Heneburgh; till Henry II. Emperor
dispossessed them, and gave this City, (with the Title of Marquisate) to one
Otho; which Family ending in 1112, the City returned to the Empire: now an
Imperial and Free City, and a place of great strength; yet taken by the Swedes
in the German War.

Schwerin, the chief Town in Mechlenburgh, upon a Lake; eighteen Miles from
Hamburgh to the East, and five from the Baltic Sea to the South. The usual
Residence of one of the Dukes of Mechlenburgh; in the Lower Saxony.

Sciglio, Scyllaeum, a Town and Promontory on the Coast of Calabria, in the
Kingdom of Naples; near Regge to the North. The famous Rock Scylla lies upon
this Coast, in the Streights of Messina.

Scillo, or Scilla, Scylla, a famous Rock on the aforesaid Shore; nineteen
Miles from Messina in Sicily the North-East; upon the Channel which parts
Sicily from Italy, at the West end of it. The Water within its Caverns makes a
noise like the barking of Dogs: whence, probably came the ancient fiction of a
Scylla becoming half a Rock, and half a Dog.

Scio. See Chio.

Sciocco, Togisonus, a small River in the Territory of Padoua in Italy.

Sclavonia, the Southern Province of the Lower Hungary; called by the Italians,
Schiavonia; by the Germans, die Sclavinien; by the Poles, Slovienska Ziemia.
The middle Ages under this Name comprehended Illyricum, Dalmatia, Croatia,
Bosnia, and this which is now called Sclavonia: On the North it has the Drove,
(a great River which parts it from the Lower Hungary;) on the East the Danube;
on the South the Save; (which divides it from Croatia, Bosnia, and Servia;) and
on the West Carniola and Stiria. The length of it from the Town of Kopranitz in
the West, to the fall of the Drove into the Danube in the East, is fifty German
Miles: its breadth from the Drove to the Save twelve. This Country was first
possessed by the Pannonians; after that by the Goths about 386; who were
Conquered by the Sclaves about 550. About 1200. these People became Tributaries
to the Kings of Hungary. About 1544. this Country was first subdued by Solomon
the Magnificent. In 1687. after the Battle of Mohats, the Turkish Army mutining
against the Prime Vizier, all this Country except Gradisca, submitted to the
Emperor: the Turks deserting it without any blows. The German^s upon their
return were very well pleased with the Fertility of it. The Chief Towns in it
are Gradisca, Esseck, and Possega, which is the Capital City. The Inhabitants
are great lovers of War; and pray for nothing more earnestly, than that they
may die with their Arms in their Hands.

Scodra, a City of Illyricum; attributed by Livy and Ptolemy to Dalmatia; and
in those times the Seat of the Kings of Illyricum. Now the Capital City of
Albania; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Antivari: great and
populous; it stands upon the River Boiana, (Barbana;) twenty four Miles from
the Adriatic Sea, and eighty from Ragusa to the North East. Twice besieged by
the Turks, under Mahomet II. without success; and in 1478. resigned to them for
a Peace, by the Venetians. The Inhabitants call it Scadar; the Turks, Iscodar;
and the Italians, Scutari. The Lake Labeatis, out of which the Boiana Springs,
takes the name now of the Lake of Sclitari. Long. 44. 20. Lat. 42. 24.

Scone, Scona, a celebrated Abbey in the County of Perth; upon the Tay; three
Miles from S. Johnston to the North West; in which the Kings of Scotland for
many Ages were Crowned.

Scopia, Scapi, a City of the Upper Moesia, and the Capital of Dardania, in the
Borders of Macedonia in the times of Ptolemy; now called Scopia by the
Italians, and Vschub by the Turks. It is a great populous City in Servia; an
Archbishop's See, and the Seat of the Sangiack of Servia; feated in a fruitful
Plain, upon the River Vardar, over which it has a Stone Bridge of twelve
Arches; one hundred Miles from Thessalonica to the North-West, ten from Sophia
to the West, and about the same distance from Giustandil to the South. The
River upon which it stands falls into the Bay of Thessalonica.

Scotland, Scotia, is the second Kingdom in Great Britain; called by the
French, l' Escosse; by the Italians, Scotia; by the Germans, Schottlandt. On
the East it is bounded by the German Ocean; on the North by the Deucalidonian
Sea, and the Isles of Orkney; on the West by the Vergivian Ocean, and the Irish
Sea; on the South by the River Tweed, the Cheviot Hills, and the adjacent Tract
to Solway Sands; whereby it is separated from England. Solway Fyrth lies in
degrees. 56. of Latitude; and the most Northern point lies in 60 30. by which it
should be three hundred and fifteen English Miles in length. Polydore Virgil
reckons four hundred and eighty: its breadth is no where above sixty; and its
form Triangular; with many great Inlets and Arms of the Ocean, which indent
both the Eastern and Western sides of it. The Soil especially toward the
North, is generally barren; affords little Timber, and no Fruit Trees. The
Southern parts are more fruitful; the Air in both sharp and cold. It is divided
into two parts, (the Southern and the Northern) by Dunbritain and Edinburgh
Fyrth. The South part called the Low-Lands, is fuller of Cities and great
Towns; the People are more rich and better civilized; as not only Inhabiting a
better Country, but driving a Trade at Sea. The Northern or High-Lands, are
more barren and poor; the Inhabitants accordingly patient of want and hunger,
and very temperate in their Diet; without which Virtues they could not subsist.
South Scotland is divided into twenty one; North Scotland into thirteen
Counties. For the Ecclesiastical Government they have two Archbishops: S.
Andrews, who has eight; and Glascow, who has three Suffragan Bishops under him.
In the times of the Romans, this Country was called Caledonia and Albania; the
People, Picts, from their custom of Painting their Bodies. The Romans never
extended their Conquests beyond the South of Scotland, because they thought the
Northern and barrener parts not worth their pains. The remaining Inhabitants,
(after the withdrawing of the Roman Garrisons from the Northern parts of
Britain,) became very troublesome to the Britains; and forced them to call in
the Saxons about 449: who Conquered the South parts of Scotland, and possess it
to this day. The Scots or Irish about the same time entered the Western parts
of Scotland; and by degrees united first with the Picts or Highlanders; by
their assistance Conquered the Saxons, and gained the Sovereignty of that whole
Kingdom. But there being no Letters here, the Story of these times is very
dark; which has occasioned great Controversies concerning the time of the Scots
coming out of Ireland. About 839 the Picts were entirely subdued by Kenneth II.
first sole King of all Scotland. This Line continued under twenty three
Princes, to 1285. When Alexander III. dying without Issue, there began a
tedious and bloody contest about the Succession; which was referred to Edward
I. of England, who adjudged the Crown to John Baliol, an Englishman. He
Rebelling against his Benefactor, was defeated by that Prince; who following
his blow made himself Master of Scotland, and kept it to his death. In 1307.
Robert Bruce, the other Competitor, overthrew the English; established himself
King of Scotland, and Reigned till 1332: when the Kingdom divided again between
Edward Baltol, and David Bruce; which latter prevailed at first against his
Competitor; but fell under the power of the English, where he was many years a
Prisoner. In 1371. Rob. II. Surnamed Steward, descended from the eldest
Daughter of David Bruce, succeeded. In 1602. James VI. (the ninth in this
Line;) succeeded after Queen Elizabeth to the Crown of England; as Descended
both by Father and Mother, from Margaret the eldest Daughter of Henry VII. King
of England; the whole Line of Henry VIII. being extinguished. The Christian
Religion was Planted here by different Persons, and at several times. The Saxon
Scots were Converted by Aidan, the first Bishop of Lindisferne, about 635. The
South-Eastern by Nimas, Bishop of Candida Casa, (or White Herne) about 555. The
Highlanders, (or Northern Picts) by Palladius, a Deacon of Rome, about 435. The
Bishops of Scotland were always subject to the Archbishop of York, till 1478:
when on the pretense of the frequent Wars between them and England, their two
Archbishops Sees were erected; and they became a separate Church from that of
England.

Scotusa, Scotussa, a small City in Thessalia; which is a Bishops See, under
the Archbishop of Larissa; near to which it stands.

Scutari or Scutaret, Chrysopolis, Dianae fanum, a Town upon the Propontis in
the Lesser Asia, over against Constantinople: believed by some to be sprung out
of the ruins of the ancient Chalcedon.

Scylla. See Scillo.

Scythia, The vast Region anciently understood by this name, was divided into
Scythia Europaea, and Asiatica. 1. Scythia Europaea was the Country of the
Nomades, Basilidae, etc. lying along the Borysthenes toward the Euxine Sea,
and the Palus Maeotis making on that side a part of Sarmatia Europaea; and now
contained properly in the Lesser Tartary. But besides this, betwixt Moecia,
Dacia, Thrace, and the Danube there lay Scythia Europaea Pontica: where we have
now the East quarters of Bulgaria, and the Territories of Dobrzin, and
Bessarabia. Of which the Scythians possessed themselves in the fifth Century.
2. Scythia Asiatica was subdivided into Citerior and Vlterior, the Hither and
Further Seythia by the Mountain Imaus. And distributed accordingly betwixt the
Sarmatae and Persae to the West, India to the South, the Tartarian Ocean and
the Hyperborei to the North. The ancient Alani, Sacae, and Jaxartae were some
of its Native Barbarians. This Scythia now lies comprehended in the Desert and
great Tartary. The Manners of the old Scythians and modern Tartars being
much-what the same.

Scythopolis, the ancient Roman name of Bethshan in Palestine, upon the Lake of
Genezareth: which Pliny and Ptolemy misplace in Coelesyria. See Bethshan.

Scrikfinner, Scritophinis, a People in Scandinavia; between Norway to the
North, and Lapland to the East. These People are said to Cloth themselves with
the Skins of Beasts, like the Samoiedes; as is usual with all these Hyperborean
Nations.

Sdille, See Delos.

Sdrin, Sdringa, Stridonium, a City of Dalmatia; the Birth place of S. Jerome,
(the most Learned of the Latin Fathers;) ruined by the Goths: but afterward
rebuilt, and in some degree Peopled. Others place it upon the Confluence of the
Mure and the Danube; fifteen Miles beneath Rakelspurg in Stiria.

Seafull, a high Hill in the middle of the Island of Man; in the Irish Sea:
which affords the Beholder a Prospect of three Kingdoms at once, England to the
East, Scotland to the North, and Ireland to the West.

Sebaste, Sebastia, Sebastopolis. See Samaria, Suvas, Saustia and Savatapoli.

Sebenico, Sebenicum, Sicum, a small City, very well fortified, in Dalmatia;
upon the Shoars of the Adriatic Sea: and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop
of Spalato; under the Venetians ever since 1412. having before been a Maritim
City of Croatia. It has a Castle and Fort built upon a Rock: which are Places
of great strength, and have four times humbled the Ottoman Forces, and
preserved this important Place under that State. It lies at the Mouth of the
River Kerka, or Kirka; thirty eight Miles from Zara to the East, and three
hundred from Venice. Made a Bishops See by Pope Boniface VIII. The ruins of the
ancient Sicum of Ptolemy appear at some distance from this City.

Sebourg, a Castle and Seigniory in the Province of Hainault, in the Low
Countries: three Leagues from Valenoiennes and near Bavay. It has the honor of
the Title of a Viscounty.

Secchia, Gabellus, a River of Italy; which springs from the Apennine, in the
Borders of Carfagnana; between Tuscany and the Apennine: running Northward, and
dividing the Duchy of Modena from that of Reggio, in some Places it waters
Sassuola: leaving Modena to the East, and Cappi to the West, it falls into the
Po at S. Benedicts Abbey, in the Duchy of Mantoua; five Italian Miles from
Mirandola to the North West.

Sechy, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk, in the Hundred of Frebridge.

Seckaw, Secovia, Secovium, a small Castle in Stiria; which is a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Saltzburgh; erected in 1219 by Pope Honorius III. and
Eberbard, Archbishop of Saltzburgh. It stands upon the River Gayl, a little
above its fall into the Mure; not above four German Miles from the Borders of
Austria to the South, and twenty from Saltzburgh to the East. The Archbishop
has the Election and Consecration of this Bishop; gives him his Investiture,
takes an Oath of Fealty from him: and he has no Place nor Voice in the Diet of
Germany.

Sedan, Sedanum, a City in Champagne, in France, upon the Maes; with a very
strong Castle. Anciently in the Propriety of the Bishop of Reims; by whom it
was exchanged with the Crown, for Cormicy. Afterward it had particular Lords
of the Families of Braquemont, and Marcan; and in the Family of Turene was made
a Principality. In 1642. this little Principality was forced to submit to the
Crown of France. It stands sixteen Leagues above Namur to the South, and from
Verdun to the North; in the Frontiers of Champagne and Luxemburgh.

See, Seva, Segia, a small River in Normandy; six Miles from Auranches to the
West.

Seelandt, Selandia, Codadonia, a great Island in the Baltic; belonging to the
Crown of Denmark: separated from Scania to the North by the Sound on the South
it has the Baltic Sea. It is sixteen German Miles in length, twelve in
breadth; a very fruitful and pleasant spot of ground. The Capital of it is
Coppenhagen, the Royal City of Denmark. The rest are Helsinore, Cronenburgh,
and Fridericksburgh; and besides these it has three hundred and Forty Parishes.

Seez, Sagiensis Vrbs, Sagium, Sajorum Civitas, Vrbs Seluniorum, a City in
Normandy in France; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Roan. It
stands near the Fountains of the River Orne; thirty six Leagues from Paris to
the West, eleven from Lisieux to the South, and five from Alenzon to the East.

Seged, or Segedin, Segedunum, a City of the Upper Hungary, seated upon the
Tibiscus; where it receives the Merish, (a great River out of Transylvania, in
the County of Bodroch;) twenty six German Miles from Buda to the South-East,
and fifteen from Colocza. Taken by the Turks in 1552. The Imperialists plundered
it in 1685: and took it from the Turks without resistance, after they were
possessed of Buda.

Segeswar, Segethusa, Sandava, Singidava, Segesuaria, a City of Transylvania;
called by the Germans Schezpurg: it is seated partly on the side of an Hill,
partly in a Valley upon the River Cochel, which after falls into the Merish;
ten German Miles from Hermanstadt (or Zeben) to the North, and fourteen from
Kronstadt or Brassaw to the West: near the foot of the Carpathian Hills. Under
the Prince of Transylvania.

Segewoldt, Segevoldia, a City in Livonia, upon the River Teyder; five Swedish
Miles from the Bay of Riga to the East, and seven from Riga to the South-East.

Segna, Senia, a City placed by Pliny in Liburnia, (now in Croatia) and a
Bishops See under the Archbishop of Spalato. It stands upon the Shoars of the
Adriatic Sea, at the bottom of a Mountain; thirty five Miles from Nona to the
South-West, and fifty from the Borders of Italy to the East. This City belongs
to the Kingdom of Hungary, and is under the Emperor: it has an old Castle, a
very strong Fort built on a steep Hill, and a Harbor upon the Gulf of Venice.

Segni, Signia, Vrbs Volscorum, a City of great Antiquity, in the States of the
Church in Campagna di Roma; under the Dominion of the Pope: giving the Title of
a Duke to the Family of Sfortia. It stands on the top of a Mountain, called by
its own name ( La Montagna de Segni:) thirty two Miles from Rome to the East,
and twelve from Preneste to the South. In this Place Organs were first
invented, and Pope Vitalianus was born. The Popes Innocent III. Gregory IX. and
Alexander IV. were all of the House of the Counts of Segni. For this Place was
an Earldom before a Dukedom.

Segorve, or Segorvia, Segorbia, Segobriga, a City of the Kingdom of Valentia;
upon the River Morvedre, which a little lower falls into the Mediterranean Sea:
it is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Valentia; small, and not well
Peopled. Eight Miles from Valentia to the North-West, and twelve from Tervel to
the South-East.

Segovia, Vrbs Arcevacorum in Pliny; Segubia in Ptolemy; Segobia in the
Councils; is a City in New Castile in Spain, which is a Bishops See under the
Archbishop of Toledo. A celebrated Place, well Peopled and Rich, by reason of a
great Clothing Trade driven in it: And besides very large Suburbs, it has a
Castle called El Alcaser. By the City, on the Northside, flows a small River
called Eresma. It stands at the foot of an Hill in a pleasant Plain; has a
noble Aquaduct, supported by a hundred and seventy seven Arches, in double
Rows, which reach from one Hill to another; built by the Emperor Trajane. This
City is twenty Spanish Leagues from Toledo to the North. Long. 16. 30. Lat. 41.
15.

Segovia La Nueva, a City in the Island of Manilia; (one of the Philippines
under the Spaniards,) on the East side of the Island; and a Bishops See.

Segre, Sicoris, a River in Catalonia, which arises in the County of Cerdagne;
at the foot of the Pyrenean Hills, in the Borders of France; and watering
Livia, Cerdagne, and Vrgel, receives the Noguera Pallaresa, and the Noguera
Rogercana: the first at Camarasa, the second above Lerida; beneath it comes in
the Cinca (a great River) above Mequinenca; below which this River Segre unites
with the Ebro, nine Miles above Garcia to the West.

Segura, Serabis, Sorabis, a River of Spain, which arises in New Castile from
a Mountain of the same name; and flowing through the Kingdom of Murcia, falls
into the Bay of Alicant; having watered Caravacca, Murcia, and Orihuela.

Sehusen, Senohusium, a City of Brandenburgh.

Seididag. See Agion Oros.

La Seille, Sala, Salia, a River of Lorain; which arises out of the Lake de
Lindre; and flowing North-West waters Dieuze, Nomeny and Going: and at Metz
falls into the Moselle.

La Seine, Seyne, Sequana, one of the principal Rivers of France; which arises
in the Dukedom of Burgundy, in a mountainous place near the Castle of
Chanceaux; two Leagues from a Town called Seine, and six from Dijon to the
North. Being augmented by some smaller Rivers, it waters Chastillion, Bar sur
Seine, Troy, Pont sur Seine, (above which the Aube comes in; and beneath it
the Yonne and the Loing:) so it hastes by Melun to Corbeil. The Marne comes in
a little above Paris, the Glory of this River: and beneath that City, above
Poissy, the Oise, the Epte; and in Normandy the Eure, and the Andelle above
Roan, the Capital of Normandy. At Caudebec in Normandy it forms a great Arm of
the Sea; which admits the Tides of the Ocean thirty Leagues into the Land;
gives passage to a Ship of great Burden as high as Roan, and smaller Ships as
high as Paris.

Selby, a large Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire and the Hundred of
Barkston, upon the River Ouse. Remarkable for being the Birthplace of K. Henry
I.

Selemne, the name in Pausanias of a River of the Peloponnesus; gliding by
Patras, in the Province of Clarentia.

Seleschia, Seleucia, a City of Cilicia; which is an Archbishops See under the
Patriarch of Antioch; twelve Miles from the Mediterranean Sea to the North.
Long. 64. 00. Lat. 38. 40. The Ancients gave it the Titles of Seleucia Olbia,
Seleucia Hiriae, and Seleucia Aspera: which latter might be occasioned by the
many Mountains in this Country. Gregory Nazianzen calls it Seleucia S. Theclae,
because it was famous for the Sepulcher of that Martyr. In the year, 359. the
Arrians assembled a Council of a hundred and sixty Bishops here* to which S.
Hilary Bishop of Poictiers came, being at that time an Exile in Phrygia.

Seleucajelbor, Seleucia Pieria, a City of Syria; built by Seleucus Son of
Antiochus King of Syria, near the Mouth of the River Orontes; ten Miles from
Antioch: which is a Bishops See, under the Patriarch of Antioch.

Seleucia Aspera, the same with Seleschia.

Seleucia ad Tigrim, the same with Bachad.

Seleucia Pieria, the same with Seleucajelbor.

Seleucia ad Belum, the same with Divortigi.

Seleucia Pisidiae, this is an ancient City of Pisidia in the Lesser Asia, upon
the Confines of Pamphylia; in which S. Paul established the Christian Faith. A
Bishops See under the Archbishop of Antioch. Now under the Turks, called
Caragar, Carasazar; and by others Celestria.

Selivrea, or Selibria, Selymbria, Selybria, a City of Thrace upon the
Propontis, of great Antiquity; being mentioned by Pliny and Ptolemy. It was at
first a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Heraclea; but now the Metropolis
it self. Great and populous, tho without Walls: it has a good Harbor too. This
City stands twenty five Miles from Constantinople to the West; also called
Selombria.

Selo. See Silaro.

Seilsey-Isle, a Peninsula, commonly so called, near Chichester in the County
of Sussex. Assigned about the Year 711. by Edilwach, King of the South Saxons,
to Wilfride Archb. of York for his Seat; who being banished his Country by the
King of Northumberland, came thence to preach to the South Saxons. Cedwal, King
of the West Saxons, having Conquered the Kingdom of the South Saxons, built a
Monastery here, and made it a Bishops See: which continued in the same place
above three hundred years, with the Title of the Bishops of Selsey; till Bishop
Stigard in 1070 removed the Sea to Chichester. Its chiefest Note now is, that
it yields plenty of excellent Lobsters and Cockles.

Semigallen, Semigallia, a Province of Livonia in the Kingdom of Poland; which
signifies in their Tongue, The End of the Earth. Bounded on the North by
Livonia properly so called, cut off by the Dwina; on the South by Samogithia,
on the West by Curland, and on the East by the Palatinate of Ploczko. The
principal Town is Mittaw the usual Residence of the Dukes of Curland, under
whom this Province is.

Semender. See Spenderobi.

Semnitz, one of the Names of the Carpathian Hills.

Sempach, a Town in Switzerland, under the Protection of the Canton of Lucerne.

Semur en Auxois, Semurium, a small City in the Dukedom of Burgundy, upon the
River Armanson; ten Leagues from Autun to the North, eleven from Dijon to the
West, and twenty two from Troy to the South.

Semur en Briennois, a Town in the Dukedom of Burgundy, in the Territory of
Autun; one League from the Loyre to the East, and three beneath Roanne to the
North.

Sendomir, Sendomira, a City in Poland; the Capital of a Palatinate of the same
name in the Lesser Poland; built upon an Hill by the Vistula, (where it
receives the Sanum) twenty eight Polish Miles from Crakow to the East, and
thirty two above Warsaw to the South. This Town was taken by the Swedes, in
1655; and retaken next year by the Poles.

Seuef, a Town in the Dukedom of Brabant in the Low Countries: made remarkable
by a Battle betwixt the French under the Prince of Conde: and the Spaniards
joined with the Dutch, in 1674. in which the former carried the Victory. It
stands upon the Borders of Hainault and Namur.

Senega, a great River in Africa; called by the Portuguese Zanaga, by the
Natives Ouedec. One of the principal Branches of the Niger, and the most
Northern; (which was called Darat or Daradus,) and falls into the Atlantic
Ocean by Cape Verde, (where there is a French Colony:) Upon its Banks stand the
Cities of Genehoa, Tombutum, and some others; its course is from East to West,
between the Kingdoms of Genehoa and Jalofarum.

Senez, or Senes, Civitas Sanitiensium, Sanesio, Sanitio, Sanitium, a small
Clity of Provence; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ambrun; from
which it stands fourteen Leagues to the South, and eight from Sisteron to the
North-East. Now reduced almost to a Village. The Sea is removed to Castellane,
a Town upon the Verdon two Miles South from Senez. And the Chapter of the
Cathedral of the Order of S. Austin was secularized by Pope Innocent X. in
1647. It stands amongst the Mountains of Provence: believed by some to be the
Sanitium of Ptolemy.

Il Senese, Senensis Ager, a Territory in Italy, called by the Inhabitants Il
Sanese; by the French le Sienois: it is a considerable part of Tuscany toward
the South; between Florence and Pisa to the North and West; the Tyrrhenian Sea
to the South, and the States of the Church to the East: Heretofore a
Commonwealth and a Free State; but has been subject above a hundred years to
the Duke of Florence. The Maremma di Siena is divided between the Prince di
Piombino (under the Protection of the Spaniards,) and the Stato di Presidii; in
which is Orbitello and Tellamont, immediately under the Spaniards, though they
be parts of the Senese. The Capital of this Province is Siena. The other Cities
are Monte Alciano, Colle, Pienza, Soana, Chiusi, Massa, Rosetto, and Piombino;
and the Island on this Coast belonged also to this State.

Senga, or Cinoa, Cinga, a River in the Kingdom of Aragon; which arises from
the Pyrenean Hills above Biela: and flowing South waters Ainsa, Balbastro,
Moncon and Fraga: at Mequinenca falls into the Segre, and with it into the
Ebro; having in this course entertained the Essera, the Guaticalema, and
Ysuela, and some other Rivers.

Senigaglia, Senogallia, Sena Gallica, a small, but handsome and strong City
upon the Coast of the Gulf of Venice, in the Dukedom di Vrbino in Italy;
belonging formerly to the Dukes of Vrbino and the Family of the Malatesti, now
to the Papacy. It has a Port, at the Fall of the River Nigola into the Gulf;
and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Vrbino. In 1627. a Synod was held at
it. The Senones, a Tribe of the ancient Gauls, establishing themselves in the
Country hereabouts, gave it this name of Senogallia. Asdrubal received a Defeat
before it; whose name is retained by a neighboring Mountain, called The
Mountain of Asdrubal.

Senio, Senna, a River of Vmbria in Italy.

Senlis, Augustomagus, Silvanectum, Sylviacum, a small City in the Isle of
France; which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Reims, and the Capital
of its County. Seated upon the River Nonette, ten Leagues from Paris to the
North: it has this Name, Sylvanectum, because it is surrounded with Wood from
the Forest de Rets. The County or Bailliage de Senlis lies between the Isle of
France, Le Valois, the Oyse, and the Aysne. The principal Towns in it being
Senlis and Compeigne. Senlis contains seven Parishes and two Collegiate
Churches. The Leaguers in the Civil Wars besieged it, and were here engaged by
the Kings Party. There have been diverse French Synods assembled at it.

Senne, or Zenne, Senna, a small River of the Low Countries; which arising in
Hainault, and slowing through the Duchy of Brabant, waters Brussels and
Mechlen; then falls into the Rupel.

Senno, Siris, a River in the Basilicate, a Province of the Kingdom of Naples;
which waters Agromento, and then falls into the Bay of Taranto; fifteen Miles
from Torre di Mare to the South. It had once a City upon its Banks called Siris
too; but now entirely ruined: its Rubbish scarce appearing, three Miles above
its Outlet.

Senonois, Senonensis Ager, a Tract in France; annexed to the Generalite of
Champagne; which is a part of the Possessions of the old Senones, and has this
Name from Sens its capital City.

Sens, Senones, Agendicum Senonum, a great City of France, called by the
Italians Sans: so very ancient, that it is thought older than Rome; and an
Archbishops See. Built in a beautiful Plain upon the River Yonne, which has
over it there a Stone Bridge. It is also the Capital of Senonois, in the
Prefecture of Champagne; though ill attributed by some to Burgundy. A beautiful
City, twenty six Leagues from Paris to the South-East, and the same from
Orleans to the North-East. Made famous heretofore by the Conquests of the
Senones, (a Tribe of the Gauls) its old Inhabitants in Italy and Greece: who in
the former took Rome, and built Siena and Senogaglia with other Places to this
day retaining their Memory in the Names they gave them. Robert, King of France,
took this City out of the hands of its Counts in 1005. It is plentifully
watered by Rivulets from all Parts: adorned with a noble Metropolitan Church,
six Abbeys, and diverse Ecclesiastical and Religious Houses. The Archbishops
take the Title of Primates of Gaul and Germany. Several French Councils have
been celebrated here. The Territory of Senonois reaches about sixteen or
seventeen Leagues in length, and eight in breadth. The learned Petrus
Abaelardus suffered the Condemnation of one of those Councils in 1140. in the
presence of K Lewis le Jeune and S. Bernard: from which he appealed to the Pope.

Senguino, Arymagdus, a River of Cilicia, in the Lesser Asia; which springs
out of Mount Taurus, and falls into the Mediterranean Sea; between the Cities
of Anemora and Arsinoe.

Sentino, Sentinus, a small River in the Marchia Anconitana; which running by
Sentina (once a considerable Town, but now only a Castle in the Dukedom of
Vrbino; in a pleasant Valley, fifteen Miles from Eugubio; the Town being ruined
by the Lombards;) falls into the Esino.

Sephoris, an ancient City of Palestine in Galilee, four Miles from Nazareth,
toward Mount Carmel; upon a little Hill in the midst of a Plain. Herod made it
the principal Place for Strength in all Galilee, for the greater security of
his Tetrarchy. Joachim and Ann, the Father and Mother of the B. Virgin, were
Natives and Inhabitants of it; in the place of whose House a Christian Church
in the Primitive Times was erected, as appears by the remaining Ruins. There
is a very large Fountain near it, called commonly by the same name of the
Fountain of Sephoris; by which the Christian Armies often assembled in the
times of the Kings of Jerusalem. From Sephoris, some write, that Joachim and
Ann removed to Nazareth, and thence to Jerusalem. It has been since called
Dio-Cesarea; but now lies in Ruins.

Ser, Cyrrhus, a River of Albania, a Province or Kingdom of Greece.

Seraio, Seraium, a City of Bosnia, upon the River Migliazka, in the Lower
Bosnia. It is great and strong; the Capital of that Kingdom; being some few
Miles from the Borders of Servia, and about thirty from the Save to the South,
and about hinety from Belgrade to the South-West.

Seram, a River of Bugey in France, in the Territory of Valromey: passing under
the Bridge of Soy into the Ser^erin, and thence near Rochefore into the Rhosne.

Serchio, Aesaris, Auser, Sarculus, a River of Italy; which arises out of the
Apennine in Tuscany, in the Borders of the Dukedom of Modena; and flowing
through Carfagnana and the States of Luca, not far from the Capital City of
that State, entertaineth the Osaro: and entering the Dukedom of Florence, falls
into the Tyrrhenian Sea; five Miles North of the Mouth of the River Arno.

Sere, Sara, a River of France in Touraine: Another in the Low Countries, which
falls into the Oyse.

Seregippe del Rey, a City in Brasil in South America; built on an Hill near
the Mouth of the River Potigipeda, on the Eastern Coast: the Capital of a
Province of the same name, between Pernambuc to the North, and the Province of
All Saints, to the South: both City and Province being subject to the King of
Portugal.

Sereth, Tiarantus, a River of Moldavia, which falls into the Danube, near
Galacz or Axiopolis.

Serica, a great Region of the ancient Asia; betwixt China to the East, and the
Mountain Imaus to the West: famous heretofore for Manufactures in Silk. Its
Cities were Issedon, Serica, Ottorocorra, Piada, etc. The Inhabitants are known
in Antiquity by the name of Seres. This Country at present lies contained in
the Kingdoms of Niuche, Tangut, etc. in the Asiatick Tartary, to which some add
Cathay. As some include it in the ancient Scythia Asiatica, others make them
separate. The Occhardus (now Tartar) is a River of Serica.

Serio, Serius, a River in Lombardy in the States of Venice; which springs
out of the Mountains in the Borders of the Grisons: and flowing South by
Bergamo and Crema, falls into the Adda above Piciglione; a great Town in the
Dukedom of Milan; five Miles from the Borders of the Dukedom of Parma.

Sermoneto, Sulmo, Sermineta, a Town in Campagua di Roma, in the States of the
Church; which gives the Title of a Duke to the Family of Cajetan. It stands
twenty eight Miles from Rome to the South, and seventeen from Terracina to the
North-East.

Serpa, a Town in the Kingdom of Portugal, toward the Borders of Andalusia,
near the River Guadiana: upon an Eminence, with a Castle for its security. It
has an unfruitful Country about it.

Serphino, or Serfinus, Seriphus, an Island in the Archipelago toward Europe:
full of Rocks, about thirty Miles in Circuit, betwixt the Islands of Fermema or
Thermia, and Sifano. The Romans used to banish Criminals to it.

Serrano, a small uninhabited Island in the North-Sea in America, betwixt
Jamaica and the Region of Nicaragua in New Spain: to which the Misfortunes of a
Spaniard, called Serrano, who was Shipwrack'd upon it in the time of Charles V,
and detained all alone some years there, for want of a Vessel to take him up
again, have fastened his own name.

Serres, or Seres, Serrae, a City of Macedonia; mentioned in Niceta, Cedrenus,
and the latter Greek Writers; by Leunclavius now called Seres. It is now a
considerable and well peopled Place; advanced to the Honor of an Archbishops
See, in the place of Amphipolis: between which, Thessalonica and Philippi, it
stands upon an Hill; our latter Maps place it thirty four Miles from Amphipolis
to the South-East, sixty from Thessalonica to the North-East, and thirty from
Contessa to the North-West.

Servan, or Schirwan, Servania, Atropatia, a Province in the North West of the
Kingdom of Persia, toward the Borders of Georgia and the Turkish Empire; the
Northern Bounds of which are the Caspian Sea. It has many great Cities: and is
one of the most Fruitful and Populous Provinces in that Kingdom; though it has
suffered much in latter times by the Depredations of the Turks. The Cities of
it are Tauris, Schamachie, Servan, Ardebeil and Ba^^. This Country makes a part
of the ancient Media.

Servia, a Province of the Turkish Empire, called by them Zirfia. It is of
great extent. Bounded on the West by Croatia, (or rather Bosnia and Dalmatia,)
and in part by Sclavonia; on the North by the Danube, which separates it from
the Upper Hungary and Moldavia; on the East by Bulgaria; and on the South by
Macedonia, Albania, and Dalmatia. The chief Towns and Cities in it are
Belgrade, Prisren, Novibazar, Procupie, Semander, and Scopia, which was
anciently the Capital. In the times of the Romans this was called Moesia
Superior, esteemed a part of Thrace, and the most barbarous Nation the Romans
had subdued; which was done by Marcus Licinius Crassus in the times of Augustus
Caesar. In the fall of the Roman Empire, the Servi (a Branch of the Sclaves)
became Masters of this Country, and gave it the name of Servia. About 1000. it
was conquered by the Emperors of Constantinople; but suffered to continue under
their own Princes as Homagers to the Empire. Amurath I. was the first of the
Ottoman Princes, who invaded this Country: He took Nissa about 1374. after
which they maintained a Bloody War with some Intermissions, till 1460: when
they finally submitted to Mahomet the Great, and ever after esteemed a Province
of that Empire. The Christian Faith was first settled here by Cyril and
Methodius, between 860. and 890. Methodius taking care to give them the Bible
in the Sclavonian Tongue; together with the Divine Offices; which they hold in
high esteem to this day. The Country is very fruitful and rich; has Mines of
Gold and Silver, especially about Zerbenick. Herzegovina and Rascia, are the
two principal Parts of it.

Sessanne, Sesanna, a small City in La Brie, a Province of France, in the
Borders of Champagne: 13 Leagues from Troyes to the North, and 24 from Paris to
the East; of late years it suffered much by fire, but now rebuilding. Some have
written it Sezania.

Sesans, or Sezans, Cincomagus, an ancient Roman Town in Dauphine; two Leagues
from Brianzon to the East, at the foot of the Cottian Alps.

La Sesia, Sesites, a River of Lombardy, which springs out of the Pennine
Alps: and flowing between the Dukedom of Milan, and the Principality of
Piedmont, waters Varallo, Romagnano and Vercelli; then falls into the Po, six
Miles below Casale.

Sessa, Suessa, Aurunca, an ancient City in Italy, in the Terra di Lavoro in
the Kingdom of Naples; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Capua;
from which it stands sixteen Miles to the West, and twenty from Gaeta to the
East; in a very fruitful soil for Wine and Corn. Honored with the Title of a
Dukedom.

Sesto, Sestos, Sestus, a Town and Fortress upon the Coast of Romania in
Europe, on this side the Hellespont, opposite to Abydos in Asia on the other.
These two Fortresses guard the Passage of the Archipelago into the Sea of
Marmora. See Abydos.

Sestula, the chief Town of the Territory of Frignana, in the Dukedom of Modena
in Italy; toward the Borders of the Bolognese.

Sestri, the name of two Towns in the States of Genoua in Italy, to the East
and West of the City Genoua.

Setia, a City in the Isle of Candy, called by the Greeks Sitia; which (though
very small) is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Candy. It stands on a
Peninsula, on the East side of the Island; under the Turks.

Sethie, Dicte, an Island on the East of Candy, thought by the Pagans to have
been the place where Jove was Nursed. Now also called Lassiti, and il Monte di
Setia.

Setines, the vulgar Name of Athens by a Corruption of (...). See Athens.

Settalia, Pamphylia, a Province in the Lesser Asia, upon the Mediterranean
Sea; between Cilicia to the East, and Lycia to the West

Settle, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of
Staincliff, upon the River Rible.

Sevenoke, a Market Town in the County of Kent in Sutton Lath: which has a
Hospital and a Free School founded in 1418. by William Sevenoke, a Lord Mayor
of London.

Les Sevennes, Cemmenus, Gebenna, a Mountain in France; which runs a Course of
thirty Leagues: between Rovergne and Givaudan (two Provinces of France) to the
West, the Switzers and le Velay to to the East. These Mountains begin near the
Fountains of the Loyre, in the Province of Vivarais; and are extended as far as
Rovergue, and the Borders of the Lower Languedoc. Toward Paris they are very
fruitful, and well inhabited. The rest is more barren; and besides the Rivers
which spring from it, and its being a Boundary, of no great advantage.

Seven-waldt, Seven-walden, Baduhennae Lucus, a Forest in Friseland.

Severino, Acmonia, a City built by Severus the Roman Emperor, upon the Danube;
near Trajanus his Bridge: twelve German Miles from Temeswaer to the North-East.

Severne, Sabrina, one of the noblest Rivers of England; which arises in the
County of Montgomery in Wales, near Plynllimon Hill, and flows at first East,
as far as Llandois: then turning North-East, it waters New-town; and (leaving
Montgomery to the East) passes by Welsh-Pool to the borders of Shropshire:
taking in the Tanot before it enters that County. So passes South-West to
Shrewsbury, and Worcester; beneath which the Temde, and at Tewkesbury the Avon
come in: passing to Gloucester, it becomes by that time very great, and beneath
that City it has never a Bridge over it. So parting Monmouthshire to to the
North from Gloucestershire to the South, it enters the Irish Sea; by a vast
and stately Mouth, liker an Arm of the Sea than a part of a River; fifteen
English Miles broad; between Nash-point in Glamorganshire, and Lintow in
Devonshire.

Sevilla de Oro, a deserted Town in the North part of the Island of Jamaica;
which has a good Harbor upon the Gulf of Mexico, but little frequented by the
English. The Spaniards were the Founders of it.

Seville, Hispalis, Ispalis, and Hispalis ad Baetim, a City of Spain; called by
the Spaniards Sevilla; great, rich, and populous; the Capital of the Lower
Andalusia, and an Archbishop's See; seated upon the River Guadalquivir, upon
which it has a frequented Harbor. There belongs also to it an University, a
Court of Inquisition, an old Castle (called Alcaser) and a large Suburb called
Triana. It is one of the ancientest Cities in Spain; ascribed to Hercules as
its Founder, which shows it to be a Phoenician City. The Moors conquered it in
the year of Christ 713, and held it five hundred thirty four years. In 1248 it
was recovered by Ferdinando, out of the hands of the Moors, after a siege of
sixteen Months: since that time two of the Kings of Castile were born here,
viz. Ferdinand IV. and Henry II. Ferdinand III. died here in 1252, Alphonsus X.
in 1284. When the Spaniards took it from the Moors, there belonged to it a very
populous Territory (being seated in a very fruitful Plain;) but by the
Banishment of the Moors, it is become almost desolate. Long. 14. 30. Lat. 37.
25. The West-Indian Fleets for the most part land their Merchandise at this
City: the Form of whose situation is almost round. The Metropolitan Church
passes for the largest in all Spain: You see a great number of Colleges,
Chapels, and Religious Houses besides; with Palaces, Grand Places, and
Fountains adorning them; whose Streams, by an Aquaduct, are fetched the space
of five or six Leagues from the City. In the years 590, and 619, two noted
Councils were celebrated here. Isidore Bishop of Sevil rendered both the Sea
and the City famous in his time. The Spaniards proverbially say, Qui no ha
visto Sevilla, no ha visto Maravilla: He that has not seen Sevill, has not
seen a Wonder. Near this Sevill, in the same Andalusia, stood the ancient City
of Italica; whence the Poet Silius, its Native (as many write) was denominated
Italicus: and which had the honor of giving Birth to three Roman Emperors,
Trajan, Adrian, and Theodosius senior. The place of its ruins now is known by
the Name of Sevilla la Vieja, or Old Sevill.

La Seure, Separa, a double River in Poictou, in France. 1. La Seure Nantois,
waters Mortagne in Poictou, and Nantes in Bretagne; then falls into the
Loyre. 2. La Seure Niortois, arises above S. Maixant; and watering Niort,
Mallezais, and Marans, falls into the Bay of Aquitain.

Sewer, Surius, Suirius, a River which arises in the County of Tipperary, in
the Borders of Leinster, in Ireland; and watering Casshel, Caryck, and
Waterford, falls into the Boyne, on the South of Ireland; and with it into the
Ocean.

Seyde, Sidon, by the Germans called Said, is a City of Phoenicia, in Syria,
upon the Shores of the Mediterranean; North of Tire; about a League distant
from the remains of the ancient Sidon, Sister to Tire in the Scripture, for its
Sins and the Punishments of them. A populous City, full of Merchants and
Artisans of all Nations; driving a great Trade in Cotton and Silk. The
Franciscans, Capuchins and Jesuits have each their Chapels; the Turks seven or
eight Mosques; and the Jews one Synagogue here. The Maronites of Mount Libanus,
and the Armenian Greeks enjoy the like Liberties. Without the City, appear many
Gardens of Oranges, Citrons, Tamarines, Palm Trees, and the Fig Trees of Adam;
(so called, because bearing a Leaf of the length of six foot and the breadth of
two, Adam (it is supposed) covered his nakedness with them.) It has two small
Fortresses; but so far ruined, as to remain indefensible. The Turks keep a a
Sangiack here, under the Bassaw of Damascus; a Cady, or Judge, and an Aga of
the Janissaries. The French, a Consul. All which Officers are handsomely lodged:
the rest of the Houses are ill built. The Harbor formerly was capable of
receiving many and great Vessels: but is now choked with Sand to that degree,
as to admit only of Skiffs; whilst Ships lie in the road behind the Rocks for
Shelter. In the Christian times it was a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of
Tire. The Eutychians held Council here of twenty four Bishops, in 512, under
the protection of the Emperor Anastasius. In 1260, the Tartars became Masters
of it: from whom the Turks obtained it about one hundred and fifty years since.
There is now a Caemetery upon a part of the Mountain Antilibanus, in the place
where the Old Sidon stood, for the use of the Christians of Seyde. And the
Maronites have a poor Chapel by it.

Seyne. See Seine. ^

Sezza, Setia, a City of Campagna di Roma in Italy, of good Antiquity;
mentioned by Martial. It is said to have sometime been a Bishop's See, though
not now. Du Val places an Epispocal City of the same name in the Terra di
Lavoro, in the Kingdom of Naples.

Sfacchia, Leuci, a Range of Mountains in the Territory of Cydonia, on the West
side of the Island of Candy; which gave name to the Sfacciotes: who signalized
themselves by their valiant resistance against the Turks, when they endeavored
the ravishing that Island from the Seigniory of Venice, of late years.

Shaftsbury, Septonia, a Town upon the Stoure, in the North-East Borders of
Dorsetshire, toward Wiltshire: seated in the form of a Bow on an high Hill;
which affords it a serene Air, and a large delightful Prospect, but deprives it
very much of Water. In the times of the Norman Conquest it had one hundred and
four Houses; and after this ten Parish Churches, now three; with about 500
Houses, built of the Freestone of its own Hill. Some write King Canutus the
Dane died here. This Town was built by King Alfred, in 880; as Mr. Cambden
proves from an old Inscription, mentioned in William of Malmesbury. In 1672,
Charles II. created Anthony Ashley Cooper, (then Lord Chancellor of England)
Earl of Shaftsbury; who died in Holland, and his Son succeeded him in this
Honor.

Shannon, Shennyn, or Shennonon, Senus, Sinejus, a River in Ireland, which is
one of the principal in that Kingdom. It arises in the County of Roscomon, in
the Province of Connaught, out of Mount Slewnern; and flowing Southward through
Letrim, forms a vast Lake (called Mine, Eske and Ree,) toward the North end of
which, on the East side, stands Letrim; in the middle, Longford; toward the
South, Ardagh; on the West side, Elphem and Roscomon; and at some distance from
the Lake to the South, Athlone. Beneath which comes in from the West the Logh,
(a vast River) from three other Lakes more to the West, (called Garoch, Mesks,
and Ben-Carble;) on the East it receives the Anney: so passing by Bannogh and
Clonfort, to the Lake of Derg, at Kiloe it leaves that Lake, and passes to
Limerick, where it turns full West; and between Munster to the South, and
Connaught to the North enters the Vergivian Ocean by a Mouth five Miles wide;
between Cape Lean and Cape Sanan, having in this Course separated Leinster and
Munster from Connaught.

Shap, a large Village in the County of Westmorland, in Westward, near the
River Lowther: in which, in the Reign of Henry I, Thomas, Son of Jospatrick,
founded an Abbey; and the same was the only Abbey in this County. There is near
this Town a noted Well, which ebbs and flows often in a day: and a perfect Bow
of vast Stones, some nine foot high and fourteen thick, pitched at equal
distances from each other for for the space of a Mile.

Sheale, a Town in the Bishopric of Durham, in Chester-ward, upon the Mouth of
the River Tine. The Newcastle Coal-Fleet takes its Cargo here.

Sheffield, a large well built Market Town in the West riding of Yorkshire, in
the hundred of Strafford, upon the River Dun; of particular note for Iron
Wares, even in Chaucer's time, who describes a Person with a Sheffield VVhittle
by his side. It shows the ruins of one of the five Castles, formerly seated
upon the same* River Dun, in the compass of ten Miles. Corn especially is much
bought up here, for the supply of some parts of Derby and Nottingham*shires, as
well as Yorkshire.

Shefford, a Market Town in Bedfordshire, in the Hundred of Clifton, situated
between two Rivulets, which below it join to fall in one Stream into the Avon.

Sheppey, Shepey, Toliapis, an Island on the Eastern Coast of Kent; at the
Mouth of the Thames and Medway. Separated by the River Medway from Kent, and on
all other sides surrounded with the Sea. About eight Miles long and six broad.
Fruitful in Pasturage, and well watered, especially on the South, by Rivers.
The Danes, Earl Goodwin, his Sons, and their Adherents, much harassed it in
former times. Queensborough is its chief Town: it has several other Towns
besides, and has been honored with the Title of an Earldom, in the Lady
Dacres, Countess of Shepey.

Shepton-Mallet, or Malley, a large Market Town in Somersetshire, in the
hundred of VVhiston.

Shipton, a Market Town in Worcestershire, in the hundred of Oswalderston,
upon the River Stower. It stands in a slip of the County, taken off from
Warwickshire.

Shirburne, Clarus Fons, a Town and Castle in the North-West of Dorsetshire; on
the Borders of Somersetshire, upon a River of the same Name; which afterward
falls into the Parret: the Capital of its Hundred. Built on the side of an
Hill, in a fruitful and pleasant Country; and much increased in the number of
its Inhabitants and its Wealth, by the Clothing Trade. In 704. a Bishop's See
was erected here; translated afterward to Sunning, and thence to Salisbury.
The Family of the Digbys, Earls of Bristol, are Barons of Shirburne. Also a
Market Town in the West riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of Barkstow, upon a
small stream falling into the VVarfe and the Ouse at the place of their
Conjunction. This Town is noted for the Stone-quarries near it: well inhabited,
and provided with a Free School.

Shoreham, a Market Town in the County of Sussex, in Bramber Rape, by the Sea
side.

Shrewsbury, Salopia, the principal City in Shropshire, is seated upon the
Severne; on the top of an Hill of Red Earth, in the middle of that County. The
River runs almost round the Town, and is covered by two lovely Bridges. Roger
of Montgomery, in the Reign of William the Conqueror, built on the North side
of it a strong Castle, which added much to its strength; he founded a stately
Abbey in it, whose remains are extant still. It was then a very considerable
Place. Nor is it (after so many Ages) sunk in its Wealth, Riches, or People:
but still a goodly City, and the Center of the Trade between Wales and
England. Near this City, in 1463, was a sharp Battle fought between Henry IV.
and Henry Percie Earl of Northumberland; on the behalf of Edward Mortimer (Earl
of March) as the right Heir of the Crown of England, after Richard II. In 1067,
Roger de Montgomery, Earl of Arundel, was by the Conqueror created Earl of
Shrewsbury. His Posterity enjoyed it till 1102, in three descents, and then
were divested of it. In 1442, John Talbot, Marshal of France, a Person of great
Worth and Conduct, (and the terror of France) was by Henry VI, made Earl of
this City; which Honor is enjoyed by his Posterity to this day. Charles
Talbot, the twelfth of this Line, succeding in 1667. Shrewsbury contains now
five Parish Churches: denominates a Lath; is encompassed with a strong Wall,
with a Bulwark that ranges from the Castle to the Severn; and is represented in
the lower House of Parliament by two Burgesses. First supposed to have taken
its rise from the ruins of the ancient Vriconium, which stood not far from it.

Shropshire, Salopia, is bounded on the North by the County Palatine of
Chester; on the East by Staffordshire; on the South by Worcester, Hereford, and
Radnorshires; on the West by Montgomery and Denbigh. Its length from North to
South is thirty four, its breadth from East to West twenty five, and the
circuit about one hundred thirty four English Miles: wherein lie one hundred
and seventy Parishes, and fifteen Market Towns. The Air of it is gentle and
healthful, the Soil rich and fruitful; abounding in Wheat, Barley, Pit-Coals,
Iron and Wood. The Severne (which is the second River of England) divides this
County almost in the middle; receiving into it the Camlet, the Morda, the Mele,
the Roddon, the Terne, the Worse, and some others: on the South it has the
Temde, which receives the Bradfield, Onke, Omey, Quenny, Stradbrook, Corve,
Ledwich and Rea; all which, and some other Rivers, water and enrich the South
part of this County; so that it may very well be one of the most fruitful and
best peopled Counties in England. The Principal City is Shrewsbury.

Siam, a City and Kingdom beyond the Ganges, in the Further East Indies. The
Kingdom is bounded on the North by the Kingdoms of Pegu and Ava; on the East,
Cambaya, Lao, Jancoma and Tangu: on the South, the Bay of its own Name; and on
the West by the Bay of Bengale: making by this form of its situation a
Demicircle of about four hundred and fifty Leagues. Some assign it a far
greater extent, and bound it by Pegu and Lao on the North; the Chinian and
Indian Oceans to the East and West; with the Kingdom of Malaca to the South:
And this way it makes a great Peninsula. It is certain, the King of Siam keeps
several other Kingdoms and Principalities tributary to him; and his Country
being blessed with a good Air, a fertile Soil, Mines of Lead, Tin, Silver and
Gold (tho of a base Alloy,) with store of Ivory; and being visited continually
by Vessels from Japan, China, Cochinchina, Tonquin, the Sound and the
Philippine Islands; from all parts of the Hither East Indies, and from Arabia,
Persia, and the Kingdoms of Europe; it affords the enjoyment of every thing
almost that is valuable. Whilst the Sun is in the Northern Signs, from March to
September, the Fields are generally overflown by the Rivers, which much
contributes to the fertility of them: for the Ear of the Rice mounts above the
height of the Waters. The King of Siam was Master heretofore of Malaca; see
Malaca. Of late, himself became a Tributary to the King of Pegu; see Pegu. But
he is very absolute over, and served with the profoundest Adoration by, his own
Subjects. The English, French and Dutch have each their Factories in this
Kingdom. The Portuguese and Armenians, Moors and Chinese, settle here in great
Numbers: being allowed dwellings in the City Siam, by a Favor not made common
to all Nations. Siam, the City, stands in an Island that is formed by the River
Menan: surpassing, in the richness of its Temples, most of the proudest Cities
in the Indies; and its Palace Royal, where the King resides, built by the River
side, is of an extent sufficient to denominate a City of it self. In 1634, the
Dutch built themselves a House in Siam, which^is one of the best, belonging to
their Company in these Indies.

Siangyang, Siangyanum, a City in the Province of Huquam, in the Kingdom of
China. The Capital over six other Cities.

Siara, a small City in Brasil, upon the North Sea, which is the Capital of a
Province; has a large safe Haven and a Castle; but not very populous. Under the
Portuguese.

(...), a Kingdom under the Great Mogul, in the East Indies; toward the
Fountains of Ganges, and Mount Caucasus; betwixt Naugracut and Pitane.

Siben, Sabiona, now a Castle only, but formerly a City in the County of Tirol,
and a Bishop's See. It is seated upon the River Eysock; ten Miles from Brixia
(whither the Brishoprick is removed) to the South-West.

Siberia, a Province of great extent, under the Crown of Muscovy; toward the
river Obb, in the Desert Tartary; between the Provinces of Condora, Legomoria,
and Permia. Some few years since first discovered; all covered with uninhabited
Woods, Marshes, and desolate Countries; having only a few Inhabitants, which
have a particular Language of their own, and not the use of Bread. The
Moscovites have of late built the Cities Tobolsk, upon the River Y^^im and
Siber on the Obb here, and united both in one Archbishopric. At the former the
Vice Duke, under the Grand Duke of Moscovy, resides; he commands over both
Siberia and Samoyeda. They have also set up Churches in diverse places, for the
Moscovian Christians.

Sicambri, a People of the ancient Germany; placed, by most, about the (now)
Province of Guelderland in the United Netherlands, betwixt the Maes and the
Rhine. By others, upon the banks of the Main. Strabo calls them Sugambri;
Ptolemy, Synganbri. The Bructeri were a part of their Dependents.

Sichem, an ancient City of the Territory of Samaria, in Palestine; in the
Tribe of Ephraim. The same which S. John calls Sychar, John 4. 5. standing near
the Well, where our Savior discoursed the Samaritan Woman. It is mentioned in
Abraham's time for the place of his abode, Genesis 12 6. Afterward for the
Sepulcher of Joseph, and the Inheritance of his children, Josh. 24. 32. For the
Election of Rehoboam King of Israel, here, by all Israel, 2 Chronicles. 10. 1. and
upon other Occasions. Now called Naplouse, Neapolas* and New Samaria. The High
Priest of the present Samaritans resides at it.

Sicily, Sicilia, Sicelia, Trinacria, Sicania, Triquetra, a very great Island
in the Mediterranean Sea, at the South West point of Italy. Thought by some
Ancients to join originally with Italy, as part of the continent, and to have
been separated from it by the stormy Powers of the Ocean. It lies in the form
of a vast Triangle (from whence some of its names are derived;) having three
great Capes ( Pelorum) now Faro, to the North-East toward Italy; Pachynus (now
Passaro) toward the Morea, and the South-East; and Lilybaeum (now Cape Coco)
to the West. Threehundred and eighty Miles from the Morea, one hundred from
Africa, one hundred and seventy from Sardinia, and from Italy a Mile and a
half. Its North side is two hundred fifty five Miles; its Southern one hundred
and ninety; and the Western one hundred fifty five, as Cluverius says, who
measured the whole Island. It is now divided into three Counties, Val di Domoni
to the North, Val di Noto to the South, and Val di Mazara to the West. The
ancient Cities of greatest power, were Syracusa (now Syragosa) Panormus,
Palermo, Messina, and Messana; of which the two last retain their former
Dignity. The other Cities are Gergenti* Calatagirone, Catania, Cefalu, Trapano,
Mazara, Monreal, Noto, Patti, Sacca, and Terra Nova. It is wonderfully fruitful
as to Corn and Wine; therefore called by Cato, The Granary of the
Commonwealth, and Nurse of the People of Rome. Abounds also with Cattle,
Sheep, Honey, Wine and Oil. In ancient times it had seventy three Free Cities:
in the time of the second Punick War it had sixty six. We have only Fabulous
accounts who were the first Inhabitants: but certainly the: Phoenicians have
been here, and were expelled by the Greeks; who not well agreeing amongst
themselves, drew over the Carthaginians to their common ruin. The Romans
followed not long after; and in the year of Rome 494, (two hundred and fifty
six years before the birth of our Savior) made themselves Masters of it; it
being the first Province they possessed out of the Bounds of Italy. In the mean
time Dionysius, Agathocles, Hiero, and Pericles advanced themselves to an
Absolute Tyranny here, by the use they made of their Victories. It continued
under the Romans till the Reign of Justinian: then the Vandals under
Gensericus, (in 439. and 440.) for some time became Masters of it, who were
expelled by Bellisarius in 535. Having been miserably spoiled by the Emperor
Constans, in 669. it fell into the Hands of the Saracens; who plundered it, as
they did several times after, and left it. Leandro Alberti faith, that in the
Division of the Empire between Charles the Great, and Nicephorus Emperor of the
East, (about 800.) Sicily, Calabria, and Apulia fell to the Emperor of
Constantinople: and that it continued under them till the times of Nicephorus
Thomas. However we find the Saracens (in 910.) after a great Naval Victory,
became Masters of Calabria, Apulia, and Sicily. Leandro places this in 914:
and says, the Greeks had part of Sicily still. In 1035. the Saracens were
still possessed of part of Sicily: but as Leander says, they and the Greeks
too were expelled by the Normans, in the times of Michael Caliphates (who
reigned but one year, about 1041. and 1042) by Gulielmus Ferebatus; [and not by
Tancred, as say others.] To this William succeeded, (as Counts of Calabria)
Roger I. by the Pope created King of Sicily; he having taken the Pope Prisoner
in the year 1139, William II. William III. and Tancred, a Bastard, opposed by
Pope Celestine III: who preferred Costanza, (a Daughter of Roger II. an ancient
Lady, a Nun) and married her to Henry, Son of Frederick Barbarossa, and made
him King of Sicily; to whom succeeded Frederick II. his Son. Then followed
Manfredus, his Natural Son; but the Pope set up Charles Duke of Anjou against
him in 1263. In 1281. upon Easterday, in time of Vespers, (whence the name came
of the Sicilian Vespers) the French were all massacred by the Sicilians, by the
Order of Peter III. King of Arragon, who had married the Daughter of Manfred.
During this Interval, this Crown had been offered to Richard, Earl of Cornwall;
(Brother to Henry III. King of England) and he refused it. From thenceforward
it became inseparably united to the Kingdom of Naples, and has ever since had
the same fate to this day, being governed by a Viceroy, who resides at Palermo
the present capital City of it. Hoffman says, the Saracens were possessed of
Palermo; had their Admiral, (or General) there, from 827. to 1070: when they
were finally expelled by the Normans, to whom Pope Nicolas granted this Island
on that condition, in 1058. So that the Normans might perhaps expel the Greeks
in 1042. and the Saracens in 1070. The Inhabitants forced the Spaniards in the
year 1647. to recall all their Taxes. This Island enjoys three Archbishops
Sees, Palermo, Messina, and Monreale; about six or seven Bishops Sees, and one
University, Catania. Aetna is a known Mountain here.

Sicyon, an ancient ruined City of the Peloponnesus; of sufficient note in its
time. The Turks have built Vasilica upon the Ruins of it.

Sida, Side, a Maritime City of Pamphylia, in the Lesser Asia; upon the
Mediterranean and the Borders of Isauria. Honored formerly with an Archbishops
See. In 385. a Council was celebrated at it under Amphilochius Bishop of
Iconium. Now in a condition of ruin; and called diversely Scandalor,
Candelohora, and Chirisonda.

Sidon. See Seyde.

Sidmouth, a Market and Sea-Town in Devonshire, in the Hundred of Budley; of
good account, before its Port was choked up with Sand.

Siena, Sena, Saena, Senae, a City of Hetruria in Italy, of great antiquity;
and a Roman Colony. Seated in the Borders of the Dukedom of Florence; thirty
two Miles from that City to the South, and an hundred and seven from Rome to
the North. This City; as Polybius says in his second Book, was built by the
Gauls in the year of Rome 396. A. M. 3730. after the taking of Rome by Brennus,
and from the Senones, (one of their tribes) took this Name. In the fall of the
Roman Empire, it suffered very much from the Barbarous Nations; and is said to
have been rebuilt by Charles Martel. The Inhabitants purchased their freedom of
Rodolphus the Emperor, and managed the same with various successes till 1555:
when it was taken by the Spaniard, and sold to the Duke of Florence in 1558.
under whom it still is. In 1459. it was made an Archbishop's See under Pope
Pius II. It was a flourishing University in 1386. but when founded is not known
to me. Several Popes ( Alexander III. Pius II. Pius III. Alexander VII.) and
great Men have been Natives of this place: its greatest glory is S. Catherine
of Siena, a Dominican, who persuaded Pope Gregory IX. to leave Avignon. She
died in 1380. Canonized by Pope Pius II. in 1461.

Sierra-Liona, a chain of Mountains upon the Frontiers of Nigritia and Guinee,
in Africa; therefore placed sometimes in the one and sometimes in the other, by
Writers. It gives name to the River Sierra-Liona, and to a large African
Kingdom, whither the English, French, Dutch and Porteguese traffic for Ivory,
Ambergrease, Pepper, Crystal, Coral, pieces of Gold, etc. The English, for the
security of their Commerce, built themselves a Fort upon the River
Sierra-Liona; which in 1664 was lost to the Dutch. In 1607 the King of this
Country with his Family and others received Christian Baptism of Father
Barreira a Portuguese Jesuit of the Mission. The Portuguese called him Dom
Philippe de Lion, in allusion to the name of his Kingdom. The present King is
also a Christian; tho the greatest part of the People, Heathens. His Kingdom
extends from Cape Verga to Cape Tagrin, and has its name from the noise of the
Sea against the Rocks, and the thunder from the Mountains of it resembling the
roaring of a Lion.

Sierras-Nevadas, a Chain of Mountains in Castile d'Or, in South America;
extended the space of forty Leagues, and accounted two in height: being, tho
near the Line, in the hottest seasons always covered on the top with Snow; as
it is intimated in its Name.

Siga, a City of Mauritania Caesariensis in Africa, with a Port upon the
Mediterranean, in the Kingdom of Algiers. It is an ancient City, and in
Christian times has been a Bishop's See. Now called Humain. A River of its own
name, Siga, falls into the Mediterranean here.

Sigan, a City of the Province of Xensi in China; which is the Capital over
thirty five other Cities.

Sige, and Sigeium Promontorium, an ancient Episcopal City of Troas, in Asia
minor: ruined. For the Promontory see Janizzari.

Sigeth, Salinae, Metuharis, a strong Town (the Head of a County of the same
Name) in the lower Hungary, seated in a Marsh made by the River Alme; two
Hungarian Miles from the Drove, seven from Alba Regalis to the South, and five
from Quinque Ecclesiae to the West. It has a very strong Castle, fortified with
three Ditches and as many Walls: which, added to the situation of it, make it
very considerable. Solomon the Magnificent ended his Life at Quinque Ecclesiae
during the Siege of this place; which was yielded to the Turks September 7.
1566, after a Defense that wanted nothing but Success to have rendered it the
most celebrated that has happened: Nicolas Esdrin, Count of Serini, (Governor
of it) being slain in the last Sally, which he made at the head of his
remaining Forces. It is now in the Emperor's hands by re-conquest: surrendered
January 15, 1688. The Imperialists found therein eighty five pieces of Cannon
There is another Town of the same Name in the Upper Hungary; near the Fountains
of the Tibiscus, in the Principality of Transylvania.

Sign, a Venetian Garrison in Dalmatia, besieged by the Turks twenty four days,
in 1687: and relieved by the Forces of the Republic under General Cornaro.

Silaro, Silarus, a River in the Kingdom of Naples, in former times the
Boundary of Lucania; and now often called il Selo, and il Silaro. It arises in
the Hither Principate from the Apennine; and falls into the Bay of Salerno,
eighteen Miles from that City to the East.

Il Sile, Silis, a River in the States of Venice; which waters the City of
Treviso, and then falls into the Adriatic Sea.

Silesia, a great Province in the Kingdom of Bohemia; called by the
Inhabitants, Slisko; by the Poles, Slusko; by the Germans, Schlesien. Bounded
on the East by Poland; on the North by the Marquisate of Brandenburgh; on the
West with Lusatia and Bohemia, properly so called; on the South with Moravia,
and the Upper Hungary. It was for eight hundred and sixty years a part of
Poland: and revolted from that Crown under Vladislaus Loch, King of Poland, in
1327. In the fifteenth Century, this Country generally embraced the Doctrines
of John Hus: which were tolerated by Rhodolphus II. in 1609. It had at first
several Princes of Royal and Sovereign Jurisdictions in their several
Principalities; which together with the Piastean Family, ended in the Person of
George William, in 1675: whereupon that Country returned entirely to the
Emperor, as King of Bohemia; having been above three hundred years ago united
to the Kingdom of Bohemia. The Principal Cities and Towns in this Province are,
Brieg, Crossen, Glogaw, Grotkaw, Jawer, Lignitz, Monsterberg, Olss, Troppaw,
Oppelen, Ratibor, Sagan, Schweidnitz, Volaw, and Breslaw, which is the Capital
City of this Country. It is divided into the Upper and Lower Silesia.

The Isles of Silly, Silurum Insulae, Casiterides, a knot of Islands in the
Vergivian Ocean; to the West of the Land's end of Cornwall; an hundred and
twenty Miles South of the Coast in Ireland, sixty from the Land's end, and an
hundred and forty from Cape S. Mahe in Britagne. The French call them the
Sorlingues. They are and ever have been under the Crown of England: in all
above an hundred and forty five; all clad with Grass or green Moss. The
greatest of them is S. Mary, which has a Town and Harbor of the same Name.
Where Queen Elizabeth, in 1593, built a Castle to defend it from the Spaniards;
and fixed a Garrison in it. King Athelstane was the first of the Saxon Kings
that conquered them. See Cambden.

Simmeren, a Town and County in the Palatinate of the Rhine in Germany. The
Town has a Castle belonging to it.

Simois, a small River of Troas in Phrygia, in the Lesser Asia. It arileth out
of Mount Ida, and joining with the Scamander, falls into the Archipelago
together with it near Cape Janizari, at the entrance into the Streights of
Gallipoli.

Sin, Sina, a City in the Kingdom of China, in the Province of Choquang; seated
at the foot of a Mountain. Also a Desert, betwixt the Mountains Elim and Sinai,
in Arabia: whither the Israelites, in their March, came the fifteenth day after
their departure from Egypt; and murmuring for hunger, were relieved by an
extraordinary Rain of Quails and Manna, Exodus 16. 4. 13.

Sinai, a part of the Mountain Horeb, upon the Coast of the Red Sea, in the
Stony Arabia: separated by a large Valley from the Mountain of S. Catherine. It
has at some distance from its foot a Spring of good Water: and upon the top
two Grotto's in Rocks, at this day said to be the place where Moses received
the Tables of the Law, and where he passed his forty days fast. It is now
wholly covered with a Multitude of Chapels, Convents, Cells and Gardens;
possessed by some Latin, amongst a crowd of Greek Christians, who, ever since
the third Century, have been planting their solitary Settlements here: So that
in the former Christian times, this Mountain with Horeb had as many Chapels
upon it as employed fourteen thousand Hermits to serve them; but the Turks have
reduced that number since. The Israelites lay encamped a whole year about this
Mountain.

Singara, an ancient City in Mesopotamia, near a Mountain of the same Name; now
said to be called Atalis. It saw a severe Battle betwixt the Armies of the
Emperor Constantius and Sapores II. King of Persia, in 349.

Singen, two Villages upon Rocks, almost inaccessible, within a quarter of a
Mile from one another in the Dukedom of Wirtemburgh, in Schwaben in Germany:
near the Castle of Hoentwiel.

Sinopi, Sinope, a celebrated City of Paphlagonia, in the Lesser Asia, upon the
Euxine Sea; which is a Bishop's See, under the Archbishop of Amisum. Seated
upon a small River of the same Name, having two Harbors. Built by Macritius, a
Coan, about the year of Rome 125: and fell not into the Romans hands, till they
had conquered Mithridates, who had a Palace here. After this it became a
Colony. In later times subject to its own Bishop, from whom it was ravished by
the Turks, who call it Sinabe: It has had yet the good fortune to preserve it
self in a tolerable State under those devouring Enemies of Mankind. Long. 64.
00. Lat. 45. 00. Valerius Flaccus intimates its ancient Splendour, where he says,

Assyrios complexa sinus stat opima Sinope. Diogenes the Cynick Philosopher,
was its Native.

Sinuessa, an ancient Roman Colony in the Campagna di Roma in Italy: which
Ptolemy calls Soessa, and Livy Synope. It became afterward a Bishop's See. but
is now ruined; and Rocca di Mondragone is built in the place of it. Baronius
refers the Council in 30^, that was held in the affair of P. Marcellinus, to
this City.

Sion, Sedunum, a City ascribed by Pliny to Gallia Narbonensis; now the Capital
of Valais; and called by the Germans, Sitten. It is a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Moutiers en Tarontaise; in a pleasant Plain, having only one Hill
on the East side; on which stand three Castles; in one of them the Bishop
resides. There is a small River runs by it, called Sitta, which after falls
into the Rhosne. It stands fifteen Miles from Bearne to the South, and fifty
five from Geneva to the East. The Bishop is the Sovereign of the City, Earl of
Valais, and a Prince of the Empire: who for his security is Leagued with the
Seven Catholic Cantons of the Swiss; the Pretensions of the Duke of Savoy to
his Country having formerly occasioned long and bloody Wars. The Sea did reside
at Martigny in Chablais, till the ruin of that Place; and then it came to be
translated hither. Charles the Great, about the year 802, bestowed these great
Privileges upon this See.

Sion, a Mountain and Citadel in the ancient Jerusalem, on which a part of
that City was built. The Knights of the Teutonick Order bore the name
heretofore, of the Order of our Lady of Mount Sion.

Sior, Siorium, a City in Asia; the Capital of the Province of Semgad and
Kingdom of Corea, a Tributary Prince to the Kingdom of China. It is seated
sixty Leagues from the Southern Borders of that Kingdom, upon a great River: as
Henry Hamel van Gorcum a Dutchman says, who lately published his Travels in
this Kingdom. This Kingdom lies to the North-East of China; in a great
Peninsula, toward Japan, and the Streights of Anian.

Sipbntum, an old Roman Town in the Province called Capuanata, in the Kingdom
of Naples: whose Ruins yet appear at the soot of Mount Gargano, two Miles from
Manfredonia. It had the honor to be made an Archbishop's See: but being by the
Saracens in the eighth Century, Earthquakes, and other Misfortunes, destroyed;
the Sea was removed to Manfredonia. The Ancients mention it under the several
names of Sypus, Sepius, Sepus, Sipontum, and Sepuntum. The Gulf upon the
Adriatic Sea near to it, took and retains its name.

Sirad, Sirackz, Siradia, a City in the Greater Poland, which is the Capital of
a Palatinate of the same name. It stands upon the River Warta; six Miles from
Vielun to the North, twenty from Breslo to the East, and forty five from Warsaw
to the West.

Sirmish, Sirmich or Zirmach, Sirmis, Sermium, Sirmium, a City of the Lower
Pannonia, in which Probus the Emperor was born. Now called Szreim by the
Natives, and Sirmish by the Germans: a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Colocza; and the Capital of a County, called by its Name, in Sclavonia. It lies
between the Danube to the East, the Save to the South, Walcowar to the North,
and Possega to the South. This City stands fourteen German Miles from Belgrade
to the West, about two from the Save to the North, and from Esseck to the
South, at the soot of Mount Almus. Now by the Turks reduced to a mere Village;
formerly famous for two Arian Councils held under Constantius the Emperor; one
in 351. the other in 357. Socrat. l. 2. c. 25. Long. 43. 05. Lat. 45. 24.
Photinus was then Bishop of the Place, whom they deposed for a Sabellian. In
one, they omitted the Word Consubstantial; in the other, they forbad both the
Word and the Thing.

Le Siron, Sirio, Serio, a River of Aquitain in France.

Situs, or Sidrocapsa, a City of Macedonia, famous for its Silver Mines: and a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Thessalonica; from which it stands fifty
five Miles to the East, toward Mount Athos. Called in the latter Maps,
Sidrocapse; but by Leunclavius, Sirus.

Sisseg, Siscia, an ancient City of Pannonia; and a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Colocza. Now a Village in Croatia, with a Monastery seated upon
the Save, and the Colaps; in the Borders of Sclavonia: two Miles from Zagrab,
(or Agram,) which has robbed it of the Bishops See. Under the Emperor.

Sisteron, Seg^stero, Segesteriorum Vrbs, Sistarica, an ancient City of Gallia
Na^bonensis; now a Bishops See in the Province of Provence in France: great and
populous: built upon the River Durance, (where it receives the Buech) in the
Borders of Dauphine: twenty four Leagues from Orange to the East, twenty six
from Grenoble to the South, and from Marseilles to the North-East.

Sittaw, or Zitaw, Setuja, a City of Germany in Lusatia.

Sitten. See Sion, a City in Valais.

Sittia, Cytaeum, a City at the North-end of the Isle of Candy, called Setia
(and Sitia;) which is a Bishops See: small, but very strong: seated in a
Peninsula, and for the most part surrounded by the Sea: it has a noble, large,
safe Haven; the Capital of a County, and one of the four Cities of that Island;
but in Slavery under the Turks.

Siucheu, a Territory in the Province of Nanquin in China.

Sixenne, a Village upon the Borders of the Kingdom of Arragon in Spain: famous
for a Priory of the Order of S. John of Jerusalem, sounded about the year 1188.
by Queen Sancha of Castile, Wise to Alphonsus II. King of Arragon, surnamed the
Chaste: who after the Death of her Husband, took the Habit her self in this
House, and diverse Princesses with her. She endowed it with large Revenues, and
a very considerable Jurisdiction: to the Benefices and Cures whereof the
Prioress at this day nominates, and has a Voice and Seat in the Provincial
Chapter of Arragon. The House is walled like a Fortress, with a Noble Palace in
it, for the Residence of the Prioress; who attains to her Dignity, by the
Election of the Religious. They bear the name also of the Ladies of Malta; as
owing Fidelity and Obedience by Oath to the Great Master of the Knights of
Malta: from which, though they subtracted about the year 1470. to put
themselves immediately under the Pope; Yet in 1569. they returned again to it,
fearing otherwise to fall under the Spiritual Jurisdiction of the Bishop of
Lerida. The persons admitted must make proof of their quality, as Ladies. They
wear a large Cross in white Silk upon their Breasts; and in time of Office,
bear in their hands a Silver Scepter, as the Badges of their Order.

Skeningrave, a small Sea-Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire; West from
Mulgrave Castle. The Seal-Fish appear in great Shoals about the Rocks here.

Skipton, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of
Staincliff, and the Tract of Craven: upon a Stream, falling into the River Are.

Skofde, Skofda, a small City in Westrogothia in Sweden.

Sky, Skia, an Island on the West of Scotland; fifty Miles in length from East
to West. It lies about three Miles from the Shoars of Rosse to the West; and
has never a Town or City of Note.

Sladitza, Osmus, a River of Bulgaria.

The Sleeve, the Sea between France and England: or the Streights of Calais.

Slawkow, Slaukovia, a City in Bohemia in Moravia; called by the Germans
Austerlitz: it stands five Miles from Olmitz to the South.

Sleaford, a large, well inhabited Market Town in Lincolnshire, in the Hundred
of Flaxwell; near the Head of a Stream of its own name, falling into the
Witham. It shows the ruined Walls of a Castle, which it had in former times.

Slego, Slegum, a Town and County in Conaught in Ireland, on the Western Shore.

Sleswick, Slesvicum, a City of Denmark; heretofore called Hedeba and Slietory.
It is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Lunden, and the Capital of a Duchy
of the same Name: seated upon the River Sleie, (which falls into the Baltic
Sea) four German Miles from the Mouth of that River to the West; between
Flensburg to the North, and Rensburg to the South; sixteen Miles from Lubeck
and Hamburg to the North. Its Bishopric was instituted in 948. by Harald
Bla^tland; and extinguished in 1556. by Frederick II. King of Denmark. Once an
Imperial and Free City, but now exempt and under the Duke of Holstein Gotthorp.
Long. 32. 45. Lat. 54. 55.

The Dukedom of Sleswick, Slesvicensis Ducatus, is a part of the Cimbrica
Chersonesus; sometimes called South Jutland. On the East it is bounded by the
Baltic Sea, on the South by Holstein, on the West by the German Ocean, and on
the North by Jutland. John Buno denies it to be any part of Holstein or
Germany: but says, it is a Fife of the Crown of Denmark. Lotharius the Emperor
created Canutus (Duke of S' eswick) King of the Vandals, in 1130. Christian Son
of Theodorick Oldemburg (King of Denmark) united this and Holstein to the Crown
of Denmark, in 1566. Christian IV. granted it to the Duke of Holstein, in 1589.
but as a Feudatary and Subject of the Crown of Denmark. By the Treaty of
Roschild, in 1658. this Dukedom was declared a Sovereign State by the
Procurement of the Swedes: the Affairs of Denmark requiring then a Compliance
with the Demands of that Victorious Nation. But the Crown of Denmark taking the
advantage of better times, forced this Duke to become a Subject of Denmark
again; by a Treaty made at Flensburg, in 1675. which last Treaty has been
endeavored to be rescinded, and that of Roschild confirmed by the Swedes, and
other of the Northern Princes.

Slonim, Slonima, a small City in Lithuania, in the Palatinate of Novogrod;
eight Polish Miles from that City to the South, upon the River Sezura.

Sluczk, Slucum, a Town in Lithuania, honored with the Title of a Dukedom:
great and populous, but for the most part built only of Timber, upon a River of
its own name. It stands in the Palatinate of Novogrod, fifteen Polish Miles
North from the Borders of Polesia. Constantine Duke of Ostrog, (in the Reign of
Sigismund I King of Poland) defeated three great Armies of the Tartars, in a
Fight of three days continuance near this place.

Sluys, Slusa, Clausulae, a small, but very strong Town in Elanders; about one
League from the Ocean, four from Midleburg to the South-East, and three from
Bruges. Taken by the Dutch in 1604. from the Spaniards; and ever since in their
hands.

Smaland, Smalandia, a County of Gothland under the Swedes; between
Westrogothia to the West, Bleking to the South, the Baltic Sea to the East,
and Ostrogothia to the North. The principal Places in it are Calmar, Jonckoping
and Wexsio.

Smalkalde, Smalcalda, a City in Franconia in Germany, in the County of
Henneneberg, under the Duke of Hess-Cassel: not above one German Mile from the
River Werra, four from Isenach, and six from Erford to the North-West.
Particularly regardable on the account of a League made and confirmed here by
the Protestant Princes, in the years successively, 1530. 1531. 1535. and 1537.
against Charles V. Wherein, besides thirty Lutheran Cities which had embraced
the Confession of Ausbourgh, the Kings of Sweden and Denmark, the Dukes of
Brunswick, Pomerania and Wirtembourgh, the young Marquess of Brandenbourgh, the
Elector of Saxony, Landtgrave of Hesse and other Princes, by times, engaged:
and whereas the Pope had convocated (what they desired) a free Council at
Mantoua, these in their Assembly in 1537. (whereat Luther and Melancthon
assisted), answered. They would never consent to a Council out of Germany. In
1547. Charles V. dissipated all the Forces of this League in one Campaign;
taking the Elector of Saxony, and the Landtgrave of Hesse Prisoners. But in
1552. having recruited themselves again, they obliged Charles V. to conclude
the Peace of Passaw, whereby Lutheranism was authoritatively established in
Germany.

Smolensko, Smolentum, one of the principal Cities of Poland, and the Capital
of a Palatinate. It stands upon the Borysthenes in White Russia in Lithuania,
near the Borders of Muscovy. Great and very strong, surrounded by a Wall eight
Cubits broad at the top, strengthened by fifty two great Towers, and a very
strong Castle. It contains about eight thousand Houses and was once much
greater: subject at first to a Russian Duke, who was the Sovereign of it; but
conquered by Vitondus Duke of Lithuania, in 1403. Casimirus II. King of Poland
subjected it to that Crown, in 1452. The Russ took it in 1514. The Poles after
many other fruitless attempts, recovered it again under Sigismund III. in 1611.
after a Siege of two years. The Russ besieged it in 1616. and in 1633. to their
great loss: Being the last time, after a years besieging of it, defeated by
Vladislaus IV. King of Poland; who obtained from the Pope the settlement of a
Bishops See in it. In 1654. it was taken by them, October 13. under whom it now
is: and by a Treaty in 1656. yielded to the Russ. It lies one hundred and fifty
Polish Miles from Vilna to the East, and the same distance from Kiovia to the
North.

Smyrna, a City of Ionia in the Lesser Asia, of great Antiquity, as laying
claim to the Birth of Homer. The Turks call it Ismyrna. It is an Archbishops
See; great, rich, and populous; the Seat of a Turkish Sangiack: built partly on
an Hill, partly in a Plain, in the form of an Amphiathe^re; upon the River
Mele: having a large and secure Haven, upon a Gulf of the Archipelago, to
which it gives name: very much frequented by the English and Dutch Merchants;
to whom alone the present Greatness and Wealth of it is owing. The ancient
Greeks and Persians went often to War about it. Taken by the Venetians, in
1344. from the Turks; and not retaken till 1428. This was one of the Seven
Churches mentioned in the Revelations; and almost the only one that is in a
tolerable condition. See Mr. Wheeler's Travels, page 240. Long. 55. 30. Lat.
39. 28. An Earthquake and a Fire conspired the same day to do mischief to this
City, June 13. 1688. They reckon in it, besides the Northern Merchants, about
sixteen thousand Turks, fifteen thousand Greeks, eight thousand Armenians, six
or seven thousand Jews. The Turks have fifteen Mosques for their Religion; the
Jews seven Synagogues; the Latin Christians three Churches; the Greeks two; and
the Armenians one. There is a Convent of French Capuchines; with some French
Jesuits, and Italian Cordelieres. Each foreign Nation keeps a Consul here for
Commerce: which consists in Persian Silks, Turkey Leather, Camelets, Tapistry,
etc. Some curious Ruins of its ancient Magnificent Buildings are yet extant; of
which, and of its Noble Statues, many have been thence transported by the
English. It was heretofore much greater than now. The Summer Season would be
insupportably hot, but for a refreshing Air from the Sea, which rises
ordinarily about ten in the Morning, and blows till Night. Provisions are cheap
in it. The Turks govern it, not by a Bassa, but a Cady, a Civil Officer; who
uses the Christians obligir gly.

Snath, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of
Osgodcross: adjoined by the Tract of Marshland.

Snetham, or Snetsham, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk, and the Hundred
of Smethden: seated upon a Rivulet, not far from the Sea.

Soana, Suana, a small City in the Territory of Siena; which is a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Siena. It stands upon a very high Hill, near the River
La Flore; in the Borders of the States of the Church; forty eight Miles from
Siena to the North-East. In a declining State, and wasted almost to a Village.
Long. 34. 46. Lat. 42. 11. Pope Gregory VII. was born here. In 1626. a Synod
was held here also.

Sobrarbe, a Tract in Arragon toward the Pyrenean Hills, and Catalonia.
Honored formerly with the Title of a Kingdom.

Soconusco, a Province in New Spain, in South America, lying along the Pacifick
Ocean.

Soczow. See Suchzow.

Sodom, the Capital of the five miserable Cities of the Plain, in Palestine;
called in one name Pentapolis: whose destruction by Fire from Heaven,
(according to the History of the Old Testament, Genesis 19) or by an Earthquake
vomiting forth a Lake of Subterraneous Sulphur and Brimstone, according to
Strabo, (who advances the number of these Cities to thirteen,) became a Proverb
to the World.

Sodore, Sodera, an ancient decayed City, in the Island of Cholmkill, on the
West of Scotland; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Glasco: in which
place, there are interred forty eight Kings of Scotland, four Kings of Ireland,
and eight Kings of Norway. The Abbey here was built by S. Columbus, the Great
Apostle of the Northern Nations; and from this place, the Bishop of the Isle of
Man is styled Sodorensis in Latin.

Soest, Susatum, a City in the Circle of Westphalia in Germany, in the County
of Mark; called by the French Soust. Once an Imperial Free City, but now
subject to the Elector of Brandenburg, as Earl of Mark: Taken by the French in
1673. and afterward deserted. This City, in more ancient times was granted by
Frederick I. to the Archbishop of Cologne; but being too much oppressed by
them, it put it self under the Protection of the Counts of Mark: and this in
time turned to a Sovereignty; but it has some remains of its ancient Liberty.
It stands seven German Miles from Paderborne West; and Munster South; and four
from Ham to the East.

Sofala, Zofala, a Kingdom in the Lower Aethiopia in Africa, in the Country of
Cafraria; toward the Ethiopick Ocean; in an Island in the Mouth of the River
Zambez, in the Borders of Zanguebaria; which takes its name from Sofala, a
strong City under the Portuguese; one hundred and fifty Miles from Zanguebar,
and three hundred and forty from Mosambique. Fifty Miles West of this City,
there are rich Mines of Gold, called the Mines of Manica, from which the
Portuguese raise a vast Revenue. Some have therefore believed Sophala to be the
Ophir of King Solomon; confirming their conjecture by the Septuagint's
Translation of Ophir into (...), which by an ordinary change of r into l, makes
Zopheila or Sofala; together with this, that the people of Sofala pretend to
prove from their own Books, that the Jews in Solomon's time voyaged to those
Coasts from three year to three year, to buy Gold: and the Country shows
several Buildings and ancient Inscriptions in unknown Characters, which must be
understood to be the Works of Strangers. See Ophir. The Portuguese call the
King of Monomotapa the Emperor of Gold, from these and other Mines in his
Dominions. For Sofala is contained in Monomotapa.

Sofia, Sophia, the Capital City of Bulgaria, called by the Turks Triadizza;
which is an Archbishops See, anciently called Sardica; seated upon the River
Boiana; at an equal distance from the Borders of Thrace East, Servia West, and
Macedonia South; being now a great populous City, and the Seat of the Turkish
Governor: but it has no Walls, nor other Fortifications; Hoffman calls the
River, Ciabrum. In this place was the greatest General Council of the Ancients
held that ever met, in 347. In which, the Nicene Council by the Arts of
Constantius was condemned. It stands three hundred Miles from Constantinople to
the West, one hundred from Thessalonica to the North, and two hundred and fifty
from Belgrade to the South, in the Road to Constantinople. Long. 51. 00. Lat.
42. 43.

Sogdiana, a large Region of the ancient Asia: betwixt the Two Scythia's,
Margiana, Bactriana, and the Caspian Sea: now answering to the Province of
Mawralnaher, or Maurenhaer in the Asiatick Tartary; North-East of Persia.

Soisons, Suessiones, Suessia, Civitas Augusta Suessionum, an ancient Roman
City in the Isle of France; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Reims; and the Capital of a County called Le Soissonnois. A great, fine, strong
City; seated upon the River Aisne, which divides it; five Leagues from the
Confines of Picardy; eleven from Reims to the West, and twenty two from Paris.
Pepin was first proclaimed King of France in this City, in 752. Soissonnois the
District belonging to it, was heretofore a part of Picardy: it lies between
Reims to the East, Picardy to the North, Valois to the West, and Le Brie to the
South. It took this name from the Suessones, an old Gallick Tribe, which
inhabited it before the Roman Conquest. Honored for many Ages with the Title
of an Earldom. The City has six Abbeys in it, besides Churches and diverse
Ecclesiastical and Religious Houses. In 853. a Council was assembled at it in
the presence of Charles the Bald, King of France.

Solane, Solana, a small River in Aquitain in France; which in the Province of
Limosine falls into the Courezze by the City of Tulle.

Solao, Salaca, a Province of the Higher Aethiopia, near the River Tacaz;
between the Kingdom of Bagamidra to the South, and the Province of Arbagela to
the North.

Soldin, the same with Seleusia Pieria, a City of Syria.

Soleurre, Salodurum, Salodorum, a City of Switzerland; which is the Capital of
a Canton called by its name. The Natives call it Soleurre, the Germans
Solothurn, the Italians Soloduro: It stands upon the River Arola; seven Miles
from Basil to the South, and from Friburg to the North; and five from Berne to
the same. The Canton is the eleventh in the number; small, and Roman Catholic.

Solfarin, a small Seigniory or Lordship in Mantoua.

Solms, Solmia, a County in Germany, which has its Name from a ruined Town on
the River Lohne. It lies extended from North to South, part in Westerwaldt, and
part in Weteraw; between Hassia to the East, and Treves to the West; under its
own Count, whose Residence is in the Castle of Brunsfeld.

Soloe, or Soli, the Birthplace of the ancient Greek Poet Aratus. This City is
a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Seleucia. It stands in Cilicia, in Asia
Minor; and took for some time the name of Pompeiopolis, from its
re-establishment by Pompey the Great. Pliny mentions it upon the account of a
Fountain it anciently had of an extraordinary quality. Now called Palesoli.

Sologne, Solonia, Sicalonia, a small Province under the Prefecture of Orleans:
by Latin Writers also called Secalonia, Sigalonia, Siligonta and Sabulonia,
being a Sandy Country; and particularly fruitful in Wheat and Rice. It lies
between the Provinces of Orleans, Berry, and Blaisois; but its proper Limits
are lost. The principal Town in it, is Romorentin; eight Leagues from Bois
South, and fourteen from Bourges North.

The Islands of Solomon, a Mass of great Islands in the Pacifick Sea, toward
New Zelandt: discovered by Alvarez Mendoza in 1567. but little frequented by
the Europeans. The names of some of them, are S. George, S. Mark, S. Nicholas,
S. Anne, S. Catherine, the Three Mary's, S. James, S. Christopher, S. Jerome,
etc.

Solothurn. See Soleure.

Solpe, a City and Bishop's See in the Province called Capitanota. in the
Kingdom of Naples.

Solsona, a City in Catalonia in Spain: which is a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Tarragona; made such in 1593. by Pope Clement VIII. It stands
upon the River Cordoner, at the foot of the Mountains; about three Leagues from
Cardona to the North. A small ill peopled Place, though it has been fortified
by the French.

Soltwedel, Heliopolis, Solvedelia, a City in the ancient Marquisate of
Brandenburg, upon the River Jetz; eight German Miles from Vlcan to the East,
and ten from Havelburg. The Inhabitants report, it was built by Charles the
Great; after he had destroyed a Statue of the Sun, which was worshipped in this
Place.

Solwey Fryth, Ituna, an Arm of the Irish Sea, which parts England from
Scotland.

Somersetshire, Belgae, Durotriges, Somersetia, is a rich, populous, and
fruitful County in the West of England. Bounded on the North by the Severne
Sea, and Glocestershire cut off by the Severne; on East by Wiltshire, on the
South by Dorsetshire, and part of Devonshire; on the West by Devonshire and the
Irish Sea. It contains in length from East to West fifty Miles, in breadth
forty, in circuit two hundred and four; wherein lie three hundred eighty five
Parishes, and thirty Market Towns. The Air is mild and gentle in the Summer:
the Roads are extremely miry and deep in the Winter; which is recompensed by
the Fertility of the Soil, yielding Corn and Grass in great plenty; nor is it
destitute of Mines of Lead. Whence comes the usual Proverb here, What is worse
for the Rider, is best for the Abider. These Mines are found particularly in
Mendip-Hills. It has also a Rock called S. Vincent's Rock; where are found
great plenty of Diamonds, equal to those of India in their Luster; but not in
hardness. It has three Noble Cities, Bristol, Bath, and Wells: all which are
discoursed of in their proper places. The Rivers Parret, Tor, Tone, From and
others water it, besides the Severne's Mouth. The first Earl of this County was
William de Mohun, created in 1138. The second, Willam Long-Espee, Base Son to
Henry II. in 1197. The third, Reginald de Mohun, in 1296. The fourth, John de
Beauford, in 1396. In which Family it continued till 1471. in six Descents. The
tenth was Edmond (third Son of Henry VI.) in 1496. The eleventh, Henry Fitz Roy
a Base Son of Henry VIII. The twelfth, Edward Seymor, (Lord Protector of Edward
VI.) created Duke in 1546. beheaded in 1552. The thirteenth, was William Carre
in 1614. The fourteenth, William Seymor, Marquess of Hartford; restored to his
Great-Grand father's Title of Duke of Somerset, by Charles II. in 1660. since
which time, there have been five Descents in this Family.

Somerton, a Market Town in Somersetshire. The Capital of its Hundred: of great
consideration heretosore, when it is said to have given Name to its County.

Sum, or Some, Phrudis, Somona, Samara, a River in Picardy in France; which
arises in a place called Fon Sum in Vermandois; two Leagues from S. Quintin
to the West; and running West, waters Han, Peronne, Corbie, Amiens, Abbeville
and S. Valery, where it falls into the British Sea, twelve French Leagues South
of Boulogne, over against Rye in Sussex; having divided Picardy into two parts.

Sommiers, Sommeria, a small City in the Lower Languedoc, upon the River
Vidole; four Leagues from Mompellier to the South-East, and the same distance
from Nismes. Once a fortified City.

Songo, a City of the Kingdom of Madingua, in the division of Nigritia, in
Africa.

Sonneburg, one of the chief Towns in the Island of Oesel in the Baltic Sea.

Sonnemberg, a Town in the Marquisate of Brandenburgh in Germany, near Poland,
to the East.

Sor, or Soro, a River in the Kingdom of Portugal, which divides Alentejo from
Extremadura; and falls into the Taio at Salvaterra* nine Miles above Lisbone.

Sora, a City of Latium, upon the River Garigliano; now a Bishops See in the
Kingdom of Naples, in the Terra di Lavoro; which is under no Archbishop. It has
a splendid Castle: honored with the Title of a Dukedom, belonging to the
Family di Boncompagno; and slands fifty five Miles from Rome to the East, and
ten from the Lake di Celano ( Fucinus) to the South. This is also the name of a
City in the Island of Scelandt, in the Baltic Sea, belonging to Denmark: which
has an University in it, founded by Frederick II. and re-established by
Christian IV. Kings of Denmark.

Soracte, a Mountain in the Dukedom of Tuscany in Italy: consecrated to Apollo
in the Heathen Ages there. It is now called Monte di S. Silvestre.

Soratoff, Soratovia, a City in the Kingdom of Astracan, upon the Wolga; in the
middle between Casan to the North, and Astracan to the South: Lat. 52. 12. in a
great Plain. The Inhabitants are all Muscovites. See Olearius, Page 162.

Soraw, Sorava, a small City in Lusatia; the Capital of the Lower part of that
Province, and under the Elector of Saxony. It stands in the Borders of Silesia;
two German Miles from Sagan to the West, and five from Crossen to the South;
often taken and retaken in the Swedish War.

Sorge, Sorgue, Orge, Sorge, Sulga, Sulgas, a River of Gallia Narbonensis;
which arises in the County of Vendosmois in Provence, and falls into the
Rhosne above Avignon, but very near it; at a Town called Pont-Sorge.

Soria, Syria.

Soria, Numantia Nova, Soria, a City of New Castile; not above one League
beneath the Ruins of the ancient and celebrated Numantia: seated in the
Mountains, well peopled, and having belonging to it a very large Jurisdiction.
It stands twelve Leagues from Baubula to the South-West, and eight from
Tarazona to the North-West.

Soritae, an ancient people, mentioned by Pliny, as neighboring upon India;
and living altogether upon Fish.

Sorlings. See Silly-Islands.

Sorrento, Sorriento, Surrentum, Surentum, a City in the Kingdom of Naples;
which is an Achbishops See in the Terra di Lavoro, on the Bay of the Hither
Principato; twenty four Miles from Naples to the South. It is seated in a
fruitful Plain; and though very ancient, (being mentioned by Pliny and Livy)
yet in a good Estate. Long. 38. 20. Lat. 40 33.

Sosteropolis, Soteropolis, a ruined small City, which stood near Nicomedia in
Bithynia, in Asia Minor: where according to Zoneras, died Constantine the Great
of Poison.

Soubiac, or Sublac, a small Town in Campagna di Roma, in the Dominions of the
Pope. It stands upon the River Teverone: and is noted for an Abbey of the Order
of S. Benedict, who did himself choose a Retreat here.

Souilly, or Seulley, a Town in the Dukedom de Bar in Lorain.

Soul, Sous, a Kingdom in the East part of Biledulgerid in Africa; under the
King of Marocco.

Soul, a Territory in the Pais des Basques in France: Honored with the Title
of a Viscounty. The chief Town in it, is Mauleon de Soul.

Soumel, a Town in the Kingdom of Bengale, in the Empire of the Great Mogul,
toward the Ganges.

The Sound. See Sund.

Sour. See Tire.

Sour, Sura, a River in the Dukedom of Luxemburg; called by the Germans* Saur,
by the French Sour. It arises near Bastoigne; eight Leagues from Luxemburg;
and being increased with some smaller Rivers, waters Dietkirch: beneath
which, it receivs the Vr from Viande to the North; then passes to Echternach
and Wasser-bilch; where it falls into the Moselle two Leagues above Trier to
the South.

Souri, a Province of Turcomania, in the Lesser Asia.

Sourie, the same with Zurich.

Souriquois, a Tribe of the unconquered Salvages of New France, in North
America.

Souristan, the same with Syria.

Sousos, a people of Nigritia in Africa.

Souster, Susa, the Capital of Chusistan in the Kingdom of Persia; one hundred
and eighty Miles from Bagdad to the East; now in a flourishing State.

Southampton, Clausentum, Antonia, Magnus Portus, Trisantonum Portus, a small
City in the County of Hamshire, seated on the West side of the River Anton, or
Hampton, (which comes from Winchester, and here falls into the great Bay of
Southhampton;) ten Miles from Winchester to the South. This was a Roman Fort
called Clausentum, and ruined by the Danes in 980. Also plundered and burnt by
the French under Edward III. and rebuilt in the Reign of Richard. It is a
strong, rich, populous, well traded City; fenced with a double Ditch, strong
Walls, and many Turrets; for the Defense of the Haven, it has a strong Castle
built by Richard II. The Haven is capable of Ships of good Burden, up to the
Key: and lies opposite to Jernsey, Garnsey, and Normandy. There are now five
Parish Churches in this City. Henry VI. granted it a Mayor, and made it a
County, in 1067. Beauvois of Southampton (that celebrated Warrior) was its
first Secular Earl, in 1538. (The Bishops of Winchester being before reputed to
be Earls of Southampton; and so styled in the Statutes of the Garter made by
Henry VIII.) Willam Fitz William Lord Admiral, in 1547. Thomas Wriothsley (Lord
Chancellor) was created the third Earl by Edward VI. to whom succeeded three
of his Posterity. The last died in 1667. In 1675. Charles II. created Charles
Fits Roy (eldest Son to the Duchess of Cleaveland) Baron of Newbery, Earl of
Chicester, and Duke of Southampton.

Southwark, a large Borough in the County of Surrey, and the Hundred of
Brixton; opposite to London, on the other side of the Thames; and under the
Jurisdiction of the Lord Mayor of London; yet enjoying several ancient
Privileges peculiarly to it self, and represented in the Lower House of
Parliament by its own Burgesses. In the number of Inhabitants and Buildings, it
exceeds most Cities; notwithstanding its Losses by many great Fires. S.
Thomas's Hospital, founded by the Citizens of London, stands here.

Southwell, a Market Town in Nottinghamshire, in the Hundred of Thurgarton, of
good Antiquity: upon a Rivulet, falling not far off into the Tren^: Adorned
with a Collegiate Church.

Southwould, Sowold or Swold, a small Corporation and Seaport Town in the
County of Suffolk; famous for the many Rendezvouzes of the English Fleets, when
ever we have had any Wars with the Hollanders: especially for two great Naval
Victories obtained against them in the Bay of this Town; the first, June 3,
1663. the second, May 28. 1672. Both under the Conduct of King James II. as
Lord Admiral of England, under his Brother Charles II. of Blessed and Pious
Memory. It is a strong and pleasant Town in the Hundred of Blithing, upon a
Cliff; with the Sea to the East, the River Blithe (over which there is a
Drawbridge) to the West, and a Bay of its own name to the South, called
Swold's Bay; made by the shooting forth chiefly of Easton Ness, the most
Eastern Point of England. The Cliff has several Pieces of Ordinance, planted
upon it.

Sow, the River upon which Stafford is situated.

Sowtham, a Market Town in Warwickshire, in the Hundred of Knightlow.

Spa, a small Town in the Bishopric of Liege, in the Low Countries; famed for
its Medicinal Mineral Waters.

Spahan. See Hispaam.

Spain, Hispania, is one of the most considerable Kingdoms in Europe, called
heretofore Hesperia and Iberia. It is separated from France toward the
North-East by the Pyrenean Hills; on all other sides surrounded by the
Mediterranean Sea, the Streights of Gibraltar, and the Atlantic Ocean: so that
it lies in the form of a vast Peninsula, joined to France by a Neck of eighty
Spanish Leagues over. Called by the Natives La Espanna, by the French
L'Espagne, by the Italians La Spagna, by the English Spain, by the Poles
Hispanska, by the Germans Spanien, and by the Dutch Spangien. Its greatest
length from East to West is one hundred and ninety German Miles; or five
hundred Italian. Its circuit two thousand four hundred and eighty Italian
Miles; taking in the Creeks and Windings of the Seas and Mountains, it is two
thousand eight hundred and sixteen Miles; the least of which Computations, is
four hundred and sixty Miles greater than France was forty years agone. The
ancient Geographers with one consent affirm, That it abounded with whatsoever
the Ambition or Needs of Men required; full of Men and Horses; all over
replenished with Mines of Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, and Lead, (white and
black;) had Corn, Wine, and Oil in abundance: in short, so extremely fruitful,
that if any place for want of Water was less useful, yet even there Hemp and
Flax thrived very well. It was in those days the West Indies of the World, and
like them the Storehouse of the ancient Treasures. The Ancients divided it
into three great parts; called by them Tarraconensis, Baetica, and Lusitania.
First, Hispania Tarraconensis was the greatest of the three, and the most
Eastern. On the East bounded by the Pyrenean Hills; on the North by the Bay of
Biscay; on the West by the Atlantic Ocean, and Lusitania; on the South by the
Mediterranean Sea, and Baetica. Secondly, Hispania Baetica was the most
Southern part; bounded on the East and South by the former in part, and by the
Ocean; on the West and North by the same Ocean and Lusitania. Thirdly, Hispania
Lusitanica was the most Western part; extended upon the Ocean between Hispania
Tarraconensis, and Hispania Baetica. The very ancient History of this Country
is either fabulous or lost. The Phoenicians may justly be supposed to have been
the first Civilizers of it, and the Founders of the most ancient Cities, as
Diodorus Siculus and Strabo affirm. After these (who settled mostly in Baetica)
the Grecians followed; who from Marseille sent many Colonies into Hispania
Tarraconensis. The Carthaginians were the next; who about forty years after
they were by the Romans dispossessed of Sicily, Sardinia, and Corsica, (in the
end of the first Punick War about the year of Rome 512;) by the Isle of Gades
(which was theirs before) entered Spain; and in less than twenty years (under
Amilcar, Asdrubal and Hannibal, the Son of Amilcar) destroyed Saguntum; built
New Carthage; conquered all the Nations of this Country, as far the Pyrenean
Hills, and the Mediterranean Sea; and might easily have subdued the rest; but
that Hannibal chose rather to revenge the Injuries of his Country, and ruin
Rome by an Invasion of Italy. The Jealousy of the Carthaginians ruined his
Designs in Italy; and the Roman Fortunes prevailed in Spain too, under
Cornelius Scipio, about the year of Rome 545. The People having been broken by
the Carthaginians, submitted the more willingly and easily to the Romans; and
continued under them till about the year of Christ 400, when Gundericus (King
of the Vandals) first conquered them. The Goths followed these; and in 418, set
up a Kingdom; which in time extirpated the Vandals, or drove them over the Sea
into Africa. This Kingdom continued under thirty one Princes, till 724; when
the Moors came in, and after a Fight of seven Days continuance prevailed
against the Goths, and forced Spain. They brought over fifty thousand Families
of Moors and Jews; and so fixed themselves here, that though they were in a
short time cantoned into a small Kingdom; and the Spaniards with the remainders
of the Goths (who had secured themselves in the Mountains and other places of
difficult access) by the help of the French, made a gainful and prevailing War
upon them; yet they could not be entirely subdued before 1492* In after times
it is hard to say, whether the good Fortunes or ill Government of the Spaniards
have contributed most to the ruin of this once most potent Kingdom. For first
Ferdinando and Isabella in 1492, expelled out of Spain one hundred and seventy
thousand Families of the Jews. Philip II. in 1610. expelled nine hundred
thousand Moors. And America being found in the mean time, the numbers of
Spaniards that passed thither is unknown. Philip I. succeeded in 1504: The
first Prince of the House of Austria, who reigned in Spain. Charles V. his Son
in 1516. Philip II. in 1556. Philip III. in 1598. Philip IV. in 1621. Charles
II. the present King began his Reign in September 1665, being then an Infant.
This Kingdom is now divided into fifteen Kingdoms or Provinces, viz. 1.
Navarre. 2. Biscay. 3. Guipuscoa. 4. Leon and Oviedo. 5. Gallicia. 6. Corduba.
7. Granada. 8. Murcia. 9. Toledo. 10. Castile. 11. Portugal. 12. Valentia. 13.
Catalonia. 14. The Kingdom of Majorca. 15. And the Kingd. of Arragon. Which are
at this day all reduced under three Crowns or Governments, Castile, Portugal,
and Arragon. The Religion professed is strict Roman Catholic; especially since
the introducing the Inquisition by Pedro Gonsales de Mendoza, Archbishop of
Toledo, in 1478. The Christian Faith was taught this Nation very early by S.
James, or more probably by S. Paul. Arianisin entered with the Goths, and
continued till 588. They never heard of the Roman Rites till after 1083: when a
Frenchman being made Archbishop of Toledo, endeavored the Introduction of that
Service; and was at first opposed in it by all the other Prelates and People.
It had been well for Spain, if it had never been received: seeing it has cost
that Nation so many of its People; no less than three thousand Families having
been destroyed by the Inquisition in one Diocese in three years: not to mention
the loss of the United Netherlands, and the ruin of Flanders. The Cities of
Spain are too numerous to be here inserted.

New Spain, Hispania Nova, is a considerable Country in North America; called
by the Spaniards la Nueva Espanna, and sometimes el Mexico, from its Capital
City. It contains all that space of Land between the North and the South Sea,
that lies between the Terra Firma (or Straight of Panama) to the East, and
Florida to the West; which by the Indians was called Anahuac; that is, The Land
by the Water. It extends from fifteen degrees. of Latitude to twenty six
exclusively; in breadth six hundred Italian Miles, in length twelve hundred.
The Air is very temperate (tho situate wholly in the Torrid Zone) by reason of
the frequent Showers which fall in June, July, and August; (their hottest
Months in the year) and also by reason of the Sea Breezes. It is abundantly
enriched with inexhaustible Mines of Gold, Silver, Brass and Iron: has great
plenty of Coco-Nuts, Cochineel, Wheat, Barley, Oranges, Limons, Figs, Cherries,
Apples, and Pears, Cattle and Fowl: but it has few Grapes, and no Wine. Their
Seed time is in April or May; their Harvest in October: in the Low Countries
they sow in October, and reap in May. This Kingdom had Kings of its own, from
1332, to 1520: about two years before which, Francis Cortez, a Spaniard,
entered it with eleven Ships, and five hundred and fifty Men; by help of which
he sacked the Town of Pontonchon, defeated by his Cannon and Horse forty
thousand naked Indians, (who came to revenge this Injury;) and in 1531, took
the City of Mexico, Aug. 13. and put an end to the Indian Empire. The Provinces
of this vast Kingdom, are 1. Panuco. 2. Mechuacan. 3. Mexicana. 4 Tlascala. 5.
Guaxaca. And the 6. Jucatan. Governed by a Viceroy under the King of Spain; who
from this Accession to his European Dominions uses the Royal Style of
Hispaniarum Rex.

Spalatro, Salo, Salona nova, Spalatum, Palatium Dioclesiani, a City of
Dalmatia; called by the Italians, Spalato; by the Sclavonians, Spla. It is very
strong, rich, and populous; and an Archbishops See, seated upon the Adriatic;
(upon which it has a large and safe Haven) thirty five Miles from Sebenico.
Long. 40. 54. Lat. 44. 00. This City grew up out of the Ruins of Salona; which
stood four Miles more to the North. And in 1420, destroyed an Army of the
Turks, which was sent against it. The Learned Mr. Wheeler in his Travels, page
15. has given a large account of the Site of this City; and a little lower,
page 19. of the City of Salona, the Mother of Spalato. The Emperor Dioclesian
was a Native of Salona: who building himself a Palace in this place, (whence
the name Spalatro might be occasioned by an easy corruption,) the other, (
Salona) grew by time neglected. It is commanded by a Fortress, upon an Hill,
without the Gate; in which the Venetians keep the lesser Garrison, because they
make sure of the Fortress of Clissa, by which the passage lies out of Turkey to
Spalatro. The Walls of Dioclesian's Palace you have yet standing; and the
little Temple, which he built in the middle of it, has become the Cathedral
Church. It is situated in a fruitful Country.

Spalding, a Market Town in the division of Holland, in Lincolnshire; and the
Hundred of Ellow; upon the Weland. Well built and traded; though not far from
the Washes.

Spandow, Spandava, a City in the Marquisate of Brandenburgh, upon the River
Havel (where it entertains the Sprehe:) two Miles beneath Berlin to the West,
and about six from Brandenburgh to the East; well fortified; yet taken by
Gustavus Adolphus, in 1631.

Sparta. See Misitra.

Spenderobi, Spenderobis, Spenderovia, a City of Servia; called by the Turks,
Semender; by the Hungarians, Sendrew, or Zendrew, and Zendrin; by the Italians,
Sandria. It is a Bishops See; thought to be Ptolemy's Singidunum: and stands
about six German Miles from Belgrade to the East upon the Danube, fourteen from
Temesware to the South. The Turkish Governor of Servia resides for the most
part in this City. Taken in this War by the Imperialists amidst their other
Conquests in Hungary: and retaken by the Turks by storm, Sept. 1690.

Spil^by, a Market Town in Lincolnsh. in the Hundred of Bulling brook.

Spinola, a Seignory in the Neighborhood of Montferrat, the Milany, and the
States of Genoua, in Italy: Honored with the Title of a Marquisate.

Spire, Spira, Nemetes, Noviomagus, Nemetus, a City of Germany; called by the
Germans, Speyr; by the French, Spire; by the Italians, Spira. It is a Free and
Imperial City, in the Upper Circle of the Rhine: in the Diocese of Spire, but
not subject to the Bishop. This great, rich, populous City is Free; but under
the Protection of the Elector Palatine, and the Bishop under the Archbishop of
Mentz. It stands in the middle between Strasburgh to the South, and Mentz to
the North; fifty German Miles from either, and fifteen from Heidelberg to the
North-West. The Imperial Chamber (which was first instituted at Franckfort in
1495, by Maximilian I.) In 1530, was by Charles V. removed to Spire; and has
been ever since in this City. Of old called Nemetum; and in 1082. being so far
by its (then) Bishop enlarged, as to enclose the Village of Spire neighboring
upon it, took the Name of Spire. The Cathedral was built in 1011, by Conrade
the Emperor; in which are the Tombs of eight of the German Emperors; to wit,
Conrade II. (who gave the Town of Brunchsol, and all the Territory of Brutingow
to this Bishopric about the year 1030;) Henry III. his Son (who finished the
Cathedral, begun by his Father;) Henry IV. Henry V. Philip, Rodolph I. Adolp of
Nassaw* and Albert I. The Emperors which granted Privileges to this City were,
Charles IV* Rodolphus I. Albert, Lewis, Wenceslaus, Frederick III. and
Maximilian II. Near it Philip the Suabian, beat O^ho* the Saxon, in 1202. In a
Diet here held in 1526, the Peace of Religion was first established; which when
it was endeavored to be Repealed in a second Diet here held in 1529, several
of the German Princes Protested against the Repeal, and were thence called
Protestants. Jesses the first Bishop was present in the Council of Cologne, in
346. This City was taken by Gustavus Adolphus; who demolished all its Outworks,
because he was not willing to spare so many Men out of his Army, as were
necessary for a Garrison to it: by which the Germans the more easily recovered
it in 1635. It received a French Garrison in Sept. 1688, who have demolished it
since. The Imperial Chamber consists of fifteen Counselors, (eight Roman
Catholics, and seven Protestants;) two Presidents, (a Roman Catholic, and a
Protestant;) and the Bishop as the Principal Judge. In 1675. the Elector of
Treves succeeded to the Bishopric.

Spiritu Sancto, Spiritus Sanctus; a small City; which is the Capital of a
Prefecture in Brasil, under the Portuguese. Sixty Spanish Leagues from the
River Januario to the North, and fifty from Porto Seguro to the South.. There
is a River in the Kingdom of Monomotapa, in Africa, which discharges itself
into the Aethiopick Ocean at Cabo de S. Nicolo, of this name: called by the
Portuguese, Rio de lo Spiritu Santo.

Spirlinga, a small Town in Sicily; which was the only place in that Island,
innocent of that bloody and infamous Conspiracy, called the Sicilian Vespers.

Spirnazza, Panyasus, a River of Macedonia; which falls into the Adriatic Sea,
between Durazzo, and the River Aspro, (which last falls into the same Sea,)
twenty five Miles from Durazzo to the North* Some call it Aspro Spirnazza:
others Spirnazza, Arzenza.

Spitsberg, an University in Brandenburgh, founded in 1544.

Spitsberg, Spitzberga, Regio Arctica, or the Sharp Mountains, as the Name
signifies; is a large Country, and a part of the Artick Continent: between Nova
Zembla to the East, and Greenland to the West; which are yet not near it by
three hundred Miles. It was called thus by the Dutch, upon their discovering it
in 1596. the English call it New-Land: others Spigelberg. It extends to degrees.
80. of North Latitude. Whether it be an Island, or joined to any Continent, is
unknown to the Europeans: extreme cold, without one Village in it; only some
parts are frequented by the Dutch, who Fish for Whales; and find some two
hundred foot long. Here are a great number of Bears, (black and white) Foxes,
and Sea-Geese.

Split, the same with Spalatro.

Splugen, Splugue, Speluca, the highest Mountain amongst the Grisons; a part of
the Rhetian Alps; upon which there was once a strong Castle, near the Lower
Branch of the Rhine, about eight Miles from Cl^ven to the North.

Spoleti, Spoletum, Spoletium, is a City in the States of the Church in Italy:
called Spoleto, and Spolete: the Capital of a Dukedom of the same Name. It
stands in the Province of Vmbria, or Ombria; partly on an Hill, partly in a
Valley upon the River Tessino; thirteen Miles from Fuligno to the North-East,
forty five from Rome to the North, and sixty two from Ancona to the South. It
is a Bishops See, immediately under the Pope; and a City of great Antiquity:
having defended it self very well against Hannibal in the second Punick War. In
1234* here was a Council held under Pope Gregory IX. for the Recovery of the
Holy Land. The same year, the Bishop's See was translated hither from Spollo.
In seven hundred and forty, it was besieged by Luitprandus, King of the
Lombards; and reduced to great Extremities. In 1155, Frederick Barberossa,
took, plundered, and burnt it, for violating his Ambassadors and corrupting his
Coin. In 1583, here was a Synod held by its Bishop. It shows some stately
Ruins of an Amphitheatre, a Temple and a Palace of the Kings of the Goths, who
made it their Residence.

Il Ducato di Spoleto, Spoletanus Ducatus, is a very large Province of Italy;
called of old Vmbria, of latter times Ombria: And a Dukedom, from the time that
Longinus (the Greek Exarch of Ravenna, after the recalling Narses) instituted
Dukes for the Government of this Province. The Lombards made a Conquest of it,
under Alboinus, (one of their Kings) in 571. But they left it under Dukes
still; one of which in 740, joining with Pope Gregary, and rebelling against
his Master Luitprandus, drew a War upon the Province. In 876. Charles the Bald
(one of the Caroline Princes) made Guido, a Descendent of Charles the Great,
Duke of Spoleto; whose Posterity in thirteen Descents enjoyed it to 1198. How,
or when, this Province fell under the Pope I know not; but it bore the Title of
a Dukedom under them, till 1440: when it reassumed its ancient Name of Ombria.
See Leander Albertus.

Sponheim, Sponheimensis Comitatus, a County in the Palatinate of the Rhine;
between the Moselle and the Naw (which last falls into the Rhine) four German
Miles beneath Mentz. The fourth part of it is under the Marquess of Baden; the
rest has been under the Electors Palatine, ever since 1416: when it came to
that Family by the Marriage of Isabella (Heiress of it) with Robert Elector
Palatine. The principal places in it are Creutznach, Simmeren, and Birkenfeld.

Sporades, the scattered Islands toward Candia, in the Archipelago: so called
in opposition to the Cyclades, which lie together in the form of a Circle. The
Romans, Saracens, and the Corsairs, with the present Masters the Turks of them,
by their several devastations have reduced these once flourishing retreats into
a poor condition. There are always some Greeks upon them.

Sprche, Sprewe, Spra, la Sprehe, Spreha, a River in Germany, which arises in
the Borders of Bohemia; and flowing through Lusatia, waters Bautzen,
Cot^^itz, and Luben; then entering Brandenburgh, falls by Berlin into the Havel
at Spandow; which last ends in the Elbe at Havelburg.

Sprotaw, Spro^avia, a City of Silesia, in the Dukedom of Glogaw; upon a River
of the same Name, which falls into the Bober. Four Miles from Glogaw to the
West.

Spurnhead, Ocelli, a Cape or Promontory in Yorkshire, at the Mouth of the
Humber.

Squillaci, Scyllcti^m, Scillaceum, a small City of great Antiquity; called by
Ptolemy, Scilacium; Pliny, Scylaceum: and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop
of Reggio; in the Fu^ther Calabria, in the Kingdom of Naples; to which there
belongs a Bay, upon the Ionian Sea, called Golfo di Squillaei. This City stands
sixty five Miles from Regio to the North-East, fifty five from Rossano to the
South: and has not above three hundred Houses in it. Long. 40. 12. Lat. 37. 48.
It was an Athenian Colony; and one of the most considerable Cities belonging to
the Brutii in Magna Graecia.

Staden, Statio, Stada, a City in the Lower Saxony, in the Dukedom of Bremen,
near the Elbe; anciently a Free Imperial City, and a Hanse Town; but now
subject to the Duke of Breme. It stands upon a small River, called S^^^vinge;
(which a little lower falls into the Elbe) seven German Miles from Hamburgh to
the West, and twelve from Bremen to the North. A very strong Town. Taken in
1676, by the Duke of Brunswick. In 1680, it was restored by the Treaty
concluded at Zell to the Swedes; under whom it was before put by the Treaty of
Munster.

Staffanger, Stavandria, Stafangria, Stavangria, a City of Norway; which is a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Drontheim; and has a large safe Harbor
upon the German Ocean. It stands in the Prefecture of Bergen; ninety Miles from
Bergen to the South, and sixty from the Baltic Sea. Long. 27. 45. Lat. 61. 15.

Staffarda, a Town not far from Saluzzes in Piedmont; made remarkable by the
Battle between the Duke of Savoy's Army, and the French, on the eighteenth of
August 1690* in which the former retired with loss.

Staffordshire, Staffordia, Cornavi, a County in the middle of England. Bounded
on the North by Cheshire and Darbyshire, (where a Stone shows the point in
which these three Countries meet;) on the East by Darbyshire, cut off by the
Dowe and Trent; on the South by Warwickshire and Worcestershire; and on the
West by Shropshire. It represents a Lozenge in its form: its length being forty
four Miles from North to South, and its breadth twenty seven; the whole
Circumference one hundred and forty seven: containing one hundred and thirty
Parishes, and eight Market Towns. For Springs, Brooks and Rivers, besides the
Trent, it has the Dove (which partly separates it from Derbyshire;) the
Churner, the Blithe, the Line, the Tea^, the Sow, the Penk, the Manifold, and
several others; over which are reckoned in all twenty four Stone-bridges. Here
is plenty of Lime, Marble, Timber, Stone for building, and game; with some
Alabaster, and Salt-springs. The Air is good, and very healthful; cold,
especially toward the North; in which part the Earth also is barren. The
middle is more level, but full of Woods. The South is fruitful, producing Corn,
and Grass in abundance, Coals, and Mines of Iron. And so great formerly was the
number of Parks and Warrens in this County, that most Gentlemen's Seats were
attended by both. This County takes its name from Stafford, the principal Town
in it; anciently called Betheny. Built by Edward the Elder. Incorporated by
King John: on the East and South walled. Trenched by its own Barons, the other
two sides being secured by a Lake of Water: the River Sow runs on the East and
West of the Town, and is covered with a Bridge. It has two Parish Churches, a
Free School, and many good Buildings. Edward VI. confirmed and enlarged their
Charter. Its Long is 18. 40. Lat. 53. 20. In the year 1357, one Ralph was
created the first Earl of Stafford; whose Posterity in twelve Descents enjoyed
that Honor to the year 1639: when it was finally extinguished in the Person of
Henry Stafford. In 1640, Charles I. revived this Honor by conferring it upon
Sir William Howard, Knight of the Bath, second Son of Thomas Earl of Arundel
and Surrey; who was then married to one of the Daughters of the last Earl of
Stafford. He was Beheaded Dec. 7. 1680. in the Reign of K. Charles II. But the
Title revived under K. James II. in Henry his Son, the present Earl of
Stafford. See the Natural History of this County, written by Dr. Robert Plo^t,
with the same extraordinary Art and Elaborateness which is peculiar to him.

Stagira* an ancient (Town, famous for being the Native place of the
Philosopher Aristotle, thence entitled Stagirita) in the Kingdom of Macedonia;
called afterward Liba Nova by some, and yet said to be extant.

Stagno, Stagnum; a small City in Dalmatia; and a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Raguza; from which it stands thirty Miles to the North, upon the
Adriatic: which affords it the Convenience of an Harbor. This Town belongs to
the Republic of Ragusa.

Stainmore-Hill, an exceeding Stony Hill, (as the Northern use of the word
Stain signifies) in the County of Westmorland: Remarkable for a Stone-Cross,
said anciently to have been erected for a Boundary betwixt the Kingdoms of
England and Scotland; upon a Peace concluded betwixt William the Conqueror, and
Malcholm King of Scotland. The Arms of England were displayed upon the
South Side of it, and those of Scotland on the North.

Stalemura, Anemurium, a City in Cilicia, upon the Mediterranean Sea; called by
others Anem^ra: a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Seleucia: between
Antioch to the West, and Celendris (now Palapoly) to the East: about forty four
Miles from Cape Cormachiti, in the North of the Isle of Cyprus to the North.
Mela places it in the Borders of Pamphylia and Cilicia. Long. 65. 10. Lat. 36.
50.

Stalimene, Lemnos, a considerable Island in the Archipelago; called by the
Inhabitants, Stilemnos. It is one hundred and sixty Miles in compass. At first
under the Venetians; but since conquered by Mahomet II. Fifty Miles from
Agionoros, or the Coast of Macedonia to the East. It has a considerable City
of its own name: produces good Wine, and is well Cultivated. Famous for a Red
Earth, called from it Terra Lemnia, and Sigillata; by which the Ottoman Port
reaps a considerable revenue.

Stamboli, the Turkish Name of Constantinople.

Stametz, Stametia, a small City in Gothland, a Province of Sweden; which is a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Vpsal; but now become a poor Village.

Stampalia, a considerable Island in the Archipelago, toward the Sea of
Scarpanto: called anciently Astypalaea, and placed by Strabo in the number of
the Sporades. It has a City of its own name now, as before; when a Temple of
great fame throughout Greece adorned it, which was consecrated to the honor of
Apollo. The principal Church is dedicated to S. George; and served with the
Greek rites, under the spiritual jurisdiction of the Bishop of Siphanto, who
some part of the year resides at it. To the City belongs a Castle for its
security, planted upon a Mountain: upon the Frontispiece of which the Arms of
Venice, France, and Thuscany appear displayed. This City is the sole settlement
in the Island; being, tho of a fruitful Soil, much in want of fresh Water.

Stanes, a large, well inhabited, and frequented Market Town in Hartfordshire,
in the Hundred of Branghing, with a Bridge over a River, leading into Surrey.

Stanford, Stamford, Durobrivae, a Town of Lincolnshire, in Kesteven division,
of good Antiquity: upon the River VVelland, on the Borders of Northampton, and
Rutland (with a part in each: but the chiefest in Lincolnshire) which is great
and well peopled; having about seven Parish Churches, and several Bridges over
the River; being expanded on both its sides. The Roman High Dike, or Way,
leads to the North from this Town. The Houses are built of Freestone; the
Streets fair and large, and begirt with a Wall. It has the honor to be a
Corporation, represented in the lower House of Parliament by two Burgesses. And
in its Neighborhood, stands a stately Seat and Park of the Earl of Exeter,
called Burleigh House. In the Reign of Edward III. part of the Students of
Oxford, (upon a quarrel between the Southern and Northern Men) settled for some
time in this Town; who erected a College here (its Ruins are yet remaining,)
and would not return to Oxford till compelled by a Proclamation: whence arose
that Statute of the University, enjoining every one by Oath at the taking of
Batchelors Degree, not to profess Philosophy at Stamford. In 1628, Henry Lord
Gray of Grooby, was created Earl of Stamford; and succeeded by Thomas his
Grandchild in 1673.

Stanhope, Stainthorp, or Staindrop, a Market Town in the Bishopric of Durham,
in Darlington Wapentake: upon a rivulet, running into the Tees.

Market-Stanton, a Market Town in Lincolnshire in the Hundred of Gartree.

Stargard, Vrbs Vetus, a City of Holstein. Long. 33. 10. Lat. 55. 06.

Stargart, Stargardia, a City of Germany, in the Further Pomerania (the Capital
of which it is) upon the River Ihna; under the Elector of Brandenburgh; five
German Miles from Stetin to the East. It is a Hanse Town, but not well peopled.
Long. 37. 40. Lat. 53. 23.

Staten-Eylandt, a small Rocky Island, discovered by the Dutch in 1594. to the
East of Weigat's Streights, near that Coast of Moscovy, called by them New
Holland. Not above one League long, and two in Circuit. Some pieces of fine
clear Crystal were found about the Rocks. The Dutch gave it this Name to
signify an Island of their States.

Stavelo. Stable, Stabulum, a Monastery in the Diocese of Vtrecht; between the
Archbishopric of Triers, and the Low Countries; three German Miles from
Limburgh to the South. There belongs to the Abbat a Territory; which lies
between the Bishopric of Liege, and the Dukedom of Limburgh and Luxemburgh.

Stavern, Stavera, a small City of Friseland, under the United Provinces in
Westergow, upon the Zuyder Zee; four German Miles from Enchusen to the North,
and six from Vollenhove to the South-West. It is a Seaport Town, included in
the Hanse League: of old the Seat of the Kings of Friseland.

Steenberg, Stenoberga, a City in the Dukedom of Brabant, under the Dutch; and
belonging particularly to the Prince of Orange.

Steenwick, Stenovicum, a Town in Over-Yssel, in the United Netherlands; upon
the River Aa, in the Borders of West Friseland: seventeen Miles from Zwol to
the North, and seven from the Zuyder Zee to the East. Taken by Alexander
Farnese Duke of Parma by Scalade; and by the French in 1672; but deserted soon
after.

Stegeborg, Stegeburgum, a small City in the Province of Ostrogothia; with a
Port or Harbor on the Baltic Sea, under the King of Sweden: sixteen Miles
from Norcoping to the East.

Stella, a Mountain in Galatia, in the Lesser Asia; near the City of Ancyra;
called by the Turks, Almadag. This is very remarkable for the Defeat of two
great Princes in their times; Mithridates, who was here overthrown by Pompey
the Great, sixty three years before the Birth of our Savior: and Bajazet I.
(Emperor of the Turks) here beaten and taken with his Son Musa, by Tamerlane
the Great, in 1397. Which Victory, if it had been followed by a vigorous Attack
from all the Christian Princes united, might (by the Blessing of God) have put
an end to the Ottoman Family then.

Stenay, Stenaeum, Stenacum, a strong City in the Dukedom of Lorain; sometimes
called Stathenay. It lies in the Dukedom of Bar upon the Maes: seven Leagues
from Verdun to the North, and six from Sedan to the South. Taken by the French
in 1654, and kept by them ever since; now annexed to Champagne.

Sterling, Sterling, a Town and County in Scotland, sometimes called
Striveling: on the North it has Mentith and Fife, on the South the Cluyd, on
the East Lothian, and on the West Lenox. It takes its Name from Sterling, a
Town upon Dunbritoun Fryth. This Town was so strong, that the Victorious
English durst not attempt it after their Victory at Dunbar. But it was taken
afterward by General Monk in 1654.

Stetin, Stetinum, the Capital City of the Dukedom of Pomerania, in Germany;
called by the Germans, Szcecin. It stands upon the Oder, over which it has a
Bridge; and is divided by it into two equal parts: eight Miles from the Baltic
Sea to the South, four from the Confines of Brandenburgh, and forty four from
Dantzick to the South-West. This City grew up after the Ruin of Vineta (in the
Isle of Vsedom, ten Miles more to the North-West) from a small Village, to that
greatness it now enjoys, by becoming the Seat of the Dukes of Pomerania; who
lived here many Ages in a Castle of an elegant and noble Structure. Otho (the
Father of Barnimius I. Founder of the Line of Stetin) removed hither in 1345.
This Family continued the Possession of it till 1630; when Gustavus Adolphus
coming before it with an Army, obtained an admission partly by force, and
partly by the terror of his Arms: Bogislaus, the last of that Line, dying soon
after. The Right of the Succession undoubtedly belonged to the Duke of
Brandenburgh: but the Swedes being in Possession, got their Right confirmed by
the Treaty of Munster, and kept this City till the year 1677. When the Duke of
Brandenburgh, coming before it with a powerful Army, after a tedious Siege took
it. In 1679, by the Treaty of S. German, it was restored to the Swedes; who
are still in Possession of this very strong place. See Pomerania. It had been
before attempted by the Imperial and Brandenburgh Forces united, in 1659: and
baffled the designs of those great Princes. Olearius. Long. 38. 45. Lat. 53. 27.

Stevenedge, a Market Town in Hartfordshire in the Hundred of Broadwater.

Steyning or Stening, a Market Town and Borough in the County of Sussex, in
Bramber Rape: Having the privilege of the Election of two Parliament Men.

Steyr, Asturis, a City of Austria, four Miles from Lintz to the South.

Stift, Ditio, a word in the German Tongue; which signifies a Dominion,
Country, or Territory; and frequently joined with the Names of places: as Stift
von Luick, the Dominion of Liege.

Stiria, a Province of Germany; styled by the Inhabitants, die Steyer or
Steyer-marck; which was a part of the Old Noricum, (or Upper Pannonia) toward
the Muer, and the Drove. It is bounded on the East by Hungary; on the North by
Austria; on the West by the Diocese of Saltzburgh, and Carinthia; and on the
South by Carniola. The Capital of it is Gratz; the other Cities, Cilley,
Kermend, Marcpurg, Petaw, Pruckam Muer, and Rakelspurg. Canisa belongs also to
this Province; and reckoned to the Lower Hungary. The Quadi were the old
Inhabitants of this Country; who being driven out by the Romans, the Country
was called Valeria in Honor of a Daughter of Dioclesian, so called. It was at
first a Marquisate: and by Frederick Barbarossa, the Emperor, changed into a
Dukedom. In length one hundred and ten Miles, in breadth sixty: for the most
part barren, being covered with the Spurs and Branches of the Alps; and rich
in nothing but Minerals. Ottacar (the last Duke of this Province) sold it to
Leopold the Fifth, Archduke of Austria; who bought it with a part of that vast
Ransom he extorted from Richard I. King of England, about the year 1193. Tho it
has been since granted to some younger Brothers of that Family, yet it is now
returned to the Emperor; and not likely to be any more dismembered from the rest
of the Hereditary Countries. As to the Fertility of it, Hoffman differs from
Dr. Heylin; who says, in Iron Mines it excels all the European Countries, and
wants nothing that is useful; it abounding with Wine, Corn, Cattle, and Salt.

Stirone, Sisterio, a small River of Lombardy, in the Dukedom of Parma; which
watering Burgo di S. Domino, falls into the Taro; four Miles above its fall
into the Po.

Stives, Thebae, a City once of great Renown, but now a poor Village in Greece;
fifty Miles from Athens to the North; Sophianus calls it Thiva. The Turks
abandoned it after the taking of Athens, to collect their Strength into one
Body at Negropont. Whereupon General Morosini in 1687, possessed himself of it.
But finding it of little use to keep, he razed the Fortifications, which were
in great part ruined before; and abandoned it also. See Thebae.

Stocksbridge, a Market Town and Borough in the County of Southampton, and the
Hundred of Kingombom, upon the River Test. Represented by two Burgesses in the
House of Commons.

Stockholm, Holmia, is a very great City, and the Capital of the Kingdom of
Sweden; standing in the Province of Vpland, in the Borders of Sudermania:
Heretofore a place of small consideration; but having for the two last Ages
enjoyed the Residence of the Kings of Sweden, and they having also much
enlarged that Kingdom by their Conquests in Poland, Germany, and Moscovy, it is
now become a celebrated Mart, rich, and populous. It has a Royal Castle, a
large and safe Port, upon the disembogure of the Lake Meler; secured by Forts,
and from the weather so protected by Rocks, that the greatest Vessels may ride
in the midst of it without anchor or cable. It has a convenient Situation, (but
being placed amongst many Rocks just by it, the prospect of it is not very
taking) upon six small Islands, joined by Bridges of Wood to each other: the
best Peopled, is called Stockholm, which denominates the City; also two large
Suburbs, one on the North, and the other on the South. Tho it is a place of no
strength, yet Christian, King of Denmark, could not take it, when he besieged
it in 1518. It stands eight Swedish Leagues from Vpsal to the South, five from
the Baltic Sea to the West, and eighty from Dantzick and Copenhagen. Long. 43.
00. Lat. 60. 30. Gustavus Adolphus and Charles Gustavus, surnamed Augustus,
Kings of Sweden, lie interred in a Church of this City: But the rest of the
Kings lie at Vpsal and other places.

Stockport or Stopford, a Market Town in Cheshire, in the Hundred of
Macclesfield, upon the River Mersey.

Stockton, a Market Town in the Bishopric of Durham. The Capital of a Ward.

Stoecades, Ligustides, the Islands Hyeres in the Mediterranean Sea, upon the
Coast of Provence: in which the Knights of Malta, after their loss of Rhodes,
entertained thoughts of settling by the permission of the King of France. The
Monks had got footing upon them in Cassian's time. There was a Cistercian
Monastery standing in the time of P. Innocent III. The Ancients mention the
principal of them by the names of Hispa, Prote, Pomponiana, Phenice, Sturium,
etc. which now are called Test de Can, Ribaudas, Ribaudon, Langoustier, etc.
This last seem to express their other ancient Name of Ligustides, See Hieres.

Stoel-Weissemburg. See Alba Regalis.

Stokesley, a Market Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of
Langbark: well watered with fresh Streams,

Stolhoffen, Stolhoffa, a City or fortified Town in Schwaben in Germany; upon
the Rhine, in the Marquisate of Baden; two German Miles from Hagenow to the
East, and three from Strasburg South-East.

Stolpe, Stolpa, a Town seated upon a River of the same Name in the Further
Pomerania; three German Miles from Lawenburg in Pomerania to the West, thirteen
from Colberg to the East. It has an ancient Castle; subject to the Duke of
Brandenburgh.

Stone, a Market Town in Staffordshire, in the Hundred of Pirehill, upon the
Trent.

Stonehenge, Mons Ambrosii, a very venerable and ancient Monument in
Whiltshire, six Miles from Salisbury: consisting of three Crowns, or Ranks of
huge unwrought Stones, one within another: some of which are twenty eight Foot
high, and seven broad; upon the tops there are others laid cross and framed
into them. Upon a large plain, scarce affording any other Stones at all in the
circumferences of some Miles. Mr. Cambden supposes the Art of the Ancients in
making Stone of Sand and unctuous Cement, was employed in this. Work: Because
these Stones seem too vast a load for Carriages.

Stormaren, Stormaria, a Province of Holstein; bounded on the North by Holstein
properly so called; on the East by Waggaren and Lavemburg; and on the West and
South by Bremen and Lunenburg; cut off by the Elbe. Partly subject to the King
of Denmark, and partly to the Duke of Holstein, Gotthorp. The principal Places
in it are Gluckstad, Crempen and Pinnenberg, which are under the King of
Denmark. Under the Duke are Elmeshorn, Steinhorst, Barmsted and Reinhorst:
Hamburg, though subject to neither of these Princes, is reckoned within the
Bounds of this Province by John Bunon.

Stow on the Would, a Market Town in Gloucestershire, in the Hundred of
Slaughter. Another in the County of Suffolk; the Capital of its Hundred, upon
the River Orwell: large and beautifully built, with a spacious lofty Church;
And driving a great Trade in Stuffs.

Straelsund, Sundis, a small, but very strong City in the Hither Pomerania,
upon the Shoars of the Baltic Sea; which has an Harbor over against the Isle
of Rugen: another toward Gripswald and Pomerania, and a third looking toward
Dumgarten, and the Dukedom of Meckelburg; being built in a Triangle. It stands
sive German Miles from Gripswald to the North, ten from Anclam, and about four
from the Isle of Rugen; secured by Marshes, the Sea, and three well fortified
Banks. Now one of the Hanse Towns, but formerly a Free Imperial City, and a
frequented Mart. Built by the Danes, in 1211: and being besieged by Count
Wallestein for the Emperor, (who had subdued all the rest of Pomerania) this
small place in 1629, called Gustavus Adolphus into Germany; who rescued it out
of the Hands of the Imperialists, and became the Master of it; which was
confirmed by the Peace of Munster. In 1678, the Duke of Brandenburgh took and
burnt this Town, not leaving out of above two thousand Houses, five hundred
unruined by his Bombs and Fireworks. He took it upon a Capitulation: and the
next year after, by the Treaty at S. Germains, it was resigned to the Swedes
again.

Stramulipa, Boeotia, Attica, a part of Greece, the Capital of which is Thebes:
it lies over against the Isle of Negropont.

Strasburg, Argentoratum, the Capital City of Alsatia in Germany, called by the
Italians Argentina: It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Mentz. And for
many Ages a Free and Imperial City; seated upon the River Ill, (where it falls
into the Breuch) one Mile from the Rhine, over which it has a Timber-Bridge of
vast length. Eight German Miles from Brisach to the North, twelve from Spire,
fourteen from Basil, and twenty from Nancy and Metz. So very ancient, that it
is said to be built in the year of the World 1955: thirty three years before
the Birth of Abraham: which tho it may be true, yet cannot be proved. Tacitus
and Caesar call it Tribocorum and Trib^cum: Ptolemy, Argentoratum: other Latin
Writers Argentina, and Strasburgum. It is mentioned by Ammianus Marcellinus, as
a Place which the Slaughter of the Barbarians (by Julian the Apostate) had made
famous. The Victory here mentioned was in the year of Christ 357. In which,
Julian overthrew six Barbarous Kings of the Germans; and took Chodonomar (the
chief of them) Prisoner. In the year 378, Gratianus the Emperor gave the
Germans another great Overthrow near this City. Attila King of the Hunns, took
and wasted this City about the year 451. Childerick King of the Franks,
possessed himself of it in the year 478. S. Amand became the first Bishop of
this City in the year 643. Henry II. Emperor rebuilt this City in the year
1004. The Cathedral was built in the year 1207. In the year 1332, it suffered
very much by intestine Divisions, between the Nobility and Populacy. In 1522,
the Reformation was first Preached; and in 1529, it was embraced. Whereupon the
year following, this City entered a League with the Reformed Cantons for her
Defense. In 1538, here was an University opened by the Senate, at the
persuasion of Jacobus Sturmius, a learned Man, who flourished that time in the
City: which in 1566, was confirmed by Maximilian I. But in September 29. 1681,
the present King of France, having before possessed himself of all the rest of
Alsatia, suddenly surprised this important Place (in a time of Peace when no
Body suspected it) and put an end to the Liberty of this great City. Long. 29.
26. Lat. 48. 25. Hoffman.

Stratford-stony, a Market Town in Buckinghamshire, in the Hundred of Newport;
in Watling-street Road, a Military Highway of the Romans, crossing all the
Country. This Town boasts to be the Luctodurum of the Romans; and the place at
which K. Edward the Elder, whilst he fortified Towcester, obstructed the
passage of the Danes. K. Edward I. for a memorial of his Queen Eleanor, whose
Corpse rested here in their journey from Lincolnshire to London, adorned it with
a Beautiful Cross.. Another in Warwickshire, in the Hundred of Barlickway, upon
the River Avon: over which it has a large and fair Stone Bridge, with two
Parish Churches: And is well inhabited.

Strathern, Strathernia, a County in the South of Scotland; between Albany and
Athole to the North, Perth to the East, and Menteith to the West and South.
Aberneath is the Capital of it.

Strath-Navern, the most North-Western County in Scotland; bounded on the North
and West by the Ocean, on the South by Southerland, and on the East by
Caithness. It is all over run with Woods; filled with Mountains desolate and
cold, and of small profit or regard.

Stratton, a Market Town in the County of Cornwall. The Capital of its Hundred.

Straubingen, Augusta Acilia, Serviodurum, Straubinga, a City of Bavaria in
Germany; which has a Bridge upon the Danube; six German Miles beneath Ratisbone
to the East, and eleven from Presburg to the West.

Strel, Sargetia, a River of Walachia, called Istrig by the Germans; in which
Decebalus hid his Treasures, when he was attacked by Trajan: it falls into the
Marell, a River of Transylvania.

Strenges, or Strengenes, Strengesia, a City of Sweden in the Province of
Sudermania; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Vpsal; eight
Swedish Miles on the Lake of Meler from Stockholm to the West, and three from
Torsil to the East.

Church-Stretton, a Market Town in Shropshire, in the Hundred of Munslow.

Stridon, or Strigna, the same with Sdrin.

Strigonic, Gran.

Strivali, or Strophadi, Strophades, two small Islands in the Ionian Sea, South
of Zante, and about thirty Miles from the Western Coast of the Morea. The
largest, not above three or four Miles in Circuit. But extraordinary fertile in
rasins and good fruits. Full of Springs. The Caloyers or Grecian Monks are the
only People inhabiting it: whose Convent is built in the manner of a Fortress,
with a Terrast of Canon for their security against the Corsaires of Barbary.
But seldom either the Corsaires or the Turks come here for any thing but water.

Stromboli, Strongyle, one of the Lipari Islands in the Tyrrhenian Sea, on the
North of Sicily: which casts forth flames of Sulphur in foam places
continually; whilst others produce Fruits and Cotton in plenty. It is ten
Miles in circuit, and made memorable amongst the Ancients by the Story of
Aeolus.

Stromona, Strymon, a River of Thrace, which springs from a part of the
Mountain Haemus; and separating Thrace from Macedonia, falls into the
Archipelago, at the Gulf of Contessa. In the Summer Season the Cranes frequent
it so notably, as to take the name of Strymoniae aves from it. In the Winter
they fly hence to the warm Nile: as Lucan says,

Deseritur Strymon, tepido committere Nilo Bistonias consuetus aves. Strongoli,
Strongylum, a small City in the Kingdom of Naples in the Hither Calabria; which
is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Santa Severina; and a Principality.
Placed on a high Hill; three Miles from the Ionian Sea to the West, eight from
its Metropolis to the South-East, and thirteen from Cortona to the North: some
believe it was of old called Macallum.

Strongyle. See Stromboli.

Strophades. See Strivali.

Stroud, a Market Town in Gloucestershire, in the Hundred of Bisley, upon the
Banks of a River of its own name, over which it has a Bridge. This River has
the Virtue of giving the tincture of Scarlet. Many fulling Mills stand upon it
for that use. The Town is well built, generally of Stone.

Struden, the Cataracts or precipitate Fall of the Danube in Austria, beneath
Lintz; the Germans call it Seuvressel.

Strumita, Myra, a City of Lycia; placed by Strabo in the Inland Parts, near
the River Lemyrus, about two Miles from the Shore; formerly a Bishops See, now
the Metropolis; having thirty six Suffragan Bishops under its Archbishop. Long.
59. 40. Lat. 38. 25.

Stugart, Stugardia, Stugartia, a City of Schwaben in Germany; the Capital of
the Dukedom of Wurtemburg, and the Seat of the Dukes. It has a fine and a noble
Castle: stands upon the River Necker; one German Mile from Esling to the West,
and four from Tubingen to the North.

Stulingen, a Town and Landgravate in the Circle of Schwaben in Germany.

La Stura, Stura, two Rivers in Lombardy. The first in the Dukedom of
Montisferat, which falls into the Po at Pontestura, four Miles beneath Casal.
The second rises in Savoy, and running South, falls into the Po three Miles
beneath Turin from the West.

Sturbridge, a Market Town in Worcestershire, and the Hundred of Halfshire,
upon the River Stower, over which it has a Bridge: It is situated in a Flatt.
There is a Free School, and a Library here.

Sturminster-Newton, a Market Town in Dorsetshire, in the Hundred of Brownsell.
It stands upon, and has a fair Stone Bridge over, the River Stower: showing
the rests of an ancient Castle hard by, in which the Kings of the West Saxons
kept their Residence.

Stymphalis, a Mountain, Town, and Lake of the Peloponnesus in Arcadia; called
anciently by this name: Now, Monte Poglisi, Vulsi and Longanico.

Styx, a Fountain springing from the Lake of Pheneus, at the foot of the
Mountain Nonacris, in the Peloponnesus in Areadia: which the fictions
contracted by its contagious qualities, amongst the Poets, have made known to
all.

Suabia, Schwaben.

Suachen, Ptolemais, a celebrated Port of the higher Aethiopia, upon the Red
Sea; in the Hands of the Turks. Long. 66. 00 Lat. 16. 26. According to the
latter Maps, Long. 68. 15. Lat. 19. 27. It is written Suaquem in these Maps.

Suani, an ancient People, remaining to this day about the Mountain Caucasus in
Asia, to the East of Mengrelia. They are mentioned in Strabo. And now, the most
civilized of all the Inhabitants of that Mountain. A hardy valiant People, good
Soldiers, and pretending to the name of Christians.

Succadana, a City in the Island of Borneo in the East Indies.

Sucheu, Sucheum, a City of China in the Province of Queycheu.

Sucheu, a City of China in the Province of Nankim.

Suching, a City of China in the Province of Quamsi: now under the King of
Tunkim.

Suchuen, a large Province in the Kingdom of China; lying toward the
South-West Borders of that Kingdom, upon India and the Kingdom of Thibet.
Bounded on the North by Xensi, on the East by Huquam, on the South by Queycheu,
and on the West by the Further East Indies: the principal City of it is
Chingtu. It contains eight great Cities, one hundred twenty four small Cities,
and four hundred sixty four thousand one hundred twenty eight Families. The
River Kiang divides it in two. It suffered very much in the last Wars with the
Tartars.

Suchzow, Suczova, a City of Moldavia, (or as Baudrand says in Walachia) upon
the River Stretch; in the Borders of Transylvania; fifty Miles from Jassy to
the West. Always kept by a strong Garrison of the Turks, in whose Hands it has
been for some Ages.

Suda, Amphimalia, a Seaport Town at the North End of the Isle of Candy; which
has a strong Castle, and a good Harbor.

Sudbury, Colonia; That is, The South Town: supposed to have had this name in
opposition to Norwich (or the North Town) and to have been in ancient time the
Capital or County Town. It is feated upon the River Stour, in the Borders of
Essex, in the County of Suffolk: with a fair Bridge over the Stour, leading
into Essex; and three Parish Churches. A Mayor Town, rich, and populous, by
reason of a considerable Clothing Trade here driven; especially in Says; about
fifteen Miles from Ipswich to the West, and forty from London to the North:
represented by two Burgesses in Parliament. The Honorable Henry Fitz-Roy late
Duke of Grafton was Baron of Sudbury.

Sudermanland, Sudermannia, a County in the Kingdom of Sweden; called by the
Natives Sodermanland. Bounded on the North by Westmannia and Vpsall; on the
South by the Baltic Sea. It has the Honor to be a Dukedom of great Esteem,
being born by the Royal Family of that Kingdom. The principal Places in it are
Nicoping, Stregnes and Trosa.

Suelli, Suellis; a very small City in the Isle of Sardinia; and a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Cagliari; from which it stands fifteen Miles: reduced
almost to a Village.

Sueonie, Suevonia, a considerable part of the Kingdom of Sweden; between
Lapland to the North; the Baltic Sea, and Bay of Botnen to the East; Gothia to
the South, and Norway to the West. It contains ten Counties. The Capital of it
is the Royal City of Stockholm.

Sues, Suez, Arsinoe, Cleopatris, Posidium, is a City or Seaport Town of
Egypt, in the bottom of the Red Sea: containing about two hundred Houses, and
has a pretty Harbor; but so shallow, that a Ship cannot enter it, nor a Galley
till half unloaded: but the Road is safe. It has a Baraque railed with Timber,
Palissadoes, thirteen Culverins; and as many Cannons for its security. It has a
Greek Church, an old ruined Castle and some indifferent Houses. When the Ships
or Galleys come in, it is pretty Populous: at other times, almost desolate.
Thevenot, Part I. page 176. Long. 63. 20. Lat. 29. 10. The Ethiopian Merchants
with Spices, Pearl, Amber, Musk, precious Stones, and other rarities out of
India rendesvouz here: Whence they transport them upon Camels to Cairo and
Alexandria, and there sell them to the Venetians and other Christian Merchants.
The Country, environing this City, is a sandy Desert; which forces the
Inhabitants to seek their Provisions elsewhere, and their water at two Leagues
distance. The Isthmus betwixt the Mediterranean and the Red Sea, separating
Egypt from Arabia, receives the name of the Isthmus of Suez from this Port.

Suevi, the ancient Inhabitants of the present Circle of Schwaben in Germany:
who in conjunction with the Vandals and the Alani, about the year 406, entered
and pillaged diverse Provinces of the Gauls: thence in 409 passing into Spain,
settled into a Kingdom in Galicia and Portugal, under Hermericus their first
King; who died about 440; and was succeeded by eight other Kings: till about
the year 585. Leuvigildus, King of the VVisegoths, conquered and united their
Estates of the Suevi to his own.

Suffolk, Suffolcia, is bounded on the E. by the German Sea; on the N. by the
Waveney, and the little Ouse (which rise in the middle of its bounds: the first
running East, and the second West, divide it from Norfolk:) on the West by
Cambridgeshire; and on the South by Essex, severed from it by the Stoure. It
lies in the form of a Crescent: The length from East to West about forty five
Miles; the breadth thirty; the whole circumference of it is about one hundred
and forty, containing five hundred and seventy five Parishes, and thirty Market
Towns: the Air mild and healthful; the Soil rich, level, and fruitful; such as
yields abundance of Corn of all sorts, Pease, Hemp, Pasturage, and Wood. The
more inland part is commonly called High Suffolk, or the VVoodlands. This
County reckons nigh fifty Parks in it. The Orwell, Ore, Blithe, Deben, and
Breton, contribute their streams for the watering of it with the three former
Rivers its Boundaries. The ancient Iceni, (a British tribe) and afterward the
East Angles possessed it in the several times of the Romans, and the Saxon
Heptarchy. The principal places in it are Ipswich, Bury, and Sudbury. The
Marquesses or Earls of this County, were Robert de Vfford or Clifford in 1335.
William his Son in 1369. Michael de la Pole (Lord Chancellor) Created Earl in
1379. William de la Pole (the IV. in this Line) was made Duke of Suffolk by
Henry VI. Edmond the VIII. in this Line, was the last of that name; Beheaded by
Henry VIII. about 1510. In 1513, Charles Brandon (Viscount Lisle) was Created
Duke of Suffolk: who by Mary second Sister of Henry VIII. had Henry Brandon;
who died a Child. In 1551, Henry Gray Marquess of Dorset, having married
Francis Daughter of Charles Brandon, was made Duke of Suffolk: he was Beheaded
in the Reign of Queen Mary, in 1553. This was the last Duke of Suffolk. In
1603. King James I. Created Thomas Lord Howard of Walden Earl of Suffolk; to
whom James Lord Howard the III. of this Line succeeded in 1640.

Sugen, Sugenum, a City formerly part of the Province of Quamsi, and belonging
to China; now under the King of Tunkin, who has fortified it very strongly.

Sulmona, or Solmona, Sulmo, a City of great Antiquity in the Province of
Abruzzo; in the Kingdom of Naples; upon the River Sangro ( Sarus.) Eight Miles
from the Borders of Abruzzo to the East, almost seventy from Naples to the
North, and near ninety from Rome to the East. It is a Bishops See under the
Archbishop of Theatino; and a principality belonging to the House of Borghese.
The Birthplace of Ovid the Latin Poet: who tells us its distance from Rome,
and praises it for its Streams, in

Sulmo mihi Patria est, gelidis Vberrimus undis; Sultzbach, Sultsbachium, a
small Town in Nortgow, in the Upper Palatinate of the Rhine; one Mile distance
from Amberg to the South-East: which gives the Title of a Prince to some
Branches of the Palatine Family.

Sumatra, a vast Island in the East Indies to the South-West of the Promontory
of Malaccia; from which it is separated only by a narrow straight; as also by
another from the Isle of Java to the South. It extends from North-West to
South-East, one hundred and eighty five German Miles; or nine hundred and ten
English; and is two hundred and ten broad in the middle. There are several
Kingdoms in this Island, which ordinarily go to war with one another. The
principal of which are Achem, Camper, Jamby, Menanchabo, Pacem, Palimban, and
Pedir: The principal City in the whole Island and Kingdom is Achem, toward the
North; the King whereof possesses one half of the Island. The Coast upon the
streights of the Sund is under the obedience of the King of Bantam. Some parts
are covered with Wood and Mountains: amongst which latter, one in the middle of
the Island casts forth flames by intervals. It is divided by the Equator into
almost two equal parts; the Air is very hot and unhealthful; the Soil will
produce little Grain but Rice and Millet. It yields Ginger, Pepper, Camphir,
Agarick and Cassia in great abundance, Wax and Honey, Silks and Cottons; rich
Mines of Tin, Iron and Sulphur; and such quantity of Gold, that some conceive
it to be Solomon's Ophir; and some the Taprobane of the ancients. The
Inhabitants are for the most part Pagans; except the Sea Coast, where
Mahometanism has got some footing. It has a vast number of Rivers and Marshes;
which with the Woods do much promote the unwholsomeness of the Air. The
Hollanders enjoy four or five Fortresses in it, and are become more powerful
than some of the Kings. The Portuguese traffic to it; but it is, when the
others will permit them; for they have no establishments here.

Sie Sund, Sundae Fretum, Sundicum fretum, a straight between the Baltic Sea,
and the German Ocean; called by the Dutch Ore Sunn; by the English the Sound.
It stretches fifty Miles from North-West to South-East; about fifteen at its
greatest breadth: but between Elsingburg and Cronenburg not above three over:
which necessitates all Ships that pass to and fro to pay a Toll to the King of
Denmark; he being able otherwise by the Cannon of his Castles to shut up the
Passage.. This name is attributed also to the Streights, betwixt the Islands of
Java and Sumatra in the East Indies. The Dutch call it, Straet Van Sunda: and
Latin Writers, Sundae fretum.

The Island of the Sund or Souud, comprehend in the Portugueses's accounts who
gave them this name, all those Islands in the Indian Ocean, which lie beyond
the Promontory of Malaca: some near, some under the Equinoctial. Commonly
divided into the Islands of the Sund to the East, and to the West. Of the
former, Gilolo, Banda, Flores, Macasar, and the Moluccaes, are the Principal.
Of the other, Borneo, Java, and Sumatra.

Sundenberg, or Sunderbourg, a Town and Duchy in the Isle of Alsen near Iutland.

Sunderland, Sunderlandia, a small Island at the Mouth of the River Were, in
the North-East part of the Bishopric of Durham, in Esington Ward: once a part
of the Continent; but rent off by the violence of the Sea; from whence it has
the name of Sunderland. A place of no great note, only for its Sea-Coal Trade,
till it was made the Title of an Earldom by Charles I. who in 1627, Created
Emanuel Lord Scrope of Bolton, President of the North, Earl of Sunderland. He
dying Childless, Henry Lord Spenser, of VVormleighton, (in 1643.) was Created
Earl of Sunderland, and slain the eighth of June the same year in the first
Battle of Newbery. To whom suc^eeded Robert his Son, sometime Principal
Secretary of State, and President of the Council to King James II.

Sungkiang, a trading and populous City in the Province of Nanking in China.
The Capital over two others.

Suntgaw, or Sundgow, Suntgovia, a Province of Germany, now under the King of
France, by the Peace of Munster. Bounded on the North by Alsatia; on the East
by the Rhine, and the Canton of Basil; (which last is sometimes included under
this name;) on the South by the Dominions of the Bishop of Basil; and on the
West by the Franche Comte. The Principal Places in it are Befort, Mulhausen,
Ferrete, (whence it has the name also of the County of Ferrete) and Huningue.
The last has been lately fortified by the King of France.

Sura, an ancient Episcopal City of Syria, near the Euphrates. The Sea is a
Suffragan to the Archbishop of Hierapolis.. Plutarch remembers us of a Town of
this name in Lycia, in the Lesser Asia: famed for Oracles in ancient times
delivered there. Betwixt Phellus and Strumita.

Surate, Surata, a very famous City of the Hither Indies, in the Kingdom of
Guzarat, upon the Bay of Cambaya: under the Dominion of the great Mogul; which
has a convenient Port or Haven, much frequented by the European and Armenian
Merchants for Diamonds, Pearls, Ambergrease, Musk, Civet, Spices, and Indian
Stuffs; procured from diverse parts, and here laid up in Mazagines. It lies
(says Monsieur Thevenot) 21. degrees. and some minutes from the Line: and was then
designed to be Fortified with a Brick instead of its ancient Earthen Wall;
which had not been able to preserve it from the depredations of a Raja. In the
time of the Monson or Fair (kept in the Spring Quarter) it is exceeding full of
People; not meanly furnished at others; nor are those Inhabitants less
considerable on the account of their Wealth, than Number. The English and Dutch
have their Factories here: it is the Staple of the English Trade in the
East Indies. It has a Castle at the South end of the Town, upon the River;
which is square, flanked at each corner by a large Tower, The Ditches on three
sides are filled with Sea Water; on the West the River runs; and there are many
Cannon mounted in it. The Governor commands over all the adjacent Provinces,
and keeps the train and equipage of a Prince. For the rest you may consult
Thevenot Part III. page 15.

Surina, a Province of South America, between the confluence of the River
Cayana, and that of the Amazons.

Surrey, Suria, is separated on the North from Buckingham and Middlesex by the
great River Thames; on the East it is bounded by Kent, on the South by Sussex
and Hampshire, and on the West by Hampshire and Barkshire. In length thirty
four Miles, in breadth about twenty two; in circumference one hundred and
twelve; including one hundred and forty Parishes, with eight Market Towns. The
Air is sweet and pleasant; the Soil, especially in the verges of the County
fruitful; the middle Parts being somewhat hard to cultivate. Whence the People
are used to say, their County is like a Course piece of Cloth with a fine List.
Besides the Thames, here is the Way, the Mole, and the Wandle, (whose head
springs from Croydon,) all emptying themselves in the Thames. It has many Noble
and Princely Houses; but few Towns or Places of any considerable greatness: the
Principal Town in it being Kingston upon Thames. The Regni an old British Tribe
were the first Inhabitants of this County. In the times of the Saxon Heptarchy,
it was a part of the Kingdom of the South Saxons. The first Earl of it was
Will. de Warren, Created by William the Conqueror in 1067. William (the
third of this Line) succeeded in 1135. who was followed by William de Blois
Son of King Stephen, first Husband of Isabel de Warren in 1148. and by
Hameline Plantagenet, base Son of George Earl of Anjou, half Brother to Edward
III. second Husband of the said Isabel in 1163. His Posterity enjoyed it in
four descents till 1347: when the Male Line failing, Richard Fitz Alan Lord
Treasurer was Earl of Surrey. In 1398. Thomas Holland was Earl of Kent and Duke
of Surrey; afterward Beheaded. Thomas Fitz Alan (Son of the former Richard)
died Earl of Surrey in 1414. In 1451, John Lord Mowbray was Created Earl of
Warren and Surrey, and after Duke of Norfolk. In 1475. Richard (a second Son
of Edward IV.) was the thirteenth Earl of Surrey. In 1483. Thomas L. Howard L.
Treasurer, after Duke of Norfolk was Created Earl of Surrey; in which Family it
is at this day.

Surunga, a City and Kingdom in Japan in the Island of Niphon.

Sus, Susa or Susum, a Kingdom in Biledulgerida in Africa; so called from a
River of the same Name. It is bounded on the North by the Kingdom of Morocco;
on the East by Darha; on the South by Tesseta; and on the West by the Atlantic
Ocean. Divided into seven Provinces; the principal Cities in it are Tarudant
(the Regal City) Teseut, and Sancta Cruz. This is a pleasant, rich, fruitful
Kingdom; yields Wine, Grain, Fruits, Pasturage, Indico, Alum, and c. has a
great Quantity of Gold, which is a perpetual cause of War amongst them: and
many Castles and Villages, well fortified by the Natives, since the Portuguese
abandoned this Country in the last Century. Now subject to the Kingdom of Fez;
tho it has been a distinct Kingdom; and the Inhabitants are for the most part
Mahometans, and some of the best Soldiers in Africa.

Susa, one of the principal Cities in the Principality of Piedmont, upon the
Doria, at the foot of the Cottian Alps, which separate Piedmons from Dauphine;
and the Capital of a Marquisa^e of its own Name: belonging to the Duke of
Savoy; but taken by the French Forces under Monsieur Cattinat, November 1690.
Nineteen Miles from Pignerol. The French call it Suse. This City shows an
Inscription upon a Triumphal Arch, from which Learned Men conclude, that the
Emperor Augustus erected his Trophy hereabouts for the Conquest of the Alpine
Nations, in the year of Rome 740; fourteen Years before our Savior. For tho
others place that Trophy about the Foot of le Col de Tend or the Maritime
Alps, near Nice and Monaco, from a part of the words Gentes Alpinae Devictae,
seen there upon a Fragment of a stone: yet these two Opinions are reconcilable,
by supposing that Augustus set up this Trophy at the foot of both the Maritime
and Cottian Alps for the greater glory. Susa was also the Capital of the
ancient Country Susiana in Asia; at the entrance of a spacious Plain, which the
River Choaspes watered. The Kings of Persia used to pass the Spring at it.
Darius repaired it, says Pliny. Alexander the Great took it. It is now in a
flourishing state, if the same Souster. See Souster.

Susdal, Susdalia, a City of Muscovy; the Capital of a Province of the same
Name, and a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Rostow. It stands eighty Miles
from Moscow to the South-East, and one hundred and thirty from Novogorod Nisi
to the North-West.

Susiana, an ancient Country of Asia; betwixt Syria, Persia and Chaldaea:
whereof Susa was the Capital City, and Melitene one considerable Province. It
had the honor to be a Kingdom: which, after the death of Abradatus King of
Susiana, submitted to the power of Cyrus.

Sussex, Sussexia, one of the Southern Counties of England: Bounded on the
North by Surrey and Kent; on the East by Kent; on the South by the British Sea;
and on the West by Hampshire. Its Length from East to West is sixty Miles; the
broadest part from North to South not above twenty; and its Circumference about
one hundred and fifty: wherein are contained one hundred and twelve Parishes,
with eighteen Market Towns. The Air is good; but subject to great Fogs and
Mists out of the neighbor Sea; which recompenceth this Inconvenience with
plenty of Fish and Fowl. There are few Harbors upon this Coast: the Soil is
rich and fruitful, but the Roads miry and unpleasant: the Middle of the Country
has excellent Meadows; the Seacoasts are Hilly, but afford plenty of Corn and
Grass: the North-side full of Woods and Groves. The principal River is Arun.
The chief City in it is Chichester, which is a Bishop's See: the next to it,
Jews. The Regni were the ancient Inhabitants of this County: who were subdued
by Aulus Plautius in the reign of Claudius the Roman Emperor. In 478, Ella
erected here the Kingdom of the South Saxons, from whence this County has its
Name, The first Earl of it was William de Albeney Earl of Arundel, who married
Adelizia, the Relict of Henry I, in 1178. He was succeeded by William his Son:
it continued in this Family for five Descents. In 1243, John Plantagenet, Earl
of Surrey, succeeded. In 1305, John, a Son of the former, followed. In 1529,
Robert Ratcliffe was Created, by Henry VIII, Earl of Sussex; whose Posterity
enjoyed this Honor six Descents. In 1644, Thomas Lord Savil was Created the
fourteenth Earl of Sussex; whose Son succeeded, and in him that Family ended.
This Honor, in 1674, was conferred upon Thomas Leonard Lord Dacres, (who
married Anne Fitz-Roy, eldest Daughter to the Duchess of Cleavland) by Charles
II.

Sutherland, Sutherlandia, a County in the North of Scotland. Bounded on the
North by Caithness and Strathnavern; on the West by Assint, on the South by
Ros^, and on the East by the German Ocean. The principal Town in it is Dornock.

Sutri, Sutrium, Colonia Julia Sutrina, a City in the States of the Church in
S. Peter's Patrimony, upon the River Pozzolo: which is a Bishops See, but for
ever united to the Sea of Nepi; from whence it stands four Miles to the West,
and twenty four from Rome to the South-West. It is little and encompassed with
Rocks on all sides. Livy says of it, that Camillus, when it had revolted
against the Romans, went with an Army to reduce it. In the year of Christ 1046.
the Emperor Henry III. assembled a Council here, which deposed Pope Gregory VI.
(who had intruded into the Roman See in 1044.) and elected Constantine II. in
his stead. In 1059. another Council confirmed Pope Nicholas II. his Election to
the Sea, and deposed the Antipope to him, Benedict, before Bishop of Veletri.

Sutton-Cofield, a Market Town in Warwickshire, in the Hundred of Hemlingford.

Suvas, Sebastopolis, a City of Cappadocia in Asia; which is a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Sebastia: now a very considerable Place, and the Seat
of a Turkish Governor: about fifty Miles from Amasia to the North-East. Long.
67. 30. Lat. 42. 30.

Swafham, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk, in the Hundred of S. Greneho.

Swansey, a Market Town in Glamorganshire in Wales; the Capital of its Hundred.

Swarteness, Iccium, a Cape in Picardy, so called by the Dutch; four Leagues
from Calais to the West, and six from the Coast of Kent. The English call it
Blackness.

Swarte Sluys, a small City in Over-Yssel, one of the United Provinces of the
Low Countries.

Sweden, Suecia, one of the Northern Kingdoms of Europe; called by the
Inhabitants Swerie, Swedenrick, and Sweriesryke: by the Germans Schweden; by
the French Suede; by the Poles Szwecya, and Szwedzka Ziemia; by the Italians La
Suetia, by the Spaniards La Suecia. It is a great and populous Kingdom;
contains the greatest part of that which was of old called Scandinavia; for
some time united to the Crown of Denmark: and has been a separate and distinct
Kingdom, only since 1525. Bounded on the North by Lapland, Norway, and the
Frozen Ocean; on the East by Muscovy or great Russia; on the South by the
Baltic Sea; and on the West by Denmark and Norway. The principal Parts of it
are, first, Gothia; second, Sweden properly so called; third Norland; fourth
Finland; fifth Ingria; sixth Livonia; all which are subdivided into thirty four
Counties. They are again subdivided into Haeradlis like our Hundreds. It has
seventeen Cities; the Capital of all Stockholm. The Air of this whole Kingdom
is very cold; clear or foggy as it lies nearer or remoter from the Seas, Lakes,
and Marshes; and for the most part more temperate and pure than that of Norway.
In length from Stockholm to the Borders of Lapland one thousand Italian Miles;
in breadth twenty days Journey on Horseback: so that with all its Appendages it
is thought nine hundred Miles greater than France and Italy put together. It
has one Forest, betwixt Jenkoping and Elsimbourg, thirty Leagues long; with
plenty of Rivers, Lakes, Marshes, Rocks and Mountains: so that the soil is more
fertile than that of any other of the Northern Kingdoms: which enables them to
transport great quantities of Malt and Barley; Brass, Lead, Steel, Copper,
Iron, Hides of Goats, Bucks, Oxen, rich Furrs, Deals and Oaks for Buildings.
They have some Silver in their Mines; in the Woods Tar and Honey; and vast
quantities of Sea and Fresh Water Fish. The People are strong and healthful,
hospitable and civil; live sometimes to a hundred and forty years of Age. So
industrious, that a Beggar is not to be seen amongst them. Of latter times they
have shown the World they are good Soldiers, and capable of Learning too. This
was the Country of the Goths; who in the fourth Century pulled up the Roman
Empire in the West, and let in the other Barbarous Nations; who still possess
it. This People were never subject to the Romans: but have been under Kingly
Government from the first Peopling of the Country. We have a pretty certain
Catalogue of these Kings from the times of Charles the Great to Magnus IV. King
of Norway and Sweden: (amongst these, Olaus II. first took the name of King of
Sweden: his Predecessors were called Kings of Vpsal, after their capital City:)
who in 1363. was succeeded by Albert Duke of Mecklenburg in prejudice of Haquin
King of Denmark and Norway; after whom succeeded Margaret the Semiramis of the
North, (Queen of Denmark, Sweden, and Norway,) in 1387. She united all these
Kingdoms into one by an Act of State. In 1411. Erick IV. Duke of Pomeren
succeeded as her Adopted Son in all these Kingdoms. After this the Kingdom
became Elective and Unsteady: till in 1523. (or 25) Gustavus Ericus was chosen
King; who expelled the Danes, and put an end to that Union. He died in 1560. In
1611. Gustavus Adolphus the Great attained the Succession in this Line; who was
killed in the Battle at Lutzen in Misnia in Germany in 1632. To him succeeded
his Daughter, the most famous and admired Christina; who of her own voluntary
motion, and pleasure, by declaration in form of Law, with the consent of the
States, i. e. truly Abdicated the Crown to her Counsin Charles Gustavus in
1654. and lately died at Rome. Charles the present King of Sweden is the ninth
in this Line; and succeeded Charles II. his Father, in 1660. This People was
converted to the Christian Faith by Ansgarus Bishop of Bremen about 816.
Lotharius the Emperor procured the settlement of Bishops in these Northern
Countries in 1133. They received the Reformation under Gustavus I. in 1525; and
have ever since stuck to the Augustane Confession: which they preserved in
Germany too, when it was (about 1630.) in great danger to have been
overpowered by the Prosperity of the House of Austria. They have also planted
a New Sweden, in New America, not far from Virginia.

Swerin, Suerinum, a City of Germany; which is a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Breme; in the Lower Saxony. Heretofore subject to its own Bishop
and the Duke of Mecklenburgh: but now entirely under that Duke by the Treaty of
Munster. It stands upon a Lake of the same name; seven German Miles from
Gustrow to the West, and three from Wismar to the South. This City received
with its Bishop the Augustane Confession, in 1530. In 1631. taken by Gustavus
Adolphus; and was under the Swedes till the Peace of Munster. The Bishopric
was Founded by Frederick I. Emperor of Germany.

Swernicke, a considerable City and Pass upon the River Trina, near the
Confines of Bosnia. Taken by the Imperialists October 15. 1688.

Swilly, a Lake in the County of Derry in Ireland.

Swindon, a Market Town in Wiltshire, in the Hundred of Kinwarston.

Swine, a River or Bay in Pomerania, the same with the Oder; the Germans write
Schwine.

Switzerland, Helvetia, is a large Country in Europe: which of ancient Times
was esteemed a part of France or Gallia; in the middle times, of Germany; and
for three of the last Centuries has been a Free and Independent Country;
governed by its own Magistrates. It is called by the Germans Schwitzerland; by
the^ French Suisse; by some of the Natives Eyatgnosts-Schafft, that is, the
United Lands; by the Italians l' Elvetia; by the Spaniards Helveciae; by the
Poles Szway^zarska: On the North it is bounded by the Rhine, which separates it
from Germany; on the East by the Lake di Idro or Brescia, and the same River
which divides it from Germany and the Grisons; on the South by the Lake Lemane,
Walisserland, and the Dukedom of Milan; on the West by the French Comte. The
Country is for the most part overspread with Lakes and Mountains: yet not
barren; the tops of these Hills being full of Grass, and the bottoms surrounded
with rich Meadows and fruitful Pastures. It yields Corn and Wine, but not
sufficient for its Inhabitants. In length two hundred and forty Miles, in
breadth one hundred and eighty. The Inhabitants are Honest, Frugal,
Industrious, great Lovers of Liberty, good Soldiers, Lovers of Impartiality and
Justice. About the time of Julius Caesar's Conquering Gaul, fifty six years
before the Birth of our Savior; these People being oppressed with too great a
number of People, to the number of three Millions six hundred and eight
thousand made an Irruption into Gaul; burning all their own Towns before they
left them. But Julius Caesar gave them such warm Entertainment in Gaul, that
they were forced to beg his leave to return; two Millions of them having
perished in this War. From henceforward they were subject to the Romans; till
in the Reigns of Honorius and Valentinian II. they were conquered by the
Burgundians, and Germans. A part of this Country about 635. was given to
Sigebert Earl of Habspurg, the Founder of the House of Austria: though that
Dukedom fell not into the hands of this Family, till the times of Rodolph the
Fortunate, about 1376. He being the twentieth in this Line, and elected Emperor
of Germany in 1273; in 1282. created Albert his Son Duke of Austria. The rest
of this Country was given by Rodolph (the last King of Burgundy) to Conrade II.
Emperor of Germany, in 1032. From henceforward they were esteemed a part of
Germany. But being unjustly handled by Albert Duke of Austria in 1308, they
Revolted and Leagued against him; that is, the Cantons of Switz, Vnderwalt, and
Vri; (He was afterward killed in a Battle with them:) which League they made
perpetual in the year 1315. In 1332. Lucerne; in 1351. Zurich; in 1352. Glaris;
the same year Zug and Berne two Free States; in 1481. Friburg, Basil and
Solothurine; in 1501. Schafhausen; and in 1513. Appenzil were added to the
former; which thirteen Cantons make up that knot of Commonwealths, now called
the Switz: and their Liberty in the year 1649. was entirely fixed by the Treaty
of Munster. These Cantons in the year 1663. made a League with Lewis XIV. King
of France for sixty years. They were converted to the Christian Faith by one
Lucius, about the year of Christ 177. At the Reformation Zuinglius began here
to Preach before Luther; and had that success, that the Cantons of Zurich,
Berne, Basil and Schafhausen, followed his Doctrine; and held a Synod at Basil
for the Establishment of it in 1530. The Cantons of Glaris and Appenzil are
mixed of both Religions; the rest persisted in the Communion of the Church of
Rome; and have been more addicted to her Interest, than their Ancestors were
before the Reformation. The Roman Catholic Cantons assemble ordinarily at
Lucerne: the Reformed, at Aran. The General Assemblies of the whole Cantons are
wont to be held at Baden. These Cantons have each their different Laws,
independent of one another; and are governed in the nature of so many distinct
Republick^.

Swol, Navalia, a strong Town or City in Over-Yssel, (one of the Provinces of
the United Netherlands) seated on the Yssel; three German Miles almost above
its fall into the Zuyder Zee, ten from Nimeguen to the North, and two from
Swarte Sluys to the South. It has double Ditches and Ramparts: thought the
strongest Town in this Province: so that the States always retire hither in
time of great necessity. Guicciardin.

Syena, an ancient and noble City of the Thebais, in the Upper Egypt: in the
Borders of Aethiopia, and upon the Banks of the Nile. The utmost Boundary of
the Turkish Empire on that side now, as it was heretofore of the Roman. One of
the principal Cataracts of the Nile falls near it, amongst the Rocks, with
great Noise and Violence. The Mountains hereabouts produce the Granite Stone,
called therefore Syenites after the name of this City: of which the ancient
Egyptians made their Tombs, Columns, Obelisks and Pyramids to eternalize the
memory of their Great Men. It is an Archbishop's See: shows many noble
Edifices, and Tombs with Epitaphs in Latin and the Egyptian Languages. But of a
greater circuit in former times. The modern Name by some is put Asna; others,
Zema, and Asuan.

Sygaros, an Island, mentioned by Pliny in the Gulf of Arabia.

Symplegades, Cyane, two Rocks or small Islands in the Canal of the Black Sea,
or the Streights of Constantinople: so near to each other, that the ancient
Poets said they dashed together.

Synnada, an ancient City in Phrygia Magna, in the Lesser Asia: in which
Eusebius places a Council in 265, that did declare, Baptism by Heretics to be
null.

Syracusa, once the noblest and most potent City in the Island of Sicily, on
the East side of that Island. Built by Archias a Corinthian, in the year of the
World 1190; above seven hundred years before the Birth of our Savior; in the
days of Vzziah King of Judah. In aftertimes it became the greatest and the
most celebrated City the Greeks possessed in any part of the World. Strabo
says, its Circuit in his time was an hundred and eighty Greek Stadia's; that
is, twenty two English Miles and an half. Livy in his twenty fifth Book says,
the spoil of it was almost equal to that of Carthage; wherein Plutarch agrees
with him. Famous it is for a great Defeat of the Athenians under its Walls; in
the year of the World 3536. of Rome 339. It fell under the power of the Romans
in the year of the World 3738. of Rome 541. two hundred and ten years before
the Birth of our Savior; when it was entirely ruined by Marcellus, the Roman
General. It had a triple Wall, two Ports, three Fortresses; three famous
Temples (besides others) of Jupiter, Diana, and Minerva: an admirable Statue of
Apollo, an Amphitheatre, a Palace of Hiero's Building, and diverse other noble
public Works. The Mathematician Archimedes (its Native) retarded more the
taking of it by Marcellus with his Art, than the Citizens and Garrison by their
Arms and Sallies. And at last in the Conquest, was killed, unknown. Theocritus
the Poet, and Epicharmus the Philosopher, were its Natives also. It recovered
again; and in Tullies times had three Walls, three Castles, a Marble Gate; and
could raise twelve thousand Horse, and four hundred Ships. In the year of
Christ 884. the Sarazens took it, and razed it to the ground; and it never
recovered since. For whereas before it was an Archbishops See, and the
Metropolis of the Island; it is now but a Bishops See under the Archbishop of
Montereale; small, and not mighty populous; called by the Inhabitants,
Siragoza, or Syragosa. Mr. Sandys, (who saw it) says, it stands now in an
Island, called Ortygia; having a strong Castle well fortified; and is it self
strongly walled, having two noble Havens; kept by a Garrison of two hundred
Spaniards, and three hundred Towns men. The Buildings are ancient; the
Inhabitants grave. It stands in a Marsh, which makes it less healthful, though
it affords the City a great plenty of all things. The Cathedral Church of S.
Luke that is there now, was heretofore the Temple of Diana. Long. 39. 24. Lat.
36. 24.

Syria, a vast Country in the Greater Asia; called by the Jews Aram or Charam.
When it is largely taken, it contains Phoenicia, Palestine, (or the Holy Land)
and Syria properly so called. In the latter Acceptance it is bounded to the
North by Cilicia, and the lesser Armenia; on the East by Mesopotamia, (divided
from it by the Euphrates, and Arabia Deserta;) on the South it has Palestine
and Phoenicia; and on the West the Mediterranean Sea. Now called by the
Inhabitants Souristan, by the French Sourie, by the Italians Soria. Its length
from North to South four hundred; from East to West it is in breadth two
hundred Italian Miles. In very ancient Times Damascus was the capital City: in
the middle times Antioch; now Aleppo. This Country is by Nature extremely
Fruitful; and once as Populous, but now almost desolate. As to the Story of it,
N. Damascenus mentions one Adadus slain by David King of Israel; after whom
there followed a Succession of Kings, thirteen in number: the last of which (
Rezin) was conquered by Tiglath Phileser King of Assyria, and beheaded in
Damascus about the year of the World 3213. After this they were subject to the
Kings of Assyria, Media and Persia, till after the Death of Alexander the
Great. Seleucus Nicanor began another Kingdom here, about the year of the World
3644; whose Posterity and Successors to the number of twenty one, or twenty
five, (of which Antiochus XII. was the last) Reigned, till Pompey the Great
made a perfect Conquest of all Syria for the Romans in the year of the World
4650, sixty two years before the Birth of our Savior. It continued under the
Romans till the year of Christ 636. (or as others 34.) when it was conquered by
Haumer the third Calyph of the Saracens. About the year of Christ 1075. Melech
and Ducat began a Turkish Kingdom: which in the year 1262, after a Descent of
nine Kings, was destroyed by Haalon the Tartar. Next it fell into the Hands of
the Mamalucks of Egypt; under whom it continued till the year 1515: and then
was conquered by Selim, Emperor of the Turks: under whom it is at this day,
most wretchedly harassed and desolated.

Syrtes, two dangerous sandy Gulphs in the Mediterranean Sea, upon the Coast of
Barbary in Africa: called anciently, Syrtes magna and parva: now, the Gulf de
Sidra, and de Capes. In one name, the Shoals of Barbary. The first lies betwixt
the Kingdoms of Tripoli and Barca, the other betwixt Tripoli and Tunis.

TA.
TA, a River on the South of China, in the Provinces of Quansey and Quantam.

Tabago, the Tobacco Island, in the West Indies, in the North Sea: Possessed by
the Dutch: commonly also called Niew Walcheren. It lies eight Miles from la
Trinidad to the North-East, and ninety South of Barbados: having eighteen
small Rivers, and many sase Harbors: about nine Dutch Miles long, and three
broad; very fruitful, and full of all Necessaries. About forty years since, the
Dutch began to plant it. In 1673. the English, under Sir Tobias Bridges took
and plundered it; carried away four hundred Prisoners. and as many Negroes. In
1677. the French (being desirous to drive the Dutch out of it) sent the Comte
d' Estree with ten Ships: which entered Klips Bay, and for several days engaged
a Fleet of eight Dutch Ships there lying under the Command of James Binckes, a
Dutchman: who so well defended the Island, that though the French pretended
they destroyed the Fort the Dutch had built; yet they were forced to draw off,
and leave the Dutch Masters of the Place. Long. 316. Lat. 10. 30. The whole
Plantation of this Island is Tobacco, after its name.

Tabarestan, Tabarestania, a Province of Persia, toward the Caspian Sea;
containing a great part of the ancient Hyrcania. The Caspian Sea is sometimes
from this Province called the Sea of Tabarestan. Asterabath its Capital City.

Tabarque, Tabraca, an ancient City in the Kingdom of Tunis in Africa, upon the
Mediterranean Sea, betwixt Hippo and Vtica, It has had the honor in the times
of Christianity there, to be a Bishops See; but now, only considerable for its
Port. Pliny, Claudian, and Stephanus mention it.

Tabasco, Tabasca, a Town and Province in New Spain, in North America. The
Province lies between the Bay of Mexico to the North, and the Province of
Chiapa to the South: extended from East to West forty six Spanish Leagues. The
principal City in it was by the Indians called Tabasco; but the Spaniards call
it Nuestra Sennora de la Vi^toria, our Lady of Victory; because Cortez, the
Spanish General, gave the Mexicans an irrecoverable Defeat near this Place.

Tabenna, an Island of the Thebais, in the Kingdom of Egypt; near the City
Syene. Inhabited formerly by the Monks, entitled Tabenniosi^ae from it; in
whose times, Tabennis, was a small Town standing here.

Tabor, Taborium, a Town in Bohemia, upon the River Lauznicz; twenty Miles from
Budwess, and forty five from Prague. The Hussites made this Place the Seat of
their War, and fortified it: and from thence for twenty years ruined the
Imperial and Hereditary Countries; called thereupon Taborites.

Tacara, a small Kingdom on the Coast of Guinea, in Africa.

Tacaze, Tacasus, Astaboras, a vast River in the Higher Aethiopia; which
arises in the Kingdom of Angote; chiefly from three Fountains; and runs West
sometime between Dagana and Hoga. Then bending North through the Kingdom of
Tigre, it waters the Desert of Oldeba; and joins the River Mareb or Marebo.
Being much improved, it passes through the Kingdom of Dengin; and at Jalack
falls into the Nile in the Kingdom of Nubia, from the East.

Tachiali, Antiochia Maeandri, a City of Caria, in the Lesser Asia; which was a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ephesus; from which it stands seventy
Miles to the East, upon the Meander; and thirty seven from Bursia to the South.
Latitus Bishop of this See, subscribed to the Council of Chalcedon. Long.
58.00. Lat. 39. 30.

Tadcaster, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire: which has a large
Stone Bridge over the River Warfe; and Limestone dug up in its
Neighborhood in Plenty.

Tadouslack, Tadussacum, a Town in New France, upon the Bay of S. Laurence:
where it receives the River Saguen; a hundred Miles from Quebec to the
South-East.

Taenarus. See Matapan.

Taff, Rhatostathybius, a small River in Glamorganshire in Wales; which
watering and giving name to Landaff, falls into the Irish Sea near the Borders
of Monmouthshire.

Taflete, Tafleta, a Kingdom in Biledulgerida in Africa; between Segellomessa
to the East, and Darba to the West: bounded with the Kingdom of Morocco to the
North. The Capital City is of the same name. A populous and plentiful City,
fortified with a Castle; of great Trade for Indico, Silks, and Maroquines: but
the Country elsewhere is extreme Sandy, hot and desert. About 1660. the King of
this place, after many Victories, conquered Morocco and Fez; and kept them for
some time. This is supposed to have been a part of the ancient Numidia.

Tagaste, is now a desolate Village in the Province of Constantine, in the
Kingdom of Algiers in Barbary: which heretofore was a Bishops See, and famous
for giving Birth to S. Augustine.

Tagat, a fruitful Mountain, two Leagues from the City Fez, to the East; in the
Kingdom of Fez in Barbary: about two Leagues in length. Covered with Pines on
one side, and affording Land for Tillage on the other.

Taicheu, Taicheum, a City in the Province of Chekiam in China. It stands upon
a Mountain, and is the Capital over five other Cities.

Tajima, a Town and Province in the North part of Niphon.

Taillebourg, a Town in the Province of Xaintonge in France, upon the River
Charante: at which S. Louis King of France in 1242. defeated the Malcontents
of his Kingdom, that were risen in Arms against him.

Tajo, Tagus, one of the most celebrated Rivers of Spain. It arises from two
Fountains in New Castile, but in the Borders of Arragon; at the foot of Mount
Vallezillo. And running North, it takes in the Molina: then turning South-West,
it passes by Pastrana to Aronjues: where it admits the Tajuna, with a knot of
other Rivers from Madrid and Henares: turning more Westerly, it salutes Toledo;
takes in beneath it the Gaudarrama, and the Alberch; visits Talavera, and
Puente de Archobisbo, where it is covered by a Bridge; beneath Almaraz it
receives the Guadalupo. So passing by Alcantara, it enters the Kingdom of
Portugal at Perdigaon; and receiving the Rio Monsul, and a vast number of small
Brooks in that Kingdom, it forms the vast Haven of Lisbon; and on the South
side of that City passes into the Atlantic Ocean: having from its Fountains
run one hundred and ten Spanish Leagues, and being at its Mouth two Spanish
Leagues broad. There is no River in Spain more frequently mentioned than this,
especially on the account of its Golden Sand, by the Poets.

Taiping, a City of the Province of Nankim, upon the River Kiang in China.
There is another of Quantum: which is now under the King of Tumkim.

Taitung, a strong City in the Province of Xamsi in China. It is the third of
Note there, and drives a great Trade.

Tajuna, Tagonius, a River of New Castile; which falls into the Tajo.

Taiyven, the Capital City of the Province of Xansi in China, near the River
Truen.

Talabo, or Talaro, Pitanus, a River in Corsica.

Talamone, a Town and Port to the Tyrrehenian Sea, in the Estate called Degli
Presidii, upon the Borders of the Dukedom of Tuscany, in Italy. Belonging to
the Spaniards.

Talavera, Ebara, Libora, a Town in New Castile, upon the Tajo. See Tajo.

Tal^a, a very fruitful Island in the Caspian Sea, according to Pliny, (who
calls it Tazata) and other Ancients: But we have no Modern Account of it.

Tamaga, Tama^a and Tambro, a River of Spain: which arises in Gallicia, above
Moan Roy; and running South through the Province of Enter Douro e minbo, falls
into the Douro; six Spanish Leagues above Porto to the East.

Tamar, Tamaris, a River in the East of Cornwall, which divides that County from
Devonshire. It arises in Devonshire, near the Irish Sea; and running South,
waters Bridgrule, Telco^, Tamerten, (which has its name from this River)
Beyton, Lawhitton, Cal-Stock: and having received amongst others the Foy, at
Plymouth it enters the British Sea; forming there a Noble and Capacious
Haven. See Cambden.

Tamaraca, a City and Island upon the Coast of Brasil in South America, under
the Portuguese: making one of the fourteen Governments or Provinces of Brasil.

Tamaro, Thamarus, a small River in the Principato, in the Kingdom of Naples:
which rising from the Appennine, a little above Benevento, falls into the
Calore.

Tamasso, Tamassus, a Town in the Island of Cyprus, toward Famagosta. Of great
Repute for its Tin-Mines.

Taming, Taminga, a City in the Province of Pekim in China.

Tampan, the Mouth of the Rhosne.

Tamul, a petty Kingdom contained in Bisnagar, in the Hither East Indies.

Tamworth, a Borough and Market Town in the Borders of Staffordshire and
Warwickshire, at the Confluence of the Tame and the Auker: whereof one washes
that part of the Town, which stands in Staffordshire; and the other that in
Warwickshire. It has a strong (though small) Castle for its defense: is
beautified with a large Church; and in the Lower House of Parliament
represented by two Burgesses.

Tanagra, an ancient City of Boeotia (now Stramulipa) in Greece, near the River
Asopus: Called Orops by Aristotle, and Gephyra in Stephanus. Athenaeus
mentions, Cetus Tanagranus, as a Proverb for a vast Whale, because one of a
prodigious Magnitude was cast up here. It is a Bishops See under the Archbishop
of Athens, the same with the Anatoria of some Moderns.

Tanais, a River of Crim Tartary, which divides Europe from Asia. Called by the
Neighboring Nations, Don; by the Italians, Tana. It arises in the Province of
Rezan, in Moscovy (eleven hundred Miles from Moscow) from the Lake Iuvanouvo
Lezicro, which is five hundred Wrests broad; and flowing with a very Oblique
Course through the Countries possessed by the Precopensian, or Crim Tartars;
not far from the Wolga falls into the Lake of Moeotis; near a City called from
it Tanais, now ruined. This City was once taken by the Russ; but now in the
hands of the Turks. The River divides it into two parts, and affords it the
convenience of an Haven; though now not much frequented. Long. 60. 40. Lat. 48.
09.

Tanaro, Tanarus, a Navigable River of Lombardy; which arises in Piedmont, in
the Borders of the States of Genoua from the Apennine: and running North-East,
waters Mondovi, Alba, Asti, and Alexandria, in the Dukedom of Milan: it falls
into the Po at Bassignano; between Casal to the North, and Voghera to the South*

Tandaya, one of the Philippine Islands.

Tandra, an Island of the Euxine Sea, at the Mouth of the Borysthenes.

Tane^axima, a small Island belonging to Japan.

Tanes, Tanitioum Ostium, one of the Eastern Mouths of the Nile. This gave name
to Tunis, now Tanes, a desolate Village in Egypt at this time; but formerly one
of the greatest, richest, and strongest Cities of Egypt; a Bishops See, under
the Archbishop of Damietta. The Calyphs rebuilt it, after it had been some Ages
desolate; but it soon returned to its former State.

Tangier, Tingi, Tingis, one of the oldest Cities of Africa, in the Province of
Hasbat, in the Kingdom of Fez. Built by Antaeus a Phoenician, as the Learned
Sir John Marsham proves from Procopius, who mentions an ancient Pillar with
this Inscription in the Phoenician Tongue; We are fled from Joshua the Son of
Nun, a Robber; whereupon he places the building of it in Joshua's time, and
says it is undoubtedly a very ancient Phoenician Colony. It stands at the
Mouth of the Streights of Gibraltar, toward the Atlantic Ocean; and was
anciently an Archbishops See, and an University. The Goths possessed it after
the Romans, and annexed it to the Government of Ceuta. In 1471. Alphonsus King
of Portugal made himself Master of it. From which time it continued in the
possession of that Crown, till in 1662. it was put by the Portuguese into the
hands of the English. Charles II. having bestowed immense charges upon the
Haven and Outworks of it, (after it had prosperously repelled several Attacks
of the Moors in 1663, 1664. and in 1682;) in 1683. by the Lord Dartmou^h, that
Prince ordered all the Forts and Works to be blown up; the Mole to be slighted;
and withdrew the Garrison into England; finding the benefit not equal to the
charge of keeping it. Long. 6. 30. Lat. 35. 56.

Tangermund, Tangermunda, a Town in the Old Marquisate of Brandenburg; upon the
Elbe, where it takes in the River Tanger: seven German Miles from Magdeburgh to
the North, toward Havelburgh. Heretofore a very strong and considerable place.
The Emperor Charles IV. kept his Court there: but in the Swedish War it was
often taken, and suffered so very much, that it is become very inconsiderable
now.

Tangu, Tangum, a Kingdom in the Further East Indies, by the River Menan; which
has a City of the same name, and was formerly subject to the King of Pegu.

Tangut, Tangutum, a Kingdom in the Asian Tartary, toward China and the
East Indies. The Capital City of it, is Tangu.

Tanjaor, a City and Kingdom in Coromandel, in the East Indies; formerly
subject to the King of Bisnagar; but has now a Prince of its own; who is a
Tributary to the former. It lies sixty Miles from the Coast of Coromandel to
the West.

Tanor, a small Kingdom in the Hither East Indies, in the Promontory of
Malabar: which has a City of the same name, five Leagues from Calecut to the
South. The King resides at a Palace one League from the City, and preservs a
strict Alliance with the Portuguese.

Taormina, a City of Sicily.

Tapaysa, or Tapy, a great River of South America: which rises in the Borders
of Brasil; and after having given name to a Province, falls into the River of
Amasons in Guiana.

Tapiaw, a Town in the Ducal Prussia in the Kingdom of Poland.

Taprobane* See Zeilan.

Tapsus, an ancient City in the Province of Byzacena, now in the Kingdom of
Tunis, in Barbary* Caesar besieged it, to oblige Scipio to a Battle: and after
his Defeat of Scipio, it surrendered to the Conqueror.

Tapua guazu, a Province of South America in Paragua; near the Lake of Xaray,
in the Borders of Brasil.

Tapu^es, a people of Brasil, in the Prefecture of Santo Spirito.

Tara, Taras, a small River in the Province of Otranto, in the Kingdom of
Naples: which arising from the Apennine near Massafra, falls into the Gulf of
Taranto, by the City of Taranto; which has its name from this River.

Taragale, a City in the Region of Darha in Biledulgerid, in Africa; near the
City of Darha: fortified with a Castle and a considerable Garrison, for the
security of the Mint, which the Emperor of Marocco keeps here. The Jews have
about four hundred Families in it. The Country adjacent affords plenty of Corn,
Pasturage, and Dates.

Taranto, Tarentum, Vrbs Salentinorum, a City in the Province of Otranto, in
the Kingdom of Naples; called at this day Tarente by the French Built by a Band
of Lacedemonian Bastards, and made the Capital of the ancient Magna Graecia;
who having no Inheritance at home, were sent hither to seek their fortunes, in
the year of the World 3242. forty five years after the building of Rome. It
became a famous Commonwealth. Its ancient Inhabitants, the Tarentini,
solicited Pyrrhus's Descent into Italy to make War with the Romans. In the year
of Rome 481. Milo, a Citizen of it, betrayed it to the Romans. In the second
Punick War it received Hannibal. And in the year of Rome 545. was recovered out
of his hands again by Quintus Fabius Maximus. In 631. it was made a Roman
Colony. In 1194. Henry IV. gave it to William, (the Son of Tancred) Prince of
Taranto; when he had caused him to be castrated, to prevent any Posterity. It
is now an Archbishops See; small, but strong, and well peopled; has a Castle
garrisoned with Spaniards. The Haven was once very good, but spoiled by great
Stones sunk in the Mouth of it; so that none but small Ships can enter it. This
City has also still the Honor of the Title of a Principality. It stands upon a
Peninsula, on a Bay of its own Name, at the Mouth of the River Tara. Some
derive the Name of the Tarantulae (whose Venom is cured only by violent
dancing) from it. In 1614. a Synod was held here by its Archbishop. Long. 41.
30. Lat. 39. 58.

Tarara, Cemmenus, a Mountain near Lions in France; more commonly called les
Sevennes.

Tarascon, Tarasco, an ancient Roman Town in Provence in France, upon the
Rhosne, four Leagues beneath Avignon to the South, and three from Arles. It is
great and populous, and has two strong Castles, a Collegiate Church, with
diverse Ecclesiastical and Religious Houses. The Relics of S. Martha are said
to be preserved here.

Tarazona, Turiaso, an ancient Roman City, in the Kingdom of Arragon in Spain;
which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Sarragosa; upon the River
Queois; four Leagues from Tudela to the North-West, and ten from Bilbao to the
North. This City was recovered from the Moors by Alphonsus VIII. in 1010. And
is chiefly commended for the rare temper of its Steel. Long. 19. 02. Lat. 42.
50.

Tarbes, Tarba, Turba, Castrum Bigorrae, a City of Aquitam, in the County of
Bigorre, whereof it is the Capital: seated in a pleasant Plain, upon the River
Adour; well peopled, and has a Castle called Bigorre, which gave name to this
County. It is also a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Aux; from which this
City stands nine Miles to the North-West, and six from Pau to the East.

Tarczal, Carpates, the Carpathian Hills, which divide Hungary and
Transylvania, from Poland.

Tardenois, Tardanensis Comitatus, a County in the Isle of France; between the
Marne to the South, and the Vesle to the North: its true Bounds are now lost.

Tardera, Alba, Tholobi, a River in Catalonia: which falls into the
Mediterranean Sea at Blanes; nine Miles from Barcinone to the North.

Tarentaise, Tarentesia, a Tract or Valley in the Dukedom of Savoy, between the
Alps and the Dukedom of Aouste to the East; Hossano to the North; Savoy
(properly so called) to the West; and the Valley di Moriana to the South. This
was the Seat of the ancient Centrones. The principal place in it, Montiers. It
is one of the three principal Provinces of the Dukedom of Savoy, but very
Mountainous and Barren.

Targa, a Kingdom, Desert, City, and Lake in Africa; in Zaara, between the
Desert of Lempta to the East, Zuenziga to the West, Biledulgerida to the No^^h*
and Nigritia to the South.

Targovisto, Targovistum, Targoviscum, Tergovistus, Tiriscum, a great City,
which is the Capital of Moldavia, and the Seat of their Princes. The Natives
call it Ternisch. It stands in the Borders of Walachia, up the River Jaloniza;
sixty Miles from Nigeboli to the North, and a little more from Cronstad, or (
Brassaw) in Transylvania to the South, in a Marsh. Heretofore, together with
Moldavia, under the King of Hungary. And now returned under that Crown again.
See Moldavia.

Tariffa, a City of Spain in Andalusia, near the Streights of Gibraltar: once a
great and strong place, but now almost ruined: inhabited by a few, though it
has a Castle and an Haven. It was recovered from the Moors in 1292. And October.
28. 1340. the Moors received a great Defeat near this place: which stands four
Leagues from Algezira to the West, and six from the Coast of Barbary to the
North.

Tarne, or le Tar, Tarnis, a River of Aquitain in France: which springs from
Mount Losere in Givaudan; and being improved by some lesser Streams, waters
Millaud; then entering Languedoc, it visits Montauban, where it is covered by
a lovely Stone Bridge: and a little beneath Moissac, falls into the Garonne;
five Leagues above Again. The present King of France, has with great expense of
late years made this River Navigable by Boats.

Taro, or Tarro, Tarus, a River of Lombardy in Italy; which arises from the
Apennine, in the Borders of the States of Genoua: and running through a Valley
of its own name, (and through the Dukedom of Parma) falls thirteen Miles below
Cremona into the Po. Upon the Banks of this River, Charles VIII. of France, in
1495. defeated all the Forces of Italy assembled hither to stop him from going
out of Italy.

Tarpeya, a Lake in the Kingdom of Peru in South America, near the City Potosi:
springing from a large Fountain in the middle of itself.

Tarragona, Tarraco, a City of Spain; which in ancient time gave name to that
part of Spain called Hispania Tarraconensis. It was built by the Scipio's:
others say, before the Roman Conquest: Eratosthenes having mentioned it in the
year of the World 2780. The Scipio's much enlarged it: and therefore Pliny and
Solinus make them the Founders. Mela says, it was in his time the richest
Maritim City on the Eastern Coast of Spain. It was certainly a great
Metropolis, and had fourteen lesser Cities under it. The Moors ruined the Roman
City; and rebuilt that which now stands; walling it for the greater security.
It is now an Archbishops See, and an University founded by Cardinal Gasparo de
Cervantes, (Archbishop of this See) in the Reign of Philip II. It stands at the
Mouth of the River Tulcis, now el Fracoli; which affords it a small Haven on
the Mediterranean Sea: thirteen Spanish Leagues from Tortosa, and fifteen from
Barcelone. In a decaying condition. Long. 22. 53. Lat. 41. 58. In 1242. a Synod
was held here to oppose the progress of the Doctrines of the Vaudois.

Tarsus, Tarsos, the Metropolitan City of Cilicia, in the Lesser Asia: upon the
River Cydenum, which divides it into two equal parts. It took diverse names from
the Roman Emperors. At this day it is called by the Inhabitants, Terassa; by
the Turks, Terfis; by the Italians, Tarso. Now an Archbishops See; six Miles
from the Shoars of the Mediterranean. Pope Clement IX. bore the Title of this
See, before his Election to the Pontificate. Long. 66. 14. Lat. 38. 56. This
City deserves a particular veneration from all Christians; because S. Paul, the
Great Apostle of the Gentiles, was born in it; and by that means pleaded its
privilege to avoid some ill usages he had otherwise suffered. This is also the
Tarshish, whither Jonas desired to pass, when he took Ship at Joppe, ( Joh. 1.
3.): which the following part of his Story has made so memorable. Lyra and S.
Anselme interpret the Tharsis of King Solomon, whither his Fleet went to buy
precious Merchandises for the Temple, of this place also. But others reject
their opinion; and we have no Concord amongst the Learned upon that question.
See Ophir.

Tartar, Occhardus, a River of Serica, (a part of the Asiatick Tartary) from
which that Nation took its name of Tartaria. The Country is bounded on the West
by Mount Imaus, and on the East by China: now thought to be called Suchur.
There is a City upon it, of the same name.

Tartaro, Tartarus, Atrianus, a River in the States of Venice; which arises in
the Territory of Verona; and flowing East, waters Adria, an ancient City:
then one part of it falls into that Branch of the Po, called il Fuosa; and the
other into the River Adige.

Tartary, Tartaria, Scythae, is divided commonly into the Great and Asiatick,
the Lesser and European Tartary. For this latter, see Krim Tartary, Chersonesus
Taurica, and Precop. The Asiatick Tartary is the far greatest Country in all
Asia: called by the Poles, Tartarcka. Bounded on the North by the Frozen Ocean,
on the East by the same Sea, and China; on the South by China, India, Persia,
and the Caspian Sea; on the West by Russia. The North Eastern Bounds upon Japan
and China are utterly unknown. It is not certain, but that Asia and America may
there meet; or at most may be divided by a narrow Channel, which could never
yet be discovered. This Country extends from the Mouth of the Nieper, to the
Cape of Tabin North-East, one thousand German Miles: and from the Mouth of the
River Obb to the Wall of China South-East, fifteen hundred of the same Miles:
perhaps it is much greater toward the North and East. It is divided into
Tartary properly so called, Tartaria Deserta, Zagathai, Cathay, and Turquestan:
these, containing many Kingdoms: some of which, as to the names of them, are as
yet unknown to us. The people are the most Barbarous of Mankind; Bloody,
Fierce, and Brutish. The Country appears Barren, Desolate, Uncultivated;
without Cities, settled Inhabitants, Agriculture, and fixed Limits. The Princes
are absolute Masters of their respective People; which live in Hoards, wandering
with their Wives and Children in covered Wagons, from place to place; with
their Cattle, (their only Wealth,) as necessity and the season of the year
require. This course of life has in a great degree fitted them for War.
Accordingly, when ever they have broken in upon the Civilized World, they have
proved in every Age the Scourges of God. In this last Age, one of these Princes
broke in upon China; and in a few years conquered it.

Tarudante, Tarodantum, Torodantum, the Capital City of Suz. Heretofore subject
to the King of Morocco, but has now a Prince of its own. It is great and
populous; about fifty Miles from the Atlantic Ocean, and three hundred from
Morocco to the South.

Tasso, Thassos, Thalassia, Chryse, an Island of the Archipelago, one League
distant from the Continent of Romania in the Morea, and about seven or eight in
Circumference: divided betwixt Plains and Mountains, which afford good Wine and
Marble. The Phoenicians anciently planted a Colony here, who built the City now
standing; which is in a tolerable condition, but far different from its
pristine Splendor.

Tatta, a Kingdom in the East Indies, under the Great Mogul; separated from
Persia to the West, by the River Indus; and bounded to the North by Buckor, to
the East by the Kingdom of Jesselmeere, and to the South by the Indian Sea. The
Capital City is of the same Name; near the Indus. Long. 102. Lat. 26. 45.

Tattershal, a Market Town in Lincolnshire, in the Hundred of Gartree, and the
Division of Lindsey: near the Influx of the River Bane into the Witham.

Tavasthus, Tavastia, a Town and County in the Kingdom of Sweden in Finmarck;
called also Tavastland. Bounded on the East by Savolaxia, on the South by
Niland, on the West by Finmarck, (properly so called) and on the North by the
Botner Sea. Tavasthus, the principal Town in it, was called Gronenberg; and
stands in a Marsh: well fortified against the Russ: ninety Miles from Aboa to
the East. Birger Jarel built a Castle in 1250. to awe the Inhabitants,

Tauber, Tuberius, a River in Franconia; which arises near Rotenburgh, nine
Miles from Norimburgh to the West; and by Onspach, Papenheim, and Aichstat
falls into the Danube below Ingolstad, and above Regensperg.

Taverna, Taberna, Trischene, a decayed City in the Further Calabria, in the
Kingdom of Naples; which was a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Rhegio; but
having lost that Dignity, is now a member of the Diocese of Catanzaro.

Teubemberg, a Town in Hungary; at which Mahomet I. in 1400. beat the
Hungarians.

Tavestock, a Market Town and Borough in Devonshire, upon the River Tave: the
Capital of its Hundred. In the Lower House of Parliament represented by two
Burgesses.

Tavira, or Tavila, a City of Algarve in Spain, upon the Atlantic Ocean;
between the Mouth of the Guadiana to the East, and Faro to the West; five
Leagues from either. It is under the King of Portugal: has a large Haven at the
Mouth of the River Xilaon, and a Castle for its security.

Taurica Chersonesus, the Peninsula dividing Europe and Asia; upon Il Mare
Maggiore, and the Sea of Zabache: from East to West twenty four Miles long,
fifteen broad; filled heretofore with Noble Greek Cities. Upon the Eastern side
of it, stands Caffa, (which was the ancient Theodosia) under the Turks. In the
entrance of the Neck of it, Precop; under the Tartars: from whence the whole
Peninsula is sometimes called Precopsca; and the Inhabitants, the Precopensian
Tartars. It makes the most Southern part of the Krim Tartary.

Tauris, Ecbatana, Tabresium, Tauresium, Tigranana, a great City of the Kingdom
of Persia, called by the Inhabitants Tebris. It stands in the Province of
Aderbuitzan; eleven hundred Miles from Constantinople to the East, and twenty
five German Miles from the Caspian Sea to the South. Founded, (as the Persians
all agree) in the one hundred and sixty fifth year of the Hegyra, in the year
of Christ 786. In 849. it was ruined by an Earthquake. In 1490. the Princes of
the Race of Sheitb-Sephi, removed to this City from Ardevil. In 1514. Selim,
Emperor of the Turks, took it upon Articles, two years after the Kings of
Persia removed to Casbin. In the time of Solomon the Magnificent, the City
rebelled; assassinated the Turkish Governor, and Garrison; which was severely
revenged by Ibrahim, (General of that Prince) in 1548. In the Reign of Amurath,
it rebelled again; and was again taken and sacked by the Turks in 1585. In
1603. Abas, King of Persia, took it by Stratagem: ever since which, it has been
under the Persians. The Learned Minadoi, (in his History of the Turkish and
Persian War, page 311.) thus describes it. It is seated (says he) on the North
side of Mount Orontes; having Persia to the East, the Caspian Mountains to the
West, and the Caspian Sea to the North: in a fruitful Plain; in a cold, snowy,
healthful Air; abounding with all things needful for the Life of Man; enriched
by great Caravans of Merchants, which pass to and fro through it; so populous,
that it maintains two hundred thousand Inhabitants; yet without any Walls or
Bastions, or the least defense against an Enemy: The Houses are low and mean:
the Gardens, Fountains, Basars and Mosques, Magnificent and Sumptuous. Sir John
Chardin, who saw this City, agrees with him: and adds, that a small River
(called Spingicha,) runs across through it; and another called Agi, on the
North side. Long. 88. 00. Lat. 41. 19. Sir John Chardin estimated the
Inhabitants to be five hundred and fifty thousand: so much has a long Peace
improved it since Minadoi's time. It extends its Commerce over Persia, Turkey,
Tartary, Moscovy, and the Biack Sea; consisting much in Cottons, Silks,
Chagrines, Brocades, etc. which fills it well with Strangers. The Mosques are
reckoned to two hundred and fifty; whereof some have been Christian Churches.
The Capuchines had a convenient House built in this City in 1668. Without the
City to the South, appear the Ruins of the Palace of the ancient Kings of
Persia: and to the East, the like of a Castle, which was the Royal Seat of
Chosroes. The Geographers generally affirm, Tauris stands in the place of the
ancient Ecbatana. It is governed by a Beglerbeg, of great power and
consideration in the Kingdom of Persia.

Taurn, Alps Noricae, a branch of the Alps in Carinthia.

Taurus, the greatest Mountain in all Asia; so called, as Eustathius says,
from its Magnitude. It begins at the East or Chinian Ocean; and traverseth the
whole body of Asia, as far as the Sea of Pamphylia in the Lesser Asia; dividing
Asia into the Northern and Southern, and assuming various Names in different
Places. Yet the particular Name of Taurus belongs most properly to that Branch
of this Mountain, which divides Pamphylia and Cilicia from the Lesser Armenia.
Sir John Chardin who crossed that part of this Mountain, (called Caucasus)
says; that it is the highest Mountain, and the most difficult to pass over
that ever he beheld: full of Rocks and dismal Precipices. The top of it (eight
Leagues broad), covered with Snow and not inhabited: yet the sides are
prodigious fruitful; afford Honey, Wheat, Gums, Wines, and Fruits in vast
quantities. The Inhabitants are a good natured sort of Christians, In Tartary
this Mountain is called Imaus. In this long course it separates many Potent
Nations one from another. Herbert (our Countryman) says; that it is fifty
English Miles over, and fifteen hundred long.

Taxiala, a great City of India, mentioned by Strabo and Philostratus, as the
Residence of the ancient King Phraortes. But we have now no knowledge of it;
unless, the same with Cambaia.

Taw, a River in Devonshire, upon which Barnstaple stands.

Tay, Tavus, is a great River in Scotland; which arising from Mount Grampus,
and flowing East helps to divide that Kingdom into two parts; the Northern and
the Southern. Its Fountains are in Albany. It passes through Athole and Perth,
watering Dunkeld and Aberneth; and between Angus to the North, and Fife to the
South, by a vast Arm of the Sea falls into the German Sea; almost twenty
English Miles North of St. Andrews.

Taygetus, a Mountain of the Province of Laconia in the Peloponnesus:
consecrated in Pagan times to Castor and Pollux. Standing in the neighborhood
of Sparta, (now Misitra); and being broken once by an Earthquake, it did much
mischief to that City.

Tearus, a River of Thrace, salling into the Hebrus: so admired by Darius, the
Son of Hystaspes, for its Water according to Herodotus; that he erected a Colom
in its honor.

Teane, a River in Staffordshire, upon which Checkley is situated.

Tebesca, an ancient City in the Kingdom of Tunis in Africa: which was a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Carthage.

Tech, Ter, Illybiris, Thicis, Tichis, a small River in the County of
Roussillon; which springs out of the Pyrenean Hills in the Borders of
Cerdanna; waters Arles and Cerdanna; then falls into the Mediterranean Sea,
twelve Miles from the Mouth of the Egli to the South.

Tectosagae, an ancient People of Gallia Narbonensis; whose Capital City was
the modern Tolose. They made an incursion into Germany, and there established
themselves, near the Hyrcinian Forest.

Tedles, Tedlesia, a Province in the Kingdom of Morocco: Its chief City is
Tofza.

Tees, Athesis, Tuasis, a River which parts England from Scotland: It arises
in Twedale; therefore called the Tweed no less frequently; and running
Eastward, and being augmented by the Cale at Rydam, it becomes a boundary; at
Tiltmouth takes in the Bromyshe out of Northumberland; and on the South side of
Barwick, enters the German Ocean.

Teflis, Artaxata, Arxata, Tephlis, Zogocara, the Capital City of Georgia; in
the Province of Carduel, upon the River Khur, or Cyrus. Anciently one of the
greatest Cities of the East; but being taken and ill handled by the Turks, it
consists of very few Inhabitants; under the King of Persia. ( Baudrand). Sir
John Chardin who saw it some few years since, contrariwise assures us it is one
of the fairest, though not the biggest Cities in Persia; at the bottom of a
Mountain, upon the River Cur; encompassed on all sides, but the South, (where
the River secureth it) with a strong and beautiful Wall; and has about fourteen
Christian Churches, served by Armenians and Georgians; together with a large
Castle guarded by Natural Persians only. The Bishops See or Palace is near the
Cathedral Church. It has in the mean time not one Mosque, (except a small one
lately built in the Castle;) because the Christians will not endure it, and the
Persians are too wise to exasperate their Frontier People; who can with ease
call in the Turks to revenge the Injuries of their Religion. It is well
Peopled, full of Strangers, who resort thither on the account of Trade. Twice
in the hands of the Turks, in the Reigns of Ishmael II, and Solomon his Son.
The latter took this and Tauris about 1548. The Persian Tables place it, Long.
83. 00. Lat. 43. 05. The Congregation at Rome de propaganda fide, keeping a
Mission of Capuchins in Georgia, (who understand Physic and by that means
render themselves very acceptable to the Country;) their Prefect resides here.
It is the Seat of the Viceroy of Georgia.

Tefza, a City in the Province of Tedles in the Kingdom of Morocco; built on an
high Hill by the River Derna.

Tegan, Teganum, a City in the Province of Huquam in China. The Capital over
five Cities.

Tegaza, a Desert in Nigritia in Africa.

Tegaea, an ancient City of Arcadia in the Peloponnesus; which was a Bishops
See under the Archbishop of Corinth.

Tegeste, a Peninsula in Florida, in North America.

Tegorarin, a City and Territory in Biledulgerid in Africa.

Teissa, or Tiissa, Tibiscus, the Theysse, a River of the Upper Hungary; which
arises in the Carpathian Mountains; and flows through Transylvania hither,
to pay its Tribute to the Danube. Segedin stands upon it. The Hungarians use to
say, It is two parts Water and the third Fish.

Tejum, an ancient City of Paphlagonia in the Lesser Asia: remarkable by being
the Birthplace of Anacreon the Poet, who died of a Grape-stone sticking in his
Throat.

Telepte, an Ancient City of the Province of Byzacena, in the Kingdom of Tunis
in Barbary. It was a Bishops See, particularly remarkable in the person of
Donatus; who, in 418, celebrated a Council at it against the Pelagians. Now in
slavery to the Moors.

Telessia, a City of the ancient Samnium in Italy; (now in the Province called
Terra di Lavoro, in the Kingdom of Naples.) It became a Bishops See under the
Archbishop of Benevento, and was adorned with the Title of a Dukedom. But since
1612, the Sea has been transserred from hence.

Telgen, Telga, a City in Sudermannia in Sweden, four Miles from Stockholm, to
the North-West.

Temesen, Temesena, a Province in the Kingdom of Fez.

Temeswaer, Temesuaria, a Town in the Upper Hungary; which is the Capital of a
County of the same Name. A great and strong place, seated upon the River Temes
(whence it has its Name:) five Leagues from Lippa, toward the Borders of
Transylvania; and about ten from Belgrade. The Turks twice attempted it before
they took it, (in 1552) from the Transylvanians: upon which they bestowed great
costs in the fortifying of it, and esteem it invincible; as indeed it is the
strongest Place they have left them. The County of Temeswaer is bounded on the
North by Chaunad and Transylvania,; on the West by the Tibiscus, on the South
by the Danube, and on the East by Moldavia.

Temiam, Temiamum, a Kingdom in Nigritia in Africa: bounded on the North by the
Kingdom of Gangara, on the West by that of Bito, on the South by the River
Niger, and on the East by the Desert of Sert or Seu. The principal City of
which is Temican.

Tempe, a sweet Valley in the Province of Thessalia, in Macedonia, watered by
the River Peneo. The Poets have rendered it famous to all Ages. It lies betwixt
the Mountains Olympus and Ossa. And some place the ancient City Lycosthome in
it, which was a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Larissa.

Temruck, or Tomaruchi, Tyrambe, Tyrambis, a City of Crim Tartary in Asia;
sixteen Miles from the Cimmerian Bosphorus to the East, and ten from the Lake
of Corocondam to the North.

Tenbury, a Market Town in Worcestershire, upon the Edge of Shropshire, and the
Banks of the River Tent: in the hundred of Doddington.

Tend, Tenda, a Town in the County of Nizza, in the Appenine, near the Borders
of the States of Genoua: eighteen Miles from Alba to the North, and twenty five
from Fossano South: which has a Mountain near it, called Le col de Tend; and a
very strong Castle. This was a Sovereign State, under Counts of its own; but
now subject to the Duke of Savoy.

Tenduc, Tenducum, a City and Kingdom of the Asian Tartary. Bounded on the
North by the Great Tartary, on the East by Jupia, on the West by the Kingdom of
Tangut, and on the South by China. This Prince has within a little more than
forty years last past, Conquered the Kingdom of China; and is one of the
greatest Princes in the World. His Dominions extending from Cochin China to the
River Obb, North-West and South-East. There is lately published a short Account
of these Tartars, in two Letters written by a Chinian Jesuit, who traveled
with this King into Tartary.

Tenedos, a small Island of sixteen Miles in Compass: five from the Shores of
Asia, twenty five from the Island Metelino to the North in the Archipelago, and
eighteen from the Dardanels to the South: called by the Turks Bosh Adasi, the
Barren Island: yet it affords excellent Muscadine Wine; Plenty of Game: and is
well situated to bridle the Streights of Gallipoli: It has a City, two Castles,
and an Harbor for small Vessels: and being taken by the Venetians (with whom
the Genouese disputed the possession of it a long time), was betrayed to the
Turks by their Governor. In the time of Troy, which stood within two Leagues of
it, this Island was consecrated to Apollo; and the Grecian Navy, seigning a
Despair to take that City, retired hither to disguise their design. It became
since Christianity, a Bishop's See under the Archbishop of Mitelene. The
Promontorium Sigaeum, or Cape Janizzari, lies near it.

Teneriffa, one of the Canary or Azores Islands in the Atlantic Ocean; over
against Mauritania in Barbary; called by the Natives Theneriffe. It is about
forty eight Spanish Leagues in Circumference. Fruitful, populous, rich, and has
been subject to the Spaniards ever since 1496. The Ancients called this
Nivaria; (as is supposed), because the top of its Point or Peak, which is
thought the highest in the World, and very sharp, is rarely without Snow. This
Peak is said to be fifteen Miles high: and may be seen one hundred and twenty
English Miles at Sea. The principal Towns in it are Laguna and S. Croce. To
which belongs an excellent Haven. Blake and English Admiral, April 20, in 1657,
(notwithstanding a Castle, seven Forts, sixteen great Galeons, all well manned
and provided with Cannon and Ammunition, which threatened his inevitable Ruin)
entered this Harbor: and in six hours time beat the Spaniards out of their Ships
and Forts too. He put the English in possession of the vast Treasure of a West
India Fleet: which they plundered; and burnt all those Spanish Ships they
found. This Island is no less remarkable for having been made the first
Meridian by many of the latter Geographers. The Spaniards have given the same
Name to a Town in the Province called Terra firma, in South America: standing
near the Confluence of the Rivers S. Magdalena and S. Martha.

Tenez, a City and Kingdom toward the Coasts of the Mediterranean, and West of
the Kingdom of Algiers; in Barbary.

Tengchieu, a City in the Province of Xantum in China; which stands upon the
Chiman Ocean on the Bay of Nanquin; and is very strongly fortified. Long. 149.
00. Lat. 37. 00.

Teno, Tenos, Tine, an Island in the Archipelago, under the Venetians; who have
been Masters of it above these three hundred years. It is a Latin Bishops See;
and but few Greeks live here. In Pagan times it was famous for a Temple
consecrated to Neptune. It produces Wine, Figs, and Silk. Has a Fortress and
a City of its own Name, Teno: but Hydrusia and Ophiusa were the first and
ancientest Names of this Island.

Tenterden, a Market Town in the County of Kent, in Scray Lath.

Tentyra, an Island and City in the Nile, in the Kingdom of Egypt: mentioned by
Juvenal.

Teos, an Ancient City of Ionia in the Lesser Asia: which was a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Ephesus.

Ter. See Tech.

Teramo, Aprutium, a City of the Further Abruzzo, in the Kingdom of Naples;
which is a Bishops See.

Terassa, the same with Tarsus.

Terbestan, the Caspian See.

Tercera, Tertiaria or Tertia, the principal of the Azores Islands: twenty five
Miles from East to West, but not of equal breadth: about sixteen Leagues in
circuit: surrounded with Rocks which render it difficult of Access. It lies
forty Leagues from Teneriffe to the East. The chief City of this and all the
Azores, is Angara; which is a Bishops See, and with Fort San Felippe under the
Portuguese. From this Island the Azores are sometimes called the Tercera Isles.
It is much subject to Farthquakes: and has a Fountain particularly remarkable
for a virtue to petrifie Wood.

Tergowisch. See Targovisto.

Terki, Terchium, the principal City of Circassia, in Asia: in a well watered
Plain; about one German Mile from the Caspian Sea to the West, sixty from
Astracan to the South, and thirty six from Derbent to the North-West, Long. 76.
30. Lat. 45. 05. This City being some years since put into the hands of the
Duke of Moscovy, has of late been carefully fortified as a Frontier against the
Persians on that side. Olearius assures us it stands in Lat. 43. 23, in a Plain
which bounds the sight upon the River Temenski; which issues out of the Lake
of Bustro, and facilitates the Correspondence between the Town and the Caspian
Sea. The Town is fortified with Rampires and Bastions of Earth; and has a
Garrison of two thousand Russ, paid by the Great Duke.

Terlee, a famous Abbey for Women of the Order of S. Bernard, in the State of
Holland: founded by the ancient Earls of Holland: a League and a half off
Leyden; but broken and ruined since the Reformation there.

Termini, or Termuli, Termulae, Buca, a City in the Capitanata in the Kingdom
of Naples; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Benevento: and
stands upon the Adriatic Sea, at the Mouth of the River Tiferno, in the
Borders of the Hither Abruzzo: thirty Miles from Lanciano to the East. Also a
Town in the Island of Sicily, upon a River of its own Name: risen out of the
Ruins of the ancient City Himera; and called in Latin Writers Terminus
Himeriorum. The River Termine bad the same ancient Name with the City.

Terna, Torna, a River which runs through Artois, and falls into the Canche at
Hesdin.

Ternate, Ternata, the chief of the sive Molucco Islands. Now in the Hands of
the Hollanders; tho it has a King of its own, who resides in the Town of Malay:
the Dutch have some Ports in this Island, to secure its Possession. There are
two ports belonging to it. The Island Tider lies within one League of it.

Terni, Interamna, an ancient Latin Colony, and a City of Ombra, in the States
of the Church in Italy; which is a Bishops See, immediately under the Pope. It
stands in a Plain upon the River Nare; twelve Miles from Spoleto to the South
in the Road to Ancona; and has many rare Antiquities to show.

Ternois, Ternensis Pagus, a small Tract in Artois, in the County of S. Paul;
which takes its Name from Terna.

Ternova, Ternobum, a City of Bulgaria; mentioned by Gregoras and Calchondylas:
now the Residence of the Turkish Sangiack, and anciently the Seat of the
Despote. It stands upon the River Jantra or Ischar; near Mount Hemus, in the
Borders of Thrace upon an Hill; and was heretofore very strong, but now
neglected. Thirty German Miles from Adrianople to the North-West, and twenty
five from Sophia to the North-East.

Terovanne, Tarvanna, Ternana, Civitas Morinorum, a City of Artois, in the
Low Countries; which was a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Reims, upon the
River Leye; but being recovered out of the hands of the French by Charles V. in
1553. entirely ruined and never rebuilt. The Morini were its ancient
Inhabitants. And we may observe, the year of its destruction by Charles V, is
expressed in the Chronogram of these two Words, DeLetI MorInI. It stood six
leagues from Bologne to the East, and two from S. Omers to the South. This
Diocese was divided into three, viz. into that of Bologne, S. Omers and Ypres.

Terra Arctica, or the Artick Continent, comprehends New Denmark, Estoiteland,
Hudsons-bay, Greenland, Spitzberg; and the undiscovered Regions beyond, or
toward the Arctick Circle.

-- Australis, a vast Country toward the Antarctick Circle: discovered in
1503, by a Frenchman of Honsleur in Normandy; who in a Voyage to the
East Indies, was driven upon the Eastern Coasts of it; and remaining for some
time there, sound it to be cantoned into a number of petty Kingdoms;
indifferently peopled: yielding several sorts of Roots for Dying, unknown in
Europe; with wild Beasts, Fowl, Fish, etc. He calls it in the declaration of
his Voyage, the South Indies. In 1615, James le Maure, a Native of Amsterdam,
made a Discovery of another part of it, to the East of the Streights of his own
Name: which he called Statenlandt: the same time that he discovered his own
Streights and Mauritzlandt.

-- di Bari, Apulia Peucetia, Barensis Ager, a Province of the Kingdom of
Naples. Bounded on the North and East by the Adriatic Sea; on the West by
Capitanata, cut off by the River Ofanto; on the South by the Basilicate and
Otranto. This is a considerable part of that which the Ancients call Apulia
Peucetia. The principal places in it are Andria, Bari, Bitonto, Conversano,
Gravina, Molfetta, Ruvo, Trani and Biseglia. The French call it the Province de
Bar.

-- Firma, a Province of New Spain, in South America; upon the Isthmus of
Panama.

-- del Fuego, an Island betwixt the Streights of Magellan and le Mair; in the
uttermost parts of South America.

-- di Lavoro, Terra Laboris, is a Province of the Kingdom of Naples, upon the
Tyrrhenian Sea. Bounded on the North by Abruzzo, on the East by the Hither
Principato, and on the West by the Sea. It is extremely fruitful; watered by
the Garigliano and Volturno; and has the Happiness of Naples for its Capital.
The other principal Places and Cities are Ischia, Gaeta, Caiazzo, Capua, Nola,
Pozzuolo, Sora, Sorrento and Venafro. This Province contains a part of Campania
Foelix, and of the ancient Latium.

-- d' Otranto, Japygia, Jesso, Messapia, Calabria; Hydruntina, Santa, Terra.
See Otranto, etc.

Terracina, Tarracina, Anxur, an ancient City in the States of the Church in
Italy, in the Province of Campania di Roma, in the Borders of the Kingdom of
Naples, at the Mouth of the River called il Portatore (Vfens,) upon the
Tyrrhenian Sea. It has a Castle; but is a place of no Strength, by reason of a
Mountain which commands it: It has a Harbor too; but of little use; the City
being almost deserted by reason of the unhealthfulness of the Air. Sixty Miles
from Rome to the West, and Naples to the East. A Bishops See immediately under
the Pope. Long. 32. 2. Lat. 41. 18.

Terrain, Terin, Tara, a small River in the Isle of France, which waters
Beauvais: then falls into the Oise, a little above Creil in Beanvais.

Terring, a Market Town in the County of Sussex, in Bramber Rape; not far from
the Sea.

Terne, a River in Shropshire, upon which Drayton is situated. It is a Boundary
between that County and Staffordshire.

Terskoy Leporie, Tersa Leporia, the most Eastern part of Lapland: under the
Russ; between the Frozen and the White Sea, and that part of Lapland which is
under the Swedes. It is a desolate Country; has neither Towns nor Villages,
though some Inhabitants.

Tervel, Tiar, Julia, Turulium, Turia, Terulum, a City of the Kingdom of
Arragon, upon the River Turia; where it takes in the Alhambra; twenty four
Leagues from Tortosa, and ten from Valencia. It is a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Tarragoza.

Teschin, Teschena, a small City in Silesia in Bohemia; called by the
Inhabitants Tessin, by the Germans Teschin. It is the Capital of a Dukedom;
upon the River Oelss, upon the Confines of Moravia; seven Miles from Ratibor to
the South. The Dukedom of Teschin lies at the head of the Vistula: between the
Lesser Poland to the East; Hungary to the South, Moravia to the West, and the
Dukedom of Ratibor to the North.

Tesino, Tuinus, Ticinus, a celebrated River in Lombardy; which ariserh out of
Mont de S. Godard, one of the Alps; and flowing through the Lake called il
Lago Maggiore, ( Verbanus) toward the South, enters the Dukedom of Milan:
washes the Walls of Pavia; then four Miles lower falls into the Po; preserving
the clearness and perspicuity of the Stream four Miles further in that thick
and troubled River, as Ferrarius faith.

Test, a River in Hampshire, which joins with the Itching at their common fall
into the Ocean, near Southampton. Whitechurch, Stocksbridge, and Rumsey are all
three situated upon it.

Tet, the same with Egli.

Tetrapolis, a Territory with four remarkable Cities in it, in the ancient
Syria; viz. Antioch, Seleucia, Apamea, and Laodicea; therefore called Sisters
to one another.

Tetuan, Teteguina, Tetuanum, a strong City which is a petty Republic in the
North part of the Kingdom of Fez; twenty five Miles from the Mouth of the
Streights of Gibraltar, and forty from Fez to the North.

Il Tevere. See Tiber.

Teverone, Anio, a River of Italy; which arises in Campania di Roma, three
Miles above Trevi; and dividing the Ancient Latium from Sabina, falls into the
Tiber, three Miles North of Rome.

Teutones, the Ancient Germans: from whom Germany took the Name of
Teutschlandt. They sustained a long War with the Romans, and remained in the
end the Invincible Enemies of that Empire. Lucan distinguishes the Cantabri
and them by their long and short Arms;

Cantaber exiguis aut longis Teutonus armis. Teutschlandt, Terra Teutonica, one
of the ancient Names of Germany.

Tewksbury, a Market Town and Borrough in Worcestershire: the Capital of its
Hundred; represented in the lower H^use of Parliament by two Burgesses. The
North Avon falls into the Severne here. It is watered with two Rivulets
besides. In the year 1471, at this place was fought a memorable Battle betwixt
the Houses of Lancaster and York, by King Henry VI, and his successor Edward
IV; in which the former suffered an entire Defeat; and Edward the young Prince
(only Son to King Henry VI.) was slain.

Texel, Texelia, a small Island at the Mouth of the Zuyder Zee; which has a
strong Castle and a good Harbor on its South side. The usual place where the
Dutch Fleet rendezvous in times of War. Near it the Illustrious General Monk
(afterward Duke of Albemarle) beat the Dutch Fleet, July 31. 1653; slew their
famous Admiral Van Trump; burnt and sunk twenty six of their Men of War, with
the loss of only two small English Ships; and drove the rest into the Texel.
Which being seen by the People from the Shore, prevented the usual Ceremony of
a Thanksgiving for being beaten.

Teyder-Aa, Teydera, a River of Livonia in Litland; which waters Adzal and
Wolmer, then falls into the Bay of Livonia.

Teysterbandt, Testerbantum, a small County in the Dukedom of Cleves: toward
the Maes, the Wael and the Rhine: in the North of Cleves, and on the Southern
Border of Guelderland: which has been united to Cleves seven hundred years.

Thabor, a celebrated Mountain in Galilee, in Palestine: six Miles from
Nazareth to the East; near the Plain of Esdrelon and the Valley of Iesreel;
having the Brook of Endor springing from its foot. Josephus gives it the Height
of thirty Greek Stadia; and the Plain upon the top of it, the compass of two
thousand five hundred Paces; where the Wind blows very to hard and cold in the
hottest Seasons. Here our Savior honored S. Peter, James and John with the
View of his glorious Transfiguration: in memory whereof Helena, the Mother of
Constantine the Great, built upon the place a stately Church with three small
Chapppels, representing the three Tabernacles in S. Peter's Wish: which
Chapels now are almost buried under the Ruins of the Church; saving one
Altar, used sometimes for Mass by the Religious of Nazareth. Alexander
Jannaeus, King of Judah, who began his Reign one hundred and three years before
Christ, built a Fortress upon this Mountain; which probably continued till the
time of our Savior; and was the same with that, taken by Composition in the
year after Christ 82, by Vespasian; when the Church and Chapels were
demolished. These latter were reestablished in 1099, by Godfrey of Bouillon;
and divided betwixt the Greek Calcyers and the Benedictine Monks; under a
Bishop, a Suffragan to the Patriarch of Jerusalem. In 1187, Saladine took the
Mountain and ruined its Works. In 1253, the Christians retook it; and Pope
Alexander gave it to the Templars. But in 1290, it was finally lost from the
Christians to the Sultan of Egypt. It stands in a round conical figure; with
its sides to the West and South, full of Shrubs and Greens.

Thamar, Rha, the same with Wolgha.

Them, a Market Town in Oxfordshire, upon the Borders of Buckinghamshire;
which takes its Name from the River Them (one of the Fountains of the Thames,
joining with the Isis at Dorchester;) whose Branches almost encompass it, and
are here covered with a Bridge leading into Buckinghamshire. It is the Capital
of its hundred; and enjoys the Benefit of a Free School, and a Hospital,
founded by the Lord Williams of Them.

Thames, Thamesis, Tamesis, Jamissa, the principal River of England. Which has
this Name from the Them and Isis, two smaller Rivers, its Fountains. The first
of these arises in Buckinghamshire: the second in Wilsthire. The second is far
the greater; receives the VVindrush and the Evenclods before it arrives at
Oxford; beneath that City, the Charwell a noble Flood; and at Dorchester it
takes the Them. Then sporting it self with vast turns, it waters
Wallingford, Reading, and Henly: dividing Buckinghamshire from Surrey, it
waters Windsor: so passes to Stanes in Middlesex: above which it takes in
the Colne; and watering Hampton Court, Kingston, Brentford and Chelsey; it
gently glides between Westminster and London on the North, and Southwark on the
South; where it is covered by one of the noblest Bridges in the World. More to
the East it receives the Lea out of Essex; and being now able to bear vast
Ships, it hastes by Graves End into the German Ocean; between Essex to the
North, and Kent to the South.

Thanet, Tan^tos, Thanatos and Athanatos in Solinus, a small Island on the
Eastern Coast of Kent; surrounded on the South by the Sea; and on the West by
the River Stoure, here called the Yenlade: about eight Miles long, and four
broad. In this Island the Saxons first landed; and also S. Augustine the Monk.
In 1628, Nicolas Lord Tufton was created Earl of Thanet by Charles I. Richard
the fifth of this Family, succeeded in 1680.

Thaurn, Taurus.

Thaxted, a Market Town in the County of Essex, in the hundred of Dunmow.

Theaco, Ithaca, an Island in the Ionian Sea, betwixt Cephalonia, Sancta Maura,
and the Curzolari; under the Venetians. The Italians call it Val di Compare. It
reckons about fifteen thousand Inhabitants; a great part, banished persons from
Zante, Cephalonia, and Corfu. It has a spacious and safe Haven; but no City or
good Town; only some Villages: and it pretends to show the ruins of Penelope's
House; supposing Ulysses to have been a Native of this Ithaca.

Thebe, Thebae, two celebrated Cities in Antiquity; in Egypt and Greece. That
in Egypt received its ruin from Cornelius Gallus, Governor of Egypt. But the
marks of its former Opulence, the number of its Inhabitants, its Conquests, the
tribute and imposts it paid to the King, and to the Temples, remained engraved
in Egyptian Characters upon Obelisks in Germanicus's time; who visited (as
Tacitus says) the ruins of this City in his Travels. It contained one hundred
and forty Stadia in Circuit, one hundred Gates; and according to those
Obelisks, seven hundred thousand fighting Men. See Diospolis* The other in
B^eotia in Greece, has ever pretended to challenge the ancient Cadmus for its
Founder, about the year of the World 2620: nigh one thousand four hundred years
before the coming of Christ. During which Interval, it was first adorned with
the Title of a Kingdom. Next changed into a Republic of great Puissance; which
maintained War against both the Athenians and Lacedaemonians; and over the
latter gained a signal Victory by the conduct of their General Epamin^nd^s, at
the Battle of Leuctra: when both h^ and Cleombrotus General of the
Lacedaemonians were slain. Philip K. of Macedon, Conquered this City, and
Garrisoned it with Macedo^ians: whose yoke they regretted, till they revol ed,
upon the death of that King And refusing to submit to his Son Alexander; He by
^orce reconquering them, entirely ^uined this City (saving the single House of
the Poet Pindar) and divided the Lands amongst his Soldiers, about the year of
Rome 419. and the CXI. Olympaid. Cassander, the Son of Antipater King of
Macedonia, twenty years after, rebuilt it: and his work is par^ly standing at
this day in the quality of a Village, under the Turks; but before those
des^royers of Mankind possessed it, it was the Sea of an Archbishop. See Stives.

Thebes. See Stives.

Theobalds, a Palace Royal of the Kings of England in H^^fordshire, in the
Hundred of Hartford; not ^ar from Hodsdon on the Lea, and less from Waltham
Abbey in Essex. It is delightfully situated amongst Groves and Springs. Sir
William Cecil, Lord Treasurer of England, built it; and Robert Lord Cecil his
Son, (of the same office to K. Jam I) much beautified it.

Theoskeposti, the Grotto in the Island of Patmos in the Archipelago, wherein
S. John is said to have written his Apocalypse.

Thermia, Ferma, and Ferminea (as the Italians call it,) Polyaegas, an Island
in the Archipelago toward Europe; which has a considerable City of its own
name, and a Castle: and a Spring of hot mineral Waters, not far from the Sea;
from whence it took the name of Thermia.

Thermodon, the same with Pormon.. The Ancients frequently mention a River in
Scythia Europaea in the Country of the Amazons, of this name also.

Thermopylae, a Straight or narrow passage at the great Mountain Oeta, and the
Gulf of Zyton, in the extreme Borders of the Province of Thessalia in
Macedonia; leading into Phocis in Achaia: Now called Bocca di Lupo, or the
Wolf's mouth. Of great fame in Antiquity, for being maintained by Leonidas,
General of the Lacedaemonians with three or four hundred Men, against a vast
Army of the Persians under Xerxes.

Thespia, an ancient City of Boeotia in Greece, near the Mountain Helicon. It
has been a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Athens. But, as it lies now
under the Tyranny of the Turks, a poor Village.

Thessalia, a very considerable Province of Macedonia toward the South. Bounded
on the South by Achaia, (now Livadia); on the West by Epirus; on the North by
Macedonia properly so called; and by the Archipelago and the Bay of
Thessalonica to the East. The Capital City of which is Larissa: now called
Comenolitari by Castaldus, and by Brietius Janna: under the Turks. It had in
the beginning Kings of its own. Next, it became subject to the Macedonians and
Romans. It had Marquesses of its own, in the latter part of the times of the
Greek Emperors: Bonifacius being made Marquess of Thessalia, in 1210: whose
Posterity possessed it till about 1380. When Amurath Conquered the greatest
part of this Country, and his Posterity still enjoy it. It is encompassed by
the Olympus, Pindus, Ossa, and Oeta; (four great Mountains:) its Inhabitants
were in the ancient Times so famous for their Chivalry, that Philip of Macedon
sought and obtained the Dominion of it chiefly on that account. Very fruitful,
reasonably well Peopled, and for the most part inhabited by Christians.

Thessalonica, a great Maritim City of Macedonia; the Metropolis of that
ancient Kingdom, called of old Thermae, now Salonichi. It has had the fortune
to keep up something of its ancient Greatness and Wealth: still an Archbishops
See, and a populous City; defended by ancient Walls and a Castle; and blessed
with a large safe Haven. The greatest part of its Inhabitants are Jews. It
stands at the foot of an Hill, upon a small River, at the bottom of a Bay
called by its own name: two hundred and twenty Miles from Durazzo to the East,
three hundred and fifty from Constantinople to the South-West, and two hundred
and thirty from Athens to the North. Long. 47. 50. Lat. 42. 10. S. Paul
Converted it to the Christian Faith, and wrote two Epistles to it about the
year of Christ 52. Timothy was sent by S. Paul to instruct and confirm them in
the same Faith. In 390. Theodosius the Great slew seven thousand of its
Inhabitants for a Tumult. In 895. It was taken and sacked by the Saracens: In
1423. it was sold to the Venetians. In 1431. Amurath II. took it from them. In
the year 1688. the Venetians bombarded it, till the Inhabitants submitted to
the Contributions demanded of them.

Thetford, Sitomagum, Sciani, a small but very ancient Roman Town in the County
of Norfolk: upon the little Ouse; in the Borders of the County of Suffolk.
Twenty Miles from Norwich to the South-West, seventeen from Ely to the East,
and eight from Bury to the North. This ancient Town was sacked by Sweno the
Dane, in 1004. and suffered more from them in 1010. About 1047. the Bishops See
of the East Angles was removed hither from Elmham. Herebert, the next Bishop,
removed in 1067. to Norwich. The Conqueror in his Survey sound two hundred
Houses soon after empty: ever since it has been decaying: yet it is a
Corporation, sends two Burgesses to Parliament, and gave the Title of a
Viscount to the Right Honorable Henry Bennet Earl of Arlington. The Lent
Assizes for the County are usually kept here.

Thiano, a ruined City in the Province called Terra di Lavoro in the Kingdom of
Naples: which had a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Benevento.

Thibet, Thibetum, a Kingdom in the Asiatick Tartary; between Tartary,
(properly so called,) and the Desert Tartary to the North, Indosthan to the
South, Tangut to the East, and Mawaralnatharia to the West. Of which there is
little known but the Name. Some make it the same with, others a part of,
Turquestan.

Thienen, Atheniensis Legio, Tenae, and Tillemontium, is a Town of Brabant:
called by the French Tillemont; upon the small Rivolet Geet, (which beneath
Hallen falls into the Demere,) about six Leagues from Namur to the North, and a
little more from Brussels to the East. Now a great Town: and formerly of great
Import and Trade; as appears by this, that her Walls have been thrice enlarged.
In the late Wars (says Guicciardin) between the French, Liegeois and Low
Countries, it has been much wasted; and in part desolated, though the
Inhabitants enjoy great Privileges. In 1578. this Place was ceded to Don John
of Austria. In 1635. taken by the French.

Thionville, Divodurum, Theodonis Villa, a City in the Dukedom of Luxemburgh;
called by the Germans, Diedenhoven. It is a small, but very strong Place, and
stands upon the Moselle: four Leagues from Mets to the North, nine from Trier
to the South-West, and about eleven from Montmedi to the East. This Place was
much beloved and frequented by Charles the Great, as Eginhard says. He
ordinarily assembled the Nobility and Clergy of his Estates here: and
particularly in 806, when he parted his Kingdom amongst his three Sons. In 835.
a Council at this City deposed the Archbishop of Rheims, as Author of an
attempt against the Person of Lewis the Debonaire K. of France; whom the said
Archbishop and his Adherents had deprived of Royal Dignity. In 844. Charles the
Bald assisted at another Council here. In the latter Times it was often taken
by the French: who ever since 1644. have entirely possessed it; the Peace of
the Pyrenees confirming it to them.

Thorax, a Mountain near the City Manissa in Lydia, in the Lesser Asia.

The Christians of S. Thomas, an ancient Church of the Eastern Christians about
Goa, Meliapour, Cranganoor, etc. in the Hither East Indies: Which claiming its
Establishment from the Apostle S. Thomas (whose Body is pretended to be
preserved at Goa,) keeps it self at an entire Independency from the Laws and
Rites of both the Roman and Greek Churches: whose several Founders (it says)
were the Heads of the Churches of their own Foundations; but no more; and so S.
Thomas was the Head of Theirs. In 1546. Dom Juan Albuquerque a Franciscan,
Archbishop of Goa, erected a College at Cranganoor, for the conversion of these
Christians to the Church of Rome. In 1587. the Jesuits established another, one
League from Cranganoor. And in 1559. Meneses, Archbishop of Goa and Primate of
the East, was employed in a grand Mission hither to promote the same
Conversion. But the Christians of S. Thomas will not, by all the endeavors
that are used, be induced to forsake the ancient Customs of their Forefathers.
They use the Chaldee language in their Offices. Acknowledge the Patriarch of
Babylon for their Chief. Practice their own Ceremonies; and in matters of Faith
are Nestorians.

Thongcaster, an ancient Town in the division of Lindsey in Lincolnshire: upon
the side of a Hill. Owing its rise to a Castle, said to be built here with the
permission of Vortiger the British Prince by Hengist the Saxon, after his
Victory over the Picts and Scots.

Thorn, Torunium, a City of Prussia Regalis, upon the Vistula; four Polish
Miles from Culm, twenty two from Dantzick to the South, and twenty nine from
Warsaw to the North-West. This was once an Imperial and Free City, under the
protection of the Teutonick Order, whom some make the Founders of it in 1234:
but in 1454. it put it self into the Hands of the Poles, who have granted it
great Privileges. Nicolas Copernicus, the great Astronomer, was a Native of
this Place. Albert King of Poland, died here in 1501. In 1645. there was a
Conference here between the Lutherans, Calvinists, and Roman Catholics; which
had no success. In 1655. this Place was taken by the Swedes: retaken by the
Poles in 1658. by a Siege of six Months.

Thornbury, a Market Town in Gloucestershire. The Capital of its Hundred.

Thorn, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of
Strafford.

Thorney-I^e, a small Island, to the East of Portsmouth, in Hampshire.

Thou, a Castle in Champagne; giving name to the ancient and Honorable Family
de Thou, which produced the Historian, Jacobus Augustus Thuanus in the last
Century; born in 1553. made Counselor of State to Henry IV. of France and
Commissioner, at the Conference of Fontainbleau in 1600; he composed a noble
History of his times from 1543. to 1608. in one hundred thirty eight Books in
Latin, and dyed May 17 1617. in great Honor.

Thovars, Duracium, a City of Poictou in France, upon the River Tove: six
Leagues beneath Salmur to the South, toward Rochelle, and the Confines of
Anjou. It gives the Title of a Duke: and was lately beautified by a magnificent
Castle, built by the Duke de Tremolle.

Thoura, Aremone, or Emmone, Armenia the Less in Asia.

Thrace, Thracia, Pieria, Odrysia, is a great Province of Greece, called by the
Italians, Romania; by the Greeks, Rumelie; and by the Turks, Icella. Bounded on
the South by the Archipelago; on the East by the Propontis, and the Black Sea;
on the North by Bulgaria, and on the West by Macedonia. The Principal Cities in
it are Constantinople, Gallipoli, Adrianople, Philippopoli, Selivree, and
Trajanopoli: two of which are the Royal Cities of the Turkish Empire. The
Mariza or Hebrus is its principal River. Rhodope, Orbelus, and Haemus its most
famous Mountains. Abdera, Cypsella, and Perinthus, some of its ancient Cities.
The Thrausi, mentioned by Livy for a custom of making rejoycings for deaths and
mournings for births, were some of its ancient Inhabitants. This Province is
twenty days Journey in length, from East to West; and seven broad. Its Soil not
fruitful, nor its Air pleasant. Corn and Fruits by reason of the sharpness of
the Air, ripening slowly and yielding meanly. The Story of this Country is
already delivered in Constantinople and Adrianople.

Thrapston, a Market Town in Northamptonshire, in the Hundred of Navisford,
upon the Eastern Banks of the River Nen.

Thrasymene, a Lake in Hetruria (now in Ombria) in the States of the Church:
upon the Borders of the Dukedom of Thuscany, seven Miles from Perugia. Hannibal
obtained a Victory over Flaminius, a Consul, at this Lake. It is now called the
Lake of Perugia, di Castiglione, and di Passignano.

The Three Churches in Turcomannia or Armenia Major, are three famous
Monasteries, near to one another, three Leagues from the City Erivan, upon the
Borders of Persia: where the Patriarch of the Armenian Christians, attended by
his Archbishops and Bishops living in Community, resides under the protection
of the King of Persia. They are much visited by the Caravans that pass that
way; receive for their maintenance yearly, a small rent of every Christian of
the age of 15. and are allowed by the King of Persia, steeples and ornaments to
their Churches. One of these Monasteries is a Nunnery for Women. The Turks call
the place, Eguriasin.

Thrusk or Thirsk, a Market Town and Borough in the North Riding of Yorkshire,
and the Hundred of Budforth. It had anciently a strong Castle for its security;
and now is represented in Parliament by two Burgesses.

Thryn, a River in the County of Norfolk.

Thule, is commonly understood to be Iseland in the Northern Ocean, or
Schetland.

Thur, or Dur, Durus, a River of Switzerland: which arises in the Valley of S
John: and watering Durgow, falls into the Rhine; two Miles above Eglisow in the
Canton of Zurick. Plantinus says, it falls into the Rhine at Schellenburgh.

Thuringia, a Province of Germany; called by the Natives, Thuringen, and
Duringen. It lies in the Upper Circle of Saxony, between Misnia to the East,
Anhault and Brunswick to the North, the Lower Hassia to the West, and Franconia
and Henneberg to the South. The Capital is Erfurt, under the Archbishop of
Mentz. In the times of the Clodovean Kings of France, this Province had Kings
of its own; but now divided amongst many Princes. Lewis the first Land^grave of
Thuringe, (who died in 1055.) was a Descendent of Charles the Great, and
thought to be the Son of Charles Duke of Lorain, (Brother of Lewis IV. Brother
of S. Lewis V. who died in 1215.) In 1423. it became united with the Dukedom of
Saxony, as it now is. It is environed with woody Mountains: within, plain,
pleasant, and fruitful in Corn: has some Mines of Gold and Silver, and rich
Pits of Salt; so that it wants nothing but Wine. About one hundred and twenty
Miles square: but so populous, that it has twelve Earldoms, one hundred and
forty four Cities, as many Market Towns, one hundred and fifty Castles, and two
thousand Villages.

Tibarent, an ancient People, mentioned by Strabo and Pliny, toward the Euxine
Sea, and Cappadocia in the Lesser Asia. Neighbors to the Chalybes.

Tiber, Tiberis, is one of the most noted Rivers of Italy; in the most ancient
Times called Albula. In those of the Roman Empire, it separated Hetruria from
Umbria, Sabina, and Latium. At this day, called by the Italians, Tevere; by the
French, le Tibre. It arises from Falterona, (one of the Apennine Hills) near
Monte Corvaio, (a Village in the Dukedom of Florence; in the Borders of the
Ecclesiastical State, and of Romandiola, twelve Miles from Sarsina to the
South:) Running South it waters Santo Sepulchro, and beneath it takes in the
Chersone: then entering the States of the Church in Ombria, it takes in the
Nicone, Carpina, and Reggia: and watering Perugia, beneath it admits the
Chiascio, Nestore, Paglia, and Nera: Passing into S. Peter's Patrimony, it is
augmented by the Treggia, Aia, Farfa, and the Teverone: then it passes through
Rome; divides the Patrimony from Campania di Roma; and at Ostia falls into the
Tyrrhenian Sea, one hundred Miles from its Fountains. It had heretofore two
Months. The Southern is now stopped, with the Porto or Haven, which the
Emperors made with vast expense: The Northern Branch is not maintained without
a considerable expense by the Pope at this day.

Tiberias, an ancient City of Galilee, in Palestine; upon the Western Shore of
the Sea of its own name, otherwise called the Lake of Genezareth. Herod gave
them both this name to flatter the Roman Emperor Tiberius.

Tickhall, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of
Strafford.

Ticou, Ticum, a City in the Island of Sumatra, on the West side; one hundred
and eighty Miles from Malaca. Long. 125. almost. It has a large Haven; subject
to the King of Achem.

Tideswal, a Market Town in Derbyshire, in the Hundred of High Peak.

Tidor, one of the Molucco Islands.

Tienlique, a small Kingdom included in Bisnagar, in the East Indies.

Tierache, Teoracia, Tirascia, a Tract in Picardy in France; between Hainault
to the North, Champagne to the East, Vermandois to the West, and Laonnois to
the South. The Chief Towns of which are, la Fere, Guise, Marle, and la Chapelle.

Tiferno, Tifernus, Phit^rnus, a River in the Kingdom of Naples, now called il
Biferno also. It arises in the County of Molise, from the Apennine, near
Bojano: and flowing Eastward waters Guardia Alferes: and at Termini, a City
in the Capitanato, falls into the Adriatic Sea.

Tigre, a Kingdom of Abyssinia in the Upper Aethiopia, of great extent. It
includes seventeen Provinces; some, with the Titles of Kingdoms. Bannagasso
lies upon the North side of it, next to Egypt.

Tigris, a celebrated River in Asia; now called by the Asiaticks, Tigil: One of
the most rapid Rivers in the World, from whence it has this Name. It arises
from the Gordian Mountains, in the Greater Armenia; above the Lake of Arethusa,
through which it flows toward the South: separating Mesopotamia from Assyria.
In which passage it washes Majafarequin, Manuscute, Merdin, Mosul or Nineve,
and Bagdat. Beneath which at Wasset, it falls into the Euphrates; having
received some Branches of that River above Bagdat into its Sreams Monsieur
Thevenot, who sailed upon it, observes that it is very crooked, full of Islands
and Banks of Stone. The Emperor Trajan designed a Canal to join the Euphrates
with it; till he found the bed of the Euphrates much higher than that of the
Tigris; so that his Canal might render the Euphrates unnavigable. This is the
Hiddekel of Genesis 2. 14.

Tiibury, Tilaburgum, a Town on the Thames in Essex: famous for the Residence
of S. Chad, Bishop of the East Angles, when about 630. he Converted and
Baptized that Nation. Also for an Encampment here made by Qu. Elizabeth's Order,
in 1588. when the Spanish Armado was expected.

Tilemont, the same with Thienen.

Tileusont, a Town in Brabant: Pillaged by the French and Hollanders, in 1635.

Timavo, Timavus, a River of Friuli; which arising from nine Fountains, falls
presently into the Adriatic Sea, with a great Stream; between Thieste to the
East, and the Mouth of Isonzo to the West; after a Course of about three Miles.

Timerais, Theodemerensis Ager, a Tract in France; which was a part of la
Beausse and Chartres: now taken into the Isle of France. It lies between
Normandy, Chartres, and la Perch: but its Bounds are lost. The Capital of it
is Neufchastel. Eighteen Leagues from Paris to the West, and twenty from
Orleans to the North.

Tine, Tinia, a City of Bosnia, by the Natives called Kerka: upon a River of
the last Name: which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Spalato. It is
little, and ill peopled, being under the Turkish Slavery. Twenty five Miles
from Sebenico to the North, and thirty five from Spalato.

Tine or Tyne, the River. See Tinmouth.

Tingmouth, a very small, naked, and defenseless Town upon the British Sea,
Eastward of Torbay in Devonshire, in the Hundred of Exmister; burnt, (with some
Vessels in the Port) by a Detachment out of the French Fleet, July 26. 1690;
two days after the Anchorage of that Fleet in Torbay; whither they came from
the fight at Beachy July 22. and ^ailed away Aug. the 4th. and 5th. following:
being with their Galleys about one hundred and fifteen Sail.

Tingoeses, a Tribe or Hoard of Tartars toward the River Obb, in the Asiatick
Tartary: subject to the Moscovites.

Tinmouth, Tunnocellum, Tinomuthum, a considerable Seaport and Castle: in the
Borders of Northumberland, and the Bishopric of Durham: upon the River Tyne,
which divides these two Counties, and here falls into the German Sea, having
passed by Newcastle, called from it, New Castle upon Tine. In the Reign of
William II. Robert Mowbray, (Earl of Northumberland) trusting too much to the
strength of this Castle, was taken Prisoner by that Prince after a sharp Siege.

Tipasa, an ancient City of Mauritania Caesariensis, in Barbary* which was a
Bishops See, made particularly famous in the year 484. (when Cyrola a great
Patriarch of the Arrians, was its Bishop) by Hunnericus King of the Vandals his
cutting out the Tongues of all the Inhabitants, that would not turn Arrians;
and the miracle thereupon said to ensue. It is now but a Village, near Algiers.
Called Saza.

Tipora, a City and Kingdom in the Further East Indies: Bounded by Pegu and
Arracan to the North and West.

Tipperary, a County in the Province of Munster, in Ireland; called by the
Irish, Cuntae Thobruidearum; by the English, the County of Tipperary; that is,
the Holy Cross. Bounded on the East by Kilkenny; on the West by Limerick; on
the South by Waterford and Cork; and on the North by Gallway, cut off from it
by the Shannon. The Principal Places in it are Cashel, Caryck, Clonmel, Emeley,
and Castelan. It is one of the Titles, (as a great part of it is the
Possession) of the Duke of Ormond.

Tirconnel, or Tyrconnele, Conalia, a Castle and County in the Province of
Vister in Ireland. Bounded on the South, West, and North, by the Vergivian
Ocean: and on the East by Tyrone and Colrane. Also called the County of
Dunghall. The Country is Champain, and full of Harbors. It extends from
North-East to South-West, above eighty English Miles; almost thirty five broad.
So that it seems to be one of the greatest Counties in Ireland. But it has no
considerable Place in it, except Dunghall, the River Dirgh, and the Lake of
Foil, separating it from the rest of Vlster.

Tiretaine, a River in the Province of Auvergne in France.

Tirol, Tirolis, Teriolium, is the most Southern Province of Germany; called by
the Natives, Tyrol. Bounded on the North by the Dukedom of Bavaria, on the East
by the Bishopric of Saltzburg, on the South by the States of Venice, and on
the West by the Grisons and Swiss. It took this name from an ancient, but
ruined City, upon the River Adige or Etsch: which, with the Inn, water this
County: and from this last it is sometimes called Etschelandt. The Tridentine
Alps divide it also into almost equal parts. The chief Places in it, are
Inspruck, and Inthal. This County fell to Albert and Leopold Dukes of Austria
by Inheritance, in 1366: and is still in that Family. It is accounted the
greatest County in Europe: though Mountainous, yet it abounds in Mines and
Game. There is also in it Trent, (famous for the late Council) Bixen, and a
Place of great Trade called Bolzan.

Tisindon, Andanius, Bagrada, a River in Persia; which falls into the Persian
Gulf, over against the Isle of Ormus. The latter Maps place it more to the
South than Ormus.

Tivedale, Teviotia, a County in the South of Scotland, in the Borders of
England; between Twedal and March to the North, Northumberland to the South,
and Annandale to the West. The principal Places in it are Jedburgh, and
Roxburgh.

Tiverton, a Market Town and Borough, represented in Parliament by two
Burgesses, at the fall of the River Leman into the Ex. The Capital of its
Hundred in Devonshire.

Tivoli, Tibur, an ancient City in the States of the Church, in Campagna di
Roma, upon the River Teverone; eighteen Miles from Rome to the East. It is a
Bishops See, under the Pope. Honored with a noble Palace and Gardens,
belonging to the Cardinal de Este. A Synod was held at it in 1636. The Sibylla,
called Tiburtina from this City, is supposed to have possessed a Vault amongst
the neighboring Rocks in the Teverone, which discover some remains of a small
Oratory.

Tivy, Tuerobius, a River of Wales; which at Cardigan falls into the Irish Sea,
between the Counties of Cardigan and Pembroke.

Tlafcala, a City and Province in New Spain in America. Called likewise los
Angeles.

Tmolus. See Tomalitze.

Toam, Tuam, Tuama, a City of the County of Clare in Conaught, in Ireland;
called also Towmond; which in ancient times was the Capital of that Province;
but now reduced to a mere Village. It is an Archbishops See still, and gives
the Title of an Earl. Twenty two Miles from Gallway to the South.

Tobolsk, Tobolium, the Capital City of Siberia, a Province of Russia: Built of
late by the Moscovites, upon a River of its own Name, and the Yrtim; which
latter falls with a rapid Stream into the Obb.

Tocat, Tochata, the Capital City of Cappadocia; an Archbishops See, and the
Residence of the Turkish Governor; called of old Neocaesarea. It is great,
strong, and populous, upon the River Casal: forty five German Miles from
Trebisonde to the South-West. Long. 63. 28. Lat. 43. 58. The Province is now
called by this Name.

Todi, Tuder, Tudertum, a City of Ombria, in the Duchy of Spoleto, upon the
Tiber; twenty Miles from Perugia to the North, and the same distance from
Narnia to the South: a Bishops See, and a City of great Antiquity. Pope Martin
I. was its Native.

Tokay, Tokaeum, a City of the Upper Hungary: at the Confluence of the Bodroch
and the Tibiscus, in an Island; and thereupon subject to be overflowed: It is
withal a strong Place; has a very strong Castle, and in a fruitful Country,
which produces an excellent sort of Wine. Thirty Miles from Cassovia to the
South, and as many from Agria to the East. Being taken by the Turks, it was
recovered by the Imperialists in 1564. In 1682. it submitted to Tekely. In
1685. it was retaken by the Imperial Forces. This City was granted to Bethlehem
Gabor, Prince of Transylvania, by Ferdinand II* in 1620.

Toledo, Toletum, Toletum in Carpetanis, a City of Castile in Spain; which was
the Capital of Hispania Tarraconensis, and the Seat of the Gothic Kings. In
705. taken by the Moors, and one of their Royal Cities; till retaken by
Alphonsus VI. King of Castile, in 1085 After which it became the Capital of New
Castile, the Seat of the Courts of Law; had the Archbishops See, and Primacy of
Spain restored to it. This Archbishop has nineteen Suffragan Bishops: esteemed
one of the greatest, and richest Prelates in Christendom. It stands on a Rock,
in a pleasant Valley, in the middle of Spain, upon the Tajo (Tagus) with a
Castle; and is one of the strongest, noblest, and most pleasant Cities in
Spain: but in a declining condition, and not inhabited by above eight thousand
Souls. It has twenty seven Parishes, thirty eight Monasteries, and a noble
Water-work made by the Order of Philip II. in 1565. Charles V. built a Palace
in this City. Twelve Miles from Madrid to the South. Long. 16. 40. Lat. 40. 02.
Many of the Kings of Spain have been born in this City; twenty four Councils
and Synods are reckoned to have been Celebrated at it. The first, and one of
the most remarkable, in 400. or 447* by the order of P. Leo, proceeded against
the Doctrins of the Priscillianists.

Tolen, a Town in Zeeland, in the United Netherlands.

Tolentino, Tolentinum, a City in the Marcia Anconitana, in the States of the
Church; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Fermo, by the
Institution of Pope Sixtus V. in 1586. Since which, it has been united with
the Sea of Macerata in the same Province. It is little, but indifferently
populous; upon the River Chienti. Ten Miles from Macerata to the North-West,
toward Camerino fifteen.

Tolne, Tolna, a City in the Lower Hungary, a little beneath Colocza, upon the
Danube; six Hungarian Miles from Simathorne to the East, and the same distance
from Esseck to the North. In the Emperors Hands.

Tolosa, Tolosetta, Tolosa, a Town in Spain, in the Province of Guipuscoa; at
the foot of the Pyrenean Hills, upon the River Orio: four Leagues from S.
Sebastian to the East. A Place of good Consideration.

Tolose, Toulouse, Tolosa, Tolosatium, Tolosa Tectosagum, a City of Aquitain of
great Antiquity; the Capital of the Province of Languedoc in France, the Seat
of the Parliament, an Archbishops See, and an University. It stands upon the
Garonne, over which it has a beautiful Stone Bridge: eight Leagues from
Montauban to the South, eleven from Aux to the East, and twenty two from
Narbonne to the West. This Archbishopric was taken out of that of Narbonne by
Pope John XXII. in 1317. The University Founded in 809. The second of note in
that Kingdom. The Parliament was opened here in 1302. in the time of Philip le
bell; and re-established by Cha. VII. King of France. Near this City it is
supposed the dreadful Battle was fought between Attila, (King of the Huns) and
Aetius, the Roman Lieutenant, in the Year of Christ 451: in which there
perished five hundred thousand Men; and Aetius, the Victor. This City and
Province being recovered out of the Hands of the Moors by Charles Martel,
Charles the Great in 779. granted it to one Thursin, with the Title of an Earl.
It continued under Earls for eighteen Descents, (who particularly were famous
for assisting the Albigenses in their Wars;) till 1270. when it was reunited to
the Crown of France. The present King of France had taken up a design to make a
Channel for Boats from this City to the Lake of Maguelone: that so it might be
a kind of Center of Trade, between the Mediterranean and the Ocean; but with
what success I know not. In the year 1119. Pope Calixtus II. presided at a
Council at this City. Besides, which it has been honored with diverse other
Councils. The Tectosagi were its ancient Inhabitants.

Tomalitze, Tmolus, a Mountain in Lidia, in the Lesser Asia; which yields Wine
and Saffron. The River Pactolus flows from it.

Tomar, Nabantia, Tacubis, a Town in Portugal; in the Province of Extremadura,
upon the River Nabaon; two Leagues from the Tajo.

Tombut, Tombutum, a Kingdom in Nigritia in Africa, upon the River Snega;
between the Kingdom of Agad to the East; Mandinga to the South; Geneboa and
Gualata to the West; and the Desert of Zanhaga to the North. It takes its Name
from a City so called, which stands four hundred hundred French Leagues from
Morocco to the South.

Tonderen, Tundera, a City in the Dukedom of Sleswick, under the Duke of
Holstein Gotthorp; one German Mile from the German Ocean, and four from Ripen
to the South.

Tone, a River in Somersetshire: upon which Taunton, Wellington, Wivercomb, and
North Curry, are all situated.

Tongres, Tungri, Aduatuca Tungrorum, Aduaca, Atuacutum, a very great City in
the Itinerary of Antoninus; now a Town in the Bishopric of Liege; called by
the Germans, Tongren: it stands upon the River lceker, four Leagues from Liege,
and three from Maestricht. Attila ruined it, and the Normans after him. It had
anciently a Bishops See; which was transferred to Maestricht, and thence to
Liege.

Tonningen, Toninga, a small City in the Dukedom of Sleswick; upon the River
Erder; in the Borders of Ditmarsh. Six Miles from Sleswick: Under the Duke of
Holstein Gotthorp.

Topazus, an Island in the Red Sea, about forty Miles from the Continent; where
the Topaz or Chrysolite Stone is found in plenty. It takes its name from its
product. Pliny mentions a Topaz of this place, four Cubits long; of which
Ptolemy Philadelphus K. of Egypt made the Statue of his Queen Arsinoe.

Topino, Tinia, a River of Italy, which arises near Nocera, from the Apennine;
and flowing through Ombria, waters Fuligno; taking in il Clinno: then falls
into the Chiascio, and with it into the Tiber, four Miles from Perugia.

Tor. See Eltor.

Tor, a River in Somersetshire. Glassenbury is situated upon it.

Toralea or Torre, Turritana, an old Roman Town in the Island of Sardinia;
which became the Sea of an Archbishop. But it has lost that Dignity since the
year 1441. when Pope Eugenius IV. removed the Sea to Sessari, twelve Miles from
it to the North.

Torcello, Torcellum, a City in the States of Venice; which is a Bishops See,
under the Patriarch of Venice: in an Island five Miles North of Venice, and not
much inhabited by reason of the badness of the Air. This See was brought hither
from Altino, in 635, which the Huns had ruined. In 1582, and 1628. Synods were
held here.

Torgaw, Torgavia, a City of Misnia, in the Dukedom of Saxony, upon the Elbe:
seven German Miles from Meissen to the North, five from Witteberg, and six from
Leipsick, Commended much for excellent Beer.

Tormes, Tormis, a River in the Kingdom of Leon in Spain: arising in a Village
called Tormellas, near the Mountain del Varco de Avila: and flowing North and
North-West, washes Alva de Tormes, Salamanca, and Ledesma: after a Course of
twenty six Leagues, and the Reception of fourteen small Rivers, it falls into
the Douro, beneath Miranda de Douro.

Tornaw, Torn, Torna, a County and City in the Upper Hungary; called by the
Germans, Dorn. The City stands four Miles from Cassovia to the West.

Tornburg, Torda, a Town in the principality of Transylvania.

Le Tornaisis, Tornacensis Ager, a small Territory in the Earldom of Flanders;
between Hainault to the East, and Lille to the West; by the Schelde. It is a
part of the Gallick Flanders: and has this Name from Tournay, its principal
City. In the Hands of the French ever sin^e 1667.

Torn, Torna, a City in Sweden, in the Province of Bothinia; at the bottom of
the Botner Sea, upon which it has a large and frequented Haven. From its Site
sometime called Torn Lapmark, being near Lapland.

Tornus, Tornu, Tinurtium, Trenorchium, a Town in the Dukedom of Burgundy;
which has a celebrated Abbey. Six Leagues from Mascon to the North, and five
from Challon to the South. In 944. and 1109. Councils were held in this Abbey.

Toro, Octodurum, Taurum, a City of Leon in Spain, upon the Douro: little, and
daily decays: being not walled, nor much inhabited. It stands between Zamora to
the East, and Valadolid to the West eight Spanish Leagues. Near this Place the
Spaniards overthrew the Portuguese in 1476. John II. King of Castile was born
here in 1405.

Torreglia, a Sovereign Marquisate, between the Duchy of Milan and the States
of Genoua.

Torrington, a Market Town in Devonshire, in the Hundred of Tremington, upon
the River Towridge. Honored with the Title of an Earldom first in the Person of
the late Duke of Albemarle.

Torsil, Torsilia, a small City in Sudermania, in Sweden; eleven Swedish Miles
from Stockholm, to the West.

Torso, Thyrsus, a River of Sardinia.

Torto, Hiemera, a River of Sicily.

Tortona, Dertona, Terdona, Tertona, Tordona, a City of Lombardy; in the
Dukedom of Milan, upon the River Scrivia. A Bishops See, under the Archbishop
of Milan. Frederick Aenobarbus, Emperor of Germany, sacked this Place: which
though rebuilt by the Milanese, yet never recovered its ancient greatness. In
1642. it was taken by the French: recovered the next year by the Spaniard; who
in 1654. built a strong Castle in it, for its defense. It is the Capital of il
Tortonese, which lies between the Apennine and the Po: Having Pavia on the
East, and the States of Genoua on the West and South: from which the City of
Tortona lies eight Miles to the North, ten from Alessandria, twenty five from
Pavia, and forty five from Placenza. In 1595. a Synod was held here.

Tortosa, Dertosa, Dertusa, Dertossa, a City of Catalonia, of great Antiquity:
a Principality, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tarragona. It stands
upon the Ebro; three Leagues from its Mouth, fifteen from Tarragona to the
South-West, and from Ilerda to the South. Small, but Strong. In 1649. it was
taken by the French. In 1652. returned under the Spaniards. It has a strong
Castle, and a large Haven; but not much frequented, as appears by the decay of
the Town. In 1429, a Council was celebrated here.

Tortosa, Antaradus, Orthosia, Constantia, a City of Phoenicia, upon the
Mediterranean Sea; which was a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Tire;
between, Balanca to the North thirty four Miles, and Tripoli to the South
twenty eight. Now almost entirely deserted, and ruined by the Turks.

Tosa, Athiso, a River of Milan, which arises from S. Gothard's Mount: and
flowing South, waters Ocella and Vogogna; then burieth it self in the Lake
called il Lago Maggiore, or Long-See.

Toscana, Hetruria, Thuscia, Tuscia, a very considerable Province of Italy;
containing the greatest part of the ancient Hetruria. Bounded on the North by
the Apennine; on the West by the River Magra, and the Tyrrhenian Sea; on the
South and East by the Tyber, the Clain, and the Marta. It contains that space
which made up the States of Florence, Siena, Pisa, and Lucca: but so that this
last is still a Free State; whereas the three former are subject to the Duke of
Florence: on which account this Country is frequently called the Dukedom of
Florence. The Capital of it is Florence. For the History see Florence, etc.
This Country was conquered by the Romans in the year of Rome 455.

Toscanella, Tuscia, Tuscania, Tyrrhenia, Salumbrona, an ancient and
considerable City heretofore, in the Dukedom of its own name, in Italy: which
was a Bishops See; and gave all these Popes to the Church of Rome, Eutichianus,
Paschal I. Leo I. John I. Lucius III. Leo VI. Boniface VI. and Paul III. It had
been besieged sixteen times. Now, entirely ruined; and its See united with
Viterbo.

Totness, a Corporation in Devonshire, in the Hundred of Colridge, upon the
River Dart: six Miles from the Fall thereof into the Ocean. It had the honor
to be an Earldom in the Person of George Lord Carew of Clopton, (Son of Dr.
George Carew, Dean of Windsor and Archdeacon of Totness) created Earl of
Totness by K. Charles I. in 1625: who dying without Issue, K. Charles II.
advanced this Place from an Earldom to a Viscounty, in favor of his Son
Charles Fitz-Charles, Earl of Plymouth.

Toul, Tullum, a City of Lorain, upon the Moselle; five Leagues from Nancey to
the West, six from Bar le Duc, and twelve from Mets to the South. Made an
Imperial and Free City by Henry I. But in 1652, fell into the Hands of the
French. It is also a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Trier. Charles the
Bald, King of France, celebrated a Council here in 859. In 1515. and 1615.
other Synods were held at this City.

Toulon, Tolonium, Tolenium, Taurentium, Telo, a City of Provence in France;
called by the Italians Tolone. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Arles: well fortified, populous, enriched by a large and safe Harbor, and a
great naval Magazine; being the station for the Mediterranean Fleets of France.
It stands ten Leagues from Marseilles to the East: and in an improving
condition. Henry IV. King of France walled it, and added two Moles to the Port.

Toupinambous, Tupinimbae, Toropinambartii, Indians of Brasil in South America.

Touque, Tolca, a River of Normandy; which waters Lisieux, and Pont l'
Evesque; and then falls into the British Sea.

Touraine, Turonia, Turones, a Province in France, in the Generalite of
Orleans; which is divided by the Loyre, and honored with the Title of a
Dukedom: Little, (about thirty Leagues long and broad;) but very fruitful, and
well watered with the Loyre, Cher, Indre, Indrois, Vienne, etc. therefore
called the Garden of France. On the North it is bounded by La Maine; on the
West by Anjou and Poictou; on the South by the last, and le Berry; and on the
East by Blaisois. The principal Places are Tours, Amboise, Chinon, and Loches.

Tournay, Tornacum, a City of Gallia Celtica; now in Flanders, and called by
the Natives, Dornick. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Cambray,
ever since 1559, having before been under the Archbishop of Reims; and in more
ancient times (about 623.) united with the Sea of Noyon; which continued till
the year 1147. or 48. when Pope Eugenius III. at the Prayer of S. Bernard made
it a separate Bishopric. This City stands upon the Schelde; nine Leagues from
Cambray to the North, and ten from Gant to the South: in the middle between
Donay and Oudenard; also between Valencienne and Courtray, in the Borders of
Hainault. It is a very strong Place, and has a noble Castle, said to have been
anciently built by the English. It belonged to the Crown of France till 1521,
taken by Charles V. In 1667. it was retaken by the French; and has been ever
since in their Hands, by the Peace at Aix la Chapelle: Antoninus mentions it in
his Itinerary. It has besides the Cathedral ten Parishes, ten Abbeys, and
diverse Religious Houses. In 1520. and 1643. Synods were assembled here. There
is a Territory belonging to it, called by its Name.

Tournon, Turnonium, Taurodunum, a Town in the Province of Vivaretz in France,
upon the Rhone: adorned with the Title of an Earldom; a Collegiate Church, a
College of the Jesuits, and some Religious Houses.

Tours, Turon^m Caesarodum^n, Turones, Turonium, a great City in France; the
Capital of Touraine, and an Archbishops See. It stands upon the River Loyre,
which is there covered by a very long beautiful Stone Bridge. On the other side
it is washed by the Cher toward the South. So that it stands between the two
Rivers; almost twenty four Leagues from Orleans to the West, eighteen from
Poictiers to the North, and from Man's to the South. A Place of great Beauty.
Clotild, King of France, died here in 537. And Carloman in ^85. Near this Place
Charles Martell overthrew an Army of four hundred thousand Sarazens; three
hundred seventy five thousand of which perished in that Battle, in 726; the
Germans and Lombards joining with the Francks. Pope Alexander III. with Lewis
VII. King of France, called le Jenue, seventeen Cardinals, a hundred and twenty
four Bishops, and four hundred and fourteen Abbots, celebrated a Council here
in 1153. against the Emperor. The Protestants of France were first called
Hugonots in this City.

Touvre, Tolvera, a famous Fountain and River in France, in the Dukedom of
Angoumois; which falls into the Charente, near Angoulesine.

Towcester, a Market Town in Northamptonshire. The Capital of its Hundred; in a
Valley; upon the Banks of a small River running into the Ouse. Mr. Cambden
understands it to be the ancient Tripontium; to which, three Bridges over so
many streams of this River cutting through the Roman Port-way, (which shows it
self often betwixt this Place and Stony Stratford,) assigned that Name. In the
year 917. the Danes besieged this Town in vain. It is adorned with a fair
Church.

The Tower of Babel. The Prospects to the North and South of the Ruins of this
famous Fabric, taken upon the Place by Petro della Valle, are engraved by
Kircher (to whom he presented them) in his Book, Turris Babel, written
purposely upon them. They are believed to be the Ruins of Babel, by the
constant Tradition of the Country thereabouts; confirmed by their situation in
the Plains of Shinar in Chaldaea; the same Place; and by their Construction in
the most solid parts with Burnt-brick and Slime, the same Matter with Babel,
expressed in Genesis xi. 2. 3. The Basis of them approaches nigh to a Square;
containing in circuit about 1150 Paces; and the height terminates almost every
where in Pyramidal Points. First built by the general concurrence of the
Families of the Sons of Noah under Nimrod, (whether for an Asylum against a
second Deluge, or a Memorial of the former, and of their Names to continue
after their separation into several Parts, none know;) according to
Chronologers, about the hundred and seventieth year after the Flood of Noah.
Whereof the Greek and Latin Poets, after many Ages coming to a confused sense,
they embellished the Story with Fictions of Giants scaling Heaven, upon
Mountains laid upon Mountains. It seems, the Undertaking was so displeasing (by
the History of Genesis) to God; that to stop it he broke the one common
universal Speech of the Builders, into all the jarring and disconsonant
Languages of Mankind at this day.

The Tower of Leander, a square Fortress upon a Rock, in the midst of the
Hellespont; betwixt the Point of the Seraglio at Constantinople, and Scutari on
the other side in Asia. Yielding a charming Prospect of the City, and Country
about, Constantinople. The Turks guard it with several Pieces of Canon: calling
it in their Language, Khescalasi, the Castle of the Young Maid, (as the
Europeans do the Tower of Leander); in allusion to the story of Hero and Him;
tho it stands in a quite different place, than where Leander by the Relation
did swim.

Towridge, a River in Devonshire; upon which Torrington, Bediford, and
Hatherley, are all situated.

Trabisonda, Trapezus, a great City on the Euxine Sea, in the Lesser Asia;
which is the Capital of Cappadocia. Called by the Inhabitants Trabosan; by the
French, Trebisonde; by the Italians, Trabisonda, and Trebisonda. An Archbishops
See, the Seat of a Turkish Governor, and has a large safe Haven. In 1204.
Alexis Comnenus established a Kingdom, over Cappadocia Paphlagonia, Pontus, and
other Provinces, with the Title of the Kingdom of Trebizonde from this its
Capital City. It continued under Princes of its own (of the Family of Lascara)
from 1261. to 1460: when taken by Mahomet II. Emperor of the Turks. In 1616.
this City was sacked by the Cossacks. It is built at the Foot of an Hill. Long.
71. 06. Lat. 44. 03.

Traerback, a Town upon the Moselle, in the County of Spanheim, eighteen Miles
from Luxemburgh, between Trier and Coblentz. The King of France's erecting a
new Fort over against this Place in 1687, occasioned a great Dispute in the
Imperial Diets, whether it was not a Violation of the twenty years Truce: tho
he erected it upon the Grounds, reunited to his Crown.

Tragonara. The same with Dragonara.

Trajanopoli, Trajanopolis, a City of Thrace, which is an Archbishops See; upon
the River Hebro, or Mariza; eleven German Miles beneath Adrianople to the
South. Now very small, and not much inhabited.

Trajanopolis. See Islenos. There was another ancient City of this Name in the
Island of Sicily. An Archbishops See, in the time of Pope Gregory the Great.
The Greeks called it Draginae.

Trajeto, Trajectum, an Episcopal City in the Terra di Lavaro, in the Kingdom
of Naples.

Tralles, an ancient City of Lydia in the Lesser Asia: which was a Bishops See
under the Archbishop of Ephesus, or Sardis. Entirely now ruined.

Trani, Tranium, Trana, a City in the Province di Bari, in the Kingdom of
Naples; which is great and populous; the Sea of an Archbishop. It stands in a
fruitful Soil, upon the Adriatic Sea; and had heretosore a great Haven, which
is now stopped with Sand. Frederick II. built a strong Castle in it to defend
it against the Saracens. In 1589. a Provincial Council was held here. Long. 40.
39. Lat. 41. 15.

Transchin, a County in the Upper Hungary, upon the River Vag: betwixt Silesia
to the North, Moravia to the South, Turocz to the West, and Neytracht to the
East. Its capital Town bears the same name.

Tranfissalane. See Over-Yssel.

Transylvania, Septemcastrensis, Erdelia, a Province of the Upper Hungary;
called by the Natives, Erdely; by the Germans, Sievenburgh; by the Dutch,
Sevenburgh; by the Poles, Siedmigrodka; by the Sclavonians, Gradikaziemia; by
the Turks, Ertel; and by the Italians, Transylvania. Bounded on the North by
Red Russia, a Province of Poland; on the East by Walachia and Moldavia; on the
South by the latter, and Hungary; on the West by the Upper Hungary. The
principal Places in it are Hermanstadt, Alba Julia, (or Weissenburgh)
Clausenburgh, Bistriz, (or Besterze) Schiesburgh or Segeswar, Medwisch or
Megies, and Croonstadt or Breslaw. Separated from its Neighbors by the
Carpathian Hills, which encompass it. Its length from East to West is sixty
eight French Leagues, its breadth sixty two. It affords great plenty of Corn,
Wine, Cattle; not destitute of Mines of Gold, Silver, and Salt. This Prince is
able to raise about twenty thousand Men for War. After the Saxons, who
cultivated this Country very much, the Romans were Masters of it in the time of
Trajan. The Religion prosessed (ever since 1561.) is the Augustane Confession;
but mixed with Calvinists, Socinians, and some that follow the Greek Rites, and
some Turks. This Principality was separated from Hungary, by John King of
Hungary, in 1541. In 1571. Stephen Battori, Prince of Transylvania and
afterward King of Poland, endeavored in vain the re-establishment of the
Roman Catholic Religion. Christopher Battori his Brother and Successor,
founded a College of Jesuits at Clausenbourgh: but dying in 1583. Sigismond,
Son to Christopher and Successor, was constrained to disperse it in 1588.
Others reckon its Princes from John Hunadies, made Vaivode hereof by Vladislaus
IV. Michael Abafti, (the twenty third Prince from John Huniades, who succeeded
John Kemeni in 1661,) by a solemn Act given at Hermanstadt, May 9. 1688, with
the full consent of the States of Transylvania, made an entire submission of
this Country to the Emperor, and the King of Hungary, to endure for ever. Which
till then was tributary to, and had its Prince (after his Election by the
States) confirmed by, the Grand Seignor. Accordingly he received Imperial
Garrisons into all the principal Places. The said Prince dying April 1690, the
States in a general Assembly resolved firmly to adhere to the Interests of the
Emperor, and the young Prince, Son to the deceased, (he being confirmed by the
Emperor in the Succession) against all the Pretenses of Count Teckely, or the
Ottoman Port, according to the Ten or of the said Treaty: And thus they remain
entirely incorporated with the Crown of Hungary, under the Protection of the
Emperor.

Trapano, or Trapani, Drepanum, a City in Sicily, in the Valley of Mazara;
which is a celebrated Mart, and has a large and safe Harbor on the Western
Shore of that Island. Twenty two Miles from the Cape di Coco, (or the most
Western Point) to the North-East, and fifty five from Palermo to the
South-West. The Rock or petty Island of Colombara stands very near it, to the
South; fortified with a strong Citadel. This City is built at the foot of the
Mountain Eryx (now Trapano); near the Ruins of the ancient City Eryx (which
yet appear and are called Trapano Vecchio, the old Trapano); in the figure of a
Sickle, according to the signification of its name in Greek, and that of Ovid,
Quique locus curvae nomina falcis habet. The Coral, fished up here, is good.

Trau, Tragurium, a small City and Port in Dalmatia, called by the Sclaves
Troghir. Strong and well peopled; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Spalato. It stands in a small Island of the same Name: but joined to the
Continent by a Bridge seventy Miles from Zara, and twelve from Salona. Subject
to the Venetians ever since 1420.

Travanor, Travancorum, a City and Kingdom in the Province of Mallabar in the
East Indies; sixty Miles from Comorin to the North, and fifty from Coulan to
the South; subject to the King of Coulan.

Travaux, Sinus Laborum, a Bay upon the Coast of America Magellanica, near
Porto Desire: the Spaniards call it Boia de los Marabaios: others the White
Bay, and S. George's Bay:

Trave, Treva, a River of Holstein, in the Province of Wagaren; which waters
Ploen, Segeberg, Oldesloh, Reinfelde, Lubeck, and Travemond; and separating
Holstein from Mecklenburg, falls into the Baltic Sea; between Tavemond and
Dassow.

Trebia, a River of Lombardy, which arises in the States of Genoua, fifteen
Miles from that City: and watering Bobio (a City in the Dukedom of Milan) a
little above Piacenza, falls into the Po. The Romans being overthrown by
Hannibal, upon the Banks of this River, were most of them in their flight
drowned in it.

Trebigna, Tribulium, a small but very ancient City of Dalmatia; which is a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ragusa: from which it stands sixteen Miles
to the East upon the River Trebinska: subject to the Turks.

Trebula, an ancient City of the Terra Sabina, in the States of the Church, in
Italy. It has a Castle, and a great repute for Cheese. Some Inscriptions and
the Ruins of a Theater, yet extant, speak its Considerableness in former times.

Tregaron, a Market Town in Caerdiganshire, in the Hundred of Pennarth.

Tregoney, a Corporation in the County of Cornwall, in the Hundred of Powder:
represented in the Lower House of Parliament by two Burgesses.

Treguier, Trecorium, Trecora, a City of Bretagne in France, called by the
Inhabitants Lantriguet. It stands upon the North Shore; and is a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Tours. Having an excellent Port, nine Miles from S.
Brien to the West, and thirty from Reims. The Bishop is also the Temporal Lord
of it, with the Title of a Count. It was often exposed to the spoils of the
Saxons, Danes and Normans.

Tremissen, Tremesin, Tremisa, a Town and Kingdom in Mauritania Caesariensis,
in Barbary.

Tremita, an Island upon the Coast of the Kingdom of Naples, in the Gulf of
Venice; which communicates its name to some others about it, called the Islands
of Tremits. It is one of the Diomedeae of the Ancients: and now adorned with a
Monastery.

Tremituge, Tremithus, Tremethus, a City of the Islands of Cyprus: which was
anciently a Bishops See; Sporidion, a famous Bishop of it, assisting at the
first Council of Nice. It is now reduced to a poor Town.

Trent, Trenta, one of the principal Rivers in England. It arises in the
County of Stafford, near Mowcop Hill, toward Cheshire: and flowing South
receives the Saw from Stafford: in the Borders of that County, the Tame from
the South, and the Done from the North: and entering Nottinghamshire, salutes
its Capital at a small distance after at Newark. So dividing this Shire from
Lincolnshire, this and the River Dun, form the Isle of Axholme; and they being
united, both fall into the Humber at Ankeborough.

Trent, Trento, Tridentum, a City in the Borders of the County of Tirol,
betwixt Italy and Germany; called by the Germans, Trient. The Capital of a
Territory called the Tridentine, amongst the Alps: which thence are also
called the Tridentine Alps. It is a small City and a Bishops See, under the
Patriarch of Aquileja: well peopled; seated in a fruitful Valley upon the River
Adige, in the midst of aspiring Mountains. Once an Imperial and Free City; now
exempt and subject to its own Bishop, as to its Revenue; but as to the
Sovereignty, to the Emperor, as Count, of Tirol. Eighteen Miles from Inspruck
to the South and about eight from Verona. It has diverse Churches, one College
of Jesuits, and a great number of religious and ecclesiastical Houses. But
most celebrated on the account of a Council begun here by Pope Paul III.
December 15. 1445: who dying in 1549. it was continued under Julius III: in
1551. He also dying in 1555. and a War broken out in Germany, it was not
resumed by Pius IV. till 1562; and by him ended, December. 4. 1563. Maurice
(Elector of Saxony) with Albert (Marquess of Brandenburgh) and William
(Landtgrave of Hesse), having suddenly taken Ausbourgh in 1552. and threatened
Trent, obliged Pope Julius III. to suspend the session of it for that time.

Trepassez, Sinus Mortuorum, a Bay in Newfound Land, in North America.

Trero, Trerus, a River of Campania di Roma, which waters Salvaterra; and
falls into the Garigliano beneath Ponte Corvo, in the Borders of the Kingdom of
Naples. Some call it Omme.

Tresen, Tresa, a small City with an Haven upon the Baltic Sea, in the
Province of Sudermannia in Sweden; seven Miles from Stockholm to the North-West.

Tresmes, Trama, a River and Monastery in Champagne in France, in the Borders
of La Brie; three Leagues from Meaux to the North.

Trevico, Trivicus, a City in the further Principate, in the Kingdom of Naples:
A Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Benevento. Horace mentions it. It is
likewise called Vico della Baronia.

Trevigiana. See Marchia Trevisana.

Treviso, or Trevigi, Tarvisium, Taurisium, a City in the Marquisate of
Trevigiana, or Trevisana, to which it gives its name: in the States of Venice,
upon the River Sile; which is a Bishops See, under the Patriarch of Aquileja. A
great and strong City, surrounded on all sides by Water, and thereby of the
more difficult access. Brought under the States of Venice in 1336. In 1509,
taken by Maximilian the Emperor, and shortly after restored to them. It stands
eighteen Miles from Venice to the South-West.

Trevoux, Trevoltium, the Capital Town of the Principality of Dombes in France:
adorned with a Collegiate Church.

Triadzzia, Sardica, an ancient City of Thrace.

Triballi, an ancient People of Moesia Inferior, now Bulgaria.

Tribur, an ancient Royal Palace betwixt Mayence and Oppenheim, beyond the
Rhine in Germany: where diverse Councils have been celebrated.

Tricaraco, Tricarium, a City in the Basilicate, in the Kingdom of Naples.

Tricastin, a Territory in Dauphine in France: the Capital of it is S. Paul de
trois Chasteaux.

Trier, Treviri, Augusta Trevirorum, a City of Germany; called by the French
Treves; by the Italians Treveri; by the Germans Trier. It is an Archbishops
See, whose Bishop is one of the eight Electors of the Empire; and his
Suffragans, Metz, Toul, and Verdun; three Subjects of the King of France. A
great and an ancient City, seated upon the Moselle, over which it has a
Stone Bridge; thirteen Leagues from Metz to the South-East, seventeen German
Miles from Cologne to the South, and from Mentz to the West. Said to be built
fourteen hundred and ninety six years before the Birth of Christ: and so to be
the most ancient City in Europe. Made a Roman Colony in the times of Augustus;
and afterward the richest and most famous City in Gallia Belgica: the
Metropolis of the Treviri. About the times of Constantine, it was for a long
time the Seat of the Western Emperors; resembling Rome in all its magnificent
public Buildings, as much as was possible. In the year of Christ 456, it was
taken and ruined by the Huns, and other barbarous Nations in their Passage into
Italy. But after this it recovered. In the year 1472, there was an University
opened here. In the year 1568, it was taken by its Bishop; and ceased to be a
Free and Imperial City. In the year 1632, it was put into the Hands of the
French, to preserve it from the Swedes, as was pretended: they kept it till the
year 1645. In 1675, it was again recovered out of the Hands of the French; who
had seized upon it the second time not long before. In 1688, the French put
another Garrison into it. Long. 28. 06. Lat. 49. 50. This City has four
Collegiate. Churches, five Parishes, and two Abbeys. The Tunique of our Savior
is pretended to be preserved here; but they very rarely offer to expose it to
view; and never since 1648. after the Peace of Westphalia. In 386. A Council
was held here in the business of the Priscillianists, by the order of Maximus.
In 1148. Pope Eugenius III. assisted in Person at another.

The Electorate of Trier, is bounded on the North by Lifall, the Bishopric of
Cologne and Westrowalt; on the East by Weteraw, on the South by Lorain; and on
the West by Luxemburgh; it is of great extent from East to West, but very
narrow from North to South. The principal Cities and Places in it are, Trier,
Coblents, Boppart, Oberwesel and Hermanstein. It is watered both by the
Moselle, and Rhine; and affords all things needful for the Life of Man in great
plenty. The Inhabitants of this Diocese are called by the Germans Trierishe.

Trieste, Tergeste, Tergestum, a City of Istria, called by the Germans
Triesten. A small but a strong and populous Place; and a Bishops See under the
Patriarch of Aquilesa; has a large but unsafe Harbor upon the Adriatic; at
the bottom of a Bay called Trieste too. This City was taken from the Venetians,
in the year 1507, by the Emperor; and has been ever since in his Possession It
stands thirty Miles from Aquileja to the East, and fifty from Pola to the
North. Long. 36. 24. Lat. 45. 40.

Il Trigno, Trinius, a River in the Kingdom of Naples; which springs out of
the Apennine, in the County of Molise; and watering Trivento, falls through the
Hither Abruzzo into the Adriatic Sea; near il Guasto; sixteen Miles from
Lanciano to the East.

Trin, Trino, Tridinum, a Town in the Dukedom of Montferrat, a small distance
from the Po to the North; seven Miles from Casal to the West; and thirty four
from Turin to the East: which in 1630, was yielded by the Duke of Mantoua to
the Duke of Savoy.

Tring, a Market Town in Hartfordshire, in the Hundred of Dacor.

La Trinidad, Trinitatis Insula, one of the Caribby Islands in America: planted
with Sugar.

Trinquimale, a City in the Island of Ceylan.

Triodos or Throhodos, a Mountain in the Island of Cyprus: so called by the
Greeks.

Tripoli di Soria, Tripolis; a City in Syria; called by the Turks
Tarabolos-scham: In 1289, taken and entirely ruined by the Saracens: and after
rebuilt by the Franks; in a fruitful Plain, with a strong Castle seated upon a
Rock. This place is now in a good condition; having about two thousand Houses,
and a very convenient Harbor on the Mediterranean Sea. It stands twenty German
Miles from Damascus to the North, and a little more from Famagousta to the
South. In the time of the Holy War it had Counts of its own; from 1109, to
1288. Now the Seat of a Turkish Sangiack. Long. 63. 30. Lat. 34. 20. See
Monsieur Thevenot's Travels, Part I. p. 221.

Tripoli, Tripolis, Neapolis, Leptis, or Tripoly of Barbary, is a great City on
the Mediterranean Sea in Barbary; which is the Capital of a Kingdom of the same
name; has a large Port and a strong Castle; but extremely infamous for its
Piracies. Heretofore a part of the Kingdom of Tunis. In 1510, it was taken by
the Spaniards: eighteen years after it was granted to the Knights of Malta; who
in 1551, were expelled again by the Moors. Since that it is governed like a
Commonwealth: Having a considerable Territory belonging to it, betwixt Tunis
and the Ocean; but very few Towns, Sanson supposes it to be the ancient Oea. It
lies over against the Isle of Malta. Long. 42. 00. Lat. 41. 40.. There is
another Tripoli in Barbary, upon the Mediterranean, with the Title of Tripoli
Vecchio or the Old Tripoli; which standing in an ill air, has almost lost its
Inhabitants.. A third in the Lesser Asia, upon the Euxine Sea.

Trivento, Triventum, Triventinum, a small City of the Kingdom of Naples, in
the County of Molise, upon the River Trigno; which is a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Benevento; and stands in the Borders of Abruzzo, upon the
Adriatic Sea, seventeen Miles from Boiano to the North.

Troesen, an ancient City of the Peloponnesus: which preserved their Alliances
with the Athenians with great Honor; and since the times of Christianity,
became a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Corinth. Gastaldus calls it now
Pleda.

Troglodytae, an obscure People of Aethiopia, from whom the Sinus Troglodyticus
there anciently received its denomination; having the Caverns of its Rocks
(adjacent) possessed by them. Whence all subterraneous dwellers in Rocks,
Caves, and Cabbins in India, Africa, etc. were called Troglyditae.

Troia, Ilium, a City of Phrygia in the Lesser Asia; upon the Coast of the
Aegean Sea; made famous by its Ruin, and a ten years War, about the year of the
World 2870. in the Reign of its King Priamus. It stood upon the River Xanthus,
near Mount Ida; three Miles from the Archipelago, thirty two German Miles from
Smyrna to the North, and from Constantinople to the South. Said to have been
built about the year of the World 2574. Whereby this City and Kingdom lasted
not above two hundred and ninety six years. Some Marble ruins of it are yet
visible. Mahomet IV. used the Columns he found amongst them, in the building
of a great Mosque. There was another City of the same Name, ( Troas Alexandri)
built by Alexander the Great, some Miles from this: which in the beginning of
Christianity was a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Cyziqua; but that too
is now ruined. Long 54. 25. Lat. 41. 15.

Troja, a small City of the Kingdom of Naples, in the Capitinato upon the River
Chilaro: which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Benevento, and a
Principality; it stands at the Foot of the Apennine; twenty five Miles from
Benevento to the East, and a little more from Manfredona. Built in 1008, by the
Greeks. In 1195 and 1115. Councils were assembled at this City.

Trois Chasteaux, Augusta Tricastinorum, Trieves, the same with S. Paul; a City
in the Dauphine.

Troki, Troka, Troccum, a City of Lithuania, a Province of Poland; which is the
Capital of a Palatinate of the same Name. It stands upon the River Bressa, in a
Marsh of difficult access; defended by a strong Castle. This City was built by
Gediminius Great Duke of Lithuania, in 1321: taken by the Russ, and burnt in
1655. It stands four Polish Miles from Vi^na to the West.

Trolhette, a River in Westrogothia in S^^den, which washes Babuse; then by
the Lake of Wonner, passes into the Baltic Sea.

Tronto, Truentum, a River which arises out of the Apennine in the Province of
Abruzzo; and flowing through the Marcha Anconitana, is augmented by the Leia;
and watering Ascoli, and separating the Popes Dominions from the Kingdom of
Naples, falls into the Adriatic Sea at Porto di Ascoli.

Tropea, Tropaea, Tropas, Tropia, Postropaea; a City of the Kingdom of Naples
in the Further Calabria: and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Reggio.

Troppaw, Oppavia, a City of Silesia, called by the Bohemians, Oppaw. It stands
upon the River Oppa, which falls into the Oder near Hilschin! and is the
Capital of a Dukedom of its own Name, and has an ancient Castle. Three German
Miles from Ratibor to the West, and nine from Oppelen to the South. This City
and Dukedom was formerly a part of Moravia.

Trossi, Tros^aeum. In the years 909. 921. 924. and 927. Councils were
assembled here. But the French Geographers describe it be no other Character,
than a place in the Diocese of Soissons.

Trowbridge, a Market Town in Wiltshire, in the Hundred of Melksham, near the
Avon.

Troyes, Trecasses, Trevae, Augustobona, Augustomana, Treca, Tricassis,
Tricassium, Augusta Tricassinorum, a great City, which is the Capital of
Champagne in France: and a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Sens. It stands
upon the Seyne; thirty four Leagues from Paris to the North-East, and twenty
from Chalon to the South. Long. 25. 15. Lat. 48. 08. Pope Urban IV. was a
Native of this place. It has six Parishes, two Collegiate Churches, (besides
the Cathedral); an Abbey, a College of the Oratorians, and diverse
Ecclesiastical and Religious Houses. A Council was held here in 867. by the
Order of Pope Nicholas I. In 878. Pope John VIII. crowned King Lewis le Begu^:
and in 1107. Pope Paschal II. celebrated a Council at this City. There have
been also many others.

Trughillo, or Truxillo, Turris Julia, a small City in the Province of
Extremadura in Spain: seated on a Hill in a Plain, and fortified by an ancient
strong Castle, which has stately Buildings annexed to it. It stands eleven
Miles from Merida to the South-East. Francisco Pizarro, the Conqueror of Peru,
was a Native of this place. There is another Town of the same Name in New
Spain, in the Province of Honduras; which has a Port on the Bay of Mexico.
Taken by the Hollanders, and sacked in 1633. But repaired since. A third in
Peru.

Trullus, the great Hall of the Imperial Palace at Constantinople, in the times
of the ancient Greek Emperors: which took this name from its being arched in
the form ( Trullae) of a Cup. Here in the year 680. was celebrated the sixth
General Council, or the third of Constantinople, under the Emperor
Constantinus Pogonatus, against the Monothelites. And in 692. or 707. Another,
called the second in Trullo and (...), or Synodus Quina Sexta; consisting of
one hundred forty seven Bishops, under the Emperor Justinian II. which
undertook to supply the defects of the fifth and sixth General Councils, as to
Points of Discipline, by one hundred and two new Canons. But neither the
Western Church received those Canons, neither all the Patriarchal Churches of
the East.

Tschelminar, a Mass of some of the noblest Remains of Antiquity in the
Kingdom of Persia: near the City Schiras, in the Province of Farsistan. Being
great Pillars, Canals, Idols, Sepulchers in Rocks, Rests of Edifices, and bas
relievo's above two thousand. They may be a part probably of the Ruins of the
ancient Persepolis. This Name, which the Turks give to the place, signifies in
their Language the Forty Pillars.

Truro, a Market Town and Corporation in the County of Cornwall, and the Hundred
of Powder: honored with the Election of two Parliament Men. It is seated
betwixt two Streams, that run into Falmouth Haven: and gives the Title of a
Baron to the Right Honorable Charles Bodvile Roberts, Earl of Radnor.

Tubingen, Tubinga, a pleasant City in the Dukedom of Wurtemburg, in the Circle
of Schwaben, upon the Necker: four German Miles from Sougard to the South, and
twelve from Vlm to the West. Antonius Caracalla, who was Emperor about the
year of Christ 213. had a Palace in this City. In 1342. it was sold to Verick
Duke of Wurtemberg by its Count: and in 1477. there was an University opened
here by Eberard le Barbe, Count of VVurtemburg.

Tucho, a City in the Province of Queiche^, in China.

Tucuman, Tucumania, a Province in Paragua in South America; between the River
of Plate to the East, the Mountains and Kingdom of Chili to the West; the
Capital of which, is S. Miguel de Estero. It is three hundred Leagues broad,
two hundred long; and has eight small Spanish Cities in it.

Tudbury, or Tutbury, a Market Town in Staffordshire, in the Hundred of O^low;
upon the River Dove.

Tudela, Tatela, a City and Government in the Kingdom of Navarre, upon the
River Ebro; where it receives the Queiles, and is covered with a Bridge: four
Leagues from Tarragona, and fifteen from Sarragoza to the South-West. Long. 19.
15. Lat. 43. 00.

Tuitz or Duitz, T^itium, a Town opposite to Cologue, on the other side of the
Rhine, in Germany: formerly joined to it by a Bridge, which no less than the
Town challenged Constantine the Great for its Founder. This Town is famous for
a Monastery; in which in the twelfth Century, an Hostia is pretended to have
remained unburnt in the midst of a Fire.

Tulles, Tuelle, Tutela, Tutella, a City of Limosin in France, upon the River
Courrez; the Capital of the Lower Limosin, and a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Bourges, by the Appointment of Pope John XXII. in the year 1318.
It lies two and twenty Miles from Clermont to the West, and fourteen from
Limoges to the South. Long. 22. 59. Lat. 45. 20. The Bishops are Lords and
Viscounts of the City.

Tulujas, Tulugiae, a Castle in the County of Rousillon in Catalonia, one
League from Perpignan: at which, in 1050. the Council, called Concilium
Tulugiense, was celebrated.

Tun, a River in the County of Kent, falling into the Medway. Tunbridge stands
upon it.

Tunbridge, a Market Town in the County of Kent, in Aylesford Lath, upon the
River Tun. Much noted for its Mineral Wells.

Tunchang, a City in the Province of Xanton in the Kingdom of China; upon the
River Inn, in the Borders of Pechin.

Tunis, Tunes; Tunetum, a City and Seaport on the Coast of Barbary, upon the
Mediterranean Sea; now called by the Natives Tune; by the Spaniards Tunez; by
the Italians Tunisi. It is great, strong, and populous; about five Miles in
compass: containing three hundred Mosques (besides the grand one, which is a
Noble Structure); twelve Christian Chapels, eight Synagogues of the Jews,
twenty four Cells for Hermites, one hundred and fifty Hott-Houses, eighty six
Schools, nine Colleges maintained upon the Public Expense, sixty four
Hospitals, and about ten thousand Families. The Venetians, Genouese, and others
drive a great Trade with it. It has two Walls, a Palace Royal, a Magazine of
Merchandises, a spacious Haven, and Prisons for Christian Slaves too well
known. Seated in a Plain by the Lake Barbasueco; nine Leagues from the Ruins
of Carthage, and from the Shoars of the Mediterranean Sea; eighteen from
Goletta: at the bottom of a Bay, to the West of the most Western Cape of
Sicily. Not far from this place, Regulus the Roman Consul was defeated, and
taken by the Carthaginians. In the Times of Christianity it was a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Carthage. In the year 1270, unsuccessfully besieged by
Lewis IX. King of France. In the year 1535. taken by Charles V. In 1570. it
returned under its former Kings; who being since extinct, it is governed like a
Commonwealth, under the Protection of the Turk; but very infamous for
Pyracies. Long. 34. 53. Lat. 32. 10. The Country about it yields Olives,
Fruits, Grain and Pasturage very well.

The Kingdom of Tunquin, or Tonquin, Tunchinum, is bounded on the East and
North by that of China; on the South by Cochinchina, and by the great Bay; on
the West by the Kingdom of Brama. The Capital City of it is Kecio. The King of
this City is also Master of a part of the Province of Quansio. He formerly paid
Tribute to the Emperor of China: Now, Homage only by an Ambassador, by an
Establishment in 1667. Of late years the Christian Religion has been preached
with good success, (as is said) by the Missionaries of the Church of Rome. A
Kingdom of great power, and nigh as large as France: situated in 20 degrees. of
Lat. and 145. Long. Mostly under the Torrid Zone: yet very fruitful, and
healthful; and watered with above fifty Rivers. Cochin China was formerly a
Province of it; now a Kingdom tributary to it. It is said to contain about
twenty thousand Towns and Cities. The Sect of the Chinese Philosopher,
Confusius, obtains much amongst the Tonquinese. It became a separate Kingdom
about seven hundred years ago: Before which, it depended as a Province, upon
the Empire of China.

Turcomania, Armenia Major, a vast Country in the Lesser Asia: of old called
Armenia. It lies between Georgia to the North, the rest of the Lesser Asia to
the West, Persia to the East, and Diarbeck to the South. This was the first
Country the Turks possessed, after they came out of Tartary, (being most
probably descended from the Scythians, that lay betwixt the Euxine and Caspian
Seas); under Tangrolipix, about the year of Christ 1037. But the present Line
was begun by Osman or Ottoman, about the year 1290: who was a Husbandman, or
common Labourer; and by his Valor raised this Family. Bursa in Bithynia was
the first Seat of their Empire, afterward Adrianople, and then Constantinople.
Solomon the present Emperor of the Turks, is the one and twentieth of this
Line, set up by the Army against Mahomet IV. his Brother, out of a Discontent
at his Misfortunes in the present War against the Christians, November 9. 1687.

Turenne, Turena, a Town in Limosin, two Leagues from Courez, and four from
Tulles.

Turin, Turino, Augusta Taurinorum, Tauriana, Taurinum, the Capital City of
Piedmont in Lombardy: called by the Italians Torino, by the French Turin. It is
an Archbishops See, and the Seat of the Duke of Savoy; in a very fruitful and
pleasant well watered Plain, twenty Miles from the Alps; upon the River Po,
where it receives the Doria. Adorned with a strong and beautiful Castle, built
by Emanuel Philbert, Duke of Savoy, in 1565. It has also an University, opened
here by Pope Benedict XIII. in 1405. and the Courts of Justice for that
Province are held in it. The City is very strong, and grows greater and more
splendid; yet in the year 1640. it was taken by the French. Long. 29. 30. Lat.
43 50. The dispute betwixt the Bishops of Vienne and Arles for the Primacy, was
heard, but not definitively decided, by an ancient Council held here in 397. or
401.

The Empire of the Turks, contains from East to West, accounting from the
Western Borders of the Kingdom of Algiers to the City Balsara upon the Persian
Gulf, the space of at least eight hundred Leagues. From North to South, that
is, from Caffa in the Taurica Chersonesus, or rather from the City Tanais near
the Lake of Moeotis to Aden on the Mouth of the Red Sea and the Streights of
Babelmandel, 7 hundred other Leagues: which together make an Empire of the
greatest Extent of any Seignior or Sovereign in these parts of the World; and
therefore the Emperor thereof bears the Title of the Grand Seignior. He has in
Asia, Natolia, Syria, Turcomannia, Diarbech, and the three Arabia's. In Africa,
he has the Kingdoms of Barca and Egypt; and the States of Algiers, Tunis, and
Tripoli are under his Protection. In Europe, his Dominion extends over Romelia,
Macedonia, Albania, Thrace, most of the Islands of the Archipelago, Sclavonia,
Servia, Croatia, Bulgaria, and part of Hungary; except what this present War
has dismembered from them; when the Princes of Transylvania, Moldavia, and
Walachia paid him also Tribute: as the Republic of Ragusa also did: and even
the Crim Tartars recognize his Protection. In the whole, before the present War
there were twenty five Governments in this Empire. To wit, Cairo in Egypt, for
Africa. Aleppo, Caramit, Natolia, Cogni, Chars, Damascus, Van, Mosul, Suvas,
Bagdet, Erzerum, Trebizonde, Tripoli, etc. in Asia. In Europe, Caffa, Candia,
Cyprus, Romelia, Bosnia, Temeswaer, and Buda. The beginning of this Empire was
laid in the Greater Armenia, about the year 1037. In 1290. the Ottoman Line
took its rise: (See Turcomania:) whose Power over the Subject is come to be
completely Absolute, Arbitrary, Despotical, Tyrannical. They pray by the
Alcoran, and govern by the Sword.

Turquestan. Some make this and the Kingdom of Thibet in the Asiatick Tartary,
to be the same Country. Others describe it as a Province betwixt the Great
Tartary, and the Empire of the Mogul.

Tuver, Tavera, a City of Moscovy.

Tuxford, a Market Town in Nottinghamshire, in the Hundred of Southclay: called
commonly Tuxford upon Clay, from the quality of the Soil it stands in.

Tuy, Tude, Tide, a City of Gallicia in Spain, upon the River Minho; six
Leagues from its Mouth to the East, twelve from Compostella, and seventeen
Bracara. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Compostella; but a small
City.

Tweede, Tuaesis, Vedra, Tueda, a River which divides Scotland from England;
and falls into the German Ocean at Barwick. Giving name to Tweedale, a County
in Scotland.

Tyana, an ancient City of Cappadocia in the Lesser Asia, at the foot of the
Mountain Taurus: famous for being the Birthplace of the Philosopher
Apollonius, called Tyanaeus from it. It became in the Christian times, an
Archbishops See: and in 365. a Council of the Oriental Bishops was celebrated
at it.

Tyndaro, Tyndarus, a Town in the Island of Sicily, in the Valley of Demone
toward Petti: which was formerly a Bishops See under the Archbishop of
Syracusa. But as Syracusa has been since reduced to a Bishopric; so has
Tyndaro from a City become a Town.

Tyrconel. See Tirconel.

Tire, Tyrus, one of the most ancient and celebrated Cities of Palestine:
supposed to be older than the coming of the Children of Israel out of Egypt:
but certainly at the latest built in the year of the World* 2693. two hundred
and forty years before Solomon's Temple, which is the account of Josephus. It
flourished, and had the Trade of the whole Mediterranean Sea: sent and settled
its Colonies on all its Coasts; as far as the Western Ocean, yea, as Britain;
and amongst the rest, founded Carthage. But when Jerusalem fell, Tire kept her
company. For Nebuchadnezzar took and burnt this City, in the eighteenth year of
his Reign, Anno Mundi 3371. the year before he took Jerusalem. Alexander the
Great took and ruined it the second time, after a Siege of seven Months, in the
year of the World 3618. Yet it recovered again; and was in great repute during
the Roman Empire; and was an Archbishops See, in the times of Christianity,
under the Patriarch of Antioch, and afterward of Jerusalem. Adrian the
Emperor having made it the Metropolis of Phoenicia. About the year of Christ,
641. after the Saracens had by a Siege of three years forced Caesarea to submit
to them, they became Masters of this City without resistance: Damascus, Antioch
and Jerusalem being taken before. Together with Jerusalem, it returned under
Christian Princes again, about the year 1099. In 1111. the the Saracens in vain
attempted the* Recovery of it: but in 1123. it was taken by them. The
Christians regained it, and kept it till the year 1259. when the Tartars took
it. In 1263. the Venetians retook it. In 1292. the Saracens finally prevailed,
and drove the Western Christians out of Syria. This is now called Sour by the
Turks; and has some lovely Antiquities, as Thevenot says, but no Inhabitants.
Long. 67. Lat. 33. 20. In the year 335. a Council here assembled by the order
of Constantine the Great, condemned Athanasius, deprived him of his Bishopric
of Alexandria, and banished him from that City. In 448. Ibas Bishop of Edessa,
accused of Nestorianism, was acquitted by a Council at Tire: and in 518. there
was a third celebrated here.

Tyrnaw, Tirnavia, a small City in the Upper Hungary, in the County of
Transchin, upon a River of its own name: called by the Germans, Durn or Dyrne;
which has always been under the Emperor, and is the common Residence of the
Bishop of Gran, being seated in his Diocese; nine Miles from Comora to the
North, eight from Presburgh to the East, and sixteen from Vienna.

Tyrone, Tyronensis Comitatus, the County of Tir-Oen, or as the Irish call it
of Thioroghain, is in the Province of Vlster in the Kingdom of Ireland; between
the County of Antrim to the East, Londonderry to the North and West, and
Fermanach and Armagh to the South. There is no Town or City of any Note in this
County; which heretofore extended further to the West, than now it does: a part
of it being taken into the County of Londonderry.

Tzaconia, the same with Laconia, a Province of the Morea.

Tzebona, a strong Town in Bohemia.

Tzorlich, or Tzurulium, or Ciarlo, a City of Thrace, which is a Bishops See;
almost in the middle between Constantinople and Adrianople.

Tzuconi, a Kingdom of Japan.

V A.
VAbres, Vabrae, Vabra, Vabrincum, Castrum Vabrense, Vabrium, a small City in
Rovergue in France upon the River Dourdan; at the foot of an Hill; three
Leagues from Rhodez to the South, and four from the Borders of Languedoc. Made
a Bishops See in 1317. under the Archbishop of Bourges, by Pope John XXII. who
converted its Benedictine Abbey into a Cathedral. The Bishops enjoy the Title
of Earls of Vabres. Long. 23. 40. Lat. 33. 00.

Vaferine, or Vanferine, a River of France; which arises from the Valley of
Chesieri in Bugey, and separates the Territory of Michaille in that Province
from Savoy: then passes by Bellegarde into the Rhone.

Vag, Vagus, a River of the Upper Hungary; which arises from the Carpathian
Hills, in the Borders of Poland; and running North-West, waters Trenschin,
Freistadel, Leopolstadt, Schinta, and Scheliz. Between Comora, and Presburgh,
falls from the North into the Danube. Whilst Newheusel was in the hands of the
Turks, this was the Boundary on that side between the two Empires.

Vai, Sabatium Vadum, Vada Sabatia, a Seaport on the Coast of Genoua; five
Miles from Savona to the North-West.

Vaison, Vasio, Forum Vocontiorum, a City in Provence, in the County of
Venaissin: upon the River Louveze, and the ascent of a Hill; four French
Leagues from Orange to the North-East, and ten from Avignon to the same. It is
a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Avignon. In 337. a Council here
assembled in the Reign of the Emperor Constantius, received and added to the
Gloria Petri, the Verse following, Sicut erat in principio, etc. In 442. and
529. we read of other Councils here.

Val des Choux, a Priory in the Dukedom of Burgundy, and the Diocese of
Langres, near Chastillon; founded in 1197. It belongs to the Benedictines.

Val des Ecoliers, an Abbey in the Diocese of Langres in France: founded in
1212. by some Parisian Doctors, for their retirement; whose example drew the
Scholars of the University of Paris in such numbers to the same life, that
their House was called the Scholars Valley; and became the Head of a New Order.

Valckembourg, a Town in the Duchy of Limburgh, in the Low Countries, two
Leagues from Maestricht. Taken by the French in 1676. and restored to the
Spaniards in 1679. by the Treaty of Nimeguen. The French call it Fanquemont.
Also a small Town in the State of Holland, one League from Leyden: which has
been adorned with the Title of an Earldom.

Valdiva, a small City in the Kingdom of Chili in South America; which has a
large and safe Haven on the Pacifick Ocean; under the Dominion of the
Spaniards, though it has been often ruined by the Indians. It stands seventy
five Leagues from Imperiali to the South; written sometimes Baldiva.

Valence, Valentia, Julia Valentia, Segalaunorum Vrbs, a City of Gallia
Narbonensis, in Ptolemy; now called Valenza by the Italians. It is a neat,
populous, great City in the Dauphine; and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop
of Vienne, upon the River Rhosne; eleven Leagues from its Metropolis to the
South. This Bishopric was for ever united to that of Dye, in 1275. The Bishops
take the Title of Earls of Valence. In 1452. there was an University opened
here. The River Isere closes it on the North, and the Rhosne on the West. It
is the Capital of the Dukedom of Valentinois: has a Citadel, an Abbey, and a
Collegiate Church, (besides the Cathedral) with a great number of Religious
Houses. And anciently was a Roman Colony. In 374. 584. and 855. Councils were
assembled at this City. In 890. Lewis Son of Bozon, was confirmed King of Arles
by the Bishops here met for the purpose. There have been more Councils in after
times held in the same place. Also a Town in the Province of Guyenne, near the
Garonne.

Valenchiennes, Valenciennes, Vallencenae, Valentianae, Valentinianae, a City
of Hainault, upon the Schelde; where it receives the Ronel, which divides it. A
great, strong, spruce place; two Leagues from Quesnoy to the North, five from
Tournay to the South, and from Cambray to the West. Henry VII. Emperor of
Germany, was a Native of it; and Baldwin, and Henry, Emperors of
Constantinople. In 1656. the French besieged it under the Mareschals Turenne
and la Ferte: But Don John of Austria, assisted with the Prince of Conde,
raised the Siege and took the latter Prisoner. In 1667. it was taken by the
French, under whom it now is. They have since added to its Fortifications. It
was made an University in 1475.

Valencia, Valentia, Valentia Constetinorum, a City and Kingdom in Spain. The
City is called by the Italians, Valenza; and stands about a Mile from the
Mediterranean Sea; forty nine Leagues from Barcinone to the North-West, from
Toledo to the East, and Saragoza to the South. Built by Junius Brutus, a Roman,
in the year of Rome 616. Rescued out of the hands of the Moors, by Roderic
Bivar el Cid, in the year 1025. Taken by them again, and recovered the second
time by James I. King of Arragon, in 1236. Made a Bishops See in 1492. by Pope
Alexander VI. In Pliny's time it was a great, noble, elegant City; walled, with
five Bridges over the River Guadalaviar: and now the best peopled in all Spain,
except Lishon and Madrid. An University; the Capital of a Kingdom, and the Seat
of its Courts of Justice, and a Viceroy. It has given to the Sea of Rome two
Popes, Calistus II. and Alexander VI. The Spaniards proverbially call it,
Valencia la Hermosa, the Beautiful. Long. 25. 15. Lat. 39. 55.

The Kingdom of Valencia, lies upon the Mediteranean Sea. Bounded on the East
by Catalonia, and that Sea; on the West by New Castile; and by the Kingdom of
Murcia to the South. The chief Cities in it, are Valencia, Segorve, Orighuella,
Xativa, Elche, and Alicante. Watered by the Ebro, the Mervedre, the
Guadalquivir, and the Xucar* so that it enjoys at once the most fruitful Soil,
and the most pleasant and temperate Air of all Spain; much like that of Naples.
Their Silk and Wool are the best in the World. Their Sheep were first brought
thither from Cotswald in England, in 1465. by the imprudent Courtesy of Edward
IV. In short, the Plenty, Delicacies, and Pleasantness of this Kingdom, has
esseminated its Inhabitants, and made them less able to defend it. The ancient
Edetani and Contestani dwelt here. It became a distinct Moorish Kingdom in
1214. Submitted to Arragon in 1228. Finally conquered by them in 1238. Philip
II. banished out of it twenty two thousand Families of the Moors.

Valeneia d' Alcantara, a strong Town in the Province of Extremadura in Spain,
but in the Borders of Portugal, upon the River Savar; eight Leagues from
Alcantara to the West. Taken by the Portuguese; and restored to the Spaniard by
the Treaty of Peace in 1668.

Valencia di Minho, a strong Town upon the River Minho, in the Kingdom of
Portugal: which has resisted the repeated Attacks of the Spaniards.

Valenza, Valentia, Forum Fulvii, or Valentinum, a strong Town in the Dukedom
of Milan, but in the Borders of Montferrat. Built upon an Hill by the Po, ten
Miles from Casal to the East, and seven from Alessandria to the North. It was
attempted by the French in 1635. and in 1656. with great loss: they took it in
1657. The Spaniards were defeated in 1658. in their design of recovering it:
but gained it by the Treaty of Peace the next year at the Pyrenees, and are
still in possession of it.

Valentinois, a Territory in Dauphine, of which Valence is the Capital. It is
divided into the Upper and Lower Valentinois: The Upper extends from the River
Isere to the Droume; the other from the Droume to the County of Venaissin.
Formerly under its own Counts. It became united with Dauphine and the Crown of
France in the time of Tewis XI. King of France. Lewis XII. advanced it to the
quality of a Dukedom.

Valette, Valetta, a new, very strong, fine, populous City, in the Isle of
Malta. Built by Jean de Valette, a French Man, (Master of the Knights of Malta)
in the year 1566. after the Turkish Siege; on the North side of the Island,
upon a Mountain called Sceb Erras: having an excellent Port. The Master of that
Order has resided in that City ever since the year 1571. The Castle belonging
to it is called S. Elmo.

La Valette, or Villebois, a Town in the Dukedom of Angousmois in France.

Valiza, Rhodope, a Mountain in Thrace; called by the Inhabitants, Rulla. It
divides Thrace into two parts; extending from East to West; and gives Birth to
the River Hebrus, and some others.

Valladolid, Pintia, Vallisolitum, Vallisoletum, a City of Old Castile in
Spain: great, elegant, and populous; upon the River Piznerga, a little above
its fall into the Douro; in the Borders of the Kingdom of Leon; (of which it
was a part.) Sixteen Spanish Leagues from Burgos to the South-West, and twenty
from Salamanca to the North-East. This City was built by the Goths, in the year
of Christ 625. Made a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Toledo, in the year
159^. Christopher Columbus, the first Discoverer of America, died here in the
year 1506. It was for some time the Seat of the Kings of Castile; and now an
University of great esteem. In this place, Philip II. King of Spain, by the
persuasion of Mr. Parsons, (a known English Jesuit), erected a Seminary for the
English in 1589. the very year after the Spanish Armado had miscarried. Philip
IV. built a Magnificent Palace in it. In 1322. a Council was assembled here.
Long. 15. 40. Lat. 42. 10. There are two New Cities of the same Name in
America; one in New Spain, in the Province of Honduras; which is a Bishops See
under the Archbishop of Mexico, since the year 1558. The other in Peru.

Le Vallais, or Valais, Valesia. See VVallisserlandt.

Valle, 1. di Demona, Demonae Vallis. 2. Valle di Mazara. 3. Valle di Noto,
Vallis Neaetina, are the three Provinces into which the Island of Sicily is now
divided.

The Valley of Iehosaphat, a Valley betwixt the City Jerusalem, and the Mount
of Olives in Palestine; to the East: which lying two hundred and fifty paces
lower than the City to that quarter, serves as a Fosse to it. Its length from
North to South comes to about two thousand paces. The name, some derive from
the Sepulcher of K. Jehosaphat, anciently built upon it. Some, from a
pretension that God will judge Mankind in this place; because of the
signification of the word Jehosaphat in Hebrew, (Gods Judgment;) and an
expression in Joel, 3. 12. Where v. 14. the same Valley is also called the
Valley of decision; elsewhere in Scripture, the Valley of Kedron, from the
Brook of that name, which traverses the middle of it; and the Kings Valley,
from Solomon's Garden, at the foot of the Mount of Scandal, a part of the Mount
of Olives. Upon this Valley, at present, is pretended to be shown the
Sepulchers of King Jehosaphat, Absalom, the Prophet Zaehariah, and S. James
Bishop of Jerusalem, all cut in Rocks* The Sepulcher of the Virgin Mary, in a
Church, built by Helena in 326. Where are also the Tombs of Joachim and Ann,
(the Parents of the Virgin;) Simeon and Levi; and that famous Queen Melisende,
in the eleventh Century, who was the Daughter, Wife, and Mother of Baldwin II.
Foulk, and Baldwin III. three successive Kings of Jerusalem. The Armenians,
Jacobites, and Abyssines have their several Altars and Apartments in this
Church; which stands upon this Valley, at the foot of the Mountain Viri
Galilaei, another part of the Mount of Olives.

Vallona, a large Town in Albania, recovered out of the Hands of the Turks by
the Forces of the Republic of Venice, Sept. 18. 1690. There were in it one
hundred and thirty Pieces of Cannon.

Valois, V^lesti, a Duchy in the Isle of France; between it, and Picardy, and
Champagne; upon the River Oyse. The chief Town of which is Crepi en Valois. All
the Kings of France from Philip IV. to Francis I. (that is, from 1328, to 1515)
were from hence surnamed de Valois.

Valombre, a Benedictine Abbey in the Florentine, in Italy.

Valpo, a River, Town, and County in Solavania; between Esseck and Belgrade;
all in the Hands of the Emperor. This River falls into the Danube, three German
Miles below Esseck to the South.

Valtelina, Vallis Telina, Volturena, a small Tract belonging to the Grisons,
at the Foot of the Alps; through which the River Adda runs. It belonged to the
Dukedom of Milan; and was granted to the Grisons, by Francis I. in the year
1516. The Spaniards have thereupon all along pretended a Right to it, and in
1620, seized upon it; more for the convenien^^ of a passage between Tirol and
Milan, than for the value of the place* though it is a most fruitful spot of
Ground: but the French, the Pope, and the Venetians interposing, and a War
ensuing, the Grisons at last recovered the Possession of it. This Valley
extends from East to West sixty Miles: on the North it is bounded by the
Grisons, on the South by the States of Venice, on the East by Tir^l, and to the
West by Milan. There are four considerable Towns in it, Morbegno, Sondrio,
Tirano, and Bormio. It made a part of the ancient Rh^e^ia, and was then
inhabited by the Vennone^es.

Van, a Fortress of the Turks, upon the Frontiers of Persia, in Armenia; which
is little, but very strong: and stands upon a Lake of the same Name, betwixt
Mar di B^chu and the Tigris; which some call the Sea of Van, and the Sea of
Armenia, because its Waters are salt. Learned Men take it for the ancient
Artemita. It stands two hundred and fifty Miles from the Caspian Sea to the
West. Long. 78. 40. Lat. 40. 30.

Vandali, an ancient People upon the Coasts of the Baltic Sea, in Germany: who
in the fifth Century, in conjunction with the Alani and others, made Invasions
into Gaul and Spain. In Gaul, they lost Godegesil^^ their King, and twenty
thousand Men in one Battle, in the year 405, before the Alani could advance to
their relief. In the other, they Conquered the Kingdom of the Suevi, defeated
the Roman Forces in Boetica, called a part of the Country Vandalitia (now
Andaluzia) after their own name; thence passed into Africa; and established a
Kingdom there in the Person of their General Gensericus: to whom succeeded five
others in the same honor; till Bellisarius with the Emperor Justinians Forces
took their last King Gelimer (an Usurper upon the Right of Hilderic, Kinsman to
Justinian) Prisoner; and brought him to Constantinople, in 533. These Kings
were Arrians, and severe Persecutors of the contrary Faith.

Vannes, or Vennes, Venetia, Dariorigum, Venetiae, Dariorigum Venetorum, a City
of the Lesser Bretagne in France: the Seat of the ancient Veneti, who were
hardly conquered by Julius* Caesar in a Sea Fight. It is now a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Tours; and is a fine, populous City, by the Bay de
Morbihan, with a Castle, which was anciently the Palace of the Dukes of
Bretagne, and diverse Churches; two Leagues from the Sea, and twenty six from
Rennes to the North-West. Long. 17. 28. Lat. 47. 15. In 465. a Council was
celebrated here.

Var, Varus, a River of Italy, which arises in the Maritim Alps, in the
County of Nizza; and flowing South, receives the Vaire, Tince, Vesubee, and
Esteron; and at Nizza, (or Nice) falls into the Mediterranean Sea; after it has
for many Miles divided Provence from the County of Nizza; it is therefore
accounted the Boundary between France and Italy; though the French have some
places on the South of this River, and the Duke of Savoy on the North of it.

Varcevo, Collentum, a City of Dalmatia; between Zara to the West, and Scardona
to the East; under the Venetians.

Varna, Dionysiopolis, Barna, Tiberiopolis, Odessus, V^rna, a City of Bulgaria;
which is an Archbishops See, and has a Port upon the Euxine Sea; at the Mouth
of the River Zyra, now Varna. It stands between this River to the North, the
Sea to the East, and the L^ke of Devina to the South. Still a place tolerably
well peopled: seven German Miles from M^sember, and the Borders of Thrace to
the North. Most taken notice of upon the account of a great Defeat the
Christians received here, under Vladislaus, King of Hungary, November 11. 1444.
Long. 54. 20. Lat. 44. 15.

Il Varo, the same with Var.

Vasento, Casuentum, a River of Calabria, in the Kingdom of Naples; which
flowing by Cos^nza, falls into the Grati. In the Bed of this River, Alaricus
King of the Goths, was buried, as Jornandes faith: who was one of those
Bat^arous Princes that sacked Rome.

Vasilig^red, a City in the Dukedom of the little Novogorod in Moscovy; upon
the River Wolg^, where it receives the Sure.

Vasilip^tamo, ^uro^us, a River of the Mor^a.

Vasserburgh, a Town in ^avaria, where the Duke keeps his principal Treasures.
It stands upon the River Inn, which almost incompasseth it; seven Miles from
Munchen to the East.

Vatzen or Vei^zen, Va^^i^, a City in the lower Hungary upon the Danube: and a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Gran.

Vau^luse, quasi Vallis Clausa, a Fountain in the Valleys of the County of
Avignon in Provence, at the foot of a Mountain: famous for the frequent resort
of the Learned Poet Petrarch thither, about the year 1300: who honoreth it with
the Title of the Queen of Founiains. Some old remaining ruins upon the place
are commonly to this day called, Petrarch's house. This Fountain forms the
River Sourges ( Sulga) very near its head; assisted by the influx of a number
of other little sources; from the same Mountain.

Vaud. See Waad.

Vaudrevange, Valdersinga, a Town in Lorain, upon the River Saar; ten Miles
from Mets to the East, and from Thionville: which suffered much in the late
German War, but since rebuilt. About a Mile from this place was built a very
strong Fort, called Saar Lovis.

Vauge, Vogesus, Vosagus, a celebrated Mountain in France; which extends from
North to South, between Lorain, Alsatia, and the Franche Comte; (in which it is
called Mont des Faucilles;) out of it arise the Moselle, and the Saone, or
Sosne. There is a small Territory near it, which by the French is called le
Pais de Vauge; and by the Germans, Wasgow; a part of the Dukedom of Lorain.

Vauge. See Wasgow.

Le Vault, Romana Ditio, a District belonging to the Canton of Bearn, in
Switzerland; betwixt the Lake of Lemane, and the Mountain Jura. Lausanne is its
Capital City. Formerly under the Duke of Savoy. The French call it Vaux, and
Pais de Vaux.

La Vaur. See Lavaur.

Vaux, a small Territory near Orleans.

Vbeda, a great, populous City, in the Eastern Part of Andalusia in Spain:
toward the Borders of New Castile; one League from the River Guadalquivir to
the North, and six from Jaen or Gaen to the South-East. This City was recovered
from the Moors, September 29. 1234, by Ferdinando King of Castile: and besides
a strong Castle, has a very advantageous Stiuation. Long. 17. 30. Lat. 38. 30.

Vberlinghen, Vberlinga, a small but Imperial and Free City, in the Circle of
Schwaben; upon the Lake of Constance toward the North, two Miles from
Constance. Made an Imperial City in 1267: often taken, and retaken in the
Swedish War.

Vbii, an ancient People, who dwelt about the (now) Archbishopric of Cologne,
and Duchy of Juliers, in the Circle of Westphalia in Germany: the memory of
their name being still preserved in a place there, called Vbich.

Vchter-See, Lacus Moratensis, a Lake of Switzerland, called also Murtensee by
the Germans. The River Broye flows through it, and falls into the Lake called
Newenburghsee.

Vdenheim, the same with Philipsbourg.

Vdiaa, the Capital City of the Kingdom of Siam, in the East Indies.

Vdine, Vtinum, a City in Friuli, called by the Germans Weyden. The Capital of
that Province, and the Seat of the Patriarch of Aquileja, since the declension
of that last City into ruin; of old a Bishops See. Brought under the subjection
of the States of Venice in 1420: and built on the River Torre; twenty Miles
from the Adriatic Sea to the North, eleven from Palma, twenty from Goritia to
the West, and eight from Friuli. Long. 35. 28. Lat 45. 46.

Vecht, Vidrus, Vider, a River of Westphalia in Germany, mentioned by Tacitus
and Ptolemy: it arises five German Miles from Munster to the South-West; and
being augmented by the Aa, the Dinchel, and the Regge, falls into the Zuyder
Zee, in Over-Yssel^^ eight Miles from Zwol to the North, where it is called
Swarte Water.

Veglia, Vegia, a Venetian Island upon the Coast of Dalmatia, in the Adriatic.
The Sclavonians call it Kirk.

Veii and Vejentes, an ancient People and City of Etruria, near Rome. Famous in
the time of Romulus, who himself made War with them. But much more by the
Victory they obtained over the three hundred and twelve Fabii (being the whole
Family, except one Youth not of age to bear Arms, who was left at home) at the
River Cremera in Thuscany, by an Ambuscade, in the year of Rome 177. Of which
Ovid, Vna Dies Fabios ad bellum miserat omnes: Ad bellum missos perdidit una
Dies. See Cremera. The Dictator M. Furius Camillus took and totally destroyed
this City, in the year of Rome 318. But it first endured a ten years Siege. The
tenths of its spoils were dedicated to Apollo Pythius by the Conquerors; who
had taken Oaths from the Soldiers, never to rise from before the place untaken.

Velay, Velauni, a County in the Sevennes in Languedoc in France, betwixt
Auvergne, Vivaretz, Givaudan, and Foretz. The Capital City of it is Puy. It was
anciently the Country of the Velauni. Separated into two parts by the Mountains
Mezeres, Pertuis, and Meigal; which are covered with Woods: therefore called
Velay beyond the Woods, and Velay on this side of them.

Veletri, or Veltri, Veletrae, a most ancient City, and Colony in Campania di
Roma; taken by Ancus Martius King of the Romans. Now a Bishops See, but united
to that of Ostia, and under the Pope. It is a pleasant spruce City; twenty
Miles from Rome to the East.

Veleuve, a County in the Province of Guelderland, in the United Netherlands:
Harderwick is a principal City in it.

Venafro, Venafrum, a City in the Province di Lavoro, in the Kingdom of Naples,
of great Antiquity: a Principality, and a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of
Capua. Twenty two Miles from Capua to the North. Long. 37. 58. Lat. 41. 35.

Venaissin, or Venaisse, Vindasanus, Vindaucensis, Venascinu^, Comitatus, a
County in Provence in France; between the Dauphine to the North, the Durance to
the South, the Rhosne to the West, and Provence to the East. In 1348, given by
Jona Qu. of Naples, and Countess of Provence, to Clement VI. Pope of Rome; and
still, together with Avignon, subject to the Pope. The now Capital of it, is
Carpentras: Vaison, and Cavailon in it are considerable Towns. Avignon is not
in this County, (as is believed) tho it stands near it.

Vence, or Vanze, Vensiensis Vrbs, Vincium, Vintium, Ventium, Vidantiorum and
Vinciensium Vrbs, a City of Provence; which is a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Ambrun, for some time united formerly with the Sea of la Grace,
but again separated. Two Leagues from Antibes to the North, and from the River
Varo to the West: made very conspicuous in the World, by the Learned Writings
of one of its late Bishops. The Inscriptions about it prove its having been a
Roman Colony. It gives the Title of a Baron; betwixt whom, and the Bishop, the
temporal Jurisdiction of it is divided. Long. 29. 15. Lat. 42.50.

Vencheu, a City in the Province of Chequin in China.

Vendosme, Vindinum, Vindocinum, a City in the Province of la Beause in France,
upon the River Loyre; nine Leagues from Chasteaudun to the West, and Amboise to
the North, and seven from Blois. This is the Capital of a Dukedom, between la
Perch to the North, Blois to the East, Touraine to the South, and Man's to the
West. The Dukedom is given to the Younger Sons of the Crown of France very
frequently. It has an ancient Castle, a College of the Oratorians, and some
Religious Houses.

Vendres, Rubensis Lacus, a Lake in Languedoc in France.

Venice, Venetia, one of the noblest Cities, and Free States of Italy; called
by the Inhabitants, Venetia, and Vinegia; by the Poles Wenecya; by the Greeks,
(...), by the French, Venise; by the Germans, Venedig; by the Georgians,
Venedich; and by the Turks, Venedick. It is the Capital also of a mighty Common
wealth, and a Mart, or Seaport; as much frequented by the Merchants of all
Nations, as most other in the World. Begun by the Inhabitants of Padoua, about
the year of Christ 421, upon the Rocks of the Adriatic Sea, out of a terror of
the Goths and other barbarous Nations: which then like an impetuous and
irresistible Torrent over run Italy. The Senate of Padoua, as Masters of the
Islands of the Lagune, to this purpose proclaimed by their three Consuls the
ssame year, Rialto (a Port belonging to them there) to be an Asylum for all
that would retire to it. Attila after this overthrowing and ruining Aquileja,
the Inhabitants of that City fled to Venice too in the year 453. Whereby both
Rialto, and the neighboring Islands, became Peopled; receiving for their
Governors, Consuls, or Tribunes, (which Cassiodorus calls Maritimorum
Tribunos) sent to them from the Senate of Padoua: till in time every Island
chose itself a particular Tribune yearly, and every Tribune became in the
nature of a petty Sovereign. And thus for nigh the first three hundred years,
they were neither one and the same City, or Republic; but a consederation of
many neighboring Islands united together, by common interest, for their
security against the Barbarians of Italy. In the year 697, the Tribunes of the
twelve principal Islands by permission from the Emperor (as Sovereign of all
the Country) and the Pope, which was procured to supersede the pretensions of
Padoua to these Islands, set up the first Duke: and since that time this City
has increased to that degree, that it has filled all the seventy two Islands
about it; which, as every Island anciently had its separate Pastor as well as
Tribune, are become so many Parishes, each having its peculiar Church. From the
year 697. to 1172. or 1177. the Dukes or Doges governed with an absolute
authority; and caused their Brothers or Children to be elected oftentimes their
Colleagues, and their Successors. The third Doge was assassinated by the People
for his Tyranny: whereupon ensued an Interregnum of five years; in which the
State was committed to certain Officers, every new year changed and elected.
Then they desired to have a Doge again: And from 697. to 1177. they had about
thirty four or thirty six Sovereign Doges. In 1172. the Election of the Doge by
the voices of all the People was abolished; and a Sovereign independent Counsel
appointed for that use, consisting of two hundred and forty Citizens, chosen
indifferently out of the Gentry, Citizens, and Artiz^ns: But withal they
Created twelve Tribunes, with power to oppose the Doges Ordinances, in case
they appeared unjust. This fo^m of Government continued one hundred and eleven
years: And in 1280. the Council was fixed upon a number of certain Families and
their descendents, expressed in public Register; with an utter exclusion of
other Persons and Families, of all States and Qualities whatsoever. Which last
form, time has improved with many additions. The Sword is now carried not
before, but behind the Doge; and the public Coins represent him in Ducal
Habits, upon his Knees before S. Mark, (who is the Symbol of the Republic;)
two no small intimations of his inferiority to it. It is lawful for the Senate
to depose him (otherwise his Dignity is for life) in case of extreme old age
and sickness, rendering him incapable of business: as they did Francisco
Foscarini, at the age of 84. after his Dogate had been always happy to them.
The Families of the twelve Tribunes who set up the first Doge in 697, are all
preserved to this day; and obtain the first rank in the Venetian Nobility, with
the Title of the twelve Electoral Houses Most of the Princes of Italy, and not
them only, but Hen. III. and Henry le Grand, Kings of France, have desired to
be received into the Body of the Nobility of this State: For which, others, who
purchase their Nobility, ordinarily pay one hundred thousand Ducats. In the
year 1177. the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa and Pope Alexander III. were
reconciled in a Council here: but the common story of the Pope's putting his
foot upon the Emperor's Neck is rejected and refuted by Baronius. In the year
1451, the Bishop of this City had the Title of a Patriarch given him: who
writes, Divina Miseratione Venetiarum Patriarcha, without the addition of
Sanctae sedis Apostolicae gratia; and is nominated by the Senate. Aquitela is
another Patriarchate within the Dominions of this State: who, though that City
belongs to the House of Austria, find means to keep the Patriarchate constantly
full, against the interposition of any Person by the Emperor. The Body of S.
Mark, brought hither from Alexandria, is said to be preserved in the NOble
Church of his name in this City. Here are accounted one hundred and forty
Palaces, one hundred and thirty Monasteries for Men and Women, one hundred and
sixty five Marble Statues, twenty five brass, sixty seven Parishes, eighteen
Hospitals, and innumerable other Testimonies of Riches and Grandeur. The
several Islands are said to be joined together by five hundred Bridges; the
greatest of which called il ponte di Rio Alto, was built of Istrian Stone, in
1591. The Arsenal for their Galleys is the most celebrated, and their Harbor
the most large and safe in the World. This City is the Mistress and Sovereign
of the Adriatic Sea; once the Mistress of the Morea, Cyprus, Candy, the
Negropont, almost all the Islands of the Archipelago up to Constantinople,
Thessalonica, most of the other Seaport Towns of Greece, Smyrna, and many
others in Asia; which have been ravished from her, by the prevailing fortunes
of the Ottoman House. She is now no less gloriously struggling to regain what
she dearly sold, if the Turk had at all valued human Blood. But of all these
places I have discoursed in the Accounts I have given of them. She stands two
hundred and sixty Miles from Rome to the North, two hundred and eighty from
Vienna South, one hundred from Ravenna North, fifteen from Milan East. Upon
Ascension-Day, the Doge accompanied with the whole College, and Ambassadors of
Crowned Heads, performs a Ceremony yearly at Port Lido, which is peculiarly
remarkable in this City, of marrying the Adriatic Sea; which is done by
throwing out of his Buccintoro (a most rich and pompous Galley for the purpose,
wherein he rides in triumph) a Gold Ring into the Sea, with these words;
Desponsamus te, Mare, in signum very and perpetui dominii. This Ceremony was
first instituted by Pope Alexander III. toward the end of the twelfth Century;
as a solemn Declaration of the Sovereignty over the Adriatic, which the
Republic had acquired by their Arms. Zebastiano Zani was the Doge at that
time. To him Pope Alexander delivered a Ring, saying; Take this Ring, and upon
this day in every year to come give one to the Sea, as to your lawful Spouse,
to the end that all posterity may know, that the Sea by the right of Arms
belongs to you. The Venetians had done great Services to Pope Alexander,
against the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa; and particularly by their Victory at
Sea over Otho, Son to that Emperor; which induced the Pope to create this
Ceremony in their honor: not pretending to grant from the Roman See, what that
See never had; but declaring and recognizing solemnly an ancient right in the
possession of this State. Therefore when Pope Julius II. asked Donati, the
Venetian Ambassador in Raillery, to show the Titles of this right; it was
thought ingeniously answered by him; If your Holiness pleases to look out the
original of Constantine's Donation to P. Sylvester, you will find the grant of
the Adriatic Sea to the Venetians. Their Generals over the Gulf,) of whom
they show in their Records, an uninterrupted Succession from 1230,) are the
most ancient Marine Officers of the Republic. But the precise time of their
Creation first was lost amongst the Records in a fire that year. A Venetian
Historian calls this gulf, Reipublicae domum, the house in which the Republic
was born. Its mouth betwixt the Cape of Otranto and that of E^questa near
Vallona, extends the space of fifty or fifty five Miles. See Golfo di Venetia.
The particular part of it in which the City Venice stands, was anciently called
Gallicae Paludes, Septem Maria, S^agna Hadriatica: Now Lagune di Venetia. See
Lagune. The Venetians date the beginning of their Republic not from the
Election of the first Doge in 697. but, to represent its Age greater, from the
day of the Proclamation of Rialto an Asylum, in March 25, An* Dom. 421: and
they think it renders them more August, to compute their beginning from the
same Epoch, as to the Month and Day, with that of the Incarnation of Christ,
and (according to some opinions) the Creation of the World. They have in their
present Constitution a Grand Council of the Nobility, a Senato, a College of
Twenty six who give Audience to Ambassadors and report their Demands to the
Senate, a Council of Ten; and a Triumvirate (monthly chosen by, and out of, the
Ten) of three Inquisitors of State; whose Authority is so absolute, as to
extend to the taking away of the Life of the Doge no less than the meanest
Artisan, without acquainting the Senate, provided they all three agree in the
Sentence. And no Ecclesiastics, tho Nobles, are suffered admittance into the
Councils or Offices of the State, to prevent the Policies of the Church of
Rome; whose long interdict upon the Republic in the last age cannot be
forgotten* Long. 34. 30. Lat. 45. 00.

The State of Uenice, called by the Italians, Lo Stato della Republica di
Venetia, or il Dominio Veneto, is a considerable Territory in Italy. Bounded to
the North by the Valteline, and the County of Tirol and Carinthia, from all
which it is separated by the Alps; on the West it has Milan; on the South
Mantoua and the States of the Church; on the East the Adriatic Sea, (now
commonly called the Gulf of Venice) and Carniola. Very fruitful and strangely
full of People: it extends from East to West two hundred and forty Miles, from
North to South one hundred. Besides Venice, it contains in Italy Belluno,
Bergamo, Brescia, Crema, Fel^re, Friuli, Capo d* Istria, Legnago, Palma, Pola,
Rovigo, Serravalle, Trevigi, Verona, Vicenza, and Vdine. And besides all these
Territories in Italy, this State possesses a great part of Dalmatia,
Cefalonia, Corfou, Zant, and many other Islands. In 1687. and since, with the
three preceding years, by her Victorious Arms and Gods blessing, she has
recovered from the Turks all the Morea; and all Livadia, or Aehaia.

Uenlo, Venloa, a very strong Hanse Town, in the Upper Guelderland, not much
Peopled; Seated upon the Maes, in the Borders of the Dukedom of Juliers, under
the Spaniards; four Leagues from Roermond to the North, and a little more from
Guelders North-West.

Uennes, the same with Vannos.

Uenosa, Venusia, Venusium, a City of the Kingdom of Naples* in the Basilicat^;
which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Acerenza; seated in a fruitful
Plain at the foot of the Apennine: and honored of old with the Birth of Horace
the Latin Poet; at present with the Title of a Principality belonging to the
Family di Ludovisia. This City is placed between Naples to the West and Taranto
to the East; seventy five Miles from either, and fifteen from Acerenza to the
North. In 1589 and 1614. Synods were assembled here. Long. 39. 51. Lat. 40. 57.

Vera Cruz, Vera Crux, a City in New Spain, in the Province of Tlascala, upon
the Bay of Mexico; eighty Leagues from Mexico to the East, and seventy from the
South Sea. A place of great Trade, being the Port to Mexico: but not walled,
nor seated in a healthful Air* especially from about April to November, because
it rains almost continually all that time: only it has for its defense a Castle
built on a Rock: and from November to April again, the Wind and the Sun
tempering each other, without rain, make the place pleasant.

Ueragua, a Province of New Spain in South America: included in the Government
of Guatimala.

Uera Paz, a Province in the Government of Guatimala in New Spain, in South
America; upon the Borders of the Provinces of Guatimala, properly so called,
and Honduras. The Capital City bears the same name; and is a Bishops See, under
the Archbishop of Mexico. This Province abounds with spacious Forests and
Mountains, which the Spaniards are daily levelling to improve the Air and the
Soil. Upon the Eastern Coast of it lies the Golfo Dolce, or sweet water-gulph;
by which Adventurers have sometime sought a passage to the Pacifick Sea in vain.

Uerberie, Verm^ria, a Royal House belonging to the Kings of France, in the
Duchy of Valois, and the Diocese of Soissons, upon the River Oise; where there
have been four Councils celebrated.

Uercelli, (as the French write) Verceile, Vercellae, a City of Piedmont of
great Antiquity; which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Milan. It
stands upon the River Sesia, in the Borders of the Duke of Milan; and has a
District called by its own name belonging to it, betwixt Montferrat, the
Milanese and Ivree: ten Miles from Casal to the North, and from Novara to the
West: thirty five from Milan East, and from Turin West. It is a very strong
Place; has a Castle, a Citadel, a famous Hospital, and handsome Churches;
often taken and retaken in the late Wars; and particularly in 1638 by the
Spaniards, who by the Pyrenean peace returned it, as it is now, under the Duke
of Savoy. In the time of the ancient Romans, it flourished. Since, it has been
a Republic; next under the Duke of Milan; then Savoy. In 1050. P. Leo XIX.
celebrated a Council at it against Berengarius, Archdeacon of Angers: who was
cited, but did not appear to the same.

Uerdun, Verduna, Veroduna, Verodunum, Virdunium, Vereduna, a City of Gallia
Belgica, mentioned by Antoninus: now in the Dukedom of Lorain, but separated
from it by the French: under whom it has been ever since 1552, when Henry II.
took it. A Bishops See under the Archbishop of Trier; great, strong, and well
Peopled; seated upon the Maes, which forms several small Islands here; fifteen
Leagues from Chaalons to the East, twelve from Metz and thirteen from Tulle to
the North. Some of its former Bishops have been Counts of Verdun and Princes of
the Empire.. There is a Territory and Town of the same name in the Province of
Gascoigne: Another Town in the County of Foix in Aquitain; and another County
in Bourgogne.

Der Uere, Veria, a small but strong City in the Province of Zealand, in the
Isle of Walcheren: which has an Harbor; one League from Middleburg to the
East. It belongs to the Prince of Orange.

Uerma, a City and Kingdom in the Terra Firma of the East Indies, beyond the
Ganges: affording precious Stones.

Uermandois, Veromanduensis Ager, a County in Picardy; which is an ancient
Earldom; between Tierache to the East, Le Santerre to the West, Cambray to the
North, and the Isle of France to the South: the Capital is S. Quentin. It took
its name from Vermand, ( Augusta Veromanduorum) a ruined Roman Town, which
stood anciently in this County. And was its Capital. There now stands an Abbey
in the place of it. The ancient Veromandui dwelt here.

Uermelandia, a Province of Sweden.

Uermio, a Straight near New Mexico.

Uerneuil, Vernolium, a City in the Upper Normandy, upon the River Aure, in the
Borders of la Percbe: sometimes called Vernevil au Perch; eight Leagues from
Dreux to the West, and seven from Seez and Eureux to the South. Famous for the
overthrow the English gave the French in 1424: where four thousand five hundred
French were slain upon the place: and the Earl of Narbone being taken, was
hanged for assisting at the Massacre of John Duke of Burgundy.

Uernon, Vernonium, a City of Normandy upon the Seyne, in the Diocese of
Eureux: over which it had a Bridge of Stone, now ruined: ten Leagues from Roan
South, seven from Eureux East, and from Gisors West: It had heretofore also a
Palace Royal ( Palatium Vernis), which in 755. and 844. was the Seat of two
Councils.

Ueroli. See Veruli.

Ueron, a small Town near Sens in Champaigne, in France: remarked for a
Fountain of such a nature, as to petrifie the mire and moss through which it
runs.

Uerona, a City of Lombardy, which is great and famous; called by the Germans
Dietrichs Bern. It is a Bishops See under the Patriach of Aquileja; and the
Capital of a Province of its own name, called the Veronois: It stands upon the
River Adige, over which it has four Bridges, and three Castles: thirty five
Miles from Trent South, twenty two from Mintoua North, and sixty from Ferrara.
Built by the Gauls, in the year of Rome 469. two hundred eighty two years
before the Birth of Christ. In the Civil Wars of Rome, made a Roman Colony. In
490. it was taken by Theodoricus: who here overthrew ^doacer King of the
Heruli, and took the name of Veronensis. In 901. Berengarius took it by bribing
the Garrison. In 1212, it was put under the House of Este: after this the
Family of the Scaligers were Lords of it seventy years, and after them the
Dukes of Milan. In 1403. the Venetians obtained it from the Duchess of Milan.
In 1509. Maximilian the Emperor took it; but in 1516. it was restored to them:
and is now the best City in a^^ their Dominions except Venice. Catullus the
Poet was Born here. Martial gives it the Epithet of Magna in Catullus's, and
his time: Tantum Magna suo debet Veron^ Catullo, Quantum par^a suo Mantua
Virgilio. Its ancient ^irque and Amphitheatre, and many other noble Monuments,
remain yet extant* Pope Lucius III. dyed here. In 1542. and 1589. Synods were
assembled at this City. Long. 33. 10. Lat. 44. 35.

Uerrua, a strong fortified Town in Piedmont, in the County of Asta, upon the
Banks of the Po, and the Borders of the Dukedom of Montferrat: sixteen Miles
from Turin, toward Casale: upon an advanced ground. In the Wars betwixt
Piedmont and Ferrara, a Sculpture was made upon the Gate of the Castle, of a
bunch of Grapes hanging over the head of a Swine, and he in vain opening his
mouth to catch it; with this Inscription, Quando questo porco pigliara l'Vva,
Il Marquese di Montferrato pigliara Verrua. When this Hog shall catch the
Grapes, The Marquess of Montferrat shall take Verrua. In the year 1625. The
Spaniards besieged this Town under the Duke of Feria. And to deride their
attempt too in the same manner, the Inhabitants put the name of the Duke of
Feria in the place of the Marquess thus; Quando questo porco pigliara l'Vva Il
Duca di Feria Pigliara Verrua. Accordingly, the Spaniards miscarried.

Uersacgli, the Turkish name of Pisidia, a Province of the Lesser Asia.

Uersailles, Versaliae, a Town in the Isle of France, where the present King of
France has built a most Noble Palace since 1661; upon an eminence, in the
middle of an excellent Valley for hunting; where before in the Reign of Lewis
III. stood only an old indifferent Castle, which was made the rendezvouze of
parties of Hunters, as they took or left the field. In 1678. Lewis XIV. rebuilt
this Castle, with the greatest Magnificence. Many curious Buildings and noble
Works have, at several times, been added for grandeur. He makes this place his
continual Residence; and the Town of Versailles, now accompanying the Palace,
wholly owes its beginning to him. It stands four Leagues from Paris to the
East, and two from S.* Clou.

Uervin, Vervins, Verbinum, a small Town in Picardy, in the County of Tierache;
scarce four Leagues from the Borders of Champagne, sixteen from Reims North,
and four from Marle South: often mentioned on the account of a Peace here made
between Henry IV. of France, and Philip II. of Spain, May 2. 1598.

Uer^lam, Verolamium, an ancient Roman City and Colony; mentioned by Tacitus
and Ptolemy; in Hartfondshire; the Royal City of Cassibellanus a British
Prince, contemporary with Julius Caesar; by whom this City was taken fifty two
years before the Birth of our Savior, in his second Expedition into Britain.
In the year of Christ 66. it was taken and entirely ruined by Boadicia, Queen
of the Iceni; and all the Romans put to the Sword: yet it recovered again, and
flourished as long as the Romans continued in Britain; and under Dioclesian had
one famous Martyr called Albanus. In 429* there was a British Synod held here
by S. German, Bishop of Auxerre in France, against the Pelagians. Soon after,
it fell into the Hands of the Saxons. I suppose about 465. Retaken by Vthe
Pendragon; who began his Reign in 498. and Reigned eighteen years. Again
retaken by the Saxons, and entirely ruined. In 975. Offa King of the Mercians
built (on the other side the little River Ver, which washed the Walls of it) a
goodly Monastery in Honor of S. Alban; which after became a great Town. K.
James I. revived the Memory of this place: when he made Sir Francis Bacon, then
Lord Chancellor of England, Lord Verulam, in 1620: who dying without Issue,
the Title failed; but he yet honors the place by lying buried in a little
Church near it.

Veruli, or Veroli, Verulum, a City in Campania di Roma, under the Dominion of
the Pope; which is a Bishops See, and now in a tolerable condition: upon the
River Cosa: forty eight Miles from Rome to the South, and from Capua to the
North; sixty from Pescara West.

Vesere. See Weser.

Vesle, Vidula, a River of Champagne; which arises three Leagues from Chaalons
to the East, and watering Reims falls into the Aisne.

Vesoul, Vesulum, a small but neat City in the Franche Comte: nine Leagues from
Besanzon, and thirteen from Beaucaire West. Now in the Possession of the French.

Vesprin, Vesprinum, Vesprimium, a City of the Lower Hungary; called by the
Inhabitants Vesprim, by the Germans Weisbrun. It is a Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Gran. The Capital of a County of the same name, strong and
populous, and defended by a Castle: Seated on the River Sarwize, eleven German
Miles from Gran South, and five from Alba Regalis West. This has been in the
hands of the Emperor ever since 1565.

Vesulus, one of the Cottian Alps; betwixt Dauphine to the West, and Piedmont
to the East. Now called Mont viso. The River Po derives its head from it.

Vesuvius, a Vulcanoe in the Terra di Lavoro, in the Kingdom of Naples; eight
Miles from the City Naples: near the Castle of Somma: from which last place the
Italians give it the name of il Monte di Somma. The particular times of its
overflowing with storms of fire are all recorded in History, since our Savior
and the Reign of Augustus. viz. in the years 81. 243. 421. 985. 973. 983. 1036.
1038. 1138. 1139. 1430. 1500. 1631 1660. 1682. Where the Intervals sometimes
continue two or three hundred years; at others, not above one, two, and ten. In
its last rupture in 1682. Aug. 14. it covered the whole Dukedom of Massa
(adjacent) with ashes of a nauseous odor, and set on fire the wood of Otajano.
The twentieth, it caused an Earthquake of three hours continuance, which
reached to Naples. The twenty second, it cast forth floods of smoke, ashes,
coals, attended with a roaring noise, Flames, Earthquake, and Thunder; the
Flames ran from it unextinguished, in the midst of vast storms of Rain; filling
Naples with Ashes. And on the 24th. it ended in a cloud of white ashes. Before
the Reign of Augustus, we read of its ruptures five times. The Elder Pliny was
suffocated, as he searched the causes thereof upon the place.

Veteravie. See Weteraw.

Veuxin, Vexin, Velocasses, a Territory in Normandy; betwixt the Rivers Apt
and Ardelle; the Capital of which was Roan, but now Gisors.. There is another
in the Isle of France of the same name, between the Oyse and the Apt; the
Capital of which is Pontoise. This for distinction is called Vexin Francois,
and the other Vexin Normand.. There is a City of the same name in Gothland, in
the Kingdom of Sweden.

Vezelay, Veseliacum, Vizeliacum, a City in the Dukedom of Burgundy in Auxerre,
upon the River Curez; in the Borders of Nivernois: ten Leagues from Auxerre to
the South, eighteen from Nevers to the South-East, and five from Corbie in
Picardy; to which Province this City is now added. P. Eugenius III. celebrated
a Council here in 1145. for the recovery of the Holy Land.

Vgenti, Vgento, Vxentum, a small City in the Province of Otranto, in the
Kingdom of Naples: twenty Miles from Otranto to the North-West, and eleven from
Gallipoli to the East. Long. 42. 28. Lat. 39. 56.

Vgogh, Vgoza, a County, in the Upper Hungary; toward the Tibiscus, and the
Borders of Transylvania. The Capital of it is a Castle of the same name. Two
German Miles from Zatmar to the East, and a little more from the Tibiscus W.

Viana, a City in Navarre, upon the River Ebro; thirteen Leagues from
Pampelune, and seven from Calahorra in Castile to the South-West. Built by
Sancius King of Navarre, in 1219. In 1423. made a Principality by Charles III.
and ever after given to the Prince of Navarre as his Title.

Viatka, a City, River, and Province in Muscovy; one hundred and twenty Miles
from Cazan to the North.

Viburg, Viburgum, a City in Sweden; the Capital of Carelia; and a Bishops See
under the Archbishop of Riga: one hundred and sixty Miles from Narva to the
North, upon the Bay of Finland; on which it has a Haven and a strong Castle.
The Muscovites have several times in vain assaulted it.

Vicenza, or Vincenza, Vicentia, Vicetia, Vincentia, a City in the States of
Venice in Lombardy; which is a Bishops See under the Patriarch of Aquileja: a
great, strong City, under the Republic of Venice, upon the River Bachiglione:
Eighteen Miles from Padoua, thirty from Verona East and from Feltria South.
Taken by Maximilian, in 1509. Long. 33. 40. Lat. 44. 50. It was inhabited
anciently by the Euganei. The Gauls were Benefactors to it. The Romans and the
Lombards possessed it; each in the times of their Power. It fell to the
Venetians, not till after great revolutions and diverse Wars. The pleasantness
of its situation gives it the Title, of the Garden of Venice. It is the Capital
of the Territory of the Vincentine. In 1583. and 1623. Synods were assembled
here.

Vich, Vicus, Aquae Voconiae, Ausa Nova, Corbio, a small City in Catalonia;
which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of Tarragona. Seated upon the River
Tera, twelve Leagues from Barcellone to the North, and nine from Girone to the
West. In 1627. a Synod was held at this City.

Vichy, a Village in the Dukedom of Bourbonne in France; of great fame for some
Springs of Medicinal Mineral Waters.

Vico della Baronia, Vicus, a small City of the Kingdom of Naples, in the
Further Principato; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Benevento;
it stands at the foot of the Apennine, thirteen Miles from Conza to the North.

Vico di Sorrento, Vicus Aequensis, a small City in the Kingdom of Naples, in
the Province di Lavoro; which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of
Sorrento. Built by Charles II. King of Naples, in 1300. four Miles from
Sorrento, and eighteen from Naples to the South.

Victoria, Victoria, Vellica, Vitoria, a City in the Province of Alava, in the
Borders of Biscay. Sixteen Leagues from Pampelon to the West, twelve from
Bilbao, and twelve from Burgos to the South-East. Built in 1180. and now in a
thriving condition.

Vidin, Widin, Bydena, Viminiacum, a City of Servia: which is an Archbishops
See, and the Seat of the Turkish Governor. It stands upon the Danube, (where
it receives the Lon) 9 German Miles from the Borders of Thrace to the West, and
fifteen from Nissa to the North. Taken by the Imperialists after a defeat of
10000 Turks that were posted near it, October. 1689. Retaken by the Turks in 4
days Sept. 1690.

Vieliluki, Vieliluchia, Vielkolucha, a strong City upon the River Lovat, in
the Dukedom of R^scow, in the Borders of Lithuania in Moscovy: 30 Polish Miles
from Witepska to the North; and 16 from the Lake of Illmen to the South. Taken
by Stephen, King of Poland, December. 16. 1580.

Vienna, Vienna; Ala Flaviana, Juliobona, Vindobona, the Capital City of
Austria, and Seat of the Emperors of Germany; called by the Inhabitants Wien,
by the French Vienne, by the Turks Beetz or Weetz, by the Poles Wieden. It is
one of the greatest, most populous, strong, and rich Cities in Germany: seated
on the South side of the Danube; over which it has a Bridge, (where it receives
a small River called the Wien; from whence it has its present Name.) Also a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Saltzburg. Made an Imperial City by
Frederick II. in 1236: But this Privilege lasted only four Years. Hofman says,
it is the noblest City on the Danube, both as to the Beauty, Magnificence of
its Buildings, and the abundance of all things useful to the Life of Man. Taken
in 1485. by Matthius Corvinus, King of Hungary. Besieged by the Turks in 1529.
September 15. under Solomon II. with an Army of 200000 Men: but his Cannon
being sunk or disordered by the Governor of Presbourgh in their way up the
Danube after two general Assaults in vain, and the News of the March of the
Emperor Charles V. to its relief, he raised the Siege, October 15. Again they
besieged it in 1532. and 1543. And when in 1683, it was reduced in a fourth
Siege to great Extremities; it was relieved by John III. King of Poland,
September 10; (the Anniversary whereof is religiously here observed) after it
had been violently battered from July 14. by an Army of 100000 Turks; who lost
all their Tents, Baggage, Cannon and Mortars, (to the number of 180 Pieces,
whereof some were marked with the Arms of the Emperors Ferdinand I. and Rodulph
II.) Victual, and Ammunition; the Standard of the Ottoman Empire, engraved with
these words, There is no other God but one God, and Mahomet is his Prophet;
their Reputation abroad, and their Courage at home, by this Defeat; which has
made them contemptible, unfortunate, and miserable ever since. The Crescent and
the Star, (the Ottoman Arms) till this, had continued engraved upon the highest
tip of the Tower of S. Stephens Church, from the year 1529: when the Citizens
placed them there for an acknowledgment to Solomon II. who, during his Siege,
totally exempted that Cathedral from Battery. But no such regard to it having
been observed by the Turks in the last Siege, a Cross was immediately advanced
in the place of the Crescent. This City has been the Seat of the Emperors of
Germany ever since 1438. Frederick II. founded an University in it, in 1237.
which Albert III. Archduke of Austria reestablished in 1365. In 1267. a Council
was celebrated here. The Scotch College was a principal, and stately Building
of this City, before its destruction in the last Siege. It is fortified with 12
Bastions. The Learned Dr. Edward Brown, in his Travels, has excellently
described the present State of it; and to him I remit the Reader. It stands 26
German Miles from Lintz to the East, 6 from the Borders of Hungary, 50 from
Cracow, 34 from Buda. Long. 39. 10. Lat. 48. 22.

Vienne, Vienna, a most ancient City of Gallia Narbonensis: in the Roman times,
the Metropolis of the Allobroges; and then a great and Royal City. Called, by
Pomponius Mela, Vienna Allobrogum. Now an Archbishops See; seated in the
Dauphine upon the Rhosne, (where it entertains the Gera) over which it had a
Bridge, (now half ruined); at the foot of an Hill; 13 Leagues from Grenoble to
the West, 5 from Lions to the South, and 11 from Valence. Pope Calixtus II. was
an Archbishop of this City. It is the Capital of the Territory of Viennois;
which lying betwixt the Rhosne and Isere, is called the Island of the
Allobroges. This City in the Roman Coins, Inscriptions and Histories, is called
the Illustrious, Adorned, Strong, Beautiful, Fruitful Colony of Vienna.
Claudius, the Emperor, chose several of its Citizens into the Roman Senate.
Hither Pilate and Archelaus the Son of Herod the Great were banished.
Valentinian the Younger was here murdered by Arbogastes a traitorous Courtier,
in 392. In the fifth Century it became the Seat of the Kings of Burgundy: that
Kingdom beginning about 408. In 504. Gundabond, one of these Kings, took it by
a Siege, and slew Godigisilas his Brother, who defended it against him. In 532.
there was an end put to this Kingdom by Clothaire King of France. In 855. it
became the Seat of a second French Burgundian Kingdom; which ended in 1032. And
this City passed to the Emperors of Germany. In 1100. it was seized by one
Guine, by the Title of Earl or Dauphine of Vienne: and continued in this Line
till 1342, when it was again united to the Crown of France. Also regardable on
the account of a Council held here, in 1311. by Pope Clement V. assisted with
the Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch, and 300 Bishops; in the presence of
Philip le bell King of France. This Council rendered the Feast of Corpus
Christi, before instituted by Pope Urban IV. of universal observance. In 1119.
Pope Gelasius II. held also a Council here. Another in 1112. excommunicated the
Emperor Henry V. and declared the Treaty betwixt Pope Paschal II. and him,
touching Investitures, null. In 892. the Legate of Pope Formosus celebrated a
Council in the same place; where there have been diverse others. Long. 26. 00.
Lat. 45. 28.

Vienne, Vigenna, Vigenne, a River of France, which arises in Limosin: and
watering Limoges, enters La March: passes into Poictou, and three Leagues
above Saumur to the East, falls into the Loyre.

Vieste, Viesta, Apeneste, a City in the Capitanato, a Province of the Kingdom
of Naples: which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Manfredonia; and
stands at the foot of Mount Gargani, *upon the Adriatic Sea; 25 Miles from
Manfredonia to the South-East. Built out of the Ruins of Marinum, an ancient
Roman City; which was honored with a Bishops See, and mentioned by Pliny.

Vietri, a Town and Duchy in the Kingdom of Naples, near Salerno.

Vigazolo, Vigisole, Togisonus, a Lake in the Territory of Padoua in Lombardy.

Vigenne, Vincenna, a River of Burgundy.

Vigevano, Viglebanum, Vergeminum, a small City with a strong Castle in the
Dukedom of Milan: in 1530. made a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Milan;
from which it stands 20 Miles to the West, and 12 from Novara, upon the River
Tecino. There is a small County belonging to it of the same name.

Vignori, Vangionis Rivus, a Town in Champagne.

Vihitz, Vihitza, a City of Croatia, also called Bigion, upon a small Lake made
by the River Wana; 45 Miles from Segna or Zeng to the East; and from Zara to
the North: formerly the Capital of Croatia, and a Hanse Town.

Uikesland, a Tract in Esthonia in Livonia; between Reval and Pernaw; upon the
Baltic Sea: under the Swedes.

Uilaine, Vindana, Herius, Vicennonia, Vidana, a River of Bretagne in France,
which watering Rennes, the Capital of that Province, falls into the British
Sea, between Nantes and Vannes.

Uilla de Chiesa, Villa Ecclesiae, a City on the South side of the Island of
Sardinia; which is a Bishops See, ever since the year 1513. but little, and not
much inhabited.

Uilach, Cacorum, Villachum, a City of the Upper Carinthia, upon the Drove,
(where it receives the Geyla) in the Dominions of the Bishop of Bamberg;
eighteen Miles from Clagonfurt to the West, and forty six from Vdine to the
North.

Uilla Franca, a Town in Piedmont, in the County of Nizza; with a large Port on
the Mediterranean Sea. Built in 1295. by Charles II. King of Naples: five Miles
from Nizza to the West, and from Monaco to the same. Near this place the French
defeated Prosper Colonna, in 1516.

Uille Franche de Conflent, Villa Franca Consluentum, a City of Rousillon; in
the Mountains, upon the River Thetis, at the soot of the Pyren; ten Leagues
from Perpignan to the West.

Uille Franche de Rovergue, a great City of Aquitain; in the Province of
Rovergue, upon the River Veronium: eight Leagues from Rhodes to the West, and
from Caors to the East.. There is another Town of this name in the Territory of
Beaujolois.

Uillemur, a Town in Languedoc.

Uillena, Bigerra, once a City of the Bastitana's; mentioned by Livy, Ptolemy,
and some others. Now a Town in the Kingdom of Murcia, in the Borders of
Valencia; twelve Leagues from Murcia to the North. As appears by several
ancient Inscriptions there found.

Uilne, Vilna, a City in the Kingdom of Poland; called by the Inhabitants,
Wilenski; by the Poles, Wylna; by the Germans, Wild, and Wildaw; by the
French, Vilne, and Vilna. It is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Gnesna,
and the Capital of Lithuania. Built in 1305. by Gedemin, (Great Duke of
Lithuania) and since become a very great City. Ill handled by the Russ, in
1655. when they took it. The Swedes have since regained, and rebuilt it. In
1579. there was an University opened here by King Stephen. It stands upon a
River of the same name: one hundred and thirty Polish Miles from Cracow to the
South-East, and forty eight from Riga to the South. Long. 49. 50. Lat. 55. 10.

Uilss, Quintanica, a River of Bavaria.

Uimen, Vinemagum, Vimesium, a Tract in Picardy; between Normandy to the South,
the Mouth of the Sum to the North, and the British Sea to the West.

Uimory, a Village in the Province of Gastinois in France; one League from
Montargis: where the Duke of Guise obtained a Victory over the Foreign Forces
that came to the succor of the Huguenots, in 1587.

Uinay, the same with Vence.

Uincennes, a famous Palace and Castle Royal, near Paris; to the East:
surrounded with a large Park, which Philip the August K. of France walled in
1183. There was a Castle standing there at that time. Philip de Valois in 1327.
demolished that old Castle; and laid the foundations of a new one in the same
place. K. John carried on the Work, and Charles V. (born here in 1338) brought
it to perfection. In 1614. The Qu. Regent of France, Maria de Medicis, adorned
it with a Gallery; and 1660. Lewis XIV. established both the Palace and Castle
in their present State. Three of the Kings of France have died here. Lewis X.
in 1316. Henry V. K. of England and by Conquest of France, in 1422. Charles IX.
in 1574. The Chapel of the Castle received its Foundation from Charles V. in
1379. In this Chapel, the body of Card. Mazarine (dying here in 1661) rested,
till in the year 1684* it was removed to the Church of the College of his own
name at Paris; and his heart given to the Theatines. The Castle now serves for
a Prison of State; and Persons of great note have often found their Tombs in it.

Uindish Marck, Vindorum Marchia, a part of the Dukedom of Carniola; between
Croatia to the East, Czirknitzerzee to the West, and the Save to the North. The
principal places of which are Metling, Rudelswerd, and Ribnick.

Uinoxberg. See Bergue S. Vinoch, a City of Flanders. Taken by the French in
1646. Retaken by the Spaniards in 1658.

Uintuniglia, Albintiminium, Albintemelium, Vintimilium, a City of Liguria, in
the States of Genoua; which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Milan;
fifteen Miles from Nizza to the West.

Uipao, Frigius, a River of Carniola; called by the Germans, Wipach; by the
Italians, Vipao. It arises out of the Alps, in the Borders of Carniola, near
the Castle of Wipach: and flowing through the Dukedom of Goritia, between it
and Gratz, falls into the Isonzo. Upon the Banks of this River, Theodosius the
Great overthrew Eugenius the Usurper, in 394.

Uique. See Vich.

Uire, Viria, a City in the Lower Normandy, of good esteem, upon a River of the
same name; twelve Leagues from Caen to the North-West, and a little more from
Coutance to the East.

Uirginia, a Country in North America. Bounded on the South by Carolina, on the
East by the Vergivian Ocean, on the North by Maryland; on the West by
Mountains, and a vast Tract of undiscovered Lands. First discovered by
Sabastian Cabot, a Portuguese, in an English Ship, in 1497. Viewed by Sir Fran.
Drake; called Virginia by Sir Walter Rawleigh, in Honor of Qu. Elizabeth, in
1584. First planted in 1607. by Sir John Popham. The Air is pleasant and
wholesome, except in the Lowlands and Marshes. Subject to violent changes,
especially when the North-West Winds blow: which coming from Mountains, always
covered with Snow, are violently cold. It abounds with all things useful to the
Life of Man, except Wine and Oil. The chief Town where the Governor Resides is
James Town: and the whole is divided into nineteen Counties.

Uirton, Virtonium, a small City in the Dukedom of Luxemburgh, in the Borders
of Lorain: five Leagues from Luxemburgh to the West, and four from Arlon to the
South; under the Spaniards.

Uisapour, or Visiapour, Visapora, the Capital City of the Kingdom of Decan, in
the Hither East Indies; one hundred and seventy eight English Miles from Goa to
the North-East, and something more from Masulipatan to the North-West. Taken by
the Great Mogul in 1687. Decan is sometimes called the Kingdom of Visapour from
this City.

Uisbui, a Town in Gothland.

Uistre, Vitreus, a small River in the Territory of Nismes in Languedoc.

Uistula, one of the greatest Rivers of Poland: which in ancient times was the
boundary between Germany and Sarmatia. Called anciently by Pliny, Vistullus;
Ptolemy, Istula; Pomponius Mela, Visula; Ammianus Marcellinus, Bistula; now by
the Sclavonians, Weissel; and by the Poles, Wissa. It springs out of the
Carpathian Hills, in the Upper Silesia, in the Borders of Hungary; flowing E
and being augmented with the Sala, waters Crakow; then taking in the
Dun^^eck, the Nida, the Wislaca; and turning North, the Vieprez, and the
Pilecka; and watering Cer^k^, and Warsaw; it admits the B^g and Bsura, above
Plociko from the East. Beneath it washes Doberzin, Thorn, Culm, Newenburgh. At
Marienwerder divides into two Branches. The Eastern passes by Margenburgh, and
Elbing, into the Bay of Dantzick: the Western subdivides into two other
Branches. The most Western of which goes by Dantzick into the same Bay, and so
into the Baltic Sea: being at its full one of the noblest Streams in the
World; but so shallow, that a great Ship cannot come up to the City.

Uitefleu, Vitefleur, Guitefledu, Vitefloda, a River near Calais in France.

Uiterbo, Viterbium, a City in S. Peter's Patrimony: which is a Bishops See,
immediately under the Pope: great and populous: at the foot of an Hill: 40
Miles from Rome to the North-West, and from Civita Vecchia to the North.
Platina says, it was of old called V^^ulonia. Four Popes lie interred in the
Cathedral. In 1614. and 1624. the Bishop of it held 2 Synods here. It is the
Capital of the Province.

Uitre, or Vitry le Francois, Victoriacum Francicum, a Town in Champagne in la
Perch, upon the Marne: 7 Leagues from Chaalons toward Diziers. King Francis
I. built it, and honored it with his Name; to distinguish it from Vitri le
Brule hard by, which was heretofore a considerable Castle.

Uitstock, a Town in Brandenbourgh: where the Swedes and Saxons got a great
Victory over the Imperialists, in 1636.

Uivaretz, Vioariensis Tractus, a Province in Languedoc, called also Vivarais.
Bounded on the East by the Rhosne, (which parts it from the Dauphine:) on the
North by Forez, and Velay: on the West by Givaudan; and on the South by the
Lower Languedoc (separated by the River Ardeche), and Vsez. The Capital City of
it is Viviers; the rest are Annonay, Aubenas, Privas, and Tournon. A part of it
is mountainous, and much exceeded in Fertility by the Plains that lie along the
Rhosne. About 22 Leagues long, and 17 broad. Divided into the Upper and Lower
Vivaretz, by the River Erieu.

Uiviers, Vivario, Vivarium, Vivario Albiensium, the Capital City of Vivaretz:
which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Vienne; and stands upon a steep
Hill, upon the Rhosne; 4 Leagues from S. Esprit to the North, and 5 from
Valence to the South. The Maps place it 12. It is risen out of the Ruins of
Abs ( Alba Helviorum); which being destroyed by the barbarous Nations in 430,
its See was translated hither. There are diverse Churches adorning this City.

Uize, Byzia, an inland City of Thrace, upon a River of the same name, in the
Borders of Bulgaria: 50 Miles from Haraclea to the North. Now an Ar. Bishops
See, and the Seat of one of the Sangiacks of Romania.

Uizzegrad, or Plindenbourgh, Visegradia, a small but strong City in Hungary:
upon a Hill, near the Danube; 3 Miles from Gran, and 8 from Buda. It was one of
the Country Palaces of the Kings of Hungary: and has a Castle, which Matthias
Corvinus, K. of Hungary, very much beautified. Lewis, K. of Hungary, died here
in 1382. The Germans call it Plindenburg.

Ukraine, Vkrania, Vcrania, Okraina, a Province of Red Russia in Poland: so
called, because it is the Marches between Poland, Moscovy, and the lesser
Tartary: and no less frequently called the Palatinate of Kiovia. It is divided
into two parts by the Nieper. The Cossacks inhabit this vast Country; which are
in part under the Poles, in part under the Russ. The Industry of the latter
Kings has filled it with Villages, Castles, Towns, and Forts; at this day very
much cultivated. That part to the East of the Nieper is under the Russ. For the
Boundaries see Kiovia.

Ula Tre^k, Vln, a Lake in Sweden, in the Province of Bothnia.

Uladislaw, Vladislavia, a small City in the greater Poland: the Capital of the
Province of Cujavie, and a Bishops See under the Ar. Bishop of Gnesira; called
by the Poles, Wladissaw. It stands upon the Vistula: between P^osko to the
North-West, and Thorn to the South-East; 5 Polrsh Miles from either. Made a
Bishops See in 1173.

Ulie, Flevo, Flevum, an Island at the mouth of the Rhine in Holland; 3 Leagues
from the Shoars of Friseland: where the Dutch Fleets use to rendezvous, when
they go upon any Expedition.

Ulles-Water, a Lake upon the Borders of Cumberland and Westmorland, which
yields great plenty of Fish.

Ulm, Vlma, a City of Germany, in the Circle of Schwaben, whereof it is the
Capital: called by the French, Oulme; great, strong, rich, and populous. It
stands upon the Danube, and the Iler; 12 German Miles from Tubingen, and 24
from Strasbourgh, 10 from Ausbourgh. In the Titles of the middle Age, it is
called Hulma; in the more ancient Alcimoenis. Not walled before 1300. Charles
the Great gave it to the Abbey of Richenow by Constance: and being redeemed
from this Servitude, in 1346. Lewis of Bavaria made it a Free City. It embraced
the Reformation in 1529. In 1552. it suffered much from the Protestant Princes;
yet to this day it perseveres in the Augustane Confession. Allowing to the
Roman Catholics 2 Churches; but excluding them from their Secret Council.
Long. 32. 00. Lat. 48. 16.

Ultzen, a Town in the Duchy of Lunenbourgh in the Lower Saxony: upon the
River Ilmenaw or Die Aw: 5 German Miles from the City Lunenbourgh to the South,
and the same distance from Dannebergh to the West.

Ulstet, Vltonia, the most Northern of the four Provinces of the Kingdom of
Ireland: called by the Irish, Cui Gully; by the English, Ulster; by the Welsh,
Wltw; bounded on the North by the Ocean, on the West by Canought and the Ocean,
on the South by Leinster, and on the East by the Irish Sea. In length from
North to South 100 Miles; in breadth from East to West 130; in circumference
420. Tho it lies so far to the North; yet it is not subject to any extremity of
Weather; the various Winds cooling it in Summer, and frequent Rains mollifying
the sharpness of the Air in Winter. The Soil is fruitful in Corn and Grass;
affords great plenty of Timber and Fruit Trees. It abounds with Lakes and
Rivers, which are well stored with Fish and Fowls, and of sufficient depth for
carrying Boats and Vessels. It wants not excellent Harbors on the Sea and
Ocean. This Province contains these Counties; Dunghall, or Tyrconnel, Upper
Tyrone, Nether Tyrone, Fermanagh, Cavan, Monaghan, Colrane, or Londonderry,
Antrim, Down, Armagh, and Louth. The Capital City is Armagh or Armath. The
rest are Londonderry, Dunghall, Down, and Knockfergus.

Ulverstoit, a Market Town in Lancashire, in the Hundred of Loynsdale, upon a
Stream falling into an Arm of the Sea near Leversand.

Umbriatico, Vmbraticum, Brustacia, a City in the Hither Calabria, in the
Kingdom of Naples: a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Sancta Severina; from
which it stands 10 Miles to the North.

Umbrone. See Ombrone.

Umegiunaibe, a City of the Province of Cuzt, in the Kingd. of Fez in Barbary:
betwixt the Rivers Esacha and Mulvia.

Underwaldt, Sylvania, Sylvaniensis and Vndervaldensis Pagus, a Canton in
Switzerland, the Capital of which is Stantz. On the North it is divided from
Schwitz by the Lake of Lucerne; on the East it has the Canton of Vri; on the
South that of Berne, and and on the West Lucerne. This is one of the lesser
Cantons. The Inhabitants profess the Roman Catholic Religion. A Wood or
Forest called Kernwalt (the Oak Forest) divides this Canton in the midst, and
from thence it has its Name. This Canton began to free it self about 1260.
First admitted into the general League, in 1307: from thenceforward they have
had the sixth place in the Roll or List of the Cantons.

Unghwar, Vngaria, a small City in the Upper Hungary; which is the Capital of a
County of the same name, at the Foot of the Carpathian Hills. This City stands
upon the River Vngh, in the Borders of Red Russia: 6 Hungarian Miles from
Cassovia to the East, and from Zatmar to the North. Has been always in the
Hands of the Christian Princes: It joined with Teckeley; and was retaken by the
Emperor, in the year 1685; yet situated naturally strong. Some Hungarian
Historians derive the Name of their Country from this City, or its River.

Unna, an Hanse Town in the County of Mark in Westphalia in Germany; which was
a considerable City, but now very small, and subject to the Duke of
Brandenburg. Ten Miles from Dartmund to the East, and from the Borders of
Munster to the South.

Uoidanar, Atrax, one of the principal Cities of Thessaly, upon the River
Atrax; 30 Miles from Larissa to the West.

Uoigtlandt, Voigtlandia, Voigtia, a Province of Germany, in the Upper Saxony
and Misnia: for the most part under the Elector of Saxony. It lies between
Bohemia to the East, and Franconia to the West. The principal Places in which,
are Swickaw, Plauwen, and Gratz.

Uolcano, in the Italian and Spanish Tongues, signifies a Burning Mountain. Of
which sort there are in several places of the World about twenty.

Uolfembuttel, Wolfembutel, a City of Germany, in the Dukedom of Brunswisk.

Uolga. See Wolga.

Uolhinia Superior, a part of Red Russia; called also the Palatinate of
Luceoria. Bounded with Russia, (properly so called) to the West; Podolia to the
South, the Palatinate of Brescia to the North, and Kiovia to the East. The
Capital of it is Lusuck.

Uolhinia Inferior. See the Palatinate of Kiovia.

Uolo, a Town and Fortress upon the Gulf of its own Name, and the Coast of the
Province of Thessalia, in Macedonia: North of the Island of Negrepont. It is
the same place with the Pagasae of the Ancients, and the same Gulf with their
Sinus Pagasicus. The Turks made a Magazine of it, both for Ammunition and
Provision. It has a sure and spacious Port. In the year 1655. Morosini,
resolving to seize the Turkish Magazine, stormed the Town and Fortress, till he
made himself Master of both; he put on board his Fleet twenty seven Canons, and
above four Millions of Pounds weight of Biscuit. Burnt the Magazine, Houses, and
Mosques; and levelled the Walls to the ground.

Uolcei, an ancient People of Latium, in Italy; who resisted the Roman Power
very much, to their own loss. T. Sicinius, Consul, defeated them in the year of
Rome 257. Q. Capitolinus beat them again in 316. A. Postloumius Tubertus,
Dictator, triumphed over them in 325. And Camillus constrained them to submit
in 365. Their Country now makes a part of Campagna di Roma.

Uolterra, Volaterra, Volaterrae, one of the most antientest Cities in Italy,
in Hetruria; in the Territory of Pisa, upon a Mountain; and a Bishops See under
the Archbishop of Florence; from whence it stands 34 Miles to the South. In
1578. and 1590. Synods were celebrated here. The Soil about it yields abundance
of Mineral Waters. There are diverse ancient Statues yet remaining in this City.
Lon. 33. 40. Lat. 42. 46.

Uoltorno, Vulturnus, a River in the Kingdom of Naples: it springs out of the
Apennine in the Borders of the hither Abruzzo; and flowing South through the
Province di Lavoro, near Venafro and Ali^i beneath Tolesi, it receives the
Sabato; and watering Capua, falls into the Tyrrhenian Sea, 20 Miles North of
Naples.

Uoltutiraria, Vulturaria, a small City in the Capitanata, in the Kingdom of
Naples: a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Benevento; from which it stands
24 Miles to the North.

Uoville, a Town in Poictiers in France: where Clovis, King of France, gained a
great Victory over Alarick, King of the Goths; whom he slew with his own hands,
in the year of Christ 507.

Uoutenai, a place near Auxerre in Burgundy; where Charles (surnamed the Bald)
got a great Victory over Lothaire, in the year of Christ 841.

Uplandia, a Province in the Kingdom of Sweden; (the Capital of it is Vpsal);
in which stands Stockholm, the Royal City of that Kingdom. Bounded on the North
with Gestricia, on the East by the Baltic Sea, on the South by the
Sudermannia, and on the West by Westmannia. Very fruitful and well cultivated.

Uppingham, a well built neat Market Town in the County of Rutland, and the
Hundred of Martinsley: situated upon an Hill; and accommodated with a
Free School and an Hospital.

Upsal, Vpsalia, is the Capital City in the Kingdom of Sweden, in the Province
of Vpland; in 1148. made an Archbishops See by Pope Eugenius III. It stands
upon the River Sala, (which falls into the Lake of Ekolen) seven Swedish Miles
from Stockholm to the North. Long. 44. 15. Lat. 60. 05. It was for many Ages
the Seat of the Kings of Gothland; and to this day the Kings of Sweden are
crowned there, in memory of its ancient Glory. It is also an University:
defended by a strong Castle built near it on a Rock. In the Cathedral you see
the Tombs of many of the Kings of Sweden; who bore the Style of Kings of Vpsal
in former times. And here in 1654. the famous Christiana Queen of Sweden
resigned her Royal Diadem. See Sweden.

Upsu. See Alaschehir.

Upton, a Market Town in Worcestershire. The Capital of its Hundred; upon the
Severn, in the South of the County. It is well built, and an ancient Roman Town.

Ur, an ancient City of Chaldaea. The place of the Birth and Death of Haran,
Abraham's Brother, Genesis xi. 28.

Uraha, a Gulf upon the Coast of the Terra firma, in South America: together
with a Province of the same Name.

Uraniburg, or Vranisbourgh, Vraniburgum, a splendid Castle, and Observatory,
in the Island of Huen, near Coppenhagen in the Sound; betwixt Seeland and the
Province of Schonen; built by Tycho Brahe, a Danish Baron; the celebrated
Astronomer, in 1575. But since, having been neglected, is ruined.

Urba, the same with Orba.

Urbanea, Vrbinia, a small new City in the Dukedom of Vrbino, under the Pope:
made a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Vrbino, by Pope Urban VIII. in
1635. who, from an ordinary Village, adorned it to this Dignity, enlarged its
Buildings, and left it his Name. It stands 7 Miles from Vrbino to the
North-West.

Urbinio, Vrbinium, is a City of Vmbria, in the States of the Church; which is
an Archbishops See, and the Capital of the Dukedom of that Name. A great and
flourishing City, seated near the Fountains of the River La Foglia: 20 Miles
from the Adriatic Sea to the North-West, 7 from the Vrbanea, and 25 from
Rimini. Made an Archbishops See in 1563.

Il ducato di Urbino, is that part of Vmbria which lies beyond the Apennine.
Bounded on the North by the Adriatic Sea and Romandiola; on the East by the
Marchia Anconitana, on the South by Ombria, and on the West by the Dukedom of
Florence. This Country was under Sovereign Dukes; first of the Family of
Feltria, and after of Roborea: the last of which having no Male Issue, in 1631.
resigned his Dominions in his life time to Pope Urban VIII. to prevent any
Quarrels about it after his Death: and ever since it has been united to the
Papacy. Reckoned to contain 3 Ports, 7 or 8 Castles, and nigh 350 Towns, beside
the Cities. The Cities of it are Cagli, Gubio, Fossombrone, Pesaro, Senigaglia,
Vrbanea, and Vrbino; which last is the Capital City.

Urgel, Orgelium, Vrgella, Vrgela, Orgia, a City of Catalonia in the County of
Ceretania: at the foot of the Pyrenean Hills. A Bishops See, under the
Archbishop of Tarragona, upon the River Segre; 5 Leagues from the Borders of
France to the South, 28 from Barcinone, and 9 from Perpignan. It had Counts of
great Power under the second Line of the Kings of Arragon. In 1580. and 1633.
we find Synods assembled here. The Tract in which it stands, is from it called
the Plain of Vrgel.

Uri, Vriensis Pagus, one of the Senior Cantons of Suitzerland, at the foot of
the Mountains; extended along the Banks of the River Russ. And one of the
first, that leagued against Albert Duke of Austria, in 1308. It Is altogether
Roman Catholic: and Alforf, the Capital City.

Urla, Clazomenae, a City of the lesser Asia: which is a Bishops See under the
Archbishop of Smyrna. It stands upon the Archipelago, between Smyrna to the
East, and Chio to the West. Long. 55. 15. Lat. 39. 30. The Seamen call it
Uourla.

Usbeck, the same with Zagathay in Tartary.

Uscopia, a great, and heretofore very populous City; situated about 30 German
Miles from Nissa, and at the like distance from Thessalonique, the Capital of
Macedonia. The Imperialists burnt it in 1689. It was secured only with an old
Wall.

Userch, a Town in Limosin in France.

Usiza, or Vsciza, an open, rich, and populous City, about 20 Leagues from
Belgrade, upon the Frontiers of Bosnia: having a strong Castle. Taken and
plundered by a Party of Rascians in 1688. In the Emperor's hands.

Usk, a Market Town in Monmouthshire. The Capital of its Hundred. Upon a River
of its own Name, over which it has a Bridge. Well built, large, and fortified
formerly with a Castle, now in Ruins. The ancient Burrium of Antoninus is
supposed to have stood here. In the Vicinage of it, the Duke of Beaufort
possesses a noble Seat, called Ragland Castle. The River Vske discharges it
self into the Severn near Newport in this County. Albeargavenny is situated
upon upon this River, at the influx of the Kaveny into it.

Utica. See Biserta, its modern Name.

Utoxeter, a Market Town in Staffordshire, in the Hundred of Totmonslow, upon
the River Dove.

Utrecht, Antonia, Trajectum Inferius, Vtricesium, Vltrajectum, Antonina
Civitas, Civitas Vtricensium, a great, strong, populous City in the United
Netherlands; the Capital of one of their seven States. It stands upon the North
Branch of the Rhine; at the distance of about 5 English Miles to the North; but
united to it by a Navigable Channel. Twenty three Leagues from Cologne, 5
German Miles from Amsterdam to the South, and 6 from Roterdam to the East. The
Original of it is unknown: but it is supposed to be a Roman Work, and built in
or before the times of Nero about 186. Being ruined by the Barbarous Nations,
Dagobert, King of France, rebuilt and refortified it, about 642. So that the
second Pile became much more famous than the former, Willibrodus (the Apostle
of the Frisons) being sent by Pope Sergius in 696. with the Title of an
Archbishop; and Pepin, King of France, having, in 692, taken Vtrecht from
Radbold the Pagan Duke of Frizeland; he assigned this City to Willibrode: and
gave him the Territories, thus reckoned up by Antonius Mattheus, in his Books
de Nobi itate. The Lekk, the Uechten, all the Lands which lay upon their Banks,
and the Territory of Teistervant; which included a great part of Guelders,
Bommel, Tiel, the Betouw, Culemborch, Viane, Asperen, Bure, Heusden, Neuctom,
the Veluwe, and Ysestein. In 700. Radbold attempting in vain the recovering
this City, submitted: So Willibrode, and Boniface his Successor, peaceably
enjoyed this vast Diocese: which was confirmed to them, and their Privileges
enlarged by Charles the Great. In after times it became a Free Imperial City of
Germany. Several of the Emperors resided, and some died here: amongst whom are
reckoned Conrad II. in 1039. and Henricus V. in 1122. So jealous they were of
their Privileges, that they would not suffer any of their Bishops Officers to
have any share in the Government of the City: nor would they suffer the Bishop
to enter the Town with more Men than they allowed him, or to stay in it above
five or eight days. They maintained this Liberty, (though it was sorely envied
and laid at by John Count of Holland, in 1297. and by William Count of Holland
in 1324.) till in 1527. the Bishop of Vtrecht passed over his Right to Charles
V. who being a Potent Prince, easily reduced this City under his Obedience,
built it a Castle, and in 1546. kept in it a Chapter of the Order of the Golden
Fleece. It had then 4 Collegiate Churches, diverse Abbeys and Ecclesiastical
Houses. But in 1577. they, with the rest of Holland, revolted from the
Spaniards. In 1559. it had been advanced to an Archbishopric by Pope Paul IV.
and nine Suffragan Bishops assigned to this See, which was one of the occasions
of the Revolt. In 1636. it was made an University: and in 1672. it fell for a
short time into the hands of the French, but is since returned to its former
liberty; the Learned Dr. Brown has given a short account of the present State
of this City in his Travels, Page 101. Long. 26. 26. Lat. 52. 10.

The State of Vtretcht, Sticht van Utretcht, is the fifth of the United
Provinces. Bounded South, West, and North with Holland; and on the East by
Guelderland. Besides its Capital, it has Wick, the (Seat of the Bishops),
Duerstede, Rhenen, Amersford, and Monfort (which are fortified strong places;)
and about sixty great Villages.

Uulxin, the same with Veuxin.

Uxbridge, a large Market Town in the Coun. of Middlesex, in the Hundr. of Elt
horn upon the River Coln.

Uzerche, Vsarcha, Vsarchia, a Town in the Lower Limosin, in Aquitain in
France; upon the River Vezere: adorned with an Abbey and a Castle. The Abbot is
Lord of the Town.

Uzes, Vcetia, Vtica, Vzetia, Castrum Vseticense, a City of the Lower Languedoc
in France, upon the River Eisent: which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop
of Narbonne; and honored with the Title of a Dukedom by King Charles VI. after
it had born the Titles first of both a Barony and a Viscounty. The Bishop
enjoys the Honor to be a Count; and joint Lord of the place with the King:
Therefore it has three Castles, for the King, the Duke, and the Bishop. A
rich, populous, and well traded City. John de S. Gelais its Bishop in the last
Age, embraced the Reformed Religion, and married an Abbess: it is said he
abjured it again before his death, and was buried in the Abbey of S. Maixant.
In 1635. there was a Synod held here. It stands 3 Leagues from Nismes to the
North, and 6 from Avignon to the West. Long. 25. 10. Lat. 43. 36.

Vzeste, a Castle in the Territory of Bazadois, in Guyenne in France; betwixt
Bourdeaux and Bazas. Remarkable for the Tomb of Pope Clement V. sometime
Archbishop of Bourdeaux: who was born at Villandrand, a Village one League from
this Castle; died at the Castle of Roque-Maure, two Leagues from Avignon, in
1314; and was interred here in 1316.

WA.
WAad, Vaudum, a Territory in Switzerland, called by the French Le Pais de
Vaud: which was a part of the Duchy of Savoy, till 1536. and now subject to
the Canton of Berne. It is bounded on the South by the Lake of Lemane; on the
West by Gex, and the Franche Comte; on the East by Berne; on the North in part
by Berne, and in part by Friburgh. The Capital of it is Lausanne. The other
good Towns are Avenches, or ( W(...)purg) Yverdon, Mouldon, and Nyon. It is
sometimes written Vault.

Wadstein, a Town in the Province of Ostrogothia in Sweden.

Die Wael, Helium, Vahalis, Vacalos, the middle Branch of the Rhine: which
divides from it at Schencken, (a Fort beneath Emmeren); and watering Nimmeguen,
Tiel, and Bommel, falls into the Maes above Gorcum, a City of Holland.

Waga, Vagus, a River in Scandia.

Wageren, Wagria, or Wagerlandt, a small Territory in Holland toward the
Baltic Sea; between Lubeck to the South, and K^el to the North. The Cities of
it are Lubeck, Oldesto, P^oen, Segeberg, and Oldenburg; which are divided
between the King of Denmark, the Dukes of Holstein, and the Bishop of Lubeck.

Wainfleet, or Waynfleet, a Market Town in Lincolnshire, in the division of
Lindsey, and the Hundred of Chandleshow; upon a Wash, in a fenny gound, which
empties it self into the Sea, not far from hence. Made famous by giving Name
and Birth to William of Waynfleet, Bishop of Winchester; the Founder of
Magdalen College in Oxon, and of a Free School in this Town.

Wakefield, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of
Agbridge, upon the River Calder; here covered with a fair Stone Bridge, which
King Edward IV. adorned with a ^^^ely Chapel. It is a large Town, well built
of Stone, of good Antiquity; and drives the Clothing Trade.

Walachia, Valachia, a considerable Province of the Kingdom of Hungary; called
by the Germans Walachey, by the Turks I^^akia, and by the Poles Wolochy. It is
a part of the ancient Dacia; and stands now divided into the Provinces of
Walachia and Moldavia: of the latter I have spoken in its proper place. The
former is bounded on the North by the Kingdom of Poland and Red-Russia; on the
East by Bessarabia; on the South by Bulgaria, (separated from it by the Danube)
and by Moldavia; which last also bounds it to the West. It is much less than
the Maps commonly make it: also commonly misplaced, and set where Moldavia
should stand. The History of it is delivered in Moldavia. To which I shall only
add here; that after Mahomet IV. Emperor of the Turks, was deposed, and
Solomon, his Brother, set up in his stead; and that the Duke of Lorain had
seized Transylvania; the Prince and States of Walachia, in 1687. and 88.
rendered themselves under the Emperor's Protection, upon condition; That the
Succession in the Government of that Principality shall be continued to the
Heirs Male of the present Prince, and the States be preserved in the Possession
of their just Rights and Privileges; paying to the Emperor the Annual Tribute
of 50000 Crowns. This Country extends from East to West 90 French Leagues: from
North to South 50; in form Triangular. The Plains would be very fruitful, if
they were well cultivated; but being little peopled, much ravaged by the Turks
and Tartars, and lying in common, they are overrun with Weeds; for here is
little or no Wood. The Mountains have rich Mines, but they are as much
neglected: their Religion is that of the Greek Church. The present Valvode is
Matthis George Gista; set up in 1658. by the late Sultan of the Turks.

Walcheten, Valacria, one of the Islands at the Mouth of the Schelde, which
compose the Province of Zeland in the United Netherlands. Its Capital City is
Middleburgh.

New Walcheren, the same with Tabago.

Waldeck, Valdecum, a County in Hassia; between Westphalia to the West, Hassia
to the East and South, and Paderborne to the North; under a Count of its own:
yielding Wine, Corn, and several sorts of Mines. The principal places in it are
Curback and Waldeck; which last stands upon the Eder; 5 German Miles from
Cassel to the West, and 7 from Marpurg to the North.

Walden, a Market Town in the County of Essex, in the Hundred of Vttlesford,
upon an Eminence: likewise called Saffron-Walden, from its situation amongst
pleasant and profitable Fields of Saffron.

Walderswick, a Sea Town in the County of Saffolk, and the Hundred of Blithing,
near Southwouldbay; adorned with a remarkable high and fair Church.

Waldhust, Valdhusta, a small City in the Province of Schwaben in Germany, upon
the Rhine, in the Territory of K^egow; 7 German Miles from Basil to the East, 5
from Schafhouse, and 2 from La^fenburgh. Under the Emperor.

Wales, Vallia, is a Principality on the West of England. Bounded on the West
and North by the Irish Sea; on the East by Cheshire, Shrapshire, Herefordshire,
and Monmouthshire; (this latter being; a long time a part of it) and on the
South by the Severn Sea. It contains twelve Shires; Pembroke, Caermarden,
Glamorgan, Brecknock, Radnor, Cardigan, Mountgomery, Merioneth, Denbigh, Flint,
Caernarvon, and Anglesey. After many and those most bloody Wars, this
Principality was finally united for ever to the Crown of England by Edward I.
in 1284. Prince Edward, his eldest Son, made Prince of Wales: which Title to
the Heir apparent of England still belongs. The rest of its description is
given in the proper places.

Wallingford, a Market Town and Corporation in Berkshire, in the Hundred of
Moreton, upon the River Thames, here covered with a Bridge: a famous place both
in the Roman and Saxon times. It is the ancient Guallena; the Seat of the
Attrebatii, a British Tribe; and under the West Saxons was the Capital Town of
these parts: being adorned with 12 Parish Churches, a Castle of great strength,
and Walls which were a Mile in circuit. The Tracts and Ruins of those Walls
yet appear, and part of the Castle: together with one Church: which declension
from its pristine State was occasioned by a Plague in 1348. It retains the
Honor of the Election of two Members to represent it in the lower House of
Parliament.

Wallisserlandt, Valinsa, Vallesia, a great Canton in Switzerland; called by
the French Vallais, or Vallays; by the Germans Wallisserlandt; by the Italians
Vallesia. It extends from East to West; between the Canton of Schwitz to the
North and East, the Dukedom of Milan and Aouste to the South, and Savoy to the
West. The Capital of it is Sytten or Syon: and the other principal Cities are
Martigny and S. Maurice. This Canton was united for ever to the rest in the
general League, in 1533. Its extent from East to West is almost 100 Miles, its
breadth between 15 and 30. The Religion here professed is the Roman Catholic;
for the maintenance of which, the Bishop (who is their Prince) combined with
the 7 Popish Cantons, in 1572. It is a pleasant fruitful Valley, abounding with
Saffron, Corn, Wine, and delicate Fruits; enriched with Meadows and excellent
Pastures; surrounded every way with craggy and unpassable Rocks and Mountains,
which afford but one entrance into it, and that defended by two Gates and a
Castle. These Mountains are at all times covered with Ice and Snow; not to be
passed by an Army, nor easily by a single Person.

The Walloons, the People of the Earldomes of Flanders and Artois, in the Low
Countries, are commonly called by this Name.

Walsall, a Market Town in Staffordshire, in the Hundred of O^^ow; upon the top
of a high Hill.

Walsham North, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk, in the Hundred of
Blowfield.

Walsingham, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk, in the Hundred of N.
Grenehoe: Noted formerly for the Concourse of Pilgrims to two Wells, called to
this day the Virgin Mary's Wells, and to the Chapel near them. There was also
formerly a College of Canons at this Town: And the good Saffron, it used to
yield, was no small addition to its Name.

Waltham-Abbey, a Market Town in the County of Essex; of great fame formerly
for the Abbey it carries in its Name. The Capital of its Hundred. Another in
the County of Southampton, for distinction called Waltham Bishops. The Capital
of its Hundred also.

Wana, Vana, a River of Croatia, which waters Vihitz: and then falls into the
Save above Gradiska, in the Borders of Friuli.

Wandesworth, a Town in the County of Surrey, in the Hundred of Brixton, upon
the River Wandle. Some numbers of French Protestants have settled here.

Wandesdike, a large Trench, or Dyke, in Wiltshire: Supposed by Mr. Cambden to
be made by the West Saxons, for a Boundary to their Kingdom against the
Mercians. It lies in the midst of the County, extended many Miles from East to
West: and saw many Battles fought betwixt those two Kingdoms.

Wang, a small River in the County of Suffolk; which ri^eth in Westhall, and
running East, waters the Town of Wangford: then falls into the Blithe, a
little above Southwould.

Wantage, a Market, and Thorough-fare Town, in Berkshire; in the Hundred of
Wanting.

Waradin, Varadinum, a great strong City of the Upper Hungary; called by its
Inhabitants Warad, by the Germans, Gross-Wardein, to distinguish it from Petro
Waradin in Sclavonia. It stands upon the River Kerez, in the Borders of
Transylvania; (to which Principality of latter times it belonged); and is a
Bishops See under the Archbishop of Colocza: defended by a strong Castle. In
1660. it was taken by the Turks; before which the Crim Tartars took it in 1242.
In 1290. Ladislans, K. of Hungary built the Cathedral Church. It was besieged
by a puissant Army of the Turks, in 1598. which miscarried. But in 1660. they
took it by surprise in a time of Peace. On the East the Castle stands, on the
North the River runs; it has a Wall with Ramparts, after the modern way;
flanked with 5 Royal Bastions, and a good regular Dike, which may be filled
upon occasion by the River Water: within there is another enclosure of 5
Bastions and a high Wall, which may serve instead of a Citadel. This City
stands 22 Miles from Giula to the North, 80 from Weissemburg to the West, and
100 from Buda to the East. Lately recovered by the Imperialists from the Turks,
after a long Blockade and Siege. The Capital of a County of its own name.
Longit. 44. 56. Latit. 47. 08.

Warasdin, Variana, Varsdinum, a City of Stiria.

Warburgh, an Imperial and Hanseatique City, in the Circle of Westphalia, in
Germany.

Warczkovie more, the Russian Name of the Baltic Sea.

Wardhus, Vardhusia, the North part of the Kingdom of Norway. Bounded on the
North by the frozen Sea, on the East by the Russ Lapland, on the West by
Drontheim, and on the South by the Swedish Lapland. It has only one Town of its
own Name, and a few Villages of no value. Under the King of Denmark.

Ware, a Market Town in Hartfordshire, in the Hundred of Branghing, upon the
River Lea: from whence a Channel of the New River Water is cut for serving of
London.

Warfe, a River in Yorkshire, falling into the Are below Pontefract; and into
the Ouse below York. Otley, Wetherby, and Tadcaster stand upon it.

Warham, a Market Town and Corporation in Dorsetshire: in the Hundred of
Winfrith: situated at the fall of the Rivers From and Biddle into Luckford
Lake: to which it has a Harbor, defended formerly by a strong Wall and a
Castle. But as the two latter have found their Ruins in the Wars of this
Kingdom; so the other is choked up. The Corporation retains the Honor of the
Election of two Members to represent it in Parliament.

Warmerlandt, Warmia, a Province of Prussia, called by the Inhabitants
Ermelandt. Bounded almost every way by the Ducal Prussia; the Capital of it is
Heilsbergh, in which the Bishop of this Province resides: which stands 8 German
Miles from Regensperg to the South.

Warminster, a Market Town in Wiltshire, the Capital of its Hundred; seated at
the Spring of the River Willybourn or Willy; and heretofore of very great note:
being the ancient Verlucio.

Warrington, Khigodunum, a Town in Lancashire in the Borders of Cheshire; upon
the River Mersey, over which it has a fair stone Bridge leading into the last
mentioned County: in the Hundred of Darby. Here the Scotch Army under Duke
Hamilton was defeated by the Parliamentarians, in the year 1648.

Warsaw, VVarsovia, the Capital City of the Kingdom of Poland: called by the
Poles VVarswa, by the Germans Warschaw, by the French Varsovie. It is the chief
City of Mazovia; upon the Vistula. Twenty four Miles from Lenczycze, or
Lanschet, thirty three from Gnesna, and fifty from Lemburg. Taken by the Swedes
in the year 1665. after a great Victory; the year following the Poles retook
it; and it is now under its own Prince. A great and populous City, being as it
were near the Center of that Kingdom; has enjoyed the Residence of their Kings
and the Courts of Justice, ever since the Reign of Sigismond III. who built
here a Royal Palace for his Successors. There has also been added a great pile
of Buildings, now called the New City. Long. 43. 20. Lat. 52. 25.

Warte, Varta, a River of Poland; which arising out of the Lesser Poland, and
entering the Greater, washes Siracks and Posnan; and taking in the Obra, the
Notesik, and the Prosna, beneath Landsperg in the Marquisate of Brandenburg,
falls into the Oder near Custrin.

Warwick, Varvicum, Praesidium Verovicum, the Shire-Town of the County of
Warwick, is seated on the West Side of the River Avon (over which it has a
Stone Bridge) in the middle of the County. Called by the Welsh, Caer Guarvic
and Caer Leon; by the Romans, Praesidium; which signifies the same thing with
the British Name. It stands upon a steep and craggy Rock mounted on high, not
easily approached; has two Parish Churches, a handsome Market-House of
Freestone, an endowed Hospital: the Assizes and Sessions for the County are
kept at it; and it was fortified with Walls and Ditches, and toward the
South-VVest it had a strong Castle. Ethelsled (a Mercian Queen) rebuilt it in
the year 911. In the year 1076, Henry de Newburg was created Earl of Warwick by
William the Conqueror. This Family lasted five Descents; and in the year 1242,
John Marshal was the seventh Earl, in the Right of Margery, Sister and Heir of
Thomas the last Earl. John de Placetis, her second Husband, was the eighth in
1243, William Maudit the ninth in 1263. William Beauchamp Son of Isabel (Sister
and Heir of William Maudit) in 1268. This Family continued five Descents:
amongst which Henry Beauchamp the Favorite of King Henry VI, who crowned him
King of the Isle of VVight, received this Place with the advanced Title of
Duke; which vanished after him. And in the year 1449, Richard Nevil (who
married Anne Sister of Henry Beauchamp, the former Earl and Duke of Warwick)
succeeded (in the Title of Earl.) In 1471, George Duke of Clarence, Brother to
Edward IV, by the Marriage of Anne Daughter of Richard Nevil, was the
eighteenth; succeeded by Edward Plantagenet his Son in 1471. In 1547, John
Dudley: and in 1562, Ambrose his Son, descended from the Lady Margaret,
Daughter of Richard Beauchamp Earl of Warwick. In 1618, Robert Lord Rich of
Leeze was created the twenty second Earl of Warwick by James I. Charles, great
Grandson to Robert, died without Issue: whereupon Robert Rich Earl of Holland,
his Cousin Germain, succeeded in the Earldom of Warwick; and left both the
Titles of Warwick and Holland united to Edward the present Earl, the twenty
seventh, and the sixth of this Family. Warwick returns two Parliament Men, and
stands in the Hundred of Kington.

Warwickshire, Varvicensis Comitatus, is bounded on the North by Staffordshire,
on the East by Leicester and Northamptonshires, on the South by Oxford and
Gloucester, and on the West by the County of Worcester. In length from North
to South thirty three Miles, in breadth twenty five; the whole Circumference
one hundred and thirty five; containing one hundred and fifty eight Parishes,
and fifteen Market Towns. As it is seated well near in the heart of England, so
the Air and Soil are of the best; the River Avon divides it in the middle.
What lies South of that River is divided between fruitful Cornfieldsd and
lovely Meadows; which from Edg-hill present the Viewer with a Plain equal to
that of Jordan. That which lies North is VVood Land. The Cornavii were the old,
the Mercians the later Masters of this County. There have been three great
Battles sought in it: One in the year 749, wherein Cuthred King of the West
Saxons slew Ethelbald King of the Mercians at Seckington near Tamworth. The
second in the year 1468, at Edgcote; in which the then Earl of Warwick defeated
Edward IV, and took him Prisoner. The third in the year 1642, at Edg-hill; in
which Charles I, overthrew the Parliament Forces under the Earl of Essex. The
Principal Town in this Shire is Coventry.

Wasgow, Vasgovia, Vogesus Tractus, a Tract in Lorrain, called by the French Le
Pais de Vauge; which takes its Name from a Mountain. It lies between the
Dukedoms of Lorain and Bipont, and the Palatinate of the Rhine; and it is a
part of Germany.

Wash, A Stream in the County of Rutland.

Wassi, or Vassi, Vasseum, a Town in the Lower Champagne in France, upon the
Marn, in the Diocese of Chalons; well situated, in a fruitful Soil. A
Rencounter betwixt the Duke of Guise and the Huguenots at this Town, in the
Reign of Charles IX, gave an occasion to the ensuing Civil VVais of Religion in
this Kingdom.

Watchet, a Market Town in Somersetshire, in the Hundred of Williton; by the
Seaside.

Waterford, Vaterfordia, Mapiana, a Town and County in the Province of Munster
on the South of Ireland. The Town is called by the Irish Phurtlairge. The
Capital of its County, and next Dublin the greatest place in that Kingdom:
having a very large and safe Haven, under the Protection of a strong Fort,
called Duncannon Fort; and conveniently seated for a Trade with any part of the
World. Built by the Norwegians in a bad Air and a barren Soil, at the Mouth of
the River Shour. Ever since it came into the hands of the English, it has
continued very loyal to this Crown; and has on that score obtained many signal
Privileges from it. In the year 1649, they forced Oliver Cromwell to draw off,
when he was Master of the greatest part of Ireland; yet when resistance was in
vain it surrendered, August 20. 1650, on good terms. As also to King William,
both Town and Fort, July 25 and 26, 1690, without a stroke.

The County of Waterford, is bounded on the East by Wexford, on the North by
Tipperary, on the West by Cork, and on the South by the Sea: the Sewer
enclosing it on the North and East, and the More on the West. The North parts
of it are overspread with a Ridge of Mountains called Slewboyne. It is from
East to West twenty seven Irish Miles, from North to South fifteen. The
principal places in it are Waterford and Lismore.

Watford, a Market Town in Hartfordshire, in the Hundred of Chashio, near the
River Coln.

Watlington, a Market Town in Oxfordshire, in the Hundred of Pirton.

Watton, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk, in the Hundred of Weyland.

Waveney, a River in the County of Suffolk, dividing that County from Norfolk.
Beckles and Bungay are situated upon the Banks of it.

Webley, a Market Town and Corporation in Herefordshire, in the Hundred of
Stretford. Represented in Parliament by its two Burgesses.

Weever, a River watering the middle parts of Cheshire: upon which Nantwich and
Fordsham are situated.

Weigats Straight, a Bay upon the South of Nova Zembla; flowing from West to
East; and discovered by the Hollanders under one of this Name in 1594: through
which they in vain sought a North Passage to the East Indies by China, not
being able to sail further for Ice. They discovered to the East and West of
this Straight, Staten Eylandt and Mauritz Eylandt, in the same Voyage; whereon
they found Rocks, Lakes, Ponds, Swans, Hawks, and VVild Ducks.

Weill, Vuila, a City in the Dukedom of Wurtemburg: which is a free Imperial
City by the Constitution of Frederick II: it stands upon the River Wurm; two
Miles from Stutgard to the West, and Spire to the South; and three from
Tubingen to the North. Hofman. Another in Switzerland, belonging to the Canton
of S. Gall.

Weimar, Weinmar, Vimaria, a City of Thuringia in Germany, upon the River Ilm;
three German Miles from Erford to the East, and five from Naumburg; which was
the Seat of Otho Emperor of Germany. Now under a Duke of the House of Saxony.

Weismar, Weismaria, one of the Hanse Towns of Germany, in the Dukedom of
Mecklenburgh; which has a Harbor on the Baltic Sea, and a new strong Castle.
It stands between Rostock to the East, and Lubeck to the West; seven German
Miles from either. Built about the year 1240, by a Count of Swerin. In 1262, it
was almost entirely ruined by Fire. In 1266, the Duke of Mecklenburg gave it
great Privileges to encourage the rebuilding of it; which procured the building
it with Stone. By the Peace of Munster it was assigned to the Swedes; but being
taken by the Danes in 1679, tho by the Treaty in 1679 they were to restore it;
yet that Crown has not performed that Article.

Weissell, See Vistula.

Weissemburg, Weissemburgum, a City of Bavaria, in the Territory of Aichstadt,
near the Fountains of Rednitz; four German Miles from Donawert to the North,
seven from Norimberg, and five from Newburg. This is a Free Imperial City.

Weissemburg, a City of Alsatia in the Territory of Wasgow; toward the Borders
of the Palatinate of the Rhine: called Cron Weisemburg, to distinguish it from
the former: which is a Town in Alsatia of old called Sebusium. It stands upon
the River Luter; four German Miles from Hagenaw to the North, and six from
Strasburg. Dagobert King of France built here a celebrated Monastery, in the
year 623; which, in the year 1496, was changed into a College. By the Peace of
Munster, this place was granted to France; and in the Wars in 1673, it suffered
very much from the Germans, but is now rebuilding. This City is the Capital of
a Territory called die Prebstey von Weissemburg, the Prefecture of Weissemburg;
which in the year 1540, was united for ever to the Bishopric of Spire.
Lauterburg was the usual Seat of the President of this District; but is now
under the French King too.

Weissenburg, Alba Julia, a City in Transylvania; called by the Hungarians,
Gyvla Fejervar. It is a Roman Colony settled in the times of Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus (from whose Mother it had its Latin Name;) and a Bishops See, under
the Archbishop of Colocza. It stands upon the River Ompay; which a little lower
falls into the Marish, in a fruitful Plain; between Clausenburg to the
North-West, and Hermanstad to the South, seven German Miles from either. The
usual Residence of the Prince of Transylvania. It has been much greater than
now it is; and affords rare Roman Medals, Coins and Inscriptions; the evident
Symptoms of its Antiquity and Grandeur. Garrisoned for the Emperor in 1687.
Long. 47. 00. Lat. 46. 05.

Weland, a River in Northamptonshire, upon which Rockingham stands.

Welch-poole, a Market Town in the County of Montgomery, in Wales: in the
Hundred of Ystrad March.

Welika-reca, Turuntus, the same with Narva, a River of Moscovy.

Wells, Belgae, Wellae, Theorodunum, Fontes, Fontanensis Ecclesia, a City of
Somersetshire: so called from the Wells and plentiful Springs which bubble up
in it: for fair Buildings it exceeds all other Towns in that County. It has an
Episcopal Palace, fortified with Walls and a Mote like a Castle; a goodly
Church, and a College; founded by Ina a Saxon King in honor of S. Andrew; which
was enlarged by King Kinewolph, in the year 766. The Cathedral Church has a
Dean, a Chaunter, a Chancellor, three Archdeacons, twenty seven Prebends, and
nineteen Canons. There was a Bishopric founded here, in the year 905, by
Edward the Elder: which about the year 1088 was united to Bath. In the year
1193, the Bishopric of Glastenbury being also united to these two Sees, the
Revenues of the Church of wells were divided between the Dean and the Chapter:
which were much impaired in the Reign of Edward VI.

Wellingborough, a Market Town in Northamptonshire, in the Hundred of Huxlon,
upon an ascent; large and well frequented, accommodated with a Free School, and
adorned with a handsome Church.

Wellington, a Market Town in Somersetshire in the Hundred of Milverton, upon
the River Tone, Another in Shropshire, in the Hundred of S. Bradford.

Wem, a Market Town in the North of Shropshire, in the Hundred of N. Bradford,
upon the River Roder: honored with the Title of a Barony by King James II, in
the Person of the late Lord Chancellor Jeffreys.

Wendover, a Market Town and Corporation in Buckinghamshire, in the Hundred of
Aylesbury: having the honor of the Election of two Parliament Men.

Wenlock Magna, a Market Town and Corporation in Shropshire, the Capital of its
Hundred: represented in the lower House of Parliament by two Burgesses.

Were, Vera, a River which runs through the Bishopric of Durham; and watering
the Capital City, where it makes a Peninsula and has three Bridges covering
it, falls at Sunderland into the German Ocean.

Werne, or Wuerne, the same with Furnes.

Wernow, Chalusus, a City of Germany, near Rostock.

Wersaw. See Warsaw.

Were, the same with Donawert.

Werthaim, a County in Franconia, in Germany.

Wesel, Aliso, Vesalia, a strong City in the Dukedom of Cleve; and an Hanse
Town, which has a Castle belonging to it. It stands upon the Rhine, at the
confluence of the Lip; twelve German Miles from Cologne North, and five from
Dorsten to the West. Taken by the Hollanders from the Spaniards in 1629. From
them by the French, in 1672, and in the year 1674, it was left to the Duke of
Brandenburg, after it had been dismantled by the French. Rudolphus I, Emperor
of Germany, granted this City to Theodorick VIII, Earl of Cleve.

Weser, or the Little Weser, Visurgis, a small River which arises in the
Dukedom of Limburgh, in the Borders of Juliers; and watering Limburgh, falls
into the Maes above Liege.

Weser, Visurgis, a great River of Germany: which arises in Franconia, in the
Territory of Coburg near Eisfeldt: and flowing through Thuringe near Smalcald,
receives the Ness below Eysenack* and in Hess the Fuld. Turning to the North
between Brunswick and Westphalia, it takes in the Dymel; and waters Corby,
Hammel, Minden, Cities of Westphalia: beneath Ferden admits the Alder, and
salutes Breme, takes in the Wemma and the Honte; and beneath Carlestadt, ^^lls
into the German Ocean.

Wesho, Vexio, a City of Sweden in the Province of Smalland: which is a Bishops
See, under the Archbishop of Vpsal: called also Vexsioe and Vexsieu. Thirty
five Miles from the Lake of Weter South, and from the Baltic Sea West.

Westbury, a Market Town and Corporation in Wiltshire, upon the River Broke,
falling into the Avon: the Capital of its Hundred, and honored with the
Election of two Parliament Men.

Westerwaldt, Bacenis, Buronia, a part of the Hercynian Forest; called also
Hartzwaldt. It makes the South parts of the Dukedoms of Brunswick and Thuringe,
in the Lower Saxony; others say, it lies by Schelde near Cologne.

Westerwick, Vestrovicum, a Seaport City in the Province of Smalland, on the
Baltic Sea in Sweden; fifty five Miles from Calmar to the North.

West Froson. See Friseland.

Westmannia, Vestmania, or Westmanland, a Province of Sweden; between Vpland to
the East, Gestricia to the North, Sudermannia to the South, and Nericia to the
West. The Cities of it, are Arosen and Arbosen.

Westminster, Westmonasterium, once a Suburb, seated a Mile from the City of
London, and called Thorney: now a great and populous City; by its Buildings
conjoined to London; so that it seems to be a part of it; but is indeed a
distinct City, having its peculiar and proper Magistrates, and Privileges. In
the times of the Romans, there stood here a Temple of Apollo; which in the
Reign of Antoninus Pius, was subverted by an Earthquake. Out of the Ruins of
it, Segebert (King of Kent) built a Church in honor of S. Peter, about the
year 655. About the year 701. Offa King of the East Angles, enlarged this old
Church; which being destroyed by the Danes about the year 854, S. Dunstane
Archbishop of Canterbury, re-edified it about 970. Edward the Confessor, in the
year 1061. made great additions to this Fabric. In the year 1221. Henry III.
pulled down this Saxon Building; and in the same place erected that great and
noble Pile, now standing; and put it into the hands of the Monks: to which
Henry VII. added the Chapel called by his Name. In the years 1066, and 1226.
Councils were celebrated here. At the Reformation, instead of the Monks, was
placed here a Dean, twelve Prebends and a Bishop; which last is since
suppressed. In this Church is usually performed the Coronation; it likewise
contains the Bones of a vast number of the Kings of England, and was the Mother
of Westminster; which from it, as from a Center, has spread it self every way:
Especially after Westminster Hall became the fixed place for the Courts of
Justice, (built by William Rufus, in the year 1099. Rebuilt by Richard II. as
Mr. Camden observes); and Whitehall, the Royal Palace of our Kings, about the
year 1512.

Westmorland, Damnii, Vestmaria, Westmorlandia, (one of the Northern Counties
of England) took this Name from its situation, and the great number of Moors in
it. On the North and West, it is bounded by Cumberland; on the South by
Lancashire; and on the East by Yorkshire. From North to South it is thirty
Miles, from East to West twenty four, in circumference one hundred and twelve.
Containing twenty six Parishes, and eight Market Towns. The Air is sharp and
piercing; healthful: the Soil barren, and not easily improved: two ridges of
high Hills crossing it as far as Cumberland. Yet the Southern parts contain
many fruitful Valleys, Meadows, Arable and Pasture Grounds: The Rivers Eden,
Ken, Lon and Eamon watering them: besides two noted Lakes, the Vlleswater and
Windermeer: the last bordering upon Cheshire, the other upon Cumberland and
Westmorland. The ancient Inhabitants were the Brigantes: who in the Saxon
Heptarchy, constituted a part of the great Kingdom of Northumberland. The first
Earl of this County, was Ralph Nevil, Lord of Raby, E. Marshall; in 1398
created Earl of Westmorland by King Richard II. This Family in six Descents
continued, till the year 1584. it failed in the death of Charles Nevil. In
1624. this Honor was revived in Francis Fane, created Earl of Westmorland, and
Baron of Burghersh, by James I. as a descendent from the Nevils; whose
Posterity still enjoy it.

Westphalia, a great Circle or Province in Germany; called by the Germans die
Wephalen. It lies between the Lower Saxony to the East, and the Low Countries
to the West; bounded on the North by the German Sea, on the East by the Dukedom
of Breme, Ferden, Lunenburg and Brunswick; on the West by the United
Netherlands; on the South by the Dukedom of Guelderland, the Bishopric of
Cologne, VVesterwaldt and Hassia. It contains the Bishoprics of Munster,
Paderborne and Osnaburg; the Dukedoms of Cleve and Berg; the Principality of
Minden; the Counties of Oldenburg, Mark, Hoye, Diepholt, Ravensberg, Lingen,
Lip, Benthem and Scaumburg; East Friseland, and the Dukedom of Westphalia.
The capital City of this Circle is Munster.

The Dukedom of Westphalia is bounded on the North by the Bishoprics of
Munster and Paderborne; on the West by the County of Mark; on the South by
Wester-waldt and Hassia; on the East by the County of Waldeck. The principal
places in it, are, Arensberg, Cleve, Dussel-dorp, Embden, Emerick, Ham,
Lipstad, Minden, Munster, Oldenburg, Osnabruck, Paderborne, Soest, Dortmund and
Wesel. Besides what is above expressed, this Circle includes the Dukedoms of
Juliers and Guelderland; the Bishopric of Liege, and the States of Vtrecht;
but this last has been separated from it, ever since 1548.

Westram, a Market Town in the County of Kent, in Sutton Lath, upon the River
Darent.

Westrick, Westrych, Westryck, Austrasia, Lotharingia, (taken in its largest
extent) contained Brabant, Hainault, Liege, Namur, Luxemburg, Juliers, Epfall,
Wasgow, Imperial Flanders, and Lorain. And under the first Race of the Kings of
France, it contained also Schwaben, Bavaria, Thuringia, a great part of Saxony,
and some Provinces of France. But the Name is only now applied to Lorain.

Weteraw, Veteravia, Vederovia, a Province in the Upper Circle of the Rhine:
between the Upper Hassia to the East, Westerwaldt to the North, the Rhine to
the West, and Mentz to the South. The principal Places in it are Dietz and
Ha^^mar.

Wetherby, a Market Town in the West Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hund* of
Claro, upon the River Warfe.

Wetsch, the same with Vienna.

Wexford, a County in the South of the Kingdom of Ireland, called by the Irish
Loghagarm. It is the South part of the Province of Lemster. Bounded on the
North by the County of Waterford, (cut off by the River Barrow.) It takes its
Name from a great Seaport Town, on the South side of the River Shemalyn, not
far from the South-Eastern Point of Ireland: fifty two Miles South of Sweden,
and about twenty East of Waterford.

Weymouth, a Market Town and Corporation in Dorsetshire, in the Hundred of
Vgscomb, at the Fall of the River Wey into the Ocean: joined to Melcomb Regis,
on the other side of the same River, by a fair Timber Bridge; since the
Incorporation of both Towns by Act of Parliament in Queen Elizabeth's time into
one Body. Yet each is distinctly represented by its Burgesses in the House of
Commons: and Weymouth has the Honor to give the Title of a Viscount to the
Right Honorable Thomas Thynne.

Weymar. See Weimar.

Whitby, a Market and Seaport Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire, at the
Fall of the River Esk into the Ocean. It has many Vessels belonging to it, a
Bridge over the River, a Custom-House; and heretofore an Abbey of great fame,
in the Person particularly of S. Hilda, an ancient Abbess of it.

Whitchurch, a Market Town in Shropshhire, in the Hundred of N. Bradford,
toward Cheshire. Also a Corporation in Hantshire, in the Hundred of Evinger,
upon the River Test: having the Election of two Members of the House of Commons.

Whitehaven, a Market Town in the County of Cumberland, in the Division of
Allerdale; upon a Creek of the Sea, which affords it a convenient and well
frequented Harbor. It stands at the North end of a Rock of hard White Stone;
and trades principally in Coals and Salt.

Whithern, Candida Casa, Lucopibia, the White-House, a Town or small City in
Galloway in Scotland: upon the Irish Sea, over against the Isle of Man: and a
Bishops See under the Archbishop of Glasco. The place where Ninia (or Ninian, a
holy Britan, the Apostle of the South Picts) in the Reign of Theodosius the
younger built a Church: which after the number of Christians were increased,
became a Bishops See. It is one of the ancientest Towns (being mentioned by
Ptolemy), as well as Bishoprics in Scotland. Long. 16. 30. Lat. 56. 30.

Wiburg, Viburgium, a City in the Province of North Jutland, in the Kingdom of
Denmark: which is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Lunden. It stands in
the middle of that Promontory; at an equal distance from the German and Baltic
Seas; eight German Miles from Alburg to the South. This Bishops See was founded
by Sweno King of Denmark, in 1065. Long. 30. 58. Lat. 58. 08. There is a Town
of the same Name in Livonia.

Wickham, a Market Town in Buckinghamshire, in the Hundred of Burnham, upon a
Stream falling into the Thames: in a low and fruitful Vale. It has the honor
to be a Corporation, represented by two Burgesses in the Lower House of
Parliament. Written also Chipping-VViccomb. The Assizes for the County, are
commonly kept here: being a large fair Town. Also a Town in the County of
Suffolk* in the Hundred of VVilford, upon the Deben: in which the Archdeacon of
Suffolk keeps his Courts for the Eastern part of that County. This Town has
lost its Market to Woodbridge, in its neighborhood.

Wickware, a Market Town in Gloucestershire, in the Hundred of Grombaldash.

Widen, Widin. See Vidin.

Wieprz, Aprus, a River which falls into the Vistula, in the Borders of Poland
and Silesia.

Wigan, a Market Town and Corporation in Lancashire, in the Hundred of Darby,
upon the River Dowles: of note for good Coal. The Corporation elects two
Parliament men.

Wiflisburg, or Wiefelbourg, Aventicum, an ancient City of Switzerland. The
Capital of the Canton of Wi^^ipurgergow; once a great City, and a Bishops See,
under the Archbishop of Besanzon; but now only a Town in the Borders of the
Canton of Friburg, called by the French Avenches. It stands upon the River
Broye: one German Mile from Friburg, three from Berne, and four from Lausanne
to the North. This Bishopric was removed to Lausanne, in 1076. This Canton is
a part of the Canton of Berne: bounded on the East by the Aar, and Argop; on
the South by the Alps, and the Lake of Lemane, and on the West and North by
Mount Jura or Jurten.

Wight, Victus, Vectis, Vecta, an Island on the South of England, belonging to
the County of Southhampton. In length twenty Miles, in breadth twelve, in
circumference sixty. About three from Hurst Castle; of an oval form, ending
with two Peninsula's to the East and West: And by nature secured with Rocks,
especially Southward. It contains thirty six Parishes, and three Market Towns.
Its Air healthful and pleasant: the Soil very fruitful: affords a good quantity
of Corn for Exportation, and Cattle and Game in abundance: its Meadows and
Wool are excellent. In short, it wants nothing needful to the Life of Man. The
principal place in it, is Newport: and Cowes, for a Harbor. Vespasian was the
first that subjected this Island to the Romans under Claudius Caesar. Cerdick
King of the West Saxons became the next Master of it, in 530. After him,
Wolfer, King of the Mercians: from whom it passed to Edelwalch King of the
South Saxons by gift: Coedwalla King of the West Saxons, at last reconquered
it. Henry VI. crowned Henry de Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, (his Favorite) King
of Wight: but this Title soon vanished with his Life, two years after. Richard
Widevil, Earl of Rivers, (his Successor) had it from Edward IV. with the Title
of Lord of Wight. Sir Reginald Bray took it from Henry VII. in Fee Farm, at the
Rent of three hundred Marks.

Wighton, a Market Town in the East Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of
Harthill.

Wild, the same with Vilne.

Wilia, Vilia, a River of Poland; which arising in the Palatinate of Breslaw,
waters Vilne; and beneath Cown falls into the Chrone.

Wilkomirz, Wilkmer, Vilcomtria, a Town in the Ducal Prussia, upon the River
Swet: eight Polish Miles from Vilne, and seven from Trock.

Willy, or Willibourn, a River in Wiltshire; which joins with the Nadder at
Wilton, near Salisbury; and afterward falls into the Avon. Werminster is
situated at the Spring of it.

Wiltshire, Wiltonia, is bounded on the North by Gloucester; on the East by
Berksshire, on the South by Dorset and Hampshire, and upon the West by Somerset
and Gloucester. From North to South thirty nine Miles; from East to West twenty
nine, in circumference one hundred thirty nine: containing three hundred and
four Parishes, and twenty three Market Towns; amongst which, Wilton, its
ancient Capital, gives Name to it. The Air very sweet, temperate, healthful;
the Soil fertile. The North parts swell into fruitful and pleasant Hills,
diversisied with pleasant Rivers, and large Woods. The South are more level;
and watered with the Wily, Adder, and Avon: the Isis, Kennet, and Deveril. The
middle is commonly called Salisbury Plains, by reason of its great evenness;
which feeds vast numbers of excellent Sheep. This Country was the Seat of the
Belgae. They being reduced by Vespasian, it became afterward a part of the
Kingdom of the West Saxons. The principal City is Salisbury. William Lord
Scrope (Lord Treasurer) was the first Earl of this County in the year 1397.
James Butler Earl of Ormond, another Lord Treasurer, in 1448. John Stafford
(second Son of Humphrey Duke of Buckingham) was the third Earl in 1469. who had
two Successors of the same Name. Thomas Bullen, Father of the Lady Anne Bullen,
(Mother of Queen Elizabeth), the sixth Earl in 1529. In 1550. William Paulet,
afterward Marquess of Winchester, was created Earl of Wiltshire, by King
Edward VI. whose Posterity in the fifth Descent, now enjoy this Honor.

Wilton, a Market Town in Wiltshire, (to which it gives Name) betwixt the
Rivers Willy by the North, and Adder or Nadder to the South. It was anciently
the Capital City of the County; a Bishops See, and the Residence of several
Bishops, before the Translation of the Sea to Salisbury. The loss whereof was a
great occasion of the decay of this place. It only retains the honor of being
by two Members represented in Parliament. The Sheriffs keep their monthly
Courts here, and the Knights of the Shire are usually elected at it.

Wimpfen, Wimpina, Vimpina, a City of Germany; in the Circle of Schwaben, upon
the Necker; where it receives the River Jaxt; two German Miles from Hailbrune
to the North, and five from Heidelburg to the East. This, though small, is an
Imperial Free City.

Wincaunton, a Market Town in Somersetshire, in the Hundred of Norton Ferris,
upon the side of a Hill.

Winchcomb, a Market Town in Gloucestershire, in the Hundred of Kistgate.

Winchelsey, a Seaport Town in the East part of Sussex, where it adjoins to
Kent; in Hastings Rape; upon an Inlet of the Sea, in the neighborhood of Rye.
A Member of the Cinque Ports: once a strong and a beautiful Town, walled:
having eighteen Parish Churches: but by the recess of the Ocean, now much
decayed; and the Haven choked up. In the year 1250. the greatest part of this
Town was destroyed by the Sea. It consists now but of one Parish. In 1628.
Charles I. created Elizabeth Finch, Viscount Maidstone, Countess of Winchelsey:
to which Honor Thomas her Son, succeeded in 1633. and Henneage her Grandchild
in 1639.

Winchester, Venta Belgarum, Vintonia, Wintonia, a City of Hampshire; which is
a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Canterbury: upon the River Itching:
fifteen Miles from the British Sea to the North. It stands pleasantly* in a
Vale, betwixt two Hills; adorned with five Parish Churches; a Noble Cathedral,
dedicated to the Trinity; in which the Bones of diverse of the Saxon Kings and
Queens, with two of the Danish Line of Kings, and two of the Norman, rest. A
fine Hall for the Assizes and Sessions, where King Arthur's Round Table hangs
as a Monument of Antiquity: a College for the Education of Youth, built and
endowed by Will. of Wickham, (the Founder of New College Oxon,) for a Seminary
to the same College; a Hospital, an Episcopal Palace, and a strong Castle upon
a Hill. The Welsh call this ancient City at this day Caer Cruent: (that is, the
White City: because it stands upon a Chalk); and the Latin Writers, Wintonia.
In the Roman times it was one of the principal Cities of Britain. In the Saxons
days twice consumed and rebuilt; being made the Seat of the West Saxon Kings:
which Family at last prevailed against all the rest. The Bishops See was
founded here in 660. by Kingil the first Christian King of the West Saxons. It
felt the fury of the Danes. In the Norman times it kept up its Head: but in the
Reign of King Stephen it was sacked in the Wars betwixt the Empress Mand and
him. Edward III. to revive it, made it the Mart for Wool and Cloth. In our
days, says Mr. Camden, it is about a Mile and a half in compass; reasonably
well peopled. The ancient Bishops of this See were reputed Earls of
Southampton; and pass by that Style in the New Statutes of the Garter made by
King Henry VIII. The present Bishop Dr. Mew, is the seventy third Bishop. The
first Earl of Winchester, was Saer de Quinsey in 1207. The second Roger de
Quinsey in 1219. who died in 1264. The third Hugh de Spencer, created in 1322.
and beheaded in 1326. The fourth Lewis de Bruges in 1472. In 1551. William
Pawlet, Earl of Wilsthire, was created Marquess of Winchester: whose
Posterity in the sixth Descent now enjoy it. In the years 855. 975. 1021. 1070.
1076. 1129. 1142. English Councils were celebrated in this City. The second,
under S. Dunstan. The sixth, in relation to King Stephen's Usurpation of the
Lands of the Church.

Windaw, Vinda, Vindavia, a City of Curland; called by the Poles Kiess, and by
the Germans Windaw and Winda. It has an Harbor at the Mouth of the River VVeta,
upon the Baltic Sea: fifteen Polish Miles from Memel to the North, and thirty
from Riga to the West.

Winder, or VVimander Mere, a Lake dividing a part of Lancashire from the
County of Westmorland; and extending about ten Miles in length, and three or
four in breadth: full of Fish; with a clear pebbly bottom.

Windham, a Market Town in the County of Norfolk, in the Hundred of Forehoe.

Windrush, a River in Oxfordshire, upon which VVitney stands; and Burford near
it.

Windsor, Vindesorium, a Castle upon the South side of the Thames in Berkshire;
upon an high Hill: which rising by gentle degrees, affords at the top a
pleasant Prospect. This Place was granted by Edward the Confessor to the Monks
of Westminster: and soon after by William the Conqueror recovered back to the
Crown, by an exchange for Wokendune and Ferings. In this pleasant Place was
Edw. III. born: who afterward built that Noble Castle, which has since been the
delightful Retreat of the Kings of England, from the Cares of Government and
the Crowds of Men. In the same place that Victorious Prince instituted the most
Noble Order of the GARTER. The Ceremony whereof has been usually since
celebrated here upon S. George's Day. Out of the Castle sprung the Town: and
that in Buckinghamshire, (not in Barkshire;) it being on the North side of the
River, and joined to the Castle by a Timber Bridge. In the Church of this
Castle lie buried two of our Kings of the most distant Fortunes and Tempers,
Henry VIII. and Charles the Martyr. The Town is a Corporation, in the Hundred
of Ripplemore; and elects two Burgesses to represent it in Parliament.

Winnicza, a strong City in the Palatinate of Kiovia in Poland, upon the River
Bug: ten Miles above Braslaw to the North. Taken by the Cossacks, in 1560.

Winshaim, Vintshaemum, a City in Franconia in Germany, upon the River Aisch:
small, but an Imperial and Free City. Built in the year of Christ 525. by
Windegast, a Duke. Seven German Miles from Norimburgh to the West, and from
Wurtsburgh to the North-East.

Winslow, a Market Town in Buckinghamshire, in the Hundred of Colstow.

Wipach. See Vipao.

Wiprefurt, a small Town in Hainault, in the Dukedom of Mons, upon the Rhine:
not far from Cologne.

Wirksworth, a Market Town in Derbyshire. The Capital of its Hundred: of great
note for Works in Lead.

Wirland, Viria, a Province of Livonia, upon the Bay of Finland. The Capital of
which is Wissemburgh. Baudrand writes Witland.

Wirtemberg, Wittembergensis Ducatus, a Dukedom in Schwaben in Germany. Bounded
on the East and South by Schwaben, on the North by the Palatinate of the Rhine,
on the West by Swartswaldt and the Marquisate of Baden. The principal Places in
it are, Stutgard, Tubingen, and Schorndorf. It takes this Name from an ancient
Castle upon the Necker; near Esling; and is under a Duke of its own. The first
of which Family was Eberhard I. who married Agnes, Daughter of Berthold, Duke
of Zeringen, in 1240. And the Descendents of this Line still enjoy this Honor.

Wisbich, a Market Town in Cambridgeshire. The Capital of its Hundred.

Wisbuy, Visbua, a small City in Gothland, (an Island in the Baltic Sea) which
has a fine Harbor. Once a great and populous Place, but now decaying. It stands
9 Swedish Miles from the Isle of Oeland to the East, and 13 from Westerwick in
Smaland.

Wistock, a small Town in the Marquisate of Brandenburgh, in the Border of
Meckleburgh, upon the River Dorss: made remarkable by the Victory obtained by
the Swedes over the Imperialists in 1636.

Wite Zee, Granduicus Sinus; the White Sea, or Bay of S. Nicolas.

Witepski, Vitepska, Vitebscum, a City of Poland. The Capital of a Palatinate
of the same Name in Lithuania, upon the River Dwina; where it receives the
Widzba: 12 Polish Miles from the Borders of Moscovy, 16 from Ploczko, and 25
from Smolensko to the North-West. Often taken by the Russ; but now under the
Poles: and was once a Sovereign State.

Witham, a River running cross Lincolnshire: upon which Lincoln and Grantham
are situated. At Sleaford, the River of the same name with that Town, falls
into it. At Tattershall, the Bane; and at Boston, it gives up all its Streams
to the Ocean.

Witney, a Market Town in Oxfordshire, The Capital of its Hundred: upon the
River Windrush. Accommodated with a Free School and a Library. Its principal
Trade lies in Blankets and Ruggs.

Whadistaw, one of the chief Towns of Cujava, a Province of Poland.

Wittemberg, Calaecia, Lucoraea Viteberga, Wittemberga: the Capital City of the
Dukedom of Saxony: seated upon the Elbe; in a large Plain, which is every where
commanded by the Cannon of the Castle; with a Marsh to the North, and a Canal
of the Elbe to the East: Fortified with strong Ramparts, Walls, and Bastions;
in almost a square Figure, but more long than broad. Nine German Miles from
Leipsick to the North, 14 from Dresden to the South West, and 10 from
Magdeburgh. In 1502. there was an University opened here by Frederick III.
Elector of Saxony. In 1517. Luther began to Preach the Reformation in this
City. In 1520. he in this Place burnt the Popes Bull, and Decrees. In 1546. he
was Buried in this City. This strong City was then the only place which held
out for the Elector; who was in the hands of the Emperor Charles V. In 1547. it
was surrendered to that Prince, who for some years after made it his Prison for
such as would not comply with him.

Wivescomb, a Market Town in Somersetshire, in the Hundred of North Curry, upon
the River Tone.

Wlodzimiercz, Vlodimeria, a City of Volhinia in Poland, upon the River Lug: a
little above its fall into the Bug: 12 Polish Miles from Lusuck, and 21 from
Lemburgh to the North-East.

Wobourn, a Market Town in Bedfordshire, in the Hundred of Manshead.

Woerden, Voerda, a strong Town upon the Rhine; 10 Miles from Vtrecht to the
West, and 18 from Leyden. Built in 1160. by Godfrey Bishop of Vtrecht, to keep
that Potent City in awe. They accordingly resented, and never gave over their
pursuit, till in 1288. they persuaded Herman Van Woerden, (the Bishops
Governor) to put the Place into their Hands. In 1672. it suffered much from the
French.

Wolaw, Volavia, a City of Silesia, in the Kingdom of Bohemia; which is the
Capital of a Dukedom; and stands upon the Oder. Seven Miles from Breslaw to the
North, and Glogaw to the South; and five from Lignitz North-East.

Wolcmarck, Volcmarchia, a City of Carinthia, upon the Drove: 25 Miles beneath
Clagenfurt to the East.

Wolga, Rha, one of the greatest Rivers, not only of Russia. but of Europe:
called by the Tartars, Edel; by the Armenians, Thamar. It arises in the
Province of Resckow, toward the Borders of Lithuania near the Lake of Wronow:
and falls first into the Lake of Wolgo. Then flowing East it waters Tweer,
Gorodna, Jerislow, and Novogorod Nisi. (where it receives the Occa, a vast
River, from Moscow:) so passing North to Wasiligorod and Casan, it turns East
to Samara, and South to Soratof. A little above the ruins of Zaresgorod, it
detaches a small River to the North, and beneath it 7 more; which all fall into
the first. So passing to Astrachan, beneath that City it falls with four Mouths
into the Caspian Sea. The learned Olearius has given an exact Map of this
River, from the entrance of the Occa to its fall into the Caspian Sea.

Wolgast, Volgasta, a City of the Hither Pomerania; which is the Capital of
that Province, at the Mouth of the Oder: five Miles from the Shoars of the
Baltic Sea, and 14 from Anclam. It is strengthened with a noble Castle, which
was the Seat of the Dukes of Wolgast. In 1630. this City was taken by the
Swedes. In 1675. retaken by the Duke of Brandenburgh: and in 1679. restored to
the Swedes by Treaty.

Wolkowiska, Volkoviska, a City of Poland, in the Palatinate of Novogrod; ^near
the River Ross in Lithuania: 45 Miles from Bielsko to the North-East, and 55
from Novogrod to the West.

Woller, a Market Town in the County of Northumberland, in Glendale ward, on
the side of a Hill; near the River Till, falling Northward into the Tweede.

Wolmer, Volmaria, a small City in Livonia in Litland, upon the River Teyder: 9
German Miles from Felin to the South, and 15 from Riga to the South-East. Near
this Wolmer, the King of Denmark gave the Livonians a great Defeat in 1218.

Wolodimer, Velodomiria, a City of Moscovy, which is the Capital of a Dukedom
of the same Name: upon the River Clesma: between Moscow to the South-West, and
Novogrod Nisi to the North-East, forty five German Miles from either. Anciently
the Capital of Black Russia, and the Seat of the Dukes of Russia.

Wologda, a great strong City, which is the Capital of a Dukedom of the same
Name, upon the River Dwina: ninety Miles from Jerislow to the North, and fifty
from Novogrod Nisi to the North West.

Wolverhampton, a Market Town ^in Staffordshire, in the Hundred of Seisdon,
upon a Hill: enriched formerly with an Abbey. Its Gollegiate Church is annexed
to the Deanery of Windsor.

Wolwich, or Woolwich, a Market Town in the County of Kent, in Sutton Lath,
upon the Thames: where it has a Dock for the Royal Navy of England.

Womie. See Medniky.

Woodbridge, a Market Town in the County of Suffolk, in the Hundred of Looes:
upon the River Deben, and the side of a Sandy Hill. Provided with four or five
Docks for building of Ships. It is a large and well frequented Town: has a
fair Church with Monuments in it; and many Ships of Burden belonging to its
Inhabitants. The Deben twelve Miles below it falls into the Sea.

Woodstock, a Market Town and Corporation in Oxfordshire, in the Hundred of
Wotton: represented in Parliament by two Burgesses. It stands pleasantly upon
an Ascent, near a small River, and a large Park enclosed with a Wall. The
ancient Royal House, called Woodstock Bower, built by King Henry I. Enlarged
by Henry II. Honored with the Birth of Edward the Black Prince, and famous for
the Death of the fair Rosamond (admired by Henry II.) in the Labyrinth
adjoining, stood in this Park till its destruction in the long Civil Wars.

Worcestershire, Vigornia, is bounded on the North by Staffordshire: on the
East by Warwickshire and Oxfordshire; on the South by Gloucestershire; and on
the West by Herefordshire and Shropshire. A rich and populous County in the
form of a Triangle, extending from North to South 32 Miles, from North to West
28, in Circumference 220: enclosing 152 Parishes, and 11 Market Towns. The Air
is very gentle and temperate, the Soil fruitful, and equal in goodness to the
best in England. Watered by the Severne, Stoure, Salwarpe, Arrow, Feck, and
Avon: which all meet in one noble Southern Point of this County at Tewksbury.
Here are many excellent Salt Pits in this County. The most ancient Inhabitants
were the Cornavii, subdued by the Romans in the Reign of Claudius Caesar. After
it became a part of the Mercian Kingdom.

Worcester. Branonium, Vigornia, Brannogenium, Brangoniae, the Capital City of
this County: called by the Welsh, Caer Vrangon; by Ninius, Caer Guorcon. It is
seated on the Eastern Bank of the Severn, (over which it has a fair Stone
Bridge with a Tower;) and from it was walled in the form of a Triangle, and
thought to have been built by the Romans against the Silures. In 1041. it was
burnt down by Hardy Canute King of Denmark. In 1113. burnt the second time by
accident. The Cathedral Church was begun by Sexwolfe, in 680. In which Prince
Arthur (the eldest Son of Henry VII.) lies buried in a plain black jet Tomb;
and King John in a white one. This Town suffered much for its Loyalty to
Charles I. and Charles II. Especially in 1651: when after the fatal Battle
under her Wall^* Sept. 3. she fell into the Hands of the enraged Tyrant, Oliver
Cromwell. Long. 18. 10. Lat. 52. 32. Boselius was settled as a Bishop here by
Etheldred, King of the Mercians, in 679. The first Earl of Worcester, was Vrsus
de Abot: Created by William the Conqueror in 1087. The second VValeran de
Beaumont, in 1144. The third Thomas Percy, Lord Admiral, in 1397. The fourth
Richard Beauchamp, in 1420. The fifth John Tiptoft, Lord Treasurer, and Lord
Constable, in 1449. Succeeded by Edward his Son, in 1477. who died in 1485. The
seventh Charles Somerset, Lord Herbert, (Natural Son of Henry Beaufort the
eighth Duke of Somerset, who was beheaded under King Edward IV.) Created Earl
by Henry VII. in 1414. in which Family it now is. Henry the 7th in this Line,
for his great Virtue and Loyalty, by Charles II. was created Duke of Beaufort,
in 1682. Augustine the Monk celebrated a Council in this City, as we learn from
Bid.

Worksop, a Market Town in Nottinghamshire, in the Hundred of Bassetlaw, and
the Forest of Sherwood. Noted for excellent Liquorish.

Worm, Warmus, a River in the Dukedom of Limburg.

Worms, Worbacia, Borbetomagus, Borbitomagus Vangionum, a City in Germany,
within the Bounds of the Lower Palatinate: which is a Free and Imperial City,
but not populous. It stands upon the VVestern Bank of the Rhine: seven German
Miles above Mentz, and six beneath Spiers. An ancient Roman City, called
Bormetomagus Vangionum. It is supposed to have been a Colony of Ments, after it
became subject to the Romans: ruined by Attila, King of the Huns, and rebuilt
by Clovis King of France. It was in the beginning of Christianity an
Archbishops See: but in 729. Pepin King of France, took away its Metropolitan;
and made it only a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Ments. Henry II,
Emperor of Germany, forced Otho, (Son of Conrad, the Duke of this Country) to
retire to Brussels: so it became a Free City. Frederick II. Charles IV.
Maximilian I. and Ferdinand I. in their times added to its Privileges. There
was a Council held here in 1078. in which Gregory VII. Pope was deposed for
Adultery and Necromancy, by the Partisans his Enemies of the Emperor Henry IV.
A Famous Diet also in 1521. in which Luther defended his Doctrine before the
States of the Empire. Long. 30. 03. Lat. 49. 33. This City is still by the
Italians called Bormio. The French demolished it in 1689.

Worotin, Vorotinum, a City of Moscovy: the Capital of a Dukedom of the same
Name. It stands upon the Occa in the Borders of Lithuania: sixty six Miles from
Moscou, to the South.

Wotton-Basset, a Market Town in Wiltshire, in the Hundred of Kingsbridge: so
called for distinction from Wotton-Vnder-Edge in Gloucester-shire; The Capital
of its Hundred.

Wreak, a River in Leicestershire; Melton-Mowbray stands upon it.

Wrexham, a Market Town in Denbighshire, in the Hundred of Bromfield.

Wrotham, a Market Town in the County of Kent, in Aylesford Lath.

Wucziden, Viminiacium, Viminacium, a Town in the Province of Servia upon the
Danube fifteen Miles from Belgrade to the East.

Wutingen, a Town in the Lower Circle of the Rhine in Germany, under the
Elector of Cologne. At which the Duke of Brabant, and the People of Cologne,
formerly fought a famous Battle.

Wurtzburgh, Herbipolis, the Capital City of Franconia, in Germany: and a
Bishops See under the Archbishop of Ments, since the year 791; when Bonifacius
Archbishop of Ments advanced it to that Dignity. It stands upon the Main, on
the North Bank; and has a strong Castle on the other side of the River, called
Marienburgh. Also a small University, founded together with a large Hospital by
one of its Bishops who died in 1617. The Capital of a great Territory and
Diocese, belonging to its Bishop; who is a rich and potent Prelate, and a Duke
of Franconia, since the times of Charles the Great: in token whereof his Grand
Marshall always assists with a Sword of State at his Master's Mass. His
Diocese extending from North to South fifteen German Miles: and besides this
City containing, Ochsenfurt, Gemund and Koningshoven. This City is fifteen
Miles from Francfort and nineteen from Mentz to the East. The Italians call it
Herbipoli. It is built in a fruitful Plain; encompassed with Hills, filled with
Vineyards, pleasant Gardens, and flowery Meadows. It has a Stone Bridge over the
River. The Territory was granted to this See by Charles the Great. Long. 31.
50. Lat. 49. 44.

Wurzen, a Town in the Upper Saxony, in Germany; in the Province of Misnia,
upon the River Muldaw: two miles from Leipsick to the East. Under the Bishop of
Meissen; but now in the hands of the Elector of Saxony, as Administrator of
that Bishopric. It belonged heretofore to the Counts of its own Name.

Wye, Vaga, a River in South Wales; which falls into the Severn at Chepstow in
Monmouthshire.. Also a Market Town in the County of Kent in Scray Lath.

X A.
XA, the same with Geichon.

Xacca. See Sacca.

Xagua, a Bay upon the Southern Coast of the Island of Cuba in America:
containing above six Leagues in Circuit, with a small Island in the middle,
which affords excellent Water. It is entered by a deep Canal; which is made
naturally safe by Rocks on each side, about a Cannon shot in length, and
narrow. The French call it le Grand Port; as being one of the best and most
commodious, in America.

Xalisco, Xalisca, a Province of New Spain in America: the same with that the
Spaniards call New Galicia.

Xalon, Salo, a River of Spain, which arises in old Castile: and watering
Medina celi, enters Arragon: in which Kingdom it takes in the Maungles, Xiloa,
Deca and Hyvela; and watering Huerta, Calataiud, Riela and Placenza, falls into
the Ebro: four Leagues above Sarragoza.

Xansi, Xansia, a Province in the North of China, which is the second of that
Kingdom. Bounded on the North by that famous Wall, which parts China from
Tartary; on the East by Pekim; on the West by Xensi; and on the South by Honan.
The Capital of it is Taiyven. It contains five great Cities, one hundred and
ninety two small; and five hundred eighty nine thousand six hundred fifty nine
Families.

Xanthi, an Ancient valiant People of Asia; mentioned by Herodotus: who being
reduced to the last Extremity in a siege by Harpagus, Cyrus's General; fired
their Citadel, with their Wives, Servants, Goods, etc. enclosed; and exposed
themselves to present Death (rather than Captivity) upon the Swords of the
Enemy.

Xanto, Xanthus, the same with Scamandro.

Xantoigne. See Saintonge.

Xantum, Xantonia, Xantung, a Province on the North of China. Bounded on the
North and East by the Bay of Nanchim, on the West by Pekim, and on the South by
Nankim; the Capital of it is Cinan. It contains six great, ninety two small
Cities; seven hundred seventy thousand five hundred and fifty five Families;
and is one of the most fruitful Provinces in that vast Kingdom.

Xaocheu, Xaocheum, a City in the Province of Quantum, in China.

Xaoching, Xaochinga, a City in the Province of Chekiam in China, upon the
River Chey.

Xaoun, Xaoum, a City in the Province of Fokien in China, upon the River Zuyen.
The Capital over three other Cities.

Xativa, Setebis, Xativa, a small City in the Kingdom of Valentia: called by
the French Chativa. Seven Miles from Valentia to the South, and two beyond the
Xucar to the same Quarter.

Xauxa, a vast River in Peru, in America; called also el Rio Maragnon; it
arises out of the Lake Chincacocha; one hundred and twenty Miles from Lima to
the North. And falls into the River of Amazons.

Xecien, Xecienum, a City in the Province of Queichieu in China.

Xeuil, Singilis, a River of Spain; which arises in the Kingdom of Granada;
and watering Loxa, enters Andalusia; falls into the Quadalquiver, beneath
Cordova, eight Leagues to the West.

Xenfi, Xensia, a Province in the North of China. Bounded on the North by
Tartary, the Chinian Wall, and the River Croceus; on the East by Xansi, on the
South by Suchen, and on the West by the Kingdom of Thibet. The Capital of it is
Sigan. It contains eight great and one hundred and seven small Cities* nineteen
Castles, and three hundred thirty one thousand and fifty one Families.

Xeres de la Frontera, Asta Reg^^, Asi^a, Ce^areana, Xera, a City in the
Kingdom of And^l^^^a, in Spain, of great Circuit: planted in a fruitful
Country, yet not much peopled. Near this City was the last Battle fought
between Roderick (the last Gothish King of Spain) and the Moors, November 11,
in the year 71^; the loss of it put the Infidels in possession of Spain. Which
they kept till the year 1462, when they were finally subdued. It stands upon a
small River, four Miles from the Quadalquir to the East, something less from
the Bay of Cadiz North, and about seven from the City of Cadi*

Xeres de Guadiana, a small City in the Kingdom of Andalusia, upon the
Guadiana; seven Miles from its Mouth North.

Xeres de Bedaiox, or Los Cavalleros, a small City in the Kingdom of Leon in
Extremadura. It lies seven Miles from Badajox to the South, twelve from Marida
to the South-West, and twenty from Sevil to the North-VVest. There is also a
Town in New Spain of this Name.

Xerte, Xerta, a River in the Kingdom of Leon, in the Province of Extremadura;
which waters Placentia, then falls into the River Alagon, which falls into
the Tajo above Alcantara. This River is not expressed in the later Maps.

Xicli, Motichanus, a River* of Sicily, which falls into the Sea on the South
side of that Island; near a Town of that Name, in Valle di Noto.

Xicoco, an Island of Japan; represented to contain four Kingdoms.

Xilaon, a small River of Algarve in Spain; which falls into the Atlantic
Ocean, at Tavira, a City of that Province.

Xiloca, Bilbilis, a River of Spain, in the Kingdom of Arragon; which waters
Daroca, and then falls into the Xalon against Calataiud.

Ximo, one of the three principal Islands of Japan; represented to contain nine
Kingdoms. Nangazachi, Arima and Bungo are some of the considerable Cities in it.

Xincheu, Xincheum, a City of the Province of Huquam, in the Kingdom of China.

Xiria, Pholoe, a Mountain of Arcadia, in the Morea

Xca, or Xaoa, a Kingdom in Aethiopia, near the Fountains of the Nile toward
Zanguebar; part of which is under the Abissines, and the rest ravished from
them by the Gala's, a barbarous Neighbor Nation.

Xucar, Sucro, a River of Spain, which springs out of the same Mountain with
the Tajo, in the Borders of Arragon; and running South waters Cuenca,
Alarcon; and receiving the Gabriel, Algarra and Suls, falls into the
Mediterranean Sea, in the Kingdom of Valentia; over against Yvia, a small
Island.

Xuicheu, a City in the Province of Quansi, in China.

Xuncking, a City in the Province of Suchuen, in China.

Xunte, or Xuntien, Xunta, a City in the Province of Pekim in China.

Y A
YAcohdal, a Royal House of Pleasure belonging to the Kings of Sweden, one
League and a half from Stockholm, in the Province of Vpland.

Yamato, a small Province in Japan.

Yamaxiro, Yamaium, a Kingdom in Japan, toward the Bay of Noaco. The Capital
of which is Meaco, a vast City.

Yancheu, Yancheum, a City in the Province of Nankim in China.

Yarmouth, Gariannonum, a great, rich, and a very populous Seaport Town in the
County of Norfolk; on the Borders of Suffolk, at the Mouth of the River Yare;
from which it has its Name. This River rises in Norfolk near Hingham; and
running East, waters Norwich; a little above which, it takes in the Cringle;
and at it the Winder; becoming navigable by these accessions, it hastes by
Bucknam-Ferry to Burg, where it takes in the Waveny, (another navigable River)
from Beccles; a little above Yarmouth, the Thyrn; all which Rivers form here a
convenient Harbor on the German Ocean. This was a Roman Town. Cerdick the
first King of the West Saxons, landed first in this place, about the year 507.
And not fir ding it worth his while to settle, went to Sea again, and founded
the West Saxon Kingdom. Between this and the Conquerours times, this Town was
rebuilt by the Saxons. In Edward the Confessor's times, it had seventy
Burgesses; about 1340. the Inhabitants walled it. Henry II. gave it the first
Charter. After this, they had a War with the Town of Lowestoft: between which
two, there was a quarrel which has lasted to our times. In the year 1652. there
being a War with the Hollanders and the Merchants of London oppressing them in
the Herring Trade, they began to send Ships to Legorne in Italy, and by degrees
enlarged their Trade to all parts; so that it became one of the best traded
Towns on the East of England: and the Key of this Coast. But the two following
Dutch Wars fell heavy on them to their great loss. In the year 1684. Charles
II. made this a Mayor Town not long before his death. It has but one Church,
(though a very large one) founded by Herbert the first Bishop of Norwich, in
the Reign of William Rufus. Charles II. advanced the Honor of this place;
when in the year 1673. he created William Paston, Viscount Yarmouth; and in the
year 1679. Earl of Yarmouth: whose Son now enjoys that Title. The Corporation
returns two Parliament Men. There is another Yarmouth, upon the North West
Coast of the Isle of VVight; in the Hundred of VV. Medine: well built, with
Free Stone: fortified with a Castle, and Works. The second Town of Note, next
to Newport, in that Island.

Yarum, a Market Town in the North Riding of Yorkshire, in the Hundred of
Langbarg; upon the River Tees, here covered with a fair Stone Bridge.

Yaxley, a Market Town in Huntingdonshire, in the Hundred of Normancross.

Yencheu, a City in the Province of Xanton in China.

Yenne, Etanna, a Town of France; upon the Rosne.

Yeovil, a Market Town in Semersetshire, in the Hundred of Stone, upon a River
of its own name.

Yer, or Jerre, Edera, a small River of France: which falls into the Seyne in
la Brie: Five Miles above Paris to the East.

Yesd, Yesda, a great City in the Province of Airach, in the Kingdom of Persia;
one hundred and thirty Miles from Hispahan to the East.

Yglesias. See Villa de Chiesa.

Ygnos, the same with Eno.

Yla. See Ila.

Yocheu, a City in the Province of Huquam in China.

Yonne, Icauna, Jauna, Junna, a River of France; which arises in the Dukedom
of Burgundy near Autun, from the Mountains de Morvant: and passing by Clamecy
in Nivernois, receives the Cure. So passes to Auxerre, where it is first
Navigable. Then admitting the Serine and the Armancione, it falls below Sens
into the Seyne: Seventeen Leagues above Paris, and seven above Melun to the
East.

York, Eboracum, Eburacum, Brigantium, the Capital City of Yorkshire; and an
Archbishops See; in the North Riding. Called by the British Caer Effroc, by
Ninius Caer Ebrauc, by the English York. Seated upon the River Ver or Ure;
which is since by the Saxons called Ouse, from Ouseburne, a small River that
falls into it. It is in Honor, Wealth, and Greatness the second City of
England: and the far greatest not only in that Shire, but in all the North.
Having thirty Parish Churches, besides the Cathedral; and governed by a Lord
Mayor, like London. A pleasant, well built, strong, and beautiful City: and the
most ancient Archbishops See in this Island. The Ure or Ouse, having with a
gentle stream entered it from the North-West, divides it into two unequal
parts; united by a Stone Bridge. The West part (tho much less peopled) is
encompassed with a sair Wall; the other which is greater, more populous and
close built, is fortified also with strong Walls with Turrets upon them, and a
muddy Dike. Herein William the Conqueror built a strong Castle, now ruined by
time: on the North-East side of this part stands the Cathedral Church dedicated
to S. Peter; which is a stately and a venerable Fabric. This City was built by
the Romans, about the times of Hadrian the Emperor; and had the honor of a
Roman Colony bestowed on it in the Reign of Severus, who died in his Palace
here, in the year of Christ 210. In the year 306, Flavius Valerius Constantius,
Surnamed Clorus, (the Virtuous Father of Constantine the Great) ended his life
in this City. Constantine his Son, took upon him here the Government of his
Fathers share of the Empire; who became afterward the first Christian
Emperor, the deliverer of the Church, and the Establisher and Exalter of the
Cross. In the times that followed, (though she had the Honor to be an
Archbishops See; and Eborius Bishop of this City in the year 313. subscribed to
the Council of Arles, before Restitutus Bishop of London; yet) the Barbarous
Nations in the next Century breaking in upon the Roman Empire; this City
suffered from the Picts and Saxons all the miseries of War. So that about the
year 627. when Paulinus was to Baptize Edwin King of Northumberland, they were
forced to build a little Oratory of VVood for that purpose; all the ancient
Churches being entirely ruined. Hereupon that Prince began the building of the
present Cathedral, which was finished by his Successor Oswald. From this time
forward, this Church and City began to revive and flourish again. The
Archbishops had under them not only all the North of England, but all the
Kingdom of Scotland, till 1471 (or as others, 74) In 740, Egbert, Archbishop of
York, opened here a noble Library; which a contemporary Historian calls the
Cabinet of all liberal Arts: from whence Alcuinus the Preceptor of Charles the
Great, and Founder of the University of Paris, borrowed those Lights which have
since glittered there. About 867, the Danes had so weakened this City the
second time, that Osbright and Ella, Kings of Northumberland, brake easily
through its VValls: and fought the Danes in the City; where both these valiant
Princes were slain, and the Danes remained Masters of it. It was recovered
again out of the Hands of the Danes, by King Athelstane in 928: and was a City
of sixteen hundred and twenty eight Mansions, in the Reigns of Edward the the
Confessor, and William the Conqueror. In 1069, (the fourth year of the
Conqueror's Reign) Sweno the Dane, and Edgar Atheling the lawful Prince of
England, with the Scots, attacking this place; the Normans siring the Suburbs,
the City took fire too: and the Enemy entering at the same time, Fire and Sword
almost destroyed it. Those few Citizens which escaped were made a Sacrifice to
the Jealousy of William the Conqueror. In the Reign of King Stephen, Egberts
Library, the Cathedral, and a great part of the City was burnt by a casual
Fire. Nor was the Cathedral rebuilt before the Reign of Edward I. At which time
the Citizens also rebuilt the Walls of the City. Richard II. made it a County
incorporate by it self: Annexing a small Territory to it on the West side, in
which the Archbishops of York enjoy the Rights of Palatines. Richard III. began
the Repair of the Castle, which ended with his short Reign. Henry VIII. erected
here a Court of Chancery for the North; not much unlike the Parliaments of
France: which lasted till the War in 1640, put a period to it. Charles I.
retired hither in 1641: when the Tumults of London forced him from thence. This
City stood firmly to him, and had certainly restored him to his rightful
Dominion and Authority, had not the Scots broke their Faith, and entered England
the second time in 1644: who joining with Manchester and Fairfax, besieged this
City with three Armies. Prince Rupert came up and relieved it July 31. But the
Kings Forces being defeated at Marstonmoor soon after, July 16. this Loyal City
was delivered up to the Parliament upon Honorable Terms: and ill kept by the
prosperous Rebels. Long. 22 25. Lat. 54. 10. Cambden.

Yorkshire, Eboracensis Comitatus, the far greatest County of England. Divided
for Civil Affairs into three Ridings, or smaller Counties. Bounded on the North
by the Bishopric of Durham, cut off by the River Tees; on the West by
Lancashire and Westmoreland; on the South by Cheshire, Darbyshire, Nottingham,
and Lincolnshire, cut off by the Humber: On the whole Eastern side it is beaten
by the German Sea. In length from North to South near seventy Miles, in breadth
eighty, in compass three hundred and eight; enclosing five hundred and sixty
three Parishes, and forty nine Market Towns; with many Chapels of Ease, as
large and populous as Parishes. The East Riding is comprehended betwixt the
River Derwent and the Sea; being the least. The North Riding extends as far as
Westmorland; and the West Riding (which is the largest) is bounded by the two
other Ridings to the North; the Counties of Derby and Nottingham, with Cheshire
to the South; Lincolnshire to the East, and Lancashire to the West. The Air is
generally temperate, the Earth fruitful: Affords besides Corn and Grass,
excellent Mines of Coal and Lead, and Quarries of Stone. Beside the Tees and
Humber, (its mentioned boundaries), and the Dun, which separates a part of it
from Lincolnshire: Her^ is the Swale, Your, Nyd, Warfe, Are, Calder, Derwent,
all falling into the Ouse at or below York; and the Hull, falling into the
Humber at Hull. The ancient Inhabitants of it were the Brigantes; who were
conquered by the Romans with great difficulty, about the year 57. in the Reign
of Nero. About the year 547. Ina Conquered this County; and began the Kingdom
of Northumberland, of which this was a part. After the Conquest, the first and
only Earl of York (which we find upon Record) is Otho of Bavaria, in 1190. In
1385. Edmund of Langley, (fifth Son of Edward III. Earl of Cambridge) was
Created Duke of York. In 1401. Edward his Son. In 1415. Richard his Grandchild
succeeded in this Duchy. In 1474. Richard of Shrewsbury, second Son of Edward
IV. had this Title. In 1495. Henry (second Son of Henry VII. who was after King
of England) had it. In 1604. Charles second Son of King James I. In 1643.
James, second Son of Charles I. was Created Duke of York So that the three last
Dukes of York, have been afterward Kings of England.

Your, a River in Yorkshire, falling into the Ouse at York. Rippon and
Boroughbridge stand upon it.

Yperen, or Ypres, Hyprae, a City in the Earldom of Flanders; which is a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Mechlin, by the Institution of P. Paul IV.
It is very strong, and has a new Citadel. Taken by the French, March 26. in
1678, and still in their Hands. This City stands in a fruitful Plain, upon a
River of the same Name; six Leagues from Newport to the South, five from
Courtray toward Calais, and thirteen from Gand or Gaunt.

Yssel, Isala, Aliso, Isla, Fossa Drusiana, a River in the Low Countries,
believed to be a Branch of the Rhine; but indeed a Cut made by Drusius a Roman
Prince and General under Augustus the Emperor. It parts from the North Branch
of the Rhine above Arnham; and bearing North, waters Doesburg, Zutphen,
Deventer, Zwol, Campen; and parting the Velewe from Over-Yssel, falls into the
Zuyder Zee. It took this Name from a smaller River, called Alt-Yssel, the Old
Yssel: which arising near Heyden in Cleve, waters Schermbeeck* Ringeberg,
Weert, Ysselburg, Aenholt (taking in the Aa,) Burg, Dotekom; and at Doesburg,
falls into this Cut or Branch of the Rhine.

Yvica. See Ivica.

Yvoix, a small but strong Town in the Dukedom of Luxemburgh, upon the River
Chiers: four Leagues from Montmedi to the West, twelve from Luxemburgh, and two
from Sedan to the East. Taken and dismantled by the French in 1552. Refortified
by the Spaniards, and retaken by the French; recovered by the Spaniards in
1637. And I believe returned under the French again.

Yupi, a Kingdom in the Asiatick Tartary: East of the Kingdom of Niuche.

Z A.
ZAara, or Saara, a vast Desert in Africa; extending from East to West; between
Biledulgerida to the North, Nigritia to the South, Nubia to the East, and the
Atlantic Ocean to the West. The Seat of the ancient Getuli and Garamantes.
Modern Geographers have discovered some Towns, Lakes and River^ there, which
give names to the respective deserts about them. Berdoa and Zuenziga are of
this number. But generally Sands, Scorpions, and Monsters; Lions, Tigers, and
Ostriches, take up the Habitations of these Deserts.

Mar de Zabacche, the same with Limen or the Palus Moeotis.

Zaberen Elsas, Zabera, Tabernae, a City of the Lower Alsatia, upon the River
Sorr; four German Miles from Strasburg to the West: Called by the French,
Saverne. The usual Residence of the Bishop of Strasburg, whilst that City was
in the Hands of the Protestants.

Zabes, a City of Transylvania, upon the River Merish; six Miles from
Weissemburg to the South, and twenty nine from Hermstadt to the West. Called by
the Natives Zas Zebes also, and by the Germans Millembach. Some suppose it to
be the Zeugma of the Ancients.

Zacatecas, or los Zacatecas, a Province in New Spain; betwixt New, Biscay, and
New Galicia, in South America.

Zaconia, Laconia, a Province in the Morea.

Zacynthus. See Zante.

Zadaon, Calipus, a considerable River in Portugal, called also Zadan. It
arises in the Borders of Algarve; and running North, waters Alvalada, Garcia
de Minjuno, and Alcaser; and at Setuval, six Leagues South of the Tajo, falls
into the Atlantic Ocean.

Zaflan, a Lake in the Upper Aethiopia, with a Town of the same name; under the
Abyssines formerly: but ravished from them by the Galla's or Gala's, a
neighbor Nation.

Zagathai, Zagataia, a considerable Country between the Kingdoms of Thibet to
the East, Persia to the South, and the Caspian Sea to the West; in Tartary, in
Asia. Called also Vsbech.

Zagaya, one of the modern names of the Mountain Helicon.

Zagrabia, Sisopa, Zagabria, Soroga, Vicus Italicus. A City in Sclavonia, which
is a Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Colocza; and the Head of a County of
its own Name. A place of great strength and well peopled. It is near the
Borders of Croatia; forty five Miles from Vihitz to the North, fifteen from
Gradisca to the West, and eleven from Cilley to the South-East; upon the North
side of the Drove. This City and County has ever been in the Hands of the
Germans, who call it Agram. The Bishops of it have the care of all Sclavonia.

Zagrus, the Mountain dividing the ancient Media from Assyria, in Asia: through
which, some pretend that Semiramis pierced a passage into Media, which bore the
name anciently of Zagripylae, or the Streights of Zagrus; and the Mountain
itself, of Semiramis.

Zaire, Zairus, a vast and a celebrated River of Africa, in the Upper
Aethiopia: which arises out of a great Lake of the same name: and flowing
Westward, waters the Kingdoms of Cosange, Macoco, Congo, and in part that of
Loangi. At last falls into the Atlantic Ocean by a Mouth, twenty eight Miles
broad, in five degrees of Southern Latitude. This River is not navigable above
eighty Miles upward from its Mouth; by reason of its Cataracts. It has been
formerly thought, that the Nile derives its source from the Lake Zaire: But
Thevenot, and Jeremy Lobo a Portugueze, who lived twelve years in this Country,
have undecelved us with their better accounts.

Zalderane, a spacious Plain near the City Tauris, in Persia; toward the
Borders of Armenia: beyond the Euphrates: made remarkable by the Battle fought
upon it, Aug. 26. 1514. betwixt Ismael K. of Persia and Selim. I. Emperor of
the Turks.

Zama, an ancient City of Africa, which is the modern Zamora in the Kingdom of
Algiers. Called in an inscription yet extant in it, Colonia Aelia Hadriana
Augusta Zama Regia. Hannibal received a great defeat from Scipio at this City.
Juba King of Mauritania chose it for the Capital of his Kingdom. In the ancient
Christian times here, it had the honor of a Bishops See. Pliny mentions an
excellent Fountain near it of the same name.

Zambeze, a great River of Aethiopia, in Africa; which springs from a Lake of
its own name (but called also Sachat), upon the Borders of the Empires of
Monomotapa and Abyssinia: And after the reception of many Rivers into its bed,
divides itself toward its Mouth into four great Branches; enclosing diverse
large and fruitful Islands: so falls into the Aethiopick Ocean, upon the
Consines of Sofala and Mosambick. Some confound the Lake, Zambeze, with that of
Zaire.

Zamora, a City in the Kingdom of Leon, upon the River Douro; which is a
Bishops See, under the Archbishop of Compostella; so made by P. Calixtus II. in
the Reign of Alphonsus VI. in 1119. Nine Leagues from Miranda to the East, and
fourteen from Validolid to the West. See also Zama.

Zamoski, Zamoscium, a City in Red Russia; in the Kingdom of Poland; upon a
fine Plain, near the River Weper: Built by a Grand Chancellor of Poland, of
the name of Zamoski; fourteen Polish Miles from Luxemburgh to the North. It is
a place of great strength, and baffled an Attempt of the Cossacks upon it, in
1651.

Zanaga. See Senga.

Zancle, an ancient City of the Island of Sicily: whose destruction by
Anaxilaus, a King of the Rhegenses in Italy, makes it mentioned in History and
Antiquity. Ovid expresses the whole Island by its name, in saying; -- -- Zancle
quoque juncta fuisse Dicitur Italiae. Some suppose Messina now stands in the
place of it.

Zanfara, a City and Kingdom of Nigritia in Africa.

Zanguebar, Zanguebaria, a great Region in the Lower Aethiopia, in Africa. It
has this Name from the Arabians, over against whose Country it lies:
(signifying Negroes or Blacks:) upon the Ethiopian Ocean, on the Eastern Shore
of Africa. It extends from North to South; from five degrees of Northern, to
eighteen degrees of Southern Latitude: but of small breadth. The Kingdoms of
Mombaza, Melinda, Mosambick, Lamo, Queilloa, and many others of less note are
contained in it: full of Forests and Marshes, which create a pestilent Air, and
an unfruitful Soil.

Zanhaga, a Region and Desert upon the Atlantic Ocean in Africa. North of the
Kingdom of Tombutum, or Tombotu, in Lybia; under the Tropic of Cancer: South
of Marocco.

Zante, Zacynthus, a great Island in the Ionian Sea, under the States of
Venice. Twenty four Miles long, sixteen broad, and sixty in circuit. It lies
twelve Miles from Cefalonia to the South, and the same from the Morea to the
West. It contains forty eight Castles, fifty* Villages, and one City of the
same Name with the Island: which is a Bishops See under the Archbishop of
Corfu: has an excellent Harbor on the East side, defended by a strong Castle
upon an high Hill, and a Garrison of Roman Catholics; but the Inhabitants are
for the most part of the Greek Church. Mr. Wheeler says, it is not above
thirty Miles in circuit; but one of the most fruitful and pleasant places he
ever saw. Lat 36. 30. It produces Wine, Corn, and Oil with great abundance:
Robert Guichard the Valiant Norman, Duke of Puglia, dyed here in his Voyage to
the Holy Land. The chief Commodity is the Curran-Trade, which bears the Charge
of the Venetian Fleet or Armada. The City, and indeed the whole Island is very
populous; subject to Earthquakes, which forces them to build low. The Jews
have three Synagogues; the Dominicans and other Religious, three Monasteries:
the Episcopal See of Cephalonia and Zante is the same, (the two Islands making
but one Diocese:) the City Zante may contain twenty or twenty five thousand
Inhabitants: There is only one River in the Island, whose Communication with
the Sea makes it Salt; and one plentiful spring of sweet water: But the great
number of its Jacynths gives occasion to some to derive its Name from them. See
Mr. Wheeler, page 39.

Zanzibar, an Island of the Aethiopick Ocean, in Africa.

Zaquismael, Susiana, a Province of Asia.

Zara, Jadera, an ancient Roman City and Port in Dalmatia; called by the
Sclavonians, Zadar. It is an Archbishops See, upon the Adriatic. One hundred
and eighty Miles from Venice to the East, one hundred from Pola, and forty from
Sebenico. It belonged anciently to the Kingdom of Hungary; and was sold to the
Venetians, with the little Islands its dependencies, in 1409, by Ladislaus King
of Hungary and Naples, for an hundred thousand Ducats. Besides the strength of
its situation, (being encompassed with the Sea and only communicating with the
Continent by a Drawbridge, defended by six Bastions;) the Venetians have
bestowed much in artificial Fortifications. Long. 39. 23. Lat. 44. 43.

Zarnata, a Town in the Province of Tzaconia in the Morea: upon an agreeable
eminence, in a Figure almost Circular: rendered both by art and nature, a place
of great consideration. The Turkish Garrison consisted of six hundred Men, when
it Capitulated with General Morosini, in 1685. But the Aga, who commanded, in
fear of his head passed over to the Venetian Territories.

Zarmisogethusa, or Zarmis, the Capital City of the ancient Kingdom of Dacia:
in the Reign of Decebalus. Trajan caused it to be called, after his Conquest of
Dacia, Vlpia Trajana: There is an ancient Inscription, which writes; Colonia
Vlpia Trajana Augusia Dacia Zarmis: wherein both its ancient names are
preserved.

Zatmar, Zatmarium, a strong City amongst the Mountains in the Upper Hungary,
upon the River Samos, near the Borders of Transylvania; ten German Miles from
Great Waradin to the North, and fourteen from Tockay to the East. This is the
Capital of a County of the same name; and has ever been in the Hands of the
Emperor as King of Hungary: only in 1680. Teckley took it.

Zator, Zatoria, a Town in the Palatinate of Cracow, in Poland; upon the
Vistula, where the Skawda falls into it: which is the Capital of a Dukedom. Six
Polish Miles from Cracow to the West, in the Borders of Silesia.

Zayolha, or Zavolha, a Hord of Tartars in the desert Tartary; toward the Obb
and the North Sea.

Zea. This Island, of the Archipelago, is Mountainous on the North and South
Coasts: on the East, it has a secure and large Harbor. In the midst of it, a
City of its own name, which is a Bishops See of the Greek Church: the Bishop
divides his Residence betwixt this Island and Thermia. It produces good Wine,
and trades much in Silk. Anciently adorned with four Cities, and thence called
Tetrapolis. See Cea.

Zeb, Zebum, Zebes, a Town and Region in Biledulgerid, in Africa.

Zecaro, a River of Portugal.

Zeelandt. See Seelandt.

Zeila, a City in the Kingdom of Adel in Africa, at the Mouth of the Red Sea:
seated upon the Outlet of a River of the same Name: which affords it the
convenience of a good Harbor. It stands over against Aden. Long. 75. 00. Lat.
10. 35.

Zeilan, Ophir, Taprobana, a great Island in the East Indies, to the East of
the Cape of Malabar; called also Ceylan and Ceylam by the Spaniards, by the
Inhabitants Tenarisin. It is of an Oval Form; six hundred and fifty Miles in
circuit: contains nine Kingdoms. The principal of which is the Kingdom of
Candy, seated in the middle of the Island. This place produces Spice in great
abundance, which has drawn the Dutch to settle here. They have possessed
themselves of Columbo and Negombo, which belonged before to the Portuguese.
There is lately published an exact Account of this Island in English, by a
Person who lived there many years.

Zeitz, Zitia, a small City in Misnia, in the Upper Saxony, upon the River
Elster: four German Miles from Altenburg, and five from Leypsick. Heretofore a
Bishops See; now removed to Naumburg; under the Bishop of which Diocese it is.

Zela, or Ziela, an ancient City of Cappadocia, in the Lesser Asia: famous in
the Wars of Caesar, for his sudden Victory here over Pharnac^s K. of Pontus,
Son of Mithridates the Great. It became since Christianity a Bishops See, under
the Archbishop of Amasia; and now said to retain its name, tho not its honor,
under the Turks. The Veni, Vidi, Vici of Caesar, in his Letter to the Senate,
understands the Victory here.

Zelandia, Zelandt, is a small Province of the United Netherlands; heretofore
an Earldom. It consists of five Islands at the Mouth of the Schelde; which are
Walcheren, Zud Bevelandt, Nort Bevelandt, Schowen, and Duvelandt. These Islands
have been much greater than now: being in part drowned by several great
Inundations; especially in 1304, and 1509. They lie between Holland to the
North, Brabant to the East, Flanders to the South, and the German Sea to the
West. The Capital of this State is Middleburgh. The rest are Flushing,
Ziriczee, Goes, and Tolen. There are about one hundred and two Villages in it.

New Zelandt, is a part of the South Continent; discovered by the Hollanders,
in 1654: extending from North to South. But whether it be not an Island, is not
yet certainly known.

Zelbecdibes, the Greater Armenia.

Zelia, an ancient City of Troas in Mysia, in Asia the less: it stood near
Cyzicus; upon an eminence; surrounded with Plains and Mountains.

Zell, Cella, a small City in the Dukedom of Lunenburgh, upon the River Aller:
six German Miles from Brunswick, seven from Hildisheim to the North, and five
from Newstadt to the East. It is a strong place; and has a Noble Castle, which
is the Seat of a Duke.

Zell Hammerspach, Cella, a small City in Schwaben, upon the River Nagolt;
which is a free Imperial City, under the Protection of the House of Austria;
five Miles from Stutgard to the West.

Nova Zembla, a Northern Region first discovered by the Hollanders in 1594. in
their search for a passage to the East Indies by China: separated from Moscovy
by those Streights, they then called We gats Streights. In 1596. Aug. 29. they
Landed upon the North Coast of it; and were there detained, whilst their
Vessels lay engaged in Ice, to June 29. 1597. under continual night from
November. 4. to the beginning of February: excessive cold, and in a desert
quarter of the Country: where three of their Seamen were devoured by Wild Bears
and Wolves. It is an inhabited Country: But whether an Island of the Frozen
Sea, or joined to the Great Tartary Eastward, none have discovered.

Zemblin, a Town and County of the Upper Hungary.

Zembra, a Lake and River in Monomoapa, in Africa.

Zemonico, a Fortress in Dalmatia, seven Miles from Zara: lost to the Turks
from the Venetians in 1573: but taken and dismantled by the Venetians in 1647.
And the Turks in vain attempted to reestablish themselves in it in 1682.

Zenne. See Senne.

Zenopolis, a City of the ancient Pamphylia, in Ajia Minor: which was a Bishops
See, under the Archbishop of Seleucia; and mentioned in the first General
Council at Constantinople. The Emperor Zeno enlarged, and gave his name to it.

Zerbi, Zetta, a small Island on the Coast of Barbary, near the Shoars of the
Kingdom of Tripoli.

Zerynthus, a City and famous Cave in the Island of Samothracia, in the
Archipelago, in the ancient times: Lycophron calls the latter, Antrum Canis.
And Ovid expresses the whole Island by the City saying

Inde levi vento Zerynthia littora nacta, etc. Zeugitana, a Country of the
ancient Africa, upon the Coast of the Mediterranean, near Numidia: included now
in the Kingdom of Algiers.

Zeugma, an ancient City of Syria: which became in Christian times a Bishops
See, under the Archbishop of Hierapolis. Alexander M. built a famous Bridge
over the Euphrates here. Another in the ancient Dacia.

Zibit, Saba, Zibitum, a City in the Happy Arabia; the Capital of a Kingdom,
and a great City: seated near the Gulf of Arabia; one hundred and eighty Miles
from Aden to the West, and two hundred from the Mouth of the Gulf to the same.
The Turks not long since took it. But the King of it has since recovered it out
of their Hands. There is a River in this Kingdom of the same name. Long. 76.00.
Lat. 16.56.

Zidem, Ziden, Acila, Ocelis, a Port Town upon the Red Sea, the nearest to
Mecca. It stands on the North side of the River Eda or Chaibar: twenty German
Miles from Mecca to the South-West. A place of great Antiquity, and anciently
had a very good Trade; being the usual Port, as Pliny says, from whence the
Ships went which sailed into the East Indies.

Ziegenhaim, Zigenhaemum, a small City in the Lower Hassia, under the
Landtgrave of Hess-Cassel; seven Miles from Cassel to the South, four from
Frislar, and six from Fuld. The Capital of a County.

Zimbao, a Town and Fortress in Monotapia.

Zina, Pamphylia, a Province of the Lesser Asia.

Zinara, a deserted Island in the Archipelago, betwixt Amorgo and Levita; with
Charuffa to the West of it: yet showing the ruins of Habitations.

Zinganes, Indian Pirates, in the Empire of the Great Mogul.

The Zinhagiens. See Bereberes.

Zirfia, the Turkish Name of Servia.

Ziriczee, a considerable Town in the Island of Schowen: belonging to the State
of Zeeland, in the United Netherlands: Built by the Flemings in 1304. The
Spaniards possessed themselves of it in 1575. But were soon expelled again.

Zirifdin or Amansifirdin, a City of the Happy Arabia: understood to be the
Acarman or Carman, by some the Omana, of the ancients.

Zitrachan, Albania, a Province of Asia.

Zittaw, Zitavia, a City of Germany in the Upper Lusatia, upon the River Neiss:
in the Borders of Bohemia, under the Elector of Saxony; four Miles above
Gorlitz to the South. Built or Fortified by Wenceslaus King of Bohemia, in 1^55.

Ziz, a Chain of Mountains in the Province of Cuzt, in the Kingdom of Fez in
Africa, to the South. Rich in Mines, but inhabited by such as make little
profit of them.

Znaim, or Znoymo, Znoimum, a City of Moravia upon the River Teye; in the
Borders of Austria; seven German Miles from Brune to the South, and ten from
Vienna to the South-West. Taken by the Swedes in 1645; and frequently by
others, in the German Wars.

Zoaro, Pisidon, a Town in Barbary, upon the Coast of Tripoli; with a
convenient Port. Taken in 1552. by the Knights of Malta by surprise.

Zocoroph, the Gulf of Arabia.

Zocotora, or Socotora, and Socotarg, Diosorias, Dioscoridis Insula, Ogyris, a
Town and Island upon the Coast of Zanguebar in Africa. Mountainous, hot, dry,
and barren: its principal product is Dates, Aloes, and Frankincense. The People
appear to be originally Arabians, by their Customs, Habits, and Language. The
only City in it is of the same name with the Island.

Zoest, the same with Soest.

Zofala, the same with Sofala.

Zofingen, a great Town or City in Argow in Switzerland, under the Canton of
Bearn: subject anciently to the Counts of Spitzbergh, who had a Citadel near
it; their Arms being still born by this City. But in 1285. it accepted of the
protection of the Emperor Rodolph I. and in 1295, was by Siege reduced entirely
under the obedience of Albert his Son. In 1396. a Fire totally consumed it.
Again being rebuilt, it obtained diverse privileges of the Princes of the House
of Austria. In 1412. it fell together with all the Country of Argow, as now,
under the Canton of Bearn. And 1528. embraced the Reformation.

Zolnoch, Zolnochium, a City of the Upper Hungary; which is the Capital of a
County of the same Name; upon the Tibiscus. Forty German Miles from Waradin to
the West, and sixty from Buda to the East. Taken by the Turks in 1552. and
retaken by the Imperialists in October 1685.

Zorandra, the place in the Mountain Taurus, upon the Confines of Armenia and
Mesopotamia, in Asia: at which the Ancients supposed the River Tigris to bury
it self under ground for some Leagues, and afterward to rise again. But we
have no such Modern account of the course of that River.

Zorlich, Tzurulum, a City of Thrace, which is a Bishops See; between
Constantinople and Hadrianople.

Zoser, an ancient City and Promontory of Attica in Greece: betwixt the Piraeus
of Athens, and the Island Zea. Much adicted to the Worship of the Goddesses
Latona and Diana in Pagan times.

Zubal, Zubu, or Zebu, one of the Philippine Islands: to which the Spaniards
gave the name of los Pintados: because the Natives had, at the time of the
discovery of it, their Faces painted with diverse colors.

Zuenziga, a small Kingdom in Africa, in Zaara: on the East of the Kingdom of
Zanhaga, and South of that of Morocco: with a City, and Desert, of its name.

Zues, the same with Sues.

Zug, Tougium, Tugium, a City and Canton in Switzerland; it consists all of
Roman Catholics, and is very small. Bounded on the North by Zurich, on the
East and South by Schwitz, and on the West by Lucerne. The City stands one Mile
from the Lake of Lucerne to the East, and eighteen from Zurich to the South. A
free Imperial City till the year 1352. when it entered the League with the other
Cantons.

Zurich, Tigurum, the Capital City of a Canton of the same Name in Switzerland;
very great and populous. Divided into two parts by the River Limat, when it
leaves the Lake of Zurich. It stands between Schafhouse to the North, and
Lucerne to the South, twenty five Miles from each; eleven from the Rhine, and
forty five from Soleurre. Made a Free Imperial City by Frederick II. in 1218.
and Leagued with the Cantons 1351. So Ancient, as to be mentioned by Caesar in
his Commentaries, who subjected it to the Romans. In the year of Christ 300. it
was burnt by the Germans, and rebuilt by Dioclefian. In the year 883. Charles
the Gross Walled it. It embraced the Reformation in 1521. Long. 30. 20. Lat.
46: 58: The Canton of Zurich is the first of the thirteen in order. Bounded by
Bearne and Lucerne to the West, Schafhouse to the North, Zug and Schwitz on the
South, and Appenzel to the East; it consists of none but Protestants.

Zuricher Zee, Lacus Tigurinus, a Lake in the Canton of Zurich; twenty five
Miles long from East to West, and five broad.

Zutphen, Zutphania, a City of Guelderland; belonging to the United Provinces,
upon the Yisel, where it takes in the Berkel; one German Mile from Deventer to
the South, and from Doesburg to the North. A place of great strength. Taken by
the French in 1672. dismantled and deserted by them two years after. The Dutch
took it from the Spaniards, in the year 1586. when Sir Philip Sidney was slain.

De Zuyder Zee, a great Bay between Friseland to the East, Guelderland to the
South, and Holland to the West. There goes a Creek from it up to Amsterdam.

Zweybrucken, Bipontium, a City of Germany; called by the French Deuxponts, and
by the Germans Zweybucken. It stands upon the River Schwolbe in Wasgow; in the
Borders of the Palatinate of the Rhine; ten German Miles from Worms to the
West, and a little more from Strasburg to the North; and is the Capital of a
Sovereign Dukedom in Alsatia, upon which the King of Sweden has some
pretensions. It suffered very much in the last German and French War.

Zwickaw, Cygnea, Zuikavia, a small City in Misnia in the Upper Saxony, upon
the River Muldaw: four German Miles from Altenburg, and ten from Leypsick. In
the Province of Voigtlandt, at the foot of the Vandalick Mountains; near the
source of the Main. It belongs to the Elector of Saxony; and in the Wars of
Charles the Great, had diverse Encampments about it to its great damage. It was
a Free Imperial City, till surprised by Frederick Marquess of Misnia, in 1308.

Zwol, Z^volla, a City of Over-yssel, upon the River Aa, not far from the
Yssel: which was a Free Imperial City and an Hanse Town, but now exempt. Eight
Miles from the Mouth of the Yssel to the South, and eighteen from Deventer to
the North. A strong place till the French took it in 1672: and dismantled it in
1674.

Zigeth. V. Sigeth.

FINIS.
To the Reader.
AMong some Faults which have escaped the Press, which the Reader is desired to
forgive and correct, as not being many nor considerable, this Oversight of the
Printer is too gross not to be minded. P. 5. Col. 2. the two last Lines of the
Description of AFRICA are annexed to the account of Afra, viz. And stands
divided into Egypt, Barbary, Biledulgerid or Numidia, Zaara or Libya, Nigritia
and Aethiopia.

A Table of the Longitudes and Latitudes of many of the most considerable
Places. In which the first Meridian is Paris. Published by Philip de la Hire,
Regius Professor of the Mathematics at Paris, in a Book Styled Tabularum
Astronomicarum Pars prima. Printed at Paris in 1687.
Long. Lat. H. M. S. D. M. ABheville 0 2 12 W 50 5 1/2 Agra 5 24 00 E 28 30
Albiga 0 3 12 W 43 44 Alenson 0 9 30 W 48 29 Aleppo 2 46 00 E 36 15 Alexandria
2 9 00 E 30 58 Amiens 0 0 12 W 49 53 46 Amsterdam 0 10 10 E 52 21 1/2 Ancona 0
47 40 E 43 54 Angers 0 12 15 W 47 27 Antibe 0 19 11 E 43 34 12 Antwerp 0 08 30
E 51 10 0 Aix Prove. 0 12 25 E 43 31 Arles 0 8 20 E 43 34 Auxerre 0 4 20 E 47 35
Athens 1 33 0 E 37 40 Arras 0 1 40 E 50 18 25 Avignon 0 9 5 E 43 51 0 Ausburg 0
35 30 E 48 24 0 Autun 0 7 40 W 46 48 0 Bajeux 0 12 10 E 49 16 ^ Barcelone 0 4
00 W 41 26 Basil 0 22 40 E 47 40 Batavia 6 34 27 E 6 15 A Bayonne 0 15 15 W 43
29 35 Beauvais 0 1 12 W 49 24 0 Bengala 6 12 0 E 21 5^ 0 Bergamo 0 30 35 E 45
43 0 Besanzon 0 16 40 E 47 18 Bourges 0 0 14 E 47 4 38 Blois 0 4 45 W 47 35 0
Bologne 0 3 0 W 50 44 0 Bononia 0 38 0 E 44 30 20 Brandenburg 0 46 0 E 52 16 0
Brunswick 0 37 0 E 52 15 0 Breast 0 27 36 W 48 22 50 Bruxelles 0 8 30 E 50 48 0
Buda 1 11 30 E 47 46 0 Bordeaux 0 11 30 W 44 50 20 Challon 0 11 00 E 46 45 0
Caen 0 11 00 W 49 10 35 Caors 0 54 45 W 44 30 00 Calais 0 2 10 W 50 56 50
Caniboia 6 51 00 E 11 20 00 Cambray 0 4 12 E 50 11 30 Chambery 0 16 15 E 45 39
15 Candia 1 46 0 E 34 40 00 Cape of Good Hope 1 10 0 E 34 15 00 Cape Verde 1 18
0 W 14 43 00 Chartres 0 3 15 W 48 30 00 Cherbury 0 16 0 W 49 38 10 Chaloons 0 9
40 E 48 56 00 Cayonna 3 35 00 W 4 56 20 Cayro Egypt 2 12 00 E 29 50 00 Clermont
0 3 00 E 45 51 15 Cologne 0 20 00 E 50 50 00 Compostella 0 48 00 W 42 58 00
Constance in Normandy 0 15 45 W 49 6 30 Constantinople 1 58 0 E 41 6 00
Copenhagen 0 41 41 E 55 40 35 Cracow 1 12 0 E 50 10 00 Cusco 5 4 0 W 12 25 A.
Dantzick 1 7 0 E 54 22 20 Diep 0 4 45 W 49 56 40 Dijon 0 11 20 E 47 20 00
Dublin 0 38 00 W 53 11 00 Dunkerk 0 0 3 E 51 1 30 Eureux 0 4 50 W 49 0 00
Edinburgh 0 20 20 W 55 47 00 Fez 0 33 00 W 33 10 00 Ferrara 0 39 3 E 44 54 15
La Fleche 0 9 52 W 47 41 40 Florence 0 38 30 E 43 41 00 Francfort 0 24 40 E 50
4 00 Gadalupe 4 15 15 W 16 20 Gades 0 38 50 W 36 16 Gand 0 6 0 E 51 1 Geneva 0
17 20 E 46 22 Genoua 0 30 00 E 44 27 Goa 4 46 00 E 15 30 Goesa 0 6 48 E 51 30
Grenoble 0 15 0 E 45 16 Hamburgh 0 33 00 E 53 41 Haver de Grace 0 8 40 W 49 36
00 Heidelburgh 0 27 00 E 49 20 Insula Ferro 1 22 00 W 28 05 0 Kebec 4 49 00 W
47 00 0 Laon 0 5 20 E 49 31 40 Limoges 0 4 45 W 45 45 00 Liege 0 15 00 E 50 40
00 Leisieux 0 8 30 W 49 8 0 Lima 5 33 0 W 12 20 A. Lingones 0 13 0 E 47 45
Lisbone 0 52 0 W 38 40 Lypsick 0 44 0 E 51 19 15 London 0 8 W 51 32 0 Lions 0
11 E 45 45 20 Macao 7 35 0 E 22 13 00 Maestricht 0 14 10 E 50 50 Malaga 6 31 20
E 2 42 6 Le Man's 0 8 50 W 50 3 30 Mantua 0 35 0 E 45 11 Martinica 4 14 45 W 14
44 Marseilles 0 12 30 E 43 19 45 Madrid 0 22 0 W 40 10 Milan 0 29 15 E 46 20
Meaux 0 2 15 E 48 56 Malta 0 51 0 E 35 40 Messina 0 55 45 E 38 21 Metz 0 17 0 E
49 14 Mexico 7 10 0 W 20 10 Moulins 0 4 15 E 46 26 Munich 0 38 10 E 48 58
Moscow 2 38 0 E 55 18 Mompellier 0 6 10 E 43 36 40 Modena 0 36 26 E 44 38 50
Namur 0 11 50 E 50 25 0 Nancy 0 18 20 E 48 39 Nantes 0 15 30 W 47 13 0 Narbonne
0 0 0 * 43 15 30 Naples 0 54 0 E 41 5 00 Nevers 0 3 0 E 46 54 0 Nurenburgh 0 40
10 E 49 29 Olinda, Brasil 2 28 0 W 7 48 A. Orleans 0 1 45 W 47 53 56 Ormus 3 58
0 E 27 30 Oxford 0 13 40 W 51 46 Pau 0 10 0 W 43 10 Parma 0 33 50 E 44 44 50
Paris, Obs. 0 0 0 * 48 50 Padua 0 36 4 E 45 31 Pekin 7 42 32 E 40 0 0 Poictiers
0 7 25 W 46 34 30 Prague 0 49 30 E 50 4 30 Raguza 1 5 12 E 42 33 00 Ratisbonne
0 40 8 E 48 59 Rennes 0 17 0 W 48 3 0 Reims 0 7 12 E 49 12 30 Rhodes 2 2 40 E
36 22 0 Rome 0 42 0 E 41 51 0 Roterdam 0 8 40 E 51 55 Roan 0 4 56 W 49 27 30
Rochelle 0 14 25 W 46 10 15 Rodez 0 0 45 W 44 10 0 St. Maloes 0 18 00 W 48 38
20 Saumur 0 10 5 W 47 14 15 Sedan 0 11 20 E 49 46 0 Sens 0 3 40 E 48 4 0 Cape
Settee 0 5 30 E 43 23 30 Siam 6 34 15 E 14 10 0 Siracusa 0 52 20 E 37 4 0
Spahan 4 14 0 E 36 14 0 Stockholm 1 5 0 E 59 30 0 Strasburgh 0 23 0 E 48 32
Turin 0 23 40 E 44 0 0 Toledo 0 28 0 W 39 46 Toulon 0 14 22 E 43 6 Tolasa 0 6
40 W 43 30 Troyes 0 7 10 E 48 8 Tubingen 0 28 0 E 48 34 Tours 0 6 40 W 47 23
Valence 0 11 25 W 44 53 Vennes 0 19 35 W 47 36 Venice 0 40 40 E 45 33 Vienne 0
11 30 E 45 28 Vienna Aust. 1 0 0 E 48 22 Utrecht 0 11 20 E 52 05 Uraniburg 0 42
10 E 55 54 5 Urbine 0 43 34 E 43 53 0 Warsaw 1 17 00 E 52 14

AN ADVERTISEMENT Concerning the INDEX.
FOR the shortning this Index as much as was possible, I have entirely, 1.
Omitted all those Latin Names which are formed from the Vulgar, and differ from
them in little or nothing but their Termination. 2. The greatest part of the
ancient Latin Names which are now in common use. 3. Most of those Latin Names
which have the four first Letters of the Vulgar Names. In all which cases the
Reader shall find the Word he seeks in the body of the Book in its proper place.

After almost every Name there is a Letter placed, which shows the Reader what
it is: as,

C. City. F. Fort or Castle. I. Island. K. Kingdom. L. Lake. M. Mountain. O.
Town. P. Province, and Port. R. River. T. Territory.
Where any of these Letters are doubled there are several Places of the same
Name.

The Latin Names are in the Roman Letter, and the Vulgar in the Italian; and
those that are in the English Letter, belong to England, Scotland, or Ireland.

AN INDEX OF THE Ancient and Latin Names Mentioned in this DICTIONARY.
ACR
AAda, Le Aade. r. Aara, Aar. r. Aballaba, Apppleby. o. Abantis, Negropont. c.
Abarinus, Navarino. c. Abassinia, Aethiopia. k. Abbatis Viila, Abbeville. c.
Abbatiscella, Appenzel. ^. Abravanus, Rain. l. Abria, Loquabre. ^. Abella,
Avella. c. Abellinum, Avellino. c. Abrincae, Auranches. c. Abula, Avila. c.
Vilches. o. Abus, The Humber. r. Abusina, Abensperg. Abydus, Abutich, c.
Abydus, Aidos. f. Abyla, Almina. m. Acaeorum Pontus, Porto Bon. p. Acc^,
Guadix. r. Accipitrum Insulae, Azores. c. Acedum, Ceneda. c. Acesta, Barbaria.
o. Achada, Achonrey. c. Achaia, Livadia. p. Achates, Drillo. r. Achelous,
Geromelea. r. Acheron, Campagnano, Verlichi. r. Acheron, Fana, Savnto, r.
Acherontia, Acerenza. c. Acherusia, Jalina. l. Achridus, Giustandil. c. Acila,
Zidem. c. Acis, Fredo. r. Acicthus, B^igi, Carabis. r. Acmona, Severino. c.
Acon, Acre. c. Acragas, Draco. Acris, Giustandil. c. Acroceraunium, Capo della
Lenguett^. r. Actania, Heilichlandt. i. Actium, Figalo, a Cape. Acula,
Aquapendente. c. Acuminium, Petrowaradin. c. Acusio, Grenoble, c. -- Colonia,
Ancone. c. Ada^^, Aden. r. Addua, Add. r. Adjaclum, Ajazzo. c. Adramyttium,
Andramati, alias Exdromit, alias Landramiti. Adrana, Eder. r. -- Roer. r.
Adria, Atri. c. Adrumentum, Mahometa. c. Adrianopolis, Adrianepoli. c.
Adriaticum Mare, The Gulf of Venice. Aduaaca, Tongres. c. Adula, S. Gothards,
or Gotherdsberg. m. Ae^usus, Ivica, i. Aedui, Autunois. r. Aegates, Gotham.
Aegathos, Favagnana. i. Aegaeum Mare, The Archipelago. Aegesta, Barbra.
Aegircius, Eg^rs, Gers. r. Aegritia, Egrez. r. Aeglesburgus, Alesbury. o.
Aelana, Eltor. c. Aemilia, Romagnia. p. Aemoda, Romagnia. p. Aemilia,
Schetland. Aemonia, Laubach. c. Aenaria, Ischia. i. Aenos, Eno. c. Aenus, Inn.
r. Aenona, Nona. c. Aeria, Vaison. c. Aer^a, Aerea, Air, Air. c. Aesar^s,
Serchio. r. Aesernia, Jernia. Aesia, Oyse. r. Aesis, Esino. r. Aesfium, Essisi.
c. Aetna, Etna. m. Agatha, Agathopolis, Maguelone. c. -- S. Agati de Goti. c.
Agendicum, Sens. c. Aginum, Again. c. Agenois. r. Agneda, Edenburg. c. Agras,
Draco. r. Agrigentum, Gergenti. c. Agrippina Colonia, Cologne. c. Aila, Eltor.
c. Ala Flaviana, Vienna. c. Ala Narsica, Aichstadt. c. Alata Castra, Edinburgh.
Alaunius, Avon. r. Alavinus, Avon. r. Alavand^, Eblata. c. Alba, Tardera. r.
Alba, Aube. r. c. Alba, Aelvas. c. Alba Graeca, Belgrade, Griecks Weissenburgh.
c. Alba Julia, Weissemburg. c. Alba Longa, Albano Palazzulo. Alba Maritima,
Zarra. r. -- Marsorum, Albi. c. Alba Regalis, St^el-Weissenburg. c. Alba
Pompeia, Alba. c. Albania, Albany, Scotland. k. Albintiminium, Vintimiglia. c.
Albis, Elb. r. Albula, Tiber. r. Alcimaenis, Ulm. c. Aldenardum, O^denarde. o.
Alecta, Alet. c. Alectum, Dundee. o. Alesia, Alais. c. Ale^ium, Lecca. c. Alex,
Alessio. r. Alexandria, Alessandria. c. Alexandria, Scanderone. c. Alexandria
of Egypt. c. Aliacmon, Pelecas. r. Alione, Lancaster. o. Aliso, Wesel. c.
Alisus, Parthen. c. Alonae, Alicant. c. Alpinus, Alpon Vecchio. r. Allobroges,
Dauphine, Savoy, c. Alisuntia, Als, Alsitz. r. Alpheus, Orfea. r. Alpheus,
Darvon. r. Aluta, Olt. r. Alvernia, Auvergne. p. Amaga vel Amagria, Ammah,
Dra^ker. i. Amasia, Marpurg. c. Amasia, Emden. c. Amasius, Ems. r. Amacum,
Macao. c. Amastrus, Famastro. c. Amanus, Judicel. o. r. Amalphis, Malphi. c.
Ambacia, Ambois^. o. Ambari, Nivernois. p. Ambavariti, Brabant. p. Ambianum,
Amiens. c. Amaea, Porta Legre. c. Amestrata, Mistretta. o. Amestris, Semastro.
c. Amida, Amidaea, Caramit, Hemid. c. Amilhanum, Milaud. c. Amphipolis, Emboli.
c. Ampsaga, Collo. r. Amicli, Scala Marmorea. c. Amizon, Mezo. c. Anas,
Guadiana. r. Anas^us, La Piave. r. Anatolia, Asta the Less. Anaxanum, Lanciano.
Anazarbus, Ac-Sarai Ain-Zarba. c. Anchialus, Achelo. r. Ancira, Engury. c.
Andanius, Tisindon, r. Anderitum, Mande. c. Andegavum, Angers. c. Ander, Indre.
r. Andomatunum, Langres. c. Anemo, Lamone. r. Anemurium, Stalemura. c.
Angeracum, S. Jean de Angoli. o. Angianum. -- Angia. Enghien. c. Anglia,
England. k. Anicium, Le Puy. c. Anio, Teverone. r. Anisus, Ens. c. Annobi,
Baar. Ansa, Ossona. c. Antaradus, Tortosa. c. Antiochia Maeandri, Tachiali. c.
Antissiodorum, Auxerre. c. Anti-Taurus, Roham-Thaura. m. Antardus, Tortesa. c.
Antona Australis, Southampton. o -- Borealis, Northampton. o. Antonia. Utrecht.
p. Anxur, Terracina. c. Aous, Aeas, Polina. r. Apamaea, Haman, Hems. c. Apamia,
Pamiers. c. Apeneste, Vieste. c. Aphana, Queximi. i. Aphas, Apheas, Inacho. r.
Apidanus, Pidanemo. r. Apidanus, Epideno. ^. Aprutium, Teramo. c. Aprutium,
Abruzzo. p. Apsarus, Arcani. r. Apta Julia, Apt. c. Apua, Pontremoli. c.
Apulia, La Puglia. p. Apulia Daunia, La Puglia Piana. p. Aqur, Baden. c. Aquae
Augustae, Acqs, Dax. c. Apulia Peuc: tia, Terra di Bari. p. Aquae ^alidae,
Aigues Caldes. c. Aquae Fervidae, Fervaques. c. Aquae Helvetiorum, Ober-Baden.
c. Aquae Sextiae, Aix. c. Aquae Statelliae, Aqui. c. Aquinum, Buda, c.
Aquisg^anum, Aix la Chapelle, Aquigrane. c. Arapotes, Buhiera. l. Arar, Saosne.
r. Arauris, l' Erault. r. Arausio, Orange. c. Arca, Hereck. c. Arcennum,
Bracciano. c. Araxis, Achlar. r. -- Colactz. c. Aretas, Lipuda. r. Aretium,
Arezzo. c. Aremorica, Bretagne. p. Arenacum, Arnheim. c. Areva, Eresma. r.
Argenes, Orne. r. Argentanum, S. Marco, Argentina. c. Argentoratum, Strasburg.
c. Argiruntum, Peschia. c. Argyrutum, Novigrad. c. Aria, Heri. p. Aria, Air.
c. Aricenium, Hereford. c. Arietis frons, Famar. cape. Ariminum, Rimini. c.
Ariminus, Marrechia. r. Arinianum, Rinano. o. Ariona, Ombla. r. Armenia,
Aladuli, Turcomania. p. Armoda, Schetland. i. Armorica, Bretagne. p. Armuzia,
Ormus. c. Arnapa, Horndiep. r. Arrabo, Raab. r. Arola, Aar, Air. r. Aromata,
Guardafu. c. Arsacia, Casbin. c. Arsicua, Brin. c. Arsinarium, Mecanda, cape
Verde. Arsinoe, Sues. c. Artaxata, Teflis. c. Artabarum, Santa Maria de finis
terre. cap. Artalbinum, Basil. c. Artemita, Van. f. Artigi, Alhama. c.
Arvernae, Clermont. c. Arvis, Bialogrod. c. Arula, Loir. Loyr. r. Arunci,
Ronches. c. Arunda, Ronda. c. Arvonia, Caernarvan. c. Arimaydus, Seguino. r.
Asaphopolis, Asaph. c. Ascalingium, Hildesheim. c. Ascalon, Scalona. c.
Asciburgus, Gollenberg. m. Ascrivium, Cattare. c. Asculum, Ascoli. c. Asta,
X^res. c. Astacus, Geivise. c. Astelphus. Engur. r. Astigl, Astygi, Ecij^. c.
Asindum, Medina, Sidonia. o. Assinnarius, Falconaria. r. Atax, L' Aude. r.
Aternum, Aternus, Pescara. r. etc. Ateste, Este. o. Athanasia, Lerida. c.
Athenae, Athens, Sentines. c. Atheniensis Legio, Thienen. o. Athenopolis,
Antibe. c. Athesis, Etsch. r. Athesis, Tees. r. Athiras, Glycynero. r. Athiso,
Tosa. r. Athos, Agion-Oros. c. Athyras, Glycynero. r. Atlantia, Colojero. i.
Atlas, Erif, Aiducal. m. Atrax, Voidanar. c. Atrebatum, Arras. c. Atrianus,
Tartaro. r. Atropatia, Servan. p. Attalia, Satalia. c. Atuacutum, Tongres. o.
Atura, Eure. r. Aturum, Air. c. Aturus, Adour, Dour. r. Avalonia, Glastenbury.
o. Audomarum, S. Omers. Avens, Carresi. r. Aventicum, Wislisburg. c. Aufidus,
Offanto. r. Augae, Eu. o. Augaea; Auge. ^. Augusta Acilia, Straubingen. c. --
Bracarum, Braga. c. -- Emerita, Merida. c. -- Firma, Ecita. c. -- Praetoria,
Aouste. c. -- Rauracorum, Augst. c. -- Romanduor, Luxemberg. c. -- Taurinorum,
Turin. c. -- Tiberi^, Ratispon. c. -- Trevirorum, Trier. c. -- Tricast^norum,
S. Paul. c. -- Trinobantum, London. c. -- Vagiennorum, Saluces. c. --
Veromanduorum, Vermand. S. Quintin. c. -- Vindelicorum, Ausburg. c.
Augustobona, Troyes. c. Augustodunum, Autun. c. Augustomagus, Senlis. c.
Augustoritum, Poctiers, Limoges. c. Avia, Forcone. o. Aviarium, Pluvers. c.
Avinus, Avin, r. Aulerci Cenomani, Le Maine. p. -- D^ablintes, Le Perch. p. --
Eburovices, d' Eureux. p. Auna, Emeley. c. Aurea Chersonesus, Malaca. c.
Aureapolis, Ingoldstadt. c. Aureatum, Alchstadt. c. Aurelia, Lintz. c. Aurelia,
Orleance. c. Aurelia Allobrogum, Geneva. c. Auria, Orense. c. Aurigi, Aurinx.
c. Arigi, S. Jean. c. Auser, Serchio. r. Aastrasia, Lorain, Westrick. p.
Austria, Racuska. p. Autricum, Chartres. c. Autura, Eure. r. Auximum, Osimo. c.
Axiace, Oczakow, c. Axona, Aisn. r. Azania, Adel. k.
B A
Babylon, Bagdat. c. Babylon, Cairo. c. Bacenis Sylva, Westerwaldt, Hartzwaldt.
c. Bactria, Orasan. p. Baduhennae Lucus, Seven-waldt, Coeworden. c. Bacueen. f.
Baetis, Guadalquivir. r. Bacuntius, Bosevetha. r. Baetius, Eda. r. Baetulo,
Bedelona, Beses. Bagrada, Tisindon. r. Bajocae, Bajeux c. Baiocensis, Tractus,
Bessin. Baleares, Mayorca. c. Balticus Sinus, the Baltic Sea, Germ. De Belt.
Barcino, Barelone. c. Basiana, Posega. c. B^silia, Norway. k. Basti, Baza. c.
Batava, Passaw. c. Batavi, Holland. p. Batavodurum, Deurstede. o. Bathis, Javi.
r. Bathonia, Fath. c. Bavacum Picardiae, Beanvais in Picardy. c. -- Wallonense,
Beauvais in Halnault. o. Baujovicum, Beaujeu. o. Bebba, Dunstaburg. c. Bedesis,
Montone. r. Belgae, Wells. c. Somersetshire. Belgium, the Low Countries.
Bellojovlum, Beaujeu. o. Bellomariscus, Beaumaris. p. Bellomontium, Beaumont.
o. Bellositum, Oxford. o. Bellovacum, Beauvais. o. Belsia, Beause. p. Benacus,
Lago di Garda, Gardsee. l. Bengebres, Ghazuan. m. Berenice, Bernish. c.
Bermius, Messo. m. Bernia, Ireland. Beroa, Berthoea, Aleppo. c. Besidia,
Bisignano. c. Biandina, Rampano. o. Bibracte, Autune. c. Bicurgium, Erfurdt. c.
Bigerra, Villena. c. Bigerrones, La Bigorre. p. Bilbilis, Xiloa. c. Bipontium,
Deux-ponts, Zuibrucken. c. Bisontio, Besanzon. c. Bistricia, Bestercze,
Nosenstadt. c. Bithynia, Biscangial, Chiutale. c. Biturix, Biturigiae, Bourges.
c. Blesae, Blois. o. Beliterae, Besiers. c. Boactus, Frigido. r. Bocanum,
Maroccho. Bochanium, Bouchain. o. Bodeni, Podolia. p. Boderia, see Bodotria.
Bodincomagus, Casale. c. Bodobriga, Bopart. o. Bedotria, Edenburg-Firth.
Boetia, Stramulipa. p. Bogadium, Fristar. c. Boiatum, Bayonne. c. Bojodurum,
Passaw. c. Bonium, Bangor. o. Bosphorus, O^hsenfurt. c. Bostra, Busseth. c.
Bormetomagus, Worms. c. Borysthenes, Nieper. r. Bovianum, Boiano. c. Bounsonia,
Boens. o. Bracara, Bracara, Braga. c. Bracenum, Bracciano. c. Brancsia,
Oldenburg. c. Branonium, Worcester. c. Brassovia, Croastadt. c. Bravum, Burgos.
c. Bremium, Berwick. c. Brennoburgum, Brandenburg. c. Brannopolis, Hildesheim.
c. Brigantes, Yorkshire. Brigantia, Braganza. c. Brigantum, Compostella. c.
Briocum, S. Brieu. c. Britannia, Britain, England. k. Britannia minor,
Bretague. p. Britannodumum, Dunbritoun. o. Brivas, Brive, Bironde. c. Brivates,
Breast. o. Brixia, Brescia. c. Brundusium, Brindisi. c. Brundusia, Porentru. c.
Bruttii, Calabria. p. Bryganium, Bracciano. c. Buca, Termini. c. Budoris,
Durlach. c. Burgundiae Comitatus, French^-Comte. p. Bullonium, Bouillon. o.
Busiris, Asakal. c. Butreae, Besiers. c. Bythinia, Chiutale, Bescangial. p.
Byzantium, Constantinople. c. Byzia, Vize. c.
C A
Cabalicus Ager, Chablais. p. Cabeilio, Cavailon. c. Cabillonlum, Challon. c.
Cacelina, Chalcedon. c. Cacorum, Villach. c. Cadavus, Cavado, r. Cadomus, Caen.
c. Cadurcensis Tractus, Quercy. p. Cadurcum, Cahors. c. Caelio-Briga, Braganza.
c. Caenus, L'Arc. r. Caeretanorum Emp. S. S^v^ra. c. Caeretanus, Eri. r.
Caesarea magna, Caisar. c. Caesarea, Jersey. i. Caesar-Augusta, Saragoza. c.
Caesariana, Xerxes de la frontera. c. Caesarodunum, Tours. c. Caesaro-Lutra,
Keisers Lautern. c. Caesaromagus, Beauvais. c. Caesaropolls, Keisers Lautern.
c. Caesortium, Gisors. o. Caferoniana, Grafignana. c. Caicus, Girmasti. r.
Cajeta, Gaeta, Gaiette. c. Calabria, Terra d'Otranto. p. Calaguris, Calahorra.
c. Calaetla, Wittemburg. c. Calatia, Cajazzo. c. Calaris, Cagliari. c.
Calarona, Garon. r. Calathia, Cajazzo. c. Calcaria, Tadcaster. o. Calciata,
Calzada. c. Cale, Call, Cagli. c. Cale, Porto. c. Caledonia, Scotland. k.
Calenum, Carniola. c. Cales, Calvi. c. Caletae, Caux. p. Caletum, Calais,
Cales. c. c. Caleva, Calleva, Oxford. c. Caliabrum, Montanjes. c. Callipolls,
Gallipoli. c. Calipus, Zadaon. r. Calidobecum, Caudebec. c. Calicadnus, Ferro.
r. Calonesus, Belle-Isle. g. Calonis, Cleves. r. Calpe, Gib^alter. c.
Calvomontium, Chaumont. c. Camachus, Kemach. c. Camalodunum, Maldon. o. Cama,
Scala. c. Camberlum, Chambery. c. Cambodunum, Kempten. c. Camboritum,
Cambridge. Cambus, Kamp. r. Cameracum, Cambray. Caminecum sive Camenecla,
Kaminieck. o. Campania, Champagne. p. Campania Foelix, Terra di Lavoro,
Campagna di Roma. p. p. -- Camp^, Kampen. c. Campodunum, Kempen. c.
Camulodunum, Maldon, Almondsbury. o. Canapicium, Canavese. p. Cangria, see
Gangria. p. Candida Casa, Whithern. c. Canopus, Ros^tto. c. Cantabri,
Guipuscoa. p. Cantium, Kent. Cantuaria, Canterbury. c. Capernaum, Jefferkin. o.
Cappadocia, Tocat. p. Caput Aquaeum, Cappacio. ^. Caprea, Capri. i. Caprasia,
Magna Vacca. o. Caralis, Cragliari. c. Carabogdiana, Moldavia. p. Carbonaria,
Porto Gori. o. Canbantobrigum, Glencarn. p. Carcoviaca, Kirkwall. o. Caracca,
Henares. r. Caramania, Macran. p. Carambice, Obb. r. Caranthonus, Charente. r.
Carentani, Stiria and Carinthia. Carentonium, Charenton. o. Carentelus,
Charente. r. Carethna, Cariniala Vallis, Bab^liza. o. Caria, Aidinelli,
Menteseli. p. Caris, Cher. r. Carleolum, Carlisle. c. Carmania, Kherman. p.
Carni, Priuli. p. Carnicum, Julium, Fella. c. Carnovia, Jagerndof. o.
Carnovium, Stella. c. Carnutum, Chartres. c. Carpanthus, Scarpanto. i.
Carpentoracte, Carpentras. c. Carraca, Guadaljara. c. Carrhae, Heren. c.
Carrio, Carrion. r. Carrodonum, Crakow, Lemburg. c. c. Cassiope, Janinnia. c.
Cassiterides, Silley Isles. Casius, Lison. m. Castra Ulpia, Cleves. c.
Castellodunum, Chastea^dun. c. Castellum Cattorum, Cassel. c. Castellum
Menapiorum, Kessel. c. Castellum Morinorum, Cassel. o. Castrum, Castro. c.
Castrum Alatum, Edemburg. Castrum Albiensium, Castres. Castrum Caledonium,
Dundellt. Castrum Britonum, Dun-Briton. c. Castrum Heraldi, Castelleraut. c.
Castulo, Caslona. c. Casuentum, Vasento. r. Catalaunum, Chaalons. c.
Catraleucos, Guimaranes. o. Caturiges, Gapenzois. r. Caucasiae Portae, Derbent.
c. Caunus, Monaco. m. Caunus, Caco. m. Moncay. o. Cauria, Coria. c. Cavum,
Caffa. c. Celbis, Kelh, or Kill. r. Cene Atlantica, Madera. i. Celenius,
Killian. r. Celendris, Palipoli. c. Celia, Cylley. c. Celidann^, Salnich. r.
Celiobriga, Barellos. c. Cella, Zell. c. Celsona, Solsona. c. Celtae the Gauls.
k. Celtiberi, Spain. k. Cemmenus, Sevennes. m. Cenimagni, Iceni. Cenomanum,
Man's c. Cenomanensis Provincia, Le Maine. Centrones, the Diocese de Grand.
Centum cellae, Civita V^cchia. c. Cephalenia, Cefalonia. i. Cetetic^, Cardigan.
p. Ceretania, Cerdagne. p. Cerne, Madagafear. i. Cerufa, Livadia. c. Cestria,
Chester, West-Chester. c. Cetius, Hensterberg. m. Cetobrigae, Setuval. c.
Chaboras, Giulap. r. Chalcis, Jamboli. p. Chalcis, Negropont. i. Chaldaea,
Curidstan. p. Chalusius, Trave. r. Chalybs, Cabe. r. Cheyles. Ch^rento,
Charenton. o. Chios, Chio. i. Chestocovia, Czenstokow. c. Chilonium, Kill. c.
Chorsa, Chars. c. Christopolis, Emboli. c. Chromium, Drobasaf, the White Sea.
Chronus, Memel. r. Chrysius, Guadalentin. r. Chrysius, Keureuz. r. Chrysius,
Kerez. r. Chrysocera, Galata. o. Chrysorrhoas, Agele. r. Cibinum, Hermanstadt.
c. Cilicia, Caraman, Finchia. p. Cimbrica Cherson^sus, Denmark, and Jutland. r.
k. Cing^, Cinca, Senga. r. Cisla, Quiso. r. Cissa, Humago. i. Cituorum Insula,
Schut. i. Civaro, Chambery. c. Clanes, Glan. r. Clansus, Agno. r. Clarana,
Glaris. o. Clarinea, Gant. c. Claromons, Clermont. c. Clatium, Glaez. c.
Claudia, sive Claudioce^tria, Gloucester. o. Claudia, Claudivum, Clagenfurt. c.
Claudia, Gozo. i. Claromentum, Clermont. c. Clania, Calahorris. c.
Claudiopolis, Clausemburg. c. Claudivum, Ens. r. Claudius, Imzag^r, and
Kisdarnoczi. m. Clausentum, Southampton. c. Cleopatris, Sues. c. Clevum,
Gloucester. c. Clivia, Cleves. c. Clodia Fossa, Chioza c. Clochora, Clogher. c.
Clodianus, Fluvian, Llobregat. r. Clora, Cluyd. r. Clusium, Chiusi. c. Clusius,
Chiese. r. Codanonia, Zeelandt. i. Coenoenum, Lawenburg. o. Coetus, Coisnon. r.
Colancorum, Birlin. c. Colancorum, Freinwaldt. c. Colchi, Mengrelia. p.
Colchis, Calpurt. c. Colapis, Kulp. r. Colippo, S. Sebastian. o. Collemum,
Varceva. c. Colocia, Colocza. c. Colonia, Colchester. c. Colonia, Taxara. c.
Colonia Allobrogum, Geneva. c. Colonia Argentina, Colmar. c. Colonia Agrippina,
C^log^e. c. Coloswaria, Clausenburg. c. Columbaria, Colmar. c. Columbralia,
Combraile. c. Columna, Kolm. c. Comagenum, Haynburg. o. Compendium, Compeigne.
c. Complutum, Alcala. c. Compsa, Conza. c. Concha, Cuenca. c. Concia, Miranda.
c. Condata, Condeum, Conde. o. Condate, Rennes. c. Condivincum, N^ntes. c.
Confluentes, Coblents. c. Conimbrica, Coimbra. c. Conovium, Aberconway. o.
Consentia, Cosenza. c. Consorani, Couserans. t. Constantia, Tortosa. c.
Constantia Castra, Coutances. c. Constantinensis Ager, Le Coutantin. p.
Convenae, Le Comte de Cominge. t. Convenae, S. Bertrand. c. Convennos, Sheppey.
i. Conventri^, Coventry. c. Coos, Lango. i. Cora, La Cure. r. Corabra, Maurana.
r. Corax, Algier. c. Corbilum, Nantes. c. Corbilium, Corbeil. o. o. Corcyra,
Corfu. i. Corcyra Nigra, C^rzola i. Confinianum, Pienza, Pientia. c.
Coriovallum Falkenburg. o. Corinum, Cornovium, Cirenchester. c. Corisopitum,
Cornovaile and Quimper. c. c. Cornavli, Wortester-shire, Cornwall, Warwick, and
Staffordshire. Cornelia, Imola Whimpfen. c. Cornubia, Cornwall p. Cornu
Byzantil, Galata. o. Corona, Croonstadt. c. Corona, Coron. c. Coronia,
Landskroone, Brassaw. c. Coos, Lango. i. Corfinium, Ptenza. c. Corinium,
Cirencester. o. Corteniacum, Courtenay. c. Cortracum, Courtray, Cortryck. c.
Cosa, Casano. c. Cossium, Bazas. c. Covalia, Kile. t. Crabra Marana, Marrana.
f. Crathris, Gratti. r. Credonium, Craon. c. Cremera, Fossa. r. Creta, Candida.
i. Crimisa, Flumia. r. Crissus, Kerez. r. Crossa, Creuse. r. Crotalus, il
Corace. r. Croton, Crotone. ^. Crustuminum, Conea. r. Cularo, Grenoble. c.
Cunetio, Kennet. r. Cunetio, Matleborow. c. Cupersanum, Conversano. c.
Cuprimontium, Kopersberg. o. Curia, Off. c. Curia, Chur, Coire, Coira, c.
Curia, Curow. c. Curia, Corte. c. Curiosolitae, Quimper. t. Curium, Episcopia.
c. Curretia, Courreze. r. Cusus, Kerez. r. Cydarus, Maclena. r. Cydonia, Canea.
c. Cygnea, Zwikaw. c. Cylistarnus, Racanello. r. Cyrene, Cairoan. c. Cyrenaica,
Barbary. p. Cypsella, Ipsala. c. Cythera, Cerigo. i. Cyta^um, Sit^a. c. Cyrus,
Elcur or Kur. r. Cyrrhus, Ser. r. Czernihovia, Zernikow. c.
D A
Dabrone, Aven-more. l. Damasia, Ausburg. c. Damnil, Cluydsdale, and Menteith.
p. p. Damnonium, the Lyzard-point. Danubius, the Danube. r. Danmonii, Cornwall
and Devonshire. p. p. Dania, Denmark k. Dan^iscum, Dantsick. c. Danum,
Doncaster. o. Danus, Dun, or Don. r. Daona, Keccio. c. Daphne, Scala Marmorea.
c. Dara, Drut. r. Dardanla, the South part of Servia: Dariorigum, Vannes. c.
Darvernum, Dover, and Canterbury* o. Da^ii Urbs, Dax. c. Daventria, Deventer.
c. Daulia, Eldasagni. c. Daunia, Capitanato. p. Dea, Dee. r. Dea, Die. c.
Decetia, Decize. c. Deidonium, Alectum, Dundee. o. Delta, Maholet, Sahid. i.
Delminium, Damnio, Dumno. c. Delphinatus, Danphine. p. Demetrias, Dimitrado. c.
Deobriga, Miranda de Ebro. c. Deppa, Depa, Diepe. c. Dertona, Tortona. c.
Dertosa, Tortosa. c. Derventio, Darwent. r. Deva, Dee r. Deva, Westchester. c.
Devana, Aberdeen. c. Dia, Die. c. Dianae Oraculum, Curiale. o. Diabete, Faluga.
l. Diablites, or Diablintres, le Perch. p. Dicte, Sethie. i. Didymotychos,
Dimotuc. c. Dienensis Comitatus, le Diois. p. Dimola, Dimel. r. Dinia, Digne.
c. Diodori Insula, Babel Mandel. Dionysiopolis, Varna. c. Dioscoridis Insula,
Zocotora. l. Dithmarsia, Dithmarsen. p. Diva, Dee. r. Divionum, Dijon. c.
Divona, Caors. t. Divodurum, Thionville, Metz. c. Divona, Cabors. c. Dobuni,
Gloucestershire. c. Dolcea, Cataro. c. Dola, Dole and Dole. c. c.
Dominicopolis, S. Domingo. c. Domi^iopolis, Domezopli. c. Dorcina, Dorchester.
o. Donum Dei, Dundee. o. Dordomana, Deizer. c. Dordonia, Dordogne. r.
Dordracum, Dordrectum, Durdrechtum, Dort. c. Dorovernia, Canterbury. c.
Dorovernum, Dover. o. Dostra, Daustre. r. Doveona, Deveona, Cahors. c.
Doulendinum, Doulens. o. Draconis, Draun. r. Dracus, Drac. r. Dragumatina,
Travemund. c. Drasomagus, Ausburg. c. Drepanum, Trapano. c. Drillo, Drino. r.
Drocum, Dreux. c. Druentia, Durance. r. Druides, le Comte de Dreux. p. Druma,
le Drome. r. Druna, Druma, Drome. r. Drusiana Fossa, Niemeyssel. r.
Drusiburgum, Do^sburg. o. Drusomagus, Memmingen. c. Drusomagus, Kempen. c.
Drymon, Drino. r. Duacum, Kilmacough. c. -- Doway. c. Dubis, Dou or Doux. r.
Dubris, Dover. o. Duellium, Hobentweil. f. Dumbarum, Dunbar. o. Dumna, Hoy. i.
Dunga, Dabul. c. Dunelmum, Durham. c. Dunkeranum, Dundalk. c. Dunquerca,
Dunkirk. o. Dunrodunum, Dornock. c. Dunum, Chasteaudun. o. Dunum, Down. c.
Durachium, Thovars. c. Duranius, Dordogne. r. Duria, la Doria. r. Durias,
Guadalquivir. r. Durias, Traun. r. Durius, Duero, Douro. r. Durobius,
Durobrevis, Rochester. c. Durobrivae, Stanford. o. Durocasses, Druidensis
Pagus, Dreux. o. Durocortorum Civitas, Reims. c. Duronovaria, Dorchester. o.
Durosladium, wick. o. Durostorum, Silistria. c. Durotriges, Dorsetshire, and
Somersetshire. Durovernum, Canterbury. Durius, Thur. Dyrrachium, Durazzo. c.
Dyrus, Guir. r. Dysporum, Duysburg. c.
E A
Eagus, Logh Eagh, a Lake. Eara, Jere. r. Eblana, Dublin. c. Ebodia, Aldernay.
i. Ebora, Evora. c. Ebora, Rota. i. Eboracum, York. c. Ebrodunum, Ambrune. c.
Ebrodunum, Brin. c. Ebrocae, Eureux. c. Ebroicum, Eureux. c. Ebudae, The
Western Is^es. Eburum, Olmutz. c. Ebusus, Yvica. i. Ebura, Eure. r. Ecae, Troja
c. Ecbatana, Tauris. c. Ecelesta, Medina Celi. o. Echedorus, Granea. r.
Ectodurum, Leutkirchen. c. Edelberga, Heidelburgh. c. Edera, Yer. r. Edessa,
Rhoa. c. Edus, Sadodela. r. Egesta, Barbara. c. Egidona, Eyder. r. Egiricius,
le Gers. r. Egolisma, Angoulesme. c. Egra, Eger. r. Egra, Heb, Eger. c. Eidera,
Eyder. r. Eistadium, Aichstadt. c. Elana, Aila. c. Elaphonefus, Marmora. i.
Elaver, Allier. r. Elborga, Talavera. c. Elbovium, Elbeuf. o. Electa, Alet. c.
Electriades Insulae, Shetland Isles. Elephaniacum, Elwang. c. Eleutherus,
Habes. r. Eleutherus, Bajara. r. Eliberis, Granada. c. Elis, Belvedere. p.
Ellocrata, Lorca. c. Elna, Lianne, Eaune. r. Elno, St. Amand. o. Elorona,
Oleron. i. Elorum, Abyso. r. Elorum, Atelari. r. Elusa, Euse, Eause. c. Eluva,
^^. Asaph. c. Elyma, Palimita. c. Elys, Ely. o. Ella, Lille. r. Ellis, Jalea.
o. Ellus, Ill. r. Embda, Embden. c. Emelia, Eminely. c. Emerita, Merida. c.
Emisa, Haman, Hems. c. Emisarium, Desaguadero. r. Emmaus, Gotza, Nicopol. c.
Endova, Eyndhoven. c. Engeriacum, St. Jean de Angeli. c. Engolisma, Angoulesme.
c. Enhemium, Ebenheim. c. Ensis, Nisi. r. Entella, Lavagna. r. Epaunum, Pau. c.
Ephesus, Efeso. c. Epidamnus, Durazzo. c. Epidaurus, Debronca. c. Epidaurus,
Malvasia. c. Epidaurus, Raguza. c. Epored^a, Jurea. c. Erasinus, Rasino. r.
Erdelia, Transylvania. p. Eretaenus, Reron^. r. Eriboea, Croida. c. Eridanus,
Po. r. Eridanus, Rodaun. r. Erigonus, Vistrizza. r. Erineus, la Miranda. r.
Ernodunum, Issoudun. c. Erubris, Rober. r. Erythiae, Barlinguas. i. Erythraeum
Mare, the Red S^a. Eryx, Trapano Vece^io. c. Escernia, Iscernia, or Sergna. c.
Escua, Huesca. c. Esia, l' Oyse. r. Eslul, Setz. c. Eslhonia, Esten. p. Estola,
Es^a. r. Esula, Isela. c. Esuris, Faro. c. Xeres de Guadiana. f. Etruria,
Toscana. p. Evandria, Olivenza. c. Euboea, Negropont. i. Eubonia, Man. i.
Evenus, Phidari. r. Fidari. Eugubium, Gubio. c. Euneno, l' Aa Boulognois. r.
Euphrates, Aferat. r. Euptea, Gai^la. i. Euratus, Galazo. r. Eurotas, I'is,
Vasilipotamo, Basilipotamo. r. Eurydemon, Zacuth. r. Euopolis, Bogazar. c.
Extremadura, Es^remadura. c. Eydera, Eyder. r. Ezerus, E^ero. c.
F A
Fabris, Far^ar. r. Fabrianum, Bremen. c. Falconis mons, Fa^q^emont. o.
Falesia, Fallesia, Falaise. c. Fama Augusta, Famagost. c. Fanum Canici*
Kilkenny. c. -- Fortunae, Fano. c. -- S. Agathae, S. Ag^tha. c. -- S. Albani.
S. Albans. o. -- S. Albini, S. Aubin. c. -- S. Andreae, S. Andrews c. -- S.
Andre. c. -- S. Autonini, S. Antonin. c. -- S. Audomari, S. Omer. c. -- S.
Botolphi* Boston. o. -- S. Clodoaldi, S. Clo^. o. -- S. Desiderii, S. Dizier.
c. -- S. Dionysii, S. Denis. c. -- S. Fidei, S. F^. o. -- S. Gisle^ii, S.
Ghislain. o. -- S. Jacobi. Sanjago. c. -- S* J^annis, S. Jean. c. -- S. Leonis,
S. Leo. c. -- S. Maclovii, S. Malo. c. -- S. Menehildis, S. Mene^ould. c. -- S.
Michelis, S. Miguel. c. -- S. Pontii, S. Pant. c. -- S. Spiritus, S. Esprit. c.
-- S. St. phani, S. Estienn^. c. -- S. Vity, S. Viet. c. Fara, la Vere. c.
Farria, Heylig^landt. i. Fauciniacus Tractus, Fossigny. Faventia, Faenza. c.
Felsina, Bologna, Bolo^ia. c. Ferreta, Pfirt. c. Ficclia, Over-^ssel. c.
Ficocle, Cervia. c. Fionia, Fuinen. i. Firmitas ad Albulam, Ferte sur Aube.
Firmum, Fermo. c. Flavia, Gallica, Fraga. o. Flaviana Ala, Vienna. c.
Flaviobriga, Bilb^o. c. Flavium Brigantum, Beta^z^s. c. Flevo, the ^^ lie or
F^i^. i. Flevum, the Velht. r. Flexia, la Flecht. c. Flexum, Altenburg. o.
Flissinga, Flushing. o. Floriacum, Fleury. o. Floripolis, S. Flour. o.
Florentia, Florence. c. Foburgum, Woburg. o. Fociniacus Tractus, Fosigni. p.
Fons Agri Carriensis, Ferventia. o. Fons Bellaques, Fontainbleau. o. Fons
Clarus, Sherborn. o. Fons E^raldi, Fonteuralt. o. Fons Rapidus, Fontarabie. o.
Fontes, Wells. c. Fontenacum, Fontenay le Comte de Forcalquier. p. Forensis
Provincia, le Forez. p. Formicae, Formigne, i. Formio, Risano. r. Forum Al^eni,
Ferrara. -- Claudii, Oriolo. c. -- Claudii, Montiers en Tarantaise. c. --
Cornelii, Imola, Jumola. c. -- Diuguntorum, C^ema. c. -- Domitii, Frontignan.
c. -- Flaminii, Forflamine. c. -- Flaminii, Fuligno. c. -- Fulvii, Valenza. c.
-- Ju^^um, Frejus. c. -- Julii, ^riuli. p. -- Livli, Forli. c. -- Neronis,
Forcalquier. c. -- Sebusianorum, Bourg. c. -- Segusianum, Feurs. o. --
Sempronii, Fossombruno. c. -- Tiberii, Keyserstul. o. -- Vecontiorum, Nais^n.
c. Fos^a Clodia, Chiosa. c. -- Corbulonis, the Leck. r. -- Drusii, the New
Yssel. r. -- Mauriana, le Gal^jon. l. -- Merovei, la Merwe. r. Fossae, Fossone.
r. Fosanum, Fossano. r. Fos^atum, Fassato. ^. Fosiniacus Tractus, le Fosigny.
p. Francia Orientalis, Franconia. c. Franciacum, Fr^nsa^. ca. Francosurtum ad
M^num, Francfort on the Main. -- ad Oderam, Francfort on the Oder. Fratres
Nessides, Fraires i. i. Fredelatum, Ramiers. c. Frento, il Forture. r.
Frequentum, Fricenti. c. Fretum Britannicum, Pas de Calais the Sleeve. Fretum
Mamertinum. Fa^o. Frigida, Frias. c. Frigidus, Freddano. r. -- Vipao. r.
Friniana, ^rignana. t. Frusio, Frufilione. c. Fruxinum, Freising. c. Fugeria,
Fulgerium, Fo^gerts. c. Fulginium, Foligno. c. Fulinium, Fulginium, Fu^ig^o. c.
Fundanus, Fondi. l. c. Furarium, S. Estienne de Furens. o. Furnae, F^rnes,
Wuerne. c. Fuxum, Foix. o.
G A
Gabali, Giva^dan. r. Gabalum, Javox Mande. c. Gabalus, Gibel. c. Gabarus,
Gave. r. r. Gabellus, Secchia. r. Gades, Cadis, Cadiz. c. Gadiva, Aherfraw. o.
Gaitia, Jatza, Jaycza, a City of Bosnia. Gaium, Pays de Gez. Gala, Jalle. r.
Galaber, Galaure. r. Galatia, Ch^angar^. p. Gallesium, Gall^se. c. Galleva,
Wallingford. o. Gallia, France. k. Galliola, Golle. r. Galliva, Gallway. c.
Gallo* Ligures, Va Provence. p. Gallovidia, Galloway. p. Gallus, Garrippo. r.
Gamb^ivii, Hamburg. c. Gandavum, Gand, Gent, Ghendt. c. Ganea, Jaracazes.
Ganga^a, Bach^. c. Ganges, Ganga, Gang^* r. Gangra. c. Gannum, Gonga. o.
Ganodurum, Zurach, Laufembure. o. Garbosentum, New Castle. c. Gardus, le
Guerdon. r. Gariannonum, Yarmouth. Burg^* Cas^le. Garites, le Pays de Gourt. p.
Garrocell, Mont Geneure. p. Garryenus, the D^se, or Yare. r. Garumna, Garronne.
r. Gastinesium, le Gastinois. p. Gastinetum, le Gastine. p. Gavanodurum,
Saltzburgh. c. Gavarus, Gaure. r. Gaudiosa, Joyeuse. o. Gaurus, Garro. m.
Gaura, le Comte de Gaure. p. Gaza. c. Gebenna, les Sevennes. m. Gedanum, sive
Gdanum, Dantzick c. Gedrosia, Formipt, Send. p. Gela, Alicata. Terranova. c.
Gelbis, Kitl, Kill. r. Gelisa, Gelise. r. Gelria, Gelde^land, Gallis, Geldres.
p. Gemblacum, Gemblours. c. Genabium, Gien. c. Genadium, Gyngich. c. Genuni,
North Wales, Genusus, Vaiussa. Arzenza. r* Gesocribate, Breast. o. Geravia,
Gerawer. ^. Gerbogi^, Clermont, Moulins. c. Gericus, le Gers. r. Germanopolis,
Ginopoli. c. Germia, Kermen. c. S. Gertrudis mons, Berga D. Gertrudis,
Gertruydenberg. c. Gerunda, Girona. c. Geruntia, Cerenza. c. Gesia, le Pays de
Gex. t. Gessoriacum, Boulogne sur me^. c. G^emum, Gien. c. Giennum, Jaen, Gaen.
c. Giesaeca, Geseke. c. Gihlova, Iglaw. c. Gimoesium, le Gimoux. p. Gippovicus,
Ipswich. o. Giro, le Giron. r. Girunna, la Gironde. r. Gislenopolis, S.
Guilain. o. Gisorium, Gisors. o. Gissa, Giessen, Gissen. c. Glacium, Glatz. c.
Glandata, Glandeves. c. Glandomirum, Mondonnedo. c. Glanum, Lodeves, S. Reims.
c. Glarona, Glaris. a Canton. Glasconia, Glastenbury. c. Glascum, Glasco. c.
Glatium, Glatz. c. Glessaria, Noot-Strand. i. Glevum, Gloucester. c. Glota,
Cluyd. r. Glovernia, Gloucester. c. Gobannium, Abergaveny. o. Goricomium,
Gorichemium, Gorcum. c. Gosa, Goslar. r. Goslaria, Goslar. c. Gracium, Gratz.
c. Graium, Gray. c. Grandipratum, Grandpre. o. Granduicus Sinus, the white Sea.
Gransonium, Granson. o. Granta, Cambridge. o. Granus, the Gran. r. Grassa,
Grass. c. Gratianopolis, Grenoble. c. Gravisca, Corneto. c. Guadix, Acci. c.
Guatimala, S. Jago c. Guttalus, Jader, Oder. r. Guelpherbytum, Wolfembuttel. c.
Gythites, Genamani. i.
H A
Habus, Humber. r. Hadria, Adria. c. Hadria, Atri, Atria. c. Hadrianopolis,
Adrianople, Edernay, Endrem. c. Hafuia, Copenhagen. c. Haga Comitis, the Hague,
Gallis la Hay. o. Hallae, Nostre-Dame de Haulx, Gallis; Hall, Germanis. Halys,
Castlimar. r. Hama, Haman, Hems. c. Hammona, Ham. c. Hania, Haisne. r.
Hanmarchia, Hanherret. pr. Hannonia, Hainault. p. Haphnia, Copenhagen. c.
Haradium Reginae, Koningsgretz. c. Havelia, Havel. r. Haemus, Balkan,
Costegnazo. m. Hebrus, Mariza. r. Hectodurum, Leutkirck. c. Hedena, Hezdin. o.
Hedua, Autun. c. Heideba, Sleswick. c. Heldona, Eaune. r. Helena, Elna. c.
Helenopolis, Franckfort on the Main. Helia, Ely. c. Heilelius, Ill. r.
Helicon, Eiala, Faribo. m. Helicon, Faribo. r. Heliopolis, Balbeck. c.
Heliopolis, Soltwedel. c. Helium, the Wael. r. Helsingora, Elsinore. c. Helva,
Elvas. c. Helvetia, Switzerland. Helvil, le Vivaris. r. Helvinum; il Salinello.
r. Hemodes, Shetland Isles. Henius, Haisne. r. Heraclea, Ergel. c. Heraclea,
Hassio Porto. o. Herbanum, Oriveto. c. Herbessus, Palazzulo. Herbipolis,
Wurtzburgh. c. Hercinli Montes, Fiechtelburgh. m. Herculeum Fretum, the Sreight
of Gibraltar. Herculia, Buda. c. Herculis Promontorium, Hartland Point.
Herculis Portus, Porto Ercole. Hercynia Sylva, Schwartz waldt, Olden-waldt,
Wester-walat, etc. Herius, Vindana, Vilane. r. r. Hermastis, Cori. o. Hermeum,
Geniscar. cap. Hermiones, Bohemia, Silesia and Moravia. Hermonassa, Beligrard.
c. Hermonassa, Bialogrod. c. Hermus, Sarabat. r. Heropolis, Herou. c. Hesperia,
Bernich. c. Hesperium Cornu, Binege, Cape-Verde. Hetruria, Tuscany, Toscana. p.
Hexi, Veltz, Magala. c. Hexamilium, Hexamili. Hiemera, Torto. r. Hiera, Giera.
i. Hieracium, Gieraci. c. Hiera petra, Giera-petra. c. Hierasus, Pruth. r.
Hierogerma, Girmasti. c. r. Hierus, Orbo. r. Hilaria, Iler. r. Himelia, l' Aia.
r. Himera, il Salso. r. Himera, Termine. r. Hipparis, Camarana. r. Hippo, Monte
Leone. c. Hippon, Bona, Bone. c. Hirmius, Irneo, m. Hirminius, Ragusa, Mauli.
r. Hirpini, the Further Principato. Hippovibio, Monte-Leone. c. Hispalis,
Seville. c. Hispania, Spain. k. Hispellum, Spello. c. Histria, Istria. p.
Holmia, Stockholm. c. Honflorium, Honfleur. c. Hordacha, Herdach. r. Hortanum,
Orta. c. Hostunium, Ostuni. c. Huena, Ween. i. Hyampolis, Jampoli. c. Hydaspes,
Rowey. r. Hydruntum, Otranto. c. Hylius, il Triunti. r. Hypanis, le Bog. r.
Hyperborei montes, Cameni Poias, Stolp. m. Hyppius, Lippio. r. Hyprae, Ypren,
Ipre. c. Hypsa, il Belici. r. Hyrcania, Hyrach Diargument, Taberistan. p.
J A
Jabadii Insula, Java. i. Jacobipolis, Sanjago. c. Jactum, Grana. r. Jada,
Jader. r. Jader, Salona, Solin. r. Jader, l' Oder. r. Jadera, Zara. c. Jama,
Jama Gorod. c. Jamassa, Thames. r. Janasum, Compostella. c. Japidia, Carniola.
p. Japodes, Jappenaw. t. Japygia, Terra d' Otranto. p. Jaresius Ager, le.
Jarez. t. Jarmutthum, Yarmouth. o. Jatrippa, Midina Alnabi. c. Jatrus, Albis,
Ischar. r. Javarinum, sive Jaurinum, Raab, Gewer. c. Jauria, Jawer. c. Jaurus,
Jaur. r. Jaxartes, Seihun. r. Jazyes, Hougary. k. Iban, Van. c. Ibera, Tortosa.
c. Flix. c. Iberia, Spain. k. Iberus, Ebro. r. Rio Tinto. r. Icauna, Yonne. r.
Iccius Portus, Calais. o. Iceni, Suffolk and Norfolk. Iciodorum, Issoire. c.
Iconium, Cogni. p. Icosium, Oran. c. Iculisma, Angoulesme. c. Idanis, l' Ain,
Ains, Dains. r. Idubeda, El Rio de Millas, r. Jecor^, Jecker. r. Jedum, Jedo,
Yedo. c. Jemptia, Jemptland. p. Jerna, Ireland. Jernus, Droses, Kilmar. r.
Igillum, Giglio. i. Ilarus, Iler. r. Ilcinum, Montalcino. c. Ilerda, Lerida. c.
Ilingae, Lignitz. c. Iliturgis, Jaen. c. Illa, Epte. r. Illa, Lille. r.
Illiberis, le Tech. r. Illiberis, Granada. c. Elvi^e. o. Illiberis, Elna. c.
Illicitanus Pontus, Alcante. c. Ilorci, Lorca. c. Imelaca, Emeley. c. Inachus,
Planizza. r. Inacho. Inarime, Ischia. i. Incra, Encre. r. Indus, Diul. r.
Ingaevones, Jutland. p. Ingeris, Ind^^. r. Ingria, Ingermanland. p. Insubres,
il Ducato di Milan. Insula, Eye. o. Insula, Isola. c. Insula, Lille. c.
Intermana, Terni. c. Interamna, Ponte Corvo. o. Interamnensis Provincia, le
Pays enter Sambre and Meuse. Interamnia, Teramo. c. Interamnis Portugallia,
Enter Douro e Minho. p. Intervallium, Entrevaux. o. Joanna, Jannina. c.
Joannipolis, Jambol. c. Joanvilla, Joinville. o. Joauna, Jonne, Yonne. r.
Jonia, Quiscon. p. Jordanis, Schierah. r. Jovernia, Ireland. k. Joviniacum,
Joigny. c. Jovis Villa, Joinville. o. Ipra, Ipres, Ypren. c. Ipuscoa,
Guipuscoa. p. Iris, Casalmach. r. Iris, Lirio. r. Isala, vel Issula, Yssel. r.
Isamnium, S. John's Point. Isapis, Savio. r. Isara, l' Isere. r. Isara, Iser.
r. Isauria, Oyse, Oise. r. Isauria, Saura. p. c. Isaurus, Donato, la Foglia. r.
Isburus, Garb. r. Isca Damnoniorum, sive Exonia, Er. r. Isca, Cxeter. c. and
Caerleon. Isca Silurum, Leskard. c. Iscalis, Alchester. o. Ischiopolis, Tripoli
of Siria. c. Isenacum, Eysenach. c. Isthmus Corinthiacus, Hexamili. Isidorum,
Issoire. c. Isontius, Lisonzo. r. Issus, Laiazzo. c. Ister, the Danube. r.
Isurium, Aldeburgh. o. Itanus, Paleo Castro. c. Itona, Iton. r. Ituna, Eden,
Solway Fyrth. r. Iturea, Bacar. p. Iturissa, Sanguesa. c. Ivernia, Ireland. k.
Ivernis, Dunkeran. o. Julia, Borgo di S. Domino. c. Julia, Geyl. r. Julia,
Giula. c. Juliacum, Gulick. Liege. c. Julia Caesarea, Algiers. Julinum, Wollin.
c. Juliobona, Honfleur. o. Juliobona, Vienna. c. Juliobriga, Porto de Santonna.
o. Juliodunum, Loudun. c. Juliomagus, Angers. c. Julium Carnicum, Goritia. c.
Junna, Juine. r. Jura, Joux. m. Jurus, Jaur. r. Justiniana Prima, Giusiandil,
Acrida. c. Justiniana Secunda, Prisren. c. Justinopolis, Cabo di Istria. c.
Juvavia, Saltzburgh. c. Juvavius, Saltzach. r. Juvantius, Tordino, or Trontino.
r. Juvencus, Giovenco. r. Juveniacum, Govenzzo. c. Juvenacium, Giovezzano c.
Juverna, Ireland. k.
L A
Labacum, Laubach. c. Labarus, Lambro. r. Labeatis Lacus, Scutari Ponta. l.
Laberus, Kildare. c. Labinus, Lavino. r. Laboris terra, la Terra di Lavaro. p.
Labro, Legorne. c. Lacedaemon, Misitra. c. Laciburgum, Rostoc. c. Laconia,
Sacania. p. Lacobriga, Lagos. c. Lactodurum, Fedford. c. Lactoracum, Lectoure.
c. Ladeni, Lathaine, Merck, and Tivedale. Legania, Leinster. p. Lagnus, the Bay
of Lubeck. Lamia, Lima. r. Lampia, Elandia. r. Lanuvium, Civita Indovina. c.
Laodicaea, Eskihissar. c. Loagia, la Forest aux loges. Laona, Killaloe. c.
Lapurdensis Tractus, le pays de Labourd. Lapurdum, Baione. c. Laquedonia,
Cedogna. c. Lar, Om. r. Larema, Lerma. o. Larius, Como, Cumerzee. l. Larius,
Laris, Larc. r. Laros, l' Arone or Larone. r. Lascura, Lescar. c. Latium,
Campagnia di Roma. p. Latobrigii, Brisgaw. p. Latone, Dorote. c. Latrippa,
Medina Talnabi. c. Lavantum, S. Andre. c. Laudonia, Lothaine. p. Laudum, Lodi.
c. Laudunum, Laon. c. Lauriacus Ager, le Lauraguais. t. Laurentum, S. Lorenzo.
c. Laurentum, Loreto. c. Lauriacum, Lorch. Laurona, Logronno. c. Laus, Coro. r.
Laino. r. Laus Pompeja, Lodi. c. Lausdunum, Loudun. c. Laedus, Loir. Leanita,
Elcatis. c. p. Lecca, the Leck. r. Lechaeum, Lesteiocori, p. Ledesia, Leeds. o.
Ledrensis Urbs, Nicosia. o. Ledum, Lez. r. Legla, Leye. r. Liege. c. Legio
Germanica, Leon. c. Leinius, Leyne. r. Lemnos, Stalimene. i. Lemovicum Urbs,
Limoges. c. Lentia, Lintz. c. Leobriga, Lemburgh. c. Leoburgum, Lawenburgh. c.
Leocata, Licata. c. Leodium, Liege. c. Leogus, Lowis. i. Leomania, Lomaigne. p.
Leona, Leondoul. c. Leonicae, Lorgues. c. Leonis Monasterium, Lemster. ^*
Leontina, Lentini. c. Leopolis, Lemburgh. c. Leopolis, San Leo. Leovardia,
Leeuwarden. c. Leptis, Tripoli of Barbary. c. Leprosium, Levroux. c. Lerina, S.
Honor. i. Lerra, Couesnon. r. Lertius, Lers. r. Lesbos, Metelin, Metylene. i.
Lesura, Leser. r. Leta, Leto Morte. r. Lethes, el Lima. r. Lethes, Bedlar,
Guadalett. r. Letia, Lesche. r. Lettaranum, Lettere. c. Leucadia, S. Maura. i.
Leuci, Sfacchia. r. Leucobria, Whithern. c. Leucosia, Nicosia. c. Leucorea,
Wittenberg. c. Leuctra, Maina. c. Levina, Lenox. p. Levinus, Levin. r.
Lexovium, Lsitux. c. Libonius, Leffy, Liffee, r. Liburnia, Croatia. p.
Liburnia, Libourne, a c. of France in the Territory of Bourdeaux. Liburnus,
Legorn. c. Libya Deserta, Elber. Licus, the Lech. r. Liger, Ligeris, Loyre. r.
Ligerula, le Loyret. r. Ligno, Loignon. r. Liguidon, Liasto. o. Liguia, Evola.
r. Liguria, the States of Genona. Lila, Lile, Rissel. c. Lilybaeum, Marsala. c.
Limagus, Limat. r. Limania, Limagne. t. Limnos, Ramsey. i. Limonum, Poictiers.
c. Limosium, Limoux. c. Lindemagus, Limat. r. Lindum, Linlit^go. p. Lindum,
Lincolnia, Lincoln. c. Lingones, Langres. c. Linienus, Rother. r. Linum, Lynne.
o. Liria, Lez. r. Liris, Garigliano. r. Litomerium, Leutmeritz. c. Liquentia,
Livenza. r. Lobodunum, Laudenburgh. o. Locanus, il Proteriato. r. Lochia,
Loches. c. Locoritum, Forcheim. c. Locra, il Capitello. r. Locrida, Giustandil.
c. Locris, Gieraci. c. Locta, Loket, Ellebogen. c. Lodunum, Loudun. c. Logana,
Lohne, Love. r. Logia, Lough Foil. r. Logus, Lug. r. Lombaria, Lombes. c.
Lomundus, Loch Lomond. l. Londinum, Londinium, Londoniae, Augusta Trinobantum,
London. c. Londinum Scanorum, Lundun in Schonen. c. Longobardia, Lombardy. k.
Longovicum, Lancaster. c. Lopadusa, Lampedosa. i. Lorda, Lourdes. c.
Lotharinga, Loraint. p. or Westrick. Lovanium, Loevea, Louvain. c. Lous,
Piergo, Polina. r. Loutosa, Louses. o. Loxa, Loss. r. Lubrensis Urbs, Massa.
c. Luceoria, Lusuck, Luck^. c. Luceria^ Nocera d lli Pagani. c. Luci^eri Fanum,
S. Lucar. o. Luciliburgum, Luxemburgh. c. Luciona, Luzon. c. Lucophibia,
Witherne. c. Lucore^, Wittenberg. c. Lucronium, Long^onno. c. Lucus Asturum;
Oviedo. c. Lucus Augusti, Lugo. c. Lugdunum Batavorum, Leyden. c. --
Convenarum, S. Bertrand. c. -- Segusianorum, Lion. c. Lugidunum, Glogaw. c.
Lugnvallum, Carlisle. c. Luisium, S. Jean de Luz. c. Luna Nova, Sarzana. c.
Lunae Montes, Gibel Caph. m. Lunda, Lundis, Lunden. c. c. Lupariae; Lo^viers.
c. Lupfurdum, Meissen. c. Lupia, Loing. r. Lupias, Lip. r. Luppia, Lip^adt.
c. Lupus, le Loup. r. Lusitania, Portugal. k. Lutetia, Paris. c. Luteva,
Lodeves. c. Lutis, Leyta. r. Lutomagus, Monstreuil. c. Lutra, the Lawter. r.
Lutra, Keisers Lautern. c. Lutum, South. r. Luxiona, Lusson. c. Lycaonia,
Cogni. r. Lycastrum, ^ocastelli. o. Lycia, Briquia. p. Lycia, le Lez. r.
Lycias, the Leck. r. Lychnidus, Giuslandil. c. Lycopolis, Munia. c. Lycormas,
F^dary. r. Lycus, il Platano. r. Lydia, Car^sia. p. Lydius, Castoro r. Lynius,
le Leyne. r. Lyra, Lire, Liere. o. Lyris, see Liris. r. Lyssus, ^i^nissi. o.
M A
Macaria, Julines. o. Macaria, Mazua. i. Macedonia, Jamboli, Comenolitani,
Janna. p. Macella, Strongoli. c. Maceriae, Mezieres. c. Machora, Traina. c.
Machlinia, Mechlin. c. Maclovia, Maclovipolis. S. Malo, c. Macra, Magra. r.
Maderiacum, Meziers. c. Madoce, Aden. c. Madritum, Madrid. o. Madus, Maidstone.
o. Maeander, Mindre. r. Maeatae, Northumberland. Magalona, Maguelone. c. Magi,
Radnor. o. Magna Graecia; Calabria. p. Magnesia, Mangresia. c. Magnesia,
Manissa. c. Magnopolis, Mecklenburg. c. Magnus Portus, Southampton, and
Portsmouth. c. Magontiacum, Ments. c. Magrada, Uramed. r. Maidra, Mandre. r.
Malduense Coenobium, Malmesbury, o. Maleos, Le Mul. i. Malmogia, Malmoe,
Elleboge. c. Malva, Manve. r. Malava, Mulvya. r. Malobodium, Maubeuge. o.
Mameridum, Martorano. c. Mammilla, Zee^z. c. Manapia, Wexford. c. Mancunlum,
Manduessum, Manchester. o. Manliana, Magliano. c. Mansuetinum, Baboliza. o.
Mansus Verduni, Le mas de verdun. c. Mantiana, Geluchelat. l. Man ua
Carpetanorum, Madrid. c. Manuasca, Manosque. c. Maracanda, Badascian,
Samarcand. c. Marchenium, Roxburow. o. Marchia, Merche. p. Marchia, Mark
Markish-landt. p. Marcodurum, Duren. c. Marcomanui, Bohemia. k. Marcopolis, San
Marco. c. Marcovada, Margnsest. c. Maria, Mar^otis, Buhira. l. Maridunum,
Caermarthen. o. Margus, Morgab. r. Marionis Urbs, Luneburg c. Marionis Altera,
Lubeck. c. Marisus, Merisch. r. Marithae, Martimos. m. Marobudum, Prague. c.
Martinopos, Tours. c. -- Mersburgh. c. Masacum, Maestych. o. Massalio^icum,
Gras de Passon. Massilia, Marseille. c. Masta, Graro. m. Marcola, Matera. c.
Mathis, Matin. r. Matisco, Mascon. c. Matium, Candia. c. Matrinus, Piomba. r.
Matrona, Le Marne. r. Mattiacum, Marpurg. c. Mauritania, Barbary. c. Maxera,
Mazeras, Firi. r. Machlinia, Mechelen. p. Medama, Rossarno. o. Medama, il
Metramo, Mesuna. r. Meden^, Newport. o. Media, Servan, Shirvan. p. Media,
Mead. Mediolanum, Munster. c. Mediolanum, Milan. c. Mediolanum, Lancaster. o.
Mediolanum Santonum, Saints. c. Mediolum, Medina Celi. c. Medoacus Major, La
Brenta. -- -- Minor. il Bachillone. r. Meduana, Mayenne. r. etc. Meduacus,
Medway. r. Medulanus, Medoc. r. Medunra, Mante. c. Megalopolis, Meckleburgh. c.
Megies, Mydwisch. c. in Transylv. Mela, Garza r. Melani, Gibel Tor, Gibel
Monsa. m. Melas, Gensui. r. Mauroneri. Meldae, Meaux. c. Melfictum, Molfeta. c.
Melibocum, Hartswaldt. m. Melignanum, M^giano. o. Melita, Malta. i. Melocabus,
Coburg. c. Melocacus, Cobury. o. Melodunum, Melun. c. Melos, Milo. i. Melphes,
Molpa. r. Melphis, Melfi. c. Melfa. r. Menapii, Kesel. o. Menehildis fanum. S.
Menehoud. c. Menevia, S. David's. o. Menlascus, Donoslein, Oria. r. Menoba,
Guadiamar. r. Menosgada, Eger, Heb. r. Menuthias, Mad^gascar. i. Memphis,
Cairo, Alcairo. c. Meroie, Galgala. i. Mervinia, Merionethshire. Merovel Fosa,
the Merewe. r. Merula, la Maira, Meira. r. Messapia, Terra a' Otranto. p.
Mesopotomia, Diarbech. p. Messana, Messina. c. Messapia, Terra a' Otranto. i.
Messenia, Methone, Modon. c. Messene, Moseniga. c. Messuium, Magdeburg. c.
Metaurus, Metramo, Metro, Marro. r. Metae, Metz. c. Metells, Rosetto. c.
Metelliburgu^, Middleburg. c. Methymna, Medina Alnabi. c. Middelsurtum, Milbar.
o. Midia, Mead. p. Midorius, Midonx. r. Miletus, Melito. c. Mimantium, Mande.
c. Mimenus, Niemen. r. Mincius, il Menzo. r. Minervium, Monemagi. c. Minio, il
Mingone. r. Minius, Minho. r. Mirabellum, Mirebeau. c. Mirapisca, Mirepoix. c.
Mirecurtium, Mirecourt. c. Misa, Marotto. r. Misnia, Meissen. c. Missina, p.
Moenus, the Main. r. Moesia superior, Servia. p. Moesia inferior, Bulgaria. p.
Moguntia, Mentz. c. Molinae, Moulins. c. Molo* Moulon. r. Mona, Anglesey. i.
Mona, Monapia, Monavia, Man. i. Monachium, Munich, Munchen, i. Monaius, Polina.
r. Monasterium, Munster. p. c. -- Mounster. p. Mons Albanus, Montauban,
Montalbano. c. -- Alcuinus, Montalcio. c. -- Altus, Montalto. c. --
Belligardus, Monbelliard. c. -- Vici, Mondovi. c. -- Ferettanus, Monseltro. c.
-- Ferratus, Monferrat. p. -- Medius, Monmedi. c. -- Limarii, Montelimar. c. --
Lunae, Bed. m. -- Pessulus; Mompellier. c. -- Physcon, Monte Fiascone. c. --
Regalis, Monreale. c. -- Relaxus, Morlaix. c. -- Serratus, Monserrat. m. --
Serratus, Monserrat. i. Montes, Mons. c. Montilium Ademari, Montelimar. c.
Mopsuestia, Malmistra. c. Moratensis Lacus, Uchtersee, Murtensee, Murat. l.
Moravus, Marh. r. Morave. r. Morgontiacum, Georgeto. o. Morgus, Orco. r.
Morundia, Le Morvant. t. Mosa, the Maes, Meuse. r. Moscus, Mosca. r. Mosomum,
Mouson. r. Motuca, Modica. c. Motycanus, il Sicli. r. Mulda, Multaw. r.
Munitium, Gottingen. c. Mura, the Muer, Mure. r. Murocincta, Muers, Moers. o.
Mursa, Esseck. o. Mursia, Muers. c. Mussipontum, Pont a Mouson. o. Mutina,
Modena. c. Muttovia, Mittaw. c. Myndus, Metense. c. Myra, Stramita. c.
N A
Nabalia, Neerse. r. Nabantia, Tomar. o. Nabathaea, Beraab. p. Nabius, Miranda.
r. Nabus, Nab. r. Naebis, el Neiva. r. Naeomagus, Nions. o. Naevia, Porto
Maggiore. o. Naisus, Nissa. c. Nanaeus, Navern. r. Nanigeris, Zeilan. i.
Nannentes, Nantes. c. Nantuates, Pays de Vaud. t. Naparis, Sereth, Dniester. r.
Nar, Nera. r. Narbo, Narbonne. c. Narda, Naerden. o. Narisci, N^rtgow. t.
Narita, Gieracia. Naro, Narenta. c. Natosie, Asia the Less. Naduli. t. Nava,
N^w. r. Navalia, Zoul. o. and Nettuno. o. Navilubio, El Mullon. r. Naulum,
Noli. c. Naupactus, Lepanto. c. Naupila, Napoli di Romanie. c. Nauportus,
Laubach. c. Naustathmus, Fontana Bianca. o. Navus, the Naw r. Naxuana,
Nascivan. c. Naxus, Naxia, Nacsia. i. Nea, Nota. p. Neapolis, Naples. c.
Neapolis, Tripoli. c. Neapolis Macedoniae, Christopol. c. Neapolis
Peloponnesiaca, Napoli di Malvasia. c. -- Sardiniae, Napoli. c. Neapolis
Austriae, Newstat. c. Nebis, Neiva. t. Nebrodes, Madonia. m. Necium Allobrogum,
Annecy. c. Neda, Longarola. r. Nedus, le Nay. r. Neetina Vallis, il Valle di
Noto. p. Neetum, Noto. c. Nemausium, Nismes. c. Nemesia, Nyms. r. Nemetum,
Nemetes, Spire. c. Nemetocerna, Arras. c. Nemorensis Vallis, il Valle di
Demona. p. Nemosium, Nemours. o. Nemus, Nemi. o. Nentidava, Besteraze.
Nosenstadt. c. Neoburgum, Naumburg. c. Neoburgum, Newburg. c. Neoburgum,
Newbery. o. Neo Caesarea, Tocato. c. Necomiensis Eacus, Newenburgerzee. l.
Neocomium, Neuschastel, Newenburg. o. Neodunum, Dol. c. Neoforum, Newmarkt. o.
Neoforum, Neusmarche. o. Neomagus sive Noviomagus, Nimmeguen. c. Neomagus,
Spire. c. Neopyrgum, Newburgh, Newedburg. c. Neopurgum, Naumberg. c. Neosellum,
Newhausel. c. Neostadium, Neustadt. c. Nepet, Pozzolo. c. Neracum, Nerae. c.
Nericia, Nerk^. p. Nerigon, Norway. k. Neritum, S. Maura. i. Neritum, Nardo. c.
Nerolinga, Norlingen. c. Nerva, El Nervio. r. Nervii, Haynault. p. Nerusi,
Vence. c. Nester. Nieper. r. Netina Vallis, Notto. p. Neustria, Westrick. p.
Neustria, Normandy. p. Nicaea, Nice de Provence. c. Nicaea, Isnich. c.
Nicastrum, Necastro. c. Nicer, the Necker, Necre. r. Nicia, Lenza. r. Nicia,
Nura. r. Nicia, Fuoa. c. Nicomedia, Isnigmid. c. Nicopia, Nykioping. c.
Nicopolis, Gianich. c. Nicopolis, Nigeboli. c. Nicopolis, Prevesa. p. Nidrosia,
Drontheim, Trunh^im, Trunten. c. Ninus, Niniva, Nineve. c. Nissa, Nisan. c.
Nita, Nied. r. Nithia, Nichisdale. p. Nitiobriges, l' Agenois. t. Nitria,
Neytracht. c. Nivaria, Tenerissa. i. Nivernum, Nevers. c. Nivernensis,
Provincia Nivernois. p. Nivesdum, Lire, Liere. c. Nivus, le Nive, Errobi. r.
Noarus, the Sav^. r. Noas, Sithnizo. r. Noedonum, Leondoal, or Dol. c.
Neomagus, Lisieux. c. Nomen Dei, Nombre de Dios. c. Nonigentum, Nogent. o.
Nora, Nura. c. Norba Caesarea, Alcantara. c. Nordovicum, Norwick. c. Norici,
Norway. p. Noreja, Goritia. c. Noricum, Austria, Stiria, Carinthia, Carniola,
Saltzburg, and part of Bavaria. Notra, Noere. r. Novantae, Galloway. p.
Novempopulonia, Gascoigne. p. Noverogus, Niort. o. Noviodunum, Noyon. c.
Noviodunum, Nevers. c. Noviomagus, Noyon. c. Noviomagus, Nimmegen. c. Noviomum,
Noyon. c. Novostadium, Newstadt. c. Novum Castrum, Newcastle. c. c. Novum
Mercatum, New Market. t. Novus Portus, Newport. t. Nuceria, Nocera. c.
Numantia, Soria, Garay. c. Numidia, Barbary. k. Nursia, Norcia. c. Nyssa, Nisa.
c.
O A
Oanus, Frascolari. r. Oaxes, Armiro. r. Obacer, Oakre. r. Oboca, Doro. r.
Awenmore. r. Obrincus, Mossele. r. Obris, Orb. r. Obtricum, Maestricht. c.
Occitania, Languedoc. p. Occhardus, Tartar. r. Ocelis, Ziden, Zibet. c.
Ocellum, Holderness, Spurnhead, Cape. Ocetis, Hoy, Hethy, South Ranals. Ochus,
Obengir. r. Ocinarius, il Savuto. r. Ocrinum, the Lands-end, a Cape. Ocriculum,
Ocricoli. o. Octavium, Cordunna. c. Octodurum, Toro. c. Odera, Oder. r. r.
Odessus, Varna. c. Lemano. c. Odia, Odia, Udi^. c. Odielis, Odiel. r. Odora,
Orne. r. Ocaso, S. Sebastian, Capt. Oeaso, Aiso. c. Oeni: ons, Inspruck c. Oeni
Provincia, Inthall. p. Oeno stadium, Instadt. c. Oenus, Inn. r. Carnero. r.
Oesia, Oise. r. Olandia, Oeland. i. Olbia, Nicaea. c. Olchinum, Olcinium,
Dulcigno, Dolcigno. c. Olda, Le Lot. r. Olfinum, Elpen. c. Glimachum, Lymbach.
o. Olina, Le Orne. r. Olisippo, Lisbon. c. Olitis, Old. r. Olivula, Villa
Franca. o. Ollius, l'Oglio. r. Olomutium, Olmitz. c. Ol^una, Tolder. r.
Olympia, Belvedere. c. Olympus, Caloieron Oros. m. Olympus, Lacha. m. On^sus,
Ens. r. Oningis, Oringe Jaen, c. Onold^um, Onoldum, Onspach. o. Oppavaviensis
Ducatus, Tropaw. Oppolia, Oppelen. c. Orba, El Rio de la Guerva. r. Orbio, l'
Orbieu. r. Orcades, the Isles of Orkney. Orcelis, Orihuela. c. Ordovices,
Montgomery, Denbigh, and Flintshire. Oresta, Adrianople. c. Oresunda Fretum,
the Sound. Oretani, La Manch. p. Orgella, Orgelium, Orgia, Urgel. c. Orine,
Muzua. i. Orge, Sorgue. r. Orgus, Orco. r. Orontes, Dracone, Farfar. r.
Oropitum, Orvieto. c. Orovernia, Ireland. Orsona, Ossuna. c. Orthosia, Tortosa.
c. Osca, Huesca. c. Osilia, Oesel, Eusel. i. Ositia, Osterlandt. p. Osmus,
Sladitza. r. Ossa, Fiore. r. Otonlum, Odensee. c. Ottadini, Northumberland. p.
Ovetum, Oviedo. c. Ousta, L'Ouste. r. Oxama, Osma. c. Oximensis Pagus,
Hiesmois. t. Oximum, Hiesmes. o. Oxonium, Oxford. c. Oxus, Deistan, Geichon, r.
Ozecarus, Zezares. r.
PA
Pahulensis Pagus, Le Pays de Penle. t. Pacta, Patti. c. Pactius, Oava. r.
Pactolus, Sarabat. r. Pactya, Pazzi. c. Padus, Po. r. Paestum, Pest, Pesto,
Pesti. c. Pagus Francus, Franc. t. Palaeo-castrum, Policastro. c. Palantia,
Palencia. c. Palatium Dioclesian^, Spalatro. c. Palia, Paglia. r. Palma,
Malorca. c. Palmatia, Venaria, Giro. i. Palum, Pau. c. Palus Meotis, Limen,
Zabre, Tana. p, Pamphylia, Carama, Se^talia. Pandataria, S. Maria. i. Panis,
Peene. r. Pannonia, Austria, Stiria, Sclavonia, and the Lower Hungary.
Panormus, Palermo. c. Panyasus, Spirnazza. r. Paphlagonia, Roni, Bolli,
Flagiana. p. Pap^a, Pavia. c. Parastaba, Peretslaw. c. Parisii, The East Riding
of Yorkshire. Parisii, Paris. c. Parnassus, Liacoura, Parnasso. m.
Paropanassiadae, Cab^l, or Sablestan. p Paropamisus, Calchistan. m. Paros,
Paris, Paro, i. Paropasmus, Navagrot. m. Parthenius, Sangari. r. Parthenope,
Betente, i. Parthenope, Naples. c. Parthenopolis, Magdeburg. c: Parthia,
Galania. p. Pastovia, Padstow. o. Patara, Patera. c. Patavia, Passaw. c.
Patavium, Padova. c. Pathissus, Tibiscus. r. Pathmos, La Palmosa. i. Patrae,
Patras. c. Patruissa, Brassaw, or Clausemburg. c. Paulon, il Paglion. r.
Pausino, Buzanich. r. Pax, La Paz. c. Pax, Augusta, Badajox. c. Pax Julia,
Beja. c. Paopolis, Wurtzburg. c. Pedemontium, Piedmont. p. Pedenat^um, Pezenas.
Pedicull, Ostuni. c. Peiso, Newsidleriee. l. Pelius, Pelion, Petras. m.
Peloponnesus, Morea. p. Pelorum, Capo di Faro, Cape. Pelusium, Belbais, Belbes.
c. Peneus, Salampria. r. Penica, Pengick. c. Perga, Pirgi. c. Pergamus,
Pergamo, Bergamo. c. Perinthus, Heraclea. c. Persia, Fars^, K. Farsistan. k.
Persicus Sinus, Elcatif. Perticus Ager, Le Perch. p. Perusia, Perugia. c.
Pestum, Pesth. c. Petavium, Petovio, Pe^taw. c. Petina, Pedena, Pettaw. c.
Petra, Herac. c. Petropolis, Petriburgus, Peterborough. c. Petrocor^ensis
Provincia, Perigord. p. Petrocorium, Perigneux. r. Petrovaradinum,
Peterwardein. c. Petuaria, Beverley, Hull. o. o. Phabiranum, Bremen. c.
Phaeacia, Corfu. l. Pharan, Fara. c. Pharia, Lesina. i. Pharsalus, Farsa. c.
Phasiana, Terra Nova. c. Phasis, Fasso, Fazo. r. Phaselis, Fionda. o. Phellos,
Fello. c. Pheugarum urbs, Halberstadt. c. Philadelphia, Filadelphia. c.
Philetum, Groningen. c. Philippi, Philippo. c. Philippopolis, Filibe,
Filippopoli. c. Philippopolis, Philippsville. o. Phiscon, Fiascone. m.
Phiternus, Biferno. r. Phylgadia, Flicz. m. Phocaea, Fogie, ^ochia. c.
Phrigida, Frias. c. Phrudis, Bresselle. r. Phrygia, Dargut-lil^. p. Phusca,
Fischio, Fiesco. c. Phycocle, Cervia. c. Picenum, Marcha Anconitana. p.
Pictaviensis Provincia, Poictou. p. Pictavium, Poictiers. c. Pinarolium,
Pignerol. c. Pindus, Mezzovo. m. Pintia, Valladolid. c. Piraeus, Porto di
Lione. p. Pisaurum, Pesaro. c. Pisaurus, Foglia. r. Piscaria, Peschiera. c.
Pisciacum, Poissy. t. Pisidia, Versacgli, Versacgeli. p. Pisidion, Porto Zora,
Zurat. c. Pistoraca, La Pisuerga. r. Pituer^um, Pluviers. c. Placenta,
Piacenza. c. Placentia, Piacenza. c. Plavis, Piave. r. Plubium, Sassari. c.
Plumbinum, Piombino. o. Podium, Le Puy. c. Polonia, Poland. k. Polybianum,
Leybnitz. o. Pomona, Mainland. l. Pompelon, Pampelune. c. Pons Arcus, Pont de
l'Arche. c. -- Audomari, Pont Audemar. c. -- Caesaris, Pont de Ce. o. --
Fractus, Pontefract, Pomfret. o. -- Poledranus, Bentivolio, a Castle. -- S.
Spiritus, Pont Esprit. c. -- Saravii, Sarbruck. o. -- Trajani, Alcantara. c. --
Ursonis, Pont Orson. o. Pontana, Drogheda. c. Pontesium, Pont-Oise. o.
Ponticum, Ponthieu. p. Pontipolis, S. Pons. c. Pontus, Genech. p. Porata,
Pruth. r. Portus Augusti, Porto. c. -- Ba^ocensis, Port en Bessin. p. -- Belus,
Porto Belo. -- Brigantinus, Porto di Coruna. p. -- Cale, Porto. p. --
^orcagiae, Cork Haven. -- Desideratus, le Port desire. p. -- Dives, Porto
Ricco. p. -- Garianorum, Yarmouth. p. -- Gori, il Porto di Gori. p. -- Gratiae,
Havre de Grace. p. -- Gruarii, Porto Gruaro. p. -- Herculis, Porto Ercole. p.
-- Iccius, Calice. o. -- Longus, Porto Longone. p. -- Ludovici, Porto Lovis. p.
-- Magnus, Southampton. -- Magnus, Portsmouth. -- Mauritius, Porto Moriso. p.
-- Monoeci, Monaco. o. -- Orestis, Porto Ravaglioso. p. -- Ostium, Portsmouth.
p. -- Pacis, Porto de la Paz. p. -- Paulae, il Porto di Paula. p. -- Regius, il
Porto Royal. p. -- Regius, Port Royal. p. -- Romantinus, Porto di Gruaro. --
Salo^ius, Porto di Salo. p. -- Santonum, Rochelle. c. -- Veneris, Port endres.
p. -- Veneris, Porto Venere. p. Portugallia, Portugal. k. Posidium, Sues. c.
Posonium, Presburg. c. Postonia, Adelspurg. o. Potentia, Potenza. c. r.
Pontremulium, Pontremoli. o. t. Pontus Euxinus, the Black Sea. -- Alacris,
Portalegre. c. Praeneste, Palestrina. c. Praesidium, Warwick, c. Praetoria
Augusta, Cronstat. c. Precopia, Praecops. c. Privernum, Piperno. o.
Probatopolis, Schaffhausen. c. Proconnesus, Marmora. i. Procopiana Villa,
Procupie. c. Propontis, il mare di Marmora. Prostropaea, Tr^paea. c. Prusa,
Bursa, Barech. c. Ptolemais, Aca, Acre. c. Puteoli, Pozzuoli. c.
QUA.
Quadi, Moravia, Bohemia, and Austria. Quantia, la Chanche. r. Quercetum,
Quesnoy. o. Quercopolis, Aichstadt. c. Quinctiopolis, S. Quintin. c. Quinque
Ecclesiae, Funff-kircken. c. Quintanica, Vils. r. Quissus, the Quiesse. r.
Quiza, Oran. c.
RA
Rabath, Petra. c. Raceburgum. Rackelspurg. c. Raceburgum, Ratzburg. c.
Raconicum, Raconick. c. Radacophanum, Radicophani. o. Radesia, Retz. r.
Radiantia, Reduitz. r. Radinga, Reding o. Ramua, Ramekins. f. Ranula, Renelle.
r. Rapa, Rapoe. o. Raptus, Oby. r. Ratiastum, Limoges. c. -- Angoulesme. c.
Ratisbona, Regenspurg, Ratisbone. c. Ravius, Erne, Trouvis. r. Rauraci, Basil.
c. Rea, Re. i. Reate, Reati. c. Reatina Palus, Lago di Rieti. l. Rebellium,
Ravello. c. Recinetum, Ricanati. c. Redae pagus, Le Comte de Razes. t.
Redaestum, Rodosto. c. Rodones, Rennes. c. Reesium, Rees. c. Regalis Villa,
Realville. c. Regenses, Riez. c. Reginae Gradecium, Koningsgretz. c. Reginus,
Regen. r. Regiomons, Koningberg. c. Regium Lepidi, Reggio. c. Regium, Rees c.
Regiopolis, Kingstown. o. Regni, Sussex, Surrey, Hantshire. Reii, Ries. c.
Remi, Reims. c. Resisto, Rodosto. c. Rha, Wolga, Edel, Thamar. r. Rhaetia, les
Grisons. Rhage, Leicester. c. Rhange, Nottingham. c. Rhatomagus, Monstreuil. c.
Rhatostathybius, Taff. r. Rhauraris, Erault. r. Rhebas, Ribas. r. Rhedones,
Rennes. c. Rhegium Julium, Regio. c. Rhenus, the Rhine. r. Rhenoberga,
Rhinberg. c. Rhigodunum, Rippon. o. Rhigodunum, Warrington. o. Rhitymna,
Retimo. c. Rhiusiavia, Giengen. c. Rhizana, Risano. c. Rhobodium, Fairforeland,
Rhoda, R^sas, a Castle. Rhodanus, the Rhosne. r. Rhodigium, Rovigo. c. Rhodope,
Valiza, Rulla. m. Rhodopolis, Rostock. c. Rhodumna, Roane. o. Rhodus, Rhodes.
i. Rhotomagus, Roan, Roven. c. Rhuspina, Sous. c. Rhusuccor^, Algiers. c.
Rhutupiae, Sandwich. o. Rheutenensis Provincia, Rovergue. p Rhymnus, Jayck. r.
Ricina, Raglius. i. Ricomagum, Riom. c. Riparia, La Riviere. t. Ripavia,
Rivadavia. c. Riselia, Rille. r. Rivi, Rieux. c. Rium, Rye. o. Rivogia, Rioja.
p. Roboretum, Londonderry. c. Rocianum, Rossano. c. Rodium, Roie. c. Roffa,
unde adj. Roffensis, Rochester. c. Roia, Roye. c. Roma, Rome. c. Roma, Romans i.
Romandiola, Romagne. p. Romaricus Mons, Remiremont. o. Romatinum, Lemene. r.
Romorentinum, Romorentin. c. Rosarum Urbs, Rostock. c. Rosburgum, Roxburg. o.
Rosetum, Grosseto. c. Rossium, Rosse. c. Rostrum Nemaviae, Memmingen. c.
Rotanus, Tavignani. r. Rotomagus, Roan, Roven. c. Rotundus Mons, Romont. c.
Roxolania, Red Russia. p. Rubea, the Nort Caep. Cap. Rubeacum, Ruffach. c.
Rubi, Rube. c. Rubicon, il Pisatello. r. Rubo, Dwina, Duna. r. Rubricatus,
Lobregat. r. Rubricatus, Jadog, Guadilbarbar. Rubrum Mare, the Red Sea.
Ruconia, Rioja. p. Ruesium, Rieux. c. Ruesium, Le Pay. c. Rugia, Rugen. i.
Rugua, Rue. c. Rumelia, Greece. Rupella, Rochelle. c. Rupes Regia, Ro^roy. o.
Rura, Roer, Roure. r. Ruramunda, Roermonde. c. Ruscino, Le Tet. r. Ruscine,
Roussillon. f. Ruscurum, Algiers. c. Rusicibar, Sarcelle. o. Rusna, Russe. r.
Rutenensis Provincia, Rovergue, p. Ruteni, Rodez, Rodes. c. Ruteni, the Russ,
Muscovy. k. Rutuba, Rotta. r. Rutupiae, Richborow, Sandwick, Ribchester.
SA
Saade. c. Saba, Meroe. i. Saba, Sabis, Sambre. r. Sabaria, Guns, Guntz. r.
Sabatia, Bracciano. t. Sabatium, Vada, Vad^. p. Sabatus, il Savuto. r. Sabatus,
Sabato. r. Sabaudia, Savoy. p. Sabina, Sabina. p. Sabis, Sambre. r. Sabolium,
Sable. c. Sabrina, Severne. r. Sabuloneta, Sabionetta. o. Sacri Capilli,
Hallifax. o. Sacrum Promontorium, Le Cap de S. Vincent. Saduca,
Guadalquivireja. r. Saena, Siena. c. Sagis, Gorio, Porto di magna Vacca.
Sagium, Seez. c. Sagra, Alaro, r. Salopia, Shrewsbury, o. or Shropshire. pr.
Sagrus, Sangro. r. Saguntia, Gisgonza. o. Sala, Saal. r. la Seille. r. Sala,
Sale. c. Sala, Seile. r. Sala, Yssel, Issel. r. Salacia, Alcazar. c. Salamis,
Colouri, S. Brousia. i. Salamis, il porto Constanzo. c. Salapia, Salpe. c.
Salassi, Val a' Aouste. r. Salda, Saude, r. Saldae, Bugia. c. Salduba,
Guadalquivirejo. r. Salduba, Sarragoza. c. Salentini, Part della Terra d'
Otranto. p. Salera, Saudre. r. Salia, Sella. r. Salia, Se^lle. r. Salinae
Vagiennorum, Saluzo. c. Salisburgum, Saltzburg. c. Salmona, Salm. r. Salmurium,
Saumur. c. Salo, Xalon. r. Salodorius Pagus, Soleurre. p. Salodorum, Solothurn.
c. Salopia, Shrewsbury, Shropshire. c. t. Salsum, Guadajox, Salobral. r.
Salvatoris Fanum, San Salvador. c. Salutiae, Saluzzo. c. Samandria, Zenderow,
Semendre. c. Somarobriva, S. Quintin. -- Amiens. c. Sambia, Szamland. p.
Sambroca, Ter, Tech. r. Sanctio, l' Ubaye. r. Sandava, Segeswar. c. Sandomira,
Sendomir. c. Sanguitersa, Santerre. p. Sangarius, Sangari, Zagari, Acada. r,
Sangossa, Sanguesa. c. Sanitium, Sanisium, Senez. c. Santones, Xaint^s. c.
Santonia, Saintogne. p. Sapina, Sauna. r. Sapi^, il Savio. r. Sarabris, Toro.
c. Saraepons, Sarbruck. o. ^ Saravus, Saure. r. Sarcinium, San Truyen. o.
Sardica, Sofia, Sophia, Triadizza. c. Sardinia. i. Sargetia, Istrig. r.
Sarisburia, Sarisbury. c. Sarmatia, Tartary. Sarnia, Garnsey. i. Sarta, la
Sarte. r. Sarum, Sarisburia, Salisbury. c. Sarus, il Sangro. r. Sasima, Sasum.
o. Savaria, Muer. r. Savaria, Guntz. r. Savaria, Leybnitz, Gratz. c. c. Savona,
Saoan. c. Savo, Saone. r. Savus, le Sez. r. Savus, the Sav^. r. Savus, Saffay.
r. Saxulum, Sassulo. o. Scaldi^, Schelde, Escaut. r. Scandava, Schesburg,
Segiswar. o. Scandinavia, Norway, Sweden and Lapland. Scania, Schonen. i.
Scaphusia, Schaffhausen. c. and pr. Scapris, Scabris, Scarlino. o. Scardus,
Marinat, Maranai. m. Scarpa, ila, Scarpe. r. Schutia, Schut. i. Scoras,
l'Isere. r. Scordis^i, Rascia. t. Scultenna, il Panaro. r. Scupi, Scopia,
Uschub. c. Scyllaceum, Sciletium, Squillaci. c. Scyros, Schiro. i. Schylla,
Scilla, Sciglio, a Rock. Scythia, Tartary. Sebastia, Saustia. c.
Sebastianopolis, S. Sebastian. c. Sebastopolis, Suvas. c. Sebetus, il Fornello.
r. Sebusiani, la Bresse, Lyonnois and le Forez. Sebusium, Weisemburg. o.
Secerrae, San. Saloni. o. Secontia, Siguenza. c. Secovia, Segovia. c.
Sedelocus, Saulieu. o. Seduni, Haut Valais. t. Sedunum, Sion, Sitten. c.
Segedunum, Segedin. c. Segesta, Barbara. c. Segesterorum Urbs, Sesteron. o.
Segeswaria, Schespurg. c, in Transylvania. Segethusa, Cronstadt. c. Segianum,
Sarzana. c. Segobriga, Segorve. c. Segodunum, Rodez. c. Segodunum, Nurenburg.
c. Segorbia, Segorve. c. Seguana, Seine, Seyne. r. Segubia, Segovia. c.
Seguntia, Siguenza. c. Segusiana, Lyonnois. t. Segusii, Gerawer. p. Segusium,
Susa. c. Segustero, Sisteron. c. Sela, Guardia. r. Selampura, Lampura. c.
Selandia, Seelandt, Zeelandt. i. Selenoburgus, Lunenburg. c. Seleucia ferrea,
Caragar. c. -- Pieria, Seleuche Jelber. -- Mesopotamiae, Bachud, Bagdat,
Bagdet. c. -- Ad Belum, Divertegi, and Salefica. Selibria, Selymbria, Selivrea.
c. Selinus, Islenos. c. Selymbria, Selieur^e. c. Sempronium, Oedenburg, Sopron.
c. Semurium, Semur. c. Sena, Saena, Siena. c. Senega, Zanaga, Ovedec. r. Senna,
Senio, r. Senia, Zeng. r. Senomagnus, S. Paul de trois Chasteauz. c. Senones,
Sens. c. Sentica, Zamora. c. Sentii, le Diocese de Digne. Senus, Scena,
Sacana, Shannon. r. Separa, Seure. r. Septae, Ceuta. c. Septem Castrensis,
Transylvania, p. Septempeda, San. Sevirino. c. Septimancae, Simancas. o.
Septumani, Languedoc. p. Septonia, Shaftsbury. o. Sequana, la Seyne. r.
Sequani, le Franche Comte. p. Serabis, Segura. r. Serbes, Miron, Hued Icer. r.
Serezana, Sarzana. c. Seria, Xeres de Guadiana. c. Serius, Caramoran. Kiang. r.
Serrae, Seres. c. Servania, Schirwan. p. Servesta, Zerbest. c. Serviodurum,
Straubingen. c. Serus, Puon. r. Sesmarus, le Semoy. r. Sesselium, Seissel. o.
Sessites, la Sesia. r. Sessui, Seez. c. Sestus, the Europe Dardanel. i.
Setabis, Xativa, Gativa. c. Setela, Deemouth. r. Seva, See. r. Severopolis, San
Severo. c. Siberna, Sibernia, S. Severina. c. Sicambri, Franconia. p. Sicambri,
Guelderland. p. Sicania, Sicily, Sicilia. i. Sicoris, Segre. r. Siga, Humain,
Aresgol. c. Siga, Sieg, la Sige. r. Sigetum, Sigeth. c. Signia, Segni. c.
Silarus, Selo, Silaro. r. Silva, Silves. c. Silva Ducl^, Hertoghenbosch,
Bos^educ. o. Silvanectum, Senlis. c. Silures, Hereford, Radnor, Brecknock,
Monmouth and Glamorganshires. Silurum Insulae, the Silly's. Simaethus, Jaretta.
r. Simyra, Erzerum. c. Sinarum Imperium, China. Singidunum, Zenderow. c.
Singilia, Antiquera. c. Singilis, Xenil. r. Sinus Balticus, the Baltic Sea,
Germ. De Belt. Sinus Tarentinus, Golfo di Taranto. Sipontum, Siponto,
Manfredonia. Siris, Senno. r. Sirmium, Sirmish, Szreim. c. Sisca Legionis, Caer
Leon. c. Siscia, Sisseg. c. Sissum, Seissel. c. Sisterio, Stirone. r.
Sitomagum, Thetford. o. Slonima, Slonim. c. Sobanus, Menan. r. Sodera, Sodora.
c. o. Sodera, Sauldre. r. Soderani, Berlin. c. Sogdiana, Mawralnaber. p.
Solana, Solane. r. Solis Vallis, Soltwedel. o. Solma, Solms. f. t. Solodurum,
Soleurre. c. Solonia, Sologne. t. Somona, la Sum. r. Sontius, Isonzo. r.
Sophia, Sofia, Triadizza. c. Soppia, Suippe. r. Sorabi, Misnia. p. Sorabis,
Segura. r. Sordisci, Part of Hungary. Sorviodunum, Did Sarisbury. Sossius,
Marsala. r. Soteropolis, S. Salvador. c. So^ia, Air, a City of France. Sparta,
Misitra. c. Spedia, Spetia. c. Spenderobis, Semender. c. Sperchius, Agriomela.
r. Spinae, Newbery. o. Spiritus Sanctus, S. Esprit. Sraberus, Segura. r. Stagna
Volcarum, Maguelone. Staliocanus Portus, Leondou^. Stampae, Estampes. c.
Stapulae, Estaples. o. Stauronesum, Creutznach. c. Stella, Estella. c.
Stephanodunum, Dunstafag. o. Stephanopolis, Brassaw, Kronstadt and Landskroon.
Stoarius, Stoer. c. Stoecades, Hyeres. i. Strateburgum, Strasburg. c.
Stratonica, Franco Castro. o. Stridonium, Sdrin. c. Strigonium, Gran. c.
Strongyle, Stromboli. i. Strymoa, Marmora, Stromona. r. Suana, Soana, or la
Flore. c. Suardones, the Hither Pomerania. Subcinum, Belforte. o. Subsylvania,
Underwalden. t. Sucro, Xucar. r. Suditi Montes, Fitchtelberg. m. Suecia,
Sweden. k. Suessa, Sessa. c. Suessiones, Soissons. c. Suevia, Schwaben. p.
Suevus, Oder. r. Suillus, Logh Suilly. l. Suinus, Salino. r. Sui^ia, Schwitz,
Swiss, a Canton. Sulga, Sorgue. r. Sulmo, Sermoneto. c. Sunda, the Sound.
Sundis, Stralsund. c. Supia, Suippe. r. Sur, Eltor. c. Sura, Saur, Sour. r.
Surrentum, Sorrento, Sorriento. Surin^, Sewer. r. Susatum, Soest, Soust. c.
Suvidnia, Schweidniz. c. Sylva Arduenna, Achterwaldt. -- Bacenis, Semana,
Hartswaldt, Swartswaldt. Sylva-Ducis, Hertogenbosch, Gallis Bois-le-Duc. c.
Sylvanectum, Senlis c. Sylvania, Underwaldt. Syria, Souristan. p.
T A
Tabaci Insula, Tabago. i. Taberna, Taverna. c. Tabernae Alsaticae, Elsas
Zabern, Saverne. c. Tabresium, Tauris. c. Tacubis, Tomar. o. Tader, Segura. r.
Taenarium, Cape Matapan. Texali, Buquan. p. Tagonus, Tajuna. r. Tagus, Tajo,
Tage. r. Taliafates, dit Eyffel. ^. Taliates, Dallendorff. c. Tamara, Tamer. r.
Tamesis, Thames. r. Tamiata, Tamiatis, Tamiathi, Damiata. c. Tana, Tayne. r.
Tanager, Negro. r. Tanais, Don, Tana. r. Tanais, Azack, Asoph. c. Tanodunum,
Tounton. o. Tanesos, Thanet. i. Taphre, Precop. c. Taprobana, Zeilan i. Tara,
Terrain. r. Taras, Tara. r. Tarentesia, Moutiers. c. Tarentum, Taranto. c.
Tarracina, Terracina. c. Tarraco, Tarragona. c. Tartessus, Tariffa. c.
Tartessus, Guadalquivir. r. Tarvanna, Terouane. c. Tarvisium, Treviso. c.
Tasta, Acqs, Dax. c. Tauredunum, Tournon. o. Taurentium, Toulon. c. Tauresium,
Giu^landil. c. Tauresium, Tauris, Tebris. c. Taurianum, Palma. c. Taurica
Chersonesus, Krim-Tartary. p. Taurinum, Turio, Torino. c. Taurisium, Treviso.
c. Tauromenium, Tavormina. c. Taurum, Toro. c. Taurunum, Belgrade. c. Taurus.
m. Taurus, Carthestan, Kornthourn, Thaurn. m. Taurus, Eltor. c. Tavus, Tay. r.
Teanum, Tiano. c. Tedanium, O^ria, Zermagna. r. Tela, la Thile. r. Telesia,
Telese. c. Telis, Egli. r. Tellina Vallis, the Valteline. t. Telo, Toulon. c.
Telonius, Turano. r. Tencteri, Marck, Westphalia. Tenera, Dender. r. Denre.
Teneramunda, Dendermonde. Tenae, Thienen. o. Teoracia, Tierache. t. Tephlis,
Teflis. c. Tergeste, Trieste. c. Terias, Jaretta. r. Teriolium, Tirol. p.
Termonia, Dortmund. c. Termulae, Termini. c. Terna, Ternois. r. Teruensis
Pagus, Ternois. Tersa Leporia, Terskoy, Leporie. p. Tertia, Tercera. i.
Tertona, Tortona. c. Tervanna, Terovanne. c. Terulum, Tervel. c. Teuderium,
Paderborn. c. Teviotia, Tividale. p. Teutones, Germany. Thelis, Egli. r.
Thebae, Stives. c. Theoci Curia, Tewks^ury. o. Theodemirensis Ager, Thimerais.
t. Theodonis Villa, Thionville. c. Theodosia, Caffa. c. Theorodunum, Wells. c.
Thera, Gozi. i. Thermae, Termine, and Bath. c. Thermae Superiores, Oberdaden.
c. -- Salinuntiae, Sacca. c. Thermidava, Dagno. c. Thessalia, Thessaly. p.
Thessalonica. c. Solonichi. Thicis, Ter. r. Tech. Thinus, Tyn. r. Thoeda, Tove.
r. Thracia, Romania. p. Thule, Iseland, Shetland. i. Thurium, Sibari. c.
Thuscia, Tuscany, Florence. t. Thyamus, Calama. r. Tiberiopolis, Varna. c.
Tibur, Tivoli. c. Ticarius, Grosso, Bozzo or Ficari. r. Tichis, Ter, Tech. r.
Ticinum, Pavia. c. Ticinus, Tecino, Tesino. r. Tifernus, Biferno, Tiferno. r.
Tigurum, Zurich. c. Tilavemp^us, Tajamento, Tagliamento. r. Tingis, Tangier. c.
Tioia, Topino. r. Tinurtium, Tornus. o. Tiracia, Tierache. t. Tirolis, Tirol.
p. Titius, Kerka. r. Tmolus, Tomalize. m. Tortium, Touars. c. Togisonus,
Sciocco. r. -- Vigazolo. l. Tokaum, Tokay. c. Tolca, Tonque. r. Toletum,
Toledo. c. Toliapis, Shepey. i. Tolosa, Tolose, Toulouse. c. Tormis, Tormes. r.
Tornacum, Tournay. c. Tornus, Torn. r. Torpatum, Derpt. c. Tortunum, Thorn. c.
Toxandri, Kempen. t. Tragurium, Trau, Troghir, and Traou. c. Trajana Colonia,
Kellen. o. Trajani Pons, Alcantara. c. Trajanus Portus, Civita Vecchia.
Trajectum, Trajetto. c. -- Francorum, Franckfort. c. -- Inferius sive
Ultrajectum, Utrecht. c. -- Superius vel ad Mosam, Maestricht. c. Trama,
Tresmes. r. Tranium, Trani. c. Transalpina Gallia, Lombardy. Trans-Issalana,
Over-Yssel. p. -- Oxiana, Mawralnaher. -- Tagana, Alentejo. p. Trapezus,
Trebisonda. c. Trasimenus, il Lago di Perugia. l. Trecasses, Trecae, Troyes. c.
Trecasses, Champagne. p. Trecorium, Lantriguet, Treguier. c. Tremonia,
Dortmund. c. Treva, Trave, r. Travemond. o. Treviri, Trier, Germanis, Treves,
Gallis. c. Trevoltium, Trevoux. c. Tribocci, Alsatia. p. Tribul^um, Trebigna.
c. Tricasses, Champagne. p. -- Troyes. c. Tricorium, Galumbatz. o. Tridentum,
Trent. c. Tridinum, Trin, Trino. o. Trinacria, Sicily. i. Trinitas, Trinidad.
i. c. Trinobantes, Essex, Middlesex. Trisantonum Portus, Southampton. c.
Trivicum, Trevico. c. Tros^ulum, Monte-Fiascone. c. Truentus, Tronto. r.
Truncum, Saumur. c. Trundhemum, Drontheim. c. Trutav^a, Forcheim. c. Tuasis,
Twede. r. Tuama, Toam. c. Tuasis, T^^s. r. Tuberum, Rotenburg. c. Tuder, Todi.
c. Tueda, Twede. r. Tuerovius, Tavy. r. Tuesis, Berwick. c. Tug^ensis Pagus,
Zug. Tulcis, Francoli. r. Tullum, Toul. c. Tunnocellum, Tinemouth. o.
Tuntobriga, Braganza. c. Tundera, Tonderen. c. Tungri, Tongren. c. Tuola, Golo.
r. Turia, Fossa. r. Turias, Guadalaviar. r. Turiaso, Tarazona. c. Turigum,
Zurich. c. Turingia, Thuringe. p. Tuinus, Tecino. r. Turris Julia, Trughilo. c.
Turritana, Sassani. c. Turobia, Alcantara. c. Turones, Toures. c. Turonia,
Touraine p. Turulium, Turvel. Tutela, Tulle. c. -- Tudela. c. Tide, Tuy. c.
Tyrambe, Temeruc. c. Tyras, N^ester. r. Tyras, Bialogrod. c. Tzuzulum, Zorlick.
c.
V A
Vabrae Vabres. c. Vacca, la Vouga. r. Vaccia, Vatzen. c. Vacomagi, Rosse. p.
Vadanus Mons, Vaudemont. o. Vadicasses, Nivernois. p. Vadicassum, Nevers. c.
Vaga, Medway. r. Vagieni* Marquisat de Saluces. Vagniacae, Maidstone. o.
Vagori^um, Seez. c. Vagria, Wageren. p. Vagus, Vag, Wag. r. Vahalis, Wael. r.
Ovah^l. Valavia, Velai. p. Valdanus, Walpo. r. Valdecum, Waldeck. c.
Valdemontium, Vaudemont. o. Valderfinga, Vaudrevange, Walder^ingen. c.
Valgentia, Valence. o. Valenza. c. k. Valentia^^, Valenciennes. c.
Valentiniani, Munimentum, Manheim. c. Vallesia, Valais, Wallisserlandt.
Valesium, Valois. t. Vallisoletum, Valladolid. c. Vallis Telina, le Valteline.
t. Vana, Wana. t. Vandalitia, Andaluzia. k. Vangena, Wangen. c. Vangiones, the
lower Palatinate. Vangiones, Worms. c. Vapingum, Gap. c. Vara, Murray Fyrth.
Varadinum, Waradin. c. Vardhusia, Wardhus. p. Vardus, Guerdon. r. Varena,
Garanne. i. Vargiones, Baar. p. Varmia, Emeland, Warmer Land. p. Varta, the
Warte. r. Varus, Var, Varro. r. Vasates, Bazas. c. Vascones, Gasconge. p.
Vasgovia, Vauge, Wasgwo. p. Vasio, Vaison. c. Vastinum, Gassinois. p. Va^renus,
Santerno. r. Vaudum, Waad. t. Vaurum, Vaur, Lavaur. c. Ucetia, Vzes. c. Vecta,
Vecht. o. Vectis, Wight. i. Vedasus, Bidasso^. r. Vedra, Were. r. Veii,
Scrofano. o. Velauni, le Velai. p. Vella, Pisciota. c. Velicer, Aa. r.
Velitrae, Veletri. c. Velocasses, le Vexin. p. Venda, Wenden. c. Venedocia,
North Wales. p. Veneris Portus, le Port Vendres. Venerius, Wener. r. Venetia,
Venice. c. Venetia, Vannes. c. Vensiensis Urbs, Vence. c. Venta Belgarum,
Winchester. p. Venta Icenorum, Caster. o. -- Silurum, Caerwent. o. Venusia,
Venosa. c. Verbanus, il Lago Maggiore. l. Verbinum, Vervins. o. Verda, Ferden.
c. Verda, Dona-wert. c. Veresis, l'Osa. r. Veria, la Vere. r. Veria s^^
Campoveria, Ter* Vere. c. Vermelandia, Wermerland. p. Vernolium, Verneuil. c.
Veronium, Vernon. c. Verodunum, Verdun. c. Verolamium, S. Albans. o. Veromandui
Urbs, Vermand. c. Verovicum, Warwick. o. Vertia, Donawert. c. Vesalia, Wesel.
c. Vesalia superior, Ober-wesel. c. Vescontio, Besanzon. c. Vesprium, Vesprin,
Weisbrun. c. Vesulum, Vesoul. c. Vesuna, Perigeux. c. Veteravia, Weteraw. p.
U^ens, il Portatore. r. Vian^, Weissenborn. c. Vibantanarum, Bar in Podolia.
Vibovalentia, Monte Leone. c. Viburgum, Wibourgh. c. Viceliacum, Vezelay. c.
Vecenonia, Vilaine. r. Victoria, Abernethy. c. Vidana, Vilaine. r. Vider,
Vecht. r. Vidua, Drodagh, or Dirg. r. Viducasses, Bessin. t. Vienna, Wien. c.
Vienno, Vienne. c. Vigenna, Vienne. r. Vigelibanum, Vigevano. c. Vigorina,
Worcester. c. Vimaria, Weimar. c. Vincium, Vence. c. Vinda, Wenden. c.
Vindalicus, Vindelicus, la Nasqu^. r. Vindana, Vannes. c. Vindascinus
Comitatus, Venaisin. Vindelis, Portland. o. Vinderius, the Bay of Knockfergus.
Vindinum, Man's. c. Vindobona, Vienna in Austria. Vindocinum, Vendosme. c.
Vintimilium, Vintimiglia. c. Vintium, Vence. c. Virdo. Wertacb. r. Viria, Virc.
c. r. Viria, Witland. r. Virodunum, Verdun. c. Vistula, Wesel. r. Visundo,
Besanzon. c. Visurgis, Visera, W^ser. r. Vitis, il Montone. r. Vitur^us,
Bidourle. r. Vivario, Viviers. c. Uladislavia, Waldislaw. c. Ulcinum, Dulcigno.
c. Uliarius, Oleron. i. Vlissinga, Flushing. c. Ultonia, Vlster. p.
Ultrajectum, Utrecht. c. Ulysippo, Lisbone. c. Umber, Humber. r. Umbria,
Ombria. p. Umbro, Ombrone. r. Ungaria, Unghwar. c. Voerda, Woerden. c. Vogesus,
Vauge, Wasgow. m. Vogasica, Wasgow. m. Volaterra, Volterra. c. Volcae,
Languedoc. p. Voliba, Voluba, Falmouth. t. Volcinli, Bolsena. o. Voltumna,
Boutonne. r. Volubilis, Fez. c. Vomia, Midnick. c. Vorganium, Treguier. c.
Vormacia, Worms. c. Vosavia, Ober-Wesel. c. Urania, Uri. p. Vratislavia,
Breslaw, c. Urba, l' Orb. r. Urbevetum, Orvieto. c. Urbicus, Orbego. c. Urbio,
l' Orbieu. r. Urbs, Orba, Urba. r. -- Borbo. r. -- Vetus, Oldenburgh. c. --
Vetus, Orvieto. c. -- Vetus, Civita Vecchia. c. Urcinum, Ajazzo. c. Uria, Oria.
c. Urium, Tinto. r. Urpanus, Valpon. r. Ursi Mons, Orcimont. p. Utica, Biserta.
c. Utinum, Udine. c. Utriculum, Otricoli. c. Vulturnus, Volterno. r. Uxama,
Osma. c. Uxan^ns, Ouessant. i. Uxentum, Ugento. c. Uzetia, Uzes. c.
W I
Walachria, Walcheren. i. Wellae, inde adj. Wellensis, Wells. c. Wibigginum,
Wigan* o. Wintonia, Winchester. c.
X A
Xanthus, Scamandro, Santo, Siribi. r. Xera, Xeres. c.
Y E
Yesda, Airach. c.
Z A
Zabesus Millenbach. c. in Transylv^nia. Zacus, Zack. r. Zacynthus, Zante. i.
Zaladiensis Comitatus, Salawar. Zancle, Messana, Messina. c. Zegira, Gezira. c.
Zogacara, Teflis. c. Zyragas, Varne. r.
FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Charles Brom at the Gun at the West End of S.
Paul's.
BIshop Ken's Manual of Prayers for the use of the Scholars of Winchester
College, and all other Devout Christians. Price 1 s.

-- Exposition on the Church Catechism, or the Practice of Divine Love. Price 6
d.

-- Directions for Prayer, for the use of Families. Price 1 d.

-- Pastoral Letter. Price 1 d.

-- Letter about the French Protestants. Price 1 d.

-- Prayers for the use of all Persons who come to the Baths for Cure, before
which is prefixed a Cut of the City of Bath, and all the Baths there; and may
be Bound up with the Manual for Winton Scholars. Price 6 d.

The Present State of the Ottoman Empire, with twenty four Cuts, by Sir Paul
Rycaut. Price 5 s.

The Alliance of Divine Offices, exhibiting all the Liturgies of the Church of
England since the Reformation, by Sir Hamon L'Estrange. Price 8 s.

The Poems of Horace, Englished by Alexander Brom.

Several Songs and Poems by Alexander Brom.

The Reformed Monastery, or the Love of Jesus, in two Parts. Price 1 s. 6 d.

All Sir Roger L'Estrange's Tracts in Quarto.

All Bishop Lloyd's Tracts against Popery, Quarto: and his Sermons.

-- Historical account of Church Government, as it was in Britain and Ireland
when they first received the Christian Religion.

Tully's Offices, in three Books, Translated by Sir Roger L'Estrange.

Several Colloquies of Erasmus against Popery, Translated by Sir Roger
L'Estrange.


