MAN's Great Duty: OR, A DISCOURSE OF The Care every Man should take, to make
sure the Salvation of his own Soul.

By Samuel Bold, Rector of Styple in Dorsetshire.

Matt. XVI. xxvi. What shall a Man give in Exchange for his Soul?

LONDON. Printed by R. Smith, and are to be Sold by R. Baldwin, near the
Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane. 1693.

THE Epistle Dedicatory.
TO Mrs. Mary Cook, Widow of that very Learned and Pious Man Mr. William
Cook, sometime since Minister of the Gospel in the City of Chester, and to the
rest of the Author 's Friends in that City.
I Present this Discourse to you, as a public Testimony that I am not
unmindful how much I am obliged to you all, for your great Love and Respects to
me, from my Infancy to this time: And in an especial manner to you Mrs. Cook,
for the Motherly Affection, Care and Tenderness you have constanstly Manifested
toward me, through my Childhood and Youth, and are pleased still to continue.
I forbear receoning up particular Obligations, because too numerous for so slow
a Pen. I know you delight more in showing Kindness and doing Good, than others
would in having the World told that they do so. The Subject treated of in this
little Book, I am sure is very grateful to you all, and I am confident you will
not be offended with my Discourse, because so familiar. It is a very sad and
afflicting Reflection to a serious Christian, that there are such multitudes
who plainly appear to take no tolerable care of their own Souls, tho they
profess the best Religion, and are furnished with eminent Advantages: For, The
Earth which is so Watered, and bears Thorns and Briars, is Rejected, and is
nigh unto Cursing, whose end is to be Burned. But Beloved, I am persuaded
better things of you, and things that accompany Salvation, Heb. 6.8, 9. It very
much concerns you all to take care I be not mistaken in you, and to use your
utmost Diligence to bring forth Fruit in some proportion to the Labor and
Pains which have been bestowed on you. You have enjoyed the Labors of that
eminently holy Person and faithful Minister, Mr. Cook, whose love to, and care
of Souls, and zeal for their Salvation was such, I am not acquainted with any
words that are significative enough to express them. And therefore if you do
not much exceed others in Divine Love, and all the Fruits of Righteousness and
Holiness, you do not fully answer the Means with which you have been favored.
I am willing to remember you of your Old Pastor, that you may thereby be
induced to reflect upon your selves, and be quickened to give such diligence to
make your Salvation sure, as he was always pressing you unto. Were the
excellent Treatises he left behind him, Published, they would contribute much
to keep those things always in your Remembrance, which he mainly insisted on
whilst he was Living, and to establish you in the Truths and Duties you know
and have been practicing. He was the greatest instance of an indefatigable
faithful Minister, and practical Believer, I was ever acquainted with. He was
diligent and industrious, even to a Prodigy. His Humility and Modesty did
exceedingly veil his intellectual Merits. Few could comprehend the time he
spent and the pains he took in his Study, much less the proficiency he made
there. He had strong Natural Parts, a great Memory, a quick Apprehension, was
very Thoughtful, and dived very far into whatsoever he applied his Mind unto.
He was the most void of all kind of Affectation (so far as my Knowledge does
extend) of any mere Man. His Learning, Ministerial Labors and exemplary Piety,
were such, could the World be furnished with an exact faithful Account of his
Life, I am persuaded it would yield as grateful and pleasing Entertainment to
the learned part of the World, and be as profitable to all People, who have a
serious sense of true Piety, as any thing that can be Published. But I doubt
those who knew him best, Died before him; and as for those who were acquainted
with him and do Survive, I suspect some were not observant enough, and others
did not know him long enough to understand very many of the most material
Passages which would be necessary for such a Composure. Indeed he did so
conceal himself, I very much question whether any Man was ever in a capacity to
do him Right. Yet, a sull Collection of the many great things his Friends
remember, and which he could not hinder People from observing, would be of
extraordinary use unto the Public: Tho the whole Relation thereof would not
comprehend the half of what he deserved should be said, to perpetuate his
Memory, and encourage a laudable Imitation. If this hint may prompt those who
knew him, to recollect themselves, and jointly apply themselves to such a Work;
I shall have this Satisfaction, that I have been instrumental to put them on
Acts of Friendship and true Piety, and have contributed a little to oblige the
Public. You are commanded not to be Slothful, but followers of them who
through Faith and Patience, are Inheritors of the Promises, Heb. 6.12. And I
propound unto you Mr. Cook, as a great Pattern you should imitate in variety
of Instances, which are within your reach, and pertain to the Stations you are
in, as well as in the whole general tenor of his Conversation. I shall
therefore pass over in Silence many very considerable things I know concerning
him, which must not by any means be omitted, by one who would attempt to write
his Life. I must not therefore insist on his Learning: And indeed he who would
do him Justice as to that, must be furnished with a much greater measure of it,
than I can hope to attain unto. Yet, let me take liberty to mention one thing,
viz. That his skill in the Oriental Languages was such, it procured him a
respect above many Persons of great worth, from the Famous Bishop Walton, whose
eminent Talent lay in that sort of Study. A very worthy Author (whom I am
obliged to Love and Honor greatly for his substantial solid Learning,
Conformists 4th. Plea for Nonconformists. p. 109.
but especially on the account of his exemplary Piety, and more than common
Zeal for the good of Souls) has told the World, That Bishop Walton would speak
Civilly to Mr. Cook, tho he told him unless he would Conform, he could not
help him. I have particular reason to say, that when he spoke those words, he
did it with intimations of great Regret; and that amongst other reasons of his
Respect to Mr. Cook, common to others for whom that Great Man had a Kindness,
notwithstanding they had different Sentiments from him, about some Matters, it
was Mr. Cooke's great knowledge in these Languages, which did peculiarly
commend him to that Bishop. Here I am to take notice, that Mr. Cook was a
Nonconformist, and so had different Sentiments about some inferior, and less
substantial, rather merely accidental Matters (about which all deserving and
good Men have not the same Apprehensisions) from what I have, and many more
have, whom I greatly Reverence. His differing Judgment about these Matters,
served him for his own Conduct. But he managed his Dissent from Conformists,
with that Candor and Christian Temper, he highly deserved Love and Respect from
all Conformists who were endowed with true Piety, or indeed had any share of
common Ingenuity. He did not abuse his Dissent to Uncharitableness and Censure;
nay, he could not endure to hear a deserving Conformist Reflected on. I
remember once, a Person of no small Abilities, and Mr. Cooke's particular
Friend, happened accidentally to reflect on a Conformist, on the account of his
being a Conformist, Mr. Cook immediately reproved him with some keenness; the
other Person replying, I believe what I said, is true: Mr. Cook presently
Silenced him, desiring him the with some earnestness of Speech to observe the
Apostle's Rule, Have thou Faith? Have it tothy self, Romans 14.22. I must also
pass over in Silence, Mr. Cook's unwearied and indefatigible Labors in the
work of the Ministry, in Praying, Preaching, Expounding the Holy Scriptures,
Catechizing, and Personal Converse from House to House; tho in these things he
very well deserves to be imitated by all Clergymen of what sort soever. An
exact Relation of Mr. Cooke's Loyalty would make a Volume, and represent him so
considerable on that account, I do not question, but most would be apt to
suspect the possibility of finding a complete Parallel in the Records of Human
History. His Loyalty was not like that so much talked and boasted of some Years
ago, an empty Name, used to cover --. His Loyalty was truly Christian. He knew
how to suffer with Patience and Meekness, and with a temper of Soul very
agreeable to that of the Holy Jesus, whose Ambassador he was, and whose Example
he followed. And he did actually suffer in that manner, both for and under the
same Government. True Loyalty is a necessary property of a good Christian and
faithful Subject. And I know not any one who has lived within your Memory, who
so well deserved your imitation in this excellent Qualification, as your
ancient Pastor. This is indeed a Topic which deserves to be enlarged on,
because the thing has been so horribly Counterfeited, and the Name so
shamefully, yea, more than villainously Abused. But I forbear, because should I
expatiate, I may find my self obliged to drop some Expressions which would
prove uneasy to certain Persons, who have happened to bring themselves under
such Circumstances, they perceive it possible for Men of haughty Spirits, who
have ridiculed the plea of Conscience, who have been very daring, contemptuous
and truculent in their Behavior and Carriage, to have some tender Places. And
I am not willing to exasperate any Man, if I may avoid it, with Innocence. He
Governed his Family with great Prudence, and with much Strictness. I think no
Man ever attended more diligently to the interest of Religion in a Private
Family, than he did. Every Morning and Evening after he had with his Family
briefly implored the Divine assistance in Prayer and Praise, and a Blessing
with that part of the Holy Scriptures which was then to be read, a Psalm, or
part of one was Sung, then a Chapter (in the Old Testament in the Morning, and
in the New Testament in the Evening) was read, which he Expounded, reporting
the principal parts of which it did consist; then he gave an account of the
substance of it, in as few words as the matter and parts of it would permit,
afterward explained the greatest Difficulties which did occur; and in the last
place showed, what useful Instructions were especially to be taken notice of.
And then he spent at last a quarter of an Hour in Prayer and Praise, usually
improving much of the Chapter that was read, into matter for the one or the
other. He was an extraordinary Person for all the parts of Prayer, tho commonly
he did very much abound in confusion of Sin, in admiring the Divine
Excellencies, and in praising of God for his Benefits of all sorts. On all
occasions he was very importunate for the Church of God, and that the Kingdom
of Christ might be Enlarged. He had no Child of his own, but did freely take
into his Family three or four Children, for whom at his own Charge, he provided
Food, Lodging and Raiment, and whom he instructed in Religion and Human
Learning, in order to their attaining to serve their Generation according to
the will of God. These and the Servants he Catechized twice every Week,
explaining every thing with a peculiar easiness, for the helping them to
understand every particular. When he could not any longer attend on his public
Ministry, he did not grow Idle, but performed most parts of it in his own
Family, with the same care and diligence he was accustomed to use in Public,
tho there were not one Person more, than those of whom his Family did
constantly consist. He was a very strict Conscientious observer of the Lord's
Day. His Family was constantly to have their Worldly Business dispatched by
four or five of the Clock in the Afternoon of Saturday. Then he bestowed an
Hour and an half or more with his Family, in explaining and applying one or
more Verses of some Chapter in the Bible, (going over the Chapter, and usually
the Book in order) and in Prayer. After that, every one in the Family was to go
to his own Apartment for some time, either to learn the Catechism, or for
private Reading and Devotion. About Eight of the Clock they Supped, and after
that, he dismissed his Family, according to his every days Custom. He was
always up early on the Lord's Day. Every one read a Chapter in the Morning; he
then spent at least an Hour and an half in expounding one or more Verses of a
Chapter, and in Prayer. Then he and his whole Family went to Church, (I speak
now of the time after his public Ministry ceased.) About a quarter of an Hour
after they were returned home, he Prayed with his Family, repeated the Sermon
they had heard in Public, and Preached and Prayed as he was wont to do in
Public before he was Silenced. A little time being allowed for Dinner, he and
his Family went again to Church, and allowing after their return home, more
time for every one in Retirement, he performed the same Religious Exercises he
had performed betwixt coming from Church in the Forenoon, and going thither in
the Afternoon. Every one in the Family having after Supper given an account of
what they remembered, he concluded the day always with singing a Psalm, and with
solemn enlarged Praise and Thanksgiving. He went through all this Labor and
Work with unaccountable vigor, cheerfulness, and fervor of Spirit. The Visits
he made were usually very short, and most of the time was spent in pious
Discourse, or Prayer. He would be exceedingly uneasy if he heard any Person
spoken of Reproachfully. He would not by any Means permit any of his Friends
and Acquaintance to use any harsh words concerning any Person who had
unexcusably injured him. If he heard of their doing so, he would be sure to
reprove them sharply. He was very free in reproving his Friends and Relations,
and all those with whom he was Acquainted, as occasion required, and in
cautioning them against the appearances of Evil. His Humility was almost
Astonishing; and he fortified himself to a strange degree against every thing
he could suspect might so much as have a tendency to tempt him to have even a
moderate Conceit of himself. I wrote to him once and used the word Reverend to
him; he sent me by the next Post a very Pious Letter, wherein he gave me a
Reprimand for that word, and desired me if I thought fit, to use that word to
others, yet not to use it any more to him. He was wont to be mightily concerned
when ever he heard of the outward Prosperity of his Friends, that they might be
provided against, and secured from the temptations which attended such a
Condition. And when ever he heard of their Adversity, or being any way
Afflicted, how earnest were his Prayers that their Afflictions might be
Sanctified to them! His Abstinence, Mortification, Self-denial, and the strict
Watch he kept over himself, together with the heedful regard he had to Divine
Providence in all Instances, would appear truly wonderful, could I give a full
Relation of them. He did every Week set apart one whole day for private Fasting
and Humiliation. He kept a constant Diary for his own private use, which he
wrote in Latin, but in such a Character, I am persuaded no Man beside himself,
could read an entire Passage. His Charity (considering what he had to live on,
and what has been already said of it by the Bye) was as stupendous as any
thing else. He would strain to the utmost to relieve the Indigent. What
multitudes of Catechisms, etc. did he Buy to give to the Poor! And how much
Money he bestowed on poor Families, which he frequently Visited, that he might
Instruct, Counsel, Exhort, and Comfort them, none can tell. For he distributed
his Charity with all the Secrecy he could devise Great numbers of poor People
were continually relieved at his Door. I believe no Man was ever more forward
than he, to contribute to the utmost of his Ability to promote any Charitable
design. I never heard that any seemingly poor Person ever met him, and asked an
Alms of him, who went away from him without good Advice, and a larger testimony
of his being affected with his appearing Poverty, than could reasonably be
expected from him. But often did he enquire after, and seek out Objects and
Opportunities for doing good in this kind. His regard to Righteousness and
Justice, was so exact and tender, peradventure the like has scarce been heard
of. I could name a Gentlewoman of good Quality in Chester, who offered Mr.
Cook some Moneys, at a time when his Circumstances were indeed very mean, but
he refused to accept of it, which occasioned her to urge him more earnestly to
accept of it, as a testimony of her Respect to him; but he would not be
prevailed with to receive it; telling her at last, that he understood her
Husband had some Creditors when he Died, and that they were not all as yet
fully satisfied, and he could not in Conscience receive Money from her for his
own use, whatever his Straits might be, as long as he knew her Husband's Debts
were unpaid. He was a great follower of Peace. He was extraordinary plain in
his Habit, and void of every thing that could look like Flattery; but truly
Civil, Courteous and Obliging, tho a perfect stranger to that Ceremoniousness,
which it may be the want of his habitual Honesty and Integrity, has brought so
far into Fashion, as even to be esteemed an Accomplishment. He was a great
Enemy to the Pomps and Vanities of this evil World, and perhaps the exactest
observer of the Baptismal Vow, that any (at least) of these latter Ages of the
World have produced. Thus far have I spoken from my own Knowledge of that
excellent Person, and do but put you in remembrance of what you more fully
know. That Mr. Cook continued this course of Life, these Religious Exercises,
and his Weekly Fast, to the very Week in which he Died, I have been certified
by one of you, a little after his Decease. And that he was very patient and
submissive under his last Visitation, being never heard to utter one complaint;
that he spent the remainder of his strength and time in Pious Discourse on
certain portionns of Holy Scripture, and in pithy fervent Prayers, till he
actually resigned up his Spirit into the hands of his beloved Jesus; which was
about two or three of the Clock in the Morning of the Third of July, 1684. and
73d. year of his Age.

The more you resemble that holy Man in all those Instances which pertain to
your selves, and wherein he was a faithful follower of the Lord Jesus Christ,
the more succesfully will you work out your own Salvation. You will be disposed
to yield up your Souls to God in due time, in such a calm and comfortable
manner, he resigned up his Soul. You will be prepared to enter into that Rest
and Joy, you have such abundant cause to conclude he entered into the possession
of almost Nine Years ago. Those things which ye have both learned and received,
and heard and seen in him, (agreeable to the Gospel of Christ) do, and the God
of Peace shall be with you. This comprehends the best Advice I can give you,
and the substance of the sincerest Prayer tendered unto God on your behalfs,

By your Obliged Faithful Friend and Servant, Sam. Bold.
Styple, June 8th. 1693.
The Preface to the READER.
Reader,
WE of this Land have been of late entertained with a constant Series of
Providence, little less than Miraculous. But our Murmuring untractable Temper,
our unreformed disobedient Lives, our aversion to, and our stiff, vehement, and
unreasonable Opposition against every thing which has a tendency to promote
the interest of Peace, Concord and Holiness, do not portend any Good. The
Ferment seems daily to grow higher and higher, and who can tell what tremendous
Eruptions may follow? As long as our Wickednesses are multiplied, our Dangers
do most certainly increase, appear we ever so Careless and Indifferent. What
astonishing Calamities and Confusions are at hand, I cannot undertake to
Relate, I dare scarce adventure to Suspect. But if God do whet his glittering
Sword, and his Hand take hold of Judgment, he will undoubtedly render Vengeance
to his Enemies, he will reward them that hate him, Deuteronomy. 32.41. I muy with good
assurance affirm, that the best Service we can every one do for our selves, is
to make sure the Salvation of our own Souls. Our doing this, will not in the
least incommode the Public; it may advantage and benefit it greatly. If we do
thus, we shall be prepared for whatso ever it will please our God in his
infinite Wisdom to permit. If we shall not be able to entertain the most
frightful Occurrences, with less discomposure than others, we shall most
assuredly lose less by them than they, because our best and chiefest Interests
will be safe. For no sooner will a period be put to our present Pilgrimage and
Warfare, but an abundant Entrance will be Ministered to us into the everlasting
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. If some of these Sheets had not
been Printed before I knew they were in the Press, this Discourse might have
come forth in another form, and a little better Polished. But if it shall
please God to make it (as it is) serviceable to quicken any of you to, or
assist you in a just concern for your own Salvation, my design is answered,
whose desire and Prayer to God for you all is, that you may be Saved.

S. B.

MAN's Great Duty: OR, Every Man should be principally Concerned for the
Salvation of his own Soul.
Psalm XXXV. v. 3. Part Last. Say unto my Soul, I am thy Salvation.


IT is very evident by this Psalm, that David (when he Composed it) was in very
great Danger, in a very afflicted and distressed Estate, by reason of the
excessive Power, inexorable Rage, and implacable Malice of his Enemies. Being
in this condition, he did not depend on any outward Succors, nor would he
betake himself to any unlawful Arts, but applied himself to God, committing
himself to his Conduct, Care and Protection, earnestly importuning him to
undertake for him, plead his Cause, maintain his Right, defeat his Adversaries,
and to defend, help and deliver him.

Which was undoubtedly the wisest course he could take, considering the
circumstanstances with which he was at that time clothed: For tho the best
People, those for whom God has a singular respect, may be under such
oppression and persecution, their case may to outward appearance seem
altogether Remidiless, yet their God can soon alter the Scene, effectually
rescue and command Deliverance for them.

These words, Say unto my Soul, I am thy Salvation, may be considered either,

First, As an affectionate and earnest desire, that God would inwardly assure
him, that he would effectually Save and Deliver him from those external
difficulties and dangers with which he was surrounded, and by reason of which
his case appeared quite Desperate. He was very well satisfied, God could make
his Enemies examples of his Vengeance, in proportion to the Malice and
Wickedness they had discovered in their unjust Persecuting of him, how
numerous, powerful and crafty soever they were. But this was not enough to
quiet and pacify his Mind, and to dispel those fears and suspicions which did
frequently disorder him, and make those Burdens others did lay upon him, much
more weighty and insupportable than otherwise they would have been. His Spirit
would be in a fluctuating and unsettled Frame, till God would assure him he
would undertake his Defense, and cause him to see a happy period put to that
ungrateful and disingenious, that rude, yea, barbarous Treatment and
Persecution, with which he had been Exercised a long time, which had now almost
tired him, and was ready to overwhelm and sink him.

Or, Secondly, As noting his diverting from what he had just before been so
intent upon, and vehemently concerned about, and improving his present Troubles
and Calamities, and his fervent Supplications for help against, and deliverance
from them and their Authors, to excite and quicken him to a more affectionate
and ardent Praying, that whatever his portion might be in this World, yet God
would be pleased to certify him, that his Soul should be Saved. Which is
certainly one of the best uses we can make of bodily and outward Afflictions.

We may perceive the Psalmist putting a sudden stop to that mighty Current of
Desire, as expressed in the former part of this Verse, and the other two which
come before it, and turning that Stream into another Channel, speaking to this
effect. Lord! tho I am very sensible of the distressed Estate I am now in, and
therefore have been so importunate with thee, to plead my Cause, and stand up
for my Help, yet the deliverance I have been begging being but a Temporal
Mercy, I dare not be peremptory, or ask it absolutely at thy Hands; nor indeed
would such a Deliverance fully satisfy me; I therefore entirely refer that to
thy infinite Wisdom: But yet there is one thing I cannot, I will not be denied;
one thing I desire above all other, and if thou will grant me that, I shall
have as much as I can wish; it will fully satisfy me. The thing I thus
importunately beg, is, that thou will assure me, My Soul shall be Saved.

How well would it become us? How much would it be to our advantage to improve
outward Calamities; to make us eminently concerned for the welfare and
happiness of our Souls? To make us more ardent in our Prayers, and vigorous in
our Endeavors to obtain a good assurance, that God will certainly conduct us
into that blessed Estate he has prepared for them; He does set apart for
himself?

But if there were no room for this last Interpretation, and we were certain
the words did only relate to the Psalmists deliverance out of that calamitous
Condition, in which he was at that time; yet we have ground enough from his
being so earnest in Prayer for such a Deliverance, to mind our selves in what
manner we ought to concern our selves, that we may secure the Eternal Happiness
and Salvation of our Souls. Sure we may, we ought to use these words, Say unto
my Soul, I am thy Salvation, according to the most Spiritual importance they
will admit.

And thus the Words might prompt us to make some Enquiry. First, Concerning the
Salvation of the Soul. Secondly, Of what consequence it is for a Person to have
a solid assurance that he shall be Saved. Thirdly, From whom and how such
satisfaction may be obtained.

But I will confine my Discourse at this time to this one Point, viz.

That every Person should be very much concerned for the Salvation of his own
Soul. We should all of us be principally busied to secure the Salvation of our
own Souls, tho that is the thing which of all other, is generally most
neglected. People ordinarily find a great many matters to employ themselves
about, which are of little moment in themselves, and will turn them to small,
or no account at last. They are so taken up in providing for their Bodies,
indulging their Appetites, pleasing and gratifying their Senses, and managing
their earthly temporary Affairs; they think very seldom and very little of the
eternal safety and welfare of their Souls. How prone are we to suffer almost
any thing to divert and take us off from minding the Salvation of our Souls,
with any tolerable degree of Attention and Seriousness; not to say with such
care and solicitude as the importance and weightiness thereof does call for and
deserve? Other things are more thought of and minded than this; and the means
we think proper to obtain them, are more diligently and delightfully used than
those God has directed us to, to make the Salvation of our Souls sure. But tho
we provide our selves other work, this remains our Duty; our heedlessness and
omission is not to be Justified; cannot discharge us from our Obligation; For,
What is a Man profited if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul?
Or what shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul? Matt. 16.26.

In discoursing of this Doctrine, I will observe this plain and easy Method.
First, I will explain the words in which it is Propounded. Secondly, Mind you
of some Reasons why every Man should be so concerned for the Salvation of his
Soul. Thirdly, Take notice of some Inferences, which the Point will evidently
afford, and which may and ought to be improved by us to our great Advantage.

First, I am to explain the terms of the Proposition, which may be done by
answering these two Questions. First, What are we to understand by the
Salvation of the Soul? Secondly, What is meant by a Person's being very much
concerned for it?

First, What are we to understand by the Salvation of the Soul?

The Soul is the most excellent part of Man; that part on which the Image of
God was at first principally Stamped and Imprinted, which does distinguish him
from, and dignifie him above all the lower parts of the Creation, and which
renders him capable of Knowing, Loving, Serving and Enjoying God, the Sovereign
Good. It is an immaterial, spiritual Substance, which is not like the Body,
liable to Corruption and Death, but when separated from it, does enter into a
State either of such Happiness and Pleasure we cannot at present form an
adequate Idea of, or of Misery and Torment, altogether unconceiveable. In which
Estate it must continue unalterably to all Eternity.

The Salvation of the Soul then, is its exemption and Freedom, as from all the
Sins Temptations and Evils, unto which Man is obnoxious in this Life, so from
all the Miseries, Curses and Plagues Sin does expose and make Man liable to in
the next World, and its fruition of God and Christ, and all that Glory and
Blessedness in Heaven, God has prepared for, and promised thorough Christ to
them, who faithfully accept of, and comply with the terms he has propounded in
his Word, Romans 6.22, 23. Romans 21.6, 7, etc. Matt. 25.34.

If any one should now enquire why the Salvation of the Soul is so much
insisted on, when it is most true in it self, and certain unto Christians, that
the Body as well as the Soul, will in the next World be in a State of
Happiness, or Misery for ever? Or why People should not rather be minded, that
it behooves them to take care to provide for the Salvation of their whole Man,
than thus to be put in mind of, and excited to concern themselves for the
Salvation of one part of themselves.

It may be pertinently enough replied, That the Soul being the noblest part, is
ordinarily put for the whole Man. So that for a Person to mind the Salvation of
his Soul, is the same thing with his minding the Salvation of himself. Our
blessed Savior speaking of this same matter, the Evangelist St. Matthew,
relates his discourse in these words, I or what is a Man profited, if he shall
gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? Or what shall a Man give in
Exchange for his Soul? Matt. 16.26. St. Luke delivers it thus, For what is a
Man advantaged, if he gain the whole World, and lose himself, or be cast away,
Luke 9.25.

Besides, the Body, when the Soul is departed from it, does not presently pass
unto a State of Torment, or Joy, but is laid in the Grave, where it remains
without any sense of either, till the Resurrection, whence it must be raised
up, and fitted for, and united to its own Soul, to share with in that State to
which it was assigned immediately after it was separated from the Body. The
Soul after its departure from the Body, appears before God, and is sentenced to
a State either of Horror and Torment, or of Satisfaction, Joy, and Pleasure,
Luke 16.22, 23. Luke 23.43. So that the Salvation of the Soul does note a
freedom from Sin, Misery, and Torment, and enjoying a State of eminent Delight
and Happiness, immediately upon its departure out of this World. When the Body
shall be again united to the Soul, it must partake of the same Happiness with
the Soul. The Salvation of the Soul implies and comprehends in it the Salvation
of the whole Man. The happiness or misery of the Body at the Resurrection,
depends on the happy or wretched Estate the Soul was consigned to at its
departure from the Body. All that are in the Graves shall hear his Voice, and
shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the Resurrection of Life; and
they that have done evil, unto the Resurrection of Damnation, Joh. 5.28, 29.
Dan. 12.2.

Secondly, What is it for a Person to be very much concerned for the Salvation
of his Soul?

Answ. To be firmly persuaded, that it is of extraordinary importance to him,
to have his Salvation well secured; to desire ardently that it may be so, and
to apply his utmost endeavors to make it sure, by a due, and regularuse of
those Means God has appointed for this purpose. He has a sound knowledge of
what the Salvation of his Soul does mean. He often thinks with himself of what
consequence and moment it is to him, that he should be Saved. He frequently
considers in what State his Soul is, and what he may reasonably concludes would
become of it, if it were presently to be called away from its earthly
Tabernacle. He seriously considers what course he ought to take, that his Soul
may assuredly be saved at last. Such kind of thoughts do often occur to him,
and he is careful to entertain them, and prosecute them with seriousness, till
they produce some good effect. What can we think of those who obstinately
neglect to meditate on their future State, and refuse to consider what a plain
and certain tendency the sins and wickednesses in which they allow and indulge
themselves, have, to make them eternally Miserable? Who are so very regardless,
they leave their Souls to all adventures? Never seriously thinking of,
reasoning, and expostulating with themselves about these matters? I say, what
can we think of them, but that they are dangerously befotted by Satan and their
Lusts, if not dreadfully forsaken and given over of God in just Judgment, to go
on Inconsiderately to the Vengeance of the Great Day? We must at least conclude
they are not much concerned for the salvation of their Souls. We should
certainly without any difficulty, make such a determination in another Case so
circumstanced. He feeds on Ashes, a deceived Heart has turned him aside,
that he cannot deliver his Soul, nor say, is there not a Lie in my right Hand?
But if we are really persuaded that it is not a matter of indifferency, whether
our Souls be saved or not, and that there cannot be any thing of such
extraordinary consequence and moment to us, as having our Salvation secured,
our thoughts will be very much employed about it: And these will excite and
stir up affections in some proportion to the sense we have of its worth, and
how much our imterest is wrapped up therein. So that we shall not be satisfied
with any thing, so long as we perceive this is in hazard. We shall pant and
breath after this, as what is indispensably necessary to our being Happy; That
in which our whole welfare consists, and without which all other things are
insipid, are as nothing, yea burthensom, and vexatious. I have longed for thy
Salvation O Lord, and thy Law is my delight, Psalm. 119.174.

And he who is thus affected toward the salvation of his Soul, will diligently
observe the directions God has given, and use the means he has appointed, in
order to a Person's making his Salvation sure. He will be careful to take God's
way to secure his Salvation, for he knows none but God can save his Soul, and
that God will not save him but in his own way. He penitently, and with great
humility and reverence, betakes himself to Christ; faithfully depends on him,
and with much fidelity follows his Counsel, being sensible that no Man comes
to the Father, but by him, Joh. 14.6. And that there is not any Name given
under Heaven but his, whereby we must be Saved: Neither is there salvation in
any other, Acts 4.12. With how much greater fervor does he pray for this, than
for all other things? As the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so pants my
Soul after thee O God; my Soul thirsts for God, for the living God; when
shall I come and appear before God, Psalm. 42.1, 2. O God, thou art my God,
early will I seek thee; my Soul thirsts for thee, my Flesh longs for thee,
in a dry and thirsty Land where no water is. Thy loving kindness is better than
Life, Psalm. 63.1. And he makes great Conscience of keeping God's Commandments.
Lord, I have hoped for thy Salvation, and done thy Commandments, Psalm. 119.166.

The Salvation of his Soul has a more settled prevailing constant power over
him, than all other things have. He gives this the preference above all, and
brings all other things to a subordination to it. This has such a fixed
prevailing influence on him through the whole course of his Life, that all
other things are measured, esteemed, judged of, approved, or disapproved,
according to the relation and tendency they have to further or obstruct this.
He that is very much and duly concerned for the salvation of his Soul, is
ordinarily thus affected, thus disposed, thus resolved.

He will not deliberately give way to, or adventure on any thing, he is
sensible will endanger, obstruct, or hinder the Salvation of his Soul, tho he
has never so many inducements to it, on other accounts; he dares not adventure
his Soul for the pleasures of Sin, the profits of the World, the applause,
approbation, esteem and favor of Men. Shall I pay so dear for these fading,
perishing airy things at present, as to occasion my sad and mournful repenting
of my purchase and bargain to all Eternity? God forbid I should ever be so
infamously Sottish, so execrably Wicked, to pawn my Soul, and stake my
Salvation at such a disingenuous, impious and unworthy rate; to offer such
indignity and contempt to the precious Blood of the Covenant, as to sell it at
such a common and unhallowed Price.

Yea, he will apply himself with vigor to any thing he understands from the
word of God; will promote and further his Salvation, tho he perceives he shall
certainly encounter very formidable discouragements; he will pass quietly
through reproaches, patiently sustain Losses, and cheerfully endure
Tribulation, and inhuman Barbarities, rather than omit, or neglect any thing
which pertains to, and must accompany, and will help forward his Salvation. Tho
Bonds and Afflictions abide with me, and wait for me every where, yet none of
these things ought to move me. Lord, let me never count my Life dear to my
self, so that I may but finish my Course with Joy.

When I say that every Person ought to be very much concerned for the Salvation
of his own Soul; you are not to understand this as if I did exclude our being
obliged to concern our selves for other Peoples Salvation: Those who are
unconcerned for their own Salvation, will not be heartily concerned for the
Salvation of other Peoples Souls. They may do several things (being induced
thereunto by some mean and selfish considerations) by which others may be much
advantaged and assisted in working out their own Salvation. But they who are
altogether regardless of their own Souls, will be every jot as little concerned
for others. But he who is truly sensible of the great worth of a Soul, and the
weightiness of Salvation, and therefore is heartily concerned that his own Soul
may be saved, will in his measure and proportion be concerned that others may
be saved too.

Having said thus much in order to a direct explaining of the Doctrine, I am in
the next place,

Secondly, To propound some Reasons, why we should every one be very much
concerned for the Salvation of our own Souls? And they are these,

First, God has by his plain and express Command, made it our Duty. We cannot
but acknowledge, both, that God has an unquestionable right to appoint us our
Work; and that he best understands what it is we ought to make our principal
Business. So that if he has enjoined us to be more concerned for our Salvation
than any thing else; we are obliged unto it by all the respect we owe unto him,
and that deference which is due from us, to his Authority. We cannot be
regardless of Salvation, but we must be justly reputed guilty of offering the
most horrid and unexcusable Contempt to the Divine Majesty; of renouncing his
Authority, and refusing to obey him in an Instance wherein his Grace and Love,
his regard to, and tenderness for our chiefest good, are eminently manifested.
God's Command should sway with us in any case, more than any thing else, but
especially in a case of this nature, where we have so evident a Demonstration,
that the Command it self chiefly respects our highest Advantage. How can a
refusal to comply with and obey such a Command, escape being Interpreted, to
proceed from a spightfulness against God, and an unaccountable hatred and
malice to our own Souls? And can any thing be enjoined in plainer terms, in
more express words, than our Lord has used in commanding us, to concern our
selves very much, and to use our utmost care and best diligence, to provide
for, and make sure of Salvation, and eternal Felicity in the next World? Could
any thing be spoken with greater Emphasis, or represented with more
Earnestness, and better testify the utmost force and strength of Affection,
than what you read, Deuteronomy. 30.19, 20. I call Heaven and Earth to record this day
against you, that I have set before you Life and Death, Blessing and Cursing:
Therefore choose Life, that both thou and thy Seed may Live; that thou may
love the Lord thy God, and that thou may obey his voice, and that thou
may cleave unto him; for he is thy Life and the strength of thy days. Are
you not in express terms commanded, To work out your own Salvation with Fear
and Trembling? Phil. 2.12. And to give diligence to make your calling and
election sure, that an entrance may be ministered to you abundantly into the
everlasting Kingdom of our Lord, and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.10, 11. And
to seek first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, Matt. 6.33. And to
strive to enter in at the strait Gate, Luke 13.24.

Now, can any thing be so execrable, as to choose to destroy and make your
selves eternally Miserable, rather than practically own God's Authority, and
obey him in that, wherein he has given the fullest discovery of his having a
singular regard to your greatest and unconceivable Happiness? The Command of
God should sway and prevail with us to apply our selves to any thing tho ever
so difficult, tho we were perfectly ignorant of the Reason, why he does enjoin
and make it our Duty. But how much more then should his Command influence us,
when we evidently perceive the reason of his Command is most expressive of his
Love, and does apparently carry with it a wonderful force drawn from Principles
so deeply rooted in our Natures, as are our own Preservation and Happiness? His
interesting his Authority thus in this matter, should not only prompt us to
take notice of the tender regard he has to our perfect Felicity, but also how
prone we are to be careless of, and neglect it, and with what heedfulness, care
and diligence it behooves us to attend to and follow it, lest we should fail and
miscarry in so important a Business.

Secondly, It is a business of such weight and consequence, that it is to
render us capable of attending to it, and to assist and quicken us to carry it
on with Success; that we are endowed with those faculties which are peculiar to
us, as we are rational Creatures; and that we are entrusted with Life and Time,
after that we arrive to years of Discretion; and that those advantages are
afforded us which are singularly adapted to further us in it. All these are
Talents committed to our trust; and those who will acknowledge them to be such,
must needs own, they ought to be employed to the ends for which they are
especially designed. Now, seeing they are peculiarly fitted both in their own
Nature, and by divine Appointment, to promote our Salvation, it must greatly
concern us to use them for that purpose, for which they were intended. As the
Members and parts of our Bodies are naturally fitted and particularly designed
for the preservation, nourishment, and perfection of our outward State, so our
rational Powers and Faculties are directly and immediately prepared and
appoited to be used to secure and advance the good and welfare of our Souls.
Our Understandings, Wills, and Affections, are never employed so pertinently,
as when they are duly exercised about those matters, which will contribute most
effectually to our Salvation. This is the noblest and most excellent use we can
make of them. And if they colud not be improved to this purpose, it would not
be a valuable advantage to be endowed with them. This is also the great
business for which God does allot us time in this World. We have indeed other
things to employ our selves about, whilst we are here in the Body, but all
other Businesses are subordinate, should be subservient to this. For this is
the one thing necessary. Life and Time are not allotted us, merely to Eat and
Drink and take our Pleasure and Pass-time here; or merely to drudge and toil
for the necessaries or varieties of a temporary State, but chiefly to provide
for a future and eternal Happiness, by such ways as God has prescribed. For
what is to be done by us in order to our Salvation, must be done whilst we have
our abode in this World. It will be too late to think of busying our selves for
our Salvation, when we are removed hence. The night comes, (says our Savior)
when no Man can work, Joh. 9.4. Whatsoever therefore thy hand finds to do, do
it with thy might, for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom,
in the Grave, whether thou go, Eccle. 9.10. So teach us (O Lord) to number
our days, that we may apply our hearts unto Wisdom, Psalm. 90.12.

Can we imagine it is for any thing else, but to oblige us to, and assist us in
the minding of our Salvation, and to excite and quicken us to a great, regular,
and due concernedness for it, that God does afford us his Word, Ordinances, and
the means of Grace? Are they not all evidently designed, to mind us that this
is that for which we should be most concerned, and to direct, help, and lead us
in the true, infallible, and most suitable way unto Salvation? Tit. 2.11, 12,
13. And is it not certain, that our neglecting to improve Gospel advantages to
this purpose, will exceedingly increase our Danger, and render our State
hereafter, more than ordinarily Dolorous, and Dreadful? Woe unto thee Corazin:
Woe unto thee Bethsada, etc. Matt. 11.20, etc. How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great Salvation? Heb. 2.3. Lay aside the consideration of the
Salvation of the Soul, and People may attend to, and follow all their other
Businesses and Affairs every jot as well, without the Gospel; as with it.

Thirdly, The salvation of a Man's Soul, is a matter of the greatest
consequence he can possibly concern himself about. It is agreeable to the
dictates of Reason, and the Maxims of Prudence, that we should be most
concerned for that which does most concern us. And doubtless, that which is of
the greatest worth and excellency in it self, in which all our Interests are
wrapped up; and without which, there is no possibility of our being safe and
happy, is of the greatest Moment imaginable to us; and is that which it behooves
and concerns us to use our utmost care about; and such is the Salvation of our
Souls.

For if our Souls be safe and happy, it is not possible we should be Miserable.
If we are really in the way to Salvation, and have an Interest in God through
Christ, so that his power becomes engaged to keep us safely unto Salvation, let
what will happen unto us here, it cannot make us unhappy. It will not be long
before we shall be perfectly out of the reach of every thing that can be called
Evil: And a well grounded hope of Salvation will make any thing Portable which
can befall us in this World. And as soon as we have passed through this
Wilderness, and are got from amongst the Briers and Thorns which grow here
below, we shall inherit a Pleasure, a Joy, a Portion; in comparison with which,
all that this World can afford, is in every respect less, and more
inconsiderable than the emptiest Dream, or most fleeting Shadow we can think
of. Why then should we be afraid of any thing that cannot hinder us from being
for ever Blessed? We should not be afraid of any thing but Sin, it is that alone
which is displeasing to God; that alone which exposes to eternal Misery: It Is
only that which can hinder our attaining to the Salvation of our Souls, Matt.
10.28.

But if our Souls Miscarry, all other things cannot make us amends. There is no
remedy for a lost Soul. We may be disappointed to a notable degree in our
worldly Designs, and Affairs, and Interests, and not be Undone. But if the Soul
be Damned, there is no reversing that Sentance. If the Soul perish and be sent
to Hell, it cannot be redeemed thence. All the Pleasures, Riches Honors,
Bravery, Applause, etc. in the World, tho enjoyed without any Interruption, the
whole space of a Man's abode on Earth, will not avail, or profit, help, or
comfort him one jot, will not abate or qualify his Sorrow and Torment one
Moment, when his Soul does sink under the weight of its own Guilt, and God's
just Indignation, into unquenchable Flames. Former enjoyments are past, and
ended, what was left behind, will not purchase one Minutes Ease: And the
remembrance of antiquated Delights and Pleasures, will but increase and make
present Tortures more wracking and vexatious; heighten and increase those
Torments and Horrors, which do every Minute unconceivably over-weigh all the
Jollities of an ill-spent Vicious Life. What can you conceive more terrifying
than to hear it said, Remember thou in thy Lifetime receivedst thy Good Things,
Luke 16.25.

Besides a due concernedness for the Salvation of our Souls, is the surest
course we can take, to be provided with what is most convenient for us, till we
arrive at the end of our Faith and Hope, the Salvation of our Souls. We have
reason enough to be well satisfied, if we have Journy-provision, where we are
Strangers and Pilgrims, if as soon as ever our Journey is over, we shall enter
into the Heavenly Canaan, and be for ever with the Lord. And if we be duly
concerned for our Salvation, we have as good assurance as can be desired, to be
supplied with what infinite Wisdom shall judge most fit and convenient for us,
during our Travel. Our allowance of outward things shall be more, or less,
according as our Heavenly Father shall see most for our good. Seek ye first the
Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto
you, Matt. 6.33. The Lord God is a Sun and Shield; The Lord will give Grace and
Glory; no good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.11.

Fourthly, A great concernedness for the Salvation of the Soul, is the only way
to secure it. Negligence, Sloth and Heedlessness, are not looked on as the way
to great, honorable and comfortable Fruitions, in this World; why then should
they be thought consistent with a rational expectation of the glorious things
which are reserved in Heaven? If you are sensible of the worth of your Souls,
and do desire they may be Saved, you must needs own you ought to be much
concerned for their Salvation; or you must renounce and depart from the common
Rules of Reason, and from those Principles by which all Mankind do govern
themselves, in seeking after wha is of great value in it self, or what they do
magnify by their own Phancies and Imaginations, unless you do know some other
way, by which their Salvation may be made sure. Now, the Salvation of the Soul
depending wholly on the free Grace and good Pleasure of God, there cannot be
any way to secure it, but what God has been pleased to fix upon and appoint.
Can you therefore produce a proof that God has revealed, and declared, that it
is his purpose to save any one who is of years of Discretion, whether he do or
do not concern himself in good earnest for his Salvation? If you cannot produce
a Revelation that is very plain and express to this effect, you run the
greatest risk imaginable, and act with the greatest inconsistency that can be,
with the Principles of Reason and Prudence: If you be not mightily concerned
for your Salvation, How unavoidably will all the methods you use, with respect
to other Matters, upbraid, reproach, and condemn your inadvertency, and
regardlessness as to this, which is of infinitely greater consideration an
importance to you than all other things can be? Moreover, you may remember it
has been proved to you by express Scripture, that God has appointed this as
the course you must take, if you will make your Salvation sure.

Indeed our concernedness for the Salvation of our Souls, be it ever so great,
does not, nor cannot procure their Salvation, by virtue of its own intrinsic
worth and excellency. We cannot be our own Saviors. We are wholly beholding to
the Lord Jesus Christ, and to free Grace for salvation. But we must in
obedience to God, acquit our selves strenuously for our Salvation, in using
those means, and following those directions he has appointed and assigned for
this purpose, depending upon him to Sanctify and make this obediential
compliance with his blessed Will Effectual, for the preparing us for, and
bringing us unto that Salvation, whereunto he has appointed the same. Our
coming to Christ when we are truly sensible of our Wants and Misery has no
intrinsic Virtue and Excellency of its own, to purchase and procure us
Acceptance with him, yet it is the necessary and only successfus way, a
convinced, sensible, humbled Sinner can take to obtain acceptance with him.
This being what he Commands, and that to which he has annexed his
compassionate and merciful Promise, Joh. 6.37. Matt. 11.28. The necessity there
is of our taking the course I have been discoursing of, does principally arise
from God's appointment: The successfulness of it, arises wholly from the
vouchsafements of Divine Grace.

Fifthly, Every Person's concernedness is necessary to the Salvation of his own
Soul. I speak to Persons who are of years of Discretion; and my Discourse is
about the Salvation of those who are Adult. Other People may and ought to be
concerned for your Salvation, in their way, to the utmost of their Power,
according to the Capacities thy have, and the Offices they are in, and the
Relations they bear to you. But what others can do, will not profit unto
Salvation, if you are altogether unconcerned about it your selves. Most of your
Worldly Businesses, may be done for you by others. Other People may Build your
Houses, make your Clothes, till your Grounds, feed your Cattle, gather in your
Harvests, etc. But other People, (excluding your particular personal concerning
your selves for your Salvation) cannot do all that is necessary to be done, in
order to your being Saved. Those who have ever so many at work for them, must
(notwithstanding that) Eat and Drink for themselves, or else they will soon be
Famished and Die. Other Peoples Eating and Drinking will not sustain you in
Life; their wearing of Clothes, will not preserve you from Cold, or warm and
heat you; their Sleeping will not refresh Nature in you. These are things all
People must do for themselves; and we are all sensible enough of the same. O
that we were every one as fully convinced that it is every jot as necessary,
for every particular Person to be very much concerned for his own Salvation.
Other Peoples Knowledge, Faith, Holiness, etc. will not save our Souls. Every
one that will be Saved, must Repent of his own Sins, must himself believe in
Christ, and be made Holy, and must Personally observe and keep God's
Commandments.

Sixthly, The Enemies of our Souls do concern themselves very much to hinder
our Salvation. Every Man has variety of Enemies, who in their several ways do
busy themselves to hinder the Salvation of his Soul, and to make his Damnation
sure. Does it not therefore behove him to do what he can, that his endeavors
to frustrate and defeat their Projects and Designs, may be equal to theirs? Be
sober, be vigilant, because your Adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion, walks
about seeking whom he may Devour, whom resist steadfast in the Faith. 1 Pet.
5.8, 9. Why should the Devil hate your Souls more than you love them? should
not you be as much concerned for their Salvation, as he is for their Damnation?
Are not you more interested in your own Souls, than he is? Does it not more
concern you what will become of your Souls, than it does him? The Damnation of
your Souls, will be no real advantage to him, notwithstanding he seeks and
labors for it so industriously; but how unconceivable will your Benefit be, if
they be Saved? We have Enemies in the World, and Corruption within us,
unweariedly laboring to obstruct our Salvation. And seeing we have so many and
such industrious and indefatigable Enemies, waiting to do us a Mischief, even
the greatest Mischief imaginable, to hinder our Salvation, to destroy and ruin
our Souls for ever; in what manner will it become us to acquit our selves? How
concerned should we be for the Salvation of our Souls, which are thus beset?

If we have any regard to the Authority of Almighty God, or think our selves
obliged to employ the best Talents and Advantages which are committed to our
trust, to the ends for which they naturally serve, and to which they are
particularly Ordained; if we believe everlasting Salvation is of any great
moment to our selves, and that it is not the effect of Chance, but will be
regularly dispensed; if we are satisfied that we cannot be saved by Proxy, and
that it does behove us to improve the diligence and industry of our worst
Enemies, to our own greatest Advantage; what has been discoursed, may in some
measure serve to beget, or awaken in us a persuasion, that we ought to be very
much concerned for the Salvation of our own Souls. And therefore I will now
proceed,

Thirdly, To take notice of some Inferences which this Doctrine does evidently
afford, and even prompt us to take into our consideration, and of which we may
make a profitable Use and Improvement.

First, The Soul of Man is exceeding precious: It Is this on which we should set
the greatest value, and of which we should take the greatest care. It is of the
greatest worth in it self, and may be improved to our unexpressible advantage.
But if it be finally slighted and neglected, the damage which will follow, will
be altogether irreparable. Man consists of two Parts, a Body, and a Soul; The
former is of a frail and corruptible Nature, of very little Excellency, and of
no use at all when the Soul is separated from it. As long as the Soul continues
in it, it is sensible of Pleasure, or Pain, according as things are
proportioned, or disproportioned to its Organs, Appetites, Frame or State, but
no sooner does the Soul part from it, but it becomes perfectly stupid and
senseless, and presently molders into Dust. Foolish miserable Wretches that we
are! How unexcusable are we, in being so immoderately sollicitous about our
fading Earthly Part and its little diminutive Interests, to the extraordinary
prejudice and hazard of our Souls, which are Immortal, and evidently our best
and noblest Part! When the Body returns to the Dust, the Soul does not cease to
be, but then becomes more sprightly and active, more apprehenhensive of what is
Pleasing, or Dolorous, than it was before.

We do all put a difference betwixt things, esteeming some more Precious than
others, and accordingly we proportion our love to, and care of, and concernment
for them. But our great fault is this, we are hasty and inconsiderate, we are
rash and precipitate; we ordinarily judge amiss, and value things above their
worth; setting a mighty Price upon those things which have no intrinsic
Excellency, but are entirely beholding to our own Fancies, or vulgar Opinion,
for all their reputed worth, and slighting and making no account of that, which
is so transcendently Excellent; we cannot possibly advance our esteem for it,
to those degrees it deserves. Lord! How shall we duly deplore and bewail our
selves, upbraid and reproach our Folly! seeing we have so long extravagantly
admired and inordinately doated on empty Impertinencies, whilst our Souls,
which are of unconceivably greater worth than all the World, have been left
unregarded and unminded by us! What vile and ungrateful Wretches are we, thus
to dishonor our selves, and disparage and prostitute the Souls God has
entrusted-us with! How loathsome may we justly appear in the sight of God, and
of all his Creatures? It Is owing to our Souls, that we are capable of setting a
value upon any thing; and having Souls committed to our trust, could we behave
our selves more unworthily, than to cast off all care of them, and degrade them
to the sordidest Drudgery we could devise? All Worldly and Earthly Enjoyments
and Objects, will be as nothing to us; the pleasure and delight we took in
them, will be gone, and tho the things themselves may stay behind, we cannot
make any more use of them, when once our Souls have taken their flight into the
other and unseen World. And what can we expect will be their lot and portion,
who have taken no better care of their precious Souls, have so neglected and
abused them here?

Did we rightly understand, and were we duly affected with the worth and
preciousness of our Souls, we could not make so light of them as we do. We
should then certainly concern our selves much to secure their Salvation. Do I
believe my Soul came immediately from God, and that it is of a Divine
Extraction; and that the greatest Excellency of my Body, consists in its being
fitted for the use and service of my Soul, during its abode in it? And can I by
any means be reconciled to cast off all concern for it, and to make such a
Heaven-born Offspring, a Slave to my drossy and earthly Part? Does not all
corporal Beauty and Luster, presently disappear and vanish, after the Soul is
separated from it? How great a Value should we set upon our Souls, were we
seriously and strongly persuaded, that as soon as they leave our Bodies, they
must return to God, who gave them, Eccles. 12, 7.

It is true, we cannot at present distinctly and fully understand what the Soul
is; but we easily perceive we have such a noble and sublime Part, by those
Actions which are peculiar to it: It Thinks, it Understands, it Wills and
Chooses; it Loves, it Reflects upon it Self and all its Actings; it converses
with Objects, which are not Objects of Sense; it compares sensible Objects one
with another, and raises notions from them: And we are sure the Body can do
none of these things, when the Soul is gone from it. And tho it is naturally
void now of its Primitive Holiness and Purity, yet it still retains some Marks
and Characters of the Divine Image upon it, and it is still capable of having
its first Excellency and Beauty Repaired, Restored, Improved. Oh! how large and
vast are its Capacities? What work can it do! What Exercises may it perform:
What Objects can it converse with! What great and glorious things may it be
employed about! And what blessed Privileges may it be advanced unto! It is
capable of having the Divine Image again Imprinted on it, with a Luster and
Glory far exceeding the utmost our most extended thoughts can possibly
comprehend, or reach unto. It is capable of Divine Illumination, and effectual
Sanctification of a partial, but blessed and joyful Communion with God at
present, and a perfect Fruition of him hereafter.

God forbid, that I should any longer prostitute, neglect, or make little
account of that part of my self, which is so Spiritual in its Nature, which the
Great, Holy, and Munificent God has endued with such Powers, and already
advanced to such Dignity! which may be improved, and ascend in this World to
such Honor and Eminency, and is capable of inheriting such Glorious and
incomprehensible Recompenses in the next World! If I be regardless of such a
Soul, and yet vehemently pursue, and inordinately prize a few empty Trifles,
some lying Vanities, what shall I allege to excuse my self? Must I not be
Self-condemned? Will not all the Ranks and Orders of Beings Condemn me? With
what Confusion must my Face be covered? May not the whole System of Nature
Tremble, be Ashamed, and Blush at such a Prospect, to have a view of a Rational
Creature, one that has so capacious a Soul, and yet more stupid and blockish
than its most sullen and dreggy Part? Lord, let not such Shame be my Portion!
Let me never fall into, nor sink under such Guilt! What! shall I be voluntarily
cruel to, shall I hate and so dishonor the noblest part of my Self? Shall I
wilfully cast away my Soul, which if I take a due care of, will in a little
time mount above the Stars, and be settled in a State incomprehensibly Joyous,
and full of Glory? No, I will now awake and rouse up all my Powers and
Strength, and tho I cannot exactly understand the worth of my Soul, no more
than I can what it is; yet I will endeavor to be as just to it as possibly I
can; I will prefer it above all the Objects of Sense, above every thing that
Time diminishes! above every thing that has either Vexation, or Vanity
inscribed upon it! And I will do all I can in a firm dependence on Divine
Grace, that this Soul of mine may assuredly arrive at the full Fruition of all
those great and blessed things which are laid up in store for truly pious and
devout, virtuous and upright, sanctified and religious Souls.

What raised thoughts should I have of a Soul, that is not liable to the Shocks
and Violences to which my Body is every Hour subject! A Soul that cannot be at
all impared by any of those rude Assaults, which may Surprise, and which may
unexpectedly and irresistibly hurry my Earthly part to Dust! Our Souls will
endure for ever, let all Created Powers do what they can against them. They do
not yield, they are not subject to the Alterations which are incident to what
is is Mortal. They are Immortal, they cannot Die, but when their Houses of Clay
are Dissolved, they pass and enter into a State more suitable to their
Spiritual Nature. They will retain their Beings, Powers and Properties, after
that the Worms have glutted themselves with our Flesh and Humors, after that
our Bodies have past through all the Changes, to which such Matter is liable.

If I believe my Soul is Immortal, what a value must I set upon it? We prize
any thing of worth much the more, if it will be of long continuance. How should
I then esteem a Soul, which will abide for ever! What Reasons can I produce for
my having beeen so intent upon the acquiring, and so industrious and unwearied
to obtain things which cannot Satisfy, which may soon Fade, and which must
certainly Perish? Misguided, foolish and infatuated Wretch! O how do I now
bewail my Folly and my Wickedness! who have so vainly, yea, so impiously abused
my self, misimployed my Strength, and squandred away my precious time! Away,
you gilded, false, you masked disguised Temptations! Be gone you empty lying
treacherous Pleasures of Sense! You have already cheated and deceived me too
long! You have robbed, abused and wronged me hitherto! You can never repair the
damage you have done me! I now with all Solemnity renounce and cast you off! I
am resolved through Grace to despise, contemn and vilify you all I can, and to
have no more to do with you whilst I Live! What relation can you pretend to a
Soul, which will continue, live and act, through all the long and
undeterminable duration of Eternity! I will not any more allow you the Service
of a Thought! I loath and detest you! I earnestly desire and pray, that as long
as I am on Earth, my Heart may be filled with an insuperable Indignation
against you all, and against every thing that cannot be improved to the benefit
and advantage of my Immortal Soul! Should I be careless of my Soul any longer,
now that Life and Immortality are brought to light by the Gospel, which Gospel
I am favored with for the guiding and directing of my Heart and Life, I should
not only be altogether inexcusable, but the very Heathens will rise up in
Judgment against me, to my greater and more terrible Condemnation! It Is said of
Pythagoras, that when he heard of the Immortality of the Soul, He presently
gave off that diligent attendance to his Body, to which he had addicted
himself, and made it his business to improve in Knowledge and Virtue. How much
more should I value and endeavor by all means to improve my Soul, who behold
and discern this Truth in a much clearer Light, than he could? How do I Blush!
and with what Grief and Revenge is my Heart rent, because of the folly and
vanity, the wickedness of the past part of my Life; because of my
unthankfulness for the Gospel; and carelessness of my Soul, to this time, when I
read what a Mohammedan King is reported to have caused to be writ on the Gates
of his Pleasure-House, viz. This World will not continue long; its Pride and
Luster will soon be gone. Remember Brother, and apply thy Heart to Him, who
only intended this World for our Inn. Let not thy Life be united to this Bitter
Sweet, for it has Cheated many; first Jested with them, and afterward
Slaughtered them. If thy Soul can but come away from her Prison Pure and
Undefiled, and reach the Mark, it is no great matter whether thou Die on a
Throne, or on a Dunghill. O how Sottish have I been in setting the Riches,
Pleasures, Honors and Accommodations of this present World, at so high a Rate,
preferring them before my Precious Soul! And shall I still continue to do so?
Let so tremendous Folly, such desperate Madness, be far from me: My own
experience does now convince me, that the more I have admired, the more I have
toiled for these things, the emptier I am; the more I am disappointed, the
further I am from being satisfied! I am sure these things are vain, yea, and
vexatious too! They will fade and Perish, and are at best, but of a short
duration! What are these, and such brittle decaying, short-lived Enjoyments, to
a Soul, which will abide and Live for ever! Were it not for the levity and
sickliness of my mind, what thousands of considerations would crowd in, to
convince and certify me, that it is my Soul, which of all other things, is of
greatest Worth? And can there be a more prodigious Folly, a grosser
contradiction, than for a Man to believe, his Soul is Immortal, and of greater
value, than his Imagination can extend unto, and yet be regardless of it!

As to other things which are of value, but which we do not exactly understand,
we usually them esteem according as they are better skilled in them, than we
are. Will any discreet and prudent Person throw away a Medal, a Jewel, or
Precious-stone, or part with it for a Counter, a piece of Lead, or any such
thing, because he does not know its just worth? Or will he not rather enquire
of some one who understands such things, and then esteem and prize it, at
therate he assures him it is really worth? Now we have no reason at all to
question, but God who Created our Souls, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who
Redeemed and Purchased them, do very well understond their worth. And by whose
determination should we govern our our selves in this Affair, but by theirs
whose Judgment is most assuredly Infallible? And if we will acquiesce in their
Judgment in the Case, we must certainly esteem our Souls exceeding precious.
For if our Souls were not exceeding precious, the Eternal Father would not have
given his Son to purchase them; nor would the only Begotten of the Father have
laid down his Life for their Ransom. Had they judged our Souls such frivolous
worthless things, as we generally appear to esteem them, they would not have
been redeemed at all; or if they must have been Purchased, it would have been
with a Price of infinitely less Value, than the Blood of him who was the Son of
God. The most that could have been demanded for them, would have been but a
very moderate sum of that, with which we buy the necessaries for our Temporal
Life. For what poor and trifling things in this World, do People ordinarily
pawn and venture their Souls? But God and Christ, had other thoughts of our
Souls than we have. Tho we expose our Souls for naught, yet if any one Man
could purchase the whole World, with the loss of his Soul, he would be no
Gainer, yea, his loss would be Irreparable. What shall a Man give in Exchange
for his Soul? Matt. 16.26. O! the inestimable price that was paid for these
Souls, which we do so neglect, slight, and disregard! Ye were not redeemed with
corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, but with the precious Blood of Christ,
as of a Lamb without Blemish, and without Spot, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. When my
thoughts concerning Reasonable Souls, have mounted as high as ever they can,
and when my esteem of them has followed my Thoughts as close as possible, how
far am I from comprehending, and being thoroughly affected with their full
worth? Alas! what are my most elevated apprehensions to the incomprehensible
excellency and merit of that Blood with which they were bought? Woe is me! who
have too long neglected and been careless of my unaccountably precious Soul, as
if it had been the only frivolous, useless thing in the whole World! If I do
any longer make but little account of this Soul of mine, I shall be unavoidably
chargeable with an affected undervaluing what is in it self of unconceivable
worth, and trampling under foot most ungratefully the precious Blood of the
everlasting Covenant, and offering the most insufferable contumely to the Lord
of Glory, who gave himself a Ransom for my Soul! Can I sustain so great a load?
Dare I wilfully cast away my Soul, to give the greated demonstration of
Ingratitude, and of sullen Contempt unto Almighty God? Shall I be so peevish,
so malicious, so revengeful, as to destroy my Soul, and sink my self under the
most horrid Guilt, because my Savior's Love was so stupendous and amazing!
Wretch that I am! in that I have till now been so unmindful of my Soul, which
cost my Jesus so dear! My dearest Jesus, thy Love does now constrain me!
Methinks I hear thy Sobs, thy Groans, the Prayers and Supplications, which thou
did offer with strong Crying and Tears! Thy earnest Expostulation on the
Cross, when Dying, to Redeem this Soul! My Heart is pierced now! I must! I
Grieve! I Mourn! My Indignation now is kindled! I despise! I hate! I loath
whatever would defraud thee of thy Purchase! The Beauty, Grandeur, Pomp and
Glory of this World, is now as nothing unto me! I neither love, nor prize, nor
value any thing but my Soul, and as it is ransomed by thy Blood! O! what shall I
do, that I may attain to prize my Soul as it deserves! This, this Soul which
cost the Son of God so dear! May I be duly affected with the Travail of my
Savior's Soul, and with the horrors of his Agonies and Death! Let me ever with
becoming Adoration, meditate on, rightly understand, and constantly retain a
lively, affectionate, powerful, constraining sense on my Heart and Spirit, of
Christ's profoundest Condescension and superlative Grace and Kindness! Would
Christ dwell in my Heart by Faith, and might I be enabled to comprehend with
all Saints, the breadth and length, and depth and height of his Love, how
should I abound in Admiring, Praising, Glorifying, and giving Thanks unto him!
and to what a height would this sort of exercise raise my estimation of my
Soul, toward which, this great, this glorious, this beneficent and most
gracious Savior, has manifested a Love, which passes Knowledge.

As the best and greatest Friend to Mankind has in so stupendous a manner,
Testified his love to, and thereby the real and extraordinary worth of Souls,
so the most envious inveterate and malicious Enemy to Human Race, has mightily
fortified this Truth, That the Soul of Man is exceeding precious, by his
indefatigable and unwearied attempts, to destroy our Souls, both in the ways of
Subtilty, and Violence. We commonly acknowledge and bouldly affirm, the Devil
is our great Adversary, and then we must likewise allow and grant, that he
designs to do us the greatest Mischief; and what can that be, but to prejudice
and ruin that part of us which is undoubtedly of greatest value? And can any
thing be more apparent and manifest, than that all his methods and assaults,
are levelled against our Souls? What a Monster shall I appear, if I make little
or no account of this Soul, for the ransoming of which, the eternal Son of God
laid down his most precious Life! And for the ruining of which, the Devil does
not spare any either of his Craft and Artifice, or of his Strength and
Industry? Would the Prince of the Powers of the Air, so sedulously contrive and
plot, be so very observant, and constant upon his Watch, make such diligent
Search after, and take so much pains as he does to destroy our Souls, if they
were such inconsiderable worthless Trifles, as we seem to reckon them?

We are careful of, and do look accurately after those those things we really
prize, and of which we make a very great account. And were we truly sensible
of, and duly affected with the worth, the excellency, the preciousness of our
own Souls, O! with what seriousness should we busy our selves to secure their
Salvation?

Secondly, Salvation is an inestimable Mercy and Privilege. Salvation! What a
sweet delicious good word is this? Take all the Letters in the World, and join
them together how you please, you cannot frame a word, that makes so
comfortable and charming a Sound as this does! Of all the expressions that can
be named, this is the most proper, and the best accommodated to our State and
Circumstances, to our Case and Necessities! We are in Misery, our wants and
dangers are greater than our Lips can utter! Who so wretched and forlorn as
Sinners and guilty Persons? None certainly excepting them whose Condemnation is
already Sealed and ratified! May such as we be Saved! is it possible for us to
obtain Salvation? May our aggravated Transgressions, the horrible Rebellion we
have so long and so obstinately persisted in against the Holy God, be Pardoned!
May we yet escape the terrible wrath that is coming apace upon the Wicked and
Disobedient! Is the door of Mercy still open? May we yet be received into
favor! Most joyful tidings! most comfortable and ravishing News! Blesbe my
Rock, Exalted be the God of my Salvation! Praise the Lord, O my Soul! and let
all that is within me, magnify his Holy Name! Thy loving kindness is better
than Life! O Lord! I will praise thee as long as I Live! Let all the Angels of
God, which excel in strength, bless him! Yea, let all his works in all Places
of his Dominion, bless him! Bless the Lord, O my Soul! Oh that Men would praise
the Lord for his Goodness and for his wonderful Works to the Children of Men!
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, from Everlasting, to Everlasting, and let
all the People say, Amen. Praise ye the Lord! This is a faithful saying, and
worthy of all acceptance, That Christ Jesus came into the World to save
Sinners, of whom we may justly repute our selves the greatest! Let that Message
brought from Heaven by an Angel, (A Message every way worthy of such a
Messenger) be the chief subject of my Meditations! And Oh that I might never
think of it, but with a Heart rightly affected toward it! powerfully
influenced by it, and mightily enlarged in thankfulness and praise for it! Fear
not, for behold, I bring you good Tidings of great Joy, which shall be to all
People; for unto you is Born this day in the City of David, a Savior, which is
Christ the Lord, Luke 2.10, 11.

This Salvation, is indeed a great and blessed word, but how little do we know
of that which it imports? No created Being can comprehend, and fully understand
the Mercy, Good, and Privilege it signifies. A Blessing is the less by its
being such, that any finite Being can reach and know its full Dimensions. This
is a Mercy and Benefit, which deserves our loudest Praises, our most solemn
Acknowledgments, and our silent Admiration. We cannot possibly raise our
estimation to its real Value: It is so great, the loftiest Expressions fall
infinitely short of conveying to our Minds an adequate and exact conception of
it. How shall we then escape, if we neglect so great Salvation? Heb. 2.3. Our
deliverances are incomplete whilst we are on Earth; we are encompassed and
surrounded here, with such variety of dangers, calamities and troubles, we are
no sooner rescued out of one, but we feel our selves Arrested by another
Disaster, and are in all respects as uneasy and dissatisfied till freed from
this, as we were when mourning under the former. Yea, many times our very
Deliverance proves but a step to a Relapse, which sinks us deeper into the very
same kind of Trouble and Disquietment we thought we had escaped. We are Born to
Trouble, as the Sparks fly upward. When one afflicting occurrence having gorged
it self, as we conceive, leaves us, we presently become a Booty to another, or
else the former returns with greater eagerness, and preys on us with more
unsatiable greediness and violence. No sooner have we one Deliverance, but we
find we do as much need another. We are not sure but whole Troops of Sorrows
will seize on us, and these so thick and close one after another, they will not
afford us one pleasant Interval. Our Lives are at best chequered; and our
Deliverances in this World, yield not a satisfaction of any long continuance.
But blessed be God, the Lord Jesus being made perfect, is become the Author of
eternal Salvation, unto all them that obey him, Heb. 5.9. O! the blessedness of
them who partake of this Salvation! who are perfectly freed from every thing
that ean offend and molest! from the worst of Evils, Sin, and the next
Temptations to it, and from all the Sufferings, Pains, Diseases, Doubts and
Fears, which here extort our Tears, Complaints, and Moans! God shall wipe away
all Tears from their Eyes, and there shall be no more Death, neither Sorrow,
nor Crying, neither shall there be any more Pain, for the former things are
passed away, Rev. 21.4. How happy are they who are safe from, and out of the
reach of all those Torment, and Curses, to which Sin does expose People, and
under which others must eternally roar! who, whilst others fry in unquenchable
Flames, and must be always tossed on the Waves and Surges of the ever burning
Lake, endure none of their Anguish, but are filled with a Joy which no Tongue
can relate! O the Honor to which they are advanced! the Glory with which they
are Crowned! the Treasures they enjoy! the Kingdoms they have received, the
Delights with which they are, and will be everlastingly entertained! Our
Understandings and Minds are not capacious and wide enough to comprehend, or
conceive the great and excellent things that are conferred on them! Eye has
not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the Heart of Man, the things
which God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. Beloved, now are we
the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know, that
when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. In thy presence is fullness of Joy, at thy right Hand are Pleasures
for ever more, Psalm. 16.11. As for me, I will behold thy Face in Righteousness;
I shall be satisfied when I awake, with thy Likeness, Psalm. 17.15. Because thy
loving Kindness is better than Life, my Lips shall praise thee. Thus will I
praise thee while I Live; I will lift up my Hands in thy Name. My Soul shall be
satisfied as with Marrow and Fatness, and my Mouth shall praise thee with
joyful Lips, Psalm. 63.3, 4, 5.

Can any thing be so desirable to me, as when I die, to have my precious Soul
guarded and conveyed by holy and blessed Angels, through the airy Regions unto
Abraham's Bosom, into the kindest Embraces of the holy amiable, and loving
Jesus! And at the general Resurrection, to have my Body raised Incorruptible
and Glorious, and every way disposed for, and united to its happy Soul, that
they may be joint and eternal sharers in all those blessed Fruitions infinite
Grace and Love will vouchsafe! How happy shall I be if through Grace I arrive
to be for ever with Christ! What a glorious Change will then be wrought on me!
How wonderfully will all the Powers and Faculties of my Soul, be advanced,
improved, and enlarged! How much more beautiful and capacious will they be made
than now they are? O the alteration that shall be made on me, to my
unconceivable Advantage! when I shall shine as the Brightness of the Firmament,
as the Stars for Ever and Ever, Dan. 12.3. Yea, as the Sun in the Kingdom of my
Father, Mat. 13.43. When this vile Body shall be Changed, and fashioned like
unto the Glorious Body of My Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, according to the
working, whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself, Phil. 3.21.
What account should I make of such a Privilege, Honor and Felicity! How should
I prepare, wait and long for this Great, Holy, and Glorious Change!

The word of that God, who is faithful and true, and cannot Lie, affords us
evident and full assurance, that such a glorious and everlastingly happy State
is prepared, and may be obtained, and it likewise certifies what manner of
People they must be who shall be admitted to it. The Lord Jesus the supreme
Judge of, and great King over all, will at the last Day, say unto them on his
right Hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you,
from the Foundation of the World, Matt. 25.34. He will render to every Man
according to his deeds; to them who by patient continuance in Welldoing, seek
for Glory and Honor, and Immortality, Eternal Life, Romans 2.6, 7. Henceforth
(says St. Paul) there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the
Lord, the Righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but
unto all them also who love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.8. Blessed be the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant Mercy has
begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from
the Dead, to an Inheritance Incorruptible and Undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in Heaven for you, who are kept by the power of God, through
Faith unto Salvation, ready to be Revealed in the last Time, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5.

This Salvation comprehends all that is Great, all that is Honorable, all that
is truly Delighting, Good and Desirable. O that we may all duly strive, labor,
desire and long to be prepared for, and brought to the actual possession of it!
What should we wish for on our own behalves, if we have any love for our
selves, but that God himself, the only satisfying good, would be our Portion!
That we may have free, Intimate, full and everlasting Communion in the highest
Heavens, with the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, with glorious Angels and all
the Saints above! That we may come to the City of the living God, the Heavenly
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels, to the general Assembly and
Church of the first Born, which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of
all, and to the Spirits of just Men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of
the new Covenant, and to the Blood of sprinkling that speaks better things
than that of Abel, Heb. 12.22, etc. Can we desire and pant after any thing
comparable to our beholding our Savior's Glory, and being for ever with him in
his Kingdom, where he Reigns in Glory?

Were we thoroughly persuaded of, and did we in any measure esteem this
Salvation as we ought, (for indeed we cannot prize it as it deserves) what an
happy Change should we presently perceive in our selves! What a mighty power
and efficacy should we feel it have on our Souls! What a sweet and constraining
influence should we find it shed abroad in our Hearts and Lives! How strangely
would it abate and take off our love and affection to this World! Its Pomps!
its Pleasures! its Vanities! How much would it raise us above the Flatteries
which have hitherto Deluded us! How would it make us despise and contemn the
painted Glories, and empty Enjoyments, which we have so unweariedly pursued,
and so passionately courted! How indifferent should we be to Earthly things,
and how little impression would any Worldly Allurements make on us, if we did
steadily look, not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are
not seen, 2 Cor. 4.18. And did we affectionately consider, that the things
which are seen are Temporal, but the things which are not seen, are Eternal!
How would this engage us to, animate us in, and with what success and vigor
would it carry us through all our Duties! Would not our Conversation be in
Heaven, did we seriously look for our Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ from
thence, to call and take us along with him thither! I press toward the the Mark
for the Price of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus, if by any means I
might attain unto the Resurrection of the Dead. What support would this yield
us? With what patience would this possess our Souls? Yea, with what joy would
this fill us in the greatest Tribulations, Distresses and Persecutions, we can
possibly have occasion to encounter in our passage toward it? We glory in the
Tribulations also, Romans 5.3. For which cause we faint not; but tho our outward
Man perish, the inward Man is renewed day by day; for our light affliction,
which is but for a Moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17. I reckon that the Sufferings of this present
time, are not worthy to be compared with the Glory which shall be revealed in
us, Romans 8.18. We read of those (Heb. 10.24.) who took joyfully the spoiling of
their Goods, knowing in themselves, that they had in Heaven a better, and an
enduring Substance. Yea, how would this reconcile us to leave the World quite!
make us earnestly desire to Die, and that the time may hasten apace, when we
may actually give up the Ghost, and resign up our Spirits to Christ! Having a
desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better, Phil. 1.23.

Who can conceive the thousandth, yea, the least part of the Happiness of the
Spirits of Just Men made Perfect! With what knowledge, admiration and love,
shall we be filled, when we are settled yonder, in those bright and shining
Thrones! when we are joined to the Heavenly Choir, and bear our part in the
eternal Halelujahs! and shall be ascribing Honor, Glory and Praise to him that
sits on Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever! With what raptures of
Love, Praise and Joy, shall we be everlastingly entertained, when we become
Denizens of that glorious City, of which the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb is
the Temple! where we shall see his Face, and have his Name in our Foreheads!
where there shall be no Night! where we shall need no Candle, neither light of
the Sun, for the Lord God will give us Light, and we shall reign for ever and
ever.

How incomprehensibly great and good are the things which God has in store for
them who heartily love and sincerely serve him! seeing God will be pleased to
admit such frail imperfect Mortals as we are, to the full fruition of himself
and his Christ; surely there is nothing can deserve to be esteemed and called
Blessedness, but only this. How can I prize and value, how can I affect, strive
and long for any thing but this Salvation alone! How am I transported with
admiration and wonder! yet these do fail me! they flag, they cannot mount high
enough by thousands of Degrees! Salvation is so transcendent! O let my Love
increase, grow ripe, ascend still higher and higher! How would the Damned value
this Salvation, might they have but the least hopes of ever being admitted to
it? What esteem have the Saints above for it? Yea, how do sincere Believers
here prize it, especially when they have a lively vigorous sense of it? St.
Paul was positive, that to Die would be his Gain, Phil 1.21. Others were
tortured, not accepting; deliverance, that they might obtain a better
Resurrection, Heb. 11.35.

O my stupid senseless Soul! what ails thee, that thou still lie grovelling
here! that thy motion is so slow! O! for the strongest and most seraphick
flights of Love! for the Ecstasies of Passion now! What, art thou bereaved of
all thy Powers! Have thou lost thy Nature? Art thou Metamorphos'd and changed
into a lifeless lump of Matter? Rouse and awake! exert and put forth all thy
Strength! Tho hitherto thou have been deceived by Objects much too little and
unsatisfying, here is that which calls for all thy Love, thy Zeal, thy Life!
Here is Salvation, which much exceeds thy most extended thoughts, and reach!
Here Is that which none could ever esteem according to the fullness of its worth;
the most glittering splendid, worldly Triumphs, are at best but poor,
deceitful, treacherous and insipid Vanities! all the Grandeur, Pomp and Glories
here, do soon decay and wither; do quickly dwindle into nothing! but this
Salvation is truly great and Glorious; it is substantial, durable and
satisfying.

Most holy, true and blessed Jesus! thou have expressly told us, that in thy
Father's House there are many Mansions, Joh. 14.2.3. That thou art gone to
prepare a place for thy faithful People! And that thou will come again and
receive them unto thy Self! that where thou art, there they may be also! Thou
Prayedst for them with most tender and earnest Affection, when thou wast here!
And it is thy will and pleasure, that thy Saints and Servants, those whom the
Father has given thee, shall be with thee where thou art, that they may behold
thy Glory, Matt. 17.24. Thou do not enjoin them any thing in order to their
being Saved, but what thou will enable them by thy Spirit to perform! Nor any
thing but what thou can make pleasing and delightful to them, by the
abundance of thy Grace! O Lord, I here absolutely resign my self to be guided
by thy Counsel; afterterwards receive me to Glory! Whom have I in Heaven but
thee? There is none upon Earth I can desire besides thee! Be thou the strength
and the joy of my Heart, and my portion for ever! There is not any thing
comparable to thy Salvation! Lord, take from me what thou will! make me Poor
and needy! let me be Scorned and Despised! let my Body be Sick, and every part
and Joint of it, Sore and in Pain! let me be afflicted and Persecuted! yea, do
with me what thou will, so that thou will grant that Grace and Peace may be
multiplied to me at present, through the knowledge of thy self; so that thou will be pleased, that I may at last obtain the end of my Faith and Hope, the
Salvation of my Soul!

Thirdly, No Person can with reason expect, or hope his Soul shall be Saved,
who is not resolvedly diligent in that course God has ordained and prescribed
him for this purpose. That customary, slight, and formal course, with which too
many content themselves, will not suffice to secure their Salvation. The best
have too much reason to complain of themselves, because they are so supine,
remiss and careless, about a business of so great importance in it self, and
unto which, the Holy and most Righteous God requires all should give a diligent
Attendance. This is the one Thing necessary, which must be minded with the
greatest seriousness, whatever is Neglected. All other Affairs and Businesses,
must give place to this, if at any time they happen to interfere with it. A few
accidental thoughts of, some flitting unconstant desires after Salvation; a
customary observation of some of the outward parts of Devotion; an
over-vehement heat for particular Modes of Worship, speculative Opinions, and
doubtful Practices, will not avail any Man unto Salvation, but will render his
Case much more dangerous, if the main bent of his Heart and Affections, is
after his Covetousness, his worldly and fleshly Lusts, if his Life is blemished
and polluted with practices diametrically opposite to the power, essence and
design of all true Religion.

If we will secure the Salvation of our Souls, we must have, and cherish a
composedness, and seriousness of Spirit, in some measure suitable to the
Nature, Excellency, and Weightiness of that we propound to our selves. We must
attend to, and industriously prosecute that course of Life and Practice, which
has some affinity with, and bears some proportion to what we aim at. We must
be resolvedly diligent in the use of those Means God has instituted for the
furthering of us in it. And if we refuse to walk in his way, and follow the
method he has directed us to, our Hope will certainly fail us, and we shall be
utterly without Excuse.

Salvation is not to be attained so easily as multitudes dream it is, and as
too many are inclined to flatter People it is. All would be Saved, and the
greatest part would fain be saved in a way very little inconvenient, and
contradictory to their senual Lusts and Interests, and then do too readily
persuade themselves they may be Saved in such a way as is agreeable enough to
their own extravagant Humors; in such a way as they would like best, and would
pitch upon, if they were to appoint the way themselves. It is a great
unhappiness, that the Christian World has been so long troubled with a sort of
Persons, who pretending they have a right to instruct others in the way to
Heaven and Salvation, have contributed very much both by their Discourses and
Practices, to reconcile the profession of Christianity to Men's Ungodly Lusts,
rather than to reconcile them they have pretended to take care of, unto the
truth and practice of that Religion they professed, whose way to Salvation
seems every jot as broad as that our Blessed Savior cautioned People against,
assuring them, it would lead unto Destruction: Such Persons may justly be
reputed Factors for the Prince of Darkness, rather than Ambassadors and
Ministers of that Sacred and Divine Person, who came to destroy the works of
the Devil, and to save his People from their Sins. Great Resolution and
vigorous constant Diligence must be used by us, in order to Salvation, let
Flattering Soul-destroyers say what they please to the contrary.

If we will be Saved and enter into Life, we must keep God's Commandments; we
must mortify our Lusts, be crucified to the World, and have the World
crucified to us; we must deny our selves, and walk in a way contrary to those
of this World, who do lie in Wickedness, and are governed by that Spirit, which
rules in the Children of Disobedience. We must expect to meet with
Difficulties and Oppositions, and must resolvedly through Divine assistance,
encounter and vanquish them all. We must have Grace; and act it strenuously and
with great seriousness and constancy, use appointed Means for the strengthening,
increasing and confirming of our Graces; and perseveringly strive to improve
and grow more and more in Knowledge, Faith, Hope, Love, and in all the parts of
a truly Godly and Religious Life.

He who is the Author of eternal Salvation, the only Savior of Sinners, did
not acquaint them he loved most, with any other way to Salvation, but Repenting
thoroughly of Sin, believing in Him, obeying his Laws, and following his
Example. He did not give any Indulgence to Peoples Lusts, nor did he
countenance their Sloth. He peremptorily required them to strive to enter in at
the strait Gate, Luke, 13.24. He is positive, that except your Righteousness
exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall in no wise
enter into the Kingdom of God, Matt. 5.20. He says, The Kingdom of Heaven
suffers Violence, and the Violent take it by force, Matt. 11.12. Yea, he
warns us against cheating our selves with false and groundless easy hopes; and
assures us with great earnestness and much solemnity, that we will find our
selves mistaken and deceived, if we think to insist upon any specious pretenses
at the last day, and will therefore content our selves with what falls short of
doing the Will of his Father which is is in Heaven. Not every one that says
unto me, Lord, Lord, shall I enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does
the will of my Father which is in Heaven. Many will say to me in that day,
Lord, Lord, have we not Prophesied in thy Name? And in thy Name have cast out
Devils? And in thy Name done many wonderful Works? And then will I profess unto
them, I never knew you; depart from me ye that work Iniquity, Matt. 7.21, 22,
23. His Apostles afterward certified the People, they must give diligence, to
make their Calling and Election sure, if they would be sure not to miscarry and
fail, 2 Pet. 1.10. And that he is the Author of eternal Salvation, only unto
those who do obey him, Heb. 5.9. With what shadow of Reason can you pretend to
hope for Salvation, if you will not credit him and his Apostles, but continue
regardless of what they have so vehemently affirmed indispensibly necessary to
your being made meet to be partakers of the Inheritances of the Saints in
Light? Is it not most evident and plain, that the precious Promises pertain
only unto them who approve themselves resolvedly diligent in eschewing what is
Evil, and in perfecting of Holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. Is not this
undoubtedly the great purport, the main design, and the principal business of
the whole Gospel, viz. To instruct, direct, oblige and assist us to deny all
Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live Godly, Righteously, and Soberly in
this present World, that we may be disposed for everlasting Salvation in the
next World, Tit. 2.11, 12. Was not this the course the Saints of Old took to
make their Salvation sure? Was it not from their having conscienciously
followed this Method, that they fetched their Evidences, to prove they had a
right to hope and look for Savation? Was it not from this that they derived
Comfort in their greatest Distresses, and looked with satisfaction and joy to
hereafter, beyond time and days? This is our rejoicing, the Testimony of our
Consciences, that in Simplicity and Godly Sincerity, we have had our
Conversation in the World, etc. 2 Cor. 1.12. I have fought, (said St. Paul) a
good Fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith: Henceforth there
is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the Righteous Judge
will give unto me at that day, etc. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Ought we not now to be
followers of them, who through Faith and Patience, are Inheritors of the
faithful Promises? Can any Man now pretend with any show of Reason, to expect
Salvation, so long as he continues Vicious and Immoral, Supercilious and
Careless, Negligent and Slothful? Do you quit your selves like good Christians,
whilst you presume on Salvation, in a way which is not consistent with God's
Commands? Whilst you depend on what the Lord Jesus has assured you, will
certainly fail you: Whilst you have not one promise in all your Bible to
countenance and support your Hope: Whilst the whole Doctrine of Salvation, the
entire Gospel of Christ is against you: Whilst you keep and continue in a way
directly contrary to that, in which all those did walk who are already got to
Heaven?

Fourthly, How justly may they be Expostulated with, and what keen Reproof do
they deserve who have been all their time regardless of the Salvation of their
Souls? Indeed we are all faulty; we have been very defective and wanting; we
have not done what wemight, to further and make our own Salvation sure. What
reason have we all to be deeply Humbled, to smite upon our Breasts, and cry out
against our selves? Ah! miserable and ill-deserving Wretches! we are horribly
guilty! God be Merciful unto us, who have been so careless of our own
Salvation! How have we cumbered our selves, been careful and troubled about
many needless and unprofitable Matters, and left the one thing necessary
unheeded? How thoughtful and sollicitous have we been about our Food and
Apparel! What we should Eat and Drink, and wherewith we should be Clothed!
With what eager, vehement desires and affections have we pursued the little
Interests of this present World? With what unwearied pains have we labored for
very Vanities! And how have we all this while shamefully forgotten the holy
God! slighted the most compassionate and loving Jesus! not looked after, nor
sought for the Kingdom of Heaven, and that Righteousness which prepares for,
and leads us to it, with any tolerable Diligence and Concernedness! How have we
neglected our eternal Salvation! We have not had a due regard to the safety and
well fare of our precious and Immortal Souls! the duties of Piety and offices
of Religion, have either been wholly omitted by us, or else we have performed
them in a very superficial, cold and heartless manner! Who amongst us all can
vindicate and clear himself from this Charge, before that God who observes all
our ways, knows our Hearts and tries our Reins? Or, what can we allege and
plead in our own Excuse, if we have been by our own Confession thus Guilty? Is
it not highly reasonable, and very fit we should all strive to acquire a true
sense of our own Guilt, and accuse and condemn our selves? Cry importunately
for Pardon and Mercy, immediately resolve, and in a dependence on Divine
assistance, presently set upon a faithful and most vigorous Amendment? Sure it
will become us to apply our selves speedily, To work out our Salvation with
fear and trembling, and to give all diligence to make our Calling and Election
sure.

And if those who have made the greatest proficiency in Religion, have so much
occasion to upbraid themselves, and to acknowledge that they deserve to have
their Faces covered with Shame and Confusion; If such be scarcely saved, then
what may be said of others? Where shall the Wicked and Ungodly, the openly
Vicious and Profane, the Unrighteous and Unmerciful, the Luxurious and the
Covetous, the Formalist and the Hypocrite appear?

All People are busy and much concerned for something or other. We are
concerned much for our Bodies, for our Temporal Life, Health, and Happiness,
for our Ease, our Pleasure, our Profits; for our Houses, Lands, Cattle, Wares,
Merchandise, etc. But how few are concerned half so much for their Souls and
their Salvation, as they are for those momentary, transient, and uncertain
things? Yet every Man ought to be more concerned for the Salvation of his Soul,
than for all other things. Sirs, reflect upon your selves, and with good
deliberation consider your State, and in what manner you have hitherto behaved
your selves, and what is your Disposition and Carriage? Do you not indulge your
selves in your Lusts and vicious Courses, tho you have been often admonished
and warned, and advised to the contrary? Are you not industrious and diligent
in providing for, and fulfilling the Lusts of the Flesh? Do you not conform
your selves to the sinful fashions and customs of this evil World? Do you not
live and persist in those practices you are convinced in your Consciences, are
disallowed and condemned by him who will be your Judge, and which you have at
least pretended solemnly to Renounce? Are you not Enemies in your minds to the
power of Godliness? Do you not make it appear by your practices, that you are
not willing to be reconciled to a serious, gracious and heavenly course of
Life? How can you pretend you are concerned for your Salvation, whilst you
obstinately refuse to walk in the only Way which leads unto it? Do you not make
light of Christ? Are you not contentedly ignorant of the great Truths relating
to his Person, his Natures and his Offices, or at least of the practical
Improvement you should make of them? Do you not sturdily reject his gracious
Invitations, contemn his Authority, and refuse to follow his Example? Does not
the World and your Pleasures carry away your Affections and Hearts from him? Do
you not undervalue the Ordinances instituted in the Gospel, and make little or
no account of the means of Grace? Are you not altogether Heartless and Formal
in, and careless in being made better by the use of them? Do you not ordinarily
allow any thing to excuse you from attending on God in them, tho God has writ
to you the great things of his Law, Hos. 8.12. Do you not account them as a
strange thing? Are you not altogether unconcerned for the due and serious
performance of the private duties of Religion? Do you not pass over Days and
Weeks, without examining your Hearts, and enquiring into your Practices and the
State and condition of your Souls, without reading the word of God, so as to
inform your selves thereby in his Mind, and quicken you to your Duties, without
praying with such a composedness of Spirit and affectionateness of Soul, as the
nature of that Duty and your own Cases call for? Do you at all delight in
serious religious spiritual Discourse? Or, do you make any enquiries for your
sound Instruction and safe guidance in the way to Blessedness, and for your
assistance toward Salvation? May you not easily convince your selves from
these and the like Instances that you do not heartily concern your selves for,
but are indeed regardless of the Salvation of your Souls? And, will you
obstinately continue so?

O! how extremely dangerous is your Estate! How justly are you to be reproved,
seeing you have passed over so much of your time in a neglect of that which
should have been most deeply Imprinted on your Hearts, and should have had the
most powerful influence on your whole Practice! Your guilt is exceeding great,
and you are absolutely without Excuse. You act against all the principles of
Reason, and dictates of common Prudence. You run counter to your own
Profession. You tear in pieces your most solemn and sacred Vows. You cast
contempt upon God himself, and affront, scorn, and testify your spitefulness
against the very Commiseration and Love, the Bowels and Blood of his only
Begotten Son. Instead of reaping advantage from the Death of Christ, you do
your utmost to Crucify him afresh. You do what you are able to put him to open
Shame. You manifestly judge and declare your selves unworthy of Eternal Life.
You destroy your own Hopes, and render the Patience and Mercy of God (other
Peoples principal Support and Comfort on all occasions) unconceivably Terrible
and Frightful to your selves. You forfeit what you pursue, and you turn your
present Possessions, into real Curses: And when you Perish everlastingly, you
will have and inherit your own Choice. You must expect your Condemnation will
be much more aggravated than other Peoples. How little a while can you enjoy
the Riches, Pleasures and Vanities, you prefer above your Souls, and their
Salvation? And whether do you think you can fly for help and comfort, when God
and Christ shall abandon you to the insuperable lashes and accusations of your
own guilty Consciences? And to the never fading, but incomprehensible Torments
of a Damned State.

You profess you believe there is such a blessed and glorious Estate to be
obtained, as that is which the word of God does give an account of: But you do
not heartily believe what you would have the World believe you do. For were you
really and fully persuaded of the truth, certainty and excellency of what God
has promised to the Faithful and Obedient, you would concern your selves in
good earnest, to get an interest in, and right unto the same. If you had a
strong and firm persuasion of those things you would be thoroughly persuaded,
that the way God has prescribed, is not only suitable, but absolutely
necessary. You would be reconciled to follow that course of Life, he has
ordained for them to walk in, who shall inherit them. People do constantly act
according to the predominancy of their Persuasion and Belief. Lord! What
Multitudes who profess the Christian Faith, are ruined by a secret, but
predominant Unbelief! It is an evil Heart of Unbelief, that makes to depart
from the living God, Heb. 3.12.

You hehave your selves in this Matter as if you were quite void of Reason. You
are thoughtful enough in all other cases, pretend to be prudent, will think and
consider, ponder and project how to manage your little Halfpenny Affairs to
your utmost Advantage, and would not by any means give People occasion to
suspect you inconsiderate and weak, silly and indiscreet in ordering your
Worldly Business. But as to what concerns your Souls and Eternity; you live at
random, as if these things were of no moment to you. Whereas, if you did but
deliberately weigh your Actions in the Balance of the Sanctuary, consider what
you have done, and what you are about to do, and whether your Practices are
consistent with, or have any relation to Salvation, it would be next to
impossible that you should continue so unmindful of, and persist in a course of
Practice so plainly contradictory and fatal to your highest Interests. Did you
seriously consider on your ways, you would soon perceive invincible Reasons why
you should presently alter your course, and betake your selves to a faithful
and diligent observing of the Divine Testimonies, Psalm. 119.59. An irreparable
miscarriage, admits of no Excuse; yea, is horribly aggravated, when it appears
to be the pure effect of voluntary Inconsideration. How exceedingly will it
increase a and heighten the torments of Damnation, when a Man shall be
necessitated to accuse himself, that he never considered what he did, nor would
not think what he was to do, that he might be Saved?

What a groundless Confidence and desperate Presumption do you please your
selves with, if you provide your selves other claims to Salvation, than God
will approve of? How come you to have reason to think you have enough to plead
for your admission into the Kingdom of God, because you enjoy outward
Privileges, and partake of Gospel Ordinances, whilst you cast off all care,
that these may have their proper effects on your Hearts and Lives, seeing our
Savior, Lord and Judge has expressly said, Many will say to me in that day,
Lord, Lord, have we not Prophesied in thy Name? And in thy Name have cast out
Devils? And in thy Name done many wonderful Works? And then I will profess unto
them, I never knew you; depart from me ye that work Iniquity, Mat. 7.22, 23.
Can a grosser Dotage be imagined, than for People to live presumptuously in
evil Courses, and yet buoy up themselves with confident hopes of making amends
for their transgressing of God's Laws, and of providing themselves a safe
passage to Heaven, when they can tarry no longer upon Earth, by ways of their
own, or other Peoples devising? This was an Imposture which prevailed amongst
the Pharisees of Old; it does obtain amongst the Superstitious in these days;
it is the principal Fancy, which supports the rude, immoderate and unreasonable
Heat, People manifest for those matters, of which we read not one Syllable in
any of the Divine Oracles. O! the senseless delusions with which Multitudes
willingly suffer themselves to be cheated! and this in a Business of the
greatest Consequence imaginable! With what ease and readiness do men of ill
Lives reconcile themselves to confident hopes of Salvation, persuading
themselves, that by a few new-devised ways of Corporal Mortifications, and
empty Abstinencies, some ritual Observances, or at most a pecuniary Indulgence,
they shall make a very good Comutation for all their Immoralities, and purchase
an easy Passport unto Glory?

Sirs! What reason can you allege for your entertaining and hardening your
selves in your vicious Courses with Diabolical suggestions? Why do you suffer
your selves to be so tamely imposed on, by your grand Adversary the Devil? He
does all he can to lead his Captives on smoothly, and without any suspicion, to
that remediless Perdition, where he designs they should be everlastingly
Lodged. When you please your selves that such seriousness of Spirit, such
holiness of Life, such circumspect Walking as the faithful Ministers of the
Gospel insist on, and commend to People, is not necessary to your being Saved:
Is it not the Devil who does furnish you with these Insinuations? When you
plead the Goodness and Mercy of God in express contradiction to the whole tenor
of his Word. Whence does this illusion arise but from your Minds being darkened
with the Vapors and Steams which ascend from the Bottomless Pit? Why will you
so affront God, and abuse his most Divine Excellencies, to disguise the
infernal Treachery of the Father of Lies, and great destroyer of Souls? Who but
your most mischievous Enemy can prompt you thus to pervert the Declarations of
God's Goodness, to defeat the main intendment of the riches of his Grace? Can
you exercise your Reason, can you Meditate and think in any degree, and yet
believe you shall be able to vindicate your tenacious adhering to a Notion
which Cancels all the Authority of God's Commands, devests him of his Truth and
Faithfulness, and transforms his whole Revelation into a plain piece of Falshod
and Imposture?

How wretchedly does Satan infatuate and befool you, when he persuades you to
put off your concerning your selves for the Salvation of your Souls, to a more
convenient Season? And prevails with you to stifle, efface and vanquish your
present Convictions, by pretending you may do it with a better Grace hereafter;
and that a riper and more mature Age, will be much more proper for, and
agreeable to so Austere and Grave a Business? Whom do you gratify in
neglecting to mind your Salvation, but your worst and most mischievous Enemy?
And will you humor him, when you cannot do it any other way, than by running
the most Dismal Risk, and rendering your Salvation at least next to Impossible?
Can any time be so convenient for this Work, as the present, seeing the present
is the only Season you can call your own? Seeing you are not sure of more time
to mind it in? Seeing the present Season is the only time, wherein you can
truly hope to attend it with good Success? Are you so destitute of Reason and
good Sense, as not to perceive that if you allow Satan to have such an
ascendent over you, as to wheedle you at this rate, he will drill you on so
long, you will have no time at last to concern your selves for the Salvation of
your Souls, to any purpose?

Sirs, what do you mean? What is your Purpose? What are you resolved on? Sure
you will not say, you fully determine to destroy those precious Souls you are
entrusted with, and make an Experiment, how much your abusing Divine Patience,
contemning infinite Mercy, and despising the Riches of God's Grace, will add to
the Horror and Anguish of the Damned. Oh! that you would seriously consider of
Matters, and show your selves Men, yea, show your selves what according to your
Profession you should be, Christians, before the door of Hope be quite shut;
whilst there remains a possibility of escaping that Vengeance, and fiery
Indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries! Do you think you are able to
contend with the Almighty? Are you equal Matches for that God, who is a
Consuming Fire? Can you with calm and serene Minds, dwell with Everlasting
Burnings? Alas! how soon may God begin to write against you Bitter things? How
soon can he throw your Consciences into Convnlsions, and wound your Souls, by
causing the Invenomed Darts of his Fury to stick fast in them? In what a case
will you be, When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty
Angels, in flaming Fire, taking vengeance on them who know not God, and that
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with
everlasting Destructiou, from the presence of the Lord, and from the power of
his Glory, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9, What will you do, when the Great and terrible
day of the Lord shall come? Whether will you then fly? How will you then be
able to appear before, and look your incensed Judge in the Face? What will you
then plead for your selves? Where do you think to hide your selves? Rocks and
Mountains cannot then conceal you! What can screen you from irresistible Power?
How do you think you shall escape the effects of Impartial Justice? Now
consider this, ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be
none to deliver, Psalm. 50.22.

But alas! how difficultly are such People brought to consider the things which
belong to their Peace? What multitudes are there every where who have so
habituated themselves to neglect their Salvation, and to those courses which
have the plainest tendency to ruin their Souls Everlastingly; they have hardened
themselves against all Reproof; whose Consciences are so canteriz'd, or seared,
they can hear the most dreadful threatenings Recorded in the Word of God, and
their Hearts not be moved or affected at all with them? yea, in express
defiance of those Menaces, can Bless themselves in their Iniquities. What so
strange and so amazing! as that People should be in so forlorn a State, and yet
will not be prevailed with by any means to take notice of it! They are sensible
of Hunger, Cold, Sickness, any Corporal wants and pains, of troublesome Times,
worldly Losses, unreasonable Weather, etc. But have no sense of their spiritual
Wants, and the great danger their Souls are in. Tho they are under the wrath of
God, stand on the very brink of Hell, and are not certain of being one Hour out
of unquenchable Flames, yet they are altogether unconcerned, can Eat and Drink
and Sleep, and follow their Sports, and worldly Businesses with Eagerness, as
if they were in no danger, nor had any reason at all to be afraid. There is a
way that seems right unto a Man, but the end thereof are the ways of Death,
Prove. 14.12. O that the carnally secure and presumptuous would ponder, believe,
and faithfully apply this Scripture to themselves! I do not only pity
multitudes of ignorant poor People, who mind nothing but a present Livelihood,
but a great many who live in pomp, have huge worldly Possessions, do fair
Deliciously every day, bestow the most of their thoughts, and the greatest
portions of their time, and their Wealth, upon their Bodies, which must in a
little time be laid in the Grave, and at last, (unless they come to be of
another Mind, and to alter their course in due time before they Die) together
with their miserable, guilty, neglected Souls, be Tormented in Hell Fire for
ever.

Fifthly, It is very fit and meet, that every one should make a serious, strict
and impartial Enquiry into himself, whether he has been duly concerned for the
Salvation of his own Soul, or have hitherto been regardless of, and neglected
this most necessary and important Business? Let us speedily set apart some
portion of our time for this Work, and employ our calmest and most penetrating
Thoughts in searching out the State and Condition of our Souls. In considering
what we have been doing? Whether we are going? What will become of us, if we
should presently be Summoned to appear before God's Tribunal? Whither we must
be Sentenced to that unquenchable Fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, or to dwell with Christ in Glory? Whether we shall see the Face of God
with Comfort and Joy, or have our Souls filled with Astonishment and Confusion?
Whether we shall hear those joyful Words, Well done thou good and faithful
Servant, or that terrible Thunder, Depart thou Cursed, I know thee not thou
wicked doer? It does behove us to enquire seriously, and to get speedily a
sound knowledge of the Estate of our Souls, lest Death and Hell should surprise
us; Death and Judgment are hastening a pace, and it will be too late to think of
amending what is amiss, and flying from Wrath, if we leave this World in an
unreconciled Estate. Yet you have time and means, and encouragements and helps
to discover the Truth of your Condition; yet you may prevent your eternal
Misery, if you have been unconcerned for your Souls; yet you may escape the
Punishments you have deserved, if you be truly sensible of your Sin, Guilt and
danger, do humbly betake you unto Christ, reform your Lives, close with the
offers of Mercy, and lay hold of the Grace which is tendered.

You will say (it may be) you hope well, and you trust that all will end well.
But I pray you, what ground have you for that Hope and Trust? Groundless Hope
will not Save you. Such Hope is but Presumption, it has ruined Thousands and
Millions. Examine your selves therefore impartially, search out what your Estate
is, bring this matter to a full determinate Issue. Awake careless drowsy Soul!
please not thy self with foolish Dreams any longer! Lord of all Grace and
Might! pour down thy gracious Influences! awake our drowsy, sleepy, senseless
Consciences, make us to attend to, and obey the word of Exhortation!

Hearken every one, listen to Advice, and improve the present Opportunity: Know
that you are called on, exhorted and warned, and if you continue finally sturdy
and disobedient, you will be without Excuse. If you Perish, your Blood will be
required at your own Hands. Your Damnation will lie wholly upon your selves.
Consider therefore,

1. If you have been unconcerned all your time for your Souls and their
Salvation, and are under the power of Sin and your Lusts, and in an
unreconciled Estate, you are in a very evil and dangerous Estate. You have been
pulling down insupportable loads of Wrath upon your selves. If you persist and
die in this Estate, it will be impossible for any thing to interpose and screen
you from the terrible strokes of divine Vengeance, or to support and bear you
up, under that mighty weight of Horror and Torment you have been hailing upon
your Selves. What trembling of Heart, failing of Eyes, and sorrow of Soul will
then seize on you? Is this an estate to be desired? Is this an Estate to sleep
and slumber and repose your selves quietly in?

2. This was your Estate once. We are all naturally concluded under Sin and
Guilt. Children of Wrath, dead in Trespasses and Sins; without Holiness,
unconcerned for our Souls, Enemies to God, and obnoxious unto his Displeasure.
And every Man continues in this evil Estate, till he is effectually
Regenerated, and does heartily entertain the word of Reconciliation, by and
through Jesus Christ. Till a real, spiritual, gracious Change is wrought in
him, he is an Enemy to God, is actually provoking of God, and treasuring up
Wrath for himself against that Great Day, when the Disobedient and Unbelieving,
and those who are unconcerned for their precious Souls, must be Destroyed, with
an utter and an everlasting Destruction. Those who are now in the holiest and
happiest Estate, were once in this Guilty and wretched Estate. Such were some
of you, etc. 1 Cor. 6.11. We our selves were sometime foolish disobedient,
serving diverse Lusts, etc. Tit. 3.3.

3. You have too just ground to suspect and fear you are in this dreadful
Estate, till you make a faithful enquiry into your Estate. You cannot
ordinarily have a sound knowledge, that your Souls are in a good condition,
without reflecting upon your selves, and descending to a strict and faithful
Examination. If you entertain an opinion that all is well and safe, as to your
Souls, you have no occasion to take any comfort in that Opinion, because you
have no ground or reason for it, which you know of. It may be mere Diabolical
Delusion for any thing you know to the contrary, having never duly enquired
into the Matter. Yea,

4. The more secure and confident you are, having never made a thorough enquiry
into the State of your Souls, the more sad and dangerous your Estate is. For
this argues you have sinned your selves out of a sense of all your spiritual
and eternal Concernments; and that you have so entirely committed your selves
to Satan's Conduct, as to rely on his Word for your Safety and Happiness. It Is
his Interest to do what he can to support and heighten your Presumption, and to
prevent your being prevailed with to search seriously into your Estate. He
would deceive but few, did he not flatter them with hopes of Heaven at last.
Could you see from one end and side of Hell, to the other, what a dreadful
Spectacle would you behold? And amongst those enumerable multitudes of Damned
Wretches which have gone thither in every Age of the World; how few would you
see in comparison of those who were secure, confident, self-deluding Sinners
when they were on Earth? Who went thither Blindfold, refusing to search into
their Estate, and consider whether they were going? Who were resolved to
Believe well, and Hope well, (as they phras'd it) of themselves, without ever
examining their Spiritual Estate, in defiance of all Warnings and Exhortations
that could be administered unto them? What a deplorable thing is it, to consider
how People do at Satan's instigation, harden themselves against Fear, and all
Consideration, so that they will not suspect they may be in the way to Hell,
till they do irrecoverably drop into it? And,

5. In what a fearful Estate will thou be, who obstinately refusest to consider
what thy condition really is, if at last thou be found an unreconciled Sinner,
utterly unconcerned for the Salvation of thy Soul? If this be thy case when
Death has seized thee, thou must presently sink into unquenchable Flames. And
then what a miserable helpless Wretch will thou be for ever? What a dreadful
thing will it be to be scared and rafted out of thy Spiritual Slumber and
Sleep, by the actual Pains and Agonies of Damnation? Should a Man Sleeping at
his own home, be a little moved with the cry of Fire, Fire! but without
enquiring whether his Dewlling Place were in Danger, should compose himself
again for Sleep, and not awake, till rasted out of his Sleep by the scorching
heat and vehement noise of the Fire burning down his own House, and should he
as soon as his Eyes are open, behold his Bed and all his Room in Flames, how
ghastly would he look, being thus affrighted out of his Sleep, and seeing no way
to escape those devouring Flames, which have seized on every part of his Room?
What loud Outcries, and dreadful Schrieks would he utter? How deplorable should
we conceive his condition, should we see his ghastly Looks, and hear his
Roarings, and his mournful Groans, whilst Burning and Roasting in the Flames of
his own House, not able to fly from that scorching Fire, nor any able to come
near to help him, because compassed in by those furious and merciless Flames?
If this would be so full of Terror to that miserable unfortunate dying Person,
and would fill the Beholders with most affectionate Trouble and Grief, what
must the Dread and Horror of that Sinner be, who sleeping securely in his Sins,
will take no warning, but at last is rafted out of his Sleep by the Flames of
Hell, and finds himself as soon as ever he awakes, in unquenchable Burnings,
and his Estate becomes one dreadful Schriek, continued (if I may so phrase it)
to the utmost length of Eternity?

6. Remember, we must every one be concerned for our own Salvation, and we must
every one try our selves, and examine our own Estate; for none can do these
things effectually for us without our concurrence, and we must every one answer
before God for our selves, and be Saved or Damned in our own Persons. Others
may advise and counsel us, give rules and directions to assist us in the Work,
but they cannot peremptorily determine the Case, for our Hearts may be false and
rotten, and corrupt, profane, hypocritical and proud, when we are performing
the outward parts of Duties; yea, when we perform them to the great liking and
admiration of others. If it appear at last that we have been unconcerned for
our Souls, and died impenitently in our Sins, who shall answer for us? Will any
one take off the blame from us? Alas! we must answer for our selves, and bear
our own Sins. Witnesses and Accusers there will be enough against us, but not
one Advocate. Not one of all those Multitudes who follow some wicked Men's
Corpses to the Grave, either can or dares go along with the Soul to God's
Tribunal, to plead for and answer God on its behalf. If thou art wicked and
unconcerned for thy own Salvation, and die Impenitent, no other Person will
go to Hell in thy stead, but thou must bear thy own guilt, perish, and be
Damned and Tormented everlastingly in thy own Person. Search therefore speedily
into your Estate, and leave not Matters of such weight, to all Adventures, and
at Uncertainties. Let us be prevailed with to set about this work in all
sincerity, and without delay, that we may every one be acquainted with our own
Estate, and learn how we are to manage and behave our selves for the future,
and what course we are to apply our selves unto further, in order to our
everlasting Welfare,

Some of you have past over a great many Years, and have no reason to expect
that you should live many more. Now, if you have been regardless of your Souls,
and have hitherto neglected to examine your Estate, how ought you to be troubled
for so great faults? What Sins might you have avoided? What Good might you have
done? What Comfort might you have treasured up for your selves, had you begun
and faithfully gone through this Enquiry some Years ago? Take heed of
continuing your Neglect; refuse not to comply with this present Entreaty, lest
God should give you over in Judgment, and you should be hardened and sealed to a
most just and dreaful Condemnation. Why will you refuse and sin against your
own Mercies? Why will you bring your own Gray Hairs to the Grave with Sorrow?
Why will you pierce your own Hearts thorough with Sorrow? Why will you ruin and
destroy your own selves? Is it not yet high time for you to know and understand
what you have been doing? Whom you have been serving? And what is like to
become of you for ever?

And you who are not so much stricken in years, even the youngest of you, who
are come to years of Discretion, it behooves you to be very inquisitive about
the State of your Souls. What Consternation and Amazement will seize you, if
you should be cut off in the midst of your Years, and then eternally upbraid
your selves with having spent the best of your Years, and the choicest of your
Strength, yea, your whole time in a way of Hostility and War against God? You
have no more assurance of time than the oldest Man has; and if you die in the
flower of your Age, in an un-reconciled Estate, wholly unconcerned for the
salvation of your Souls, you must as infallibly be Sentenced unto Hell, as the
oldest and most overgrown Sinner in the World. The infernal Flames will prey as
violently on you who are thrown into them in your greener Age, as they will on
those who are cast into them in their decayed and withered Age. A strong Fire
burns the greenest Log, as well as the driest, tho the green may make a little
more noise for a while. Whatever your outward State and Circumstances may be in
this World, be you Rich or Poor, High or Low, Learned or Unlearned, Master or
Servant, you are equally concerned in this Business. He that lives and dies in
an un-regenerate Estate, wholly regardless of, and unconcerned for his
Salvation, will lose his Soul, his whole self, and what has any Man More? Or,
if he have, What is all the World to one who is Damned, and in Eternal Torments?

Good Lord, open the Hearts of Sinners now, that they may entertain Advice! And
so improve what has been said, that it may produce some good Effect! Let not
every one continue in a groundless Soul-destroying Presumption! Let not Satan
triumph, that he carries all away headlong and unconcernedly unto Hell, in
defiance of all persuasion to Consideration and Enquiry! Lord, let not the
Exhortation be wholly lost! but cause some one Self-deluding Wretch to be
awakened, and brought to a right Mind!

Friend! what do thou intend to do? Will thou stubbornly shut thy Eyes and
slumber, till Vengeance does actually seize on thee? Till infinite Wrath come
upon thee and surround thee, so that there shall be no escaping? Can thou be
contented to be reproached by multitudes of forlorn undone Souls, that thou art
the Monster that would not hearken and consider, but would voluntarily
Damn thy Self, in opposition to all Persuasion? Search and try thy self now at
last, and take heed lest there be in thee a Root that bears Gall and
Wormwood, and do not whilst thou hear these words, Bless thy self in thy
Heart, saying, I shall have Peace, tho I walk in the Imagination of my Heart,
to add Drunkenness to Thirst, Deuteronomy. 29.18, etc. Know thou who ever thou art,
the Lord will not spare thee, but the Anger of the Lord and his Jealousy shall
smoke against thee, and all the Curses that are written in his Book, shall lie
upon thee; the Lord shall separate thee unto Evil, according to all the Curses
of the Covenant, that are written in his Book.

Sirs, have some pity upon your selves! What hurt have your precious Souls ever
done you, that you should thus neglect and cast them out of your thoughts, that
you should revenge your selves on them in this manner? How can you think to
escape, if you still neglect this Enquiry? What will you say for your selves at
the Great Day of the Lord? Sure you will not pretend you were never warned, or
persuaded. And would not those Powers and Faculties you employ in examining
other matters, serve you to much better purpose on this account? And has not
God given you a Rule, and set you down Marks and Characters, by comparing your
selves with which, you may acquire a distinct and true knowledge of your
Estate? Do not your Bibles tell you very plainly, what sorts of People will be
shut out of the Kingdom? And how should you know, whether you be or be not of
those numbers, if you refuse to examine and make a true judgment of your selves?
Presume what you please of your selves, God cannot be deceived, nor will he be
mocked. Death and Judgment will in due time fully discover the truth of your
State, both to your selves, and to all the World. Can you imagine that this
Enquiry should do you any prejudice? If you have been, and are duly concerned
for your Salvation, nothing can fill you with a greater and such rational Joy
and Comfort, than to perceive this attested upon a just Search, by the word of
God; and that an eternal and glorious Inheritance is made sure to you, by the
promise of that God who cannot lie. Whereas a neglect of this Enquiry must
needs deprive you of the best and greatest comfort of your Lives. If you have
been and still are unconcerned for your Salvation, nothing can more
mischievously hinder your recovery out of that dangerous Estate you are in,
than your refusing to try and examine your selves. Make no delay therefore, but
presently betake your selves to what you are persuaded unto. O! that you would
be so kind to me, to grant me this one request! I beg it of you for your own
Sakes! I have no Interest to serve by it but your own, that you may presently
escape out of the snares of the Devil, and be safe from eternal Agonies, that
you may not walk any longer in the Broad Road, which ends in Hell, and
irrepairable Destruction, but may live in Peace and Comfort here, and Reign
with Christ in Glory for ever.

Reason then and argue with your selves about this Matter. Cannot you discourse
thus with your selves? How terrible and dreadful a thing will it be, to be
found at last a neglecter of Salvation, one who has been all his Life
unconcerned for his Soul! To have God and Christ Enemies, when I must appear
before their Tribunal! He that commanded me into Being and Life, can with a
word speak me into Eternal Misery! The Holy God, I must needs acknowledge,
loves Holiness, and cannot but hate Iniquity. He will in his Righteous
Judgment, infallibly make a difference betwixt People. He will assuredly
separate the Holy from the Vile. Then shall the Righteous be discerned from the
Wicked, and he that serves God, from him that serves him not, Mal. 3.17, 18.
I am at present undoubtedly of one of these Ranks. And does it not much concern
me to understand what my Estate is? Careless negligent Wretch! in omitting an
enquiry of such Importance so long! The time past shall suffice, to have lived
in so supine and unthoughtful a manner! My Eyes shall not Sleep, nor will I
give slumber to my Eyelids, till I have made a diligent Enquiry, and do know
what the Word of the Lord does say of, and to me! I dare not lie down to Sleep,
till I have examined my Estate! till, if it appear I have been unconcerned
hitherto for my Soul and its Salvation; I have sued heartily for Pardon and
Peace through the Blood of Christ! lest I should sleep the Sleep of Death! lest
Destruction should surprise me! And I should awake in those Flames which will
never be quenched! Be gone all Excuses, for I have no Business so necessary to
be attended to, as this! I am not at leisure to follow any Sports, or to mind
Wealth, or Honors, yea, or the Necessasaries of this present Life, whilst I am
Ignorant of the State of my Soul, and know not whether I have been duly
concerned, that my Salvation may be made sure! I will not any longer venture
Eternity upon Uncertainties! Now I have been called on, and exhorted to apply
my self to this Examination! Should I refuse to comply, God may justly suffer
me to be hardened in my Sins. I may never have the like opportunity again! Tho I
should find I have hitherto been unconcerned for the happiness of my Soul, yet
eternal Misery may be prevented! There yet remains place for Repentance! and
some ground to hope that I may find favor with the Lord! Therefore I am
resolved, nothing shall divert me from going through with this Work. Lord!
powerfully fix my Resolution! Keep my my Mind and Heart intent on this
Business, and give me the gracious assistance of thy holy and powerful Spirit,
to guide and carry me with success thorough it!

Sixthly, You who have been careless of your Souls, and their Salvation, till
this time, should now be prevailed with to concern your selves with all
seriousness and earnestness, that they may be secured. Could I set forth a
miserable Estate before you, in the most doleful Strains, and with the fullest
account of aggravating Circumstances imaginable, I should not declare the
thousandth part of your Wretchedness. The Groans and Sobs of the Damned,
manifest they cannot speak what they feel; their Shrieks and Clamours are but
broken Relations of the Horrors and Pains they sink under. And you are
obnoxious to all that Wrath which does so terrify and overwhelm them. If you
still continue secure, and cannot bemoan your selves, nor cry heartily for Pity
and Mercy, your Danger increases. Did you understand what you are doing, what
Vengeance you are treasuring up for your selves; whom you are Offending; what
Souls you are Murdering; what a glorious, holy, powerful, just God you are
Provoking, what a Change would soon appear in you? You would look upon all your
Enjoyments as nothing worth; you would look upon the Pleasures, Riches and
Honors of this World, as insipid useless things. The whole World would be no
more to you than a Prison, or Dungeon, in which you are reserved till the
Sentence of Wrath is to be Executed on you. The wicked is reserved to the day
of Destruction; they shall be brought forth to the day of Wrath, Job 21.30.
Were you sensible what Love you despise; what Salvation you neglect; what Mercy
you trample under your Feet; what Grace you reject; what Patience and Goodness
you abuse, and what great things you might lay hold on, what Inheritances you
might obtain, what Glory you may be assured of, if you would but consider
things aright, and approve your selves truly Wise; what an alteration would
soon appear in your Carriage and Conduct? You will in a little time be
convinced fully of the truth of all this. When Death has executed its
Commission against you, and your Souls are dragged into another World, continue
Infidels if you can. When you have drank a few draughts more, spent a little
time more in your Sports and Games, slept a few Nights, drudg'd and toiled a
few days more, you will see and know, and be convinced of these things in
another manner. Then you will have no need of such Ministers to tell you of
them, whose warnings you can now slight, whose Exhortations and Counsel you can
now reject with Scorn and Contempt. For then you will hear the Sentence of
Condemnation from One, the Glory of whose appearing, you will not be able to
endure, whose Presence will grieve and terrify you.

But your case is not yet quite Desperate. If you will now concern your selves
heartily for your Souls, and apply your selves in good earnest, to make their
Salvation sure, there is some ground for Hope, Mercy may yet be had. The
Scepter of Grace is still held forth. Your endless Misery may yet be prevented.
You may yet be made Holy and Gracious, behold God's reconciled Face, and
inherit incomprehensible Glory and Blessedness. Nothing will hinder but your
wilfulness, your resolved continuing unconcerned for these things. What Mercy
is it that God will yet be favorable, notwithstanding thou have at this time
been unconcerned and stubborn in thy Enmity? Will yet, if thou turn sincerely,
pardon and blot out all is past? Will receive and honor, love and eternally
glorify thee? Who would not seek reconciliation with all his might, with such
a gracious condescending, patient and merciful God? Who would go on to provoke
such a God, and Damn himself in opposition to such Love, and Grace, and Mercy!
What acceptance would thou find with God? What good would thou do thy self?
What Happiness would thou treasure up for thy self to all future Generations?
What Joy would thou occasion in Heaven, would thou now be prevailed with to
come out of thy miserable sinful State, and to concern thy self as thou
ought for thy Soul, and its endless welfare? Peruse carefully these
following Scriptures, Luke 15.7. and 10, and 20, etc. Isa. 55.7. 2 Cor. 6.2.

Take heed you do not prevent all this to encourage your selves to continue in
your unconcernedness for your Salvation. For if instead of complying with Calls
and Entreaties to accept of, and close with the offers of Mercy God is pleased
to make you, you stubbornly refuse to hearken, to yea, abuse them, to harden
and embolden your selves in your Sins, your condition will become exceeding
Dreadful, yea, quite hopeless, according to that account the holy Scriptures
give of People under such Circumstances; as you may evidently see, if you
please to turn to, and read the following places in your Bibles, Prove. 1.24.
etc. Prove. 29.1. Heb. 12.17. Luke 19.42. Yea, remember this will render your
State in Hell terrible and tormenting to the highest degree. In what boisterous
Waves of inflamed Wrath shall those Persons be rolled and tossed, who affectedly
persist in their Enmity against God, and contempt of the riches of his Grace!
Why should you be curious to secure to your selves the utmost efforts of Divine
Displeasure? How sad must your estate be if after you have enjoyed the Gospel,
and been earnestly persuaded to concern your selves in good earnest for your
Salvation, you should perish and reap no advantage from all that Christ has
done, suffered and purchased for repenting, reforming Sinners? What a terrible
day will the day of Christ's appearing be to you, if after all your coming to
Church, hearing Prayers and Sermons, and partaking of Sacraments, you remain
stubborn and untractable, sensual and worldly in your Minds, loose, carnal and
vicious in your Lives?

Be entreated, dearly Beloved, to lay these seriously to Heart, and forthwith
to make a good improvement of them. Please not your selves with purposes of
taking them into consideration hereafter, lest Satan prove too subtle for you,
and carry you away securely to his own Appartments, full fraught with seemingly
pious resolves. What multitudes have cried out for Mercy, when it has been too
late! Mat 25.11.12.

If you are now willing to do what it behooves you to do, that you may secure
the Salvation of your Souls, observe and follow these few Directions.

First, Set your selves to a serious thorough consideration of your present
Estate. Weigh and insist on this till you are fully convinced, your present
State is such, you cannot with any safety continue in it; and do firmly resolve
to alter your Course; press your danger and guilt upon your selves, till your
Souls and Consciences are mightily affected with your present Circumstances,
and you become in some measure sensible how much more desirable their Condition
is than yours, who have heartily concerned themselves to secure the Salvation
of their Souls. In other cases, we think it a mighty blemish, to give occasion
for others to repute us inconsiderate and rash. And sure nothing better
deserves our best, our most mature and vivid thoughts than this Matter, because
it does so nearly concern us. Can we expect prudently to avoid our Danger, and
amend our Mistakes, whilst either ignorant of, or unaffected with them? Serious
consideration is a proper, if not the only preparatory expedient to bring us to
a right Mind, to furnish us with a just Notion and becoming Sense of those
things, which are of eminent Importance, and to dispose us to rectify past
Errors and Defaults. When the Prodigal came to himself, and considered the evil
and dangerous case he was in, and how much better the very Servants in his
Fathers Family were provided for than he was, he presently resolves to go
thither, Luke 15.17, 18. Psalm. 119.59, 60. Set thy self as in God's Presence,
call thy self to account, and revive the remembrance of thy past Carriages.
Call to mind how God has expressly declared such or such Affections of Soul,
Speech Actions, to be detestable abominable Sins, and has declared from
Heaven his Wrath against them, in such or such places of his holy Word. And
then apply the same particularly and with all vehemence of affection and
faithfulness to thy self, till thou feel the power and efficacy of them in
thy own Spirit and Conscience. Is this my Estate? Does the word of God speak
nothing but Terror and Indignation against me, whilst I continue in this
condition? Is the infinitely, holy, powerful just God my Enemy? O wretched
Creature that I am! What shall I do! Is this an Estate to be rested in! What is
all the World, and all it can afford to me, if God should pour forth the Vials
of his Anger upon me! If I must pass from the applause and favor of Men, from
Houses, Lands and Friends, to dwell with everlasting Burnings! and be a
Companion with Devils for ever! O how happy are they who have been wise for
their Souls! who can look with comfort into the Holy Scriptures! and read over
all those Passages with Satisfaction, which Terrify me, and are as so many
Arrows sticking fast in my Soul! What a Fool have I been all my time! What
Mercy and rich Grace must be discovered, if ever I escape Damnation! I cannot
escape it, if I continue in this Estate! A great Change must be wrought in me.
I must be made a new Creature, I must lead a new Life! And by God's Grace so I
will! Blessed be the Lord, that he has given me any sight of my Danger! That
he has brought me to consider, before my condition is absolutely past remedy!

O what Trouble and Sorrow, have I been heaping on my self! How bitter and
gnawing now are all the things I counted pleasant! How vile and contemptible
are all the things for which I ventured my precious Soul! There is nothing now
can relieve and do me good, nothing I can account precious, but an Interest in
Jesus Christ, and pardoning Love through him! O the Confusion I am in! But I
wish not that it were with me as in times past! That my vain Presumption,
stupidity and insensibleness might again return! No, but O that I had sooner
seen my Danger! and sooner began my Retreat! Here I lie on the very brink of
Hell! Had I made one step further, I might have been among the Damned! and yet
I scarce know which way to turn! O the proficiency others have made in the way
to Heaven, who had no more time, nor outward Calls and Means than I had! O the
peace and comfort they have! the Sweets with which their Souls are feasted! O
that I might love the Lord Christ in sincerity! have an interest in his Merits!
a right to his precious Promises! and that I may dutifully acknowledge his
Authority! walk in his Laws! and know by experience what joy is to be found in
Believing! Well, by Divine Assistance, I will up and be doing! I will not
loyter any longer! I now cast away with abhorrence, and lay aside every weight,
and the Sin that has so easily beset me! Lord, do thou enlarge my Heart, and I
will run the way of thy Commandments! May I ever have my eye fixed on Jesus,
the Author and Finisher of a Believer's Faith! To thee holy Jesus I flee for
Refuge! Help me to lay hold on the Hope thou have set before me!

Secondly, Humble your selves deeply before the Lord, and offer unto him
fervent earnest Supplications and Prayers, to commiserate and deliver you. No
help can come but from Heaven, and it must be fetched thence by hearty
affectionate Cries and Entreaties. Lay your selves therefore low before the
Lord; acknowledge your Sins with Godly Sorrow and Grief: Rehearse before him
your sad Estate; the aggravating Circumstances of your Guilt, your Fears, your
Guilt, the dreadful Curses which hang over you; how sensible you are of his
Displeasure against Sin, that you are not able to bear his Wrath, and that
nothing but Free Grace can save and preserve you. Justify God in all his Laws,
and in all his Threats, and in his executing of them. Confess heartily thou art
a Monument Monument of his Patience. Break forth into affectionate Admiration,
that he has born with thee so long, whereas, he might have caused his
Vengeance to have overtaken thee long ago. And then with strong Cries, and
Tears too, if thou can beseech him for his Mercy sake, his name sake, the Son
of his love sake, to pity, Pardon, help and sanctify thee. Consider what
encouragement thou have from these and the like Scriptures, Psalm. 145.18, 19.
Psalm. 32.5, 6. Psalm. 50.15. Matt. 7.7, etc.

Lord, thou art Great, Holy, Just and Powerful, none can set himself against
thee and Prosper! Thy purity and holiness is such, thou can not behold the
least Iniquity with Approbation! Thou have declared thy Wrath against every
Sin! And in particular have revealed thy Indignation against this, and that,
and the other Wickedness; and that thou will terribly avenge thy self of such
Adversaries as live impenitently in them! Lord, I am the vile Wretch who have
been guilty of these Transgressions! I have lived a great while in them, and
have often repeated these acts of Hostility against thee! O my Misery, my
Guilt, my Wretchedness! Whither shall I go? What shall I do? I cannot flee from
thy Presence! Where ever I am, thy Arm can reach me! I cannot bear thy Frowns!
thy Terrors make me afraid! Damnation and Hell are the least I have deserved! O
the Light, the Love, the Means I have sinned against! I have nothing to say for
my self! who shall plead for me! Methinks I am now sinking! Hell appears ready
to swallow me up! Just and Righteous art thou O God! No punishments are too
great for so wicked, so ungrateful, so vile and obstinate a Wretch as I am! In
the very midst of my Fears and Anguish, I cannot but wonder that the Sentence
of Condemnation is not already pronounced against, and executed on me! O what
long-suffering goodness have thou manifested toward me, the worst and greatest
of Sinners! Blessed be thy Name for thy Long-suffering Patience toward me!
Whither shall I now turn! Will the holy God have Mercy on such a desperate
Sinner! To whom shall I go in these Straits! Creatures cannot help me! My Lusts
and Sins have brought all this Misery upon me! All will fail me, unless the
Lord will be pleased to look down in Mercy upon me! And it is the Lord I have
offended! How shall I go to a provoked God! Yet all my hope must be from him!
To the Lord I will go, I will lie at his Feet! I will throw my self wholly upon
his Mercy! Lord, I have heard that thou art Gracious, Long-suffering, slow to
Wrath, and of great Goodness. Thou have said so of thy self. Thou have the
words of eternal Life. There is Forgiveness with thee that thou may be
feared. Thou have contrived a way for the glorifying of thy Mercy, in saving
the greatest Sinners who truly repent, and turn from the evil of their doings
unto thee, with all their Hearts. Lord, here behold a miserable mouring Sinner,
than whom none ever stood more in need of Mercy! Extend thy wonderful Grace to
me! I come to thee in thy Son's Name, I depend entirely on his Merits; I plead
with thee the only gracious Promises! Sustain now a sinking Soul! I loath and
abhor my self! O let thy Bowels ern over me! Tho I stand on the brink of Hell,
let thy Grace prevent my falling into that Bottomless Pit! Say unto this Soul,
Live! May I, who deserve to houl for ever under the dreadful testimonies of thy
Displeasure, be effectually delivered from Sin, Guilt and Condemnation! May I
be Pardoned, made Holy, and sing forth the Praises of thy rich and abounding
Grace to all Eternity! Consider Isa. 63.15, 16.

Thirdly, If you take pains with your selves, and faithfully perform what you
have been advised to already, you will easily perceive what is further
necessary to be done by you, to make secure the Salvation of your Souls; and
you will be disposed to urge upon your selves, and improve such Counsel as
shall be offered you, and is manifestly pertinent to this purpose. I will
therefore propound the other Directions you are to observe altogether, and only
give you brief hints for your future Conduct, leaving you to imprint them on
your own Hearts, by meditating on, and expostulating with your selves about
them, till you feel they have their proper and due influence on your Souls and
Lives. You must then endeavor to acquire a sound knowledge of the gracious
method God has been pleased to pitch on, for the bringing of Sinners into a
State of Reconciliation and Peace with himself. You must heartily entertain the
great Truths he has revealed concerning the Lord Jesus Christ. Those which
concern his Person, his Natures, and the Commission the Father has given him.
And you must sincerely close with Christ in all his Offices, depending wholly
on his Merits, Intercession, and Influences; submitting to his Authority,
diligently following his Example, and faithfully keeping his Laws, For there is
not Salvation in any other, Acts 4.12. You must labor to understand distinctly
the Baptismal Vow, with Understanding and Judgment, solemnly devote, consign
and dedicate your selves to God, through Christ, and daily addict your selves
to the conscientious performing of that Vow, as long as you Live. Therefore you
must diligently read and study the Holy Scriptures, and make them the sole Rule
of your Faith, your Worship, your moral Conduct, or Practice; for they are able
to make you wise unto Salvation through Faith which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy
3.15. Read the word of God daily with a fixed Attention, and holy fervent
Desires, that you may find it powerful to subdue Corruption, and bring you to a
saving Acquaintance with Christ, and to nourish your Souls in all Godliness of
Living. Attend diligently on the Ministry of the Word, and wait conscientiously
on God in those Ordinances he has instituted for the Conversion and
Edification of Souls. Take heed of Customariness and Formality in these. Use
them as means God has appointed for higher Ends, and be not satisfied till you
really perceive they are Sanctified to you, and have such an effect on you that
you do thereby grow in Knowledge, Grace, and practical Holiness. You must
renounce the Society of loose and vicious People, and shun the company of those
who deride and mock at Religion and Holiness, appearing in their Truth and
Power, Prove. 13.20. And wonderful Advantage will accrue to you, if you do
ordinarily accustom your selves to cross the design of Temptations, and make an
Advantage of them, to put you with greater seriousness and fervency on acting
those Graces, and performing those Duties which are most opposite and contrary
to the Sins, the Enemies of your Souls would draw you unto.

You who have been and are in good earnest concerned for the Salvation of your
Souls, must diligently attend to what does peculiarly belong to you,
considering the State you are in. Give God the glory of that Grace he has
vouchsafed you. You were Ignorant, Blind, Foolish and Disobedient formerly, as
well as others. Praise and Magnify God with all your might, that he has made
you know and follow after the things which belong to your Peace. How should you
bless the Lord who has made you the Triumph of your Savior's Love, whereas
you might have been Monuments of his Anger? Pity, Prayfor, advise do what you
can to convince, awaken, and recover them, who appear altogether careless of,
and unconcerned for their Salvation. Hold fast what you have received, proceed
forward in the work you have begun. Grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Watch over, and assist one another all you are
able. Heb. 3.12, 13. So run that ye may obtain. Pesevere to the end, and let
none take away your Crown, Rev. 3.11.

In a word, every Man should be very much concerned for the Salvation of his
own Soul. Then let us all forthwith shake off Sloth, remembering we are hastening
apace toward Eternity. Do the wicked do evil with both hands earnestly, Mic.
7.3. And shall we fold our Arms, and refuse to take a little pains for the
obtaining of that Inheritance, which is reserved in the Heavens? We have done
too much already to prejudice our Souls; now let us use all possible care and
industry to recover and save them.

Sirs, I beseech you in the Bowels of Christ, and by all that should be dear
and valuable to you, to concern your selves so for your Salvation, as in a
little time you will certainly wish you had. What a change will Death quickly
make in every one of you? O lose not Heaven and eternal Glory, for Shadows!
Lose not your Souls for Trifles! Quit you now like Men. Be watchful, serious
and diligent. Gird up the loins of your minds, be sober, and hope to the end.
My Brethren, dearly beloved and longed for; my Joy and Crown, so stand fast in
the Lord. Finally Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good Report; if there be any
Virtue, if there be any Praise, think on and practice these things with all
your might and affection, and with all perseverance. Be ye steadfast,
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as you know,
that your Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

FINIS.

