A CONSOLATORY TREATISE OF THE FOUR COMPLEXIONS, THAT IS, AN INSTRUCTION IN THE
TIME OF TEMPTATION For a sad and assaulted heart; SHOWING, Where-from sadness
naturally arises, and how the assaulting happens: hereto are annexed some
consolatory speeches exceeding profitable for the assaulted hearts and souls;
written out of desire [to profit] March 1621.

By the Teutonicall Philosopher, JACOB BEHMEN.

LONDON, Printed by T. W. for H. Blunden, and sold at the Castle in Cornhill,
1654.

The Preface to the Reader.
OF all the works of Jacob Behm, this is one of the least in bulk, but not in
worth. Much and important matter lies here enclosed in a narrow room. Besides,
this Paradise of useful truths stands not guarded by a fiery Cherubim hindering
the Readers access, and dazzling his eyes with a flaming sword of obscurities.

I speak not this to impute as a crime to our divine Author his uncouth
Phrases, not affected, but enforced by the matters remotenes he writ of from
human imagination, the Dictator of al expression in man's language. Plato's
Idea, Aristotle's Intelechia, Trismegists Aeon and Crater, Zoroasters
Intellectiles, Iynges, the Cabalists Hochmah and Binah are words to this day
not understood by many, yet not laughed at by sober men; as nonsense; the
Chemist, Logician, Physician are (for sparing circumscriptions) allowed a
coynage of terms of Art, which pass for current in their several
jurisdictions, the mechanic, or other meaner Artisan is not debarred of this
privilege; and shall a man rapt up into the third Heaven, where he heard (...)
things beyond human expression, be deemed a Barbarian, because he cannot
appareil his wisdom in the Bas Almain, and Lawyers French, spoken by the
generality of mankind?

He wanted neither desire nor endeavor to have spoken to the meanest capacity,
he did not, like some Spirit-pretenders in these times, upon his being
acquainted with Truth in a more excellent way, decry and undervalue those other
gifts of skill in nature and tongues acquired by a blessing upon man's industry,
by which as serviceable handmaids the Noble Sophia may be attired in a garb
best suited for human converse. 'Twas his wish expressed somewhere in his
writings, that if it had pleased God, his education had given him better skill
in the learning and tongues of men, for then says he, I might perhaps have
better suited those divine manifestations to the common apprehension, many of
which for want of that enablement remain locked up in the Magic language of
the Spirit, and will scarce be understood by any but men skilled in that
Dialect.

Hence comes that unusual difficulty many are so much stumbled at in the works
of this Author, especially in those translated into other tongues, in which the
Interpreters out of a just fear of wronging his notion, having religiously
followed the Oracles Counsel [Barbara nomina ne mutaveris] they have proved to
be like Aristotle's Acroams (...), extant in part only, the Dutch made English,
but in the Magic each man left to his own skill. Yet by this are we set upon
even ground with those of his own Nation, and to have done more, had been not
simply to translate, but interpret.

He that will in any Author whatever jointly perform both these offices under
one name, had need of a double sufficiency. First, He must be a bilinguist, a
perfect Master in the Idiomes of both tongues he has to deal with; as for an
Englishman to make Demosthenes speak Latin, it suffices not to get by rote his
Cambden, and Lillies Grammar, and to have his head stuffed with Vocabularies,
but he must know the whole guise of the Country, and forms of elegance most in
fashion in the several times and places of the Books double nativity by edition
and translation; his not being an absolute free Denison of both, may make him
defraud the Reader he takes pains for, sometimes of the sense, but very often
of the chief grace of his Author. Secondly, He had need have, besides the
tongues, a double portion of his Authors Spirit, else he will often give us his
words without his sense, the Lions skin stuffed with straw instead of Hercules
that wore it.

But he that will be this Authors right Trucheman, must be a trilinguist at
least, skilled no less in the language of Angels than in the Dutch and
English, for want whereof much of the writings, not of this man's only, but even
of Scripture Penmen, are in some parts rather clouded than cleared by
translations.

For my own Part I pretend to no great expertness in any of the three, yet have
not been as to this work without good helps in all; in the English from my
birth in Sparta, and education at Athens; in the Dutch, I eek'd out my own
skill with the advice of a learned man of that Nation, one of our Society of
Peter-house in Cambridge; for the Angelique, my way was a little smoothed by my
former Perusal of this Authors other original writings that speak the same
language.

Yet has the rare occurse of those Idioms in this manual, together with its
brevity, been my chief encouragement to undertake it, leaving the grand body of
his Divinity to the greater knowledge and pains of that public spirited
gentleman who has already enriched our Nation with some of his larger volumes,
and not yet weary of well-doing, is in travel with more.

As for the matter and scope of this discourse, it is to show each complexion
its good and evil, temptations and remedies.

I know his Colloquies with Black-John in the melancholy will make some men
smile, especially our Atheist and Sadducee, that laugh at the thought of a God,
Angel, Soul, or Devil, and know nothing of the joys of Gods Kingdom, or
thorough what a wilderness of tribulations it is arrived to; and how that
roaring Lion that goes about daily seeking whom he may devour, fails not to
use all means of continuing the separation 'twixt the Soul of man and that
rock whence it was hewn, and where he cannot, by fraughting their vessel with
hellish or terrene appetites and cares, keep God out of all their thoughts,
strives to beget such an Idea of him in the imagination, as may justly render
him a prick in their eyes, and thorn in their sides; which is no hard task for
him to perform with many sad souls in all religions that give more credit to
human surmises than to Gods oath [that he has no pleasure in the death of a
sinner] with those clear Evangelick Oracles, that [God would have all men to be
saved and come to the knowledge of the truth] and that there is joy in heaven
over one sinner that repents.]

This of despair has been even in our days a Rock many have been split upon,
and the hand of the Devil often very visible in seductions of this nature: we
need not wonder our Author should store us up some provision of advise for such
a necessity, and in particular a weapon offensive as well as defensive against
those assaults.

It Is true, his Replies in conflict with that wicked Spirit may seem at first
to have somewhat of gall, but we may take notice he both shows how effectual a
weapon this of contempt is above all other for repulsing this enemy, besides
advizes an abstinence from this bitterness but upon important necessity.

The Devil ( says he) is a proud, arrogant Spirit: in his visible terrifying
apparitions you cannot better get quit of him than by a bold defiance and
contempt. As often therefore as by his frightning appearances and discouraging
suggestions he endeavors to drive thee to distraction or self-murder, flinch
not an ace at his presence; but meet him with a stout courage, and upbraid him
with the memory of his lost glory and present shame, how of a glorious Prince
in heaven he is fallen to be an infamous hangman in Hell. This is a bitter
pill, he is not long able to digest, two or three doses of it, will say hard to
set him a packing; but use it only as a necessary evil, in cases of grand
terror, otherwise do not by such bitter mockings bestorm thy own Spirit, and
add new affliction to the calamity of his fall.

This inoffensive carriage, even to the Devil himself (like that of the
Archangell Michael, not reproaching him with railing accusations, and our
Saviors not refusal so far of gratifying them in their moderate request, as to
qualify their grief for the loss of their Nobler habitation, by a Permission to
enter the foul carcasses of the Swine) shows in the man and his doctrine an
unparalleld mildness of spirit, scarce visible in the writings or practices of
any that now pretend most to the Gospel. First, we think it lawful, nay an act
of godly zeal, to spit all our venom in the face of the Devil, and then every
contrariety to our humors, opinions, interests, looking like him, and presumed
to have much of the Devil in it (though indeed of Christ) must be served with
the same sauce.

Lastly, if any be offended with the ill savor the Devil leaves behind him,
when he flies away in fume, he may know that Melancthon a grave Author reports
the same circumstance of the same Spirit or one of that Regiment being flouted
away by Luther, and some others, that when a Devil comes off with shame in
such an assault, he becomes a laughingstock to his fellow-Devills in the air
spectators of the combat, S. Paul affirming 1 Cor. 4. 9. That we are made a
spectacle to Angels as well as to the world and men; Now the Passions of men's
souls often reflecting their Images so clear upon their bodies in color,
gesture, and some other more gross demonstrations, why may not the perturb'd
imagination of a wicked Spirit produce the like symptoms upon its aerial
Vehicle.

Much more reason in nature might be given to assert the probability of Such a
Phenomenon, but that the Book's short, and the Preface must not be long.

I commend thee to the grace of God in a sober use of these discoveries of thy
self.

Chapter Hotham.

CHAP. I.
Of the causes of fear or sadness: what the astonishment and anguish is. [about
spiritual things.]
ALL sadness and fear, where with a man terrifies and amazeth himself, is in
his inward man from the soul; for the outward Spirit which has his original
from the Stars and Elements is not in this sort troubled, because he lives in
his Mother which bore him: but the poor soul is with Adam entered into a foreign
harbor, viz. Into the Spirit of this world, wherewith the beautiful creature
is veild and captivated as in a darksome prison.

Now the Spirit of this world has four sorts of lodgings, wherein the precious
jewel is shut up. Of these four, there is but one principally manifest to one
man; as it is with the four Elements, which every man has in himself, and is
himself the same being, except his soul, which is not of that Essence, though
it lie as a prisoner in it; and of these four lodgings, or Images, one only
has the predominance in his life; the names of them are as follows; 1.
Choleric. 2. Sanguine. 3. Phlegm. 4. Melancholy.


1. The first, viz. the Choleric is of the fevers property, causes a stout
courage, hasty anger, swelling pride, self-willedness, mindlesness of others;
This image shines after the outward world, in a side-light, labors after the
power of the Sun, and will always be a Lord.

2. The second, viz. the Sanguine, is after the nature of Air, subtle,
friendly, cheerful, yet not of a stout courage: it is mutable, and easily
moved from one thing to another, receives naturally the Starry properties and
knowledge into her essence, its pure and chaste, and brings great mystery [of
knowledge] into her understanding.

3. The Phlegmatic is after the waters nature and property, fleshly, rude and
soft, of a feminine will, of but a reasonable comprehension, yet holds fast
what it has once attained; knowledge must be infused into it by teaching, for
she finds it not in her own root. She takes all in good part, troubles not her
self with grief, has a glance of light, is neither extremely sad or merry, but
is altogether of a middle and common temper.

4. The Melancholy being of the earths nature and property, is as the earth,
cold, frozen, dark, and full of heaviness, hungry after the light, always
fearful of the wrath of God.

For the Earth and Stones are on the outside of the Eternal essentiality ( i.
e.) are comprehended or captivated in the kindled desire in the Fiat, both
according to the property of the anger and love; the good and evil are in them
mixed one with another; the Good stands in a perpetual fear of the Evil, which
make a perpetual flight and pursuit: as it is to be seen in metalls, whose
Tincture is good, but the body altogether earthly, evil and of an angry
corrosive nature; whereupon the Tincture of the Metalls, as soon as the
malignant starry influence touches it, would fly from the earthly and uncenter
it self from it; hence comes the growth of the Metalls, for their Tincture
drives their desire out of it self, and desire to fly away; but receives in the
desire such a corporiety as the spirit or desire it self is, hence arises the
Metallic body.

The Melancholy nature is dark and dry, yields little corporiety, consumes and
corrodes it self inwardly in its own being, remains constantly in the house of
mourning, and even when the Sun shines in her, yet is she in her self
sorrowful, she receives indeed some refreshment from the Suns glance, but in
the dark she is always in fear and horror of Gods Judgment.

Observe here further, the nature of the sad mind.
IF this Complexion has predominance in a man, so that it be his proper
complexion, then does the poor soul as the precious jewel inhabit this house;
and must during the time of the life (if she has not yet fully attained the
light of God in herself) help herself with the glance of the Sun, seeing the
Divine Light-eye was in Adam shut up to her in the earthly property into which
she entered. The Soul has in Adam suffered the complexion, as also the Spirit
of the great world, the Stars and Elements, to enter into her; which during
the time of this life, dwell intermixedly the one in the other; the Soul in the
complexion, and the complexion in the Soul, yet one of them comprehends not the
other essentially: the Soul is deeper than the outward Spirit, though in this
life they hang upon each other as the inward and outward world, neither of
which yet is the other, so likewise the outward Spirit is not the Soul.

Know further, that, The Soul is in her substance a Magical fire-fountain or
property out of God the Fathers Nature; a vehement desire after the light, as
God the Father from eternity, with a most intense longing, desires his heart,
to wit, the Center of light, and in his desiring will, begets him out of the
fiery property, as the light is now usually born out of the fire.

Now, there can be no fire, but there must be also there a root for the fiery
subsistence, to wit, the Center or image to Nature; this the soul has also in
it self, and burns out of the Image to Nature [or the Natural complexion] to
wit, out of the dark world which in her fountain of desire drives it self till
unto the fiery property, then desires it the liberty ( i. e.) the light, as in
the Book of the threefold life is expressed.

So then the Soul being a hungry Magical Spirit-fire, desires spiritual
essentiality and power wherewith she may nourish and preserve her fire-life,
and still the thirst of her fiery fountain. Now it is well known, how that she
has with Adam in his disobedience entered into the Spirit of this world, and
eaten of it. Whereupon Christ became a man in our essence, that he might bring
her again thorough the Center, and thorough Gods fire into his light, namely
into the world of meekness, which in the person of Christ was actually; but our
soul seeing that from the mothers womb it remains involved in the Spirit of
the great world in the Complexions, it eats from the very birth, yea, even in
the mothers womb, of the Spirit of this world.

The Soul eats spiritual meat, namely of the Spirit of the image of the
complexions, not altogether their essence, but Magically: it is the kindling of
their fire. The Complexions in the souls fire become soulish [or of a soular
property.] They are as wood and fire to each other: understand by wood, the
Complexion; by fire, the Soul. Now the fire must have fuel, viz. Either the
outward complexion or a divine essentiality of Gods Nature; of one of these
must she eat or die; but it is not possible for her to perish, seeing she is a
desire, and where there is a desiring, there is also a being; the desire makes
a being to it self.

By this we understand whence arises such a difference in the wills and
actions of men.

For of what the Soul eats, and wheerin her fire-life is kindled, thereafter
does the life of the Soul exercise her Regiment.

Goe's the Soul out of her complexion into Gods Love-fire into the heavenly
essentiality (which is Christ's corporiety according to the Angelical
light-world) then eats she of Christ's heavenly flesh, of his eternal
essentiality of the mildness of the Majestic light, in which the fire of God
the Father, in the glance [resplendence of the light] makes a Tincture in the
same essentiality in the waterfountain of everlasting life whereof Christ
speaks, saying, that he would give us such water to drink.

Of this water does the souls fire eat, as of Divine, heavenly, essentiality,
which in the Tincture is converted into heavenly and spiritual blood, whence
arises in the Soul a Godly will, wherewith she compells the body to do that
which according to its own inclination and spirit of this world, it would not
do; in such souls the Complexion rules not, but remains only in the lower
fleshly nature, exercises the Regiment, as to the outward body only. The man
enquires after Gods Word, and has always an uncessant longing after God; his
desire is ever to discourse of God, would always gladly taste more of Gods
sweetness, but is clouded and hindered by the Complexion; in so much that he
lives in a continual combat. The Soul fights againsts the Complexion (for they
are here linked together in one band) and the Complexion against the Soul, it
would ever gladly enter into the Souls fire, and kindle it self, and obtain a
life in it. For when the Soul eats of Gods Word, the complexion according to
the outward life becomes powerless, and as it were a captive, th^ugh it live in
it self.

But the soul is so steadfast and faithful before Gods Love, which alone comes
to her help [in the combat] that often when she eats of Gods Love, and essence,
she induces a triumph and a Divine taste into the complexion it self, that the
whole body begins to be roused up into a trembling and height of joy, as
Paradise were now approaching; but his condition proves not durable; for the
soul is shortly after overshadowed with something of another nature, which is
insinuated into the Complexion by the outward imagination from the Spirit of
the great world, whereof she makes a looking-glass, and begins to contemplate
in it with her outward imagination. Thus goes she out from the Spirit of God,
and is often bemired in the dirt, were it not that the Virgin Wisdom of God
should call her again to conversion; which is here set down as a Looking glass
for souls.

Further of the Complexions.
WHen the Soul imagines into the Complexion, and eats of it, and turns herself
from Gods Word and Will, she then does after the property of the Complexion;
she embraces all whatsoever is injected by the Stars unto the Complexion, all
that the Spirit of the great world brings into the complexion by its
imagination. She empoysons herself thorough the desire in the complexion in the
whole outward Nature, in all that the world does in words and works. Such
matter as this the desire of the complexion brings into the soul-fire, [or its
fewell] and the Soul-fire burns [or feeds it self] therein. Here we see how
all evil deeds and works burn in the fire of God the Father (in which the Soul
consists) what is not agreeable to Gods Love, that cannot the Love receive.
Here find we likewise what and how sin is, how Gods anger is kindled when in
the burning or life of the soul such abomination as a man works is brought in
to him, which withhold the Soul from Gods Love, and make the Soul-fire
stark-blind to Gods Wisdom and Light.

For the Spirit of God enters not into the fire burning or life of the
abomination, till the Soul again goes out of it, and bathes it self again in
the water of the eternal Life, which comes to pass thorough a serious
repentance: then is the Soul renewed again in the fire of Gods mildness, as a
new born child, and begins again to drink of the same water and lives in God.

CHAP. II.
Of the four Complexions in particular, with their properties; what the Soul
and the whole man does, kindles her fire-life merely from the complexion and
influence of the Stars.
Of the Choleric.
IS the Souls-life clothed [encompassed] with the Choleric Complexion? then is
she Fiery, Furious, Haughty and Fretting, makes also to it self a body of a
temper correspondent, L^^^e, Malignant, subject to fury and wrath; and if the
Soul imagine therein, then does she yet more vehemently kindle and inflame the
complexion, the Soul it self being of a fiery Nature. Then become these
following dispositions operative in such a man, viz. Anger, Pride, an ambitious
desire, with power, and highmindedness to bring all men in subjection under
him; he is an insulter over [despiser of] those that are in misery, and a
Tyrant over those that are in subjection to him; he cares not though he die in
anger, except it come to pass, that the Stars hinder, which often joining
themselves with the complexion, lay a bair in the way, and hinder many things.

There is great danger in this complexion, if the soul live according to the
outward imagination, and the bond is the harder [stronger,] there being one
fiery essence linked to another.

The fierce Devil has a powerful a: proach to this complexion, for the
fire's property is his servant; the Devil is also proud and envious, so is
this complexion. O how hardly is the soul freed, if she be once thorough
kindled and enflamed in this property; the Devil needs not assault her with
temptation, she danceth willingly after his pipe. She is not easily sad,
because she has a fiery light in her complexion, and thinks always that it is
the Divine light, and her ways are holy and good; but as long as the soul goes
no higher than the complexion; it is a proud, envious, wrathful, violent,
oppressing will or Spirit.

She desires in her pomp to make a glorious [show] out of her fiery complexion,
and in the height of her pride and arrogance will be reputed holy.

O thou Devil in an Angels shape, how dark art thou when the fiery glance of
thy complexion comes to be put out by death?

CHAP. III.
Of the Sanguine Complexion.
THe Sanguine Complexion is mild, lucid and cheerful, after the Airs
property, easy, gentle, and lovely, and resembles much the [inward] life
[whence these properties slew into the outward man.]

If the soul be clothed with this complexion, and will fix her imagination and
life in it, then does she demean herself friendly, is also subtle, desirous to
try many things. It likewise comes to pass: whatsoever the constellation
modells forth, she experiments it in her complexion. She is naturally
cheerful, yet soon amassed at the terrors of the fires power; but in herself,
she is great in her own conceit; without advice. The complexion gives her a
sharp understanding according to the outward spirit. She does not ordinarily
transgress thorough anger. She is seen lifted up into a height of spirit, and
as soon again cast down, as the Air easily moveable. She must look well to
herself, the Devil is much enraged against her, being not able to get much
advantage against her [but] he endeavors to perplex her with variety of
imaginations, that she may not fix her thoughts upon Gods Kingdom. He
represents strange things to her fancy for her to spend her time in, and she
herself delights in various studies. The stars inject their imagination into
the Air; and from hence her fancy is filled with many strange wide-wandring
thoughts.

The man converses humbly, friendly, heartily, and peaceably with all men; yet
does the Devil set on his enemies against him, whence he must suffer much, but
glides easily, like the soft Air, thorough all, and seldom is he troubled with
much sadness.

For he having no fiery complexion burning within his heart* the fiery terrors
cannot much corrode his vitalls; only let him be careful to preserve himself
from unchastity and Idolatry* for else by their means the Devil will find an
ingress into his complexion.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Phlegmatic, or watery Complexion.
WHen the soul is clothed with this complexion, and swells up the principle of
her life with it, she is of a dull, heavy, swinish and rude temper of life and
conversation, most perverse and careless, of a gross corporature, slight
understanding, yet capable, through teaching, of any ordinary skill; If she be
not inspirited by the Lunar influence, she prove an arrant blockhead, yet by
the same influence becomes mostwhat inclinable to wickedness and injustice.

A man may make any thing out of this complexion; the watery spirit takes any
Tincture to it self, be it good or bad; this complexion makes likewise a
hypocritical pretense to holiness, and arrogates to it self the repute of an
honest righteous life, but it is not without mixture, and in this it resembles
the glittering property of the water; the soul in this complexion is not prone
to take much notice of Gods wrath, and the dark world that lies hid in her
center, but rather bites greedily on the worldly abomination, and hides herself
under the waterglance, supposing it to be the resplendence of the divine light.

The Devil can introduce all the vilany he exercises in Hell it self into this
complexion, and if the stars hinder not, and the soul will give way to it, he
gets as much advantage here as he does in the fire of the Choleric complexion;
For sin here is little regarded as the waterstream that passes away. He has
power likewise to assault this soul with sadness, whenever she goes about to
oppose him: For he darkens the water-glance with the sins foulness, which she
had brought in, and shuts in the soul in this dark prison that she cannot
behold God; but when the soul with a strong resolution storms the prison-gates,
she delivers herself, the Devil can subsist here no longer, the complexion is
too weak a hold, the fire is his stronger fortress.

CHAP. V.
Of the Melancholy complexion.
THE Melancholy complexion resembles the sad earth, which stands in a perpetual
fear before the wrath of God which came into her in the Creation.

It gives a moderate understanding, yet of deep cogitations.

The complexion-chamber stands open, and is capable of much knowledge if the
way be not blocked up by too much sadness.

Is the soul clothed with this complexion, and takes she her nourishment from
it? then does her fire burn extreme dark: then is she likewise exceeding sad
esteems not much of any worldly pomp, and is by reason of the complexion
always in heaviness; the Devil mightily assaults her, being desirous to throw
her headlong into the full possession of his Kingdom of darkness.

For he enters there gladly where darkness has the predominance: he makes
strange representations to the soul, and frights her with the thoughts of her
own wickedness, that she may despair of Gods grace; For otherwise the soul in
this chamber of melancholy is not much serviceable, if she depart not from Gods
grace, and grow light-minded: but then the bodily complexion may serve him in
the office of a robber and murderer who regards man, God, and the Devil all
alike: For if she once turn a side from God, and give herself over to the
obedience of the complexion, then all whatsoever the stars work in the
complexion, she puts it in execution, and the Devil mixes his imagination
therewith.

But while she remains in the combat against the sadness of the complexion,
there is none among all the four complexions whereinto less wickedness is
introduc't; For she is always in combat against the Devil, knowing him to be
her very near neighbor; for the darkness is his habitation: therefore does he
so willingly assault the melancholy soul: striving always, either to keep her
in the darkness, or to throw her down headlong from he* hope in God, that she
may despair and make away herself.

For he knows well what the soul can do, if she once kindle Gods light in her;
for then she fires his Garrison over his head, whereupon he remains in great
ignominy, and his deceit is made manifest.

There Is no complexion wherein the Devils will, with all his sly suggestions,
lie more open to the clearest discovery, (if the soul be once kindled in Gods
light) than in the Melancholy, as they that in their storming his Fort, have
felt his onsets, well know. For they then in their enlightened complexion see
quickly what a shameless impure Harpy he is. After that, he desires not to come
near the soul, except he finds her secure: and in suo, (i. e.) returning to
feast herself in the house of sin: then he comes as a fawning Spaniel, so as
the soul knows him not: Strowes sugar upon her viands, holds forth to her
nothing but shows of friendliness and piety till he can bring her back again
out of Gods light into the complexion, that she feed upon its unwholesome sad
making nourishment.

O how cunningly does he lay his Nets for the unwary soul, as a Fowler for the
birds? Often he frights her in her prayer (especially on the night time, when
it is dark) injects his imagination into hers, that she thinks Gods wrath now
seizes upon her, and will throw her into hell: then he makes semblance to have
power over the soul, as if she were his, though indeed he has not power to
touch one hair of the head, except she despairing yield herself over into his
hands; he dares neither spiritually take possession of her, nor touch her, only
darts his temptations into her imagination, thorough the complexion.

For this is the reason why he so assaults this soul, viz. because the
complexion-chamber is dark, for into the light he cannot intrude his
imagination, it is man's sin must give him entrance, but into this complexion he
finds an easy and most natural entrance, it being of a nature so near that of
his own most desired home, because its dark desire produces darkness, in which
sear is an inhabitant by reason of the wild earth; Except in this respect, he
has not one spark more of right to, or dominion in this, than the other
complexions. He can accomplish no more in the imagination than only to affright
the man, and make fainthearted, if the soul thorough despair do not give over
herself to him, then he induces the man at last to make away himself, for
except the man first cast a way himself, he dare not lay hands on him.

The Soul ha^h its Free Will or choice, and if it withstand the Devil, and
refuse consent, however desirous he be, yet has he not so much power as to
touch the outward sinful body; he boasts himself indeed as if he had this
power, but is a liar; for had he such power, he would soon show it. But it is
not so; Christ has by his entrance into death, and Hells darkest dungeons, set
open the gate of Heaven for all souls; each one has now a free entrance; the
Devils strong cords wherewith he fast bound the soul in Adam, is broken in
sunder by the Cross.

O how unwillingly does he hear the Cross mentioned, which seriously applied,
[in the work of mortification] is his most deadly pestilence.

The Devil is ever objecting to the melancholy man the hainousness of his
sins; and thereupon seeks to persuade him there is no possibility of attaining
Gods grace and favor: therefore that it only remains, he despairing, stab,
drown or hang himself, or murder another, that so he may gain an approach to
the soul, otherwise he neither dare nor can touch her.

But if he can so far prevail with the soul, that she consent to his
suggestion, then is he as a hangman that binds a prisoner, and leads him to
execution, yet dares not execute any thing upon her, till she herself become
her own, both judge and executioner.

A receipt for the Prince of Darkness when he comes in his black visard to
affright the soul into despair.
WHen he sollicits the poor soul to despair, let a man at his coming set before
him this following receipt to feed upon.

The Devil is a proud arrogant spirit, whom a man cannot any ways more vex,
so as to make him quit the place, than by withstanding him with a bold,
cheerful, and courageous Spirit, without showing the lest fear or terror at
his approach. (for he has not one straw of power to hurt) And likewise by
casting in his dish the shame of his fall, of how beautiful an Angel he is now
metamorphos'd into a black deformed Devil. First, when he comes with the
sin-register, and makes a show of his power and free entrance he has gained to
assault thee, by no means dispute with him* give him to that point no answer.
But when he first onsets the soul by injecting into her imagination evil
thoughts [of God] and the horror of sins past, and gives out, as if he would
now snatch her away with him in a terrible storm; then bear up against him with
a fresh courage, and say whence come thou, thou foul Spirit? I thought thou
had been in Heaven among the Angels, but thou it seems severed from that
communion, comst hither to boast thy self with the Register-book of Gods wrath.
I thought thou have been a Prince in the Divine Regiment, how comes it thou art
cast down from that high dignity to be his Jailer? is then such a bright Angel
turned down to be hangman? fie on thee, what will thou with me? get thee hence
into heaven to the Angels if thou bees't Gods servant. Avaunt hence thou
executioner of Gods wrath, go to thine own Angels, here thou have nothing to
do. This receipt he will, I Hope, feed on with an appetite, it is for his
health. Will he not yet begone, but still holds forth the sin-register? then
stand before him, and say, read, and take good notice of these words; [The seed
of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents head] Can thou not find it? Stay a
little and I will light a candle to help thee: it stands registered in the same
place with Adams fall, where immediately upon the denuntiation of Judgment from
Gods wrath upon man, follows this sentence of wrath upon thee, and of mercy to
the fallen Sons of Adam, That the Woman's seed should crush thy head. This is
another receipt will please him no less than the former.

But if he will not yet be gone, but shall still urge, Thou art a gross sinner;
have purposely committed this or that heinous sin, which thou knewst to be an
offense yet would still cover the deformities with the outward mantle of Gods
gace, when as the principle of Gods wrath was indeed kindled in thee, and that
therefore thou art now the Devils propriety.

Thus by the injections of the Devils imagination is the poor soul often cast
into such affrighting thoughts, as these thou have been a most heinous sinner,
and for this cause God has forsaken thee.

Now will the Devil lay hold on thee, and throw thee headlong into the
bottomless pit, (whence she grows exceedingly afraid of him.)

But when he signifies his approach by these his discomforting harbingers: take
again a fresh courage out of Christ's armory against him, and say, I have yet
something for thee Devil in store, that may, if thou can use it help thee to
thy Angels shape again: here take it, and say if thou can the Blood of Jesus
Christ cleanses us from all our sins Item [the Son of Man is come to seek and
save that which was lost What would thou give, O Devil, that God might
become man in thee? I have always an open door of grace to these saving
promises; but thou have not so, thou art now, as always, a liar, pack hence,
thou have not the least share in me. If I be a sinner, the guilt is principally
thine, thou thorough thy deceit wroughtst the sin in me* take to thee what is
thine own, the sin is thine: the suffering and death of Jesus Christ is mine.
He for this purpose became man, that he might free us from the guilt and
infection of sin. Thou were he that wrought the sin in me, keep it as thy own
portion: and my Lord Jesus Christ has wrought in me that righteousness that is
accepted with God, this I will keep to my self, his death and passion for man's
sin is mine. He died for my sins that I have committed, and is risen up in his
righteousness, and has received my soul into his satisfaction. Christ is in me,
and I in him, my sin is in thee, and thou in Hell.

Mock him further, saying, go too, thou glorious Angel that could not stand
one day in Heaven. That wast created an Archangell, but now boasts thy self of
the sin-register, the filthy sins of men's transgressions.

Take thou hangman my sins into thy beggars wallet, art thou now become sins
servants? carry them to thy masters, so shall I be rid of them, so will Christ's
merit only remain with me. Christ has said [My sheep are in mine hand, and no
man can rend them thouce from me; the Father that has given them me, is
greater than all.] How art thou bright Angel turned to a drudge to bear about
that sack full fraught with sins? from a Prince to a base Executioner? Get thee
hence with thy load of sin, and take mine in to make up weight, for it is men's
sins thou have most need of, nor does ought else belong to thee in my soul,
thou have not the least share; here I stand, devour me if thou can. But see,
I have in me a sign or mark, viz. the sign of the Cross, whereon Jesus
strangled sin and death; destroyed Hell and bound up the Devil to remain a
prisoner within the Dungeon of Gods wrath-principle, eat up this Recipe with
the rest, and they may perhaps remetamorphose thee into an Angel.

Suffer not by any means thy thoughts to dispute with him, neither be terrified
at his presence; Let nothing make thee despair by day or by night: he dares do
nothing to thee, though thou mockst him never so bitterly, he giving cause for
it, otherwise mock him not.

If the inward anguish or terror of soul be not accompanied with a kind of
[outward] terrifying astonishment, then is the Devil not there present, but
it is the souls amazement which is affrighted at the inward risings of the dark
Abyss or principle of Gods wrath in her. She thinks often when the melancholy
complexion is kindled by some angry sour influence of the Stars, that the
Devil is there, when indeed there is no such matter. When he comes, it is
either with vehement astonishing terrors, or in an Angels behavior, or rather
in a flattering posture like a fawning hound. If he comes to thee in the dark
and skares thee, thou being in the dark stir not a foot from thy place, she not
from him: he is not worthy a man should do him that honor. Mock him in the
dark, saying, how-now? art thou there? I thought thou had been an Angel of
light, and do stand as a thief in those dark lurking holes? there had need be
provided for thee, (whoswillest up so greedily the foetid exhalations of sin)
some other more stinking abode. Let this when he there comes be his
entertainme^t, but otherwise give him not by causeless provocation any occasion
of drawing near. A stout-hearted man that starts not back for all his menaces,
he does not lightly assault, especially if withal he take courage and mock
him, for he is proud and would be Lord wheresoever he be, so if the man he
assaults will not flinch nor give back his ground, it much troubles him, he
will not stay long there; and if (as most commonly) at his departing he leave a
stinck behind him, then leave the place for that time, saying, Fie thou
stinking hangman, how strong thou smellest of thy own dungeon? the
draught-house smells not so odiously; thus repulsed with scorn, he will have
small mind to return again in have with his vapors against the manly soul.

Entertain (as I said) no dispute with him in thy mind, for he is not worthy
the spending an argument upon; Fix this one following sentence in thy
imagination (which will be enough nor shall thou in the greatest affrightments
need more comfort) The blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God, cleaseth us from
all our sins. Herein wrap up all thy thoughts, let for the time no other issue
out of thy heart, let the Devil suggest to thy imagination what he will, know
all what he says is a lie, but this sentence is a firm truth; hold it fast as
thine own, maugre all his sly suggestions to the contrary.

Make not provision of many sayings against the assaults of terror; he is too
subtle for thee, steals the first and best out of thy heart, that thou
forgetest or doubtest of it. Wrap up thy whole soul and confidence in one;
there is strength enough in one to withstand him, thou may in it strength, will thou but wrap up thy soul in it easily put him to shame. Neither can he touch
thee, nor will he long abide thy presence. If thou manfully stand thy ground
and give not back, he becomes a laughing stock to his other agents employed in
his service among men, and also the holy Angels, therefore he usually takes
his wings and flies away before he be forced by those tart scoffings to avoid
the place.

Repeat therefore as need requires that one saying thou have made choice of,
fix it in thy heart, and from thence strengthen thy courage against him; the
Spirit that lies hid in the holy Oracle, will not fail to stand by thee. Though
the soul tremble before him, stand firm (though in the wrath his own principle)
against him; yea though thou art in fear of thy life, thou shall suffer no hurt.

He dare not force thee, nor indeed has he any power to touch the soul during
this life: for Christ has unlock^ the door of grace, it now stands wide open
to the poor finner while he lives upon earth, this door of grace stands open in
the soul.

Christ has in his soul broke open the Iron gate that was fast shut up in Gods
wrath. Now all souls have a communion and correspondence with this soul: they
all come from one, and are altogether one tree with many branches: his breaking
open of that prison is from him gone forth upon all souls from Adam till the
last men: the door of grace stands open to them all: God has shut it up to
none but those that will needs exclude themselves. The sign or mark of his
ingress into the manhood is manifest to all souls: the same will be a witness
over all ungodly men in the judgment day, which they have despised.

Though our sins (says Esaias) were as red as blood, yet stands the door of
mercy still open, for in the sinners conversion they shall be made as white as
the snowy wool, further says the Prophet Esaias Can a mother forget her child
that she take not pity of the son of her womb? She may possibly forget it, but
I will no forget you: for I have marked you in mine hand. viz. In his hand
pierced thorough with the sharp nails, and in his spear-wounded side did he
engrave the everlasting memorial of the soul of all souls.

Will now any man not come and rest himself therein, but contemn the mark of
Christ, or suffer the Devil to cover it, he is himself in the fault: and
though he cover it, yet remains it still deep engraven in the greatest sinner
that lives on earth. For Esaias says in the Spirit of Christ; Though a mother
forget her children (which she cannot do but with great grief) yet shall his
love and grace never be forgotten; he forgets not the souls, though never so
deep dyed in the sinful Tincture, for he has engraven their character in his
own Blood and Death; not of some only, but of the whole tree, entire with its
root and branches, and as sin came from one upon all: so (says the Apostle)
came righteousness through Christ upon all. As the sin from one pierced through
all unto death, so had the righteousness out of Christ its impenetration from
one into the whole stock with all its branches, to animate them to a new life.

But that all men partake not of this life the fault is in their own will,
their will is free. Gods will is that all men should be helped, and Psalm. 5.
Thou art not a God that willest the evil. And Ezekiel. As true as I live, says
the Lord, I will not the death of a sinner, but rathat he be converted and live.

Therefore let no soul think, the measure of mine iniquities is full: God has
forgotten me, I cannot be saved. No, it cannot be so: he has engraven her in
his nail-pierced hands. She is a sprig of the great tree of all souls, and has
an invisible commerce and communion with all, as the branch with the tree.
While she lives in this world, so long as she is clothed with flesh and blood,
she remains yet in the tree.

Of the temptation arising from the complexion and insluence of the Stars.
ALL temptation comes not from the Devil, especially with melancholy men, but
the most part of that afflicting sadness which falls so heavy upon them, comes
from the imagination of the soul, which being necessitated to dwell in dark
melancholy habitations, no wonder if it be easily surprised with heaviness, so
as to think God has forgotten her, and will have none of her. For the
melancholy complexion is dark and has no light of its own, as the other
complexions have; yet is not this darkness essential to the soul; but is only
her lonesome tabernacle, during her pilgrimage here on earth; nor does the
souls holiness and righteousness consist at all in the complexion, but [is deep
rooted, viz.] in the inward heavenly principle where God dwells. For as S. Paul
says, Philip. 3. Our conversation is in heaven.

Now this Heaven wherein God dwells is not manifested in the outward complexion,
but only in it self, viz. in the second principle.

It often happens, that the holiest souls are in this manner overwhelmed with
sadness, and this not without Gods special permission, to the end they may be
proved, and strive the more earnestly after that heavenly crown of victory
which is given them in this life as a pledge of their everlasting felicity.

For, when the soul takes heaven as 'twere by storm, and winns her crown (the
gift of the Holy Ghost) after a constant persevering stedfastness in the fiery
conflict, her Crown of triumph is much more noble and precious, than that which
is not obtained till after the bodily death, for the Revelation of Jesus Christ
says; To him that over comes will I give to sit with me upon my Throne, as I
have overcome, and am seated on my Fathers Throne. Item; To him that overcomes
will I give to eat of the hidden Manna, and will give him a good testimony, and
with the Testimony a new name written which no man knows but he that receives
it.

But to return to the natural cause of sadness in the melancholy complexion.

There often happens a malignant conjunction of the Stars, or Eclypse of the Sun
or Moon, which if it chance to be in an earthly sign, and poison the with his
hellish influence, then does the influence of this mightily terrify this soul
enwrapt in the melancholy complexion she always imagines it is the fierce wrath
of God is risen up against her, or that it is the Devil is now come to hale her
away into Hell. For her complexion being strongly imbiterd with his venomous
beams, and finding herself enclosed in a desolate and dark dwelling, she
presently imagins God has cast her from him, and will have none of her, and
this especially when she casts her imagination into the complexion by an
anxious search, and so feeds upon his poisonous breath, blows up her fire-life
therewith, then is she filled with a most bitter anguish and horible fear of
the Devil, and Gods wrath in her. Then begins she to speculate, and think that
God has not ordained her to eternal life in Jesus Christ, whereupon she
becomes so discontented, that she cannot willingly lift up her eyes and
countenance to God, thinks herself such a heinous sinner that the door of
grace is wholly shut up against her.

But all this is nothing really but a fancy arising from the complexion
disturbed by the starry influence wherewith the soul plagues herself. For when
the Macrocosmick Spirit has, in the Constellations vehicle, insinuated it self
into her, it acts in her like a Hocus-Pocus, fills her brain with strange
fancies, in so much that both the deluded soul is therewith much afflicted, and
the outward spirit enflames it self in the earthy origination, whence the
centrall wheel of Nature whirles fast about, that the Spirit cannot fixedly lay
hold upon and stay the thoughts; which is properly madness: with which we often
hear how melancholy men are infested; Which when the Devil sees, he injects
likewise his imagination, torments the soul yet worse: but he has no power to
hurt her but by herself, only the same principle which is the fountain of
anguish in the soul, is also the fountain of his life [as Devil] and therefore
he is most delighted in such a lodging. Except in this he has a perfect
abhorrency from the whole nature of mankind.

Therefore let no man thus tormented with anguish imagine within himself in the
assaults of the complexion, that it comes from Gods wrath and want of mercy in
him, which is a mere fancy of his own complexion in the stars. For we well see
that the vilest fatted swine of the Devils herd, that wallow and bath
themselves day and night in the filth of sin, are not so full of sadness, not
so assaulted with this kind of temptation; the reason is, because they have an
outward light in the complexion, wherein they dance before the Devil in an
Angels likeness. So, as long as there is but one little spark of light
glimmering in a man's heart, which desires Gods grace, and would gladly partake
of salvation, the door of Gods grace stands yet open.

For he who is given over by God, whose sin is come to the full measure, he is
not at all sollicitous after God, Man, or Devil, but is stone-blind, runs on
carelessly in a course of lightness without fear, rests himself upon a customary
practice of some outward service of God; goes a beast into the sanctuary, and
comes again a beast out; there is in him no true divine knowledge, but all his
religion is a mere outward custom and Chimaera of man's brain, which he sets up
to himself as an Idol, and embraces it as his holiness.

Hereby may the Melancholy mind perceive that God does not so thoroughly
manifest his wrath in this life. For however the ungodly be punished by God in
this life, he looks at the punishment not as coming from a divine hand, but as
a thing casually befallen him.

But that this troubled consc^ence, is rather a subject of his pity than wrath,
that of the Prophet Esaias does sufficiently evidence, A bruised read will he not
break, and smoking fl^x will he not quench. Item, Matthew. 11. Come to me, all
ye that are sadned in spirit, and I will refresh you. Now, his yoke is this,
that what in the course of Nature, or by special providence befalls the soul
be it temptation, persecution, weakness of body or spirit, a man bear it with
patience, and cast himself with a resigned will into Gods free love and mercy;
The affliction then cannot hurt the soul at all but rather much profits it. For
while she sits contentedly in the house of mourning* she is not in the house of
sin, viz. the worlds pride and voluptuousness* for God holds her hereby fast
chained from ranging abroad to immerse herself in the delights of sin.

She must be content to remain in sorrow for a little while, but alas what is
it? how soon will she be at liberty from her sorrowful prison, and have the
victorious Crown of everlasting joy set upon her head. O Eternity, thy duration
is of a vast extent; what is it for a soul to be a small moment of time in
sadness, and after that to rejoice everlastingly? for God will wipe all tears
from their eyes.

As long as there is in the soul but one single spark that breaths after God,
Gods spirit is it self present in that spark. For that a man is desirous of God
and earnestly labors after him with a longing thirst, comes in no wise from
the now corrupted nature of man, but it is the impulse of the Father* in his Son
Jesus Christ drawing the soul toward him. The Holy Ghost is it self the divine
desire. No man can desire God without Gods Spirit, which is always in such
desire, and holds fast the will of the desire in God, whereby the poor soul is
preserved from falling away; for S. Paul says, We know not what we should
speak before God, when we pray, but the spirit of God intercedes for us with
gronings which cannot be uttered according, to the good pleasure of God.

Why should we then any longer rest in pusillanimous doubting of his grace and
good will toward us? he is far more willing at all time to receive us to
mercy, than we are to come to him.

See how he dealt with the lost Son which had wasted his Fathers inheritance
among the Devils fatted swine, and was now become a naked and filthy
swineherd? how as soon as he saw him returning to him* he fell upon his neck
and kissed him, saying, This is my dear Son whom I had once lost, but is now
come home again, he was dead, but is now again restored to life? how he stirred
up himself with his whole house and neighborhood, to rejoice over his once
prodigal Son returned again into his bosom? according to what Christ in
another place testifies more explicitly, that there is joy in Heaven among the
Angels of God over one sinner that repents, more than over 99 just persons
that need no repentance.

This lost Son is no other than the wretched sinful man, when he begins to be
sensible how great a sinner he has been, and thinks of betaking himself to
Gods mercy, then does our most gracious Father in Christ Jesus go out to meet
him, embraces him with the deepest joy, and both the Angels and holy Souls in
Heaven rejoice exceedingly, that a beloved Soul, a dear brother, is come up to
them from out of the house of sin and death.

The sorrowful soul troubles and torments herself, because she cannot
presently in the point of her desire exsuscitate, dig up in herself the
fountain of the greatest joy; she sighs and bewailes her sad condition, thinks
God will have none of her, when she cannot palpably feel his presence. She sees
other men, that walk along with her in the way of Gods fear, that yet are
cheerful enough, and supposing this cheerfulness of theirs proceeds only from
a divine fountain of love and light in their souls is conceited, that she is
not accepted with God, but rather rejected by him, because she does not
presently upon her conversion which she expected, feel in her heart the like
comfortable effects of the refreshing presence of God.

Before the time of my enlightening, it went even thus with me: I stood out a
hard conflict before I obtained my precious Crown of victory, and then did I
first learn out this experimental knowledge, that God dwells not in the outward
fleshy heart, but in the souls center, in himself; then was I also first aware
of it, that 'twas God which had laid hold on me and drawn me to him in my first
desire, which before I was ignorant of, thinking the good desire had been my
own property, and that God was indeed far from me. But afterward I saw him,
and rejoiced at the unspeakable grace and love of God, and now write the same
for a caveat, that they by no means faint or despair, when the comforter
delays his coming, but rather think of that of David, Heaviness may endure
for a night, but joy comes in the morning.

Thus has it fared with many of the chiefest saints of God, they were forced
to strive a long time for their Crown of Victory; nor indeed is any man crowned
therewith, till he has passed as a Conqueror through the combat. It Is indeed
deposited near the soul, but in the second principle, the soul stands fixed upon
the first principle, and therefore if she will have the Crown set upon her head
in the time of this life, she must earnestly fight and contend for it. And then
if she go not so far as to obtain it in this world, yet she obtains it after
this life, in the laying down of this earthly tabernacle. For Christ says, Be
of a good comfort, I have overcome the world, and in the world you have sorrow,
but in me peace.

The precious pearl lies in many an assaulted and troubled spirit, much nearer
than in them that think they have already comprehended it; but it hides it
self: for where it lies richest and most noble, there will it not easily
discover it self, but rather wraps it self close up as if it would never be
communicated, therefore let no soul be hereby terrified or amazed. She
therefore hides herself, that the desire of the soul being the more earnestly
enflamed after her, may in the comprehension drink deep to assuage her thirst,
and meanwhile knock unweariedly at her gates till it be opened unto him. For
says Christ, Seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you;
And, My Father will give the Holy Spirit to them that pray to him for it.

Have a certain assured confidence upon Gods promise, and however thy misgiving
heart say no, yet let not this affright thee. For to believe is not to be
filled with joy in the fleshly heart and outward complexion, that the fleshly
mind and Spirit be so jocund, that the very heart and reins leap for joy, this
is not faith, but these are only some love emanations from the Holy Ghost
within, a divine lightning, which has no stability, but after a short
resplendence, disappeares. For God dwells not in the outward heart or
complexion, but in himself, in the second center, in the Jewel of the noble
Image of Gods likeness which is hidden in this outward world. But the true
Faith is, that the Spirit of the Soul with its will and desire goes into, and
thirsts after that it neither sees nor feels; here understand that of the soul
in it self precisely considered, stands not in this time, yet she sends in the
subtle spirit of the will which has its original from her firelife, and in
this spirit of the will is the precious pearl received, so that the souls-fire
now remains in the desire. For so as the pearl remains in the spirit of the
will, so long does the desire remain in the soul. For this pearl is a spark of
the Divine love, it is the engine with which the Father draws the soul unto him
in his love* the soul must therefore stand fast in her desire, even when the
outward reason out of the dark Complexion speaks a flat contradiction, and
denies Gods presence there. Were not God present, there could be no desire or
will after him in the estranged soul. For, where God is not in the Spirit of
the will, the soul is as wholly blind and dead as to God, desires not God at
all, nor has any want or breathing after him, but lives and disports himself
in the heaven of his own natural light, and self-pleasing imaginations; only is
a more subtle piercing understanding than the other beast of the field, his
souls natural essence being of a higher gradation than theirs. Therefore by no
means let any troubled soul suffer the complexion to fasten such an imagination
as this upon his heart, that God is not present with her, will have none of
her, other wise the soul feeding upon such imagination becomes exceeding heavy.
Its a very great sin for the mind, to shape out such a fancy in the heart: for
by this means the soul which is a noble creature, out of Gods Nature falls into
great anxiety, and the Phantasy kindles the souls fire with this fuel, and
causes it to burn in the painful principle.

Dear soul, think no other, when the anxious property of thy complexion, thus
kindled by the stars, begins to move, but that thou then stand as a
labourer in Gods vineyard, thou must not stand idle, but be working; thou do
God herein a great and very considerable piece of service; And thy labor is
this, that thou overcome the temptation by an unmovable faith, however no
comfort in the outward heart appear to support it. Be not deceived. It Is not
faith, to give assent to what I see and feel, but this is faith, to trust the
hidden Spirit, and believe the truth of its words, maugre all the contradiction
of blind nature; and this so firmly, that I choose sooner to lose my natural
life than distrust his promise: this is a faith which wrastles rightly with God
as old Jacob did the whole night, which though it neither sees nor feels the
least atome of the thing hoped for, yet rests firm upon the word of promise;
this faith does indeed overcome God, as 'twas said to Jacob, thou have wrastled
with God, and Man, and half got the upper hand. If thou ask what word of
promise I mean, I answer it is this: My Father will give the holy Spirit to them
that humbly and fervently beg it of him; And this is that which the mouth of
Christ it self has further delivered, When he comes he will lead you into all
truth, for he will take of mine and will make it known to you.

Now that thou may undoubtedly know that this temptation and terror comes
from the complexion, I will lay before thee an example of that which happens
especially to the Choleric or fiery and melancholy complexions.

When thou wakest by night in a dark room, thou art seized on with a strange
kind of amazement and terror of mind, and art subject to imagine, that there is
somewhat in the dark that affrights thee. Whence now proceeds this fear? Is the
flesh afraid of any danger to it self? no sure, it would not without the force
of blows be made to enter as an Ox to the slaughterhouse, into that place of
terror. But it is the poor soul, a prisoner in the flesh, that is afraid in this
darkness, is ever sollicitous and fearful, lest the Devil should lay hold on
her, for she knows that his dwelling is in the darkness, and therefore fears he
will be catching at her; whence it is easy to be seen, the fear proceeds from the
imagination of the soul.

Thus goes it with a poor soul perpetually mur'd up in the dark chamber of the
complexion; she is so extremely out of heart, that her thoughts cannot clear
up, but must grope in the dark; ever fearing, because of the Devil and the
wrath of God.

Therefore should not a soul that is locked up in the dark chamber of a
melancholy complexion, dwell long or scarce at all in speculations about the
wrath of God, nor give it self much to solitude, but rather spend its time in
godly conferences. For so the matter of those, friendly and profitable,
yielding sufficient entertainment to the working fancy, it is by this means
handsomely diverted from her torturing cogitations. For no deep speculation is
in this state profitable for her, which seeing she cannot turn it to her souls
health and comfort, its better she let it alone.

Such a man must also take heed of reading such books as teach the doctrines of
a partial and personal election and Predestination of men to salvation or
damnation.

They all teach with misunderstanding, and do not explain the doctrine aright
according to the sense and declaration of the mystical language of the Holy
Ghost, of which I have given a further and better explanation in my other
writings.

Neither is it good for him to perplex his thoughts with the reading of many
books, but rather to adhere solely to the Scriptures, in which he shall find
durable and steady comfort.

But if God has given him naturally a deep-searching understanding, in which
the soul cannot cease her perpetual diving to the bottom of the deep mystery,
let him in Gods fear be take himself in continual prayer to God, for the
opening to him the center of Nature, in the finding whereof, the soul will be
at rest. For there she sees the cornerstone, on which the grand fabric of
human souls is bottomed, and so all fear and sadness quickly vanishes away; of
which, I am able to say by experience with soul chearing and established light
is attaind by him that has found this center. But no self-seeking or
self-opinionated understanding, is able by his deepest searching to find it
out. Yet does not God willingly shut it up from any man; but it must be sought
and found out in the fear of God, by a constant importunity in prayer; for it is
the greatest treasure in this world; he that finds it, has an easy egress out
of Babel.

The Melancholy Complexion should also with great care avoid drunkenness, that
the soul be not overladen and pressed down by the power of the earth. For when
the body thus loads it self with drink, the earthy fumes of the strong liquor
presently take possession of the complexion chamber; then does the soul,
entering therein with the imagination to her great hurt, feed upon the earthly
property, kindles her fire therewith, and for a short time rejoices in it; but
the earthy floating fumes of the drink which danced those merry Anticks in his
brain, must ere long vanish into air, and he, like a man warmed by a wisp of
straw, returns a prisoner to his old frozen Melancholy which has contracted it
self in a heavy and darker consistency by the antiperistasis a of false light
of this momentany refection. Then stands the poor soul as most desolate and
more than ever forsaken of God; for she loses, in the overflowing of the
earthly property, the divine imagination and desire; for the Spirit of God will
not have his dwelling in the earthly imagination. Then arises in the Soul a
sad dispairing repentance, as if she were accursed of God. The wrath of God
does then set it self against her, as if it would root her up from her very
center, and throw her into the bottomless pit of darkness; then falls the man
into great heaviness, and it may be for an easement of his grief, again
associates himself with his pot-companions to refresh himself with them in
their sottish joviality. Thus do these foolish drunkards, whose company he is
now linkt in, add one day of sin to another, and plunge his and their own souls
almost irrecoverably into the earthly darkness and the wrath of God. I speak it
as a most certain truth, which I have a wellgrounded knowledge of, in the
Center of Nature and deepest principle of life.

Let the Melancholy soul beware also of inflaming it self with anger; For wrath
is her greatest poison, and drives her to madness, which is clearly seen in the
Center; For the complexion-Chamber is rude and unpolisht like the wild and
uncultivated earth to which it is best resembled: it is also, as the earth was in
the beginning of the Creation, of it self without form and void, and has but a
very slender hold on the great wheel of nature; Whence it falls out, that upon
a too vehement excitation of the fire of anger, the wheel of nature whirles
about with such a tumultuous noise, that it makes the body of the angry man
even visibly to tremble. Now then the complexion-chamber being so empty and
void of substance, the broken wheel cannot so easily cement again, nor the
thoughts be reduced to an orderly consistency or composedness, but all runs
about in a hurly burly fierce fiery driving of wrath and fury, so that the mind
cannot fix the thoughts in any steady posture of cogitation, as in mad men is
most apparently seen. Nor is he knowing of what he does, but as the disordered
wheel of the inward Nature moves, so are the tumultuous motions of the outward
members of the body; the Devil also slily delights to fish in these troubled
waters, insinuates his imagination therewith, aggravates the madness yet more,
and makes it his instrument to work much mischief. This wheel well becomes the
outward Spirit; but then the poor soul also lays hold on it, and causes it to
make impressions of great horror upon her Spirit. Yet let no man pronounce any
soul damned, during the time of this life, for the heavenly sign of the Cross
remains yet, upon which the door of grace stands wide open. The soul shut up
in the Melancholy-chamber must likewise carefully preserve herself clear from
covetousness, yea with the greatest diligence; for it is a thing no less
banefull to her than anger. For Covetousness is an earthly desire, the
complexion is also earthly: and this chamber being as was said, empty and void,
its desire does naturally attract the earthly substance into its empty mansion,
and fills it with such dark matter wherein the mere wrath of God, with all
unrighteousness and falsehood, lies enclosed, with much other evil of the nature
of the terrene property, which make the complexion, being it self an earthly
desire, yet stronglier and faster tied to the earth than before.

Upon which earthly matter, the soul-feeding, with her imagination, feels
afterward, upon the awakening of conscience, the fierce judgment of God
burning in her fiery Vehicle, who is inflamed and made hot by that evil fuel
of falsehood and unrighteousness which covetousness had pil'd up in store. Now
the poor soul finding herself thus burning in Gods wrath, and encompassed only
with that vast congeries of that evil earthly matter of falsehood and
unrighteousness, when this fire is still more and more kindled, cannot but fall
into an excess of doubting, and despair of the grace of God.

Know therefore of a truth, That for the Melancholy spirit, there is nothing
better than to lead a simple retired life, in a mean condition, where there is
no temptation to pride, and where he live soberly and temperately, not having
his mind charged with multiplicity of worldly cares, which if he be
necessitated to sometimes, he must begin and end all in the fear of God, and
constant exercise of prayer, which will carry him on with profit thorough all
his emploiments.

For the Melancholy chamber thus prepared is an excellent Councellhouse, it
has a door open Heavenward, while it keeps it self in a watchful posture of
sobriety, It pierces every whit as deep as the Sanguine; but without Gods fear
it obtains nothing beyond the shallow comprehension of the natural reason; if
she stand open, and have her nativity in a sign of which is Lord, she lays a
foundation of the great mischief which has plagued mankind, almost from the
beginning of the world, for she builds Babel, and all deception to himself and
others of that nature, to which with her native austerity she gains power and
reverence among the sons of men.

Therefore let a man that is thus complexiond (however knowing as he thinks of
that he has in hand,) attempt nothing without prayer. Let him always in the
first place commend his heart, thoughts, mind, will, and actions, into the holy
hands of the highest God, to be directed by his wisdom, to the performance of
his good pleasure, and pray earnestly that he will be the sole regent in all
his desires and undertakings, so may the complexion freed from its delusions,
by the in-dwelling wisdom of God, be in his hand, a serviceable instrument of
much good. Without this none thus complexiond can in the public office perform
ought that's good and well-pleasing to God.

Of the other three Complexions.
A general Looking-glass, wherein their several natures and properties are
represented to the discerning eye, very briefly described, as it was out of the
light of Gods grace set before the eyes of my understanding in the Spirit.
1. Of the Choleric.
THe man that has his best treasure, the noble Soul in habiting in the
Choleric Complexion, must above all things exercise himself in humility; else
he stands in very great danger: he must power this water of humility and
meekness into his fire, that his noble Image be not therewith inflamed above
measure; for she is full of pride, severity, and sudden anger, and is therefore
of all men feared and highly extolled, but truly loved by few, except the
Divine water from heaven, viz. The noble humility descend down, and incorporate
with her fire; then does her fire break forth into a glorious, mild, and
harmless flame, which gives light and warmth, and attracts to it the affections
of all men.

For this chamber has a native luster of its own in it self, in the outward
nature, but is commonly void of mildness and humility, except she have Jupiter
or Venus, Lord of the ascendent of her Nativity; Yet has she invelop'd under
Venus his soft mantle her Devil, which tortures her day and night, with strong
temptations to unchastity; and I tell it now for a warning, that there is great
danger in this complexion, yea much greater than in the melancholy. For here
comes the Devil in his Angels visard of light, which as the natural, proceed
of the fire of the complexion, tickles the souls with the pleasing sense of her
native light, whence she grows highminded; he represents all things to her
imaginations, as slightly to be regarded, and so she swallows down glibly, and
without any remorse of conscience, all his poisoned baits of sin, as swearing,
cursing, light and lascivious talking, so that to despite and unhallow the holy
Name of God in the soul, is a thing usually practiced in this chamber; the
wrathful fiery essence bears up the mind, that it can very hardly (especially
in a right repentant abstinence) sink it self down into a divine temper of true
spiritual love and meekness. It rather adheres rigidly to its wrathful
principle, will subdue all by terror, and make all stand in awe of him. If
withal its nativity happn'd to be in an earthy sign, there is then small good
that may tend to Gods honor to be naturally hoped for from this complexion.

He therefore that has his pretiousest treasure locked up in this storehouse had
need be very circumspect both over his inward life and outward actions.

For the poor deluded soul fixes her imagination thereupon, and thence
rejoicing in the slight comfort of that natural light, takes no notice that she
has still her residence in Gods wrath in the hellish fire, till either it
awaken it self in her, or till she come to be bereft of her outward firelustre,
by the death of this body. Then appears she in her native colors, a proud
angry Devil, and must have her abode in the eternal darkness.

Therefore is it good for such a soul not to labor to purchase to it self any
high degree of worldly power, and honor, but if in the way of divine
providence they fall to her lot, then not to please her imagination with
reflecting upon the thoughts of her greatness: For she has naturally a proud
fire-eye, easy to be inflamed. An earnest and humble casting down of herself in
prayer before God is her best security.

This kind of soul is easily by her fiery complexion into the false complexion
of a triumphant natural joy, which she often mistakes for the lively emanations
of Gods Spirit; but it is a gross error, the approaches of the Spirit of God,
when it reveals it self, in the soul, comes like that still voice of God to
Elias, clad with the greatest humility and meek calmeness of spirit. O what a
blessed serenity and divine triumph does calm the fire complexion in the soul
at its appearance there; but it here rather remains in its own inward center,
and has very rarely its outflowings into outward skirts of this self-admiring
masterfull complexion.

Therefore take warning, strive diligently after meekness in words and works,
so shall not thy complexion be able to kindle the fire of hell in thee, for God
loves a humble and contrite spirit.

Thou art not by thy complexion at all debarred from communion with God,
provided thou abuse not the good of it, and beware of the evil, be sure thou
do all with a sincere desire to the sole honor of God, and crucify thine own
will, and then thy complexion shall do thee no harm.

Of the Sanguine.
THou may live orderly according to this noble complexion, but let not
hypocrisy take place in it. By the largness of thy comprehension, thou art
capable of great inventions. Take heed thou bring not stubble and straw into
thy sanguin habitation, and mistake and give it forth for the Holy Ghost. For
thou have in the complexion a shining light, it is but humane, however defile it
not, nor embase it by the letting in of earthy vanity.

A sober temperate life is good for thee, keep thy self carefully from
drunkenness, else thou castest thy self wilfully into thine enemies arms. Thou
art much inclined to Love, place it upon the right object, love not unchastity
and pride.

And though thou be naturally of a pliant, gentle and humble disposition,
yet may thou be easily surprised with pride: For thou bear about thee (as
the air and upper waters) a receptacle of all the influences of the Stars and
Planets.

If thou will enter into the fear of God, and behave thy self a right therein,
thou may easily find the Great Mystery, yet not of thy self, but through
Gods gracious revelation, only thou have above other complexions a lightsome
chamber, and an open door thereunto. Therefore beware with what kind of food
thou nourish thy soul.

For there is nothing so good by nature, but it may be converted and abused to
evil, by the letting in that which is evil, to contaminate and commix with
it. If men despise thee, pass it over with neglect, and trust in God, for this
will often happen unto thee from the wise of this world, by reason of the candid
simplicity of thy disposition. Keep well what thou have, content thy self with
the pure simplicity of the Divine wisdom, and have not much commerce with the
subtle inventions of the alienated humanity, lest otherwise to thy hurt, thou
admit of a stranger into thy noble palace. It Is better to suffer here a little
shame, than everlasting misery hereafter.

If thou should addict thy self to drunkenness, the Devil would then bring
into thy tender house great misfortune and much evil: For thy complexion is
most hateful to him, being a property wherein he can have no possession, till
he has first induced to infect it by false imagination, or some sinful
mis-use of the creature. A private quiet life is best for thee, but thou art
full of wandering thoughts, and like the air thou art resembl'd to, easily
take in all impressions, and as easily lett'st them vanish again.

Take heed to thy goings out, and comings in, mark well what thou let out
of thy soul, and what thou take in, that it be not the product of a Starry
influence, but a genuine issue of the Deity in thee; else, if thou be not very
watchful, thou may be easily misled to the deceiving both of thy self and
others.

Of the Phlegmatic.
THe truth and righteousness were an excellent medicine in thee, for otherwise
thou art full of lies, and little regardest what thou give forth, or take
in.

Poor soul thou have a very dangerous way, and a vast Ocean of sorrow to pass
thorough; in this complexion, thou art naturally inclined to a perpetual
defilement of thy self in sin, both in words and deeds; water has indeed a
bright, transplendence and repercussion of light, but it is for all that a faint
deceitful mirror, and such is that of the poor soul in this complexion. For
the water receives all things indifferently into it self, be they good or ill,
which it keeps and darkens it self therewith.

In like manner goes it with this complexion, she receives all the poisonous
influences of the Stars into her imagination, and presents them as a
Looking-glass to the poor captive soul to contemplate in, which false shadow
she mistaking for a substance, modells for herself in words and works
answerable thereunto.

O what a treasury of smooth glozing words has this complexion in store, to
sell, like the fresh-springing waters, to every one at an easy or no cost, yet
not unmixt, with a conseal'd bitterness from the Starrs-infection. It makes no
scruple of deceiving with lying pretenses, which are the fair tapestry its
hypocrisy lies shrouded under.

There Is no deceit seems too much to this complexion; Lies are her mantle of
hypocrisy, with a superficial appearance to be good Christians and servants of
God, though living in Babel.

Thou do not easily of thy self discover the unrighteousness of thine own
ways, but if a man come before thee with a spark of the true light, thou may
receive it into thy mirror. The best counsel for thee is, that thou know thy
self a man more than ordinarily addicted to sin, yet may well enter into
effectual repentance, if thou will pray to God for the government of thy
floting water by his holy Spirit, wherewith the depraved affection and desire
of thy constellation may be restrained that it possess not the soul, and drive
it on headlong into all folly.

A temperate sobriety will also conduce much to thy health both of body and
mind; and to stand always upon thy watch, and to be frequent in prayer, and
constant in the fear of God, will secure thee against all the evil of thy
nature and constellation. For he that is wholly acted by his constellation,
lives no otherwise than a beast. But when a man sets up the fear of God, as a
ruler in his heart, the Soul then becomes Lord of her outward inclinations, and
compells them all into an obedience to the divine light; otherwise the
complexion becomes the souls master and instructor, which though she cannot
govern in her own power, yet she presents before the soul in her mirror, the
several effects of the configurations of the Stars, and elements, wherewith
the foul comes to be bewitched and led into captivity.

Conclusio totius.
Therefore let a man behave himself as becomes a man, giving the dominion of
his life to the manly reason and light of God shining therein, and not suffer
himself to be hurried on by the brutish instincts of his complexion, as a beast
to the slaughter, so may he win the possession of the highest and eternal
good, let his complexion be what it will.

For there is no complexion so noble and pure in nature, but is capable of
infection from the malignant impresses of the Stars, and of the Devil, and
so the man in danger of being there by led captive into sin and death, if
forsaking his true pilot, he will suffer his ship to be carried on by every
wind blowing from that principle.

Therefore is that of S. Peter to all complexions, a most necessary and
seasonable aviso, 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9.

Be sober, and Watch, for your adversary the Devil goes about, as a roaring
Lion, seeking whom he may devour.

Withstand him in the faith and fear of God, and be never securely careless of
his temptations.

FINIS.

