A Voice from the Dead: OR THE SPEECH OF AN Old Noble Peer: Being the Excellent
ORATION OF THE Learned and Famous BOETHIUS, To the Emperor THEODORICUS.

London Printed, and sold by Richard Janeway, 1681.

A Voice from the Dead: OR, The Excellent Speech of that Noble and Learned
Roman Boethius, to the Emperor Theodoricus.
SIR,
I Am not Ignorant, that we are in a time, wherein it is, as it were, much
easier to Fly, than to Speak of the state of this Empire without offense to
any; and that all discourse, which at this present may be framed, will ever be
suspected by those, who have made even our Thoughts Criminal to your Majesty.

Yet must I needs say, it is a matter very hard to be Silent in so great
Revolutions of Affairs, since Nature has not Created us like Crocodiles, who
are said to have Eyes to Weep, and not a Tongue to Complain. I perceive we lose
as it were all that which we have of Roman in us, and that in this Universal
Disaster, where all the World should strengthen their Arms against Violence:
Men are contented to do, as in Thunder, every one prays the Thunderbolt may
not fall upon his own house, and very little Regards the danger of his
Neighbor: so likewise we see many Senators, whose Dignity ought to put into
their Mouths, good and forcible Words for the defense of Justice, satisfying
themselves to avoid the Blow, and expecting safety in Common Ruins.

As for my self, I freely protest, that being Born of Blood, which never
learned to Flatter any man, and seeing my self in a Rank where my Silence may
prove Injurious to the Public, since I cannot uphold Liberty already too much
leaning to it is Ruin, I will at least support the Image of it, and in so
general a servitude, speak something, wherein I will either discharge my
Conscience for the present, or comfort my Ashes for the time to come.

Alas Sir, when I behold you sitting upon the Throne of Glory, whereunto the
Hand of God seems to have raised you by a Miracle, fortified you by
Discretion, and blessed you with so many Prosperities; I cannot choose but
remember with the most tender Resentments of my Heart, the Calms of the first
years, when you took into your Hand the Stern of this large Empire; who ever
saw diverse Metalls so happily commixed, as we then beheld different Nations
united in one entire Body under your Authority? what consent in Affections?
what correspondence in all orders? what vigor in Laws? what Obedience in
Subjects? what Agreement in the Senate? what Applause among the People? what
Policy in Cities? what good Fortune in Arms? what Blessing in all the success
of your Affairs?

Seemed it not, that God had affixed to your Standards and Edicts some secret
virtue, which made the one Triumph in War, and the other become prosperous in
Peace, with so much Terror and Reputation, that even things opposite of their
own Nature, knit themselves firmly together for your Benefit?

O Sir! what is become of that Golden face of your Government? who has
Metamorphosed it into this Leaden Visage? perhaps you thought it was a part of
the Greatness of your Majesty, to hold a Senate under, to whom all the good
Emperors have so much ascribed, that they esteemed them as necessary for their
Greatness, as leaves about the Rose to set out its Beauty.

I could tell you Sir! how much these Counsels are pernicious, were it not that
the Experience of the years of your Reign has taught you more, than all the
Malignity of Men can deface. If you will be pleased to call as yet to Counsel
your Wit and Understanding, which God has Replenished with so many fair and
noble Lights: Believe me, you shall find this people is as the Herb Basil,
which renders a good Savor, as it is said, when gently handled, and creates
Scorpions when rudely Chafed. Hold us in the Estimation and Condition, wherein
you hitherto have Retained us, and you shall see nothing more Tractable than
the Roman people; but if you proceed with these Violences, by which some daily
pervert your good Nature, it is to be feared, lest this severity produce not
rather Poison, even for those who hope out of it to derive sweetness.

Our Enemies cease not to Exasperate you, upon want of Respect due to your
Majesty, and yet God knows we have so regarded Royal Authority, that seeing it
in most unjust hands, where it lost its Luster, we suffered it not to lose the
fruit of our Obedience.

Allow Sir, the Liberty, which ever has been the most precious Inheritance of
this Empire; you have placed men over our Heads, who, to become Great, and
unwilling to seem any thing less than what they are, seek to smother in our
Miseries the baseness of their own Birth, and Believe the means to justify
their own Carriage, is to take away Eyes from those who have them, and to
render Tongues Mute, lest they may learn a Truth. Now adays to be Born Rich, is
to become a Prey, and to arrive at Government with some supereminencies of Wit,
is to raise Enemies; all great Actions are suspected: and it seems, that to
find safety, we must seek it either in Ignorance or Idleness.

We have so learned to Obey, that we would not hitherto so much as enter into
consideration of the distribution you made of your Favors, leaving them more
Free, than are in the Sun, his Rays, and contenting us to Honor the Character
of your Majesty, as well on Rocks, as Marbles and Silver. But now, when we see
the precious Interests of the Kingdom, in Hands less pure than we wish, what
else can we do in so public a Calamity, but here most humbly Remonstrate, that
which the Subtle dissemble, the Miserable suffer, the Good deplore, and even
the very Stones Relate?

Where is the time, Sir, when we heard those Noble words to proceed from your
Mouth, That the Flock may be Sheared, not Flayed; That a Body overcharged sunk
to the Ground; That there was no Tribute comparable to the precious Commodities
derived from the Love of Subjects? Now, all the Cities and Countries bewail the
Rigorous Concussions they feel, to satisfy with their Sweat and Blood, the
Avarice of some particulars, who are notwithstanding, as greedy as Fire, and
more unsatiable than the Abyss.

I exasperate not here our Miseries, by an amplification of words; I have, Sir,
made you to see, when you pleased to hear me in your Cabinet, the Tears of
Provinces, which softened your heart to Compassion, and opened your Hands to
Liberality, so that if your good Affections be not altered by some, you are
capable enough to discharge Heaven of all Promises, which it has made unto us,
by the happiness of your Empire.

Vnseal those Eyes which you so often have opened for the comfort of your poor
Subjects, and in what part soever you turn them, you shall behold nothing but
Miseries. Is it not a strange thing, that Slaves being sometimes sold to
courteous Masters, sweeten the sharpness of their condition by some Gentle
usage, and that there should be none, but the people of Rome, who yearly buy
out their Bondage? None but the people of Rome, who were made accountable for
the Goods pulled from them, and Tributary for the Shiprack of their Poverty?

From thence the way is taken to the oppression of Magistrates, and some are
persuaded, That thoroughly to Mow the Meadow, you must Humble the Heads of
Plants most Eminent. Paulinus is dispoiled, Albinus is Guilty of Treason; They
are culpable enough, since they are Rich and Powerful. It is said, there can be
no safety found but in their Disgrace. And who sees not, that these
proceedings tend to the Ruin of that most Noble Body, which almost Thirty years
maintained your Royal Crown?

Out alas, Sir, if we Exclaim against Witches, who Poison Fountains, how can
we be Silent, seeing endeavor is used to Invenom the Soul of the Prince, who
is the Source of all Counsels, to the end we may hereafter find Poison, where
we hope for Remedies?

Sir, only behold and imitate your Self, Reassume that Spirit, which made you
Reign in our Hearts, as well as in your Provinces: distinguish Flatterers from
true Friends; hearken to those, whose Loyalty you have known in the success of
so many Prosperities.

Remember your Self, That you were made to Reign over Men, not as a Man, but as
the Law; to bear your Subjects in your Bosom, and not Trample them Under-foot;
to teach by Example, and not constrain by Force; to be a Father of Citizens,
and not a Master of Slaves.

Remember your Self, Kings are given by Heaven, for the Use of People, and that
they ought not to have so much Regard to the Extent of their Power, as not to
consider the Measure of their Obligations. Handle the matter so, that the
Greatness of your Majesty may appear in it is Goodness, and that this word which
you heretofore had in your Mouth, may stick Eternally in your Heart, when you
said: A Good Prince ought not to fear any thing so much, as to be too much
feared.

Boethius, who made this Oration, was Author of that Incomparable Philosophical
Discourse, De Consolatione, being Consul of Rome, under the said Theodoricus,
the first Emperor of the Gothish Race, about the year of our Lord 500. And
this Speech was first Published long since in Causins Holy Court, fol. 290. in
these very words, as any person may find that pleases to Examine it. But
Obsequium amicos veritas odium parit, the Upshot of the Business was, That the
Emperor was much offended at this his freedom, and being spurred on by his
three Mischievous Favorites, Trigilla, Congiastus, and Cyprianus, first
Banished, and afterward Murdered the wise and faithful Boethius, who had served
him many years with an Entire and Irreproachable Loyalty. And soon after
Theodoricus himself Died distracted, and the Empire in a very few years, was
snatched from his Successor, by the Victorious Arms of Justinian Emperor of
Constantinople.

FINIS.

