THE CHARACTER OF QUEEN ELIZABETH

ELIZABETH and MARY Queens of England.
UTERQUE QUATERQUE BEATI
L Sturt sculp(...)



THE CHARACTER OF Queen Elizabeth.

OR, A Full and Clear ACCOUNT of Her Policies, and the Methods of Her
Government both in CHURCH and STATE.

Her VIRTUES and DEFECTS.

Together with The CHARACTERS of Her Principal Ministers of State. And the
greatest part of the Affairs and Events that Happened in Her Times.

Collected and Faithfully Represented, By EDMUND BOHUN, Esquire.

Semper eadem. London: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard. MDCXCIII.

Academiae Cantabrigiensis Liber
Cambridge University blazon or coat of arms

TO THE KING and QUEEN.
May it please Your Majesty's,
I Here present you with the Noble Character and lively Representation of the
Greatest Princess that ever swayed this or any other Scepter. A Princess, whose
Natural Endowments, and Acquired Abilities, made her the Envy, or the Example,
of all the Crowned Heads about her; whose Fame filled the World whilst she
lived, and the Histories of all Countries since she died. In Persia they had
heard of the Maiden Queen, before they knew the Name of England. And the Sophi
asked our first Merchant that went thither, if his Country was not governed by
a Maid; and upon his Reply It was so, enquired no further. Her Religion and her
Morals, her Public and her Private Conversation with her Courtiers, her
Bedchamber Women, ^er Maids of Honor, her Friends and Relations, are all
accurately described in this small Piece, and must needs yield great pleasure
to Your MAJESTY'S to read or hear them at convenient times.

The Great Things she did, and the Ways, Means and Instruments she employed
under her to bring them into Act, are very divertising and instructive: Nor
will it be any diminution of the Glory of Your Reigns, that in some things you
followed the Example of this Wise and Illustrious Queen.

I know Your Royal Cares are great, and therefore I shall not presume to rob
you of any more of Your precious Minutes than is requisite to beg Your
favorable Acceptance of this bounden Duty of

Your Majesty's most Loyal Servant and Subject, Edmund Bohun.
Feb. 6. 1692/3
THE PREFACE.
I Am bound in the first place to acquaint my Reader, That the Learned
Johnston, a Scotch Physician, is the Principal Author I have followed in this
Piece; for I would not translate him: To what I found there, I have added what
I could light upon that was pertinent to my purpose in the Histories of those
Times: So that I am persuaded, it cost me as much pains and time, as it cost
him at first to write it. I took the liberty also to use my own Language, and
Thoughts, as well as Judgment, in the whole; adding and diminishing, as I
thought fit, though never without Reason, or good Authority.

In such a Work as this, things ought to be delivered without any order of
time, things of the same nature being laid together; So that this is not
intended so much for a regular Story of those Times, as a Collection of
Examples, that others may thereby be instructed what to choose or avoid, what to
commend or blame, what had a good, or an ill event.

Truth is as well the soul of a good Character, as of an History; to commend
without cause or above measure, is the part of a PANEGYRIC; but it rendereth a
Character, or an History, suspected and odious. I love the Name and Memory of
this Generous Queen as much as any man living; but it could not bribe me to
represent her otherwise than she was: The mixing the Faults of great Persons
with their Virtues, abates the Envy of Mankind, and purchases a kind and ready
Acceptance of the whole. A Lying Satyr is full as odious as a Flattering
Panegyric: If I were worthy to have my Story written, or my Picture drawn, I
should wish they might be equally true, and represent both my Life, and my
Face, just such as they were.

It is not impossible some may be offended with the Truth of this Little Piece;
but they must know, I have no other share in it, than the collecting things
that lay dispersed before, and the representing them as I found them (I hope I
have nowhere Censured or Commended any thing above the truth; but if I have,
upon admonition I shall endeavor to amend it. As the Persons mentioned in it
were all dead before I was born, so I cannot be suspected to be guilty of Love
or Hatred, but what was the result of their Virtues, or their Vices: If I would
not spare the Queen, there was no reason I should spare any of her Courtiers;
and when any of our Nobility find any of their Ancestors did ill things, and
they are represented in Story; let them remember, the Princes of those times
had their Faults too, and they are as freely written. Let them think also, Thus
it will be with us; Infamy or Oblivion will cover our memories when we are
dead, if we do not live well. It is only Virtue that can render a Name
illustrious in the Annals of time, though great Estates and swelling Titles may
make a man seem great on this side the Grave: And Posterity will be no more
able to drown the Vices of this present Age, than they are to prevent the
knowledge of those that are past. As a bad Face quarrels a true Looking-Glass,
so a bad Liver hates a true Historian, and both equally without just cause.

There has nothing more Eclipsed the Glory of Queen Elizabeth, than the want of
a good History of her Reign in English. Cambden is good in the Original, but
too short; but the Version of that Author is intolerably bad; would any good
Pen do that by her Annals, which I have done here by her Character, it would be
a grateful Tribute paid to Her Sacred Memory. Would our Great Men live in the
Memory of the World? why let them promote the History of their Country, and
that will make their Names famous to Posterity. Maecenas is oftener remembered
for his bounties to Learning, than for all his other Expenses and Gallantry, of
which perhaps it was not the hundredth part.

No Nation in Europe has exceeded the English in Martial Bravery; but for want
of good History, much of the Honor of our Ancestors is lost both at home and
abroad. I would be contented to die when I had finished but one good Piece of
our Story in such a manner as it should be worth the reading. I would serve my
Country in any honest and brave thing; but History is my beloved Study, with
it I would (if I had it in my power) grow old and die.

It was the comfort of a Prince in all his Sufferings, that his Name would one
day, like the Sun, break through the Clouds of Reproach that the Iniquity of
the Times had thrown about him; and he should shine the more gloriously in
History for the things he had suffered in his Life. If he in the lowest Abyss
of Misery, in the melancholy Recesses of a Confinement, could thus comfort his
drooping Spirits with the prospect of that Honor would be paid him in his
Grave, when his Name should be imbalmed in the grateful memory of his Subjects;
It is a wonder there is no more care taken by the Living to render this
grateful Acknowledgment to their Ancestors for all that they have left them.

But if we are unmindsul of the Dead, if their cold Bones can merit no corner
in our Hearts or thoughts; why are we so regardless of the Living? a Prince can
scarce deserve better of his Subjects, instruct, direct, reform, or amend them
more effectually by any other method, than by Good Histories. The Precepts that
are so delivered, slide insensibly and pleasantly into the minds of the Reader,
and make lasting Impressions on his Memory.

Nor is this Benefit confined to the Subject, and meaner Persons; even Princes
themselves do borrow from History those Counsels and Assistances they shall
hardly gain from Courtiers and Ministers; sometimes they will not, sometimes
they dare not Admonish their Master; whilst a good History shows them by
others, what will be the effect of ill-concerted Designs and Counsels, and at
the same time is an Awe upon them, suggesting this Thought frequently to them,
How will this look in History? Thus Augustus, Queen Elizabeth, and Henry the
Fourth of France, became Famous to Posterity, by observing carefully in
History, what Fate had attended the Princes that preceded them.

Posterity too are to be taken care of; if the present Age is not such as a
Good or a Wise Man would wish it, let us try if we can make the next Generation
better, by showing the Chain of Calamities have followed at the heels of the
Vices of the last and of this Age. At her Death the Thrift, the Probity, the
Piety, and the Hospitality of the English Nation was much abated: The Luxury
that attended the Peaceable Reign of James the First, and the Beginning of
Charles the First, brought on a War that threatened our Ruin: What has happened
since the Restitution, to the time in which Their Majesty's began Their Reign,
is now fresh in Memory, but will be lost, if not written. And I am persuaded
nothing can possibly be invented to make us Wiser than we now are, sooner or
more easily, than a good History of this Period of Time; but then our Princes
and Great Men must encourage it, and skreen the Writer, or it will never be
done: The Expense is too great for a Private Man, and the Materials are most of
them locked up from the view of all those who have not the Royal Authority
consenting to their Inspection, and the Royal Purse to support the Charge of
Transcribing them.

Methinks every Prince that resolves to do things worthy to be written, should
take care to have one good Historian about him, to preserve the Memory of his
Actions. Those that live ill, will find what they fear above all things, a man
to paint out those things to the Life, which they would gladly have concealed.
Story will go on with or without their care, but to their Damage, if not
discreetly encouraged.

But why do I write thus in all the Misfortunes that have so lately befallen
me! My Character has been written with the Poison of Asps, instead of Ink; so
that one single Word (in another man's Work, otherwise interpreted than either
he or I meant it, as is plain by the words that follow and explain it) has been
enough to sink me, after my Reputation had been sufficiently pierced by the
Arrows of Envy and Detraction. But all that I shall say in my own Defense, is,
That I hate what I am supposed to be guilty of, as much as any man in the
Nation; and never suffered, said, or thought the thing in all my Life.

THE CONTENTS OF THIS BOOK.
THE Birth and Parentage of Queen Elizabeth, Page 1 Her Education, 3 Her Tutors
in the Greek and Latin Tongues, and her Observations in Reading, 4, 5 Her Tutor
in Theology, 8 She spoke French and Italian, and understood many other European
Tongues, 9 The Untimely Death of her beloved Brother Edward VI. 12 And the
Succession of Q. Mary, 13 She was a sorrowful Spectator of the Popish Cruelty,
15 She was hated by the Popish Bishops for her Religion, 16 Her Life was saved
by King Philip, 18 The Death of Queen Mary, 19 The Nation then divided into
Factions, 22 Calais newly lost, 23 She at first dissembled her Religion, 24 Her
Prime Counselors, 26 She dissembled with the K. of Spain, 27 She makes a Peace
with France, and resolves on a War with Spain, 29 The Treaty of Cambray, 30 The
French Plea against the Restitution of Calais, 31 She resolves to reform the
Religion of England, 32 The contending Religions equally balanced, 33 Her first
Parliament. The Complaints of the Popish Bishops, 39 The Reformation
established, 40 The Miseries of Scotland in the Reformation, 43 The Happiness
of England, 44 Her Care to settle Pious and Learned Bishops and Clergymen, 45
And to curb the immoderate Liberty of the Protestant Dissenters, 47 The
Behavior of Pope Pius IV. 50 The Council of Trent restored: The Plea of the
Protestants against it: The Popish Party inclined to Rebel, 53 The Set^lement
of the Civil State considered, 55 The Means by which she improved and enriched
her Kingdom, 59 Laws and Orders made for the Public Good, 60 The Bishops and
Commons favored, as a Balance to the Nobility, 61 She favored her Kindred,
and advanced them, 62 Her Care to abolish the evil Customs and bad Laws of
former times, 64 The Parliament Address to the Queen to Marry, 67 Her Answer.
Her Temperanee and Chastity, 71 The Princes and Great Men that courted her, 73
The Character of the Earl of Leicester, 75 Of Robert Earl of Essex, 85 Of
Thomas Earl of Sussex, 89 Of Sir William Cecil, afterward created Lord
Burleigh, 90 Of the Lord Willoughby, 94 Of Sir Francis Walsingham. Of Mary
Queen of Scotland, 97 And of Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, 98 The French desirous
of a War with England, 99 They design to improve their Interest in Scotland, to
the Ruin of England, 101 The Scots send to England for Assistance against the
French. The Scotch War. The First Civil War in France, 110 The Death of Francis
II. The Beginnings of the Misfortunes of Mary Queen of Scotland. The deplorable
condition of Princes, 113, 118 Murray comes into England. Queen Elizabeth durst
not restore the Queen of the Scots to her Throne, 124 The Trial of the Queen of
the Scots, 125 Foreign Princes, and the Popish Priests, guilty of the Murder
of the Queen of the Scots. Rebellions in England. Northumberland taken in
Scotland. Westmorland fled into Flanders. A second Rebellion. The Duke of
Norfolk the secret Head of them. His Character, 141, 143 They are f^llowed by
many Treasous and Conspiracies, 145 Which occasion Acts of Parliament against
the Recusants, 146 Colleges built for the English Papists beyond the Seas, 147
Parry's Conspiracy Babington's, 151 A Justification of Queen Elizabeth against
the Reproaches of the Papists. A plentiful Supply given to the Queen. She
discharges a part of it, 158 A Digression concerning Parry, 160 The Queen's
Severity toward the Conspirators, 163 The second Civil War in France, 165 The
third, in which the Queen sends great Supplies of Men and Money, 167 A
Reflection concerning Passive Obedience, 169 The King of France labors to
divide the Protestants without success. The true Causes of these Civil Wars,
170 The Queen preserved the Protestants of France, 171 The beginning of the Low
Countrey-Wars, 172 Liberty of Conscience treacherously granted and recalled,
172 The King of Spain enraged at it, 174 The Spaniards design to settle an
Absolute and Arbitrary Government there, 176 Valenciennes commanded to receive
a Garrison, 177 The rest of the Cities petition for a General Assembly of the
States, 178 The Designs of Spain discovered to the rest of the Nobility, 179
Which at first only terrified and divided them, 181 A Bloody Persecution
against the Protestants in the Netherlands, 182 The Breakers of Images not put
upon it by the Reformed. The Character of the Duke of Alva. He comes into
Flanders. The Council of Blood, 185 Their Rules. The Counts of Egmont and
Hoorne the first they seized; and after them vast Numbers of meaner people, 187
The Protestants of France, and the Queen of England, alarmed at these
Proceedings, 188 The Subjects of the Low Countries fly into England, 189 The
Conduct of King Philip considered. The Reasons why Queen Elizabeth opposed the
Spaniards, 191 The Inhabitants of the Netherlands follow the Example of
England, 193 The King of Spain complains of the Queen for harboring the
Netherland Pirates, 194 They seize the Seaports of Holland and Zealand. The
Queen of England undertakes the Protection of this oppressed People, 197 The
French Affairs during her time, 201 A Private League between France and Spain
against the Protestants, 203 The Duke of Guise made Head of this League against
his Sovereign, 204 An Account of the House of Guise, 205 The Reasons why Henry
III. was to be deposed, and Henry IV. excluded, 207 The Queen Mother of France
dies of Grief. Queen Elizabeth assists Henry IV. with Men and Money, 209 Spain
invaded by the English, 211 The Actions of Robert Earl of Essex, 212 The
Affairs of Ireland during her Reign, 216 Ulster the first Province that
rebelled, 218 A Quarrel between Ormond and Desmond, 219 The Pope and King of
Spain Interested in the Wars of Ireland, 221 The Difficulty of administering
Justice and Mercy seasonably, 224 Sr. Jo. Perrot Lord Deputy of Ireland. New
Colonies sent into Munster, The Irish complain of the English, 226 And they of
the Deputy, 227 Fitz William's Character, 228 The College of Dublin finished.
The English Colonies keep Ireland quiet for some time. Part of the Spanish
Armado Shipwrackt on the Coast of Ireland, 229 The Rise of Hugh Oneale, Earl of
Tyrone, 232 He aspires to be King of Ulster. Tyrone made a County, which
occasioned that Rebellion, 233 Sir William Russell Lord Deputy of Ireland,
under whom it began, 234 Sir John Norris sent into Ireland, 235 The Irish made
very Expert in the use of Arms. Tho. Lord Buroughs made Deputy. The Council of
Ireland represent the Irish War as an Universal Rebellion of the whole Nation,
241 Tyrone beats the English, 243 He treats with Spain and England at the same
time, 244 The Earl of Essex sent Deputy. The Lord Montjoy sent Deputy, 246 No
Irish pardoned but what merited the favor by some Signal Service, 247 The
Spaniards land at Kingsale. The Irish reduced to eat man's Flesh, 248 Religion
causlesly made the Pretense of this Irish War. Liberty of Conscience
considered, 249 The great Reputation of England in Queen Elizabeth's time, 250
Sir Francis Drake's Original and Story, 253 The Story of John Oxenham, 256
Drake's two Voyages into America, 258 The Story of Mr. Tho. Cavendish, 263
Philip, King of Spam, highly inc^nsed against the English, 265 The Invincible
Armado. Charles Lord Howard Admiral of England. The Condition of the Spanish
Fleet when the English left it, 273 The King of Spain bears his Loss with much
patience and prudence, 275 The English and Hollanders glorify God for the
Victory over the Spaniards at Sea, 277 The Queen declares a War against Spain,
278 The English Expeditions against that Kingdom. A rare Example of Martial
Valor. Complaints made of the Depredations of the English at Sea, 285 The
Hanse Towns very clamorous against the English, 287 The Trade of England
prohibited in Germany, 288 The Queen seizes the Still-yard, 289 Poland
continues a Trade with England, 291 The Queen ends a War between the Russ and
Swedes, ibid. Her Laws for the enriching her Subjects. Her Severity to those
she employed, when found faulty, 292 The Liberty of the Theater restrained, 297
The Calamities that happened in her times, 298 Her kindness to her good
Magistrates, 299 Her tender care of the Church, 300 Her Stature and Personal
Accomplishments, 301 She was concerned in her old Age for the decay of her
Beauty. She loved Flattery, because it raised a good opinion of her in her
Subjects; but Crafty men made ill uses of it, 303 She loved good Preachers, 307
She loved Religion, but hated Faction, 308 Her Devotion in public. She exposed
her Life for the Safety of the Church, 309 She humoured and caressed the body
of the People, 310 Parliaments frequently held, 312 Her Maxims concerning Peace
and War, 314 She would never arm the meanest of the People. All honors
carefully and sparingly bestowed in her time, 315 Her Justice and Severity
toward Offenders, which made her beloved, 317 Her Justice in other Instances,
322 She was sparing in her Personal Expenses, but magnificent in her Public,
323 She was too sparing in her Rewards. She showed a great respect to the
memory of the meanest Soldier that perished in her Service, 327 The Praises of
Henry VII. who was her Example, 329 Her Bounty to some Great Men, 330 The
manner of her bestowing Honors 333 The choice of her Servants, Officers, and
Ministers, 335 Her kindness to the Bishops and Churchmen, 337 Her Principal
Favorites and Statesmen, 338 Her Habit, 339 Her Furniture, 341 Her Diet in
public and private, 342 The Splendour and Divertisements of her Court, 344 Her
private way of living, 346 Her Summer Progresses, and her Carriage toward the
People, 348 She spent the Winter in London, 350 Her Diet in Summer and Winter,
352 Her Diversions and Private Conversation, 353 She was subject to violent
Angers, 355 Her Seve^rity to the Queen of Scots. To Leicester, 358 To Hatton,
360 The Provocations she met with, many and great, 361 The Character of
Sanders, and others, who defamed her, 363 Her last Sickness, 367 he spent the
last moments of her life in Devotion, 371 Her last Words and Death, 373 The
Sorrow for her Death at Home and Abroad. 374
LICENSED November 10. 1692.

THE CHARACTER OF Queen ELIZABETH.
ELIZABETH, Queen The Birth and Parenrage of Queen Elizabeth.
of England, was born at Greenwich the 7th of September 1533. Her Father was
Henry the VIIIth, Her Mother was the Lady Anna Boleyn the Daughter of Sir
Thomas Boleyn, a Knight of great Estate and Esteem. After She came to wear the
Royal Crown of England, She had a particular Affection for Greenwich, that
Pleasant Seat upon the Thames, as for the place of Her Nativity: and upon that
account, amongst many others, She preferred Her Palace there before all Her
other Country Seats near London; as in truth it enjoys one of the Noblest
Prospects in the World, and an healthful, and a pleasing Air. From Her very
Cradle She was exposed to the Hazards and Hardships of an unkind Fortune. Anna
Boleyn Her Mother, upon the Death of Queen Catherine, in the Year 1535. the 8th
of January, was Arraigned for Treason; and in 1536. being Sentenced, was freed
by Death from a bloody Marriage, the 19th of May. The Inveterate Malice of the
Popish Clergy having ever since pursued this Match with their Reproaches as
unlawful and void; because Queen Catherine his first Wife was then still
living, and very much enraged at it, though to no purpose. Hereupon soon after a
Parliament was summoned, which began the 8th of June; In which the Issue of
both the King's former Marriages was declared Illegitimate, and for ever
excluded from claiming the Inheritance of the Crown as the King's Lawful Heirs
by Lineal Descent; and the Attainder of Queen Ann, and her Accomplices, was
Confirmed. So that by Authority of Parliament She stood wholly incapacitated as
to the wearing the Crown of England. Her only Support in the mean time under
all these Injuries and Afflictions was the Goodness of God.

The King Her Father observing in Her Education.
Her a Noble Presence of Mind, a good Memory, great Apprehension, an Excellent
Nature, and good Dispositions toward Piety and Virtue, caused Her to be
diligently educated and brought up in Learning, and taught whatever was
suitable to Her Birth and Age. Her Tutoress was the Lady Champernon, a Person
of great Worth, who formed this great Wit from Her Infancy, and improved Her
Native Modesty with wise Counsels, and a Liberal and Sage Advice. Thus Her
Natural Parts were in progress of time polished and improved by the knowledge
of many of the best and most useful Arts: That when She came to Reign (which
was even then supposed) She might manage Her Affairs with a steady hand,
happily and regularly Administer Justice, and show Mercy, cure Her Anger, and
govern prudently all Her other Passions and Affections. The King Her Father,
the day after Her Mother was beheaded, married the Lady Jane Seymour; and this
New Queen, what from the sweetness of Her Disposition, and out of compliance
with the King, who loved Her very much, was as kind to Her as if She had been
Her Mother. There is still extant two Letters written by this Young Princess to
Her, the one in Italian, and the other in English, in a fair Hand, the same She
wrote all the rest of Her Life, when She was not full Four years of Age. The
English Letter is Burnet's History of the Reformation, and bears date in July
1537.

This Ripe and Flourishing Infancy Her Tutors in the Greek and Latin Tong^e.
was a good Omen, that the next Stage of Her Life would be most Excellent; and
accordingly, before She was 17 years of Age, She had made a very great progress
in all the Liberal Sciences; so easily did She apprehend, and firmly retain
whatever She was taught. The Learned Mr. Roger Ashcam (a man born and bred for
that Age, which was to refine the Greek and Latin to a Politeness, and raise
them to an Eloquence) was Her Tutor for the Latin Tongue; and by his Industry
and Diligence he directed Her so well, that from Cicero, Pliny and Livy, She
became the Mistress of an Even, Beautiful, pure, unmixed, and truly Princely
Style, which She could speak with Elegance and Facility. As She became thus
Eloquent, and was well furnished with Knowledge by the means of this Tongue; so
upon all Occasions She was ready afterward to express Her Love and Esteem for
the Latin Tongue. She became so perfect in it, that she spoke it with all the
Advantages of Eloquence; so that some of Her Extemporary Orations were
deservedly approved by both the Universities, and they too are consigned to
Eternity, and left a lasting Impression on the minds of them that heard them,
though few of them are now extant; but however, there is one preserved and
published by Mr. Fuller in his History of Cambridge, Page 138. In this Tongue
She did not make it Her business, whilst She was reading the best Latin
Authors, to furnish Her Memory with Grammatical Observations, or a plenty of
high sounding Words, or Elegant Phrases, which might help to exalt her
Reputation for Learning, or adorn Her Style: But She treasured up those
Precepts very carefully, which were useful for the government of Her Life, or
for the managing Her Private Affairs, or those of the State, well and wisely.
To this end She read Livy's History, Tacitus his Annals, the Acts of Tiberius
the Emperor, and all Seneca's Works. By all which She at last furnished Her
Judgment with the best Remedies against all the Attacks of Fortune: With an
equal Industry She read over all the best of the Greek Orators and Historians;
with the Assistance of Mr. Ashcam She read Isocrates, Aeschinis and
Demosthenes. She was curious, not only to understand the Propriety of the Greek
Idiom, and the Sense of the Author, but pried into the Antiquities that
occurred, the Causes they managed, the Decrees of the People, the Customs of
the Gr^cians, and the Manners of that Famous City of Athens, till She thoroughly
understood them. She caused Sir John Fortescue, a great Master in the Greek and
Latin Tongue, to read to Her Thucidides, Xenophon and Polybins, and after them
Euripides, Aeschines and Sophocles: And to reward him for this Service, She
afterward made him Master of her Wardrove, and Chancellor, and Under-Treasurer
of the Exchequer; And She would afterward say, that Fortescue for Integrity,
and Walsingham for Subtilty, outdid Her Expectation; no wonder then that he was
ever of Her Privy Council. She had afterward a great Love for Sir Henry Savil,
a Gentleman of various and great Learning, who afterward composed many noble
Volumes, and arose to Honout purely by his Learnning.

In Her reading She did not only aim Her Observations in Reading.
to understand Her Author, and observe the softness of the Attick, and the
sweetness of the Greek Tongue, which may serve for Ostentation: But She mado
many Observations for the Tempering of Manners; The Sanctity of Justice, and
the allaying Humane Passions, that nothing might be done by Her Angrily,
Proudly, Injuriously, and beyond the Rules of Civility. There was not one
remarkable Story or Expression in all the Works of Thucidides and Xenophon,
pertaining to the Governmene of Life or Manners, or to the ordering Public
Affairs, but She had it by heart. She was as great an Admirer of Philosophy, as
of Eloquence; by which She attained the Knowledge of many excellent Things; and
that civil Prudence or Policy which is so absolutely necessary for all Princes,
And besides all that civil Prudence and the Knowledge of Governing, by which
the Public Utility is acquired and improved, She drew from the Ancient and
most Noble Philosophers all those Precepts that they have set down for the
gaining Moral Prudence and Virtue: For Her greatest Care was spent in the
Cultivating these two beautiful Parts of Philosophy. I will omit the common
Philosophers, of whose Learning and Doctrine She was a great Lover. The Divine
Plato, that illustrious Light of Greece, was made more Noble by the Hands of
this Heroic Princess. Aristotle, the Prince of the Philosophers, the acute
Master of Alexander the Great, was read by Her: She was thoroughly acquainted
with Xenophon's Cyrus; a Piece not writ with the Truth of an Historian; but to
represent the lively Image of a Just and Moderate Prince, accomplished with all
those Endowments which the Great Soerates had set sorth, for the living well
and happily.

Being thus prepared by Philosophy, G Grindal Her Tutor in Theology.
she was, by the Learned Dr. Grindal, Professor of Divinity, initiated in
Theology; which above all other Sciences, teaches the Worship of God, Pure
Religion, and the Knowledge of Heavenly Happiness; and by these disposes men
to Justice, Modesty, Clemency, Magnanimity, and Humanity. She cheerfully and
readily embraced a genuine and true Theology, free from fictitious Legends, and
the Popish Superstitions, which she afterward made more venerable, by an holy
and pious Life, without any Ostentation. And being of a Great Wit, and a Strong
Memory, She drew from the Annals of all Nations and People the Actions of the
Greatest Princes, and an innumerable number of their Fights, and most
Illustrious Victories. She would frequently set before Her the Monuments of Her
Predeccssors, the ^riumphs and incredible Victories obtained by the English at
Cressy, Poictiers, Agincourt, or Blagni, and at Vernevil, against the French,
with a vast effusion of their blood; and she would frequently say, These
Victories were owing more to the Assistances of Heaven, than the Arms of her
Ancestors.

Besides the French, Italian, and English She spoke French and Italian, and
understood many other European Tongues.
Tongues, which She spoke freely, She well understood most of the common
Languages now spoken in Europe; but as to these Three I have mentioned, it was
hard to say which she knew best. Of this there were many witnesses, when She
answered the Imperial Ambassador in Italian; the French, in French; and the
Sweden in Latin, Sharply, Prudently, Pertinently, Elegantly, and Politely,
without any time taken to consider of it. She gave de Ronsard, a French Poet, a
Diamond of great Value, as a Testimony of Her approving his elegant and
splendid Poems in that Tongue. She understood Music very well, and could Sing,
Dance, and Play on the Lute, with a composed Motion of Body, attended with a
Countenance, Habit, and Gesture, which became a Queen. She was a great Lover of
Consorts, when Voices were mixed with Instruments of Music; and at such times
She would be strangely Facetious and Pleasant. She spent Her times of Leisure
and Diversion, with the greatest Pleasure that was possible to Her Self, and
those about Her. Yet after all, Her Virtues procured Her more Honor and Esteem
in all Nations, than all these Ornaments of Industry, Learning, and Ingenuity,
though they appeared in Her to an higher and more illustrious degree, than ever
was found in any other Lady; and were attended also with the greatest Sagacity
and Judgment: For there was not any Person in Her Times, that exceeded Her in
Chastity, Piety, Justice, and Magnanimity.

Now I have shortly shown the Beginnings Her Progress and Improvement under the
Reign of Edward VI.
and Progress of Her Virtues, and the Means and Degrees by which She attained
to them: It will be pleasant to show how she brought them into Act under the
Reign of Her Brother, EDWARD the VIth, (who by the Consent of the Three Estates
in Parliament, abolished the Popish Religion, and introduced the Reformed). She
having then attained to great degrees of Piety, Eloquence, and Learning, went
on in the commendable Improvement of all those Perfections She had received
from the Bounty of Nature or Fortune. She rendered Her Royal Extraction more
illustrious, by the Assistances She took every day from Books; and when She had
spent the time She had assigned to Polite Learning, She betook Her self every
day to the more severe Studies of Religion, with a vigorous and lively
Affection. She read over Melancth^n's Common-Places; and gained very much by an
exact and acurate Perusal of the Sacred Scriptures: There were innumerable
Sentences in the New Testament, and the Oracles of the Prophets, which She had
treasured up in Her Memory, and which She would afterward upon occasion
mention; and She attended the Offices of Religion and Piety, with great
Devotion and Care. She often addressed Her devoutest Prayers to God, and
implored his Assistance, for the obtaining a Chaste Heart, a Pure and Unspotted
Life, and a Steady and Constant Soul. The Wills of the Subjects of England were
then divided, and their Opinions distracted in the matters of Religion; and She
then showed to mankind the true and salutary Doctrine, not so much by Words, as
by a holy Life, and good Actions. She attentively heard the Sermons of the
Clergy, not only to please Her self with their Oratory, but admitted them into
the most intimate Recesses of Her heart, with an incredible satisfaction; and
She joined devoutly and constantly in the Liturgy and Prayers of the Church.

The Death of Edward the VIth, Her The Untimely Does of Her Beloved Brother
(...) VI.
beloved Brother, in his Childhood, in the very Blossom of a promising Spring,
tho he was snatched away from Her by an immature Fate, to the damage of his
Country; yet it gave no stop or affright to Her Piety, but She consolated Her
self with the Immortal Glory he had acquired in the short time he lived.

^o him succeeded MARY Her Sister, And the Succession of Q. Mary.
who always adhered stiffly to the old way of Worship, and the Ceremonies and
Superstitions of the Church of Rome, even when they were abolished by Acts of
Parliament; and having now got the Crown, made it Her greatest Design not only
to restore the Pomp and Splendour of it as before, but also to compel all her
Subjects to submit to it by Force, Threats, Banishment, and most Ba^barous
Deaths and Cruelties. To this purpose also she called over Cardinal Reginald
Pool, a Person of rare Learning, and of a very Innocent Life and Conversation;
and which is rarely to be found in the men of that Persuasion, of a great
Pro^ity, Candor, and Sweetness of Temper. The Popish Religion being thus
restored, there were New Bishops, and New Preachers, sought for, to recommend
it to the Nation; and the Honest, Innocent, Religious, Good men, who had set
the Crown upon Her Head, upon Her Promise to Protect the Religion which She
found Established, were oppressed by the Fury of their Enemies, which spread it
self over the whole Kingdom of England, and there was no place free from their
Religious Butchery. The Princess ELIZABETH, in these doleful times seeing her
self deprived of the Protection of a Kind Brother, deserted by Her Friends, and
betrayed by Her Enemies, had not the least hope of enjoying the Free Exercise
of the True Religion. Nor was this Calamity thought enough; but Her Popish
^nemies persecuted Her, under the pretense She had Conspired with Sir ^homas
Wiat to Destroy Her Sister; tho at his death he declared to all the world, She
had no hand in his Insurrection; but however, Her Sister was glad of this
pretense to use Her ill; and being spurred on by Her Popish Bishops, who were
highly cnraged against Her, as the Head of the Reformed Religion, She was sent
close Prisoner to the Castle of WOODSTOCK, in the year 1554. Thus She saw Her
self deprived at once of all her Friends, and Her Liberty too: Her Servants and
Friends abroad were many of them Attainted, and others forced to seek their
Safety in Foreign Countries: And the Protestants in great Numbers became a
Sacrifice to the Rage of the Popish Bishops: So that no Orator is able truly
and effectually to represent in words the Desolations and Calamities of those
times. Many, however, of the most Learned of the English Nation, during this
storm, betook themselves to Germany, as to their safest Harbor: The rest who
could not make a timely Escape were committed to Prisons, tormented with
various Arts of Cruelty, and at last burnt alive: The Public places of our
Cities were bathed with the Blood of Innocent and Holy men; and our streets
were filled with the dreadful shrieks and groans of the miserable; men from
their souls detesting the Cruelty of the Popish Clergy, and the infamous
Inhumanity of these Marian The Princess Elizabeth a sorrowful Spectator of the
Popish Cruelty.
Times. The Princess Elizabeth was a sorrowful Spectator of this Tragedy; but
for all the fear she lived in, and the repeated Threats of Her Sister, She
stood her ground, and would not be withdrawn from the Religion She had
embraced, and in Her Conscience approved; but bore all with an undaunted and
Heroic Courage The Cheerfulness of Her Temper soon overcame the Greatness of
the Calamity, the Melancholy of a Prison, and the Fear of Her Sister The
Bitterness of Her Misfortunes was much allayed also, by discovering to Her how
tenderly the People loved her; so that the Joy of this, over balanced the
Calamities of the Times, and the Frowns of Fortune. In the midst of such
overwhelming Sorrows, Suspicions, and the Fears of an Ignominious Death, no
mortal ever saw her dejected or dispirited. When the fears of Her Treacherous
and Perfidious Enemies, and that of Violence encompassed Her, Good Reason
encouraged Her; a Sound Mind, and a Quiet Conscience supported Her under Her
Misfortunes, and Her Hope and Trust in the Goodness and Mercy of God, overcame
all assaults of Despair.

It is not my Purpose to make the She was hated by the P. Bishop^ for Her
Religion.
Reigns of Henry the VIII, and Qeeen Mary odious; and therefore I will not
spend my time in representing the Cruelties that were then put in Practice; the
manifold Murders extending to all Sexes and Ages; or the Miseries that
followed those that fled hence into Foraign Countries. For tho the mischievous
Example of the Popish Clergy, who by their Authority, Counsel, and the specious
pretenses of Retrieving and Preserving the Ancient Piety and Worship, raised
and augmented these Persecutions, and is for ever to be detested; yet the
Faults of Princes, like those of our Parents, are to be concealed as much as is
possible; and the Injuries they do us are patiently and silently to be suffered.

The Popish Clergy, and especially some of the Bishops, foreseeing what hazard
their Religion was exposed to as long as the Princess Elizabeth lived, and was
the next Heir to the Crown of England, because she had from her Infancy been
bred up in the Protestant Religion, made it their Great Design to hasten her
Death with an implacable Malice, that so they might at one blow cut off the
Head of that Party which was here formed against their Church. She in the mean
while, during all this calamitous time saw herself under Custody, her faithful
Servants in Prison, and she had perpetually before her eyes the Images of a
violent Death. The People of England saw her Danger, but could not so prudently
conceal their Fears, but upon all occasions openly and with great Anxiety said,
This Royal Offspring was designed for Slaughter: Truth and Innoccnce were not
secure; and the Ruin and Undoing of the Nation would be the effects of her
Death. Queen Mary in the mean time was distracted between the Shame of
offending the whole Nation, which generally believed the Princess Elizabeth to
be innocent; and the Fear of exposing her Religion (which she loved above all
things) to the Hazard of another Protestant Reign. She saw herself in danger of
Conspiracies if her Sister lived, and that on the other hand she could not take
away her Life without being guilty of a great Wickedness. Philip the Her Life
was saved by King Philip.
II. a King of Spain, the Husband of Queen Mary, upon wise Reasons of State,
delivered the poor, distressed, and helpless Princess out of this horrid
Danger, out of pure Aversion to the Kingdom of France, his most dreadful Rival:
For he wisely considered, That Mary Queen of Scotland, and Grandchild to Henry
VII. was married to Francis the Eldest Son of Henry II. King of France; and
that if the Princess Elizabeth were cut off, she would be the undoubted Heiress
of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and would transfer and unite these Three
Northern Crowns to that of France, and make the House of ^aloise dreadful to
that of Austria. This Thought put a stop to their Cruelty; God by it procuring
her Safety, and with her, preserving the English Nation, to the universal joy
of all who wished well to her or their Country.

Queen Mary her Sister died the 17th. The Death of Queen Mary.
of November, 1558, when she had Reigned Five Years, Four Months, and Eleven
days, being then in the XLIII. Year of her Age, concluding an unhappy Reign,
and an unfortunate Life. She at her Death by her last Will left the afflicted
and disconsolate Lady the Princess Elizabeth, the Heir of the Crown of England,
rather out of an unavoidable Necessity, than any thing of Choice. There was
then a Parliament sitting, which began the 5th. of that month in which she
died; and as the Government was then wholly in the hands of the
Roman Catholics, none of the other Party daring to appear, or if they did, not
daring to own their Opinions, the Death of Queen Mary was concealed for some
hours, for what purpose is not known; but about Nine of the Clock the Lord
Chancellor went to the House of Lords, and first acquainted them with it. This
gave a great terror to the Bishops, and those Counselors who hadbeen severe
against the Princess Elizabeth; yet they all agreed to Proclaim her Queen; so
they sent for the House of Commons, and the Chancellor told them also the Queen
was dead, and that the Princess Elizabeth was the indisputed Heir to the Crown,
of whose Right and Title none could make any Question; and therefore the Lords
intended to Proclaim her Queen, and desired their Concurrence; which was
joyfully entertained by them, and they all cried, God save Queen Elizabeth;
long and happily may she reign. She being thus advanced to the Throne, not only
by her own undoubted Right, and the Providence of God, but by the Confent and
with the Approbation of all the Three Estates then Assembled in Parliament,
(which, I think, never before happened to any of our Princes besides her), she
was received by the whole Nation with incredible Transports of Joy and
Affection, and the loudest Acclamations they could make; men highly valuing the
Innocence of her former Life, and commiserating the hardships she had suffered
in the former Reign, to the hazard of her Life. When God had thus brought this
Queen to the Throne of her Ancestors, of a sudden the course of things, and the
current of affairs took a new bias; the heavy Tempests and Misfortunes that
attended England we^e instantly blown over, and a serene and prosperous course
of things succeeded in their place. Thus in a moment she was not only freed
from the Miseries of an Imprisonment, but adorned with the highest degree of
Honor and Power; and this Lady with a Masculine, or rather Heroic Soul, which
was worthy to have governed the Empire of the World, for almost Forty five
years after, managed the Royal Scepter of England, and was the Arbitrator,
prescribing the Conditions of Peace and War to all the Princes of Christendom,
with a Greatness of Mind, and a Wisdom that became so high a Station. This
Virtue, which was almost Divine, joined with so admirable a Prudence, renders
her worthy of the Applause and Honor of all mankind. Thus one may see and
admire the great force and power of Time, and the wonderful Changes of Human
Affairs; and how useful it is to arrive at Prosperity by the Waves of
Adversity. Whilst she was in her private Station, she was perpetually under the
fear and danger of Death; but by the Goodness of God she escaped all the
Insults of Adverse Fortune; her Innocence procured her Safety, that made way
for her Liberty, so her Sovereignty was acknowledged; and from her prudent
Management of that Royal Station, she gained an ^ndless Glory, and an Immortal
Name. Thus attaining the Possession of a Kingdom with Glory, and the Public
Safety, and the Good Will of her Subjects, she on all occasions showed the
Greatness and Brightness of her Wit and Soul: That she had well studied and
digested the best Arts, and had had an excellent Education, and wise
Instruction, the good Effects of which were now made known, by her wise
promoting the Good and Safety of her People.

In the beginning of her Reign she The Nation divided into Factions.
found the Nation at home filled with Divisions and Heart-burnings, by reason
of the contrary methods used in the two preceding Reigns: Abroad she had never
an Ally she could trust to; all was in War, or an uncertain and unsteady Peace.
The Spanish Government was b^come odious here, and the English called their
Assected Gravity, Pride and Insolence: The French had equally incensed us by
the late Surprise of Calais. Calais newly lost.
The T^easury was at the lowest Ebb; and our Bulwark, which our ncestors had
preserved Two hundred and ten years, was taken from us in one weeks time, in
the beginning of January, in this year: The New Queen proposed to herself the
common Safety and Welfare of her People, and pursued it with the utmost Care
and Asfection. She was then Twenty five years of Age, and something more, when
the Royal Diadem of England descended to her; and she began the difficult work
of raising the low and calamitous state of England, and redressing those
Grievances which the opposite Interests and Designs of the former times had
brought upon this Nation She was not only ripe and sit for Government, but she
had by this time acquired a strange and unusual degree of Civil Prudence. She
knew the Public or Royal Laws of England, not only by reading them in Books,
but also by the great Reflection she had made on our History, and on what had
happened in her own times; and by her Conversation with great men, and the
application she had ever made of her Mind to whatever was worth regarding. The
14th. of January after her Sister's Death, 1558/9, she was Crowned with the
Ancient and Usual Ceremonies, when her People gave her fresh Instances of their
Loyalty and Affection, by crowding in unusual Numbers to see and partake in the
Joy of this Solemnity: And she (having observed that her Sister, by the
sullenness of her Behavior, had much disobliged the People), frequently looked
on them with a cheerful and pleasing Countenance, and returned the Respects
they paid her, with great sweetness. She took the Ancient and Usual
Coronation Oath, That she would govern her Kingdom according to the Ancient and
Laudable Laws and Customs of England; which she observed more willingly than
most of her Predecesfors had before her; and this gained her both the Love and
Reverence of her People.

At first she cherished in her Roman S^e at first dissembled b^r Religion.
Catholic Subjects a belief she would Embrace that Religion they prosessed.
She changed nothing in the Public Service, or the Administration of the
Sacraments, that she might not enrage her Papists, and give them a pretense for
Separation before she had well Established herself. The Kingdom of England was
then very unsettled, and had received great Damages both at home and abroad; the
French had wrested from us the strong Town of Bologne in the Year 1546. before
the death of Henry the VIII^h, and Calais in the beginning of this Year: The
Sea was full of Privateers, and there was scarce any thing to be trusted to. In
this Disorder of Affairs she wisely thought, That the only way to settle and
preserve the Nation from Imminent Ruin, was to choose wise and upright Men to
manage the Public Affairs: She declined the use of Rash and overbold Men, who
have commonly brought mischief on the States that have trusted to them. Being
weary of the Popish Ceremonies, and their Conversation, she retired for some
time to one of her Country Houses, as it were, for Diversion and Pleasure, but
in truth that she might with the greater Leisure and Secrecy consider of the
Methods she should take for the removing the Dangers which threatened her
Kingdom, for the Preservation of its Peace, for the Abating the Power of the
Popish Party, and the settling that Religion here, which she believed was most
for the Glory of God, as being most agreeable to the Sacred ^criptures. The Men
that she most relied on in this great and difficult Work, were William Lord
(...) P^ime Counselors.
Parre of Kendal, Marquess of Northampton, whom she had restored to his
Honors. Francis Russel, Earl of Bedsord. Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of
the Great Seal of England, and Sir William Cecil, Prime Secretary of State; all
of them men of great Prudence and Courage, who had with much difficulty escaped
the Marian Tempest. These were the Chief Managers of her Secret Councels, and
acquainted with her most private Thoughts and Designs for the good and safety
of her People, and were all of them Protestants: The Popish Nobility and great
Men were either contented with a Vote in the Privy Council (in which many of
them still sat) and others of them refusing however to be any otherwise
concerned; or foreseeing the Change that was intended, had withdrawn themselves
altogether, and deserted their former Stations

Of these, she relied mostly on the C^cil and Bacon her Prime Ministers.
Council of Cecil and Bacon, who were closely united each to other, and both
equally in her Favor, and were besides men of great Judgment. They were also
her Chief Ministers, and most trusted by her for their Integrity and Industry.

Having thoroughly considered the state of the Nation, she resolved at first to
promote a Peace abroad; and that she might gain her point in this with the
greater case, she used some Dissimulation. Philip the IId, King of Spain, had
lost the possession of England by She dissembled with the King of Spain.
the death of Queen Mary, and to recover it, had begun a Treaty of Marriage
with Queen Elizabeth, which she declined with much civility and modesty; so
that he still insisted upon it for some time, and she was not willing wholly to
undeceive him till she saw an end of the Treaty of Cambray. Francis the Eldest
Son of Henry the IId, King of France, having married Mary Steward, Queen of the
Scots, and the next Heir after her of the Crown of England, the French were
forming a Design against her, and made a kind of Claim of the Crown for the
Dauphiness. The Queen feared the King of Spain the most of the two, as being a
Prince of deep Designs, and formidable to all his Neighbors on the score of
his vast Dominions; and was resolved, as time and opportunity should serve, to
abate his Power, and cross his Designs: She was as much offended with the King
of France for the ravishing Calais from us, and for assuming the Arms of
England to hers and the Nation's Dishonor; yet she resolved to make a Peace
with him as soon as she could. Thus this Heroic Lady, which had tried both
Adverse and Prosperous Fortune, being by Nature endowed with a strange Sagacity
and Prudence, which is very rarely to be found in that Sex; and which she had
also much improved by the Afflictons she had suffered; by her wise Counsels
soon brought this almost Shipwrack'd Vessel to a sase Port, and governed it all
her days with much ease and Peace; by which she gave the World a noble Specimen
of her Virtue, Justice and Prudence. She discovered all the Inclinations,
Forces, Leagues and Counsels of her Neighboring States; She laid aside all her
Feminine Indignation, and would not suffer her most intimate Affections to have
any place or consideration with her, when she was to consult the Peace, and
secure the safety of her People. Of which this may serve for a clear Proof;
From the beginning of her Reign she had established this as a Maxim, That the
King of Spain was the most formidable Enemy the English then had; but then
because that Nation was strong, rich, and powerful, she seemingly paid, for
some time, a great respect to the King of Spain, that he and the French King
might not join against her; and she also sent an Ambassador to renew the Amity
between her and the House of Austria.

Yet considering that it was necessary She makes a Peace with France, and
resolves on a War with Spain.
that she should in a short time have a War with Spain, and that part of his
Dominions lay near her, and that others were more remote, and very rich and
fruitful, so that they would well pay her Subjects for the pains and danger of
attacking them; She upon the whole concluded, That it was her Interest to enter
into a Treaty of Peace and Amity with the King of France; and accordingly she
kindly received his Ambassadors, who were sent hither to renew the Peace. She
put out a Proclamation to forbid all her Subjects the offering any violence or
wrong to the French that were then in England, that she might prevent their
enraging the Foreign Nations against her or her Subjects. And in The Treaty of
Cambray.
the Castle of Cambray she by her Ambassadors concluded a League with France,
upon Condition, That the Town of Calais, and all that belonged to it, should
after eight years be restored to the English; and if the same was not done,
that the French King should pay to her, at the ex^iration of the said Term,
50000 Crowns, and give Hostages of the Children of Noble Families for the
persormance of the said Condition in the mean time; and the assurance of an
Oath, that they would punctually and truly keep the said Agreement. When this
Peace came to be discovered by a Proclamation in London, and all the Seaport
Towns, almost all the good men of England were inwardly offended at it; and
they whispered their Discontents in all places. Yet I cannot but think the
Queen in this League (how much soever it was spoken against) did rather consult
her own Honor and Reputation, and the safety and welfare of her People, than
trust to the Faith of the King of France, as to the restitution of Calais. The
Hostages indeed fled away, and the French broke their Faith (as it was to be
thought they would) when they were to restore Calais; but then the Advantages
which England then gained by that seasonable Peace, abundantly overbalanced the
Damages sustained by the disappointment. When the time was expired for the
restitution of Ca^ais, the English Ambassadors in the Court of France
endeavored to make that Nation appear odious and detestable to all Mankind,
because they had fraudulently departed from the Terms of the League so solemnly
made at Cambray, and afterward sworn to by that King: But The French Plea
against the Restitution of Calais.
Monsieur de l'Hospital, Sieur de Vitry, Chancellor of France, a Learned and a
Cunning Lawyer, replied, That Calais was lost by a War, and regained by
another; That the Promise of restoring it was a Necessity imposed upon the
French by the Iniquity of the Times, which had enforced t^em to yield so far to
the English for the safety of their State; but that in truth the English had as
much right to Paris, as they had to Calais; and might with as good justice
demand the first, as the last. Yet after all, this Wise man never endeavored
to clear his Nation from the Guilt and Infamy of Fraud and Perjury, which was a
Task above his strength. In all Revolutions and Changes, the Queen always in
the first place took care to secure the True Worship of God, and the safety of
all her Subjects. When therefore she had thus secured her Peace abroad, or at
least had gained a Cessation of War till she might take breath, and recover her
strength, and was now freed thereby She resolved to resorm the Religion.
from all fear of Foreign or Domestic Dangers, she made it her next great
business to reform the Religion of England. She foresaw, that if she suffered
Popery to continue, she could never establish her own Government. Therefore she
resolved with pious and holy care to establish the Reformation that had been
begun by her Father, and carried on by her Brother; and to suppress and
eradicate by degrees, by the Authority of her Parliaments, without force or
violence, the Popish Superstition, which she esteemed a Corrupt and Immoderate
Religion, and equally i^jurious to Princes and their Subjects.

In these times the contending Religions The contending Religions equally
balanced.
were so near an Equality, and so balanced each against other, that the
Authority of the Prince was able to turn the scale. Henry the VIIIth. was able
to settle a Mongrel sort of Popery: Edward the VIth. advanced this to a
thorough Reformation: Queen Mary, without much difficulty, re-setled the old
Mass of unrefined Popery: And now when it was become ten times more hated than
before, on the account of the Perfidy and Bloodshed that had been employed to
establish it, Queen Elizabeth comes upon the stage, resolved to use all her
Skill and Authority for the entire Extirpation of it; and the People readily
and willingly complied with her in it, or rather in truth led her the way, and
were a little too hot on the work. She presently summoned a Parliament, which
was opened the 25th of January, Her first Parliament.
after her Accession to the Crown; the great Design of which was, To put an end
to the Distractions of the Nation in matters of Religion; and to that end, by
the Lord Keeper Bacon, she desired, They would consider of it without heat, or
partial affection, or using any reproachful terms of Papist, or Heretic; and
that they would avoid the Extremes of Idolatry and Superstition on the one
hand, and Contempt and Irreligion on the other; and that they would settle
things so, as might bring the People to an Uniformity and cordial Agreement in
them. And as to the State, she promised she would use her utmost endeavor to
advance the Prosperity, and preserve the Affections of her Subjects. And tho
she had need then of their Assistance, yet she professed she would desire no
Supply, but what they did freely and cheerfully offer. And at the same time she
represented Calais as a thing which they could not at that time hope to
recover. Thus she would neither wheedle nor deceive her Subjects, but with an
English Sincerity laid before them the Truth of the Case, and left it to God to
direct them to what was best to be done. The Houses having heard and well
considered what was offered on both sides, came at last to a full Resolution,
That all the Acts and Laws of Mary her Sister, in favor of the Romish
Religion, should be Repealed. That the good Laws of Edward the VIth. and Henry
the VIIIth. in favor of the Reformation, should be Revived and Confirmed. That
the Mass, which had been Restored by the Laws ena^ted in Queen Mary's time,
should be Abolished as a thing that was full of Vanity and Levity. That all
Images should be taken away out of the Churches: And all use of Holy Water.
That the Liturgy and Public Prayers should be all performed in the English
Tongue, and by a Form prescribed, and then by Act of Parliament Confirmed and
Allowed, as it had been before in her Brother's Reign, that so the People
having a full and clear knowledge of the Service of the Church, might the better
and more devoutly join both Voice and Heart in it. By this her prudent Care she
gave the Romish Church one of the most mortal Wounds she ever received from any
hand, by Rupudiating and Despising, Abolishing and Exposing all her Pagan
Pageantry, and Jewish Ceremonies. She commanded all her Magistrates to take
effectual Care, That the Romish Religion should not be exercised in Public, or
in any open Churches or Chapels: That all the Priests which should exercise
the Romish Rites and Ceremonies, should be excluded out of the Church, and
deprived of their Benefices. That they should exercise at all times a severe
and wholesome Discipline: That the minds of men might thereby be reclaimed from
Vice, and fixed in the true Worship of God, She commanded them to get as many
of the Popish I do not remember that I have read elsewhere this Order for
burning the Popish Books.
Books together, as they could possibly, and burn them; and that they should
take away and destroy all the Preparations and Vestments belonging to the Mass,
all the Images, and all other the Ceremonies of that Church. She commanded,
That for the future no Respect or Obedience should be paid to the Pope as the
Head of the Church. Nor did she scruple to assume the Authority of a Governor
of the Church in her own Dominions, in all cases Sacred and Civil, which is
called with us, The ECCLESIASTICAL SUPREMACY. And she abolished by Act of
Parliament all that Authority and Jurisdiction which had heretofore been
Usurped or used by the Bishops of Rome in this Kingdom, in Public or in
Private, which is called the Popish Tyranny, and was a pretended Supreme, both
Spiritual and Secular Jurisdiction. She also restored the Oath of Supremacy,
which had been first introduced by Henry VIII. her Father; continued by Edward
VI. her Brother; and was taken away and abolished by ^ueen Mary; by which she
was acknowledged to be the Supreme Governor in all Causes, as well
Ecclesiastical as Temporal, within her Dominions; and that they renounced all
Foreign Power and Jurisdiction; and should bear the Queen Faith and True
Allegiance. She declined the use of the word, Supreme Head, in this Oath, which
had been used before by her Brother and Father, both in Reverence to our
Savior, to whom she thought that Title only belonged; and also to abate, by
this Verbal Compliance, the Reluctance she feared from the Popish Party: For if
she gained her Point, she was unconcerned for the Form of Words, as all Wife
Princes ever were. Against the Passing this Act Nine Bishops and Two Peers
Protested, viz. the Earl of Shrewsbery, and Viscount Montacute; and they added
some words which were very injurious to the Queen and the States; but she
wisely dissembled it, and gave them no disturbance on that account.

The Popish Bishops and Priests in The Complaints of the Popish Bishops.
the mean time were not idle and unconcerned Spectators; but being agitated by
Hopes and Fears, and a confused Expectation what would be the Event of these
Counsels, they made loud and bitter Complaints, That men were drawn away from
the Ancient and Established Roman Rites and Ceremonies. That Christ's Vicar
(the POPE) was robbed of his Supremacy and Divine Jurisdiction. That the
Reverence to the Holy and Apostolic See was brought to nothing; and that now
the Pope's Authority was despised, intolerable Heresies were daily minted. So
they endeavored to retain the Nation in the Profession of their Religion, and
to uphold their Ceremonies by any means; and when this failed, to alienate the
minds of the People from the Queen, and to dispose them to Sedition and
Rebellion. The Queen saw the Tendence of this, and did not think it was fit to
despise their Complaints: That therefore she might prevent the ill effects of
their Malice, and withdraw the matter that fed their Fury, and threatened her
Kingdom with Schisms and Factions, which would be the Causes of great
Calamities, she appointed a Conference or Disputation between the Roman
Catholics and the Protestants, at London, Concerning the Authority of the
Church, and the Supremacy of the Pope; the Ceremonies in use in the Church of
Rome, and the Change of the Elements in the Holy Eucharist; that she might by
this means unite the disagreeing minds of her Subjects, in one and the same
opinion, and mutual Love and Charity to each other. In this Conference many of
the most reverend Mysteries of the Christian Religion were on both sides
debated with great Warmth and Heat, and much Learning; yet nothing was gained
on either side, by reason of the immoderate Opposition, and the implacable
Hatred they bore each to other. So when the Popish Party saw that the Pope's
Authority, which was once reverenced as Divine, was now become contemptible and
infamous; 2nd that all the Reasons they could pretend for the Justification of
their Ceremonies, were overwhelmed by the load of Infamy their Pride and
Cruelty had brought upon them; so that it was not possible for them to abate
the Hatred, or remove the Contempt the people were then possessd with, against
the Popish Clergy; they sullenly pretended, That in the Matters of Religion
there was no need of Reason and Disputation; and defended themselves with more
Passion and Anger, than Reason and Judgment.

After this Disputation there were The Reformation estab^ished.
Acts of Parliament passed for the Establishing the English Service, and
concerning the Ministers of the Church, as also for Restoring the Queen's
Supremacy, with the unanimous Consent of the Peers, and the Applause of the
Commons. But however, the Popish Party refused still to comply; and openly
said, These Laws were not to be submitted to; and thereupon began a Dissension
which is not yet ended. The turbulent Bishops and Clergy, who still adhered to
the old Rites and Ceremonies, being thereupon bereaved of their Sees, made
great Complaints of the Iniquity and Injustice of these Laws; and concealing
themselves as well as they could in corners and lurking-holes, for fear of
being prosecuted for their disobedience, they said the Queen was guilty of
Heresy; and solicited that part of the Nobility and Commonalty which still
stuck to the Church of Rome, to renounce their Obedience to her, and stoutly to
maintain the Old Service. They also sent their Agents to Rome, to persuade the
Pope to Excommunicate her by Name, as one that had brought a New Heresy into
the Church, and had confined the Bishops of Winchester and Lincoln, and many of
the inferior Clergy, for sticking firmly to the Romish Ceremonies: And lastly,
That she had assumed a Jurisdiction and Royal Authority, as well in all
Spiritual Causes as Secular. The Queen on the other side, had by this time
found the Inclination of her People, and being now well settled in her Throne,
did not think fit to act any longer with that Reservedness she did at first,
when she feared the Number and Authority of the Papists, who had then the Law
on their side; but by her Proclamation she courageously and openly commanded
them, That they should embrace the True Religion, which was most acceptable to
God, and leave their Popish Rites; or otherwise depart out of her Kingdoms,
Royal City, and Dominions, within so many months. And upon this, she removed
all those Popish Noblemen which had in her Sister's time been advanced to any
Public Employments or Stations in the Court or Kingdom, and she settled
Protestants in all those Places, and put the whole Management of Public
Affairs into their hands; affirming very stoutly, That she would sooner lay
down her life, than desist from that Zeal and Resolution she had taken up, for
the bringing down the Wickedness of the Papists. This Bravery encouraged all
her Friends, and struck her Enemies dumb.

Thus was the Popish Religion abolished in England, when it had flourished many
Ages in great Wealth, by the help of a profitable Ignorance, and a fallacious
and deceitful Interpretation of the Sacred Scriptures. And the Protestant
Religion being restored to that Liberty, Esteem, and Splendour it had had in the
times of Edward the VIth. it was soon after by the means of their common
Language and Vicinity, communicated to the Scots, and spread it self not only
in their Cities and great Towns, but also in their Villages and Country
Habitations. It is impossible to the Life The Miseries of Scotland in the
Reform^tion.
to describe the Calamities this Revolution brought upon the Scots Nation. The
most sacred and venerable Churches, which seemed to be secured from Violence by
the Awe of Religion, were burnt down; the most sacred Chapels were first
Rifled, and then Demolished by the Rabble: The Sepulchers of their Ancestors
were pulled down, their Statues beaten down, and trodden under foot, and the
basest and most lewd Injuries done to the Altars, as if the Papists had been
mere Pagan Idolaters. I am so enraged (says my Author, a Learned Scot) against
these men, on the account of the great Ruin they wrought in my Native Country,
that I cannot forbear expressing my Resentment: For I am of opinion, That these
Popish Mo^ments ought indeed to have been shut up, not to have been demolished,
because they were the Ornaments of our Country. But The Happines^ of England.
to teturn to Queen Elizabeth, she made it no part of her business to find out
those peaceable Ro^ish Priests who had betaken themselves to private lurking
holes, and secret places, more out of Fear than any Legal necessity: And if any
of them by chance happened to be taken, they were committed to an honorable
and easy restraint in the Cities, or delivered up into the hands of their own
Bishops, to the end that by this her Moderation she might in the beginning of
her Reign create an opinion of her Clemency in all her Subjects; and at the
same time deprive these Priests of the opportunity of doing Mischief. There was
not one of these men put to death, till Pope Pi^s the Vth. in the year 1570,
excommunicated her by his Bull, upon which there followed a Rebellion of the
Papists in the No^th: This was in the Twelfth Year of her Reign; and in the
next Ten Years that followed, there was but Twelve men of that Religion
executed, who were all Convicted of very great Crimes, by the most Legal
Trials. The name of Papist was not punished in any man that was not guilty of
great Wickednesses; because in the beginning of a Reign it is a dangerous thing
to punish Offenses with too much Rigor; whereas Clemency is of good use: And
she accordingly took care, by her Benefits to allure the minds of her Popish
Subjects to her, rathet than by Cruelties to fright them: Thus the Entrance of
her Reign was made happy and blessed; and she was able by the Blessing of God
to settle her Religion, and to lay the Foundations of a Long Peace at Home and
Abroad.

Having thus totally abolished all Her Care to settle Pious and Learned Bishops
and Clergymen.
that Papal Superstition and Pomp, which for so many Ages had domineered over
the English, so that there was scarce any sign left that it had once been here;
her first and greatest care was to advance men of Piety and Learning to the
Bishoprics and Preferments in the Church. There were many Protestant
Clergymen of great Integrity and Honesty, Innocence and Holiness, who during
the Marian Persecution had fled into Germany; or being driven from their
Churches, lurked up and down the Nation in obscure and remote places; these she
recalled and restored to their former or better Stations, with more honor than
they had been in before. So that after a Recess of Five years Duration,
thesemen, who had been banished with Ignominy, were with Honor and Reputation
repossessed of their Country, their Good Names, and their Liberties and
Fortunes. She re granted to them all their Ancient Privileges, with some
Improvements; and she took such as were of good report for their Learning and
exemplary Lives, and set them to Govern the Church as BISHOPS. When any man was
commended to her as a man of Learning, she would ask if there were not others
to be found, of more Learning and Piety, to whose Authority, Fidelity, and
Prudence, she might recommend the Care of the Church?

She took great care to curb the immoderate And to curb the immoderate liberty
of the Protestant Dissenters.
Liberty of the PURITANS, who licentiously began to sow Discords and Divisions
in the Church, and with a Fiery Zeal in their Preachments endeavored to excite
the common people, (who were then quiet and at ease) to Sedition, by declaiming
against the Jurisdiction and Authority of the Bishops; and by her Prudence and
Authority she reduced many of the first Leaders, from their rash courses to a
moderate Temper. In the Eighteenth year of her Reign, (A. C. 1575.) the
Anabaptists Anabaptists discovered.
first appeared, or at least were discovered to be in England; a Conventicle of
Dutchmen of that Sect, being then detected without Aldgate in London, and
Twenty seven of the Meeters were taken up and Imprisoned; of which Four bearing
Faggots at Paul's Cross, recanted their dangerous Opinions, and one Dutchman
and ten Women were condemned to be burnt; one of the Ten Women also recanted;
eight others were banished; but two of the number continued so obstinate, that
the Queen ordered the Writ de Heretico Comburendo, to be issued against them,
tho Mr. John Fox, the Author of the Book of Martyrs, interceded with the Queen
to spare their lives, and banish them. In this Letter he blesses God, that
none of the English were infected with these m^d Opinions. And (says he) I
will most readily grant, That these FANATIC Sects are by no means to be
cherished in any State, but are to be severely corrected; but to exterminate
them with Fire and Faggot is, I think, too hard. The Queen thereupon gave them
a Months Reprieve, and ordered that Learned Divines should endeavor in that
time to reduce them; which proving without effect, these two were burnt in
Smithfield, Two of which were burnt.
the 22d. of July, and they died in great horror, with crying and roaring. In
the Twenty sixth Year of her Reign, one Robert Brown, an English The (...).
Clergyman, began a new Sect also in the City of Norwich, his Hearers being
half Dutch, half English: The Queen endeavored to suppress this Schism in its
Rise, and prohibited his Books, but that not taking effect, Thacker and Coping,
two of his Disciples, were hanged at St. Edmonds-Bury in Suffolk. The Queen was
the more severe upon these Sects, because her Subjects were then untainted; and
these men made it their business to draw in the unlearned multitude, and
inflame them both against the Eccle siastick and Civil Government; and the
Queen besides having before this time been forced to be very severe against
some Popish Traitors that had conspired against her, she did not think it
became her to be less concerned for the Majesty of God, than for her own
Personal Safety. After this she caused their Conventicles to be carefully
Conventicles suppressed.
watched, and seized the Effects of all Foreign Sectaries she found in England.
She dealt more gently in the mean time with the English Puritans, who were the
first beginners of the English Separation, and left them to the Discipline of
the Bishops and the High Commission, where they were often called to account,
for Reproaching the Church, Licentious Preachments, and Libelling the Bishops
in their Prints. Having taken these effectual Cares for the Adorning and
Confirming the Church, she committed all the other Concerns of Religion to the
Management of Peaceable, Moderate, and Judicious men, and spent her whole Care
and Solicitude in preserving, adorning, and strengthening her State and
Kingdoms. In all this time she was never severe against Any Papist, who had not
first been clearly convicted to have raised Sedition, armed the People against
her, or by Rumors and false Insinuations to have endeavored to render the
Queen odious and contemptible to her People.

PIUS IV. Pope of Rome, in The Behavior of Pope Pius IV.
the beginning of her Reign (A. C. 1561.) having deeply considered the Dangers
and Ruin which then threatened the Papacy and Church of Rome, though he was
enraged against the Protestants to the utmost degree, yet seeing how little the
Passions and Violences of the last Pope Paul IV. had profited them; he thought
it became him to act a contrary part; and ^called the Council of TRENT, The
Council of Trent recalled.
which had been some years before indicted by the Authority of the Sea of Rome,
rather for the up^olding the Pope's pretended Ecclesiastical Authority, than
for the promoting the Salvation of men; and which, when things succeeded
contrary to the expectation of his Predecessors in that See, had been
frequently intermitted, and had not been assembled since the year 1552, but was
now again renewed, as the only means left for the healing the Wounds of
Christendom. In this Council many things which had by the Mistakes, Ambition,
and Avarice of the Popes of Rome, been changed and corrupted, were considered
and debated; and particularly that grand Question was to be determined,
Concerning the Authority The Plea of the Protestant Princes against it.
and Power of the Pope in Sacred and Civil Ca^ses. When the Protestant Princes
were called to this Council, they answered, That they did not own the Pope had
any Power to call a Council. That it did not belong to him, but to the Emperor
to Indict Councils. That he had no Right to give or take away Kingdoms. And
having sharply declaimed against the corrupt Manners of his Clergy, and
deplored the Calamities of the times on that account, they represented the
Pride, Pomp, Luxury, Ambition, Avarice, and Cruelty of the Court of Rome, in
which mere Wolves took upon them the Office of the Pastors of the Church. And
they said, this Council at Trent was not called to Establish Religion and true
Piety, but to confirm the Inventions of men, or rather of Satan; not for the
reforming the Lives and Manners of men, but to defend the Pretended Dignity of
the Sea of Rome, and the vast and boundless Authority of the Pope. That it was
not intend^d for the Purging the Christian Flock, but for the Establishing and
Confirming their inveterate Errors. Tho the Pope had had these sharp Replies
from the German Protestant Princes; and the Guise's and Spanish Faction had
represented to him, That it would be an undervaluing of his Power and Person,
to send a Nuncio to England, where he would certainly be rejected; yet Pius IV.
would not be discouraged, but said, He would humble himself even to Heresy it
self, in regard that whatsoever was done to gain Souls to Christ, did beseem
that See. And accordingly he sent Abbot Martiningo Martiningo sent Nuncio into
England.
to the Queen, who came as far as Flanders, and there he met with her Commands
not to cross the Seas, but at his Peril; and although the King of Spain and the
Emperor of Germany did earnestly entreat he might be heard, yet the Queen stood
her ground, And rejected by theQueen.
and replied, That she could not treat with the Bishop of Rome, whose Authority
was for ever excluded out of England by Act of Parliament. Nay, she would give
the Pope's Nuncio no other Answer, but a flat Denial; tho she gave this reason
to the French and Spaniards, to give them some satisfaction: For she well
perceived this Remedy did not tend to the healing the Wounds of the Church, but
to the making them incurable; and the Event justified her Conduct.

In the mean time the Queen clearly The Popish Party well disposed to rebel.
foresaw, that the Restoring the Protestants to their Native Country, and
their former Stations, would disoblige all the Popish Nobility of England; who
tho for the present they suppressed their Resentment, yet when occasion was
offered, they would not fail to do her the utmost Mischief that was in their
Power. The only noise of the coming of a Nuncio from the Pope, encouraged many
to break the Laws made against the Pope and his Authority, with great boldness;
and they spread false Reports abroad, That the Queen was going to change her
Religion, and alter the Government of the Realm; to dispose the Protestants to
join with the Papists in a Rebellion to her Ruin. She saw also, that at length
she should be involved in a Foreign War, and that the Pope would fulminate
against her; all which Dangers the Greatness of her Soul despised. She also
changed her Privy Council, into which she chose Protestants of famed Prudence
and Moderation; and she openly and avowedly broke the Power, and lessened the
Authority of her Popish Nobility and Gentry. The Pope having at this time sent
a Legate into Ireland, who had joined himself to some desperate Traitors then
in Rebellion against her, and endeavoring to deprive her of all Right and
Title to that Kingdom; Some others of that Persuasion were found also to have
practiced with the Devil by Conjurations, Charms, and casting Figures, to be
informed of the Length and Continuance of her (...); but Heaven would not, and
Hell could not help them.

The Affairs of the Church being thus The Settlement of the Civil State taken
into consideration.
settled, she applied her mind to restore the Civil State of England to its
Ancient Strength and Happiness, it having been strangely shaken by the Factions
and Divisions in the Three Reigns that preceded hers: To this purpose she
passed many Acts of Parliament, and other State-Orders for her own Security,
and the Welfare of her Subjects. She made some new Additions to the old Laws,
for the better Administration of her Civil Government, for the Promoting the
common Interest of her Subjects, or for the Regu lating her Parliaments: She
enriched her Kingdom also; and whereas she found a great part of the current
Money of England adulterared and mixed with Brass, she reduced it all to the
old Standard, and made it good STERLING. The Money reduced to the old Standard.
She furnished all her Havens, Seaports, Cities, and Frontier places, with
Garrisons, Forts, Castles, Cannon, Ball, Gun powder, and Provisions. She took
care to have her The Security of the Nation providently taken care for.
own Gunpowder made in England, which before had been fetched in from abroad.
She cast great quantities of Brass and Iron Ordnance, after she had discovered
a plentiful Mine of Brass at KESWICK in Cumberland. She fortified BERWICK anew,
and caused all the Frontier places toward Scotland to be repaired, and placed
Garrisons of good Soldiers in them. Tho she was upon better terms with the
Scots, than any of her Ancestors for many Ages had been, especially after they
embraced the Reformed Religion, yet she would not so wholly rely on their good
affections, as to neglect a timely provision for her own Security: And when all
these great Designs had brought a Debt upon the Crown, she chose rather to sell
a part of her Crown Lands to pay it, than be over-burthensome to her People.
She ordered also the Debts contracted by her Father and Brother (but neglected
by her Sister) to be paid. She provided Maga^ines and Naval Stores provided.
a great Magazine, and furnished her Kingdom with plentiful Stores of Arms and
Ammunition, and all sorts of Warlike Provisions, that she might always have at
hand whatever was needful to secure her against the sudden Insults of her
Foreign Enemies, or any Insurrections which might be raised at home. She caused
her Forces to be often drawn out, viewed, and mustered, and with Honors and
other Rewards she recompensed those that in this kind had deserved well of her;
by which she much encouraged her Soldiers and Seamen. She increased her Fleet,
and built many large Men LargeShips of War built.
of War, and furnished her Naval Stores with whatever was needful; and she
increased the Wages of her Mariners and Seamen, and appointed a Guard of Ships
to ride always in the Downs, for the Security of the British Seas; and
carefully scoured the Seas by her Men of War, and purged them from Pirates and
Sea-Robbers; so that in all her time the Seas were secure, safe, and open. Dr.
Heylin in his History of the Reformation, acquaints us that she began these
Preparations in the year 1560. Ahd that holding it a safer Maxim in the Schools
of Policy, not to Admit, than to endeavor by strong hand to Expel an Enemy,
she entertained the fortunate thoughts of Walling her Kingdom round about with
a puissant Navy; for ou^ Merchants had already increased their Shipping, by
managing some part of that Wealthy Trade which formerly had been Monopolized by
the Hanse-Towns or Easterlings. And thereupon she resolved not to be wanting to
her self in Building Ships of such Burden, and so fit for Service, as might
enable her in a short time not only to Protect her Merchants, but to Command
the Ocean: Of which the Spaniard found good proof, to his great Loss, and
almost to his total Ruin, in the last Twenty years of her Glorious Government.
At the same time, by her Proclamation, dated November 15. 1560. she commanded
all the Easterling, Flemish, and Spanish Moneys to be brought into the Mint, to
take the Stamp of her Royal Authority, or otherwise not to pass for current
Money in her Kingdom; which had a strange effect, and enriched both her and her
People.

She invited all sorts of Artificers into The means by which she improved and
enriched her Kingdom.
England; and by proposing to them good terms and great Privileges, she
repeopled the almost-desolate City of NORWICH, and the Towns of COLCHESTER and
MAIDSTON: She increased the Inhabitants of many of her other Ancient Towns; and
she by her Laws reduced the Inhabitants of the Countrey-Villages from Laziness
and Beggary, to Labor and Husbandry; so that there was no part of her Kingdom
but was cultivated and improved to the best advantage. When she was to settle
any thing relating to her Revenues, her Treasury, or the Administration of
justice, she admitted none to advise her, but men of good Knowledge and
Experience in those Affairs. If she considered of any Military Concerns, she
always called to her Assistance the old Experienced Commanders, which had spent
much time in Camps. She was as careful to give a good and a prudent Dispatch of
Public Transactions, and the great Affairs of private men, Ambassies, the
Petitions of her Subjects, the Requests of her Allies and Confederates, and all
matters concerning Commerce and Trade with Foreigners. She took the opportunity
of the times, and her Subjects Affections to her, to curb the Luxury of Youth,
all immoderate Expenses and waste in Clothes and other Furniture, and by
severe Laws carefully put in Execution. She reduced her People to the Ancient
Thrift, when they were declining toward Effeminacy and overgreat Expenses,
which are ever the forerunners of Poverty, and the Causes of great Calamities
and Revolutions in all those States they have prevailed in.

She went on to consider and provide Laws and Orders made for the public good
of her people.
whatever was recommended to her as useful to any part of her State, carefully
viewing the Conveniences and the Inconveniences that were annexed to every
Change. And whatever was at last found useful and profitable to the Body of her
People, was settled by the Authority of her Council or Parliament, as the case
required. She procured the Repeal of all those Laws which were either
unprofitable or unjust; and she brought others which were out of use, into
esteem again, and amended the defects that were found in them. It was a Maxim
with her, That Equitable Laws, and Equal Justice are the two sure and lasting
Foundations of a State. She was as much reverenced and feared on the account of
her Justice, T^mperance, and Continence, as on that of her Royal Authority and
Majesty.

She favored the Protestant Bishops, The Bishops and Commons favored, as a
Balance to the Nobility.
and the Commons of England, as a means to curb the Insolence of the Nobility.
She would never gratify any great Ambitious man with the grant of any thing
which might inflame his Avarice, or make him arrogant. She had a true value,
and a good esteem for all men of illustrious Parts, and of good Learning; and
she preferred such men to all Employments, and rewarded their Virtue with
Honors. When the meaner people at any time crowded about her Coach, with great
desire to see and salute her with loud Shouts, and fervent Prayers for her
Prosperity, and long and happy Reign over them; she would ever return their
Loyal Zeal with much Courtship and Civility; so that some said she was too
Theatrical in her Carriage toward them; but as by her Meekness, Clemency,
Lenity, Justice, and the settling good Laws and exact Justice, she had won their
hearts, so by this Condescension and Flattery she fixed their Affections, so
that they would have willingly sacrificed all they had, to her Service and
Safety. She exercised a moral Friendship and Familiarity with many private
persons; and ever reserved in her sole disposal all the Rewards of Virtue and
good Service. She would never suffer any Immunities or Privileges, Benefices,
Church Livings, Governments, or the Rights of her Kingdom, to be openly sold.
She advanced her Friends, Kinsmen, and Relations, with great Kindness and
Affection, and no less Moderation and Prudence. She made Sir Henry Carry, Lord
H^nsdon, who was her Cousin-German; and she gave him Riches, Employments, and
Attendance suitable to that Station. She advanced William Lord Howard of
Effingham, She f^oured her Kindred, and advanced them.
on the score of his being related to her, and of his good Deserts, to be Lord
Chamberlain of England; of her own free motion, without any solicitation from
themselves or others. She preserved the Family of Seymour, (which was ruined by
the Attainder of Edward Seymour, Duke of Somerset, Uncle and Lord Protector of
King Edward VI in the year 1552.) and in the first year of her Reign she
restored Edward his Son to the degree of Earl of Hertford: She restored also
several of the Nobility, whose Families had been ruined by her Sister, and put
them into the same condition they were before. She Attainted no man in all her
Reign, by Act of Parliament. No man ever could perceive, that the least
remainders of any Offense were left in her mind; but when she could most easily
have revenged her self, she always chose rather to forget the Injury; so that
every man presently promised himself a better Fortune for the future. If there
was any Quarrel between any of the great Nobility, she presently made it her
business to reconcile them each to other; and she would on such occasions
exhort them, Her advice to the Nobility.
not to suffer any Enmity to settle between their Families* that they should
not involve their Children, and educate them in the Dissentions of their
Families, and a desire of Revenge: That they should cut off those Feuds that
had descended to them from the Contests of their Ancestors; and with an
invincible Courage repress the Foreign Fury of their Enemies abroad; but with
one heart and one mouth provide for the Safety and Security of their Native
Country at home.

As she took this care to put an end Her care to change or abolish evil Customs
and Laws of former times.
to the Dissentions of her Nobilty, so she was no less careful to root up those
evil Customs which had crept into the Nation in the former Reigns, and tended
apparently to the Ruin of it; some of these she corrected, and others she
totally abolished. She rescinded all Sales that were made for the cheating
Creditors; she dealt very severely with all those that were found guilty of any
Frauds or Cheats in the Management of the Public Revenues, or the purveyance
for her Court; which she was wont to call Harpies, which fouled and ravaged all
they could come at; and she discouraged as much as was possible, all the tricks
and corruptions of the Courts of Justice: She increased the Wages and Salaries
of the Judges; and that they might the better be enabled and encouraged to go
their Circuits, and administer Justice to her people, she allowed them
Travelling-Money and Purveyance. The effect of this prudent Administration was
the enriching her and her Subjects, attended with great Glory, and a willing
obedience from those under her happy Government. The Country was rarely well
Tilled and improved. The Subject quiet and rich, and her Councils and
Parliaments honored and reverenced. In short, all those Perfections which
separately have made so many Great Men admired, met in this one Lady, viz.
Civil Prudence, for the Government of a State; the knowledge of Equity and
Laws; and an exact Skill of managing a Kingdom, and the Public Affairs of it.
Her Government was not like that of most other Women, turbulent and insolent;
but was grateful to her Subjects, pleasing to the People, acceptable to the
Nobility and Gentry, equal and just to her Allies, and admired by the Neighbor
Nations. She has been celebrated not only in her own times, but in all that
have since followed, and will be to the end of the world, on the account of
these Divine Virtues and Deserts; For she was truly accounted the Parent of her
people, a Prince by her Nobles, and the Patroness of true Piety and Religion,
by the Protestant Nations about her. Nor was there ever any Prince that was
equally esteemed and loved by the Nobility and Commonalty too of his own
Kingdom, as Queen ELIZABETH was by hers. If she happened at any time to be
sick, or ever so little disordered in her health, her Nobility would be so
alarmed at it, that they would willingly never stir from her to eat or drink,
or take any care of themselves; and all degrees of people would fly in vast
Numbers to the Churches, and with Tears and the most devout Prayers beg her
Life and Health, and the Continuance of her Government over them, till God
heard their Petitions, and restored her to her Health. Nor was this an enjoined
and formal Devotion, but it was as hearty and as earnest as that which is made
for the nearest and dearest Relations: And when they had obtained their desire,
the Joy and the Gratitude they expressed, showed they took her Preservation and
Life for a Public and an Universal Blessing. When in the beginning of her
Reign she had first taken care to reform and settle Religion, and after that to
redress and restore the Civil State or Government of England, (which had been
brought by the Calamities of the foregoing Reigns, not only into a deplorable,
but almost into a desperate condition, but now were by her Authority, Prudence,
and Moderation, with the Assistance of her Council, brought to the state of
Tranquillity, Order, and Equity she designed); the Fears of England which before
oppressed the Nation in relation to Foreign Dangers as well as Domestic,
expired.

When her first Parliament had settled 1559. The Parliament Address to the Queen
to Marry.
the Succession and Religion, their next care was for the Marriage of the
Queen, and the providing for future times; and accordingly, the Commons, by
common consent resolved to Address to the Queen, (fearing, though without just
cause), That she should Marry a Foreign Prince, and thereby bring the English
Liberties, and the Protestant Religion, into the same dangers they had been
exposed to in the former Reign. They therefore represented the Affections of
the Nation to her, and said, If they could hope she might be Immortal, they
would rest satisfied; but that being a vain Imagination, they earnestly
besought her to choose such an Husband as might make her self and the Nation
happy; and by the Blessing of God bring such Issue as might Reign after her
Death, which they prayed God might be very late. To this she replied, That tho
the Subject they came about was not acceptable to Which she refused. and in a
set Speech told them, she resolved to live in Celebacy.
her, yet it was a great satisfaction to her, to see how zealous they and her
other Subjects were for her Welfare, and that she b^lieved they desired it for
here is and the Nation's Good. And as to the changing my present state, (said
she) and Marrying, which you so earnestly desire I would do, I have long since
pe^suaded my self, That I was brought into the world by the special Providence
of God, that I might in the first place think and do what tended most to his
Glory: Therefore I have chosen that state of Life which is the freest from
human cares, that so I might be at leisure only to attend the Service of God
And if it had been possible for the Marriage of a Potent Prince to have allured
me, or the Fears of Death to have affrighted me from this Resolution, I might
have been long since engaged in the Honorable State of Matrimony: and these
were my thoughts when I was ^et a Subject: But now when all the Cares which
attend the Governing of a Kingdom, are come upon me, it would appear a very
inconsiderate and imprudent thing in me, to add to them the Cares of a Married
State. In truth (said she) I am already married (if (...) else will satisfy
you) to the Kingdom of ENGLAND. See (what I wonder you could forget) the Pledge
of my Marriage and betrothing to the Nation: And stretching out her hand, she
showed them on one of the Fingers of her Right Hand, the Gold Ring had been put
upon it, according to the Custom, at her Coronation. And after a short pause,
she thus went on: And I desire you would not look upon me as Childless, and on
that account weak and defenseless; for you and all other Englishmen are my
Children and Kinsmen; and if God does not deprive me of you, (as I hope he will
not), there can be no reason why I should be thought Childless. Yet I cannot
but commend you for this; That you have not prescribed or appointed who should
be my Husband; for this would have been a very great Affront to a Sovereign
Prince as I am, and very misbecoming you who are my Subjects born: But if ever
it should please the Divine Majesty to incline me to change my Condition, I
promise you I will never do any thing that shall tend to the Damage of the
State; but will to the utmost of my power take such an Husband, as shall take
as much Care of the Kingdom as I do. But then if I should continue in my
present State of Life, I do not doubt, but that God will so direct mine and
your Counsels, that there shall be no doubt of my Successor, who may be more
beneficial to the Kingdom, than one born of me; for it is often observed, That
the Children of the Best Princes do degenerate from the Virtues of their
Parents. And as for me, it will be the best Memorial and the greatest Honor I
can wish to leave behind me, to have this Inscription after my Death upon my
Tomb, HERE LIES A QUEEN THAT REIGNED SO LONG, AND LIVED AND DIED A VIRGIN. And
she concluded, That she took their Address in good part, and desired them to
carry back her Thanks for the Care the Commons had of her. By this means it
came to pass, that Her wonderful Temperance and Chastity.
many Noblemen of great Estate and Power, especially such as enjoyed the
Blessings of Nature and Fortune, Beauty and Wealth, united together, conceived
an almost certain hopes, that they should win their Maiden Queen, and were by
her Arts carried on in that expectation. But on the contrary, tho she lived in
a Royal Plenty, and was attacked by the Blandishments of Nature, and a
multitude of external pleasing Objects, yet she persisted in the Resolution she
had taken, and with a constant and unmovable Soul preferred her Maiden State
to any Marriage. Though she was almost every night tempted to change her
Resolution, by the Luxury, Cheerfulness, and Wantonness of a Court which showed
it self in Interludes, Banquets, and Balls, and was surrounded on all sides
with the Enticements of Pleasures, and the things which might provoke the most
cool and languid Lust; yet she preserved her self from being Conquered or
broken by them: For the Fear of God, and a true Sense of Piety extinguished in
her all Feminine Intemperance and Lust. Though she was the Sovereign and
Mistress of all, she did nothing that was insolent; tho she ha^ an abundance of
Wealth at her Command, she was not dissolute, but she governed her self by the
severest Rules of Chastity and Continence. Yet her Juvenile Age, (for she was
then about Twenty five years old) and the Intemperance which will ever attend a
Court, gave occasion to some injurious Reports; but then she as casily washed
off that slanderous Infamy, which was one of the most raging Crimes of the Age,
by the incredible Continence and Chastity of her whole Life; her Modesty and
Prudence overruling and controuling the Natural Inclination and Disposition.
Her Maids of Honor, who waited on her, took a wonderful pleasure in her
Manners, her Discourses, and Conversation, and wholly applied themselves to
imitate her, borrowing from her examples of Modesty and Chastity; so that they
would never suffer any young Nobleman to have any familiar Acquaintance with
any of them, if he had not recommended himself to them by some Generous Manly
Action in the Wars.

Amongst those who in the several The Princes and Great men that Counted her
parts of her Life aspired to the Honor of her Bed, Edward Courtney, Earl of
Devonshire, and Marquess of Exeter, was the first who courted her in her
youngest years: And after him, Christian III. King of Denmark, for his Son
Frederick; after this, ^erdinand the Emperor desired her for his Son Charles;
Philip II. King of Spain, In 1560.
Erix King of Sweden, and In 1560.
Adolph Duke of Holstein; the Dukes of In 1568.
Anjou and In 1574.
Alenzon, both Princes of the House of France, desired to have Married her; but
all this was to no purpose; for when she had by these Treaties deluded them,
and secured her self, she ever after pretended, That at her Coronation she had
obliged her self not to Marry a Foreign Prince. Yet there were some at home,
who after this deceived themselves with these deluding hopes; amongst whom was
James Earl of Arran, a Scotch Nobleman, who was recommended to the Queen for an
Husband, by the Protestants of that Kingdom, as the best means of Uniting
England and Scotland; but though she commended this Gentleman, yet she rejected
the Proposal. There was also one Sir William Pickering, a Gentleman who had
improved himself by Ambassies and the French Breeding, who aspired to it, tho
it was so much above his Fortunes. And Thomas Howard, Earl of Arundel,
asterwards Duke of Norfolk, one descended of one of the Noblest and Richest
Families in the English Nation, and a person of great Interest and Authority,
though he was advanced in years, yet he would also very fain have married the
Queen; but when he perceived his Old Age was ridiculed and despised, he left
the Court, and went abroad, and never came back again into England.

She persisted in this Resolution of By degrees she became more averse to
Marriage than the seemed at first to be.
Celebacy, with a Constancy that was admired then, and ever since; and at last
she would grow angry when any of her Subjects spoke to her of Marriage, which
they as passionately desired, as she declined it. The reason of this was
wonderfully exagitated in the thoughts of men, and some were very unmannerly
(to speak the best of it) in their Conjectures; whilst others ascribed it, with
much more probability, to an habit of Chastity, which put a Curb upon all
irregular Desires; or the fears of changing her Fortune, and diminishing her
Authority; it being but reasonable she should ^spect, that whosoever had
Married her, would have taken upon him the principal Administration, and so
have abated her Power and Reputation: others ascribed it to the Counsel of her
Friends, who yet prevailed with her to suffer Treaties of Marriage to be
carried on, to render Foreign Princes more favorable to her Interests, by the
hopes of attaining her at last. But whatever was the true Cause of it, which
can be certainly known to none but God, had this Queen been of the Communion of
the Church of Rome, this single Virtue would have gone a great way to the
Canonizing of her, as it has of many others; and she certainly would have much
more deserved it, than any of the best that have been Sainted on that account
only.

The common people of England for The character of the the Earl of Leicester,
a long time most firmly believed, That Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, and
Lord Steward of the House to her Majesty, would be the man that would marry the
Queen: He was youngest Son to John Dudley Duke of Northumberland, who with his
Eld^r Sons, ^ohn called Larl of Warwick, Sir Am^rose, Sir Guilford, and Sir
Henry Dudley, had been found Guilty of High ^reason, and the Father, an^ Sir
Guilford a younger Son, was behead^d in the first year of Queen Mary s Reign;
when this Ro^ert (who was the youngest Son his ^ather had then living) was
spared merely on the account of his youth, and never Tried or Dishonored. This
Gentleman in his younger years was a very goodly Person, of a B^autiful and
Lovely Complexion and Features, but high foreheaded, which yet was not then
thought any diminution of his Beauty; he was a very great Politician, but no
great Soldier; and tho he was not over-righteous in his Actions, yet in his
Letters there was not known a Style more Religious, and fuller of the strcams
of Devotion. This Favorite was then in the Verdure and most Flowering Spring
of his Youth, of a Stately Carriage, a Modest and Grave Look, a great
Flatterer, of a pleasant and easy nature in outward show or appearance; and
being endowed with all those Accomplishments the City or Court could teach him,
in which he had had his Education, he had insinuated himself into the Favor
and Familiarity of the Queen, by his specious shows of Loyalty, Industry, and
Vigilance in her ^ervice, and for a long time managed the greatest Station in
the Court, and was reputed the First Minister of State, though his Counsels
were not over-fortunate. His Brother Ambrose was Heir to the Estate, and he to
the Wisdom of that Family; for he had all the Arts of the Publi^an Dudley, his
Grandfather, and the Policies of Northumberland his Father. He was the most
reserved man of that Age, that saw all, and was invisible, carrying a depth not
to be fathomed, but by the Searcher of He^rts. He became in his latter times
sullen to his Superiors, haughty toward his Equals, insolent to his Inferiors,
ungrateful to his Friends, and pernicious to his Enemies, and in a word,
intolerable to all but the Queen. She made him first Master of her Horse, and
after Earl of Leicester, for the Sufferings of his Ancestors, both in her
Father's and Sister's Reign: But the common people, who very rarely penetrate
into the Thoughts of Princes, ascribed all his Power and good Fortune to his
Wit and Carriage, which was formed by Nature and Art, to the alluring of the
softer Sex, he being of a very taking Behavior, and an excellent Dancer, so
that one of the b^st Dances of that Age, was called by his Name, The Leicester
Dance. When he found the Tide of Fortune flowing according to his Ambitious
Wishes, his heart was too much lifted up; and being sometimes confounded by the
Number of his Attendants, and those that waited upon and visited him, he would
forget their Names, and call them by that of other men. He oft^n changed his
Clothes, and affected Gallantry to an Excess. He put himsels forward, and took
up the distant Employments of Peace and War, in exclusion of others who had
more Experience, (especially in War) and were Nobly born. He was continually
plodding to find the Studies, Abilities, Forces, and Dispositions of other men;
and so great was his Application and Parts, that he rarely miscarried in his
Enquiries He would terrify and sometimes destroy his Enemies, and allure his
Friends by the shows of Rewards: He by his Interest advanced his Dependants,
Kindred and Relations, to Honors and Employments; And when he found his
opportunity, he as craftily sold his Mistress's Favors, and the Employments he
had taken from others: He did the same by the Livings of the Church, but then
he took Bonds and other Securities, to avoid the Penalties of Simony. Yet there
were few for a great while called to the Council Table, or admitted to Titles
of Honor, but by his Commendation and Procurement; so that he seemed not so
much to be the Queen's particular Favorite, as her Partner in the Royal Power;
and he was accordingly courted and revered by the rest of the Nobility.

The Queen made him Earl of Leicester in the year 1564. she gave him also a
considerable Estate out of the Crown Lands, and advanced him from Master of the
Horse, to Lord Steward of her Household. She had made Ambrose Dudley, his eldest
Brother, (then living, for John the eldest of them died a Prisoner in the Reign
of Queen She Preferred him in Title and estate, and advanced his Brother.
Mary, without Issue), about two years before Earl of Warwick; and enriched him
with the Grant of a plentiful Estate to bear the Charge of that Honor; much of
which being made up out of the Estates that had been forfeited to the Crown,
this and the sudden Rise of these two Brothers, who had not done any
considerable Service to the Nation, that was known, either in Peace or War,
made them envied and hated not only by the Nobility and Courtiers, but by the
Populace: And Leicester increased the Aversion of all men, by his licentious
and expensive way of living, and by his Rapins which he craftily made upon
many; he in other Instances perverted the Laws, and invaded the last Wills and
Testaments of the Dead: He ruined many of his Neighbors by cunning and tedious
Lawsuits to get their Estates which lay convenient for him: In the mean time
he gave himself up entirely to the exercise of a most wicked and univerfal
Luxury, and brought into England from Foreign Countries, many new and
unheard of Pleasures, and invented new kinds of Dishes to gratify his
Gluttony: He would drink dissolved Pearls and Amber to excite his Lust; and had
so accustomed himself to the scents of Musk and Civet, that when he went
General into the Low Countries, he could not live without them; so that in
short, he very much exceeded the Intemperance of all former times, and made an
accursed addition to the ruining-disorders of men. His Example corrupted many
of the younger Nobility also, who being prone to Luxury, very easily imitated
his Vices, and thought that the height of human Happiness was in Pleasures; and
therefore wholly neglecting the Care and Improvement of their Minds, spent all
their Time, Money, and Thoughts on the Dressing themselves after the French
Fashion, and pleasing their Senses. The ill effects of Luxury.
Who can conceive the Poverty that followed these immense Expenses? And the
bold Adventures these impoverished Gallants were forced upon to supply their
Wants? Desperation and Effeminacy making them outrageous to the Ruin of the
State. Certainly there is nothing that is more destructive to a Nation, and
consequently more to be avoided, than the Feasts and Riots of a prodigal
Apicius, or the Luxury and Banquets of a profuse (...). Thus was Fitz-Alan the
last ^arl of Arundel, and Edward de Vere, Lord High Chamberlain of England, and
Earl of Oxford, the Baron of Windfor, and many rich Knights and Gentlemen, who
might have been the Ornaments of their Country, by his ill Example and
Conversation drawn into great Expenses, Chargeable Feasts, Balls, and
Interludes, and an excessive Gallantry, the common Attendants of too much Ease
and Plenty; by which they much wasted their Estates, and impoverished their
Families; and their Bodies also were much softened and unmann'd by their
Excesses and Sloth; and the generous Inclinations and Faculties of their Souls
stifled and weakened by the Charms of Pleasures.

There are some who think that the His designs in debauching the Nobility.
crafty Earl of Leicester designed this debauching the Prime Nobility of
England, when he entered upon this way of living, that he might by it render
them weak and contemptible: But however, it is most certain, the great
influence he had upon the Queen, and his being the Prime Minister of State; and
acquainted with all her Counsels and Intentions, made him extremely hated by
all the rest. He had by his cunning and crafty Projects and Counsels, engrossed
all the Rewards of Virtue, Riches, Honors, Attendants, and the first Place of
Minister of State, and he managed them, and lived without any Religion toward
God, or Fidelity to men, making it his great design to cover all things with
Luxury, Cruelty, and Rapines. With whom did he continue in a constant
Friendship? What good man did not find him an Enemy? He was to the utmost
degree ungrateful to all his Friends; and if any of his Enemies had at any time
a little too freely expressed their Resentments against his Dishonesty,
Wickedness, Injuries, Power, or Perfidy, (as he gave men too frequent occasions
to reflect on them) he seldom failed to cause them to be treacherously
murdered. Many fell in his time (says a Great Man of that Age) who saw not the
hand that pulled them down; and as many died, that knew not their own disease:
He would not trust his Familiars above one year, but either Transported them to
Foreign Services, or wafted them to another world. In the year 1583, he caused
one Mr. Edward Adern, a Generous, but Imprudent and Rash Gentleman, a zealous
Roman Catholic, and a great Defamer of others, to be drawn into Troubles, by
the means of one Somervil (a mad Papist) his Father-in-Law, and one Hall, a
Popish Priest; and being found guilty of Treason, he, his Wife, Somervil, and
the Priest, were all sentenced to die. Somervil hanged himself in Prison, Adern
was executed, and Hall the Author and Procurer of all this Mischief, was
preserved by the Intercession of Leicester. This was by all men looked upon a
Spectacle of great Compassion. He laid Snares for many of the Nobility, ruining
the Reputation of some of them, endangering the Lives of others; and some Noble
Families he utterly extinguished. He impiously and sacrilegiously invaded the
Revenues of the Church, and brought some of the Bishops into Danger and
Dis-favour. He incensed the Queen against the Lord Archbishop Grindal, a
Prelate of great Integrity and Honesty, by his Calumnies and Slanders. This
Grave and Religious Prelate was (as Mr. Cambden Anno 1583.
says) first made Bishop of London, then Archbishop of York, and afterward of
Canterbury, and for many years enjoyed the Favor of the Queen, till by the
crafty Insinuations of Leicester, she was set against him, upon a pretense and
slanderous Report, That he was a Favourer of the Conventicles of the turbulent
Puritan Preachers, and of their Preachments; but in truth because he would not
patiently dissemble the Disorders of one Julio an Italian Physician, and a
Favorite of Leicester's, who had Married another man's Wife, for which the
good Prelate stoutly prosecuted him, though Leicester appeared for the Criminal.

The best of Princes, after all the Leicester recommends Robert Earl of Essex
to the Queen.
Care and prudent Foresight that Mortality is capable of, are yet sometimes
deceived in the choice of their Servants. Leicester having married the Countess
Dowager of Essex, who was a Widow when his first Lady died, and having no
Children of his own, was easily persuaded by his Wife to recommend Robert
Devereux, the young Earl of Essex, her Son, to the Queen, as one fit to serve
her Majesty; and by this he opened the way to that great man, and brought him
with good advantage into the Court, and into Business. Nor would this Nobleman
afterward refuse to acknowledge, That all the Authority and Favor he had
acquired with the Queen, was owing in a great measure to the Assistance his
Step-Father had at first given him.

When he had some time served as a The Actions of that Earl in Holland.
Volunteer, first under his own Father in Ireland, and after in other places,
he was made General of the Horse, and Field-Marshal, under the Earl of
Leicester; when in the year 1585, he went General of the English Forces in the
Low Countries. In this Expedition this Noble Gentleman behaved himself with
that Courage, Bravery, Moderation, and Prudence, that he won the Love and
Esteem of the whole Army; and by that Reputation he became very Popular, which
afterward was the occasion of his Ruin. The truth was, His Character.
he for Honesty, Valor, Liberality, and Sincerity, was equal to the best of
the Nobility of his time; but in Prudence and Discretion he was inferior to
many. He for a long time enjoyed the Favor of the Queen, which his goodness
prompted him freely to employ to the doing good, and to the relief of the
indigent and oppressed; so that all his Greatness seemed only to be lodged in
him as Water in a Cistern, for the good of others He was not observed to be
addicted to any Vice, but that of Missing and Luxury; but as to all his other
Appetites, he had them in a tolerable subjection to his Reason. In the year
1587, he was made Master of the Horse. In 1590, he was sent into France with an
English Army, to assist Henry the IVth. In 1596, he was made Earl Marshal of
England, and after that, Master of the Ordnance the same year. In the year
1597, he was Admiral of the second Squadron of that Fleet which was sent
against Cadiz. In 1599, he was made Lord Deputy of Irel^nd, with more ample
power than had been given to any of his Predecessors, and a good Army. This
Expedition was the occasion of the Ruin of this Great Man; his Army being
wasted, without any considerable Advantage. Cambden attributes this to the
Discontent of the Earl of Essex, Because Sir Robert Cecil was made Master of
the Wards; which so netled him, who desired to engross all h^s Mistress's
Favors, that he left Ireland without leave, and returned to England, where he
perished in his Discontent and Folly, in the year 1600.

The Queen was in her own Temper The Queen very much oppressed by the Inf^my
and Villainies of Leicester.
a Person of an extraordinary Piety and Goodness, and without any exception;
yet her Virtue was scarce able to secure her from being made infamous and
unhappy by the Wickedness of the Earl of Leicester; she in the beginning of her
Reign relying too much upon his Counsel, and as it were committing her self and
her Kingdoms to his Industry and Care, to the neglect of the rest of the
Nobility, who hated this Minister; Whilst the rest of the Peers withdrew from
Danger, or stood as it were at a gaze in a stupid amazement, or servilely and
patiently complied with him: But Thomas Ratcliff, Earl of Sussex, and Lord
Chamberlain of the Household to the Queen, and President of the North; agoodly
Gentleman, of a Brave and The Character of Thomas Ratcliff, Earl of Sussex.
Noble Nature; constant to his Friends and Servants, and the best Soldier the
Queen then had, would not so tamely yield to Leicester; there being in his
Nature as well as Morals, a perfect Antipathy to the other; so that the Court
for a long time stood divided between them, and they kept Spies upon each
other's actions: The Queen did what she could to reconcile them, but it was
utterly impossible; they were equal in Power and Estate, but so differing from
each other in their Designs and Interests, and so unwilling on both sides to
yield, that nothing but Death could determine this mortal Feud between them.
This Noble Martial Earl died in the year 1583. He would often remonstrate, That
Leicester's Covetousness and his other Vices were intolerable; that he had more
Authority with the Queen, than all the rest of the Nobility; that he disposed
of all the Rewards of Virtue and Industry, and all the rest were forced to
truckle under, and serve him; that his Pride, Laziness, Luxury, and dissolute
Manners were not to be born; and there was hardly a good man in the Nation, who
was not in his heart convinced of the truth of all this, and did not wish to
see this ill man humbled. The truth is, Sussex was the honester man, and the
better Soldier; Leicester the more accomplished Courtier, and the deeper
Politician, not for the general Good, but his own partitular Profit.

Sir William Cecil was a Person of The Character of Sir William Cecil,
afterward Lord Burleigh.
great Learning, singular Judgment, and admirable Moderation and Prudence; unto
which is justly attributed very much of the Prosperity which England for so
many years enjoyed under this most auspieious Government. He was made Secretary
of State the 5th. of Ed^. the 6th. 1551. His opposition to the Exclusion of
Queen Mary, preserved him in her fair Esteem, tho he was of a differing
Religion. In the first of Queen Elizabeth he was again called to the
Council Table. In the 3d. year of her Reign he was made Master of the Wards;
and in the 14th. Anno 1572. he was made Lord Treasurer of England, upon the
Death of William Lord Pa^let, havingthe 25th, of February of the preceding
year, obtained his Patentof Baron Lord Burleigh; so that he was the first Peer
of this Illustrious House, though his Father and Grandfather had enjoyed good
Employments under Henry the 8th. In all the Contests between Sussex and
Leicester, this Great Man stood Neuter, and would engage in neither of the
Parties; which made him the Head of a Third, and enabled him to serve himself
of both the other, in whose ways he laid many rubs. Others were raised to
balance Factions, he to support a Kingdom; as he was the best Statesman in that
Age, so he was constantly on the watch for the Safety of his Mistress and her
Kingdoms. Leicester was the Cunningest man of the Age, but Cecil the Wisest,
the Stoutest; and being without Guile or Pride; made it his business to baffle
all Leicester's Projects for the Marriage of the Queen, and the enslaving the
Nation. He and Sussex threw themselves once at the Feet of the Queen, and
presumed to tell her, That all her good subjects were concerned to see the
Danger and Dishonor Dudley had brought upon her; That he had transgressed all
the bounds of a Subject, and very much exceeded the Crimes of Northumberland
his Father: That he had bragged of Marrying her: That this was a Dishonor to
her Majesty, and would bring Mischief on her Kingdoms; for her Subjects would
never endure the Sovereignty of an unchaste and wicked man. And they advised
her to put a stop to the Jealousies of her People, and to consult her own
Honor, and the Safety of her Friends. They represented to her very warmly, the
Dignity, Power, and Wealth of a Foreign Match; and recommended to her Charles
Archduke of Austria, second Son of Ferdinand the Emperor, and Brother of
Maximilian II. as a Prince worthy of her Affections. These Discourses of these
Great Men made a very deep Impression on the The Earl of Sussex sent Ambassador
to the Emperor.
mind of the Queen; and thereupon this Noble Earl was sent in the year 1567, to
carry the George to Maximilian II. Emperor of Germany; and had Commission at
the same time to treat of this Marriage; which he endeavored to effect with
all his Power, though the Earl of Leicester opposed it. The Gallantry of his
Behavior, and the Splendour of his Equipage and Retinue, gained him a
Familiarity from the Emperor, and a Reverence from the Archduke, a Respect
from the People, and his Mistress a kindness in that Court, which stood her in
great stead against the Attempts of the King of Spain, and Pope of Rome; which
perhaps was all that was designed by the Treaty; for it is said, the Lord
North, who went with him, had Orders under hand to oppose all his Negotiations,
as he did, and by a few fond Scruples disappointed and at last defeated the
whole Design. It is supposed by some, this Obstruction was procured by
Leicester, to secure his own Greatness. When this The Ruin of Leicester.
Great but Ill Man had struggled many years with the opposite Parties which
arose one after another against him in the Court, and found himself sinking in
the Favor of the Queen, by his private Marrying the Countess of Essex during
the Life of his first Wife; fearing the Divine Justice, the Change of the
Times, and the great Numbers of men he had exasperated against him, he in the
year 1585, obtained a Commission of the Queen for Levying 500 men, to be sent
into Holland and Zealand; and was after that, by another, constituted
Lieutenant and Captain General of the whole Army designed for the Service of
the United Provinces, against the Spaniard, whither he went the same year; he
had no good Success in this Expedition; and the next year the Hollanders made
loud and dreadful Complaints against him, for mis-spending their Money, and
ill-managing their Affairs; whereupon he was re-called; and the Complaint
following him hither, he told the Queen, That she having sent HisDeath and
Dishonor.
him thither with Honor, (he hoped) she would not receive him back with
Disgrace; and that whom she had raised from the Dust, she would not bury alive.
Thereupon he left the Court, and the 4th. of Septemb^r, 1588 he died at
Cornbury-Park in Oxfordshire. Thus died this Favorite, having in one year in
the Wars lost all that Reputation and Favor he had acquired in so many years
in the Court.

Peregrine Lord Willoughby, a Noble The Character of the Lord Willoughby.
Gentleman, a good Soldier, and a Virtuous Man, who was one of the Commanders
under the Earl of Leicester, succeeded him as General of the English Forces in
the Netherlands: He had more Experience, more Courage, and also more Success
than his Predecessor; so that he was styled the Queen's first Swordman, and a
great Master of the Military Art, by the Historians of those times: He did the
States of Holland great Service, by his brave Defense of Bergen ap Zoom,
against the Prince of Parma, in the year 1588: But for all that, he had some of
the Fate of his Predecessor, which fell to his lot, for he was complained of by
the Hollanders, as well, tho not so justly as Leicester; but his Innocence
cleared him. In the year 1589, he was sent General of 4000 men, in aid of the
King of Navarre, into France; and he died in the year 1601.

The Queen in all the time of her The Character of Sir Francis Walsingham.
Reign, took care to Establish her Government by the Counsel, Virtue, and
Fidelity of many Wise and Learned Men, who spent their whole time in promoting
the Public Welfare and Peace of her Kingdoms. Sir Francis Walsingham,
Secretary of State, was one of the greatest of these, and an Ornament to her
Court and Council. He so sedulously attended the execution of the Office
committed to him, and took his Measures for the Safety of her Person and
Kingdoms, and the Security of the Protestant Religion, with that Prudence and
Caution, that it was scarce possible any thing should happen, which his Care
and Industry had not foreseen, or his Spies discovered to him beforehand. His
Maxim was, Knowledge is never too dear; and accordingly he spent his whole
Income and Time in her Service, and died in the year 1590, so poor, that the
Queen gave his Daughter her Portion. The Queen has been heard to say, That his
Diligence and Sagacity exceeded her Expectation.

The Lord Burleigh was made Lord Burleigh made Lord Treasurer for his Virtue.
Treasurer of England by her, because he was the Cato of his Time; a man well
versed in the Affairs of the Treasury, and a Provident and Careful Manager of
them: He would insinuate to the Queen, That the Treasury was not her own Money,
but committed to her Care for the Safety of her People; and therefore it was
not to be spent in useless ways, or in satisfying the Avarice and Knavery of
her Ministers, but for the Benefit and Welfare of the State; and that the best
thing which could possibly be done by any person, was to do that which tended
to the good of his Country.

Mary the Daughter of James V. King of Scotland, was a young Lady The Character
and Story of Mary Queen of Scotland.
of great Beauty; and by the Arts of her Mother, who was a French Lady, and
descended of the House of Lorain, she was persuaded to marry Francis the Eldest
Son of Henry II. then King of France, by which he obtained the Title of King of
Scotland in her Right. After Mary Queen of England was dead, the House of Guise
in France persuaded this Prince and his Lady to assume and use the Royal Arms
of England, because she was of the Royal Family; and accordingly it was
Engraven on all their Plate, and put upon all their other Furniture, and they
used it in their Seals, to the great Injury and Exasperation of Queen
Elizabeth: She suffered also her self to be styled Queen of England, which
highly incensed the English Nation against her and the French Court; it being
thought the greatest Contempt that could possibly be offered to us, to assume
that Title at a time when France was engaged in a War with Spain: But however,
the Civil War which soon after broke out in France, and lasted many years, the
defeating their Designs in Scotland, the Deaths of Henry II. and Francis II.
and all other the Calamities that followed this foolish Attempt, sufficiently
revenged the Injury offered to the Queen and the English Nation.

Sir Nicholas Throgmorton was an Industrious, The Character of Sir N.
Throgmorton.
Wise, and an Active Statesman, but apt to be heat, and of a fiery Temper: He
was at that time the English Leiger Ambassador in the Court of France, and was
highly exasperated to see this Affront put upon his Mistress, and he made sharp
and loud Complaints of it to the Council of France: After a tedious Debate, and
many Hearings, he at last by the means of Montmorancy, Constable of France,
obtained an Order or Promise, That the Queen of the Scots should no more use
the Royal Arms of England, nor the Title of Queen of England or Ireland, during
the Life of Queen Elizabeth, or of any Children born of her. The Envy and
Hatred which was occasioned by this imprudent Contest between these two great
Ladies, who were equal in Authority and Beauty, had an ill effect upon them in
all the after-parts of their Lives, and at last ended in the violent Death of
Mary Queen of the Scots.

The French seemed then to desire nothing The French desirous of a War with
England.
more than a pretense for a War with England: Throgmorton the Ambassador was
made the subject of their Court-Jesters and Comedians Raillery; one of his
Servants was, contrary to the Laws of Nations, taken violently and unjustly
from him, and sent to the Galleys by the Brother of the Duke of Guise; the
English which Traded in France, were without any provocation or complaint made
of them to their own Queen, most unjustly Imprisoned, and otherwise exposed to
Contempt and Blows: The Ambassador bore all things with an invincible
Resolution, and resolved, whatever he suffered, not to be frighted from his
Post, but to watch the first opportunity to revenge the Contempt was offered to
his Character, and their violations of the Laws of Nations: He complained
openly and freely to the Council of France, of the Affronts offered to his
Mistress, of their Violence, Injuries, and Rapins committed upon her Subjects:
And as for the Duke of Guise, he considered him only as a Subject of France,
and said many things of him with the utmost Freedom and Sharpness; and the Duke
of Guise answered him with some vehemence: The Council on the other hand laid
all the blame on the common people of France, and offered a specious
T^rogmorton kindles the Civil Wars in France.
but un^rue Excuse for what had been done. The Ambassador thereupon calling God
and man to bear witness how much they had violated the Law of Nations, and the
Liberty of an Ambassador, which was Sacred by the Laws of God and man, returned
to his House; and from thenceforward made it his business to imbroil France; he
exasperated by his Arts Anthony King of Navarre, the Prince of Conde his
Brother, Montmorancy, and the rest of the Peers of that Kingdom, till he made
all France the Scene of a Civil War, and filled it with inexpressible
Calamities, which ended in the utter Ruin of the exorbitant Power and Greatness
of the House of Guise. Tho this Great man did all this; yet upon his return
into England he did not meet with a Recompense proportionable to his Integrity,
Courage, and Industry; because the Lord Burleigh was his Enemy, and sought by
all means to curb and conquer this lively, free, and haughty Spirit, which too
often appeared against him.

The French having obtained a Matrimonial The French design to improve their
Interest in Scotland, to the Ruin of England.
Right to the Crown of Scotland, thought it afforded them a fair pretense, and
an happy introduction into the Island, and designed to employ these Advantages
for the Conquest of England also. They thereupon taking hold of the Disorders
their own Cruelty and Perfidy had caused in Scotland, raised a Potent Army
under the Command of the Count de Martigues, and Monsieur La Brosse, two Expert
Commanders, and sent them into Scotland: These French Gentlemen did all that
was possible to Establish the Faction that favored France in Scotland; they
wasted and destroyed all that durst oppose them; and threatened the entire
Destruction of all that any way opposed their designs: Their Violence and
Cruelty in the mean time highly exasperated the common people of that Kingdom,
and they began to whisper, That the Destruction of all the Scotch The Scotch
complain, and arm against them.
Nobility, and the Extirpation of their Government, was intended: Thereupon the
Scots began in good earnest to think how they might preserve themselves, and
defend their Lands and Territories from the Incursions and Depredations of the
French. The French, on the other side, meeting with Repulses, and seeing the
whole Nation arm against them, when they expected the most profound Submission,
retired to Leith, which they had then Fortified for their The French retire to
Leith.
security, whither the Scotch Nobility sollowed them; and there were frequent
but small Skirmishes between them and the French: But however, still the storm
fell heaviest on that part of the Scots which had embraced the Reformation,
(for that was made the pretense for sending over these French Forces); and they
on the contrary saw, that during the Marriage of their Queen with Francis II.
King of France, there was no hopes of Security against the Pride and Cruelty of
their new The Scots send into England for assistance.
Masters, and that they were not able to defend themselves, without Assistance
from abroad. Whereupon they sent their Agents with Letters to Queen Elizabeth,
laying before her Majesty the miserable Estate they were reduced to, and
imploring her Protection and Assistance for the prevention of their Ruin. The
Queen being before exasperated by the ill usages she had received from the
Guifes, and compassionating the Dangers of Scotland; foreseeing also at the
same time the great and almost unavoidable danger which was approaching her own
Kingdom, if the French were suffered by force or fraud to subdue that part of
the Scots which were of the Protestant Religion; she courageously and prudently
resolved to undertake the Defense and Protection of this Nation; A Fleet sent
into Scotland.
and broke with the French, whose Friendship is at all times doubtful and
uncertain: Thereupon she sent Mr. William Winter, the Master of her Naval
Cannon, with a Fleet into the Fryth of Edinburgh, in the year 1560; which took
the Island of Keth from the French, and expelled their Garifo^ and relieved the
Scots that were then in Arms. She made also the Duke of Norfolk, a Peer of good
Experience in Warlike (...), President of the North. At the same time she sent
the Lord Gray of WILTON, who had been very unsuccessful in the Defense of
GUINES, a Fortress belonging to Calais, in her Sister's Reign, with an Army by
Land into Scotland. He entered Scotland with And an Army, which besieged Leith.
this Army, which consisted in Six Thousand Foot, and Two Thousand Horse, in a
peaceable and civil manner treating the Countries through which he passed, as a
Friend and an Ally that came to help them; and sat down before Leith, a
Seaport which was then Garrisoned by the French. Martigues, who was a young and
a fiery Gentleman, being spurred on by the overwarm desires of Glory, would
needs undertake with Twelve Companies of Foot, to beat the English Army, upon
their first approach, from the Hills on which they were posted, tho the French
were to charge up the Hill; whereupon there was presently a sharp and bloody
Fight for that Ground; the French for a great while sustained with much Bravery
the Charge of the English Army on their Front; but the Scotch Horse Wheeling
about, and Charging them on the flank too, they were at last beaten with great
Loss from their ground, and forced into the Town of Leith; and very few of them
had escaped, if the English Horse had done their part, as well as the Scotch
did theirs The French however, were not quiet, tho thus beaten, but making a
Sally after this, the 15th. of April, they surprised the Advanced Guards, and
cut them off, broke into the Lines, and Nailed up Three of the English Cannons,
and took Maurice Berkley, one of the Commanders, Prisoner: But Robert Crof^s,
and Cuthbert Vaghan, two other English Officers, fell on the French who pursued
their point too far, and forced them back into the Town. In this Sally, Arthur
the Eldest Son of the Lord Gray, who then commanded in the Trenches, was
wounded in the Shoulder by a Musket-Bullet, whilst he valiantly opposed the
French. This Sally exasperated the English, and they observingthat their
Batteries had not any considerable effect on the Walls, by reason of their
distance, they came nearer to the Town, and erected new Batteries. There was
nothing wanting in the Town which was needful to enable the Garrison to make a
stout Defense; the Walls and Bastions were full of men excellently Armed, and
they played furiously on the English, wounding some, and killing others, and
both by day and by night making furious Sallies besides; which the English bore
with so much Patience and Bravery, that they sur^ounted all these difficulties.
The last day of April a Fire happened in the Town, which b^rned all that night;
and the English by turning their Cannon upon those parts that were burning,
terrified the Inhabitants, and spread the Fire; and the same night they passed
the Dike, and measured the height of the Walls: The French within the Town,
were no less industrious than the English were without, and at last they had
the good fortune to put out the Fire, and to prevent the English from turning
the Terror of it to the best advantage: After this the English burnt the
Water-Mills upon the River Leith, which here falls into the Fryth of Edinburgh,
and gives name to the Town; and what they could not burn, they demolished: The
5th. of May the English stormed the Town, with the Assistance of the Scots,
under the Command of one Vincer; the French, tho much terrified with the bold
approaches of the English, yet manfully defended the Walls; and the Ladders
proving too short, and the Waters being restrained by the Garrison, were also
found deeper than was expected, to their great damage; so that 160 of the
English were slain, and nothing gained. The whole blame of this Misfortune was
cast upon Crofts, who stood stone still in the plac^ he was appointed to act
in, and neither diverted the Enemy, or sent any Assistance to them that were
engaged; and thereupon he was accused to the Queen by the Duke of Norfolk, and
the Lord Gray, for which he afterward being called before the Council, was
deprived of the Government of Berwick. The Duke of Norfolk in the mean time
took care to revive the droopi^g Spirits of the English, by a fresh Supply of
2000 men, which he soon after sen^ to reinforce the Camp, and to curb the
Insolence of the French, which rose higher upon this Misfortune of the
Besiegers, so that they made more frequent Sallies, after i^ than they had done
before. At the same ti^e the Duke sent a Letter to the Lord Gray, to comfort
the Army for the late (...), and to assure him, that within a short time he
would follow with all the Forces he had under his Command. This Recruit blew
off the Memory of their Loss, and kindled in the minds of the Besiegers a
strong desire to revenge the Baffle they had received, and recover their former
Reputation: By this time the Besieged had tried all the ways their prudence
could suggest, to raise the Siege without any success, and were now as much
oppressed by Famine within, as by the Enemy without; and having no hopes of any
Relief, they at last began, with the consent of the French King, to Capitulate
with the Queen, (for he scorned to Treat with the Scots who were his Subjects);
who to that end sent Sir William Cecil, and Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, to
Edinburgh. The Lord James, a Scotch Peer, proposed some things on the behalf of
the Scots in this Treaty, which Sir William Cecil told him, did not become
Subjects to ask, or Princes to grant: And the French on the other side offered
the Queen, that if she would withdraw her Forces out of Scotland, he would
restore Calais to the English; to which she generously replied, She did not
value that Fisher-Town so much, as to hazard for it the State of Britain; so
even did she hold the Balance between that King and his Subjects, suffering
neither of them to wrong the other: At last it was agreed, That the French
should within Twenty days depart out of Scotland, and the Fortifications of
Leith and Dunbar should be Leith dismantled.
slighted: The 16th. of July the French accordingly embarked on the English
Fleet for France; and the same day the Lord Gray began his March with the
English Army for England, where he was rewarded for this Service with the
Government of Berwick, which he did not long enjoy, for he died the 14th of
December, 1562. This War, says Mr. Cambden, preserved all Britain from Ruin,
restored the Scots to their Ancient Liberty, and settled the Peace, and enlarged
the Reputation of the English Nation; so that from thenceforward during all her
happy Reign, she had no reason to apprehend any danger from Scotland, the
Protestants of that Nation esteeming the Queen their Patroness and Deliverer;
and the English acknowledging she had laid a sure foundation for their future
Security, Thus she delivered Scotland from those Foreigners who designed by
Violence and Force to suppress not only the Protestant Religion, but their
Civil Rights and Liberties also, and to bring upon that Free Nation an
intolerable French Slavery. Of this the Scots were then so extremely sensible,
(says my Author, who was of that Nation) That they being delivered by her
means from Foreign Servitnde, they thereupon subscribed to a League to maintain
the Protestant Religion, and to use the English Worship and Rites.

After this a Civil War arose in The first Civil War in France.
France, and the Queen sent Supplies under the Earl of Warwick, in 1562. to the
Prince of Conde, the Count de Rohan and Coligny, the Defenders of the
Protestant Religion, and of the Liberties of that Kingdom; To these Forces,
when the Protestants themselves opposed them, she sent afterward Additional
Forces and great Sums of Money: At this time the French Protestants put Havre
de Grace into her hands as a Cautionary Town, and it was Garrisoned with English
Soldiers; but so soon as their Fear of the Popish Party was a little abated by
a Peace granted to them, which yet wa^ of no duration, they joined with their
Popish Countrymen to drive out their Benefactors, and with equal Violence
endeavored to reduce the Town under the Crown of France again: The Earl of
Warwick seeing his men consumed by a War without, and a Pla^ue within the Town,
and no Relief to be expected in due time, he thereupon began a Treaty with the
Enemy, and the 28th. of July, 1563. the Articles of Surrender were signed; the
next day there came a Fleet of 60 Sail of English Ships into the Haven, on
which the Garrison was Transported into England: And the Protestants of France
had the chief hand in the driving them out, as all sides acknowledge.

The Death of Francis II. King of The Death of Francis II King of France.
France, the 5th. of December, 1560. when he had Reigned but Seventeen Months,
put an end to all the French Ambitious Designs of Conquering England, and
Reducing Scotland, and to the Fears of both these Kingdoms on that score. Mary
Queen of Scotland being thus deprived of her Beloved Husband, soon grew weary
of that Kingdom, and getting a small Number of Ships together for that purpose,
she went on board at Calais, the 14th of August, and she landed at Leith the
20th. of the same month in the year 1561, being attended by many of the
Nobility, and some great Ladies of both the French and Scots Nation. Not long
after the Queen of England having opposed this Princess's designs of Marrying
Charles Archduke of Austria, and rather recommending to her choice the Lord
James Darnley, Eldest Son to the Earl of Lenox, and the next Heir after her of
the Crowns of England and Scotland; so that this Match would undoubtedly Mary
Queen of the Sco^s Marries.
secure her Title to England too, after the Death of Queen Elizabeth; whereupon
she married him at Edinburgh, in the year 1565; and the next year after, James
their only Son James 1. borr.
was born, to the great Joy of both the Nations; for he was then thought one of
the Pillars of Christendom, the Ornament of his Native Country and Family; and
all men presaged, That he would one day become the King of Great Britain, as it
came afterward to pass, by the wonderful good Providence of God.

This Marriage was attended with The beginni^g of the Mi^ortunes of Mary Qu. of
Scotland.
a Catastrophe and Tragic Event, which is grievous to the thoughts, and scarce
possible to be enough lamented; Mary Stewart, the Relict of Francis II. King of
France, and the Immediate Heiress, and Lawful Queen of Scotland, and the
Presumptive Heir of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, the Mother of James
VI. soon after became a Lamentable Example of the Unsteadiness of Human
Affairs. The Lord Darnley her Husband, having out of Jealousy ordered the
Murder of one David Rixio, the Queen's Secretary, was afterward himself
Poisoned first, and then Murdered at Edinburgh, in the year 1567: The effect of
which was, the Deposing the Queen her self, (who was suspected to have an hand
in it), and the Imprisoning her in a Castle in the Lake of Locklevin, where she
was forced to subscribe a Resignation of the Crown and Government of Scotland,
in the year 1568. The Queen by the Providence of God escaped afterward out of
this Restraint the 2d. of May, and raised some Forces to recover her Crown
again, which were entirely routed and dispersed by the Forces of the Regent of
Scotland: So that having nothing more to trust to in that Kingdom, she took
shipping with intention to pass into France; but being by stress of Weather, or
the Treachery of those that carried her, brought into England, she was landed
at Warkinton in Cumberland the 17th. of the same Month, and not long after
committed Prisoner to the Castle of Carlisle; so that being driven Her
Impri^onment at Carl^.
from her Native Country by her own Subjects, she found an uneasy and cruel
Restraint, where she expected a Refuge and a Sanctuary: The Laws of
Hospitality, and that Kindness which Nature teaches all men to use toward
those that are of the same Lineage and Blood, not being able to protect her
against the Jealousy of a Rival Queen. When Mary Queen of the Scots saw her
self reduced to this Calamitous Condition, forsaken of all her Subjects and
Servants, and forced to flee in one day about Sixty Miles, and then not
thinking her self secure till passing to Sea, she was thrown upon the English
shore; She wrote a Letter to the Queen of England, before she left Scotland,
and sent it by one Beton, and she gave him a Diamond which the Queen had sent
her before this as a Pledge of her Friendship; she also ordered him to tell the
Queen, That she intended to leave Scotland, and to come into England; and did
most earnestly beseech her to send her such Help and Assistance as was
necessary, in case the Scots should persist in the same Methods of Oppression.
Queen Elizabeth assured this Gentleman, That she would show the Queen of Scots
all that Affection that she could possibly expect from a Sister. Before this
Gentleman could get back again, she left Scotland, contrary to the Advice of
all her Friends, and came into England, and as soon as she was on shore she
sent the Queen a Second Letter in French, in the Conclusion of which she tells
the Queen of England, That she was come into her Kingdom with The Queen of
Scots Letter to Q. Elizabeth upon her first Landing in England.
an entire Reliance upon her Majesty's most unquestionable good affections
toward her, not doubting but her Majesty would assist her, and that by her
Example and Encouragement others would be won over to her. I do most earnestly
therefore (said she) beseech you, That I may presently be admitted to come to
you, because I am now in great Distress, as I will more at large inform you,
when you shall please so far to have Compassion on me. God grant your Majesty a
long and an happy Life, and me that Patience and Consolation which I ^ope to
obtain from him by your seasonable Assistance. Queen Elizabeth sent Sir Francis
Knolles and some others to the Queen of the Scots, to comfort her, and promised
her all that Protection and Assistance which the Equity of her Cause would
allow, but she would not suffer her to come to her. And she ordered her to be
removed to Carlisle, which was a place of great^r Safety to her, than that she
was at present in, where the Scots might perhaps surprise her: Upon this the
Queen of the Scots wrote a Third Letter to the Queen, and sent it by the Lord
Herris, desiring that she might be suffered to come before her Majesty, to
propose the Injuries The Thi^d Letter.
which had been done to her by her Subjects, and to answer the accusations they
did pretend to bring against her. That it was most equitable and just, that
Queen Elizabeth should admit her who was her Nearest Kinswoman, and was now an
Exile, into her presence, and hear what she had to say for her self, and
restore her to her Kingdom, which she had most unjustly been deprived of, by
those who had been most justly banished for their Treasons against her, and
were Pardoned and Restored upon your Majesty's Intercession with me, to my own
R^, as now it plainly appears, (said she) if your Majesty d th not prevent
it. Wherefore I once more Conjure your Majesty either to Admit me into your
Presence, and to Assist me, or otherwise to suffer me forthwith to go out of
England to seek help elsewhere, and that you would not detain me as a Captive
and a Prisoner any longer in the Castle of Carlisle, because I came freely into
England, trusting in your many kind Letters, Messages, and the Pledges of an
Honorable Reception. This Letter wrought very much upon the heart of the
Queen, and she could not but pity the desolate and deplorable Estate of so near
a Relation, who being by Force of Arms taken by her own Subjects, had been
thrust from a Throne into a Prison, brought into the utmost danger of her Life,
Condemned without being heard, and was deprived of a Kingdom, and had now fled
to her out of a Confidence of her Assistance, and was now at last willing and
desirous that the Queen of England should be her Judge, and when she had heard
both her and her Subjects, pronounce what Sentence she thought fit and just.

Princes are certainly the most unhappy The deplo^ble state of the Princes of
the earth.
part of Mankind, because they are frequently reduced to those straits, that
they can scarce tell which way to turn them; Sin or Misery, Ruin or Dishonor,
surround and encompass them, so that there is no possibility of avoiding both
at once. Had Queen Elizabeth dismissed the Queen of Scots, she would without
doubt have found enough who would have entertained her as an Instrument and
Pretense to ruin both England and Scotland too. If she The Difficulties
attending the keeping or dismissing the Queen os the Scots.
detained her in England, it was feared that her Wheedling Humor, Youth, and
Beauty, and her stout Attachment to the Popish Religion, would draw in many of
the English to take her part, as long as she was considered as the nex^ Heir of
the Crown, after the Queen then Reigning; and this would very much endanger the
Peace of England: Foreign Ambassadors would have Orders from their Masters,
(when her Case was once known) to espouse her Interest, and promote her
Affairs; and a part of the Scots would certainly endeavor to restore her, and
suppress the Opposite Party, when they had so fair a Prospect of making their
own Fortunes into the bargain. The Faith of those that were trusted with the
keeping this Precious Depositum, was not to be relied on, and if-she should
happen to dye by a Natural Death, the Queen must expect to be defamed and
slandered as the Murderer of her. So that the Queen saw that every day new and
unforeseen Difficulties grew upon her. If she were suffered to go into France,
it was feared the House of Guise which was related to her by her Mother, might
renew their old Pretenses in her Right to England, and again set on foot her
former Claim of this Throne, and might win many over to assist her, either on
the score of her Religion, or the Probability of her Right, or lastly, merely
out of a mad desire of changing the present Government, which is never so easy
or sweet as to please all. That the parting with her would put an end to the
League and Friendship between England and Scotland, which was then considered
as a thing of the greatest use that could possibly be conceived to England; and
it was to be feared if by her means the Popish part of Scotland prevailed
against the Protestant, the League with France would be renewed; and this would
be so much the more mischievous to England now, because heretofore we had the
Friendship of the House of Burgundy, to balance that of Scotland; but the
Estates of that Family being all at this time united in the Person of Philip
II. King of Spain, England had not one Ally near it which could be relied on,
but the Scots: If she were resetled in Scotland, it was to be feared that those
of the English Faction would be ruined, and those of the French would be alone
entrusted with all the Power: The young Prince would be exposed to Dangers; the
Religion which was now well Established there, would be changed; the French and
other Foreigners would be invited thither and entertained; and Ireland would be
more infested by the Highland-Scots, than heretofore, and Queen Mary her self
would be in danger of losing her Life amongst her own Subjects. Hereupon the
far greatest part of the Council of England were A Resolution taken to detain
her as a Prisoner of War.
of an Opinion, That she ought to be detained here as a Prisoner of War, till
she had given sufficient satisfaction for her assuming the Title of the Crown
of England; and answered for the Death of the Lord Darnly, who was a Subject of
England. For this, the Countess of Lenox had furnished them with a Pretense, by
her coming to the Queen, and with Tears in her eyes demanding Justice in her
own and her Husbands name; and had also besought the Queen, That Mary Queen of
the Scots might be Arraigned for the Death of her Son. To whom the Queen had
calmly and wisely answered, That the Countess ought not to bring so grievous an
Accusation, or charge so black a Crime as this was, upon a Princess so nearly
related to the Crown; which yet could not be proved by certain Evidence. That
the times were unjust and wicked, and Malice was blinded with Prejudice, and
made no scruple to charge the most Innocent with horrid Crimes: that, however,
there was an All-seeing Justice. which attended at the Throne of God, which was
the best Avenger of all secret Villainies.

It will appear by all this what Difficulties The Queen of England not acted by
a spirit of Jealousy and Revenge.
there were on all hands in this great Affair; and that the Queen was not acted
only by a spirit of Jealousy and Revenge for what was past, or out of a
Personal and Selfish Humor oppressed this Banished Queen, without considering
all things with great application of mind. The Lord Herris, who attended the
Court for the Queen of Scots, was not idle in the mean time, but earnestly
solicited Queen Elizabeth, That she would not rashly believe any Accusation
which should be brought against a Sovereign Queen, till she had been heard: and
that the Meeting of the States of Scotland should not be precipitated by the
Earl of Murray, the Prime Regent, to the Prejudice of the Deposed Queen, and
the Ruin of all her Loyal and Good Subjects. The Queen of England accordingly
did interpose her Authority with Murray, as to the lattter of these; but the
Regent went on for all that, Assembled the States of Scotland, and attainted
several of those that had taken Arms for the Queen, and seized their Estates
and Houses: The Queen of England being highly incensed upon this, sent Sir
Walter Mildmay to the Regent, to Mildmay sent into Scotland to threaten the
Regent.
tell him from her, That she could not sit still and see the Sacred Power of
Princes be brought into Contempt amongst their Subjects, and be trodden under
foot at the Will and Pleasure of Factious men. That although they had forgot all
that Duty and Respect which they owed to their Queen; yet she for her part
could not forger the Affection and Compassion her Piety obliged her to show to
a Sister and a Neighbor Queen: That therefore Murray should either come to her
himself, or send some able men who might answer the Complaints of the Queen of
Scots against the Regent and his Partakers; and show the Causes for which they
had Abdicated (Deposed) the Queen; which if they did not forthwith do, she
would dismiss the Queen of Scots, and lend her all her Forces, in order to the
resettling her in her Kingdom. And at the same time she admonished them not to
sell the Queen's Jewels and Wardrobe, tho the States had given him leave to do
it.

The Earl of Murray accordingly, Murray upon Q. Elizabeth's threats comes into
England.
and some other of the Nobility came into England, and the case of the Queen of
Scots was heard at York by several of the Lords of the English Council, but
could be brought to no Issue by reason of the cross Interests, and the mutual
Fears on all sides: Tho the Queen of England to the last declared, That she
detested the Insolence of the Scots in her soul, who had presumed to Abdicate
their Queen. But then, when the Duke of Norfolk thought it reasonable that
Murray should be stayed in England, and be prosecuted for the Death of the Lord
Darnley, which the Queen of Scots said she would prove against him; tho this
was approved by the Earls of Arundel, Sussex, Leicester, and Clinton,
afterward Earl of Linco^n, yet the Queen was very angry at the Motion, and
openly said, The Queen of Scots would never want an Advocate as long as the
Duke of Norfolk lived. So that upon the whole, it is strongly probable Q
Elizabeth durst not restore the Qu. of the Scots to her Throne.
she durst not dismiss or restore the Queen of Scots, for fear it should
involve both England and Scotland in Wars and Calamities which would have very
much endangered the utter Ruin of both the Nations; but then she was desirous
as much as was possible, to keep the Example from spreading, to the Damage of
other Princes, and the Endangering other States in other Circumstances, as much
as it tended now to their Preservation. Many have endeavored to blacken this
Act of the Queen's, and others to defend and excuse it; but for my part, I
think the Character God gave of King David, may be applied to Queen Elizabeth
here; David did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, and turned not
aside from any thing that he commanded him, all the days of his life; save only
in the matter of Uriah the Hittite. And what if upon the whole, the Queen of
the Scots is to be excepted only in our Instance?

This Reflection will appear so much The Queen prevailed upon to put the Queen
of Scots upon her Trial.
the more reasonable, if we take into Consideration her Death too. The Queen of
Scots had been now a Prisoner in England almost XVIII. Years, when the Queen of
England was prevailed upon by the earnest Solicitation of many of the Peers and
Commons of England, who fell down upon their Knees, humbly requesting her
Majesty (as Melvil expresses it) to have Compassion upon their unsure Estate,
albeit she should slight her own: Alleging, That her Life was in hazard by the
Practices of the Queen of Scotland, and their Lives and Fortunes also. Now as
it was possible for the English to have kept all those ill men from her, which
might put the Queen of Scotland upon such Practices, so it was utterly
unreasonable that Queen Elizabeth should expect the Queen of Scots would desist
from endeavoring by all the ways that were possible, to recover her Liberty
and her Kingdom, tho with the Death of her Oppressor. But by this time the King
of Scotland her Son was become a man, and he would have secured the Peace and
Possession of that Kingdom; and the Queen of Scots was now XLIV. Years of Age,
and so not so likely if she had escaped, to have been Courted, or to have
wrought her any great Mischief in the world, as she might have done in her
Younger years; besides, by this time the States of Holland had pretty well
establishtd themselves to balance the Spaniards; but then the House of Guise
was then in its greatest Pride, and the King of Spain was preparing his
Invincible Armado, which came two years after; and these two may seem to have
been the real Motives to it: But whatever they were, the thing cannot be
justified, neither ought it; and Queen Elizabeth seems to own as much, by her
ruining Davison the Secretary, to conceal her own fault, tho in truth it made
it much worse.

When the Queen of Scots was The Trial of the Q. of the Scots.
brought before the Lords that were to Try her for her Life, she declined their
Jurisdiction (as well she might) and alleged she was a Sovereign Queen; to
which the Chancellor, the Lord Hatton Hatton's wheedling Speech.
replied, You are accused, but not condemned: You say you are a Queen, be it
so; if you are innocent, you wrong your Reputation in avoiding Trial: You
protest your self Innocent; the Queen fears the contrary, not without grief
and shame: To examine your Innocence are these Honorable, Prudent, and upright
Commissioners sent: Glad will they be with all their hearts, if they may return
and report you guiltless; believe me, the Queen her self will be much affected
with Joy, who affirmed to me at my coming from her, That never any thing befell
her more grievous to her, than that you were Charged with such a Crime:
Wherefore lay aside the bootless Privilege of a Royal Dignity, which here can
be of no use to you; appear in Judgment, and show your Innocence; lest by
avoiding Trial you draw upon your self suspicion, and lay upon your Reputation
an Eternal Blot and Aspersion.

This short Speech is highly commended The Speech censured.
for the Ingenuity and Softness of it; but it was a detestable piece of
Wickedness to wheedle a poor Captive Queen, who was ignorant of the Laws of
Nations, and destitute of all Advice and Counsel, out of her Reputation,
Majesty, Innocence, and Life; and under the false Pretenses of the Queen's
Tenderness for her, her Judges Uprightness, and her own alleged Innocence, to
bring her by a Pretended Show of Justice, to a Scaffold as a Subject, who was
an Equal, an Enemy, and a Sovereign. The Queen of Scots Innocence did not
consist in her having never contrived any thing against Queen Elizabeth, but in
her Right to contrive all that was possible, to recover her Liberty and her
Kingdom; and therefore when they had proved her in their Notion Guilty, they
had done nothing; she was no Subject to Queen Elizabeth, and so ought her no
Allegiance, and consequently could commit no Treason against her; and the Queen
of England ought to have set her at Liberty, and commanded her out of her
Kingdom, before she could justly treat her as an Enemy. So that this was all of
it Pretense, Injustice, and Oppression; and had Nathan the Prophet been sent to
the Queen of England, he would certainly have told her as he did David, Thou
have slain her with the sword of the children of Ammon. And the Complaint that
she made to the Lord Hatton, and all that she did after to excuse her self,
show that she had a reluctance within, and acted against the Dictates of her
own Conscience; so that this can be no Example, for the future, to any Prince
or Subject, but ought to be looked upon as the Dishonor and Shame of that
otherwise most Excellent Princess.

Yet after all, the Queen is not to be Foreign Princes, and the Popish Priests
guilty of the Murder of the Q. of the Scots.
charged with the whole Guilt of this Royal and Innocent Blood; but those
Foreign Princes, and the Priests and Jesuits are justly chargable with the
greatest part of the blame, because when they saw the Queen of Scots in so much
danger of her Life, they would never suffer her to be quiet, but were eternally
Plotting and Contriving, Bribing and Conspiring, how to murder Queen Elizabeth,
and to set up the Queen of Scots in her stead, to restore their Beloved Popery
here in England: To demonstrate the Truth of this Assertion, I must in the next
place give an account of the Troubles and Conspiracies of the Popish Party
against this Princess, which to the shame of their Religion were all began and
carried on under the pretense of a mighty Zeal for their Faith, and in
Obedience to its Principles. Pope Pius Quintus, in the year Pins V
Excommunicates the Qu and absolves all her Subjects.
1570, thought it became his Piety, and would be an excellent Argument of his
deserving that name, to Arm all the Queen's Subjects against God, and their
Prince and Country, and foolishly presumed the Avenger of Perjury would permit
him to free them from the obligations of their Natural and sworn Allegiance to
their Lawful Sovereign and his Vicegerent: Thereupon he sent out his BULL, to
declare the Queen an Heretic, and that she had forfeited all her Right to
Reign and Govern: And he excited all the Neighbor Catholic Princes to take
Arms against her, and put this Bull in Execution. And one Dr. Morton, the
Pope's Legate a Latere here, then lay lurking amongst the Papists in the North
of England, and with impatience expected the Roaring of this Bull, as the
Signal to Treason and Rebellion; and in the mean time made it his business to
excite their Madness and Rage, and inflame their Hatred by vain hopes and
promises, that so he might engage them in a miserable destructive War. The
Popish Subjects of England, being Thereupon followed Rebellions and
Insurrections in England.
thus debauched from their Allegiance, by the Pope's Authority and Approbation,
there presently followed a great many Seditions and Insurrections, and some of
the Nobility and Gentry of that Persuasion, in compliance with their Religion,
began to be very ill affected toward their Prince. Thus Religion became a
Pretense for, and a Promoter of Rebellion and Treason. The first of the
Nobility that entered into Action against the Queen, was Thomas Piercy, Earl of
The E. of Northumberland leads the way.
Northumberland, who in the year 1569, had been privy to the Intended Marriage
of Mary Queen of the Scots, with Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk; and being
discovered thereupon, he submitted himself to the Earl of Sussex, at that time
President of the North; yet after this he joined with Charles Nevil, And is
followed by the E. of Westmorland.
Earl of Westmorland, and great Multitudes of people began to resort to them,
and they began to be suspected again by the Government as designing some
Mischief. The President of the North sent for them both at one time, and freely
told them what he had heard, and they both stoutly disclaimed the having a
Conspiracy in hand against the Queen, and promised to adventure their Lives
very zealously against any Traitor whatsoever, that should take Arms against
their Sovereign: Yet after all, Piercy began to raise what Forces he could in
the year 1569, which being discovered to the Queen, she sent her Letters to
them, requiring them to come both to Court. The Earl of Northumberland was so
easy a man, and so far from that fiery Activity that is requisite in the Head
of a Faction, that upon the receipt and reading of the Queen's Letter, he was
almost resolved to go to Court, and cast himself at the Queen's Feet, as in all
probability he had done, if his Servants and Followers who were more bent upon
Mischief than he, had not alarmed him in the dead of the night, and frighted
him into a Rebellion by their crafty arts; persuading him at the same time,
That all the Catholics in England were ready prepared to assert that Religion;
and that if they neglected it any longer, Foreign Princes would take this work
in hand, to the great Damage of the Nation: Whereupon he fled to Branspeth in
the Bishopric of Durham, to the Earl of Westmorland, and they joining in a
Rebellion, summoned their Confederates, and issued out a Proclamation in the
Queen's Name, commanding the people to put themselves in Arms for the Defense
of her Majesty's Person. In their Banner was a Cross Painted, with the Five
Wounds of Christ; yet after all, they never could assemble more than 2000
Horse, and 5000 Foot; so that tho they designed to have marched to York, they
durst not do it; and upon the first News that the Earl of Sussex was advancing
toward them, they disbanded these Tumultuous Forces before he came up to them,
and both the Farls fled into Scotland. The Earl of Northumberland was not long
there before he was discovered by the Regent Northumberland taken in Scotland.
of Scotland, and was sent a Prisoner to the Castle of Lo^klevin, and in 1572,
delivered into the Queen's hands; and the 22d of August in that year, he was
Beheaded at York. The Earl of Westmorland Westmorland fled into Flanders.
fled into Flanders, and was received into the Protection of the Spaniards,
where he lived to a great Old Age, and died in the year 1584, having lived all
that while he was there in great Penury and Want. This was the last Earl of
that Noble Family, which had enjoyed that Earldom Six Descents, from the year
1398, and was now wholly extinct, he being Attainted in Parliament, and leaving
none but Daughters behind him. As their Forces were small, they did but very
little mischief to any besides themselves: First they marched to Durham, which
they entered without Resistance, in a kind of silly Triumph, and entering the
Churches, they cast to the ground the Bibles, and trod upon them, because they
were English; and then they plundered all the Church-Treasures, threatening
great Calamities to all those they called Heretics: Then they went Northward,
and Besieged Bernard-Castle, which Sir George Bows defended against them
Eleven days, and by that time they had taken it, Sussex was upon them, and they
were forced to disband and fly for it; so little did the Popish Religion gain
by this Abortive Insurrection.

When the Queen heard of this sudden The Causes of the Miscarriage of this
Insurrection.
Insurrection, she forthwith by the Advice of her Privy Council, issued out a
sharp Proclamation against the two Earls and all the rest of the Commanders and
Abettors of this Rebellion; and exhorted all her Subjects to join heartily with
her to revenge the Injury which was hereby offered both to her and them. The
Popish Religion, which in the beginning of her Reign was not able to preserve
it self, tho Established by Law when she came to the Crown, in the Thirteen
years which she had now Reigned, was become so much less in Numbers than it was
at her coming to the Crown, and her Throne was now so well established, that
many of the Roman Catholics which were desirous enough of Innovation, durst
not be too forward to appear, for fear the Event should prove ruinous to them:
So that many of them sent the Earls Letters to them, to the Queen, and promised
to assist her toward the suppressing this Rebellion. And the two Earls being
by their Servants and a company of hotheaded Priests, tricked into a
Rebellion, had made so little Preparations, that they seemed only to rise that
they might fall the lower, and rise no more. But that which hastened the
Reduction of them mostly, was the Reputation and Valor of Thomas Ratcliff,
Farl of Sussex, then President of the North: He was a Gentleman of great
Industry and Experience, and having now the supreme Command in the North, he
would not give them time to fill up their Numbers, but getting what Forces he
could on a sudden together, he marched against them with an Army of 7000 men;
and by his bold and quick approach struck Terror into the Rebels, and
extinguished this dangerous Fire in its beginning. The two Earls were by this
time sensible that a great part of the Popish Faction would not Rise, and that
they had neither Numbers, nor Officers, nor Ammunition, nor Money to carry on a
War; and besides, they heard that the Earl of Warwick and Clinton were Raising
Forces in the South, and had got together 12000 men, and were marching toward
them: So that if they had beaten Sussex, they had been sure of another Army in
a few days, that would have ruined the Remains of their small Forces. So that
they had no other course to take, than to disband their men, and skulk away as
well as they could

Whilst the Earl of Northumberland The Calamities of the Earl of Northumberland.
continued at Liberty in Scotland, he was forced to lurk in a small Cottage
destitute of Meat and Drink and all other Necessaries of human life, suitable
to a Person of his Birth and Quality, as living amongst the bordering Thieves;
and it was not long before they grew weary of him, and discovered him to the
Regent of Scotland: Morton, the next Regent of Scotland, sold him after this,
tho he had formerly been very kindly entertained by this Earl, when he was
forced to flec out of Scotland: So that as he had broke his Faith to his
Mistress, he found no Faith, nor Pity, or Gratitude, amongst others, but was
pursued to the Block by a Divine Vengeance, which turned every thing against
him. But it was, however, the happiness of this Family, that by his Attainder
the Estate descended with the Title to Sir Henry Piercy, his younger Brother,
upon whom it was by Name entailed by Queen Mary, when she re-granted this
Earldom to this Thomas, in 1556; whereas the Family of the Nevils was entirely
ruined, and never got up again.

The Earl of Sussex prosecuted the The Earl of Sussex prosecutes the Rebels
with great Severity.
Rebels with great Severity, tho he had obtained so easy a Victory, and
without any Bloodshed, hanging many of them who had the misfortune to fall into
his hands, plundering their Houses of all they had, and confiscating and
seizing their Estates. And not contented with this, he led his Army into
Scotland, in hopes to catch the Fugitive Earls, and wasted Tivedale with Fire
and Sword, and then returned into England, without gaining what he sought. The
Queen was so incensed against them too, that she Attainted all that she could
find were concerned in it, that were men of Estate, but showed more Mercy to
the Poorer people, whose Ignorance might bespeak her Compassion. She ordered
also her Thanks to be given to those Noblemen and Gentlemen, who in the heat of
this Affair had taken Arms and come into her Assistance, commanding competent
Rewards to be given to all that deserved them; and that they should spare the
Lives of all those miserable men, who should beg her Pardon, and acknowledge
their Fault.

Out of the Ashes of this Rebellion Another Rebellion springs out of this.
there arose another at Naworth in the North part of Cumberland, upon Severus's
Wall, which was headed by Leonard the second Son of William Lord Dacres of
Gillesland. This Gentleman was discontented, because the Estate of his Family
was by Law so vested in the Daughters of Thomas Lord Dacres, his Elder Brother,
that it would pass into other Families with them; and this was the first spring
of this Motion: He was in the Conspiracy of the Two Earls, and was then at
Court managing an Intrigue with some Foreign Ambassadors, for some Assistance
to be sent to them; but finding the War began unseasonably, he went to the
Queen, and tendered her his Assistance against the Earls, and she granted him
her Commission for the Raising men to that purpose: He thereupon sent some to
encourage the Earls to persist, and to assure them, That he would join them
with what Forces he could raise; but before he could get down and get into a
Posture of Assisting them, he saw all their Army dispersed, and they forced to
flee into Scotland; whereupon he formed a Design to Murder the Bishop of
Carlisle, and the Lord scrope, Warden of the West Marshes; which when he saw he
could not effect, he recommended the Two Earls to the Scots, and seized
Greistoke and Caworth Castles as his own, which belonged to the Family of the
Dacres; and he got together about 3000 Borderers, with some others who were the
Friends of that Ancient and Splendid Family. The Lord Hunsdon hearing of this
Insurrection, drew out a part of the Garrison of Berwick (of which he was
Governor), and marched against this Incendiary, who met Hunsdon, and fought
stoutly at the Head of his Party; which was yet at last overpowered and
broken; the Lord Hunsdon having no great reason to be overjoyed at the Victory,
by reason of the Number of men he lost: Dacres fled into Scotland, and was with
the two Earls Attainted in the next Parliament. Both these Rebellions were
caused by Pope Pius his Bull, tho they broke out before the Bull was Published
here in England, which was one great reason that they spread no further. The
Delivery of the Queen of Scots, who was then in the Custody of George Earl of
Shrewsbury; the Restoring the Popish Religion, and the suppressing the
Protestant, was the last thing they aimed at; and the King of Spain was the
Fomenter of these Troubles, and had sent them Assurances that he would send
them Assistance from Flanders, and had his Agent at Court to promote it. But
all these Projects being disappointed, England soon returned to her former
state of Peace; and the rest of the Popish Party seeing their Weakness, and the
Severity of the Government against these Ringleaders, soon found how much it
was their Interest to be quiet.

The secret Head of all these Motions, The Duke of Norfolk the secret Head of
these Rebellions.
was Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, who was the Richest, most Noble, and
Wisest Peer then in England, and of the greatest Authority with the Queen, and
no less beloved by the People. This Great Man having appeared a little
over-inclined to favor the Interest of the Captive Queen of the Scots, in the
XIth. year of the Queen's Reign, he drew upon himself both the Suspicion of the
Queen, and the Practices of his Enemies at Home and Abroad: The Pope, the King
of Spain, and many of the Nobility of England, for different and very contrary
ends, promoting a Marriage between the Queen of Scots, and this Duke; which
being by the means of these Rebellions discovered in part to the Council of
England, in the latter end of the year 1669, he was first Committed; he left
the Court in Discontent, and resolved to Marry the Queen of S^ots, without the
Queen of England's Leave, tho he had promised the Queen he would proceed no
further in this business: Whereupon he was committed Prisoner to the Tower, in
the year 1571; and the 16th. of January, 1572. he was found Guilty of
High Treason, and Beheaded the 15th. of June following. The Greatness of his
Fortunes and Soul, and the wonderful Affection the People of England on all
occasions showed to this Noble Gentleman, added to his Compassion for the Queen
of Scots, who was a Lady of great Wit and Beauty, first stirred in him the
thought of Marrying her upon her first coming into England; which coming to the
Queen's ears, he was a little before the Rebellion of the North, put under
Confinement; yet he found means to send Money to the Earls of Northumberland
and Westmorland, but so privately, that after this he had his Liberty again. By
the procurement of one Robert Ridolf, Agent for Pope Pius Quintus here in
England, under the pretense of Merchandise, he was again drawn into a secret
Practice for the Marrying that Captive Queen; which being discovered to the
Lord Treasurer Burleigh, by the Duke's Secretary, out of mere Treachery, he was
again Imprisoned, Tried, and Convicted, by one whom he most trusted, and leaft
suspected of Designing against him. Thus wonderfully did God appear for this
Religious Queen, turning all the Crafty Imaginations of her Enemies, and all
their intended Violences, upon their own heads, for the Preservation of this
Church and Nation.

Says Mr. Cambden, The Love that The Character of the D. of Norf^
the People of England bore to the Duke of Norfolk, is incredible, which he had
acquired by a Courtesy and Goodness which was worthy of so great a Prince. The
Wiser part of the Nation were very differently affected toward him, some being
affrighted at the Danger which was threatened to the Nation from his Numerous
Party, whilst he lived to Head them: And others very heartily commiserating
this Noble Gentleman, who was of an excellent Temper, of great Beauty, and of a
Manly Aspect, and would have been the Ornament and Securer of his Country, if
the fraudulent Arts of his Enemies had not turned him out of his former course
and way of living, by the deceivable hopes of greater things, and the specious
pretenses and shows of promoting the Public Welfare. His End renewed the
Memory of his Father's most unhappy Fate, who Twenty Five Years before was
Beheaded in the same place, only because he wore the Scutcheon of Edward the
Confessor, in his Arms; which were granted to the. Mowbrays, Dukes of Norfolk,
from whom he was descended Lineally, by King Richard the IId.

This Bull of Pope Pius V. and his Practices After these Rebellions followed a
shoal of Treasons and Conspiracies.
against England, produced a shoal of Traitors to plague that Generation; for
they were ever after it restlefly plotting and conspiring against their
Sovereign, their Country, and their Kindred, with an invincible perfidy and
obstinacy, which the Executions of many could not extinguish: But yet the
Calamity did not end there; for from the same Exuberant Fountain of Mischief,
issued those refractory and stabborn Recusants, who separating from the
Communion and Service of the Church of England (which till then they had
frequented without the least scruple or difference) they set up Popish
Conventicles, and the Latin Mass, and called over a swarm of Jesuits, Priests,
and Monks, to infest the Nation, and incense those that entertained them,
against the Religion and Government that was established, and so perpetuated
our Quarrels, and kept open the bloody wounds of this Kingdom. This is the
thing we have most reason to complain of, because it has brought upon all the
succeeding Times, great miseries and distresses; and the Wisdom of our
Forefathers has not been able to cure this Disease. The Queen seeing in the
mean time the mischief this would bring upon her Kingdoms, and being roused by
the Rebellions in the North, and the intimations she had, that there were
Designs on foot against her Person and Life, took up a resolution to put a stop
to it; and to that end, passed an Act in the next Parliament for the levying 20
l. Which occasioned the Acts of P. against the Recusants.
the Month, upon all that should refuse to go to Church, and attend at the
Service of God; or to take the Oath of Supremacy. And finding that the Jesuits
and Secular Priests were, under the Mask and Pretense of Religion, the Spies
and Partisans of Philip II. King of Spain, and the Emissaries and Promoters of
the Papal Tyranny and Disorder; and that their greatest business was to pervert
her Subjects, and to entice them to commit the most unnatural and horrid
Crimes, she banished them for ever from her Kingdoms and Territories, and made
it Treason for them to return, and Felony for any of her Subjects (knowing them
to be such) to entertain, conceal, or harbor them. This, which was designed by
the Queen and the Government to cure, or rather to prevent their Treachery and
Malice, by keeping them at a distance, inflamed their rage against her, so that
concealing themselves under the Habits and Dresses of Lay men, and sometimes
under the Disguise of Mechanic and mean Trades and Employments, they lay as it
were in ambush, expecting and ready to catch at any opportunity that offered it
self to murder her.

In the year 1578. which was the The Colleges of the Jesuits opene lin Eanders,
etc.
12th year of her Reign, and the very year when the Popish Schism began;
several of the Popish Priests fled over into Flanders, where Philip II. had
already prepared for them a College at Doway; and here they put themselves
under the Government of one William Alan, a Divine of Oxford; who having
obtained a large Pension from the Pope, opened here a School for Rebellion and
Treason; To the end (say they) that as the Papal Priests in England are by time
extinguished, there might always be a new Race to supply their Places, and sow
the Seeds of the Roman Religion in England; and therefore they called these
Places And called Seminaries.
Seminaries, and those that were educated in them Seminary Priests. The first
of these Seminary Priests sent Parson and Campian the two first Seminary
Priests sent into England.
over, were Robert Parson, and Edmund Campion, in the year 1580. Parson was a
Somersetfhire man, of a furious and hot Temper, and of an ungenteel behavior:
Campian was a Londoner, well bred, sweet and elegant, and both of them had been
bred up in the University of Oxford, and had professed the Protestant Religion.
These men, upon their coming over into England, appeared sometimes in a
Military Habit, sometimes in the Dress of a Gentleman, and at others in the
Habits of the Clergy, and sometimes like Paritors, and frequented the Country
Houses, and Seats of the Popish Nobility and Gentry. Parson was so hot with
them for the deposing of the Queen, that some of them were strongly inclined to
deliver him up into the Hands of the Magistrates. Campian made it more his
business to pervert the People by his Writings, to the Popish Religion; but his
Reign was not long, for in the year 1581. he was taken and executed for
High Treason. The Queen had before this, put out a Proclamation to give these
men a caution beforehand, That seeing they had put off all that Love which
they owed to their Country, and the Allegiance which was due to her, they
should yet behave themselves prudently and modestly, and not irritate her
Justice any farther against them; for she was now resolved not to be cruel to
her self and her good Subjects any longer, by sparing such Miscreants, as she
had found them to be: So that how severely soever they were used, they had the
less^ason to complain, because she had fairly beforehand told them what she
meant to do, and what usage they might expect at her hands.

In the year 1583. Francis Throgmorton, the eldest Son of John Throgmorton,
Chief Justice of Chester, Thomas Lord Paget, and Charles Arundel, and others of
the Popish Religion, conspired to deliver the Queen of Scots out of her
Confinement. Henry, Earl of Northumberland, and Philip his Son, Earl of
Arundel, were suspected, and confined to their own Houses: and some others were
suspected, and difficultly delivered themselves. For about this time, the
outrageous Malice of the Popish Party against the Queen, broke out to that
degree, that they printed Books to exhor^ the Queens Servants to serve her as
Judith did Holofernes The Author of which was never fully discovered, but i^
was suspected that it was written by Gregory Martin of Oxford; but Carter, a
Printer that printed it, was hanged; Throgm^ had the same Fate; but Paget, and
Charles Arundel, left the Nation, and went into France. Stafford, the Queen's
Ambassador, desired they might be sent out of France, which was denied, because
the Queen had at the same time entertained the Count de Montgomery, and had
then with her, Sagner an Advocate of Berne, an Ambassador for the King of
Navar, who was endeavoring to promote a War in France.

In the year 1585. William Parry, a Parry's Conspiracy against the Queen.
Welshman by Birth, and of a very mean Extraction, meanly learned in the Civil
Law, but proud and gallant beyond his Means, being chosen a Member of the
Lower House, declaimed very furiously against a Bill then proposed in
Parliament against the Jesuits, averring that it was a cruel, bloody, desperate
Bill, and would be destructive to the Kingdom of England. Being desired to show
his Reasons for what he said, he refused to answer before any other than the
Privy Council, whereupon he was commit^ed, and afterward upon his submission,
readmitted into the House; but was afterward accused by Edmund Nevil, the Heir
Male of the House of Westmorland, to have a Design against the Life of the
Queen, which he confessed afterward in the Tower, upon which he was tried and
executed.

In the year 1586. J. Ballard, a Ruffling Babington's Conspiracy.
Priest of the College of Reims, came over to embroil the Nation, and made his
visit to most of the Popish Nobility and Gentry in England and Scotland, being
every where accompanied by one Mand, who was a Spy employed by Sir F.
Walsingham. This Silken Priest His Character.
came into England about Easter, and contracted a great acquaintance and
friendship with Mr. Anth. Babington, of Dethick in Derbyshire, a young
Gentleman of good Birth and Estate, of great Wit, and Learned above his years;
but being a great Zealot for the Romish Religion, he about a year before this,
without the Queen's leave, went into France, and there was first debauched as
to his Loyalty by Morgan, an Agent for the Scotchmen in that Court. Ballard
informed this Gentleman, that the Queen of England would not live long, because
there was one Savage come over Savage sent to assassinate the Q^en.
to assassinate her. This Project did not please Babington, so he formed a new
Design, in which were Edward, Brother The Persons in Babington's Conspiracy.
to the Lord Windsor, Thomas Sarisbury, of the County of Denbigh, Charles
Tilney, one of the Gentlemen Pensioners that waited upon the Queen, and the
only hope of his Family; but reconciled to the Church of Rome underhand by
this Ballard; Chidick Tichburn, of the County of Southampton, Edward Abington,
Son of the Queen's Cosserer; Robert Grage of Surry, John Traverse, John
Charnock of Lancaster, John Jones, whose Father had been Master of the Wardrobe
to Queen Mary; Sava^e, and one Barnwell of a Noble (...) Family;; Henry Dun, a
Clerk in the Tenth and First Fruits Office; and there was one Polle, who
pretended to be a great Friend of the Queen of Scots, and was trusted very much
in her Affairs, though he was a Spy employed by Walsingham the Secretary. Nave,
the Scotch Queens Secretary, had in some degree scented the Treachery of this
false Brother, and had given them a caution to beware of him; but he appeared
so active to promote the Conspiracy, and pushed them on in the Design with so
much Zeal and Warmth, that they had no manner of suspicion of him, tho he every
day discovered to the Secretary what they did or said.

Babington was the great Manager of Babington the great Actor in it.
this Plot, and assigned to every one of them his business, without
communicating to all the Orders he had given to the several Parties. He was
very earnest that Tilney and Tichburne should be the men that should
assassinate the Queen, which they at first stoutly refused, till Ballard and
Babington undertook to prove to them, That it was lawful to kill an
Excommunicated Prince; and that if Justice was in any cause to be violated, it
was for the sake of the Catholic Religion; Yet they at last did not hear^ily
consent, but in some sort yielded, but with great reluctance, Abington,
Barnwell, ^barnock, and Savage, were on the other hand prepared and ready for
mischief, and so needed no Persuasion. Sarisbury would never be persuaded to
have any hand in the Death of the Queen; but then he promised his assistance
for the freeing the Queen of the Scots. Whilst they were contriving the Design,
and talting care for Foreign Forces to second it, Gilbert Giffard a Priest, was
sent over to put Savage in mind of his Promise, who was born of a good Family
at Chellington in Staffordstire, not far from Chartley Castle, where the Queen
of Scots was then a Prisoner; and he came over under the Name of Luson. His
other Business was to take care to transmit beyond Sea the Queen of Scots
Letters, which several others of Greater Quality had refused. This Giffard
betrayed the whole Business to Secretary Walsingham, and sent him all theirs,
and the Queen of Scots Letters; So that the whole Design was discovered, and to
be proved as clear as the Light in Heaven. Whereupon the Queen ordered Ballard
to be taken up, and Babington to be so closely observed, that he could not
stir. Giffard was sent into France, where being suspected, he was clapped up in
Prison, and perished miserably. The 13th of September, seven of the
Conspirators were arraigned, and confessed the Crime, viz. Ballard, Babington,
Savage, Barnwell, Tichburn, Tilney, Abington; seven denied it, and put
themselves upon their Trial. Babington was executed with great severity; Savage
broke the Rope, and was cut up alive, without any hanging: These two, with
Savage, Barnwell, Tichburn, Tilney, and Abington, were executed with great
rigor the 20th of Sept. in St. Giles's Fields. The next day the other seven
were executed with more mercy, the Queen detested the cutting them up alive, as
had been done the day before: These were Sarisbury, Duns, Jones, Charnock,
Traverse, Gage, and one Bellamy, who was not in the Plot, but had a Brother in
it, who hanged himself in Prison; and Bellamy was executed for concealing
Babington, after he was declared to be a Traitor.

This Conspiracy being thus detected, This Conspiracy proved fatal to the Queen
of the Scots.
proved fatal to the Queen of Scots, and was the Cause and Pretense of her
Death, she being tried as one of them that had an hand in it, as without doubt
she had.

The Papists in that, and all the succeeding A Justification of Queen Elizabeth
against the Reproaches of the Papists.
Ages, have belched out against Queen Elizabeth, the Hellish Steams of an
enraged Mallce, traducing her as the most bloody and unmerciful Tyrant that
ever yet swayed a Scepter; and averring that the Roman Catholics suffered as
much or more in her Reign, than all the Primitive Christians did under the
Pagan and Arian Roman Emperors. Now if this were literally true, yet they have
no reason to complain, because they brought all this upon themselves, by their
abominable Perfidy and Treasons, which the other never were guilty of. For
could they think she was bound to sit still, and suffer them to depose and
murder her? No; but if they find the Person of a Prince is out of their reach,
that they cannot destroy it, their next care is, to defame them to Posterity,
and so to murder their Reputation. But the necessary Inference is, That this
is the worst Religion that ever got foot amongst men, and equally destructive
to its own Votaries, and others, by putting them that embrace it, upon such
base and detestable Practices, as must ruin both Body and Soul, and make their
Names infamous to Posterity. Who can consider the Untimely End of Mr.
Babington, a hopeful Young Gentleman, and not detest to the Pit of Hell, the
Baseness and Treachery of Ballard and Gifford, those Firebrands of Hell, that
brought him to so Untimely a Grave, with Infamy and Horrible Tortures; for he
was perfectly alive when he was cut open, and said after he was cut down, Parce
mihi Domine Jesu; Lord Jesus spare me. And however unjustifiable the Execution
of the Queen of Scots is, these were the men that brought her too to an
Untimely Grave, and betrayed her into the hands of her Enemies; and in the Day
of Judgment thty shall answer for her Blood.

The Queen in the mean time finding The Queen has a plentiful Supply given her
in Parliament.
her Treasury exhausted by the vast Expenses she had been put to for the
upholding the Hollanders against the Spaniards; to whom in the year 1576. she
Lent 20000 l and after that time she furnished them several times: And in the
year 1585. she had Cautionary Towns given her, and openly espoused their Cause,
and undertook the protection of them. All these great Expenses, and her
Troubles at home, enforced her to demand Assistance of her Subjects in
Parliament, which was accordingly given by the Temporality and the Clergy most
freely and liberally, and with a kind of Emulation which should give most. The
Queen finding on the other side, that of four Subsidies that were given her,
three would do her business, she by her Proclamation discharged the She
discharges a Part of what was granted by her Proclamation.
fourth, and so much of the other three as was not levied; presuming that the
backwardness of the payment was occasioned only by the poverty of those that
should have paid it. Thus her Care and Thrift enabled her to maintain a vast
Charge with a small Revenue; and at the same time relieve the needy part of the
Nation, by her remitting one Part, and the whole Nation by releasing another
Part; which won the Hearts of her People to that degree, that they never after
denied her whatever she asked.

The Spaniards finding their Naval The Spaniards send Lopez and two others to
murder the Queen.
Preparation in 1588. defeated; all their Designs against the Hollanders
baffled; their Attempts in Ireland disappointed; their Forces wasted, and the
Floods of Treasure the New World then sent them, exhausted to small or no
purpose; in the Year 1594. out of mere spite and desperation they condescended
so low, as to employ one Roder^ck Lopez a Jew, and a Physician by Profession,
to Poison the Queen; Stephen Ferreira Gama, and Emanuel Loisio, two Portuges,
to stabher; but all this was so seasonably discovered to the Queen by the
Letters that were sent to them, and intercepted by her Subjects, that they were
all three taken up, and they all confessed their several Treasons, and had
Sentence of Death sor it, and they were all three executed for it; together
with one Cullin, an Irish Fencing-Master, who was hired by the Fugitives in
Cullin, York, and Williams, sent from Flanders on the same Errand.
Flanders, and sent over to Murder the Queen, which he also confessed. And not
long after, Edmund York, and Richard Williams were hired by D. Ybarra, a
Spaniard, and these Fugitives, and sent into England on the same Errand, and
here taken up. When the Queen was told of all the base Conspiracies against And
executed in 1595.
her Life, she was no way terrified at the danger, tho she saw Henry the III.
fall by their Hands in the Year 1589. in France; but repeated that Passage in
the Psalms, Thou art my God, my time is in thy hand, (Psalm 31.) And with a
Maseuline Courage, despising all their Rage and Baseness, she took great care
of her self, and put her whole trust in God: For the rest, persisting She
spared none of those who fell into her hands.
to her dying day in her first Resolution, not to spare one of these Traitors
that fell into her hands, as she at first told them in a Proclamation she would
not: And this is the true way of dealing with these Implacable Monsters, who
are neither worthy of Mercy, nor capable of Repentance.

This Censure may possibly seem too A Digression concerning William Parry.
severe to those that are not perfectly acquainted with the Principles and
Tempers of these Men; and therefore it will not be amiss to confirm it with an
Example: William Parry, mentioned above, was employed by the Jesuits to murder
the Queen, and they had thoroughly persuaded him, That there was nothing more
Glorious than to die for the service of the Church; and that he would be
reputed a Martyr, if he could extirpate her who was the Favourer of Heresy,
and the Enemy of the Church. To this End he came into England, in the Year
1583. And to insinuate himself into the Queen's Favor (whose Servant he had
formerly been) and to obtain her belief, he freely and openly told her, that he
had been solicited to Murder her, by Morgan and other Fugitive Priests beyond
the Seas; Pretending that he had entered into a Familiarity with them to no
other end, than to discover their secret Designs against her, and to take care
of her Safety, to whom he owed his Life; she having pardoned him when he had
forfeited it to Justice, in the year 1580. The Queen heard all this Story with
an unconcerned Courage, and told him, That none of the Catholics should be
called in question on account of his Religion, or of the Pope's pretended
Supremacy, if they behaved themselves in all other things like good Subjects.
Which words he afterward confessed made such an impression on his mind, that
he could not forget them: And after this he was so much in her good opinion,
that he solicited for an Employment; but receiving a Letter from the Cardinal
of Coma, wherein he commended the Design he was engaged in, (says he) and
sending him an Absolution Parry's Confession.
in the Pope's Name; tho he showed the Letter to the Queen, yet he persisted in
his Resolution to Assassinate her; and from thenceforward had no scruple in his
mind concerning the Lawfulness of the Fact. But then he pretended he was
resolved first to try if he could persuade her by fair means to use the
Catholics more favorably: And when at any time he went to the Queen, he would
lay by his Dagger, for fear the Opportunity should be too strong a Temptation
to him. When he looked upon her, and considered her Royal Virtues, he confessed
he was staggered in his mind: But his Vows were in Heaven, and his Letters and
Promises on Earth, that he would do it; and this perpetually disquieted him,
and put him on. At last he fell upon a Book written by Alan a Jesuit, to prove,
That Princes that were Excommunicated, might be Deposed or Slain; and this Book
was a strong Motive to him to go on with the Treason. And he communicated it to
Nevil, (who afterward Accused him); and they two having taken an Oath of
Secrefse each to other, formed a Design to set upon her with Ten Horsemen when
she was in the Country, and so Murder her. They could, however, never find
the opportunity; and about six months after this the Earl of Westmorland dying,
and Nevil being his next Heir, he discovered His Design discovered by one Nevil.
to Secretary Walsingham this Conspiracy. By the Queen's Order he sent for
Parry, and asked him, If he had had any Treaty with any Dissatisfied or
Suspected person; opening him a door for his Escape; but he plainly denied he
ever had; for if he had confessed it, and said he did it to try Nevil, he had
without doubt escaped; but the Crime he had resolved upon, had blinded his eyes
so, that he could not see it: Nay, he had the Impudence to say, That tho the
Queen had twice spared his Life, yet he was not beholden to her for it, because
it had been unjust to have taken it. The greatest part of this Narrative is
extracted from his own Confession before the Lord Chancellor Hatton, and
others; so that there can be no doubt of the Truth of it.

This her Severity to them struck a The Queen's Severity to these Conspirators
made her terrible to the English Papists.
great Terror into the minds of the English Papists, when they every where saw
the Heads and Quarters of their Party exposed to the public view, but nothing
could cure or appease their festered Malice. Her Majesty and Presence, we see,
was able to excite the Admiration, and her undaunted Valor to terrify this
Cutthroat, as he confessed; but tho she charmed his hands, yet neither was her
Mercy or Goodness able to melt his hardened heart; nor was her Severity toward
him and other such Miscreants, sufficient to mitigate the enraged Malice of the
rest of the Jesuits and Popish Villains, but they still went on with their
Hellish Designs to destroy her. But when all was done, the Goodness of God
watched over her to preserve her, and frustrated all the Designs of wicked men
against her: and without this, all the wise Counsel of Burleigh and Walsingham,
and the rest of her Servants would have signified nothing. We may see Henry the
But it was God that preserved her.
IIId. of France, and Henry the IVth. his Successor, tho they both professed
the Roman Catholic Religion, were Assassinated in the day time, in the midst
of their Servants and Friends, by these Religious Villains, when it was not
possible they that did it could escape; and yet this Queen, who was more hated
than either of them, and less able to defend her self, in the spite of all
their Malice Reigned above Forty four years, and died in Peace. And it is worth
the observing, That in all the times since the Reformation began, which is now
One hundred seventy five years, though they have been engaged in endless Plots
against the Protestant Princes, yet they There has been but one Protestant
Prince Murdered since the Reformation, by them.
have been so far disappointed by the special Providence of God, that I do not
know of any Prince they have been able to Assassinate, but Willian the First,
Prince of Orange; and him they attempted twice before it succeeded.

In the year 1567. there broke out a The second Civil War in France.
second Civil War in France, on the score of Religion, which filled that once
most flourishing Kingdom with Factions and Seditions, and strangely exagitated
the Towns and great Cities of that Kingdom; so that the people of France ran
upon each other as if they had been divided and set on by a Divine Judgment.
Catherine de Medicis, the Queen Dowager of France, had then assumed the Supreme
Government, as Guardian to CharlesIX. herSon, who was then a Minor: She and her
Council were contriving by all the ways that were possible, to suppress the
Protestants of France, which grew numerous during the Minority of the King, and
under the Favor and Protection of the last Treaty; to this end they had
ordered some men to be Levied in Champagne, and had sent for Six thousand
Swiss: The Prince of Conde, and Coligny, observing these Preparations,
concluded they were made against them, and resolved to begin first; and they
formed a Design to surprise the King and the Queen Mother at Meaux; but she
being informed of it, withdrew in the night time toward Paris; the Prince of
Conde being thus disappointed, followed them to Paris, and Besieged that City,
which being reduced to some streights, there followed a Fight at St. Dennis, in
which Montmorancy was slain, but the Protestants were driven out of the Field;
and they fell next upon Chartres, which they besieged. Queen Elizabeth
thereupon ordered her Ambassador Norris to interpose between the Parties, and
bring them to a Peace, as he did, but it was short, and full of Insincerity and
Treachery. The Queen Mother of France was now so afraid of Queen Elizabeth,
that to prevent her sending Succors to the Protestants, she caused a Marriage
to be proposed between her and the Duke of Anjou her Second Son, who was
afterward King of France, by the name of Henry III. and was now about
Seventeen years of Age, but this Treaty ended with the Peace, for the procuring
of which it was began.

In the year 1568. the War broke The third Civil War of France.
out again, by the Perfidy of the Popish Party, who had now joined with the
Spaniards, by a Treaty made in a clandestine manner at Baionne, in the year
1565. for the Extirpating the Protestant Religion in France and Flanders, and
the mutual assisting each other to that purpose. And the Duke de Alva, the
Spanish Governor of the Low Countries, had Orders to join with the Guises in
this Religious work; and tho the King of France had in the beginning of this
year promised them of that Persuasion Liberty of Conscience, yet he soon after
put out an Edict to forbid all public Exercise of any other Religion in France
but the Roman Catholic; and commanding all the Protestant Ministers to depart
out of France within a certain time. This was followed by a severe Prosecution,
and in many places they were Assassinated or Robbed, and all France was
thereupon in Arms: Queen Elizabeth ordered her Ambassador to use all his
Endeavors to procure a solid and a sincere Peace, showing the King, the
Methods prop^sed would only serve to exasperate the minds of his People, and
deprive him of the Service of his most faithful Subjects; so that the Forces of
France being diminished with his People, his Kingdom would be exposed to the
Violence of its Enemies: A Consideration which Lewis the XIVth. may have reason
one day to think more seriously of: But now it was rejected, and the young King
of France sent into Spain to borrow Money, and into Germany and Italy to raise
Auxiliary Forces to carry on the War: Whereupon the Queen resolved not to be
wanting to the common Protestant Interest (which was now plainly struck at);
and upon the French Protestants assuring her, That they had not taken up Arms
against the King's Authority, but for their own sale Defense, she sent them One
She sends 100000 Crowns, and great Stores of Arms and Ammunition into (...) to
the Protestants.
hundred thousand Crowns in Money, and great Stores of Ammunition, and
entertained all the French that fled into England, with great Humanity. It is
worth the observing here, the Wild Notions of Passive Obedience, which have
been since set on foot, were not in being in these times, the Queen desiring no
other Security or Justification, than this Protestation, which being A
Reflection concerning Passive Obedience.
joined with her own knowledge of the Designs of the Guises, was then thought
sufficient to warrant a Defensive War, when nothing less than the Extirpation
of the Protestant Religion was intended. She did not think these Subjects of
France were obliged to submit to an Extirpation, because it was the Will of
their Monarch to have it so; nor that she Assisted Rebels and Traitors against
their Lawful Prince, when she undertook the Defense of those of her own
Religion against a Tyrant, who contrary to all Faith and Humanity, had designed
the Destruction of those he was bound and had promised to protect.

The King of France seeing by this time a destructive War would follow, The
King of France labors to divide the Protestants, without Success.
to distract the ^inds and divide the Forces of the Protestants, promised that
all those that continued quiet at home, should be tolerated; but this Facility,
as a Jesuit calls it, when it was a mere Treachery, had no effect, the Perfidy
of it was palpable: If he was in good earnest, why had he Revoked the former
Edict, and began the War? Who could reconcile these two contrary Edicts, That
they should and should not be tolerated at one and the same time? The Pope to
promote this War, gave the King leave to sell Church Lands, to the Value of
50000 Crowns by the year; and says the same Jesuit, Never were Church Revenues
better employed, or granted away upon a better reason. The destruction of
Heretics with Fire and Sword, contrary to the Public Faith, is certainly a
most Holy Work, and an Excellent Subject to spend the Revenues of the Church
on. The next year the Armies drew into the Field, and in March there followed a
Fight at Jarnac, in which the Prince of Conde was slain, and Coligni became
General of the Protestants; and after this another at Moncontour, in which the
Protestants lost 20000 men: They renewed their Forces, however, with that
Alacrity, that in the year 1570 they forced the King, after a vast Expense of
Blood and Treasure, when he saw he could not any longer continue the War
without apparent Ruin, to make a Peace on the same terms with the former. The
Queen Mother The true Causes of this and the other Civil Wars of France.
was the Firebrand of France, and by her Dissimulation and Hypocrisy, raised
all these Combustions there. She was jealous of the Princes of the Blood, of
the House of Bourbon, who were become the Heads of the Protestants in that
Kingdom; and she was perpetually Plotting how to ruin them, or force them to
preserve themselves by War. The King of Spain pushed on the Incendiaries of
France, under pretense of securing the Catholic Religion, but with a Design at
the bottom to weaken that Kingdom by their intestine Wars, and at last to
subdue it. Queen Elizabeth observed all this, and saw whither it tended; and by
her seasonable Supplies upheld the Protestant Party, The Queen of England
preserved the Protestants of France.
which was the weaker, till she forced the Court of France to see its Error,
and lay aside, or rather change their destructive Methods, for others that were
more infamous, and as ineffectual. In the mean time the noble Kingdom of France
was desolated by Fire and Sword, their Populous Towns destroyed, their Rich
Churches and Monasteries plundered, their Nobility and Gentry slain on both
sides, and by their own Swords; their Matrons Ravished, and the Children
Murdered in the Arms of their Parents, and France was more wasted by this War
in her bowels, than by all the Foreign Wars she had been engaged in from the
time the English were expelled, to that time. Was ever Church-Treasures better
spent?

At the same time that France was thus miserably harassed by an intestine The
beginning of the Low Country War.
War, the Spaniards were as busy in the Low Countries to extirpate Heresy, as
they pretended, but in truth to deprive those Provinces, under that pretense,
of their Ancient Liberties and Civil Privileges, and to submit them to the
Servitude of the Insolent Spaniards, that so they might from thence pass on to
the Conquest of England and France, and so erect an Universal Monarchy in
Europe; which Design they had Vanity enough to discover. To this end, in the
year 1564. they erected Seven new bishoprics to curb that people. In the year
1565. he commanded the Council of Trent to be Revived, together with the
Inquisition, and a strict observation of the Edicts concerning Religion. Upon
this the Nobility of those Countries, as well those that persisted in the
Roman Catholic Religion, as those that were well inclined to the Reformation,
seeing the Liberty and Riches, Trade and Commerce of their Country must be
ruined, if these courses were taken, they interceded with Margaret the King's
Sister, their Regent, that the King's Letter might not be put in execution; but
she went on, however, and they on the other hand stood upon their guard, and as
much as was possible hindered it. The next year the Quarrel grew higher, and the
multitude rose in many places with an irresistible fury, and destroyed all the
Images in the Churches of many of the great Cities; the Torrent ran so high,
and was so impetuous, that the Regent was forced to publish an Edict of Liberty
Liberty of Conscience treacherously granted, and re-called.
of Conscience, to appease the people, the Spaniards being not able by any
other means to secure the Possession of these Countries; but so soon as the
people were quieted, the Edict was recalled; which they owned was granted only
to gain time to send for Men and Moneys, to force the Inhabitants of the
Netherlands to submit to the King's Will, and to punish them for their
disobedience. Yet however, in the mean time, whilst this Edict was observed,
all places returned to the former state of Peace, and Trade went on
successfully; so that if the King of Spain could have persuaded himself to have
complied with his Interest in this Affair, he and his Posterity had continued
in the Peaceable Possession of these Provinces, which would have been worth the
owning, Rich, Populous, and Potent, and able to defend themselves against the
French. But by pursuing contrary Methods, he brought a War upon himself, which
wasted Spain, ruined his Treasures, erected a part of these Provinces into an
Independent Commonwealth; and so depopulated and impoverished the rest, that
they are not able to defend themselves against the French: So that the breaking
this Edict, proved the Ruin of all the Spanish Greatness.

This Liberty of Conscience, which The King of Spa^n enraged at the Edict for
Liberty of Conscience.
was extorted from the Regent by pure Force and Fear, being sent into Spain to
be confirmed by the King, he was highly displeased at it, and ordered some of
his Council to let the Prince of Orange and Count Egmont know, That if they or
either of them had opposed these Insurrections with that Bravery they had
showed on other occasions, and as they were bound in Duty to have done, things
could never have been brought by the Populace into the state they were now in:
That if yet they would do their Duty without mincing or dissembling,
absolutely, they might reduce things into the former state, or at least keep
them as they were, till the King could come thither himself to settle them.
That it was the Duty of a good Subject, when he once knew his Prince's
Pleasure, to set himself roundly, (without considering what should be the event
to himself or others), to put the same in execution, and that willingly,
readily, and effectually, tho he himself were of a contrary opinion; for that
it did not become them to think themselves wiser than their Prince, since they
were his Subjects and Vassals. They had Advices at the same time from Spain,
That the King was fixedly resolved to oppose these Grants of his Sister the
Regent, both to prevent the Example as to his other Provinces, and also
preserve the Popish Religion in these. And they were informed The Spaniards
design to settle an Absolute and Arbitrary Government in the N^therlands.
also, that under the pretense of preserving the Catholic Religion in the
Netherlands, there was a Design formed to advance the King's Power; and that
they were not displeased ai Court, that they had this occasion given them to
bring the whole under, and settle in them a new and more Absolute Form of
Government, because they concluded in Spain, That all the Obstinacy the people
had shown, proceeded from their Reliance upon their great Freedoms and
Privileges. But then this was to be concealed with the utmost care from them;
and the King and the Regent to delude and deceive them, wrote the kindest
Letters, and spoke the sweetest Words to the Confederate Lords, and especially
to the Prince of Orange, that the Wit of man could invent. But in the mean
time, the Regent Levied Two Regiments in Flanders, under the Earls of Arenbergh
and M^em, and Two more in Germany, under Count Philip of Overstein, and Three
of Walloons, and a German Regiment of Horse, under Count Mansfield: These
Forces were Levied in distant places, and upon different pretenses, and brought
into, or near the Provinces; and then the Regent began to throw off her Mask by
degrees; And she ordered The Regent grows severe against the Protestants, on
various pretenses.
the Protestant Meetings and Sermons in many places to be disturbed, pretending
they were not kept just in the same place that they were at first allowed. And
after, she went on and seized on and imprisoned some of the Preachers on the
same pretense; and she hanged one of them near AELEST. And when complaint was
made of these Proceedings to the Regent, she would sometimes say, Her Consent
was not free, but extorted from her by fear, and therefore she was not bound to
keep her Promise. And at other times she would say, She promised them a Liberty
to Preach, but she never meant they should Marry, Bury, Baptize, Administer the
Lord's Supper, and hold Consistories, and the like.

When the Regent saw her Forces at Valenciennes commanded to receive a Garrison.
hand, she wrote to the City of Valentiennes to receive a Garrison, in the year
1566, because that City was more inclined to embrace the Reformed Religion,
than any of the rest in the Low Countries, and had rescued some that were
condemned to be burnt for Heresy heretofore, and also because it was near^r to
France, and so more suspected. They refused to comply with this Command,
alleging many Reasons and Privileges to the contrary; and were thereupon
proclaimed Rebels the 14th. of December. After this, all means good and bad
were used to prevent the exercise of the Protestant Religion; which had its
effect in all places, but Amsterdam, Antwerp, Sherlogen-bosk, Maestricht,
Utrecht, and Ghent; for these Cities still upheld it. These Proceedings alarmed
the Cities of Flanders; and Antwerp sent a Committee of the principal
Inhabitants to consult with the Deputies of the Cities in Brabant, The rest of
the (...) petition for a General Assembly of the States.
who all joined in a Petition to the Regent, That there might be a General
Assembly of the States, to take present order concerning the business of
Religion, by provision, That then new Orders might be therein made for the
preserving the true Christian Religion, the Authority and Majesty of their
King, and for the promoting the Prosperity of these Provinces: That in the mean
time assurance should be given to those of the Reformed Religion, That they
should not be molested or disquieted during this Suspension: That after the
said States have resolved with the King how they will settle these things,
those that were not satisfied with their Orders, might have some Months time
given them to retire in, whither they pleased; and those that would submit,
should have a general Pardon granted them. This reasonable Request was very
little debated, because they of the Council knew the King's mind; but was
altogether rejected. The principal Nobility of these Countries thereupon met at
Dermond^: And here was read the Letter written by the Lord Montigni, giving an
account how much the King of Spain resented the present state of Affairs in the
Low^Countries: And there was also read a Letter written by Francis Davala, the
Spanish Ambassador in the Court of France, to the Regent of Flanders, the 29th.
of Au^ust, The Design^ of Spain discovered to the Nobility of the Netherlands.
1566. which was intercepted; wherein he endeavored to confirm her Highness in
her opinion, That all the Calamities of the Netherlands sprang from the
Triumvirate, (meaning the Prince of Orange, and the Counts of Egmont and
Hoorne): That it was fit nevertheless to show these all the respect that was
possible; and to tell them, that the King owned the preserving those Countries
to have been the effect of their Loyalty and good Service: But yet when time
served he would punish them: And also the two Lords that were now in Spain, who
should be kept there still to that purpose, with Counselor Rennert; and that
the King had sworn at Madrid, That he saw well that what had happened in the
Netherlands, was not only prejudicial to his Honor, but also to the Service of
God, which touched him so near, that he would run the hazard of losing all the
Dominions he had, rather than not chastise this Rebellion exemplarily in the
sight of all Christendom; and that he would go thither in Person, and send to
the Emperor and the Pope for Assistance. That his Majesty would certainly reap
great Advantages from the ill things that had been done; and expected to see
those Countries brought under his Absolute Command; and to settle after this,
both the Religion and the Civil Government, as he thought fit; which the King
could never have done, if these things had not happened. That the King had
desired this a long time, and they had now given him means to bring them under
as to the Civil State, and to quiet them as to the matters of Religion, as he
thought fit.

Thus the Crafty Spaniard made up The Discovery at the first only terrified and
divided them.
his reckoning without his host, and in the end found himself deceived. The
Nobility were never able, howev^r, to come to any Resolve, because Count Egmont
was resolved to throw himself upon the King's Mercy, and the Prince of Orange
durst not undertake to Head the Leaguers against so Potent and Implacable a
Prince as Philip the IId. was then: So this Discovery terrified and divided,
instead of uniting them: And Valenciens besieged.
the City of Valenciens in the mean time defended it self very resolutely, from
the 14th. of December to the 24th. of March, and then was forced to submit to
Mercy: Norcarmes, the General for the King of Spain, thereupon hanged up their
Ministers, and about Two hundred of the best of the Inhabitants; whereupon the
Regent forced or persuaded a great part of the Nobility to take an Oath to
maintain the Roman Catholic Religion; but yet the Prince of Orange, and some
few others, refused it, and retired. After this, she fell to shut up all the
Protestant Meeting Houses, and opened the Popish Churches, furnishing them
splendidly with new Images, and other suchlike Necessaries; and they hanged up
the contrary Party by wholesale, fifty or an hundred in a place, some for
pulling down their Images, and others for bearing Arms against the Government:
And in some of the greater Cities they A bloody Persecution against the
P^otestants of the Netherlands.
hanged up two, three, or four hundred men, making Gallows of the Timber of
their Meeting Houses Upon this many thousands of the Inhabitants of these
Countries retired, some into England, and others into Germany; so that by the
beginning of May, 1567. the Regent was entirely Mistress of all the Seventeen
Provinces, and there was not the least opposition any where made to whatsoever
she was pleased to order. Yet the King was never the more appeased; but so soon
as he heard the Inhabitants were mastered and brought under, he put John
Marquess of Bergen ap Zoom, and the Marquess Van Montigni, two Flandrian
Noblemen, both of the Roman Catholic Religion, who went into Spain to inform
him of the state of Affairs, and to induce him to show pity to his good
Subjects, into Prison; where they both perished, by what means was not known;
and besides, he seized both their Estates. In truth, after long consultation it
was resolved, That the first L^gal Pretense that should be offered, should be
taken to bridle these provinces, that they might so be brought into the new
form of Conquered Kingdoms, and be put under other Laws: They pretended also,
that it was impossible without this to keep these Countries in the
Roman Catholic Religion, because they were on all sides surrounded with
Heretic Countries, and relied very much upon their Civil Privileges and
Liberties; and this reason was very much pressed upon the King's Conscience by
the Fathers of the Inquisition. So that these Countries were doomed to Slavery
and Oppression, as the only means to preserve Popery, which can never thrive in
a free enlightened Country: And their case was perfectly like ours; for we too
of late were to be Conquered, and our Laws changed for the same end.

It was observed with great wonder on all sides, That when they took so many,
and punished so severely those The Breakers of Images not put upon it by the
Reformed.
that had pulled down and destroyed the Images, there was not one of them to be
found, that would confess that they had been put upon this, or persuaded to it,
by those of the Reformed Religion; but they all said it proceeded from an
Impulse upon their minds, of which they could give no account: But however, in
Spain it was resolved to take the opportunity The use Spain designed to make of
this Disorder.
of these Troubles, to bring under and subdue all these Provinces, and to
deprive them, by way of Punishment, of all their Privileges and Liberties; and
although all was quiet in the beginning of the year 1567, yet they were not
satisfied with the Punishment of the particular persons that had offended, but
resolved to extend their Revenge to all the Provinces, and to those of their
own Religion, as well as to their Opposers: And to fulfill this Bloody
Tyrannical The Character of the Duke of Alva.
Resolution, the Duke d' Alva was chosen, a man of great Experience in Warlike
Affairs, and well acquainted with these Countries, and of a merciless violent
Temper. The Inquisition and Clergy of Spain opened their Treasures, and
furnished the King liberally with Money also, for they looked upon this as an
Holy War, and hoped to make it the dawning to a general Destruction of the
Protestants. This Duke arrived at Brussels the 22d. of August, He comes into
Fland^rs.
1567. with 8678 Spanish and Italian Foot, and 1600 Horse; and 12000 German
Horse and Foot; tho all was quiet, and no opposition to be feared, if they he
brought with him did not cause it: He concealed a great part of his Commission;
yet what he produced of it, went very much beyond that which had been given to
the Regent that now was recalled and discharged of the Government. The Duke
usurped presently an Absolute and Uncontrollable Authority; and having
appointed a Council The Council of Blood settled.
of Twelve Bloody Men, he disposed of the Lives and Fortunes of the Subjects of
the Low Countries, of all States and Conditions, contrary to their Laws,
without any Appeal, Reformation, or Revision of his Sentence. He proceeded to
that height of Cruelty and Tyranny, that Nine of the Twelve left the Council
out of pure shame, and went home: For he had obtained from the King before he
came thither, a Full, Absolute, Sovereign Authority, which was not bounded by
any L^ws or Instructions, and was not to be contradicted by any body: Which was
contrary to all the Laws of that people, and to the King's Oath and Promise;
but he relied upon his Forces, and was not at all concerned what men thought or
said of him. Amongst the Eighteen Rules which the Council of Blood prescribed
to themselves to judge by, these were some.

1. All Petitions made by the States, Their Rules.
Cities, or Nobility of the Land, against the New Bishops and the Inquisition,
or to have any of the Placaets made by the King or Council moderated, were
Conspiracies against God and the King.

2. That all the Lords, Nobility, and Governors, that had not appeared against
the Petitions, Preachings, and breaking down of Images, are guilty of the same
Crime, tho they appeared discontented at them, and ashamed.

3. And all those that took the Proceedings of this Court for Tyrannical,
Unjust, or Illegal.

The First this Council began with, The Counts of Egmont and Hoorne the first
they seized.
was Count Egmont, the Count Van Hoorne, and Anthony Van Straten, Burgomaster
of Antwerp, who were treacherously summoned to a great Council, and there
Arrested by the Order of the Duke d' Alv^, the 9th. of September, 1567. which
put the Country into such an affright, that all degrees of men fled into all
the Neighbor Countries; but however, they went on, and filled the Prisons with
the remainder, and such as they happened to take; and it was observed, that they
had beforehand taken good care to Repair, Strengthen, and enlarge these places;
yet in some places they were broken up, and the Prisoners discharged by Force.
Having spent the rest of this year in Ruining and Attainting the Nobility, they
in the year 1568. began to Persecute the meaner sort of people, citing And
after them vast numbtrs of the meaner Inhabitants.
Thirty, Forty, or Fifty at a time, out of every City in the Provinces, to
appear before this Council; and upon their not appearing, (as none but the
Imprisoned durst), they seized upon their Estates, and confiscated their Goods
to the King's use: Thus they dealt with the Rich; but as for the poorer people,
they took them up and hanged them, without any more Ceremony. They pretended by
this Violence to enrich the King, and to establish the Romish Religion; but
they frighted away the people, alienated their hearts from him, and drove many
Roman Catholics into Protestant Countries, where they embraced that Religion
they had only a moderate opinion of before. To remedy a part of these
Inconveniences, they published an Order, That whosoever harbored or assisted
any person that was fled, or held any Correspondence by Letters or otherwise,
should be thought guilty of the same Crime; and that any Ship that carried off
any of their Goods, or any Wagon or Boat that furthered their Escape, or
conveyed away their Goods, should be forfeited.

The noise of these Proceedings alarmed all the Protestants in France, and
These Proceedings alarm all the Protestants in France, and Queen Elizabeth.
was the principal Cause of the renewing the War there; of which I have already
given a short account. Queen Elizabeth was a sorrowful Observer of all these
Tyranical Encroachments on the Lives, Liberties, and Fortunes of her
Neighbors; and such as fled into England from the bloody and outrageous
treatment of the Duke of Alva, and the Spaniards, found here in England a
secure Sanctuary, and had her They fly into England, and set up many
Manufactures.
leave to settle at Norwich, Colchester, Sandwich, Maidstone, and Hampton, to
the great Advantage of the English Nation, and the great Impoverishing of the
King of Spain's Territories, by setting up here the making of SAYS, BAYS, and
STUFFS, which the English before fetched out of France and Flanders. The King
of Spain would have no Heretics (as he called them) and none of his Subjects
should have any Civil Liberties to secure them against his Will or Humor: But
then he might have soreseen he should have lost his Subjects, his Trade, his
Wealth, and he had reason to fear he should lose his Country too; but he
trusted in The Conduct of this Prince considered.
Force, and it deceived him; but no Force could secure the other Three; Men are
not like Beasts of Burden; they must be well treated, or they will fly, or
not work, or be poor, or fail, and the Land become desolate, and not be able to
defend it self. How happy had Philip II. and Lewis XIV. been, if they had but
understood this? The ignorance of this has ruined many flourishing Empires, I
might say all; and this is that first Cause of the Ruin of the Ottoman Empire,
which has sapped its Foundations, and brought a Consumption upon it, which in a
few years will destroy it. Thus also fell the Roman, and all the other Empires,
when the fatal time was come. Not that Religion was then the pretense of the
oppressing their Subjects, but Oppression is the same thing, and will eternally
have the same effect, be the Pretense or Motive what it will. Emanuel Van
Meteren, in his Third Book of the History of these times, deploring the Loss
his Country sustained by being deprived at once of all its Trades, and so many
of its useful and industrious Subjects, says, That there was not less than an
Hundred thousand people that then fled into strange Countries to earn their
bread; and tho some of these afterward returned, yet the main body of them
never did; and their Trades were lost to the English and other Nations, who
learned them of these people, and exercise them to this day.

The Queen of England seeing the King of Spain was deaf to all her and her
Neighbor Princes Entreaties and Intercessions with him for the mitigating The
reasons which moved the Queen of England to oppose the Spaniards.
his Sanguinary and Cruel Edicts concerning Religion; and that he had set up in
the Netherlands a Spanish Inquisition for the more grievous Torturing the
Consciences of his Subjects: That he had denied an Assembly of the States of
the Netherlands, (which was the only and the usual way of composing their
Affairs, when they were in any disorder): That he governed them rather by
Arbitrary Orders sent from Spain, than by the Laws of the Country, or Counsels
of the Natives: That he made use of the Tumults which the meanest of the people
had fallen into upon the account of the Images, tho they were presently
suppressed, and that by the Natives, to bring one of the Freest Nations of
Europe under the intolerable yoke of an Arbitrary Government; turning unjustly
the rash Folly and Madness of a few mean people, to the great Damage of this
whole Nation, by pretending All that people had rebelled against him, and
thereby Forfeited their Ancient Liberties. She saw also that he had sent
Ferdinand Alavares, Duke of Alva, a Bloody man, to usurp this Arbitrary
Government, who being no way related to the Royal Family, was now constituted
the Supreme Governor of these Provinces, contrary to their Laws, and that he
had abolished and suspended the Jurisdiction and Authority of all their Legal
Courts, and brought in amongst them a new unheard of Tribunal, which had
proceeded illegally against several of the Nobility of that Country, and
condemned them to death, and they had been thereupon executed. That Spanish
Garrisons were quartered, and Citadels built in the great Towns and Cities; and
the Twentieth Penny of all their Real Estates, and the Tenth of their Personal
had been illegally assess'd, and by force levied. She saw also that the Duke d'
Alva the 29th. of December, 1568. had furiously and impatiently seized the
Goods and Persons of her own Subjects, and put them into the Custody of his
Soldiers, on the pretense of some Moneys stopped in England, which belonged to
the Merchants of Genoua, who had consented to the Embargo; and she concluded
this enraged man was not content to oppress the Netherlands, but would needs
make himself a Terror to her and her people too; whereupon this Heroic Lady
commanded all the Ships and Goods of the Netherlands which were in her Ports,
to be stopped; which were of greater value than those the Duke had been able to
find in the Low Countries; whereby she humbled that proud, hasty man, and made
him see how little she could fear either him or his Master.

This Action of the Queen's opened The Inhabitants of the Netherlands follow
the Example of Q. Elizabeth.
the eyes of the poor oppressed people of these Countries, and showed them the
way to deal with their Oppressors was to attack them by Water, and not by Land.
They had made several attempts on the side of Germany, under the Command of
some of their banished Nobility, in the year 1568; and they had been
unfortunate in all of them. Lewis Van Nassau, Brother of William Prince of
Orange, tho he had 7000 men, Horse and Foot, and was a good and a prudent
Commander, and had taken all the care that was possible to prevent Misfortunes,
yet he was defeated near Emden The Prince of Orange, who followed after, was in
a short time forced to retire into France, tho he had 11000 men under him. The
two next years he served the Prince of Conde in France; and in the year 1569.
he took up the Resolution to grant Letters of Mart to all that would put out
Ships to Cruise against the Spaniards in the Low Countries; the Here Van
Dolhain being Admiral, who in that year took, and spoiled, and ransomed many
Ships. This good success encouraged more in the year 1570. to take this course;
and as they grew stronger and more numerous, so they had better success. In
1571. they set upon the Fleet that was going to Spain, and took and plundered a
great part of it in the Texel. The Duke of Alva sent out some Men of War
against these Privateers, but to small purpose, because they were small and too
nimble for his great Ships; and Germany and England protected, victuall'd, and
harbored them. Whereupon in the year 1571. he sent to the Queen of England to
complain of the He com-plains to Q. Elizabeth of her Harboring the Netherland
Pirates.
Harboring these Pirates as he called them. The Queen was in no haste to do
his business after he had so far provoked her, but in the year 1572. when they
were become Rich, and very Numerous, she put out a severe Proclamation against
them, commanding them to be gone by a limited time, or to be feized in her
Harbors; whereupon in March this year they put themselves under the Command of
William Van Marck, Lord Lumey, to the number of about Thirty Ships or
Fly-Boats, well manned and victuall'd; and these had the good fortune to find
the Briel without They seize the Seaports of Holland and Zealand.
any Garrison, and so they took Possession of it without any opposition, the
first of April. The eighth of the same month, Flushing joined with them, and
cast out the few Spaniards were there. And after this, in a short time the
whole Provinces of South and North Holland, as fast as they could by any means
get rid of the Spanish Garrisons, revolted from them, and took up Arms against
the Duke of Alva, declaring at first for the Prince of Orange, as Stadtholder
to the King of Spain in these Provinces. Thus were the Foundations of the
Liberties Which was the beginning of the United Provinces.
of the United Provinces in the Low Countries, laid in the blood of its
Inhabitants, and as heartily at first promoted by the Roman Catholic Subjects,
to preserve their Civil Privileges, as by the Protestants to secure their Lives
and Fortunes from the Arbitrary Violence of the Spaniards: So that if
either of them were Rebels, it was because Philip the IId. would not be
contented with the same degree of Power the former Princes his Predecessors had
enjoyed; but made use of a Ferment the Providence of God and his own Cruelty
and Imprudenee had raised in the minds of his Subjects, to enslave the Innocent
and the Guilty. And although he made Religion his Pretense, yet Ambition and
Worldly Greatness, and the subduing his own People and all his Neighbors, was
the Real Motive at the bottom. I conclude therefore, That he was a Tyrant, and
a Perfidious Man; and his Subjects that revolted from him upon such horrid
Provocations, and after they had done all that was possible to bring him to
better courses, were no Rebels. I cannot here but observe how frequently and
passionately of late the Hollanders were called Rebels and Traitors here, by a
sort of men who were going to act upon us all the ill things the Spaniards did
there; but wanting Numbers, they were forced to go slowly on, and had great
thoughts of heart, that our Doctrine of Non-Resistance might fail them when
they stood most in need of it to bind up our hands till they should cut our
Throats; and therefore they declaimed furiously against these Hollanders, to
fright us into the snare. But certainly the man must be very silly, that would
at all regard the being called a Rebel by the Roman Catholics; or part with
all that is valuable, to avoid that Reproach from such men of all others.

But to return from this Digression Q. Elizabeth undertakes the Protection of
her oppressedNeighbours.
concerning the Cause of this War: The Queen seeing her Neighbors in the
Netherlands thus oppressed by the Savage Tyranny of the Duke De Alva, and so
injuriously exhausted by his Arbitrary and Illegal Exactions, Prosecutions and
Murders, and all the other Calamities of an unjust War; and the distressed
Inhabitants of these Provinces flocking in great numbers into her Kingdom, to
shelter themselves from the Affronts, Assassinations, Pride and Cruelty of this
Enemy and Executioner, with all they could bring away with them, she opened her
Ports to receive them, and with great compassion heard their bitter Complaints,
whilst they deplored the Miseries of their Country, and begged her Protection,
pursuant to the Treaties and Leagues between England, and the House of
Burgundy. She always expressed a great regard for those Nations and Countries
that lay near hers, and were by Leagues united to her; and she was the more
afflicted for this People, because fhe saw the extirpating the Protestant
Religion, was made the Pretense of one of the most flagrant Injuries that was
ever offered to a Free People: And therefore she was the more easily induced to
deliver these her nearest Allies out of the Jaws of this Pyratc and Enemy of
Mankind; and to curb the Insolence of these Spanish Forccs, that from all
quarters were poured in upon these miserable Countries, to enslave and destroy
them. She thought there was nothing in this world which so well became the
Majesty of a Prince, and tended more to her Reputation and Glory, than the
taking Arms against such men as these, and in the Defense of such Supplicants,
to deliver them at once from the most intolerable Dangers, and from Slavery. It
is very probable she would for a longer time have dissembled the Injuries the
King of Spain had done to her and her Subjects, if he would have mitigated his
Rigors in the Low Countries; but seeing that was not to be hoped for, she
resolved to put a stop to his Rage by Force; and for the Glory of God, and the
common Safety of the Protestant Interest, to assist the Netherlanders with Men,
Money, Arms, Ammunition, and whatever else was necessary to keep them out of
the hands of their Oppressors. She neither feared the Greatness of Philip the
IId nor the Threats of France, nor the Secret and Treacherous Machinations and
Plots of her own Popish Subjects at home; nor the Hazards, Expenses, or
Calamities of a very dangerous and lasting War abroad, with the Richest and
most Potent Princes in her Times; but putting her sole Trust and Confidence in
the Providence and Protection of God, she cheerfully and undauntedly entered the
Lists with these men, that her Neighbors and Friends, Confederates and Allies,
might enjoy their Ancient Liberties and Privileges, their beloved Country,
their Estates and Fortunes, and the Liberty of their Consciences, and live
happily. She thought no Labor, no Danger, no Expense too great to be hazarded,
to obtain so great a Blessing for them; but went through all that stood in her
way, with Courage, Equinimity, Fidelity, and Constancy: By which she acquired
an Immortal Glory, and is still esteemed the Deliverer and Preserver of this
People, and in truth of the whole Protestant Interest in Christendom. The Kings
of France and Spain in the mean time threatened to expel her out of her
Kingdoms; and promoted Rebellions in England and Ireland to that end against
her; but there happened such dreadful Civil Wars in both their Kingdoms, that
they were very much disabled from prosecuting these Designs to the degree they
intended. And she for her part was not wanting, but sent her Forces both into
France and Flanders, to find these two Monarchs work at home, and by kindling
Fires in their Kingdoms, prevented their laying her own in Ashes. Thus at the
same time she delivered Britain from the fear of a War with France and
Flanders; and whilst she protected her Oppressed Neighbors, she preserved her
own Subjects from an intolerable Foreign Servitude. Thus she preserved England
for ever from the Danger of a Spanish Invasion and Conquest, upon which they
were then bent, and slew vast numbers of their best Commanders and Forces both
by Sea and Land.

France for the first Thirty Years of French Affairs.
her Reign was perpetually involved either in an actual Civil War within its
own bowels, or enjoyed an uneasy and a suspected Peace; so that this Kingdom
was never so quiet, as to be able to look abroad, and give any disturbance to
its Neighbors. The Protestant Party was strong and numerous, and every day
grew greater, and was headed by the Princes of the Royal Family of the House of
Bourbon: And the Popish Party on the other side was the far greater Party, and
was headed by the Royal Family that was in Possession of the Crown of France:
So that Henry II. and Francis II. Charles IX. and Henry III. his Sons, who were
all successively Kings of France one after the other, did all that was
possible, by Wit and Policy, Force, Perfidy, Wars, Massacres, Breach of Faith,
and Surprises, to extirpate this Party; and when all was done, the End of Seven
Civil Wars one after another, was a Toloration; and the End of every
Toleration, but the last, was a Civil War, began by the Popish Party, upon the
Principle, That no Faith was to be kept with Heretics; which Maxim was so
often alleged, either by way of Excuse, or by way of Incitement, or
Justification, that nothing but the Weakness of the Protestant Party could
possibly have induced them to accept a Security, which had been so often
forfeited, and which they were certain would last no longer, than till the
Popish Party were in a condition to break it. And yet the keeping of the
Seventh, that was granted by Henry the IVth. in the year 1596. did them more
damage than the breach of all the other Six that went before it; because by its
long duration it disarmed and effeminated that Party, and robbed them of their
Fears, their Martial Courage, and that keen Zeal for their Religion, which the
Perfidy and Violence of the former Times had kept alive. We desire Peace and
good days; but God who knows our temper, and what will follow very often, sends
us Troubles for our good, which like Physic keeps us alive, tho it does not
please us.

In the year 1565. there was a secret A Private League between France and Spain
against the Protestants.
League made at Bayone, between the Crowns of France and Spain, which was
called, The Holy League, because chiefly designed for the Extirpating the
Protestant Religion out of France and Flanders; tho it was managed with all the
Privacy and Secrecy that was possible, yet the suspicion of the Protestant
Party gave them the first hint to dive into it; and within a little time it was
discovered both by its effects, and by the cross Interests of many of the
Roman Catholics, who were to be deprived of their Civil Privileges, in lieu of
having their Religion established and preserved. This gave the occasion to all
those fearful Commotions in Flanders, which I have just now related: And in
France there followed a Civil War in the year 66. another in the year 1568.
which in the year 1572. was ended by a Treaty of Marriage between Henry of
Bourbon, King of Navarre, Head of the Protestants, and Margaret Sister of
Charles the IXth. then King of France. Here the Roman Catholic Party played
their last Card, and with a Diabolical Perfidy and Cruelty which has no Example
in Sacred or Profane History, and Massacred vast Numbers of the Principal
Nobility and Gentry of the Protestants, who were come to Paris to see the
Marriage, not being able to suspect a Court could be so base as to stain it
self in so Treacherous a manner with the blood of men who relied upon their
Faith. The next year after Charles died; and Henry the IIId. his Brother, who
had been a great Henry III. succeeds in France.
Actor in the Massacre, succeeded him in the Kingdom of France: Under him the
Holy League, as it was called, went slowly on; and he was not so forward to
involve his Kingdom in War and Blood, as the weaker Princes, his Brothers had
been; but he was rather inclined to destroy them insensibly by the Arts of
Peace, as it came afterward to be done; but this Method was disliked by the
Popish Party in France, which is for the most part Fiery and Cruel, and will
never use slow and gentle ways, but when it is impossible they should do
otherwise. Hereupon the Duke of Guise, a Valiant, but very The D. of Guise
designs against that Prince.
Factious Gentleman, began in the year 1576. to set up himself against his
Prince; and in the year 1584. he got himself declared Head of the Holy League
against the King his Master, as a Favourer of Heresy, by Gregory the XIIIth.
then Pope of Rome, and a great part of the bigoted and discontented Clergy and
Nobility of France: Whereupon in the year 1585. followed the Seventh Civil War
in France, upon the Pope's Excommunicating the King of Navarre, and the Prince
of Conde, for Heresy. This last War was began by the Popish Party, against the
opinion, and without the consent of Henry King of France; and accordingly it
thrived, the King of Navarre beating them in the Battle of Courtay, in the year
1587. After which Victory, the King was desirous to have a Peace, and the
Guises and the Popish Party to continue the War: And upon this the Roman
Catholic Party subdivided it self into two Factions, part siding with the King
for a Peace, and part joining with the Guises to carry on the War, and depose
this King as a Favourer of Heresle, softened with Pleasures, and unfit for
Government.

The Duke of Guise was a younger An Account of the House of Guise.
Branch of the Family of Lorrain, which is esteemed the Direct Heir of the
House of Charles the Great, and consequently it has a Pretense to the Crown of
France, which is foreclosed by nothing but the too great Antiquity of the
Claim, and the Weakness of that Family. Henry the IIId. the then King of
France, was become the last of the House of Valoise, and thought unfit for
Generation; and upon his Death, the Crown of this Kingdom was to devolve to
Henry King of Navarre, who was the Head of the Protestant Party; and all the
Family was in the same Interest, but the Cardinal of Bourbon, who was a very
old Gentleman; so that if things were suffered to go quietly on, the Death of
Henry III. would put the Protestants of France in Possession of the Throne in
the Person of Henry IV. This was the true ground of that dreadful Revolution,
which shook the Fou^ndations of the French Monarchy and Nation. They
considered, that if a Protestant Prince was once quietly settled in the Throne,
nothing but a Miracle could preserve the Roman Catholic Religion in France;
and they durst not trust an Event to the Providence of God, and the Reasons and
Consciences of men, which in all probability would put an end to the Romish
Religion in France, and so weaken it in all the rest of Europe, that it would
never be in a condition to make use of Force more, against those that had
forsaken it; so The Reasons why Hen. III. was to be Deposed, and Henry IV.
Excluded.
the Design was laid between the King of Spain, the Pope, and the Duke of
Guise, That Henry the IIId. should be Deposed, and turned into a Monastery, as
Chilperick was; and Henry the IVth. should be excluded as an Heretic relapsed,
and Excommunicated, and a new King of France should be chosen; and then each of
these Heads of this League hoped to make their own Market in the end. Henry the
IIId. saw all this, and to save himself, in the year 1588. called an Assembly
of the Three Estates of France at Bloise; but finding the greater part of his
Subjects, by the procurement of the Popish Clergy, inclined to join with the
Duke of Guise against him, he ordered Henry Duke of Guise, and Charles his
Brother, Cardinal of Lorain, to be both Assassinated by his Guards; and secured
many of their Friends; but the Duke of Maine, another of the Brothers of the
Duke of Guise, escaped the slaughter, and thereupon almost the whole Kingdom of
France revolted, and took up Arms against him under the Duke of Maine; so that
he had no way to save his own Life and Crown, but to call Henry King of
Navarre, and his Protestant Subjects, to his Assistance against these his
enraged Catholic Subjects, who were now become his implacable enemies. Being
thus in a condition to have forced Paris, and to have driven the Conspirators
out of France, one James Clement, a Dominican Monk, stabbed Henry III. slain.
him the first of August in his Tent, under the Walls of Paris. The House of
Valoise thus failing in him, when it had enjoyed the Crown of France Two
hundred and sixty Years, the Right of it fell to Henry King of Navarre, of the
House of Bourbon; but he was suspected by all his Popish Subjects, stoutly
resisted by all that were in the League against his Predecessor, and
Excommunicated by the Pope, and sorely laid at by the King of Spain, who
dreaded nothing so much as the seeing France in the hand of a Valiant, Wise,
Protestant Prince, now his Invincible Armado was returned back srom England
with Shame, Ignominy, and Contempt, and such a Loss as Spain was never able
since to recover.

The Queen Mother of France, who The Queen Mother of France dies of Grief.
had been the principal Incendiary, when she saw the Duke of Guise fall in the
Assembly of Bloise, and her only Son in the utmost danger of being Murdered or
Deposed, she died with the mere apprehension of the Calamities she had brought
upon her own head and Family, before her Son was slain. And as for Henry the
IVth. the new King of France, he saw things in that Disorder and Confusion,
that he was forced to raise his Camp, and retreat from Paris into Normandy,
from whence he sent to Queen Elizabeth for Succors of Men, Money, and
Ammunition. The Queen presently sent Peregrine Queen Elizabeth assists Henry
IV. with Men and Money.
Lord Willoughby, who had signalized his Valor in the Netherlands, with Four
thousand Men, and Two and twenty thousand Pounds of English Money in Gold,
which was a Sum which Henry the IVth. owned he had never before seen together
in Gold at once. Henry had beat the Leaguers before these men arrived, contrary
to the expectation of all the World; and being thus reinforced from England, he
pursued his Victory to the Gates of Paris, and was in a fair way to have taken
the City, but that he did not think it possible, and he was besides unwilling
to run the hazard of seeing the Capital City of France plundered by his own
Army. This tenderness of his at length brought him under the necessity of
changing his Religion, to gain the Crown of France.

In the year 1590. the King of Spain The Spaniards invade Britagne, a Province
of France.
sent Forces to take possession of Bretagne, a Province of France, pretending a
Title to it for himself; and some of the English Courtiers advised Queen
Elizabeth not to concern her self any farther in the Affairs of that Kingdom,
to her great impoverishing, and no advantage, telling her, Charles the Bold,
Duke of Burgundy, used to say, It would be better for all the Neighbor Nations
to have France under Twenty Kings than One: To which she as stoutly replied,
The Evening of the last Day the Crown of France should see, would be fatal to
England. And the next year she sent a Q. Elizabeth assists the French against
these Spaniards.
Fleet, and Three thousand Land-men to secure that Province out of the hands of
the Spaniards. This small Number of men being commanded by Sir John Norris, a
person of great Experience and Conduct, preserved that Province not only from
the Dominion, but in a good degree also from the Rapines and Cruelties of the
Spaniards. She spent in Three years in these French Affairs, (besides the Gold
she sent to Henry the IVth. into Normandy), 226058 Crowns of French Money; yet
she did not burden her Subjects to pay it, but got it together by her Thrifty
Management.

This Queen was wholly intent upon Spain invaded by the English.
the humbling the Pride of Spain; and at the same time she opposed his
Greatness, and curbed his Ambitious Designs in France and the Netherlands, she
sent a potent Fleet, and an Army into Spain, in the year 1589, to revenge the
Invasion of the preceding year, and to settle Anthony a Bastard in the Kingdom
of Portugal, which was then in the Possession of Philip the IId. King of Spain:
The Army consisted of Eleven thousand Men, and there went in the Fleet Fifteen
hundred Seamen: The Army was commanded by Sir John Norris, and the Fleet by
Sir Francis Drake; They first landed at the Groyne in Galicia They take the
Groyne.
without any Opposition; and the next day they took the Lower-Town by Scalado,
but not without the loss of a great many men: And here they found a vast
Magazine of Gunpowder and Maritime Stores, which was brought hither for another
Expedition against England. In this Expedition Robert Earl of Essex stole away
from the Court, and served as a Volunteer in this Expedition.
Robert Earl of Essex gave proofs of his Martial Inclinations, for he stole
away from Court without the Queen's Leave, she being unwilling to venture any
of her principal Nobility in so dangerous an Undertaking as this seemed then to
be; but this brisk young Gentleman, on the contrary, despising the soft
Pleasures of a Court, greedily embraced this opportunity of Revenging the
Wrongs of his Country, and set Sail after the Fleet in a single Ship, and he
had the good fortune to fall into the English Fleet, after they had left the
Groyne, and were going to attack Lisbon, wherein they had not the same success,
by reason their Forces were too small, and the Fleet was kept at too great a
distance to relieve the Army, which was forced to march about Sixty Miles by
Land; but however, they took the Towns of Paniche and Chascais, and brought out
of Spain One hundred Great Guns, and about Sixty Ships, sent by the Hanse Towns
in Germany, loaded with Corn, which went round about Scotland and Ireland, by
the Vergivian Ocean, to avoid being intercepted by the English, the Queen
having before warned those Cities, That if they sent any Provisions or
Ammunition into Spain, she would treat them as Enemies. Besides all these, they
brought back with them a very rich Prey in Housholdstuff, Money, and Plate,
which they gathered in that Kingdom; but the most considerable advantage, was
the intercepting all the Stores which had been gathered for a second Expedition
against England, (the Design of which was after this laid aside), and the
discovering the Weakness of the Spaniards when they were set upon at their own
doors; so that after this time the English despised this before so formidable
Enemy, they having with so small an Army marched so many Miles, and taken so
many places in two of the best peopled Provinces of that Kingdom.

In the year 1591. Robert Earl of Essex was sent into Normandy with Four
thousand English, to Assist Henry the The Actions of Robert Earl of Essex.
IVth. in the Reduction of Roan; where before that City he lost his Brother
Walter, who was ^ain by a Musket: This was so far from terrifying this Noble
Earl, that it was with wonder observed by the French, that he exposed his own
person the more freely, that he might take all opportunities to revenge his
Death. After this, in the The second Expedition into Spain.
year 1596. the Queen sent him her General again into Spain; the Fleet which
consisted of One hundred and fifty Ships, (being partly English, and partly
Dutch) was commanded by Charles Lord Howard, Admiral of England; and the
Landforces, which were about Seven thousand and three hundred men, were to be
commanded by Essex and Howard, as Joynt-Generals, Essex having the Precedence
on Shore, and Howard at Sea: They came before Cadiz the 20th. of June, but did
not attempt to Land while the 22d. and then Cadiz taken by the English.
they took the Town on the first Assault by the Cowardice of the Spaniards,
which paid Five hundred and twenty thousand Ducats for its Ransom. There was
Two Millions more offered for the Redemption of the Ships in Port Real, but it
was refused by the Admiral, he saying, He was sent to Burn, and not to Ransom
the Spanish Navies. The Spaniards confess they lost in the Sack The loss the
Spaniard sustained.
of this Town, in Ships Taken and Burnt, in Canon Taken and Sunk, and in
Stores, and Ammunition, and Victuals, above Twenty Millions of Ducats. The
Magnanimous Earl of Essex was for keeping the Town and Island, and he offered
to do it with Three hundred men, and Three Months Provision for them; but the
rest of the Commanders who had enriched themselves, were for returning, and so
he was forced to return much against his will, the 5th. of July, when he had
got little but a Noble Library, which he chose out of that Rich Spoil. The
Spaniards observed, The English in this Sack showed themselves to be Heretics
by their Contempt of their Religious Houses and Places; but in all other things
they behaved themselves with great Valor, Prudence, and Generosity. The Noble
Earl would fain in his return have attempted the Groyne, St. Andreo, and St.
Sebastian, but the rest of the Commanders were against making any other Trial
of their Fortune, believing they had done enough for the Glory and Safety of
their Country. This Expedition secured England for the Remainder of her Reign
against all the Attempts and Fears of Spain. In the year 1599. this Earl was
made Deputy of Ireland, which proved his Ruin, Sir Robert Cecil in his Absence
being made Master of the Wards, tho the Queen had promised him that Office, and
he depended upon it as that which was to repair his Estate, shattered in her
Service; whereupon he came back without her Leave, and the next year after was
beheaded for Attempting to Raise an Insurrection in London against the Court.

To pass from these Foreign Affairs to The Affairs of Ireland in her time.
others that were of nearer concern to England; there was in all her days a
Destructive and most Chargeable War continued against her in Ireland. The Irish
Nation have ever since it was subdued by the English, born an implacable hatred
to the Conquerors, which neither Marriages, nor Benefits, nor Losses, nor Time
it self has been able to extinguish: But when in her time the Religion of
England was changed, and the general Body of the Irish, and a great part of the
old English Families persisted in the Popish Religion; there was by that means
a new Ferment added to their restless and unquiet spirits; so that there was
nothing to be heard of from thence, but frequent and perfidious Rebellions,
which were the more dangerous and lasting, because they were excited by the
Pope's Bulls whom the Irish reverence above all other Nations; and supported
and carried on by Spanish Counsels, Money, and Forces: Yet however, the Queen
did never think it her Interest to make a sharp and a concluding War upon them,
because this was not possible to be done, without being grievous to her People
of England, whilst she was forced to spend such prodigious Sums of Money in the
Netherlands, and France, as would have made an effectual War in Ireland
insupportable. She took care in the mean time to send over thither the Best and
Wisest of her States men and Swordmen, as her Deputy Lieutenants; and she sent
them such Supplies of Men and Moneys as enabled them from time to time to keep
the English Pale in good order, and to hinder the Spanish Party from growing
more Potent in the North, than was convenient to consume his Forces, and divert
him from nearer and more dangerous Attempts; and by her Generals and the Forces
she sent over, she wasted and consumed the Forces of the CLANS and great Irish
Lords, and by degrees brought the Wild and Barbarous Irish from the former way
of living more like Beasts than Men, in Woods and Mountains, to the living in
Populous and well-governed Towns and Villages. She taught them to leave off
their barbarous cruel Customs, and to live soberly and according to Law; to
forsake their wild ways of Diet and Clothing, and live more Civilly, and like
the English. The Northern Province of Ulster was the Ulster the first
Provencethat Rebelled against her.
first that Rebelled, the Scots and the Islanders in great Numbers pouring into
that Province; whereupon Shan O Neale in the year 1563. took up Arms against
his Sovereign, instead of sending to her for Assistance to drive out these
Foreign Enemies: He was first Reduced by the Earl of Sussex, and forced to come
into England to beg Pardon of the Queen: The next year he broke out again, and
was reduced by Sir Henry Sidney, Lord Deputy; and in 1565. he perished in a
drunken Fray by the Macdonnels, to whom he fled for Succor and Refuge. This
Shan O Neale was so wicked and debauched a Villain in all his Actions, that all
men approved of the Revenge Macdonnel took of so false and perfidious a man,
that had done many Wrongs to them and their Families, as well as to the
English. The Macdonnels were Scots, and of the number of the Islanders that had
settled in this Province of Ulster. This Execution happened the 2d. of June, 1567.
Mr. Cox writes their Names, MACCONEL.

In the year 1564. there happened a Quarrel A Quarrel between Ormond and Desmond.
between the Earls of Ormond and Desmond, which came to a Battle between them
at Affane, in the County of Waterford. The next year they went over into
England together to implead each other before the Queen, who of the two was
most inclined to favor Desmond. In 1566. they returned, and Desmond took the
Field with Two thousand men to join Shan O Neale, as was pretended, but in
truth to Revenge his Quarrels on the Earl of Ormond, who defeated him and all
his Forces near Drumelin; and in the close of that year the Lord Deputy Sidney
took Desmond Prisoner, and at Limerick tried him for High Treason, and he was
found Guilty, and committed to Prison, and his Brother John was Knighted, and
made Earl of Desmond. This Quarrel was at first a personal private Feud between
these Two Potent Families; but in the year 1568. some Laws having passed in a
Parliament, which displeased the Great Men, they took up the pretense of
Religion to draw in the People; and the Pope entered into it, and the King of
Spain was solicited to send Forces by the Earl of Desmond's younger Brother,
Titular Bishop of Cashil: Thereupon the Lord Deputy began the War this very
year, and defeated Two thousand of their men near Kilkenny, with the loss of
one single man. The Earl of Ormond was then in England, and went into Ireland
to reclaim his own Brothers, who joined with Desmond in this Revolt, which was
designed to subvert the Government, and clear the Country of all English Men,
and English Laws.

In the year 1569. Pope Pius Quintus The Pope and King of Spain interested in
the Irish War.
Excommunicated the Queen, and deprived her of all her Dominions; and this had
such effect upon Ireland, that there was no quiet to be looked for in that
Kingdom to the end of her days: But yet by the year 1571. Sir John Perrot,
Governor of Munster, brought that Province into Peace. The King of Spain was
slow in meddling with the Irish Affairs, and sent them little or no Supplies
till the year 1578. which was Ten years after they began to treat with him for
his Assistance. This year one Stukely an Englishman was sent by Gregory XIII.
Pope of Rome, and the King of Spain, with Eight hundred Italian Soldiers; but
he went with Sebastian King of Portugal, into Africa, where he and his men
perished with that King.

In 1578. Sir William Drury was Fitz-Morris and Sanders invade Ireland with
Spaniards.
sworn Lord Deputy of Ireland, the 14th. of September. The same year James Fitz
Morris after he had Sworn Allegiance to the Queen before Sir John Perrot, went
into France, and failing of any Supplies, from thence he went into Spain, where
he obtained a few Men, and some Money; and in July, 1579. he landed Eighty
Spaniards at Semerwick in Kerry, where he built a Fort, and Sanders the Pope's
Legate Consecrated the ground; but the English took the three Ships for all
that, and put the Spaniards into a wonderful fright: The Desmonds joined with
these Rebels, and soon after, a great many of the old English, who persisted in
the Roman Catholic Religion; which was in a great degree owing to the smalness
of the English Forces in Ireland, the Army being then but about Six hundred
men. Sir William Drury sickned and died; and Sir William Pelham was chosen in
his Place by the Council, and Sworn the 11th. of October, 1579. who was
succeeded by

Arthur Lord Gray, Baron of Wilton, Sworn the 14th. of September, 1580. He took
the Fort abovementioned, and put all the Spaniards to the Sword, which much
displeased the Queen, tho the Deputy alleged, That he could not keep them his
Prisoners, the Army was so small, and the Numbers of his Enemies were so great.
The Deputy went on with small Forces, and an Invincible Resolution and
Industry, defeating and reducing them so often and so strangely, that at last
they got him represented to the Queen, as a Bloody The Deputy for his good
Service, slandered in England.
man that regarded not the Lives of the Subjects any more than the lives of
Dogs, but had Tyrannized with that Barbarity, that there was little left for
the Queen to reign over, but Carcasses and Ashes. The Necessity of the Times
had indeed made him severe; but he had showed much more Mercy to the Irish than
either they deserved, or was consistent with the Queen's Interest, or the
Safety of the English that were in Ireland; however in the midst of his
Victories he was re-called in August 1582. The next year the miserable Earl of
Desmond was taken in a Cabin in a Wood, and slain unknown by an Irish man, and
his Head sent over into England, and set on London Bridge: His Name was Girald,
and he was the Fifteenth Earl of that Family; and with his Life ended this
Rebellion in Munster. The Queen was however a Lady of that Generous Mercy and
Compassion, that she was heartily concerned for the Bloods of these miserable
Wretches who sought hers, and her Protestant Subjects Ruin with an Hellish and
Implacable ^ury.

The distributing Mercy and Justice The difficulty of Administering Justice and
Mercy seasonably.
with Prudence, is the hardest Task a Prince has; and in truth there is none
but God that can pretend to do it always well; because he alone knows both the
truth of all men's actions, the ends and designs of them, and the tempers of the
Agents as to the present and the future: But Princes are often deceived in one
or more of these, and so spare or punish, when they should not: Besides, they
are subject to the same Passions other men are, and by them they are misled
when the thing is plain. It is better, generally speaking, to be too Merciful,
than too severe: But when it is known once that a man will be so, it ruins more
than it can save; and too much, exposes the Innocent. Mercy to Multitudes and
mean people is always seasonable, and the contrary destructive; but to pardon
Great men for two, three, or four Rebellions one after another, is to proclaim
a liberty of doing it impunedly. She was never guilty of this in England, but
in Ireland it was frequently done, and therefore it was her own fault that she
met with so much trouble; and all her Mercy almost was thrown away, and proved
Cruelty to the English. Pardon a barbarous Enemy, and you make him insolent;
and therefore inexorable Justice, especially upon a relapse, is absolutely
necessary; but then this is to be understood only of great Men and of great
Crimes, such as Murder and Rebellion.

In the year 1584. June 26. Sir John Perrot Sir John Perrot, Lord Deputy of
Ireland.
was made Lord Deputy of Ireland. He was sent thither in unquiet and dangerous
times; and he managed Affairs with so much Industry and Courage, that he saved
Ireland, tho he himself fell a Sacrifice to the Malice of Hatton, the Lord
Chancellor of England. In his time the Queen gave to New Colonies of English
sent into Munster.
several Adventurers, of the Lands forfeited by Desmond and his Accomplices,
574628 Acres. The Proprietors were to People the same, and to pay the Queen
over and besides, 1976 l. 7 s. 5 d. the year, Quit-Rent. To this end she
invited the younger Brothers of the English Nation to settle in Ireland,
promising them great Privileges, and Land at reasonable Rents. The Burks in
Connaught hereupon rebelled, but were overthrown; Seven of Three thousand
scaping. Thus things were again reduced into a tolerable good order; and the
dispeopled Province of Munster was at once Peopled and Civilized by the
English; but the Deputy had no share in it, but it was managed by a Committee;
for he was on ill terms with the Queen, upon the account of some indiscreet
passionate words he had dropped; and which were by the Malice of his Enemies
told the Queen, with many invidious Additions.

The Queen had ordered, That if The Irish complain of the English.
any unforfeited Lands were intermixed with those that were forfeited, that the
Proprietor should be compounded with to his content, and be bought out, that so
the Undertakers might have his Manor entire. But when this came to be put in
practice, there was great and loud Complaints brought to the Deputy, That the
Adventurers had unjustly outed many innocent men of their Inheritances, out of
covetousness to get their Estates: Whereupon a Proclamation was issued out,
Commanding the Proprietors to restore what they had unjustly taken; which with
the favor the Deputy showed to the Ejected Irish by the Queen's Order, put a
stop to the Wrong and the Complaints. As he had had no hand in the distribution
of these Lands, so he soon made the Adventurers sensible they were to expect no
favor from him; which turned to the advantage of the Irish, but occasioned
bitter Complaints from the The English complain of the Lord Deputy.
English against the Deputy, as a Favourer of the Irish rather than of the
English: But this Great Man, who was of a Regal Spirit, (and is supposed to
have been a Bastard Son of Henry the VIIIth.), despised too much the Complaints
of his Contrymen, and forced the greatest of the English to fly before his
Authority; and as for the Irish, he made them better than they would otherwise
have been both by his Threats and Severity, and by his good Advices; and by the
strength of his Reason he made them understand how much it was for their good
to continue firm in their Allegiance to the Queen. This was an hard Task,
considering the Capacity and Temper both of the People he was to deal with, and
of the Times in which he governed Ireland.

In the year 1588. Sir William Fitz-Williams was made Lord Deputy of Ireland,
and continued till the 11th. of August, 1594. He was a Covetous, Fitz-Williams
Character.
Unjust man, and laid the Foundations of a great many Troubles to the English
in after times; but in all his, Ireland was tolerably quiet, till toward the
latter end of his Government; only the Irish took up an Aversion for the
English Government and Sheriffs, by his means; and Tyrone having Six Companies
allowed him under the Queen's Pay, he changed his men so often, that the whole
Country became Disciplined men; and he got great quantities of Lead into his
Possession, under pretense of building a fine House. In the year 1593 the The
College of Dublin finished.
College of Dublin was finished at the Queen's Charges, and Burleigh was the
first Chancellor, and Usher the first Scholar in it.

That which made Ireland so quiet The English Colonies keep Ireland quiet a
while.
under Fitz-Williams, was the Justice, Prudence, and Valor of his Predecessor,
Sir John Perrot, which had broken the Power of the Heads of the Irish Clans,
and so well Civilized and Planted that Kingdom with English Colonies and
Garrisons, that during these Six years there was but Eight hundred Foot, and
Three hundred Horse maintained, to keep the Natives in quiet. The Irish were
also so well settled in their Lands, Estates and Cattle, that it was no man's
Interest to make any Disturbance: And there was no Foreign Prince that could be
brought to join with them, or lend them any Assistance. The Spanish Part of the
Spanish Armada shipwracked on the Coast of Ireland.
Armada in the latter end of the year 1588. lost Seventeen of its Ships upon
the Northern and Western Shores of this Kingdom, and 5394 of the men in it
perished; and tho some of the Popish Natives sheltered some of them, yet they
all robbed them of their Freasures, and got what they had for it: And King
James of Scotland looked upon himself as the Presumptive Heir of this Kingdom
after the Queen, and kept a fair Correspondence with the English, and
restrained the Scots and Islanders from joining with the Irish. There was a
Rumor in England, That there was a vast Treasure found in the Spanish Ships
which perished in Connaught, and Ulster: And Fitz-Williams the Lord Deputy made
a severe search after it, commanding by a Proclamation all the Spanish
Treasures to be brought into the Exchequer for the Queen's use; and he
imprisoned Sir Owen O Tool, and Sir John O Dogherty, two of the greatest men
in the North, in the Castle of Dublin, on this pretense, tho they were the best
affected to the English, of any of the Inhabitants; but he could discover
nothing, tho he kept the first Two years in Restraint, and the latter all his
time, who was discharged by his Successor, and died soon after, being much
decayed by the Hardships of a long Imprisonment, and Old Age. But all these ill
things done under Fitz Williams, made work for them that followed him.

Upon the Death of Mac Mahon, who Hugh Roe wrongfully murdered by the Deputy.
was one of the Heads of an Irish Clan, and had not long before taken a Patent
from the Queen for the County of Monaghan, to him and his Heirs Male for ever;
Hugh Roe his Brother and Heir, Petitioned the Deputy to be settled in his
Inheritance, according to the Queen's Patent, and the Laws of the Kingdom; and
the Irish say it coft him Six hundred Cows to have a Promise of it. And then
the Deputy only said he would go in person to do it: But as soon as he came to
Monaghan, he Imprisoned, Tried, and Condemned Hugh Roe, by Military Law, and
without any Legal Trial; pretending he had Levied Forces two years before, to
distrain for Rent he pretended was due to him in the Ferny. Hereupon he was
hanged, and the County was divided between Sir Henry Bagnal, Marshal, Captain
Henslow, and four of the Mac Mahons, under a Yearly Rent; each of these giving
the Deputy considerable Bribes, as they said in their Complaint to the Council
of England. The Deputy denied all this; but it was observed, That from
thenceforward the Irish loathed Sheriffs, and the Neighborhood of the English,
fearing the same fate might at one time or other attend them, that had befallen
Hugh Roe. The Report of this Villainy Spread it self all over Ulster; and the
Heads of the Clans were greatly terrified and incensed at it, and had close
Cabals, wherein they severely taxed the ill Management, Covetousness, and
Cruelty of the Deputy.

There was then in Ulster a Great The Rise of Hugh O Neale, Earl of Tyrone.
Man, called Hugh O Neal, the Son of one Matthew a Smith, a Cunning and a Crafty
man; who from his youth had served the Queen in the Wars: In Desmond's
Rebellion he had done the Queen good Service, and got much Reputation both for
his Courage and Industry: The Queen on the other side protected this poor
obscure Gentleman against the Malice of the O Neals, who hated him as the Enemy
to their Nation; and she advanced him from an abject and mean Condition, to
great Honor, and made him Earl of Tyrone, for his Merits and Deserts. He
became intoxicated with his too good fortune, and ungratefully and madly
designed to ruin her that had made him what he was; and now nothing would serve
him, but he would needs be King of Ulster; He aspires to be King of Ulster.
and to that end he assumed the Title of O Neale, and cast off all Respect and
Allegiance for the Queen. He disciplined the rude and ignorant Kerns after the
English manner, under the pretense I have before recited; and in the mean time
under hand instilled into them an invincible hatred of the English Religion and
Government, calling the first Heresy, and the latter a shameful Slavery and
Servitude; by which he disposed them so well to a Rebellion, that almost the
whole Nation revolted at once from the Queen.

In July 1591. Tyrone was made a Tyrone made a County; which occasioned O
Neal's Rebellion.
County, and divided into Eight Baronies, Dungannon being appointed for the
Shire-Town; which with the Authority of Marshal Bagnal, so fretted Tyrone, that
it is believed it occasioned his Confederating this Summer underhand with the
rest of the Irish to defend their pretended Rights, and not to admit Sheriffs
into their Counties. The effects of this first appeared in the year 1593. when
O Connor became troublesome in Connaught, and O Donnel and Mac Guire, chief of
Fermanagh, rose in Ulster against the Sheriffs, and would have murdered them,
but that Tyrone pretended to intercede to have their (...) spared: This they
durst never (...) done, but that they knew all the ^ans in Ulster would second
them: The Deputy, to revenge this Insurrection, proclaimed Mac Guire a Traitor,
and invading Fermanagh he took Inniskilling; but upon his withdrawing, the
Irish returned and drove the English he had left, out of Fermanagh. During this
Tumult, Tyrone came thither, as by chance, and asking what the matter was, and
what had provoked their Anger against the English, he gravely reprehended Mac
Guire, the Beginner of the Insurrection, and then began seemingly to appease
the exasperated meaner Irish people, tho in truth he was the first Promoter of
all this Disturbance, and did this only to conceal himself, and avoid being
suspected by the English. Hereupon the Queen recalled Fitz-William, who had
never been a Soldier, and sent a new Deputy in his stead.

Sir William Russel, youngest Son of Sir William Russel made Lord Deputy of
Ireland, under whom O Neal broke into a Rebellion.
Francis Earl of Bedford, was sworn Lord Deputy of Ireland the 11th. of August,
1594. Under him this great Revolution happened. Cormock Mac Baron, Tyrone's
Brother, about the same time Befieged Inniskilling, and defeated 46 English
Horse, and 600 Foot, that came to Relieve it, under the Conduct of Sir Edward
Herbert, and Sir Henry Duke; yet Tyrone had the Impudence to come to Dublin,
and impose upon the Council, That he had no hand in this Insurrection, tho some
offered to prove him a Traitor, which was not then believed. In March, 1595. he
broke into a second open Rebellion, notwithstanding all his Oaths and
Asseverations, which in an Irish man are the certain tokens of Treachery and
Falsehood. Bagnal, his mortal Enemy, thereupon marched against him with 1500
Foot, and 250 English Horfe; and Tyrone appeared with 1500 Irish Horse, but
retired without attempting any thing; but soon after he appeared with 8000 Foot
to second his Horse: Yet this handful of men fought all his Forces, and came
off with good Success, tho they were in great danger of being destroyed, as
they had been if the Enemies Powder had not failed in the Action.

In June, 1595. Sir John Norris arrived Sir John Norris sent into Ireland with
3000 men.
with Two thousand Veterane Soldiers, and One thousand New-raised men, and with
the Title of Lord General of the Forces in Ulster, he being to command
absolutely in the absence of the Deputy. The Queen's Design The Character of
this Great Man.
in sending Norris with this large Commission was, that he and the Deputy
should act with the greater vigor against the Enemy: But then tho Norris was an
excellent Commander, he was a little too violent, and disdained to be subject
to the Orders of the Deputy; and which was yet worse, disagreed with him in the
general method of managing the War, and was very stiff in his opinion besides;
so that much time was spent in useless Contests between these two high-spirited
men, which very much prejudiced the Queen's Affairs, and secured Tyrone, (who
cunningly made use of it) from being suppressed in the beginning of his
Rebellion.

By this time the Rebels had taken The Irish become very expert in the use of
Arms.
several of the English Forts, and were become so expert in the use of Arms,
that they were almost a Match for the English. Sir John Perrot to save charges,
had armed the Irish in Ulster, against the Isl^nder Scots, and taught them the
use of Firearms; and Fitz-Williams had pursued the same false Measures, and
had taken many Irish into the English Army, and sent others of them into the
Low Countries to be bred Soldiers; and now they were become stout Rebels, to
the damage of the English. The Deputy having in the mean time spent the Summer
in the Field against the Enemy, took care to settle Connaught and Leinster in
the Winter, and finding them much disordered by the Injuries of the Presidents,
he heard their Complaints very patiently, and redressed what he found amiss,
with much Justice, that he might raise in the people an expectation and hopes
of better ^mes to come. And he also levied ^ore Forces, and invited Tyrone to
co^ (...) him to Dublin, and sent him a Passport: The Earl came accordingly,
being tossed between hopes and fears; and there the Deputy before many of the
Nobility of that Kingdom, represented to him the Benefits he had received at
the Queen's hands; which he readily acknowledged; pretending, Tyrone's
Pretenses to the Deputy.
That he had on that consider at ion patiently born the Injuries of
Fitz-Williams Government, and the Wrongs done him by Bagnal the Marshal: That
he had saved the English from the Fury of Mac Guire, and preserved them in the
possession of Fermanagh: That his good Actions had been misrepresented, and he
had been ill rewarded for them: That he desired nothing more, than to be
restored to the Queen's Favor, which he had been deprived of by the slanders
of his Enemies. This cunning Defense appeased the Deputy; and he was resolved
to try if he could reclaim him by favors and good usage; and so he permitted
him to return home again. Yet in September of this year he offered the King of
Spain the Kingdom of Ireland, if he would supply him with 3000 Men, and a
little Treasure. Thus were the Winter of this year, and the Spring of the next,
spent in needless and ineffectual Treaties, Tyrone pretending to submit, to
gain time; and at last he was Pardoned; but Three Ships arriving from Spain
with Powder and 200 men, he refused his Pardon a great while, and when he took
it, he used it as a cover for his Treasonable Designs. He was always Treating
and Rebelling at the same time; and finding a Discontent between Sir John
Norris and the Lord Deputy, he made use of the one against the other, and in
the mean time surprised the Garrisons, and embroiled the Country, to the great
hazard of Extirpating the English. A Treaty with a perfidious man tends to
nothing but to make him insolent, and the Government secure to its Ruin: If you
never trust him, he can never hurt you. The English Council was so weary of
these Chargeable Wars, that they dreaded nothing more than a War in Ireland: So
that it was then a Maxim here, That it were well for England, if Ireland could
be sunk into the bottom of the Ocean; but since that was not possible to be
done, it had been well if they had gone roundly to work, and sending competent
Forces, had pursued these counterfeiting Rebels to utter destruction, not
suffering any Irishman to have any Firearms.

The Deputy observing that Tyrone The Deputy offended with Tyrone.
slighted him, and made his applications to Norris, to whom he sent Messengers
to commemorate his Loyalty and Duty to the Queen, and to beg her Majesty's
Pardon; he thereupon wrote to the Queen, That he had not been used to Wars, and
was unacquainted with the Fatigues that attended Insurrections and Tumults:
That King Philip of Macedonia was less terrible to him than a desultory Enemy,
and a barbarous Irish Teagne: That this languid Sedition might be composed
without wounds or bloodshed, as some thought, if good men were but sent to
treat with the Rebels: That there were those in Ireland who had conferred with
the Rebels, and had sent into England the Rebels Defamations against him and
others of her Governors: By which passage the Deputy slily taxed Sir John
Norris as one that had done nothing worthy of his former Military Reputation,
but thought to work upon the good nature of the Ulster Clowns by his Courtship
and Flattery; which tended rather to the making them more insolent. This
carriage of the General's was the occasion of fierce Contests and Quarrels
between him and the Deputy, and the effect of it was, that not only the Heads
of the Clans in Ulster, but those also in Connanght and Leinster, took Arms and
revolted from the Crown of England The Deputy seeing things by their Divisions
brought to so desperate an estate, resolved to get rid of the Government, and
by his Letters humbly besought the Queen a good General might be sent in his
place In this doubtful time, Sir John Norris as earnestly desired to be Deputy,
and that his Brother, who was fitter for the Labors of the War, might be made
President of Munster. But he obtained neither of his Requests. The Council of
England was divided for some time between the Lord Buroughs and the Earl of
Essex, but the latter joining with the former, it was carried for him, and he
had both the Supreme Civil and Military Power put into his hands.

The 15th. of May, 1597. Thomas The Lord Buroughs made Deputy of Ireland.
Lord Buroughs arrived at Dublin, with a Commission to be Lord Deputy of
Ireland: With the Supreme Authority, he presently commanded Norris to his
Presidency of Munster, which with the disappointment of the Deputy's Place,
broke his heart. Johnstonius says, The reason of this was, because Norris was
a person of more Experience in the War, and of greater Fame than Buroughs. So
that when he came to Dublin, Norris was no way pleased with the change, for
that he dreaded the fiery Temper of that Lord, with whom he had formerly had
some quarrels, which he would now have willingly sacrificed to the Welfare of
his Country. But the Deputy was of an Implacable Temper, and commanded him
into Munster, upon the peril of his life, not permitting Norris to see him:
This Great and Stout Man could not bear the Affront; but he that had run
through so many Perils in the Field, in the Netherlands, France, and Portugal;
he that had despised the Rages of the Duke d' Alva in Holland, and put a stop
to the Victories of the Duke of Parma, fell under this, and expired in the Arms
of his Brother. Thus he became a wonderful Instance of humane frailty, as well
as of Martial Courage; being rather pitied than approved; because his
Management in Ireland was much inferior to what he had done elsewhere, and
short of what was expected from him. The Lord Lieutenant died in November
following; yet in that short time he beat the Irish in Ulster, and recovered
the Fort of Blackwater, and Garrisoned it with English. Sir Thomas Norris was
nominated for his Successor, but he was melancholy, and would not accept it;
his Brother the General being just then dead also: Thereupon the Archbishop of
Dublin, and Sir Robert Gardener, Lord Chief Justice, were sworn the 15th of
November, when the Council The Council of Ireland represent the Irish War as an
universal Rebellion of that whole Nation.
concluded their Account of the State of the Kingdom, That it was an universal
Irish Rebellion to shake off all English Government. In August this year Tyrone
had the good fortune to rout Marshal Bagnal his mortal Enemy, in a Wood half a
mile beyond Armagh, where the Marshal, 13 Captains, and 1500 English Soldiers
were slain. The Tyrone beat the English.
Irish by this Defeat got Arms, Victual, Ammunition, and Reputation, and the
Fort of Blackwater; so that the English were reduced from an Offensive to a
Defensive War. This nettled the Queen, and she sent to Ormond, who was
Lieutenant General, to clear the Army of all the Irish, and she sent 2000 Foot
and 100 Horse to recruit the Army. Tyrone sent after this 4000 Kerns into
Munster, and the President not being able to resist them, by reason his Forces
were small, that whole Province rebelled also in October, 1598. and began to
Kill, Rob, and Ravage the English, without Measure or Mercy. Thus the Rebellion
grew to that height, that it became terrible to the Queen. Tyrone in the mean
time sent submissive Letters to the Earl of Ormond, and promised the Spaniards
that he would accept And at the same time treats with England and Spain.
no Conditions from the English, magnifying his Victories beyond all reason and
truth: So that now the Courtiers in England began to consider, as Mr. Cambden
observes, That by long use it was grown to a destructive custom in Ireland,
That Rebels and Traitors might with the Money they had gotten from the spoiled
English by Pillage and Villainy, procure for themselves Protection and Pardon.
The Queen was well inclined to have sent the Lord Montjoy into Ireland; but the
Earl of Essex pretended to it, and he was chosen. Others say the Council put
him upon The Earl of Essex sent Deputy.
it, that he might put an end to the Troubles of Ireland, which had been
increased by the Contentions between the Commanders that were employed before,
and also by the deaths of Sir John Norris, and that of the Lord Deputy, as well
as by the Defeat of Marshal Bagnal: That the Lords cried up the Valor of the
Earl of Essex to the skies; and affirmed that there was not in England any
General who could undertake the Reduction of so far-spread a Rebellion, with
that Prudence, Diligence, and Courage, they might expect from him. Thus he was
sent thither by the perfidious Commendations of his Enemies, against the
opinion of his real and true Friends, that they that put him upon it might when
he was there, find an opportunity to ruin him. The Earl on the other side was
anxious, and unresolved what to do; for as he feared the Fate of his Father,
who perished in that Kingdom, so he could not tell how to oppose his own
Destiny; and accepted of an Employment which no other durst pretend to, purely
to comply with the good opinion of the whole Privy Council, which loaded him
with Praises on this occasion, tho in his heart he misdoubted the Event. The
Queen also sent him away thither with great Testimonies of her Affection to
him, commending him excessively for preferring her Service before his own
Safety; but then this was the last good day that unfortunate Earl ever saw.

He landed there the 15th. of April, The Army under Essex 20000 men.
1599. with 13000 Horse, and 16000 Foot, which were made up 20000. there being
more than that number in Arms against the Queen: But with all these Forces he
did nothing worthy of his former Reputation, or of his Army: And that Winter he
went out of Ireland in a Discontent, without the Queen's Leave, and returned
unexpectedly to the Court, which proved his Ruin. Tyrone grew insolent
hereupon, and professed publicly he would recover the Liberty of Religion and
his Country.

Charles Lord Montjoy was thereupon The Lord Montjoy sent Deputy. The Methods
by which he ruined the Irish, and ended the War.
sent Lord Deputy, who landed the 24th. of February, 1599/600 The English Army
was then 1200 Horse, and 14000 Foot; and the General finding the Irish Strength
was in their Fastnesses, he resolved to ruin them by small flying Parties
placed in Garrisons; and this way accordingly destroyed them without redress,
and they began to talk of submitting, which was not regarded, because all the
world saw there was no Truth, Faith, or Honor in this barbarous and false
Enemy. From thenceforward many that begged for Pardon No Irish pardoned, but
what merited the Mercy by some signal Service.
were denied it, if they did not bring in the Heads of their Fellow-Traytors,
or do some other considerable service to purchase it, which they seldom failed
of attempting, and were very often taken by their own Party in the Fact and
hanged. The War went vigorously on, and the Rebels were generally beaten in all
places till the 23d of September, 1601. when the Spaniards landed at The
Spaniards land at Kingsale.
Kingsale, and the English immediately sat down before it; yet the Spaniards
(tho beaten in every Sally) defended the Town to the 24th. of December, when
there was a general Battle between Tyrone and all the Rebels on the one side,
and so many of the English as could be spared out of the Trenches: Tyrone was
beaten out of the Field, and he lost 1200 of his men, 800 wounded, and the
English lost only one Cornet, and six Soldiers: The Spaniards knew nothing of
the Battle, and made no Sally till it was over, tho the Fight was within one
Mile of Kingsale, but then they sallied twice to no purpose; whereupon, the
31st. of December, the Spaniards capitulated, and delivered up the Town. After
this, the War went on so successfully against these Rebels, and they were
reduced to such Necessities, that the Parents eat their Children, and three
Children roasted the flesh of their dead Mother, The Irish reduced to eat man's
flesh.
and lived upon it twenty days; so that this exceeded the Famine of Jerusalem:
The 30th, of March, 1602. Tyrone Tyrone submits.
submitted to Mercy at Melifont, begging to be received upon his Knees. Thus
ended this most dangerous Rebellion that ever was made in Ireland before that
time, about a week after the Death of the Queen, and before it was known. It
had never risen to that height, but for the overgreat penuriousness of the
Queen; for which she afterward paid very dear, and had not the happiness to
see the Traitor Tyrone at her foot before her Death; but however she was
sufficiently revenged of all her Enemies, by the Ruin, Famine, Deaths, and
Plagues that fell upon them; Heaven favoring her Cause, and blasting all their
Undertakings against her. It is very observable, Religion causlesly made the
pretense of the Irish Rebellion.
that the main pretense of this Rebellion, was the Preservation of the
Roman Catholic Religion; yet there was then never any Law passed in this
Kingdom against it, nor any Prosecution made of those that professed it; but
they had a perfect Liberty of Conscience to embrace which of the Religions they
pleased; only the Church-Preferments and Revenues were put into the hands of
the Protestant Clergy, and the Tithes paid to them; and the Government was
generally put into the hands of the Protestant Nobility and Gentry, but so that
they were mixed; and they of the other Religion being more in number, were
commonly returned on all Juries: So that Liberty Liberty of Conscience
considered.
of Conscience will not keep a divided Kingdom always quiet; but there have
ever been men to be found, who are as uneasy when they cannot persecute
others, as when they themselves are persecuted. The Charge of this War from the
first of October, 1598. to the first of April, 1603. amounted to Eleven hundred
ninety eight thousand seven hundred and seventeen Pounds Nineteen Shillings and
One Penny, as Mr. Cox assures us; from whence he infers how justly the Irish
had for feited the Estates were taken from them; and how reasonable it will
ever be for the English in Ireland to contribute freely to the maintaining of a
good Army for the preserving that Kingdom in Peace.

In her time the English Nation was The Greatness of the Reputation of the
English Nation in Q. Elizabeth's time.
at its highest pitch of Honor, Wealth, and Reputation. The Queen was also in
the greatest esteem that was possible with all the Neighbor Nations; because
she had delivered Scotland from the hated Dominion of the French; and she had
after this succored and supported the Netherlands when their Affairs were most
desperate; she had sent vast Treasures into France to support Henry the IVth.
against the Holy League, and the King of Spain; and when after all, Ireland had
been stirred up against her, and had made almost a general Revolt under the
Command of a false and treacherous Traitor, she had the good fortune to reduce
that Kingdom by the Prosperity of her Arms, and the Valor of her Subjects.
Spain was in her time terrible to all the other Nations in Europe, till her
Navies afflicted and ruined that Kingdom, by burning their Fleets and Naval
Stores at the Groyne and Cadiz. Her Fame spread it self to the most distant
parts of Europe; and the Muscovites and Turks, who were only known by report to
the English before her happy times, sent Ambassies to her to beg her
Friendship, and settle Commerce and Trade with her. The King of Morocco and
Fez, in Barbary in Africa, sent also an Ambassy to her; so that her Subjects
had the pleasure of smiling at the half-naked Moors, and the Russ who were
loaded with Furs after the manner of their Country. The Hollander, French,
Poles, Germans, Danes, and Swedes, and all the other Nations about her, begged
her Friendship in times of Peace, her Assistance and Protection in times of
War, and on every occasion testified their sense of her Favors, and their
Gratitude for the good offices she had done them. She labored always to unite
those Her Carriage toward her Allies abroad.
Princes who were her Friends and Allies, by Marriages and other such methods;
if any Controversy or Difference at any time arose between them, she sent her
Letters and her Ambassadors to both the Parties to compose them; and they on
the other side did for the most part acquiesce in her Judgment, and yield to
her Authority. If in any part of her Dominions the Country happened to become
desolate and ill peopled, she took particular care to send Colonies thither to
supply that defect. She brought her meanest Subjects from an idle, poor, and
beggarly way of living, to the practice of good and useful Trades; many of
which were brought into England in her time by the banished and persecuted
Netherlanders, to the great benefit and advantage of this Kingdom. She made the
Naval Glory of England equal to its Military or Land-Service and Reputation.
The Bounds of her Fame were not confined to England, but extended to the utmost
parts of the earth, and the farthest Recesses of the Ocean; for her Subjects in
her time passed the Li^e, and filled all the corners of the habitable world
with the fame of this most Celebrated Queen. There was no place in the wide and
remotest Ocean, but her Subjects sailed thither with their Merchandise to
enrich their Country. The English Fleets then first pierced into the vast Bays
of the East-Indian Ocean; and they frequented the Philippine Islands, and the
South Parts of Asia, and the Eastern Shores of Africa. Drake and Cavendish, in
these times went round the Globe of the Earth, and erected every where Trophies
to the Honor of their Queen. This last was not only above the hopes, but
beyond the thoughts of this Nation, so far they were of attempting any thing of
that nature before.

Sir Francis Drake was of a mean and Sir Francis Drake's Original and Story.
obscure Extraction, and born in Devonshire, his Father embracing the
Protestant Religion in the time of Henry VIII. was persecuted for the same, and
forced to remove for his greater security into Kent, after which he entered
Orders, and by Poverty was constrained to bind his Son to the Master of a Ship,
who sometimes passed into France and Flanders. The young Man so well pleased
his Master, that he dying unmarried, he gave this Servant of his, his Ship.
After this he put himself under Mr. John Hawkins, who in the year 1567. was
preparing a small Fleet at Plymouth, with a design to discover some yet unknown
Parts of America; but this Voyage was very unfortunate, and the English falling
into the hands of the Spaniards, he lost all his stock, and hardly escaped with
his Liberty. After this he became one of the most famous Mariners this Nation
has produced; and by his industry he opened the way to both the Indies, which
before was not known to the English. For about five years after this first
Voyage, he preyed as a Pyrate upon the Spaniards wheresoever he found them, and
could master them; and having by this means acquired a good sum of Money, he
built a stout Ship, which he called the Dragon, with which and two Barks he
ventured once more in the Year 1572. to visit the Coasts of America, and took
Nombre de Dios, a Town in the Bay of Mexico. Here he was informed by the
Negroes that were Slaves to the Spaniards (and were called Cimarones) that a
vast Treasure in Gold and Silver was to be shortly after transported by Mules
and other Land-Carriages from Panama, in order to be shipped for Spain: These
he waylayed, and seized all this Wealth, which proved much more than he could
bring away; so that he was forced to leave the Silver, a great part of which he
buried in the Earth, but he got all the Gold on board his Ship; after which he
burnt Sancta Cruz, a Rich Receptacle of the Merchandises of this Country,
seated upon the River Chiagre, which falls into the Gulf of Mexico, at Porto
Bello. This Town of Sancta Cruz seems to be that which Mr. Gage in his Travels
calls Venta de Cruzes, and says it lies about twelve Leagues from Panama to
the East, upon the Chiagre, and was in his time inhabited by none but Mulatto's
and Black-Moors, who belonged to the Boats that carry the Goods brought thither
from Panama to Porto Bello. Thus far this bold Captain ventured to travel by
Land with a small Party of resolute English men, to the great loss and terror
of the Spaniards; and by the success of it encouraged others to follow him. So
that the Buccaneers, which in our times have performed such wonderful things in
America, have only followed him in their Adventures. From the Mountains of St.
Pablo upon this River he first saw the Mar del Zur, or the Pacifick Occan,
which washes the Western Shoars of America, and thereupon being strangely
possessed with a strong desire to sail herafter upon thatOcean, he fell down
upon his Knees, and beseeched God to grant him that favor, vowing to do his
utmost for the discovering it; and from thenceforth he found no rest in his
mind night or day, till he had accomplished this Resolution. In the mean time
our Great Man having divided the spoil he had taken amongst his followers, with
an open hand to all their content, he set sail for England with vast Riches.
Whilst others gazed on the Gold he brought home with wonder; He gloried in
nothing but that he had seen the Mar de Zur, and thought of nothing but the
making Preparations to sail upon it, which the Treasure he had got (for he was
now become very rich) furnished him with means to effect, and enabled him to
build Ships for that purpose.

Whilst he was thus employed, one The Story of John Oxenham.
John Oxenham a Common Sailer, who had served under him in his former
Expeditions, as a Soldier, Seaman, and Cook, and had gained the name of a
Captain amongst the Mariners, having scraped together under hand a good stock,
took up the same Project, and resolved once more to rob the Mulatto's, and sail
upon that Sea before his Master; to this end he got a single Ship, and 70
Sailors to venture with him; and in the year 1575. failed to the same place;
but hearing from the Negroes, that now the Spaniards were become so cautious as
to send a Guard of Soldiers with their Caravans, to guard them from Panama to
Porto Bello, he drew his Ship ashore in a desolate place, and covered it with
Boughs, burying his Cannon and Provisions in the earth, and then with all his
Company, and six Negroes for his Guide, he traveled to a River, which falls
into the South Sea, where he cut down Timber, and built some Boats, and so
passed to the Island of Pearls in that Ocean, which lay not far from the Mouth
of this River; where he staid ten days to expect the return of the Ships from
Peru; and he intercepted one with fixty pound of Gold, and another with One
hundred pound of Silver; and in these ships he passed back to the River. The
News of this being brought to the Spaniards, they sent John de Ortega, with an
hundred Soldiers, to pursue the bold Adventurers; the River had Three Mouths,
and he was doubtful which to choose, till the Feathers of the Fowls the English
had eaten, came down, and showed him which way they were gone before: The
Spaniards found the Gold, and the English contending about the dividing of it
amongst them, but they soon put an end to the brawl, and defended themselves
against the Spaniards, who were more numerous than they, with great Courage,
but many of them being slain in the Fight, the rest were taken, and amongst
them Oxenham the Captain^ and sent to Lima, where being not able to produce any
Commission from the Queen for the invading these Spanish Dominions, he and many
of the Mariners were executed as Pirates, and the common enemies of mankind.

Drake, who knew nothing of this Drake's second Voyage to America.
Attempt and Miscarriage of Oxenham, in the year 1577. the 13th. of December,
set sail from Plymouth with five Ships, and 163 Mariners; the 16th. of April he
arrived in the Mouth of the River of Plate in Brafil; the 20th. of August he
arrived at the Mouth of the Streights of Magellan; when he came into the
Pacifick Ocean, he found it very turbulent, and was driven by a furious
Tempest, in a few days, above a hundred Leagues to the South; and here one of
the Ships being separated, returned back again through these Streights into
England. After this, Drake took St. Jago in Chili, and plundered He takes St.
Jago.
it, and here he got a Prize with 400 pound of pure Gold. Arriving at
Turapassa, he found 13 Bars of Massy Silver, of the value of CCCCM Ducats,
which was left on the ground by some Spaniards, who were asleep by it; he took
the Silver, and never waked the Keepers of it. From thence he passed to the
Port of Arica, in which he found three Ships without one man in them, but there
was 57 Wedges of Silver, each of 20 pound weight, and some other Merchandise
which he took. Arriving at Lima, he found twelve Ships, but all the Mariners
were on shore, and yet in them he had a great quantity of Silk, and a Chest of
Minted Silver; which shows how secure from Pirates this Coast had to this time
been. Nor in truth till this time had any other than the Spaniards ever sailed
upon this Sea, except Oxenham. In his journey to Panama he took a Barque
without any resistance, that afforded him 80 pound weight of Gold. The first of
March he took a Ship called the Cacofoga, which had on board 80 pound weight of
Gold, and 13 Chests of Minted Money, and as much Silver as balasted his own
Ship; the Master of this Ship told him, That his Ship (Drake's) should
henceforth be called the Cacofoga, and the Spanish Ship the Cacoplata.

Being thus wonderfully enriched, and, as he thought, sufficiently avenged on
the Spaniards for the Loss he had sustained in his first Attempt upon Vera
Crnz, he began to consider of his return; and not thinking the passage by the
Streights of Magellan safe (as in truth it was beset by the Orders of Francis
Duke of Toledo, then Viceroy of Peru) he directed his Course Northward to the
height of 42 Degrees of North Latitude, to seek a paslage; but finding nothing
but snow and defolate shores, he returned to 38 degrees, and Wintered there,
calling the Country New Albion; and here the naked people chofe him for their
King, and by their ignorance showed him plainly the Spaniards had never been so
far that way. In the Month of November he He sails for the Nolucca Islands.
set sail for the Molucca Islands; the 9th. of January his Ship stuck 27 hours
upon a Rock, but by the blessing of God came off it by a side-wind, which
seemed to be sent of purpose to save this Hero. From thence he passed to the
Jsland of Java in the East Indies, and so to the Cape of Good Hope, which had
never been seen before by any Englishman; and Watering at the Rio Grande in
Africa, he arrived in England the 3d. of November, 1580. having in this time
gone round the Globe of the Earth. The People of England received him with
great Triumph, and a Public Joy; and the Queen as a Reward of the good Service
he had done her against the Spaniards, Knighted him, and caused the Ship he had
sailed in to be laid up at Deptford. Mr. Gage, our Countryman, who lived some
years in the Spanish Territories in America, assures us, his Memory is
preserved there by the Spaniards, who to this day, says he, admire this
Expedition, and teach their Children to fear even his Name. After this the
Queen often made him one of her Admirals; and he being grown exceeding rich,
took diligent care to put out a greater Fleet, and openly assaulted the Island
of St. Jago, and took St. Domingo, and Carthagena, and some others in the West
Indies, being sent by the Queen with 21 Ships, and 2300 men, in the year 1585.
The Towns they took in this Expedition were either so poor that there was
nothing of Silver or Gold to be found in them, or they had had such previous
notice of the coming of the English, that they had sent a way all that was
valuable; yet St. Domingo and Carthagena were forced to redeem themselves from
Fire by Money; the first gave Twenty five thousand Ducats, and the latter One
hundred and ten thousand, which was presently divided amongst the Mariners and
Seamen. The Spaniards more regretted the loss of their ships, great numbers
being burnt; and this hastened the Invasion designed upon England, which was
undertaken in the year 1588. which miscarrying, the Spanish Greatness dwindled
into nothing; and after the Queen's Death they were glad to send to King James
the First, her Successor, to beg a Peace in the first year of his Reign; so the
Honor of Reducing Spain was hers, and that of settling Peace, after a War that
had lasted so long, his.

The Riches and Fame Sir Francis The Story of Mr. Thomas Cavendish.
Drake had acquired in these Maritime Expeditions, encouraged Mr. Thomas
Cavendish, a Gentleman of Trimely in the County of Suffolk, to pursue the same
methods for the raising his Fortunes, and with them the Reputation and Glory of
the English Nation. The 21st of July, 1586. he set out from Plymouth with three
ships, the biggest of which was but 120 Tuns, and 123 Seamen, with Provisions
for two years. With this small Fleet he passed the Streights of Magellan, and
sailed up to the Coast of New Spain in the Mar del Zur, and took 19 of the
Spanish Merchant ships, and burnt two or three of their Towns, and then sailing
to the Philippine Islands, the Molucca's, and the Cape of Good Hope, he staid
some time in St. Helens; and the 9th. of September, 1588. he returned to
Plymouth; he having been the second man of this Nation, that went round the
Globe of the Earth, with no less Honor, tho he returned with less Spoils than
the first Adventurer. The Queen entertained him at Greenwich, and bestowed upon
him many Marks of her Favor, and gave him some considerable Rewards. Sir
Martin Forbisher, or Frobisher, Sir John Hawkins, Davis, Jackman, Jenkenson,
and Sir Walter Rawleigh, and many others of the English, employed their time in
searching out the remotest parts of the world at the same time to very good
effect, there having been great Trades driven ever since by the Dutch and
English, by the means of their Discoveries. Mr. Richard Hackluit, Hackluit
records and publishes all the English Expeditions in these and former times.
who lived in these times, took a particular care to collect and publish the
Journals of all these Voyages; by which he des^rved very well of this Nation;
and it is a great pity that his Works are become so scarce, and so little
known, and that no man has since pursued the same method; these Discourses
being of great use for all Mariners, and serving very much for the enlarging
and clearing the Geography of the World.

Philip King of Spain being highly incensed by the ruin of so many of his
Towns, and the losses he had sustained Philip King of Spain highly incensed
against the English Nation.
by Drake's Expeditions, gave Order that all the English Seamen that should
after this be taken in America, should be treated like Pirates and the Enemies
of mankind: And all the Merchant Ships that fell into his hands, were seized,
and the Merchants imprisoned, tho there was then no open Wars proclaimed; and
he laid cunning Designs to ruin the English Nation, which the necessity of his
other affairs put off from time to time; so that there were Threats of a War,
and great Preparations made for it, rather than a War. But when he saw Threats
and Anger would not terrify the English, he turned his secret Anger into open
War, and entered into a Contention which in the end proved fatal to himself and
his Nation: The Invincible Armado in 1588. prepared and sent to invade Enggland.
He prepared to that end a vast Fleet of 134 Sail of Ships, so great, so armed,
and so manned, that perhaps the Ocean never bore such another on its proud
Billows; there was on board it 20000 Land-men, and 8300 Seamen, and the Command
of it was committed to the Duke of Medina Cali, a Person of an exalted Worth
and Reputation: One Martin Re^alda was, under him, the great Director of the
Fleet, being a Pilot of great Experience. This Fleet, which had raised so great
an Expectation in the Neighbour-Countries, that it was not doubted but it would
not only subdue but overwhelm the little Island of Great Britain, sailed from
the Groyne the 12th. of July, 1588. and came within sight of Cornwall, the 19th.
of the same Month; whereupon the Beacons were fired, and one Fleming came in
with a Scout-Ship, and assured the English Admiral, the Spanish Fleet had been
seen by him near the Lizzard: The English Fleet was then in the Port of
Plymouth, under the Command of Charles Lord Howard, then Admiral of England:
Charles Lord Howard Admiral of England.
And as it was believed the Spanish Fleet would not have come that year, so
there was not on board it that number of men that was necessary to man it, and
which on the sudden was hardly possible to be got together; but however, the
Admiral went first to Sea, and gave the Signal for the rest to follow, and he
ranged them in their Order as they were able to get out. The Spanish Ships were
very much higher and stronger than the English, and had greater and more
Cannon; but there was four CARACKS of an excessive Greatness, and which seemed
scarce fit for motion, which served instead of Castles to defend the smaller
Ships: The English Fleet, on the contrary, was nimble, and very well provided
for Fight or Flight, and managed by men that understood the Sea-Affairs
wonderfully well; so that they assaulted the Spanish Armado the 21st. of July,
with Dexterity and Courage: The Fight lasted three days without any
intermission, and then was intermitted for want of Gunpowder. After this they
followed the Spanish Fleet, (which kept its course for Flanders,
notwithstanding this continual Fight); and when any Ship happened to be
separated from the main body, they would be sure to be upon it, and for the
most part they took it. The English were at first but 40 Sail, the rest not
being able to get out of the Port. The St. Catherina, a great Spanish Galiass,
the first day was so torn by the English Shot, that they were forced to take it
into the Body of the Fleet to repair the Mischief it had received: The
principal Galeon of Sevil, wherein many of the Spanish Nobility sailed, falling
foul upon another Ship, in this disorder had her Foremast broken, and so could
not sail with the rest, but was left to the Mercy of the Seas, and of the
English. The 22d. of July, Sir Francis Drake found this great Galeon, which was
disabled, and summoned it to yield, which was done when they heard Drake was
the man they had to do with: The Commander of this ship was Valdez who was one
of the principal persons in the Navy, and he had with him 450 persons. The same
day the Admiral of the Squadron of Guipuscoa, commanded by Michael de Oquendo,
Vice Admiral of the whole Fleet, was set on fire by a disobliged Hollander, the
upper part of it, and most of the men perished, but the Gunpowder never fired.
This night the Admiral of England followed the Spanish Lanthorn, and was next
morning in the midst of their Fleet. The 23d. of July, the Spanish Fleet was
over against Portland, and the Wind was against the English; but they being
nimbler, soon recovered that advantage again over the unwieldy Spaniards; this
day the English played with more fury on the Spaniards than the two former, but
they would not be provoked to stop till they came to Calis, that being the
Orders given them in Spain; by this time the English Fleet was become a hundred
strong, of one sort or other; and many Voluntier Ships made out by men of all
degrees, were come into it; and by that time they came to Dover, there was 130.
of which yet there was not above 22. or 23. of the Queen's biggest ships, that
were able to grapple with the Spanish ships. The 24th. of July the Sea was
calm, and four great Galeasses which had Oars, fought the English Fleet with
great advantage; by night the English wanted Gunpowder, which they sent for
that night. The 25th. the Spaniards being at the height of the Isle of Wight,
the Admiral of England, with five of the biggest ships, attacked the Admiral of
Spain in the midst of his Fleet, and then there followed a terrible fight,
which was managed on both sides with the utmost Bravery; but the Spaniards grew
weary of it, and cast themselves again into the form of a Ring. The 26th. the
Admiral Knighted Sir Martin Forbisher, and Sir John Hawkins. The 27th. by
Sunset the Spanish Fleet arrived over against Dover, their Fleet cast Anchor
this night in the Channel, within sight both of Dover and Calis, and the
English Fleet were within Cannon-shot of it, and now 130 strong; from hence the
Duke of Medina sent to the Duke of Parma, who was then at Dunkirk, and had
Orders to join this Fleet, to hasten out the Land Army, which in 40 Fly-boats
was to have joined him, that being covered by this huge Fleet, and with the
Forces sent from Spain, now aboard it, a Descent might be made in England; but
the Hollanders having notice of his Intentions, had sent a Fleet of 35. Men of
War, under the Command of Justin of Nassau, their Admiral, on board the which
was 1200 Musketeers; and he hadOrders not to suffer any ship to come out of the
Ports of Flanders, nor any Zabraes, Pataches, or other small Vessels of the
Spanish Fleet to enter thereinto; and this Dutch Fleet so awed the Duke of
Parma and his Land-Army, that they durst not stir, nor indeed was his Army then
come to the Sea, or ready to be embarked, if he could have gone out; and
besides, he wanted all manner of Necessaries for such an Expedition; and all
the Flandrians had no great inclinations to make the King of Spain Master of
England, to the Ruin of their own Civil Privileges. The Mariners also that were
to have served the Duke of Parma, being terrified by the Hollanders, withdrew
from the danger, and stole away for fear they should have been forced by the
Duke to attempt the passing through the Dutch Fleet to their Ruin. The 2d. of
August was the day appointed for the landing in England; but before that came,
the Admiral of England having chosen eight old Ships, and filled them with
combustible matter, and charged all their Ordnance with Stones and Bullets, he
sent them the 28th. of July, about Two of the Clock in the morning, with the
Wind and Tide against the Spanish Fleet, and when they were just upon it, the
Mariners fired all these ships at once, and left them under sail to enter the
Spanish Fleet; this fire in the dead of the night put the Spaniards into such
an affright, that cutting their Cables, and hoisting their Sails, they betook
themselves to the Sea in great confusion and disorder; one of the greatest of
their Galeasses falling foul upon another ship, lost her Rudder, and was driven
on the Coast of Calis, where the English found and took her, and in her,
besides other valuable Spoils, they found 50000 Ducats of the King of Spain's
Treasure. The 29th. of July the Spanish Fleet got it self into some Order again
before Graveling, but the English Fleet which had followed it, furiously
assaulted it, and the Spaniards suffered the English to get the Weathergage of
them, tho they were more in number, and stronger than the English, but they
were resolved to keep on the Defensive part till Parma was joined with them.
This whole day was spent in a furious Fight, with great slaughter of the
Spaniards, tho there was few ships taken or sunk; but at night the English
having spent all their Powder, retired. In all these fights the English did not
lose above 100 men, and amongst them not one Person of Quality. The Spanish
Ships were so battered, that this night two or three of them sunk, and amongst
them a great ship of Biscay, and two Portugal Galeons of Seven or Eight Hundred
Tun, were deserted by the Spanish Fleet, because the Water entered into them on
all sides, and taken by the Hollanders of Flushing. That day the Spanish Fleet
passed by Dunkirk: The next day the Spanish Fleet cut down their Main-Sails,
and resolved to fight no more; nor was there any occasion, for the English
Admiral having sent a Squadron to secure the Duke of Parma in Flanders, he with
the rest pursued the Spanish Fleet till the 2d. of August, but tho he was very
near them, yet wanting Powder and Ball he never offered them any violence. The
4th. of August, the Spanish Navy spread all their Sails before a strong Wind,
and committed their shattered ships to the Violence of the Northern Ocean, but
the English following them to 57. Degrees of North-Latitude, returned and left
them to receive the rest of their Chastisement from the Seas, and the Scots and
Irish, but there were certain Pinnaces sent to follow them, and observe their
Motions at a distance.

The Spaniards found they had lost The Condition of the Spanish Fleet, when the
English left it:
four or five thousand of their men, and ten or twelve of their principal
ships; and tho they were rid of the English, yet they wanted Water and
Victuals, Cables, Cordage, Anchors, Masts, and Sails; and as for the Duke of
Parma, he they saw could not succor them; so they resolved to pass round about
Scotland and Ireland, and return into Spain; they also cast overboard all
their Horses and Mules, to preserve the remainder of their Water: Thus they
were driven Northward to 61 Degrees of Latitude; Twenty five of the best
provided ships returned into Spain; forty more wanting Water, set sail for
Ireland to get fresh Water there: These (the 2d. of September) were by a Storm
from the South-West driven upon several parts of Ireland, and most of their
Ships perished, together with the men in them; others were by a West Wind blown
into the English Channel again, and were taken by the English or Rochellers: So
that of 134 ships (as some counted them) that came from Spain, there never
returned above 53. Of almost 30000 men that went in it, there perished above
half, and many of them that came back, died with the hardships they had
suffered. In short, there was not one Great Family in Spain, which did not lose
a Son, a Brother, or a Kinsman. All those of the Spaniards which happened to be
cast upon the Coast of Scotland, were entertained by the Scots, and fed and
clothed, and afterward sent into Spain; but those that were cast upon the
Coast of Ireland, were plundered of all that was left them by the English and
Irish, and without any Mercy put to the Sword; those that were cast upon the
Coasts of Norway and France, and even those that fell into the hands of the
English and the Hollanders, met with a better treatment: So that Ireland the
most deceived their expectation, and of a Friend proved the most implacable and
barbarous Enemy to this wretched Fleet in their greatest distress.

Philip King of Spain bore the Loss The King of Spain bears his Loss with much
Patience and Prudence.
of this great Fleet and Army with a more equal mind than is usual for Princes;
and at last took the Duke of Medina, the General of this unfortunate
Expedition, again into his favor; attributing the Calamity not to the
Imprudence or Negligence of the General, but to the Violence of Tempests, and
the Rage of the Ocean; tho in truth it was owing to the Blessing of God upon
the Valor and Policy of the English, and the too strict Orders they brought
from Spain, Not to engage till they were joined with the Duke of Parma, who
could never get out of the Harbor to meet them, being locked in by the
Hollanders: This exposed them for so many days to the ^ury of the English
Cannon, with the advantage of the Weathergage; and had the English had Powder
enough to have continued the Fight to the last, very much fewer of these ships
had ever returned into Spain: But however, when they were battered and
strangely weakened, they were forced to take the way of the Northern Ocean in
September, and were exposed to dreadful Tempests, wanting fresh Water,
Victuals, and all other Necessaries; for all the Northern Countries hated the
Spaniards, so that neither Germany, Denmark, nor Scotland would relieve them:
Thus being exposed to all manner of hardships in this battered estate, it is a
great wonder so many of them returned into Spain. Some were for grappling with
these ships when they fought them in the British Seas, but the English Admiral
confidering they were taller and stronger than the English ships, and had a
Land-Army on board to defend their Decks, which we had not, he would never
consent to it, and this was a principal cause of the Victory. The States of
Holland, and the The English and Hollanders glorify God for the Victory.
English Nation, which were equally concerned in this Victory, returned the
Glory of it to God alone, who was acknowledged by all as the Author of it, the
English Fleet being nothing, when compared with the bulky ships that came from
Spain; so that they thought we would not have dared to resist them: The 29th.
of November the Queen went into the City of London in a Triumphant Chariot, the
Spanish Colors that were taken being born before her to St. Paul's Church,
where was a Sermon and a solemn Thanksgiving, at which the Mayor and all the
Companies were present; and the same Piety was commanded at the same time in
all the remoter parts of her Kingdom; and it was observed by her Subjects with
the highest Expressions of Joy and Gratitude toward God, and of Loyalty and
Affection toward her; so that she was now in the height of all her Glory both
at Home and Abroad, beloved by her Friends, and feared by her Enemies, who were
never after in a condition to assault her Kingdom the second time; but found it
difficult to defend their own against her and her brave Martial Commanders.

To revenge this Attempt upon her The Queen declares a War against the King of
Spain.
Kingdoms, the Queen the same year put out a Declaration of War against Philip
King of Spain, which was sharply Penned, and from thenceforward to the end of
her days there was a perpetual and a sharp War carried on against the
Spaniards, which kept her Subjects quiet at home. The very next year she The
English Expeditions against that Kingdom.
sent Sir Francis Drake with a Fleet into Spain, who took the Groyne, as is
said above; by which Action she defeated the Designs of that King, who was
preparing there for a second Invasion; and having abated his Pride and Rashness
into a more tractable Modesty, she thereby delivered her People from a signal
Danger. In this War the Earl of Essex signalized himself by taking Cadiz in
1596. and Burning all the ships he found in that Harbor. George Earl of
Cumberland, and Thomas Lord Howard, a younger Son of the Duke of Norfolk, lay
heavy upon the Spaniards, and took many of their ships richly laden, giving all
but the tenth part (which was reserved for the Queen) to the Mariners and
Soldiers as the Reward of their Valor. In the year 1597. having heard the King
of Spain was preparing a Fleet against Ireland, she sent a Navy of 120 ships,
part English, and part Hollanders, under the Earl of Essex, and in it a
Land-Army of 6000 men; but this Fleet went out and met with so severe a storm,
that it was forced to return, and after that, was detained by contrary Winds,
so that the Provisions being spent, the greatest part of the Army and of the
ships were dismissed, the rest got to Sea the 17th. of August. This Fleet went
to the Azores where Sir Walter Rawleigh took the Town of Fial, and beat the
Spaniards that endeavored to hinder his passage to it. After this they lost
the opportunity of surprising the Spanish Indian Fleet, which they there waited
for, and returned into England without any signal Victory, or what might help
to bear the Charges of this Expedition, which was owing in great part to the
Emulations between the Chief Commanders, who envied each other the Glory of
doing well. Tho the English did not get much by this Expedition, yet the
Spaniards were great Losers, one of their biggest Caracks being forced ashore,
and burnt, three ships were taken, and many others of that Fleet being kept out
too long, perished by tempestuous weather; whereas all the English Fleet
returned in safety.

In the year 1597. George Clifford, The Earl of Cumberland put out a Fleet
against Spain at his own Cost.
Earl of Cumberland, at his own proper Costs and Charge put out a Fleet of
Eleven ships to way-lay the Caracks that go every year from Lisbon to the
East Indies; but they having notice of his being there, sheltered themselves
under the Fort of St. Juliana, which had a Hundred great Guns to defend it; and
here he attended so long, that there was no ships sent that year. From thence
he set sail to the Canary Islands, and took that which is called Lancerata,
with the Town upon it, which he pillaged: Thence he passed to Boriquena in the
Bay of Mexico in the West Indies, and took Porto Rico, the principal Town in
it, and one of the Keys of America, with the loss of less than 30 of his men,
though it was very strong, and defended by 400 Spanish Soldiers, besides the
Townsmen. The Earl considering the strength and importance of the Place,
resolved to keep it, though the Spaniards offered him a vast price for the
redemption of it; but within a short time a Disentery, with grievous Torments
seized the English Garrison, so that in 40 days he buried 70 of his men; and
this forced him to return home with 60 great Guns, but otherwise more exalted
by the Victory than enriched. However, he did the Crown of Spain a vast damage,
for that Year there went no Fleet to the East Indies, and there came none home
from America. It is observed of this Great Man, That his building so many great
ships, and some other less honorable Diversions, wasted more of his Estate,
than any of his Ancestors had spent. After this the Rebellion of Tyrone grew so
formidable to the Queen, and the English Nation, that all the Money and Forces
the Queen could space, were employed that way, and spent in Ireland, of which I
have given an Account in its proper place; So that from henceforth there was no
considerable Expedition undertaken against the Spaniards.

There was one singular Instance of A rare Example of Martial Valor and
Courage.
Personal Valor in the Course of this War, which happened in the Year 1591.
but was reserved to this Place, that the Steps by which the Spanish Pride and
Greatness were abated and pulled down, might appear the better by being laid
together. May this Magnanimity of this Virgin Queen be an encouragement and an
Example to the Present Age for the humbling another Prince, who in our times,
and by our means, is become a terror to all his Neighbors on the score of his
Naval Forces, though infinitely inferior in that, and the Point of Wealth too,
to Philip the IId. King of Spain. But to return, Tho. Lord Howard, Second Son
of the Duke of Norfolk, was sent this year with six Men of War, and six Ships
of Burden, to way-lay the American Flect in its return to Spain, whilst he was
waiting for it at the Azores, where he lay six months, his Soldiers and Seamen
being generally sick, Alphonso Bassano, the Spanish Admiral, came upon him
suddenly with 80 Ships, so that the English could hardly gain the main Sea to
make their defense. One RICHARD GREENVILL, Vice Admiral, being in a Ship called
the REVENGE, staying a little too long to take in some of his men who were on
shore, and not hoisting his Sails neither in the mean time, out of a contempt
of the Spaniards; by all these oversights happened to be shut in between the
Spanish Fleet and the Island. Attemping, when it was too late, to break through
the Spanish Fleet, which was divided into four Squadrons, the Spanish Admiral,
called the St. Philip, a Ship of vast bulk, clapped in between him and the Wind
to deprive him of it, and three smaller Ships surrounded him, and poured in
their great and small Shot on all sides; the Spaniards very often boarded him,
but he every time drove them into their own ships, or into the Sea; Thus he
defended himself all that night, with the great slaughter of his own men, but
with the greater loss of the Enemy. In the morning the English found their
Powder fail, their Masts shot down, their Rigging torn, and the most part of
their bravest men slain or wounded, and the rest so wearied with the fight,
that they could hardly stand to their Arms; The ship also had received 800 shot
of Cannon from the Enemy. Greenvill was wounded, and whilst the Chyrurgeon was
applying a Plaster to the Wound, he was wounded on the head, and the
Chyrurgeon was slain. When the day broke upon them, they found the Deck all
covered with Blood, shattered Timber, dead and dying men; so that it struck
terror into the beholder. Greenvill having now fought 15 hours, and there being
no hope of escaping, commanded the ship to be sunk; the Pilot forbad it, and
went forth within the Longboat to the Spanish Admiral to resign the English
ship, covenanting for their Lives and Liberties that were left in it; Greenvill
thereupon was carried aboard the Spanish Admiral languishing, and just ready to
expire. The Spaniards, when they came to fetch him off, found him lying upon
the Deck all covered with Blood and Wounds, and gasping out his Soul; and they
being amazed at the Resistance he had made, and the Condition they found him
in, endeavored to stanch his Wounds, and applied fit Remedies to him. But all
they could do or say to mitigate his Sorrows was despised by him, and he
answered all their Kindnesses with Frowns and Threats; and thus living two days
in the Agonies of Death, he expired. The Spaniards, who are a valiant Nation,
were so far from being exasperated by this carriage of his, that they
reverenced him as an Hero. The ship verified her Name at last, for being sent
into Spain with 200 men on board, she perished in a storm, and all the men were
drowned: so that every way she was to them a severe REVENGE.

When the Queen had any small respite Complaints made to her of the
Depredations of the English at Sea.
from the Cares of War (the far greatest part of her Reign being in truth spent
in the defense of her Kingdoms, and her Neighbors, who all had their recourse
to her in their Distresses) she always turned her thoughts to the amending what
was amiss in the State. There were great Complaints made to her by the
Ministers and Ambassadors of Foreign States residing here, That the Seas were
infested by her Subjects, and the ships of her Friends and Allies rifl'd;
whereupon she put out a Proclamation for the security of her Friends; strictly
forbidding all her Subjects for the future to offer any violence or wrong to
the Ships of any of her Neighbors, if they did not carry Iron, Corn, or Stores
for Navigation and Shipping to the Spaniards, with whom she was then in War.
Threatening, that whoever was hereafter found to break her Orders, should be
taken for Pirates, and treated accordingly. By this Proclamation, and her exact
care to see it executed accordingly, she cleared the Seas, and made them as
safe as the Land. The management of Proclamations A Reflection concerning
Proclamations.
in our Government is a thing of great difficulty, because they can introduce
no new Law, and are of no force if they be contrary to Law; And when they are
never so legal, if men are once inured to the slighting them, they are no more
regarded than the whistling of the Wind in a stormy day. We have seen many
Proclamations put out in our times which were extorted from Princes against
their wills, or issued upon design to serve a turn for the present, and the
Prince well pleased to see the Bauble ridiculed and contemned; but men did not
stop there, they treated other Proclamations in the same manner, which were of
the greatest importance to the safety of the Prince and Nation. And all these
Orders of State, which in her times were as venerable as an Act of Parliament,
in Ours sunk to the value of almost a common Ballad, a Mischief which it will
take some time perfectly to redress.

Amongst those that complained of The Hanse Towns very clamorous against the
English.
the Depredations of the English, none were more clamorous than the Hanse Towns
in Germany, who in the Year 1597. brought a Complaint before the Diet of
Germany at Ratisbon against the English, That they had rifl'd and robbed all
their ships that carried Corn, Iron and Cordage to the Spaniards. The Quarrel
went so high, that the English were prohibited all Trade in Germany, because
they traded there upon their own Laws, and not according to the Laws of the
Empire. That is, that they would not submit their Trade to the Rules of the
Hanse Towns, but traded as a free Nation under the Protection of their own
Queen and Laws. To this the Queen by her Ambassador Mr. John Wroth replied,
That the Complaint of the Hanse Towns was unjust; That it became her as a good
Prince to consult the Welfare of her own People, and to promote their safety
and common advantage; and that it became a good Shepherd to prefer the welfare
of his own Flock, before that of any other. That the Hanse Towns, if they did
well consider it, might trade upon the same Privileges with her own Subjects;
but then if they expected to enjoy a Monopoly in her Kingdom, they desired more
than was fit to be granted by a just and free Prince, as she was. Rodolph, then
Emperor of Germany, The Trade of the English prohibited in Germany.
was offended with the Answer the Queen had made, and passed a Law in the Diet,
prohibiting the English from trading in any of the Ports of Germany, and
commanding them to withdraw, with their effects, by a certain day. The Queen on
the other hand represented the injustice of this Edict to the Emperor, and the
Princes, and informed them that Henry the IIId. her Predecessor, had by a Royal
Charter made by agreement granted to the Hanse Towns, a place in London called
the Stillyard, with many very large Privileges, for the preserving the Freedom
of their Trade; That this Grant had after been confirmed by Edward III. Richard
II. Henry IV, V, VI. and all the other Princes, to her Brother's time, and had
been religiously observed, and therefore she desired that the Edict might be
suspended, and the Controversy ended by a Treaty; but this was denied:
Whereupon the Queen, by the Advice of her Council, put out a Proclamation, She
takes away the Stillyard from the Easter lings or Germans.
commanding the Germans to depart from the Stillyard the same day the English
were commanded to leave Germany; from thenceforward she put a stop to all their
Trade in London, or any other of her Ports, and ordered the Lord Mayor of
London to seize the Stillyard. The Hanse Towns called a Diet of all their
Members at Lubeck, and in it, by way of Revenge, resolved to put a stop to the
Trade of the English in Poland, and other places of the Baltic Sea; Whereupon
the Queen sent Sir George Carew, Chancellor of the Exchequer, into Pruffia and
Poland, to acquaint the Diet of that Kingdom, That the Hanse Towns of Germany
might still have enjoyed their Ancient Privileges in England, if they would
have been contented to use them as Favors granted by our Princes, and not have
pretended they were their Right: That as there was reason for the granting them
when they were given, so there was all the reason in the world they should be
suspended, restrained, or quite taken away when the Reason ceased upon which
they were granted; that this had been done in Denmark, Sweden and England in
the Reigns of Edward the VIth. and Queen Mary. That the Hanse Towns had been
made so rich by the Favor of Princes, that they had been heretofore terrible
even to their Benefactors; that it became the King of Poland rather to favor
her who was a Prince, than to patronize the insatiable Avarice of the
Merchants; who when they were become very rich, were too apt insolently to lift
up themselves against Princes: That the Queen was contented they should carry
Corn, and all other Merchandise to Spain, except Ammunition and Warlike Stores
for Sea or Land, though it was lawful, and the Practice of all Nations, to
intercept all those Provsions that were sent to an Enemy. She had better
success Poland continues the Trade with the English.
here than in Germany, and settled her Subjects Trade in the Baltic so
effectually, that the Hanse Towns were never after in a condition to dispute
the Trade of the English. Thus the Queen by her Authority and Prudence mastered
the Obstinacy of the Hanse Towns, and forced them to sue for their Goods in her
Court of Admiralty, and to trade with her Subjects upon equal terms in all
places; and she so divided and broke their Power, that they were never since
able to contest with any Prince, much less with her, or her Successors.
Notwithstanding which, the The Embassy into Muscovy p. 213
Kings of England have always religiously continued the same Privileges to the
Hanse Towns, though the tide of the Trade be long since wholly turned, the
English now carrying all that Trade to their own doors, and much more than ever
they received from them; And I my self (says the late Earl of Carlisle) was
present in Council, when Charles the IId. after his Happy Restoration ratified
the said Privileges.

She also by her Authority, in the She ends a War between the Russians and
Swedes.
Year 1595. composed a War which had depended many years between the King of
Sweden and the Emperor of Russia, who had a greater respect for her, than for
any other Prince in Christendom; her Subjects having opened a way by the White
Sea, and the Bay of Archangel, to trade by Sea with him in the Year 1554.
which was then, and has ever since been of vast advantage to that remote,
barbarous, and poor Kingdom; The Subjects of which have not only been enriched,
but civilized, and learned many mechanic Arts, which they did not unsterstand
before, of us, and those people we and the Hollanders have sent thither.

Her whole care was not employed in Her Laws for the Enriching of her Subjects
at home.
defending her People from the violence of her foreign Enemies, and the Frauds
and Arts of the Neighbor Traders by Sea, but she took effectual care at the
same time in her Parliaments, to promote excellent and useful Laws for the
Restraint of excessive Dvmestick Expenses, and the regulating the Lives of her
Subjects, as will appear by the Printed Statutes of her time. To this end she
necessitated the meaner of her Subjects, by sharp Laws, as sharply executed, to
a modest and frugal way of living, both as to their Diet and Habits. She curbed
and discountenanced the Luxury, and expensive folly of the English Youth and
Nobility, both by her private Advices, and her public Laws; and she prescribed
them Rules for their Furniture, Families, and Retinues. She had observed the
Purveyers The Purveyers reformed.
for her Court were a rapacious sort of men, and under the color and pretense
of Law, made great depredations on the Husbandmen, and the Farmers in her
Kingdom, and therefore she kept a strict hand upon them, and by her Severity,
when ever any Complaint was brought against them, she kept them in awe. There
was another Generation of men called commonly the CONCEALERS; of mean
Extraction, As also the Concealers.
and worse Disposition; who had obtained Commissions to enquire into the Frauds
and Concealments of those that had got any Lands belonging to the Royal
Demeans, or Crown of England; and they had under that pretense wrested from
many of her Subjects their Inheritances and Estates; but when she understood
their Crimes, she not only punished them for their Wrongs, but revoked their
Commissions which she had formerly granted out; And by a Proclamation she
forbad any further inquiry should be made into the Titles of her Subjects, as
to those Lands they possessed on the behalf of the Crown, by which she put a
stop to that sort os Miscreants, and secured the Estates of her People from
further wrong. Whencver she found that her Her Severity to her Judges and
Governors.
People had been afflicted, or ruined in their Fortunes by the Judges and
Governors she had set over them in any part of her Dominions, she consolated
them upon the first opportunity. Before her time the Usurers of England had
taken what they could get from all for usury; and she to prevent the Frauds and
rapacious Encroachments of these men, first passed a Law, that they should not
take above ten in the hundred for one years Usury mitigated.
interest, which by the plenty of Money sunk after to Six, and of late, without
any Act, to five in the Hundred. To prevent enhansement of the Market, she made
a severe Law against Forestallers, Ingrossers, and Regattors, repelling their
insatiable Avarice, by imprisoning, whipping, and Pillory. She called her
Customs the Nerves of the Nation The Customs carefully looked after.
(as they were the best branch of her Revenues) and she made it her business to
study them, and well understand the value of them, and the ways of raising
them. When her Exchequer was at the lowest ebb, she detested all Monopolies and
bitter Exactions upon Monopoly suppressed.
her People, which she thought to be utterly unlawful, and tending more to the
loading her with the hatred of her Subjects, than the enriching of her Coffers.
She was very severe against all Informers, or Promoters, who having Informers
and Promoters carefully inquired into.
been for many Ages encouraged by her Predecessors, as the Enrichers and
Improvers of the Royal Revenues, had contracted a vast envy from the whole
Nation; but she was the first Prince that would suffer their Crimes to be
inquired into; and finding they had been guilty of many ill Actions, she put a
stop to them, and punished them for what they had done, that they might no
longer impoverish the better and richer part of her Subjects. Thus she
delivered her People from the grievous Oppressions of Usurers, Ingrossers, and
Promoters. She was no less careful to protect them against the Avarice of her
Judges and Presidents; and when any of them came to wait on her, she would upon
occasion speak very severely against their aspiring to those places, the She
detested multitude of Suits.
multitude of Suits, and the over great variety of Causes. She increased the
Wages of her Judges, that she might deliver them at once from the temptation
and suspicion of Bribery. She passed an excellent and a most equitable Law, for
the more speedy determining the Cases depending in her Courts. She admonished
her Judges, That Her Admonition to the Judges.
they should consider the Judgment or Jurisdiction they exercised, was God's;
and therefore they should hear with patience, and give judgment with equity and
justice, truly, and without any corruption. That they should diligently study
the Law, and consider it well, and with relation to the profit of the State,
and not show the sharpness of their Wits by a falacious interpretation of a
doubtful Law, to the injury of her People; but that without partiality they
should administer equal Justice to all, and severely punish those they found
guilty. If therefore there were any just cause os complaint in her times, it
was only owing to the Judges, who had a full liberty to have satisfied the
Nation by their Fidelity and Integrity, and the Religious Observation of their
Oaths; and so were not necessitated to become a Grievance to her People by
Illegal Proo^edings. But then all these cares show the Corruption of the Times,
and that many of the Law-Proceedings had been corrupted by the Lawyers, which
made these Laws for the correction of them necessary. When she had thus
restored her Law-Courts, her next care was to restrain the License of the
Theater, The licentious liberty of the Theater restrained.
and she prohibited all Exercises and Plays, but what were Manly, and tended to
the fitting her Subjects for War, by making their bodies more hardy and active,
and their Souls more valiant. Her Divine Virtues are not to be Recompensed by
Statues of Brass or Marble, which have more of Ostentation than true and solid
Honor; nor are they to be Equaled by any Commendations or Magnificent Titles;
for they deserved more Lasting Monuments to be erected in the Minds and
Judgments of men for an Everlasting Remembrance. And certainly Posterity will
stand amazed to read and consider a State so firmly established by the
Greatness of her Soul and Counsels, so many Victories obtained, and such
incredible things done in her Times.

Tho her Reign was the most glorious and happy period or space of time The
Calamities and Misfortunes that happened in her Times.
that had ever happened to this Island from the Norman Conquest to her days; yet
there were some Misfortunes and Calamities that clouded the Brightness of it.
In the fifth year of her Reign there was a Plague brought out of France by her
Soldiers from Newhaven, which destroyed more people in England than any that
had happened before it. The Earthquakes that happened frequently in those
times, frighted the English more than any other thing, they being very unusual,
and attended, with horrible Noises in the earth, and some Damage. The Queen was
always ready to relieve any of her Subjects that had suffered by these
Earthquakes, Inundations, or Fire; her Coffers were ever open to redress the
Calamities of her Subjects, and to enable them to repair their Losses. When the
people of London fell into an outrageous Tumult on the account of a Famine, and
a great want of Corn, she first by her Royal Proclamation appeased their
enraged minds, and then commanded the Lord Mayor to undertake the Care of
supplying the Wants of the City; and she sent many Ships into the Baltic Sea,
and to Poland, for Corn, which upon their return put an end to these Complaints.

She would punish the Iniquities of Her Care of, and Kindness to her good
Magistrates.
her Magistrates, whenever she found them guilty; but then she would defend
their Lawful Power, and assert their Just Authority against ill men, with the
hazard of her Life. Thus she put a stop to the Insolence of the Londoners when
they were in the greatest Rage that was possible, by the sole Authority of her
Proclamation, without any Forces. She frequently Her Care of the Poor.
issued considerable Sums of Money out of her Treasury, for the Relief of the
Poor. She took a particular care that all Religious Foundations, and places
built for the benefit of the Poor, should be employed to the right uses; and
that the Lands and Houses belonging to them, should for ever be preserved
entire to them.

As she took effectual and wise Care Her affectionate and tender Care of the
Church.
to heal the Wounds of the State, or Civil Government, so she well understood
the Diseases of the Church were to be taken into consideration too, and to be
prevented with the utmost hazard of a Prince's Personal Safety: To this end she
made severe Laws against the selling Livings, the Avarice of Patrons, and the
Simony of Clergymen. She detested the giving Curacies and Preferments to those
that had no Learning. She preferred honest stout men, who were well read in
Divine and Humane Literature, and well acquainted with Men, and Books, and the
Times, to the Dignities of the Church, and the greatest and best endowed
Livings: But on the other hand, she despised all those that had neither Virtue,
nor Parts, nor Learning; but above all, the dishonest, slanderous, and crasty
Knaves, who were at a catch to injure others. She compelled all that were
inducted into any Benefice, to swear, That they had not given nor promised any
thing to any person whatsoever, directly or indirectly, on the account of that
Preferment. She would not suffer any Benefice to be bought or sold; but she
detested the Buyer and the Seller as the worst of Plagues; and took care to
exclude them from that and all other Preferments. She was never silent or
unconcerned, when unworthy and unfit men were recommended to the Dignities of
the Church. The most earnest solicitations of the greatest of her Courtiers and
Favorites, could in this case have no effect upon her; and in all other things
which concerned the Safety and Welfare of the Church, she took a Pious and
Religious Care to place her Favors to the best advantage.

She was a Lady of Great Beauty, of Her Stature and Personal Accomplishments.
a Decent Stature, and of an Excellent Shape: In her youth she was adorned with
a more than usual Maiden Modesty; her Skin was of pure white, and her hair of a
yellow color; her Eyes were beautiful and lively: In short, her whole Body was
well made, and her Face was adorned with a wonderful and sweet Beauty and
Majesty. This Beauty lasted till her Middle Age, tho it declined: In her Old
Age she became deformed with Wrinkles, Leanness, and fallen Lips; so that it
was hard to believe she had ever had that Excellent Composure, and Lovely
Beauty: But then, Time was able to make no change in her, as to her Majesty,
her Princely Speech and Carriage; her Mind was as high, her Manners as regular,
and the Course of her Life the same it had ever been. She was however so
displeased to see her Beauty wear off, and her Body decline from its former
Luster, that she made her self a little ridiculous, by her taking too much
notice of it. If she happened by accident to cast her eye upon a true
Looking-glass, she would be strangely In her Old Age she was offended at the
Decay of her Beauty.
transported and offended, because it did not still show her what she had been.
The Courtiers, who knew her humor, if she were to pass through any of the
Ladies Chambers that waited on her, presently conveyed away all the
Looking-glasses, and sometimes for haste broke them. To please and flatter her,
they would also frequently admire her Beauty, and pretend in her greatest Age
and Deformity she was still handsome and lovely. She was strangely pleased to
hear the Beauty of her Face, the Sweetness of her Voice, and the Majesty and
Decence of her Countenance still admired by others: And this gave occasion to
many unworthy strokes of Flattery, and examples of Adulation sometimes used to
her.
Adulation. Thus the Orators of those times would too often in their Speeches
vainly commemorate and celebrate the wonderful and pleasing Beauty and Shape of
their Queen, and say, The Majesty of her Countenance was not at all subject to
the Injuries of Time; when their eyes told them and all that saw her, the
contrary; from thence they went on sometimes to tell her, She had a Soul was
worthy to Rule over the whole World; and enjoyed those Favors of Fortune, and
Gifts of Nature and Art, which fitted her for the Empire of the Universe: Nor
were her stately Palaces and Buildings, her noble Furniture, her fine Statues,
or excellent Pictures, her great Treasures, Virtues, or Felicity, forgotten on
these occasions.

The Flatteries of Learned men toward The Flatteries of learned men noted.
her were very base and shameful, and such as would hardly become the Stage or
Theater; for they would often apply to her that Expression of Virgil's as
spoken of her, (O Dea certe)! Surely this is a Goddess! And that Sentence too
which Tacitus marked as the utmost pitch of a wild and boundless Assentation,
(Solam D. Elizabethae mentena tantae molis capacem), That none but the Divine
Soul of Queen Elizabeth was able to sustain that Weight: By which extravagant
Flatteries they would have had men think that the Name of their Queen had
something of Divinity in it, and that they revered her as a Goddess which fell
from Heaven. These base and pernicious Flatteries so far transported the minds
of Caligula, Domitian, and Heliogabilus, that they fell into a kind of Madness,
and forgetting the frailty of their humane state, they assumed the Style and
Honors of gods, and despised all Religions, and the Providence of God. The
Queen especially She endeavored at first to raise a good opinion of her self
in her Subjects.
in the beginning of her Reign endeavored to raise in the minds of her
Subjects an high opinion of her self; and to that end she showed her self on
all occasions very Civil and Obliging to the Many in her Attire, Retinue, and
Carriage. She always openly professed that she would make it her business to
employ her Estate and Fortunes in the most prudent Administration of her Royal
Power and Authority. Whatever Which by degrees brought her to love Flattery.
she did or said was by her designed to draw upon her self the Applause and
Good Wills of her Subjects; and by this her Moderation and Prudence she won the
Hearts, and obtained the Prailes of all men. Afterward with the Prosperity of
her Affairs, Flattery, that old haunter of the Courts of Fortunate Monarchs,
under the Vizor and Mask of Diligence, Loyalty, and Duty, gained her ear and
her heart; and she was pleased to see her Parasitical Courtiers, when they had
looked intently on her, of sudden cast their eyes upon the ground, and
craftilyseem to shake, as if their Modesty was not able to bear the Greatness
of her Majesty, and the splendour of her Heavenly Eyes. And if in their common
Intercourses with her, or their Public Addresses to her, they happened to fall
into Flattery, she never corrected them for it, nor forbid these indecent and
unseasonable Flatteries. She would not suffer any of her Subjects, tho
Parliament Men, to speak to her by way of Address or Business, but upon their
Knees, and with great submission. The crafty men of that Age who lay in Ambush,
made great use of this Infirmity Crafty men wrought upon this her Infirmity.
of the Queen's, and observed not only her Words, but her Looks and Nods, and
flattered her in every thing. Sir Thomas Henage, a Knight, was one of these
cunning Blades, who by the basest crouching Insinuations scrued himself into
her good opinion, and most intimate Familiarity; and by this means in her Court
raised himself to a great Power and Estate. And besides him, there were many
others who were not ignorant of this useful Art, tho they were inferior to him
in Place, Fortune, and Fame. Tho many of her more sincere and hearty Friends
advised her, Not to be imposed on by the specious Pretenses of obsequious
Diligence and Respect; yet she was not only better pleased with Flattery than
Truth, but hated all that Liberty in her Subjects that was above this practice.
A Learned man taking notice in one of his Sermons before her, That she that had
been as meek as a Lamb, was become an untameable Heifer; he was reprehended by
her so soon as he came out of the Pulpit, as an over-confident man, that
dishonored his Sovereign; as in truth that was the worst Time and Place he
could have chosen to Reprove her in. Rudd, Bishop of St. David's, a man of
great Piety and Learning, discoursing once very prudently of the many
Infirmities of Old Age, so provoked the Indignation of the Queen, that she
would never after endure to hear him. Tho she was an utter Enemy to all Freedom
of Speech, yet she very well knew how to distinguish between a Crafty Preacher
who made it his She understood Preacliing very well, and loved Severe and Grave
men.
business to accomodate himself to the Opinions and Wills of his Hearers, and a
constant, severe, and grave man. Accordingly she ever preferred a Moderate and
Temperate Way of Preaching, for fear her People should have been excited by
such Turbulent men to excessive Insolence, and the minds of wiser men should
also have been offended. In this affair she made good use of the provident
Prudence of the Bishops, But curbed the Fiery, Turbulent Preachers.
who deprived the over-fiery spirits of the Liberty of Preaching, and put a
stop to their excessive Boldness. And this was the principal Reason why none
were suffercd to Preach in her times, but such as were Licensed to do so. Yet
at the same time she was a Person of great Piety, and endowed with the most
ardent Love of Religion; but then she did not think it was fit to suffer her
Kingdoms to be embroiled by Seditious spirits, under the Mask and She loved
Religion, but hated Factions.
Pretense of avoiding Persecution, and promoting the Service of God: And she
was happy in this, that in her times those Parties that have since spread
themselves over this whole Kingdom, were small and inconsiderable, and so she
was under no necessity of complying with them for her own safety, but could
treat them as she thought fit; and perhaps if her two next immediate Successors
had pursued the same Methods she did, there had been no Civil War in England;
but whilst they sought to gratify the Princes of the Roman Catholic Religion
abroad, by their Lenity to the Papists at home, the Protestant Dissenters grew
up here, and if they were connived at, increased; if they were suppressed, they
turned the Envy of the Favor shown to the Papists, upon the Government; and
easily persuaded the People, that Popery would be restored in England. Whether
she consulted of (...) War, she always set God befo^ (...), and directed all
things to (...). For the promoting Charity and Piety, she Her Devotion in the
Public Service of God.
Religiously observed the stated and ap pointed Festivals of the Church, when
she was present at the appointed Prayers, and the Sermons, both which she heard
with much Devotion and Attention, but without the least mixture of
Superstition. She ever received the Eucharist with highest Expressions of
Respect, and used the Ceremonies of the Church. When she went to hear the Week
day or Lent-Sermons, she was ever attended by many of, her Nobility of both
Sexes, but without, any extraordinary Splendour in her Dress or Retinue.
According to the nature and circumstance of the times, she religiously and
devoutly listened to the Sermons made before her; and according to the Merits of
the Preachers, rarely failed to show them her Favor, and salute and thank them
before they went away. She very freely exposed She exposed her Life for the
Safety of the Church.
her Life to the utmost hazards for the preserving the Dignity and Discipline
of the Church; to which end she caused her Laws against the Papists to be
constantly and regularly executed; and she showed the same Severity against the
Obstinacy of the Protestant Dissenters, whom she kept all her times under
strict and sharp Restraint. I think it is not needful to show here again to
what great Perils she exposed her Life for the Preservation of the Reformed
Religion.

She showed her self ever easy and She humoured and caressed the Body of the
People.
merciful to the People, and condescended to humor them, and promote their
Welfare with the utmost Humanity. By this her Clemency and Sweetness, and the
Equity of her Laws, and the Proceedings on them, her Courteous Behavior, and
Obliging Speeches to them, she so entirely won their Hearts, and fixed their
Affections, that without any Command of hers, of their own accord, and by an
universal Consent, they every year celebrated her Coronation-Day with a
Religious Joy: They cheerfully exposed their Lives to any Danger for her
Safety; and never refused to suffer or hazard any thing, if they might but
enjoy their beloved Queen. Being thus secured of the Affection of her People,
she lived pleasantly and securely in Peace and Plenty; and she could safely
treat her Nobility, as became a Prince, when she was sure to be reverenced and
obeyed; her Authority being supported thus by the Love and good disposition of
her Subjects toward her. The People honored some of her Ministers of State
too, and very much applauded them; and upon every New Year's Day freely made a
present to them, to testify the grateful sense they had of the Benefits they
had received by their Ministry. The People of the meanest degree had ever an
easy access to the Queen, and could with the utmost freedom make their
Complaints to her of any Injury they had suffered from the greatest of the
Nobility; so that it is very difficult to say, whether her Subjects most feared
her Authority, or loved her Humanity and Courtesy. All these many and great
Virtues, her Piety, the Love of her Kingdom, and the careful diligence she
employed to win and keep the Affections of her Subjects, sprang from one and
the same Fountain, her Prudence. This taught her how much it contributed to the
Safety and Security of her State, to have her Privy Council consist of none but
Wise and Faithful Men, chosen freely and prudently by her self: And by the
Authority and with the Approbation of this Council, she provided for the
Government of her Border-Counties and Garrisons, approved men, of good
Understandings, and well Educated, who were to take care to secure her Kingdom
from External Surprises, and Internal Broils; they were directed by her to take
care also of whatever tended to the Welfare of her People, and to punish what
was wicked and disquieting; which they did, not only by the execution of good
Laws, but also by the exemplary Lives they led.

The Parliaments in her time were Parliaments frequently held, and for the most
part well tempered.
frequent, and well tempered; the Lower House being generally chosen of Men of
good Prudence, and beloved by the people, upon the opinion of their Integrity,
Fidelity, and Piety: By their Advice and Assistance the Royal Authority became
more resplendant; and whilst they did their Duties, she as carefully observed
their Privileges, and regarded their Petitions and Advices; but if at any time
they happened to transgress their bounds, and entrench upon her Authority, she
would make them soon sensible that they were her Subjects, as well in
Parliament, as out of Parliament: And the truth is, those Notions and Practices
which afterward imbroil d this Kingdom, and injealoused some, and ruined one
of her Successors, began to spring up in her time, and were only suppressed by
the prudence and steadiness of the Queen, her wise Council, good Government,
and the affection the People bore to her; so that it was not possible for
Factious and Ambitious Men in her times to raise those Fears, or foment those
Distrusts, that became so fatal afterward. Though she was thus jealous of her
own Regal and Sovereign Authority, by which she had the right of conferring
Titles of Honor, administering Justice, etc. yet she did little of importance
without the concurrence of the Three Estates: And they never stubbornly and
generally invaded the Royal Authority, despised her Commands, or resisted her
Counsels and Admonitions. Whilst she was settling the methods of her Government,
she laid down this as a certain Maxim, which she had learned from the English
History, and her own Observation and Experience, That the Her Maxim concerning
War and Peace.
People of England were more governable in times of War, than in times of
Peace. That the common People were hardened and made valiant by War, but by too
much Peace became sloathful and dissolute, and at the same time Factious and
unquiet. That the Nobility, if once manumised from the Labors and Perils of
War, would in Peace become expensive, luxurious and effeminate. Her greater
care was to know thoroughly the state of her Kingdoms; and those men that were
entrusted by her to govern her People, whose Words and Actions she carefully
observed. She carefully observed the Examples of her Royal Ancestors, the
Public Laws and Institutions, the Manners and Inclinations of the Common
People, the Names and Abilities of her Nobility, their Public Offices, and
Private Estates, the number of her Soldiers and Garrisons, her Fleets and Forts,
and whatever else had been provided for the defense and safety of her Kingdoms;
her Customs, Taxes, Crown Lands, and Revenues, and the Charges and Expense she
was to make; in all which she prudently and providently altered many things for
the better. She never put Arms into the She would never arm the meanest of the
People.
hands of the meanest and poorest of the People, that their wants might not
prompt them to Sedition; So that the Militia in her time was generally supplied
by the Yeomanry and richer Tenants, who served in their own Arms. The present
Practice of employing mean people, arose upon the multiplying the Train Arms,
and the overcharging men, which indeed has made them more numerous, but not so
safe, considerable, or governable, as they were before, to the damage both of
the Crown and People. She never advanced any to the degree of a Peer, but The
Honors belonging to the Peerage, carefully given.
those that were men of worth, and whose virtue and industry had rendered them
fit for it; and yet after all these Cautions, the number she created was very
small. She rarely created any man a Peer upon the solicitation or
recommendation of others, or for her own fancy or humor; but when any person
stood Candidate for that Honor, there was an exact and careful confideration
had of the Nobility of his Ancestors, the Greatness of the Family, the
Endowments of his Mind, and the briskness of his Parts, of his Probity, Wisdom
and Prudence, and of the strength and vigor of his Body, which might enable
him to perform some good service to the Nation. It was the rare felicity of
these Times, That men were advanced to Honors without their seeking it; and
sometimes against their wills, being promoted for their Virtues, not Fortunes.
She chose Her care in choosing good Counselors, Bishops, Judges and Ministers.
her Counselors, Bishops, Judges, Ministers and Court-Officers, and her
inferior Magistrates, on the single score of their Fidelity, Experience, Piety,
Justice, Modesty, Prudence and Wisdom: That they being thus advanced, might
exercise their Offices the more honorably and sincerely. She would often tell
those she entrusted, That they might rest assured she would reward their
Integrity, Industry and Equity; and if she found them guilty of any Injustice
and Oppression, she would as certainly punish them for it. She would never
entertain in her Service any Ignorant, Covetous, Dishonest, or Light Person.
She always loved Sir Walter Rawleigh for his great Ingenuity and Loyalty, yet
he was never admitted into the Privy Council. When Burleigh, the Lord
Treasurer, had a long time solicited her to advance his Son Robert, a Person of
great Parts, to be Secretary of State; she a great while denied it, only
because he was little of stature, and hunch-backed; and she thought it a
dishonor to that Board, to have a deformed Person sit amongst so many Eminent
and Noble Persons; and when afterward he attained this Honor upon the
solicitation of his Father, and his other Friends, the Nobility were highly
offended at it. And when after that he was, upon the death of the Lord
Buckhurst, made his Father's Assistant in the Treasury, it so far provoked the
Military men, that it proved the Ruin of the Earl of Essex, and it was well it
ended here. The Queen being thus provided with a Wise and Noble Council with
great care and prudence, and which were highly esteemed by her People too, as
well as her self, for their virtue; she chose the most learned and uprightest
of the Counselors, or Lawyers, to be her Judges, only Hatton excepted.

She was an exact Observer of Justice, Her Justice, and Veracity, and Severity
to Offenders.
which is the most resplendent of all the Moral Virtues, and of veracity or
constancy to her Word, which is the foundation of Justice: She was extremely
severe against all that broke her Laws, and punished sometimes small Offenses
with great severity. Though the Earl of Essex was a Person of great Fame, her
particular Favorite, and had done her, and the Nation, good Services, and was
the best Soldier her times bred (which were well stored with excellent Military
men) yet when by the fraud of his Enemies and Flatterers, rather than his own
Inclinations, he was so far transported, as to attempt to arm her Subjects
against his envious Rivals, who treacherously sought his ruin; That which he
expected would have turned to his advantage failing, the Queen delivered him
into the hands of the common Executioner, who mangled his Body to that degree,
that it enraged the people that saw it, against the Hangman, and they stoned
and cursed him for it, and drove him out of the City. Soon after God took a
severe account of those that had been the Procurers of this Noble Person's
death; Cobham, Gray and Rawleigh, with their whole Families, were ruined within
the space of a few years; Sir Robert Cecil, the principal Agent in it, lived
longer, but at last perished too by a long Disease, attended with Ulcers, and
other painful and loathsome Circumstances; and as the Story goes, under an
Hedge in the open Fields as he was traveling on the Road.

Sir John Perrot, a Welsh Gentleman Sir John Perrot an Instance of her Severity.
of great Spirit, and of much fame for his Military Exploits, and his Integrity
in the management of the Wars in Ireland; was yet of something too fierce a
temper, which gave his Enemies too many opportunities to traduce and injure
him. The Lord Chancellor Hatton was one of those who employed Spies upon him,
and they catching some Expressions that fell from him in a passion, and much
improving them to his disadvantage, accused him to the Queen as one that was
not well affected to Her Majesty, and that had used some Expressions which
tended to her dishonor; for which, and his over-stiff Contumacy, he was put
upon his Trial, and being found guilty, he was condemned, and was imprisoned to
the day of his death; suffering want, and nastiness of a common Goal and the
uneasiness of an afflicted and delected mind. to see himself thus in his old
Age abandoned to the malice of his Enemies by his Mistress, whom he had served
with much fidelity and courage in her Wars. His Estate also, which he had
received from his Ancestors, which was considerable, and what he had gained
himself, was all taken from him. The Lord Treasurer Burleigh was also suspected
to have had a great share in the Contrivance of this Gentleman's Ruin.

Her Severity, which she exerted in Her very Severity to Offenders made her the
more beloved by the People.
punishing the Disorders and Offenses of her Servants, was so far from being
invidious, that it made her more popular, and the better thought of by all good
men. She had the utmost aversion for all contrived and malicious Murders; so
that she thought such Miscreants could never be treated too ill; and when she
got them into her power, she would rarely show them any mercy. Of this I will
only give two Instances of a multitude that happened in her times, which will
shorten my Work, and serve to illustrate her Justice and Severity. There were
two Brothers of the Family of Davers who were of the degree of Knights, and men
of good Estates and Reputations, and they had a quarrel with another Gentleman
of equal Birth and Estate, whose name was Long, a man of Valor too; thereupon
they resolved to murder him; and taking the advantage as he was going to set
down to Dinner, they shot him in the breast. The Queen hearing of this Fact,
was strangely enraged at it, and resolved to revenge the Villainy to the utmost
degree (as she ever detected all premeditated Assassinations) and she
accordingly ordered the Law to pass against the two Daverses, and cited them to
appear before her Judges to answer for it. But the two Brothers made their
escape, and fled first into France; there they heard of the Insurrections in
Ireland, into which Kingdom they passed, and served the Queen against her
Rebel-Subjects, in hopes by some signal Acts of Valor to blot out their said
Crime, and regain her Favor; And in truth they served her many years with
extraordinary Fidelity and Courage against those Barbarous Rebels; yet after
all, the Earl of Essex could not obtain their Pardon without very great
difficuly, and many and repeated Solicitations. The Eldest of these two
Brothers afterward lost his Life in the Service of the Queen, and under the
Command of the Earl of Essex.

In all private Suits she was observed Her Justice.
to be a religious Observer of Justice and Equity, and to keep the Balance
even between the greatest and the meanest of her Subjects: She preserved the
poorest from wrongs, and made it her care that every man might enjoy what was
his own, and serve the Public with it; by the impartiality of Justice, and the
equity of all Law-proceedings, providing carefully for the preservation of
Human Society, for the good of the whole Community. When any Case happened to
be wrongfully determined, by reason of Perjury, or Interest, Partiality, or
mistake in any of her Courts; she would upon complaint hear it her self, taking
to her assistance men of the greatest Authority, and much celebrated for their
exact knowledge of the Laws of England. And when she had thus sifted it to the
bottom, she would ever give a most just and wise Sentence, by which she made
her Judges the more careful to keep within the bounds of Equity and Justice,
and showed her Subjects, that no part of her People should want the benign
influence of her care and assistance in time of need. She always took care that
her inferior Magistrates should be reverenced, and the Authority of her Council
and Laws kept up? But then whatever had been injuriously transacted by Bribery,
or Error, in any of her Courts, she as willingly corrected, that Errors might
not increase and multiply by her carelessness, or the ignorance of her Judges;
and that Mistakes might not get strength by time, and plead custom. She would
sometimes also cause Cases to be heard by her other ordinary Judges after they
had been determined, that she might keep the ordinary Judges in awe, and make
them the more circumspect, when they were liable to have their Actions scanned
over again.

In her Personal Expenses she was She was sparing in her personal Expenses, but
magnificant in her public Actions.
^hrifty and sparing; that she might not exhaust her Exchequer, and at the same
time to teach her Subjects by her own Example to live thriftily, and soberly,
after the manner of their Ancestors: In her Government, and all her Public
Actions she carried all things in such manner as might best befit her Honor,
and represent her to the World as a great and a splendid Prince: Nor would she
at any time make any considerable expense, till she had first consulted with
her Treasurer Burleigh concerning the state of her Exchequer, and what Moneys
she had to defray the same: It ws then thought his Advices to her made her more
sparing than was fit toward the Swordmen and Commanders in the War; It is
certain however, that she never called Gray, Willoughby, Norris, or Sir Francis
Vere to the Council Table, though they were excellent Commanders, and had done
her good service in Holland, Spain, France and Ireland, by the gaining of many
signal Victories, and the spreading the Fame, and exalting the Reputation of
the English Nation. When some of them had wasted the She was too sparing in her
Rewards, especially to the Swordmen.
Estates left them by their Ancestors, and complained to her of their Poverty,
beseeching her to give them wherewith to pay off the Debts they had contracted
in her Service, it is certain she never contributed any thing to that purpose
from her Treasure, nor in the least assisted or favored them in any thing. She
sought rather to encourage and win her Generals and Nobility over to Acts of
Valor by her Commendations, than by the gift of Money, Lands, or Offices. In
her conversation with them she would show them much patience and affability,
and would frequently acknowledge how much they had obliged her by their
Actions. But as to those that had lost their Lives in her Service, or done any
great Action for the Safety, Liberty, and Glory of her Kingdom, she would often
take occasion to speak of them with much affection and honor, which was the
best Reward they often met with for having served her with great Iudustry and
Courage.

When Sir Philip Sidney, a Gentleman Sir Philip Sidney much lamented.
of noble Birth, and honest Disposition, of great Parts, Learning, Virtue and
Fame, had lost his life before Zutphen in the Netherlands, in the Year 1586. he
was not only lamented by the whole Army in the Camp, and Elegies made to his
Honor by the Universities of England, but he was commended also by the Court,
and the Queen commanded his Body to be publicly interred in St. Paul's Church
in London, which was performed with much solemnity, and a vast concourse of the
Nobility, Gentry, and Citizens: And it was fit all this respect should be
showed to his Memory on the score of his Virtue, Learning and Merits, which
have made him so famous in those, and all the succeeding times. This is an
Honor that is more lasting, and more noble, than any Statues, or Funeral
Monuments, which are often destroyed by Fire, Wars, Earthquakes, or Time; and
without any of these, are sometimes lost to the knowledge of men, and
themselves buried in forgetfulness; but his Books and Actions will make him
admired in all times. The Magnificent Funeral of this Noble Knight was an
honor to the Queen, and to the Age, and even to Learning it self. The Earl of
Leicester, who was his Uncle, was chief Mourner at his Funeral, and extolled
the Virtue of his Nephew to Heaven, in hopes the luster of his Pupil's Name
would reflect upon himself an equal commendation and glory; but in truth Sir
Philip Sidney was his own Tutor, and gained all the glory he met with by his
natural Endowments, and his Studies; and perhaps it was owing too in great part
to the scarcity of Learning at that time, which made those that enjoyed it
then, more conspicuous and regardable than they have been since, when it became
more common; but then this latter neglect has made it less desired, and less
aspired to, and almost wheeled us about to the same point of the Circle he was
in.

Nor was the Queen's Favors confined She showed great respect to the memory of
the meanest Soldier that perished in her Service.
only to her Generals, and Great Men, but she would condescend to celebrate the
Memory of the meanest common Soldier that had had the honor to spend his life
in the service of his Country, to excess. She redeemed out of Captivity those
that were taken of the meaner People; and she willingly gave to their Parents,
Wives and Children, that Money, and those Rewards they might justly have
expected from her, if they had lived. So that she kindled in the minds of all
her Subjects by her bounty, kindness and beneficence, an ardent desire of
Military Virtue, and in this she exceeded the most of her Predecessors.
Burleigh, though a man of great virtue and honor, too stubbornly prosecuted
the Cause of the Exchequer against the Commanders of those times, and kept the
Queen from showing them that Favor, and from giving them those Rewards they
had by their Virtue and Industry so well deserved; by which means he alienated
from the Queen the But was not liberal to the Great men, which had an ill
effect.
hearts of many of the Nobility, who were men of great knowledge, valor,
industry and fidelity, and had, with the hazard of their Lives and Limbs,
procured hers, and the Nation's safety; and after all, in their old, Age were
left in poverty to struggle with the Debts and Diseases they had contracted in
her Service. To this man's sordid and sparing Humor was owing the failing of
all Military Virtue in the following Reigns, when men saw how rich he, and the
rest of the States men, could leave their Families and Descendents; whilst
those of the greatest Generals and Commanders in the Wars, were forced to be
satisfied with the gilded glory of their Ancestors, but ought in Reason and
Justice to have been at least equally rewarded, and I may say, in point of
Interest too.

Yet she was not over-liberal to the Gown-men and Statesmen in general, nor
did she take any extraordinary care of them or theirs. She had learned this
Lesson of her Grandfather Henry the VIIth. Not to exhaust in any case the
Fountain of her Bounty, I mean the Exchequer; which was again to be recruited
by the Spoils of the People, and unusual Taxes. That Prince by his The Praises
of Henry VII.
Virtue, Labor, Solicitude, Thrifti ness, and Provident Administration, had
re-established and improved the English Monarchy, and the Revenues of the
Crown; and was for it much esteemed by the People of England of all degrees;
his Covetous Humor having been more beneficial to the Crown, than damageable
to the Body of the People, because he gave few or none of the Crown Lands to
his Followers or Servants, except when they were extorted from him by mere
importunity, or he was cheated with the pretense of an advantageous exchange;
but then he was also wont to give more freely the Estates of Convicted
Criminals; so that there are many Examples in the Rolls of his Times, of men
that rose by the Falls, and grew rich by the Calamities and Ruins of others.
The small Gifts, and inconsiderable Largesses this Prince gave when he was
possessed of so much Wealth, was a means that preserved England from Ruin,
after it had been so terribly exhausted by the Civil Wars between the Houses of
York and Lancaster.

The Earl of Oxford was one of the Her Bounty to the Earl of Oxford, and some
few others of the Nobility.
most Ancient Houses amongst the Nobility, but by the excessive Bounty and
Splendour of the former Earl was reduced to a very low and mean condition, so
that the Family was no longer able to maintain its Dignity and Grandeur: And
the Queen allowed that House One thousand Pound the year out of her Exchequer,
that one of the most Illustrious Houses in her Kingdom might not suffer that
Want which was intolerable to those of meaner Extraction. She also upheld Sir
Edward Dyer, an old Courtier, who was become very poor, and would not suffer
him to want. But as for those Spendthrifts and Wasters that had foolishly
wasted their Patrimonies in Luxury and base Expenses, to gratify their
Intemperance, and afterward solicited her to bestow Pensions on them, she sent
some of them to her Privy Council, who rejected their Petitions, and gave those
Reasons for it which the Queen was not willing to give her self; and others who
sought And her Severity toward Luxurious Spendthrifts.
by way of Reward what they had never deserved, she neglected: That her Bounty
might not encourage others to Luxury and imprudent Expenses, whilst they relied
upon the Crown for the Repair of what they had wastfully consumed.

She for some time entertained, and Her Favors to Anthony King of Portugal.
out of her Treasury supported This Anthony is by all confessed to have been a
Bastard of the former King's.
An thony King of Portugal, who was deprived of his Dominions by the Iniquity
of Philip the IId. King of Spain, and fled to her with a few Servants for her
Protection and Assistance. She severely punished Sir Richard Bingham, President
of Connaught in Ireland, tho he were an excellent Soldier, because he was found
guilty of a sordid and injurious Covetousness. She entertained all Strangers
that came to her Court, with great Pleasantness, Munificence, and Decency; and
when they went from her, she gave them Princely Presents.

Ursino Duke de Bracciano in Italy, Ursino, Duke of Bracciano.
hearing of the Fame of this Queen, came over into England to see her; and he
being a person of great Virtue, and descended of one of the best Families in
Italy, the Queen gave him a splendid Reception, and gave order he should be
shown her Fleets, her Stores, and Magazines, her Veterane Soldiers and
Garrisons, her Treasures and Wardrobes, her Retinue and Princely Palaces, and
extorted from him a Confession, That there was no where in the world a more
Potent and Happy Prince than she. She entertained several of the best and
greatest Noblemen of Italy, France, Germany, and Poland; who all said of her,
That they never saw a more Magnificent, Honorable, Loving, Courteous Prince
than Queen Elizabeth; and that her Virtue and Prudence was great and admirable,
above all the Examples they had ever seen, read, or heard. In truth, she was
Mistress of all the Virtues that belonged to both Sexes, and had none of the
Faults belonging to her own, but a little Unsteadiness in her Will.

Knighthood in her Times was rarely She never Knighted any but men of Virtue
and good Estate.
given, and to none but men of Virtue and real. Worth, Soldiers, and Gentlemen
of good Families and Estates; so that she scarce ever admitted any man into
that degree, of a mean Fortune or Extraction, as was too frequently done in
after times. There were not many Enobled, or raised from the lower degrees of
Peerage to higher, as Clinton and Howard, her Admirals at Sea, Lei cester and
Warwick. She made few Barons, and amongst them, Burleigh, after he had served
her many years with admirable Prudence, Fidelity, and Industry, in many of the
principal Offices at Court. This lowest degree of The Peerage well and
sparingly given.
Peerage was sparingly, and with great Care and Consideration, bestowed upon
Worthy Men, as a Reward of some signal Services, and an Encouragement to
others, and not out of a Personal Affection or Respect. It was not then sold by
men that had easily obtained the Grant of a Blank Patent, instead of ready
Money; and took no other care, but who should give most for the Mercenary
Creation; which could only dishonor the person that gave it, as well as he
that bought it. In her time none but the most Worthy, the most Valiant, the
most Faithful to his Country, and the most Loyal to his Prince, could hope to
obtain this Favor, and raise his Name and Family. Thus she charily and
prudently kept the Rewards of Virtue and Industry, never granting them upon
Caprice, to show her Absolute Power, upon the Intercession of Favorites, or
the Letters of Great men, to those that were mean, and neither deserved nor
could maintain the Grandeur of that Noble Title.

She set a high Value upon the most Noble Order of the Garter, and took The
Noble Order of the Garter prudently given.
the utmost care to keep it as the sincerest Reward of an extraordinary
Fidelity, Industry, and Nobility; and therefore she would never suffer it to be
in the least corrupted by any mixture of mean persons. Tho the Lord Burleigh
was her Principal Councellor, and the First Mover in all her greater Affairs,
without whose advice she would rarely resolve upon any thing of moment, and he
had deserved so very well of her by his unparalled Care, Labor, and
Vigilance; yet because he was but a Gentleman born, and a Peer of her own
Creation only, it was very long before she could persuade her self to take him
into the Order of the Garter, which has flourished now Three hundred years and
more, and has in all times been given to the Greatest and Best of the Nobility
at Home, for the best Services they could do for their Princes and Country; or
to Foreign Princes Abroad, who were united to us by the most strict and
indearing Bonds of Friendship and Interest.

She gave Governments, Magistracies, Court-Offices, and other Places of Trust,
Reputation, and Profit, to those The Choice of her Servants, Officers and Min
isters.
that deserved well of her, that by the example of these Rewards she might
provoke others to imitate their Fidelity and Industry. She would never endure
that any man she employed should raise to himself an odious or oppressive Gain,
either from the Power or Office she had given him. If she observed a man to do
nothing but for Money, she would never trust him; and as for any Offices or
Governments, she took care to keep them as much as was possible out of such
men's hands. Yet she was not too hard to, or suspicious of her Servants; she
extended her Favor to all those she found good men, and her Friendship and
Kindness was lasting to all those she found honest, thrifty, sober men; but
then in Lawsuits she would not suffer any the least distinction to be made
between her Servants and Favorites, and the rest of her Subjects, lest they
being exalted by it above measure, should any way endanger the common Liberty
of her People, or the Public Peace and Safety. She raised Sadler from nothing;
Mildmay and Fortescue from mean Fortunes to the Honor of Knighthood, and made
them Privy Counselors for their good Services; and lest that Dignity should
suffer by the meanness of their Estates, she gave them a Competency by way of
Addition to what they had before. She would always remember to Reward those
well that had served her faithfully as her Ambassadors in Foreign Courts: And
she raised many of her servants for their Fidelity, and protected others of
them from the Violence of Great Men: She protected Sir Thomas Knevet from the
Violence of the Earl of Oxford, who to revenge a Wound he had received from Sir
Thomas in a Duel, was mustering up all his Friends and Servants to destroy him;
which the Queen prevented, by giving him a Guard for some time.

She so effectually recommended the Her kindness to the Bishops and Churchmen.
Cause of her Bishops to her people, when they were attacked by the Clamours
and Reproaches of the Puritans, that nothing was more dear to the Multitude
than their Bishops, and no Name was more Popular or beloved than theirs, so
that all men stood up for their Dignity and Authority. She curbed the Boldness,
Rage, and Fury, of these Pretenders to Godliness, by Laws well and severely
executed; and she made it her business to preserve the Church to the utmost of
her Power, as well from the Disturbance of Seditious Preachers within, as the
Insults of Declared Enemies without. Her Motto was, Semper eadem, Always the
same; and in this affair she took the greatest care to verify it, never
departing one tittle from what she had once settled, or changing the Methods she
had established, but upon great reason.

She had a very great Love for Sir She loved Sir F. Walsingham herSecretary.
Francis Walsingham, Secretary of State, who was one of the Pillars of her
Kingdom, and so intent upon the Preservation of the Public Safety, and the
Discovery of the Designs of her Enemies against her Person and Government, that
he took little care of his own private Family, and made no provision for those
he left behind him: But then it was hardly well taken by the body of the
Nation, to see the most part of his Inheritance sold after his death to repay
those Moneys to the Treasury, which he had spent in the Queen's Service: The
Envy of which, however, fell heaviest upon the Treasurer and the Earl of
Leicester, who were none of his Friends whilst he lived, and took this
opportunity to revenge the Affronts they had received from him. She Sir
Nicholas Bacon, Egerton, Popham, but above all the Lord Burleigh and Howard.
had also a particular favor for Sir Nicholas Bacon, the Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal, who was the Ornament of the Court, and the great Luminary of
Westminster Hall. She highly esteemed Egerton and Popham: But above all her
other Counselors and Ministers of State, she valued Burleigh the Lord
Treasurer, and Howard the Lord Admiral of England, the Ornament of his own
Family, and a strange Example of Modesty, Civility, and Liberality. These men
enjoyed her Favor to the last, and were ever of great Authority with her.

She loved a Prudent and Moderate Her Habit in Public and in Private.
Habit in her private Apartment and conversation with her ownServants; but when
she appeared in Public, she was ever richly adorn'dwith the most valuable
clothes, set off again with much gold, and Jewels of inestimable Value; and on
such occasions she ever wore High Shoes, that she might seem Taller than
indeed she was. The first day of the Parliament she would appear in a Robe
Embroidered with Pearls, the Royal Crown upon her Head, the Golden Ball in her
Left Hand, and the Scepter in her Right; and as she never failed then of the
loud Acclamations of her People, so she was ever pleased with it, and went to
the House in a kind of Triumph, with all the Ensigns of Majesty. There was at
such times so great a Concourse of the People to see and salute the Queen, that
many were trodden down, and some have been lamed. The Royal Name was ever
venerable^ to the English Nation; but this Quee^ was more sacred than any of
her Ancestors. She alone was able to furnish her whole Sex with the Examples of
Chastity, Temperance, and all other Virtues: And she was very vigilant to keep
her Family and Court in severe Discipline. She persuaded all Married Women to
pay a modest Respect to their Husbands, as to their Superiors. She kept a
severer Guard upon her own desires, than upon those of others that were about
her; so that by degrees she made them seem at least like her self, because she
ever labored so to have them. She banished from her Court all Drunkenness,
Filthiness, Immodesty, and the very fame and saspicion of Wantonness.
Whoredoms, Rapes, Adulteries, and Incests, were Crimes she detested; and if she
found any of her Retinue, how great soever they were, guilty of them, they must
never more come before her. She banished Burgess, one of her Maids of Honor,
because she had entered into an Intriegue with the Earl of Essex, who loved her
very passionately; because the Queen suspected she had had an hand in his Ruin:
And the Lady Fitton, another of these Maids, was sent away too, for yielding to
the Inticements of a young Gentleman of Noble Birth. The Noblemen found no more
favor than the Ladies, if once they were found guilty in the same kind. She
sent the Earl of Oxford to the Tower, for attempting to Ravish one of her Maids
of Honor, that was a Tall and Lovely Lady. If she knew any of her Nobility
given to frequent Houses of ill fame, she treated them with as little Respect
as she did meaner men. To conclude, she showed her self the Irreconcilable
Enemy of all that had been found guilty of any base or immodest and unchaste
Action. She would frequently admonish her Servants and Attendants, That they
should take heed not to do any thing that might be dishonorable to her,
destructive to themselves, and of ill Example to the Public. That they should
take care not to bring an Ill Report upon the Chaste, a Blot upon the Upright,
or an Infamy and Dishonor upon the Good.

In the Furniture of her Royal Palaces Her Furniture.
she ever affected Magnificence, and an extraordinary Splendour; she adorned the
Galeties with excellent Pictures, done by the best Artists; the Walls she
covered with Rich Tapistries: She was a true Lover of Jewels and Pearls, all
sorts of Precious Stones, Plate, plain, Bossed of Gold and Silver, and Gilt;
Rich Beds, Fine Coaches and Chariots, Persian and Indian Carpets, Statues,
Medals, etc. which she would purchase at great Prices. The Specimen of her Rich
Furniture was to be seen a long time after her Death, at Hampton Court, which
was Moveabled, above any of the other Royal Houses in her Times; and here she
had caused her Naval Victories obtained against the Spaniards, to be
represented in excellent Tapistries, and laid up amongst the Richest Pieces of
her Wardrobe. These things did not only please the eyes of the Spectators, and
renew the Memory of the great things achieved in her Times, but they helped to
raise in the minds of her Subjects and of Strangers too, a Venerable Idea of
the Majesty, Wisdom, Riches, and Power of this Heroic Lady.

In her Meat, Drink, and other Nourishments Her Diet in Public and in Private.
and Refreshments, she was very Temperate, in private especially. She was not
subject to the love of Sleep, or any of the other Pleasures of Human Life. She
eat very little, but then she chose what was pleasant, and easy of digestion;
and in her declining Age she became more Temperate than before; but then she
eat whenever she was hungry: She seldom drank above Three times at a Meal,
and that was common Beer, and she very rarely drank again till Supper. She
would seldom drink any Wine, for fear it should cloud her Faculties: She loved
Aligophore.
Alicant Wine above any other. She always Religiously observed the
Fasting-Days. When she made any Public Feast or Dinners for her Honor or her
Pleasure, she would then order her Table to be served with all the Magnificence
that was possible; and many Side-Tables to be adorned with all sorts of Plate.
She had many of the Nobility which waited upon her at the Table at those times,
and served her with great Care and Attention. In these things she took the
greatest Pride to show her Royal Treasures, and made her greatest Feasts when
Foreign Ambassadors were present, who were highly, pleased with these Shows. At
these times she would also have all sorts of Music, Vocal and Instrumental;
and after Dinner, Dancing; and she took care thus to entertain the most
Illustrious Persons of other Nations, that came into England. Nor was she less
careful that her great Ministers of State should keep up the Tables she allowed
them; and she would order her Nobility to keep good Hospitable Houses according
to their Qualities and Degrees. All which tended more to her Honor, and the
Reputation of the Nation, than the Courses were afterward taken up with a
greater Expense.

The Splendour and Magnificence of The Splendour and Divertisements of the Court.
the Public Feasts in her times, and the Ceremonies that were used when the
several Courses were served up to the Table, would be troublesome to relate,
and perhaps a little ridiculous, now they are antiquated. The Cup Bearer never
presented the Cup to the Queen, but with much ceremony, and kneeled always when
he gave, or took it; and during the whole Refreshment, Music and Songs were
heard, and the Queen her self would frequently dance to humor the younger
Persons in her Court; for all these Solemnities were in her Royal Palace, and
were designed to adorn and sweeten her Government. The coming of the Duke of
Alenzon into England, opened a way to a more free way of living, and relaxed
very much the old severe form of Discipline: The Queen danced often then, and
omitted no sort of Recreation, pleasant Conversation, or variety of Delights
for his satisfaction: At the same time the plenty of good Dishes, pleasant
Wines, fragrant Ointments and Perfumes, Dances, Masks, and variety of rich
Attires, were all taken up, and used, to show him how much he was honored.
There were then acted Comedies and Tragedies with much cost and splendour; From
whence proceeded in aftertimes an unrestrainable desire of frequenting these
Divertisements; so that there was afterward a greater concourse at the
Theater, than at the Sermon. When these things had once been entertained, the
Courtiers were never more to be reclaimed from them; and they could not be
satiated, or wearied with them. But when Alenzon was once dismissed, and gone,
the Queen her self left off these Divertisements, and betook her self, as
before, to the care of her Kingdom: And by her own Example and severe
Corrections, she as heartily endeavored to reduce her Nobility to their old
severe way of living, and the former provident way of clothing.

In her private way of living she always Her private way ofliving.
preferred her necessary Affairs, and the dispatch of what concerned the
Government, before, and above any Pleasures, Recreations, and Conversation; and
serious things before what was pleasing. In the morning she spent the first
fruits of her time in her Closet at her Devotions, and then she betook her self
to the dispatch of her Civil Affairs, and to the reading of Letters, and the
ordering what Answers should be returned; then she considered what was fit to
be brought before the Lords of the Council; she ever kept a vigilant eye upon
the Motions of Philip II. King of Spain, who was all her days plotting and
contriving the Conquest of Europe, and the reducing all his Neighbors and the
Free-States, and Cities of it, under his obedience. She ever consulted first
with her wisest, and best experienced Ministers and Statesmen, of whose
Fidelity, Industry and Ability, she had formerly made good proof; and she
commanded them to speak freely and plainly what was best to be done; and when
she had heard the Advices of all, she chose what she thought was best. When she
had thus wearied her self, and oppressed her Spirits, she sought for rest and
peace; and would either walk in a shady Garden, or pleasant Gallery, without
any other Attendance, than that of a few Learned Men. Then she took her Coach,
and passed in the sight of her People to the Neighboring Groves and Fields,
and sometimes would hunt, or hawk, spending in her Youth all her time in this
change of Labor, or innocent Divertisement. Nor was she less careful to
exercise her mind in Learning, than her body by Labor; but by a wise
distribution of her time, she consulted the good and welfare both of Body and
Soul. There was scarce a day in her Her Studies.
life, but she employed a part of it in reading and study; sometimes before she
entered upon her State Affairs, and sometimes after them; so that by this means
she gained a part of every day for her self, and the improvement of her own
Faculties. In her Studies she mixed pleasing and serious things one with
another. In the Summer she for Her Summer Progress, and catriage toward her
People in it.
the most part lived in the Country; then she took her Royal Progresses into
the several Counties of England, and she would amuse her self with considering
and commending the pleasantness and goodness of her Country, and the greatness
and variety of the Fruits England produced; she would also admire the Wisdom
and Goodness of God in diversifying the face of the Earth by the mixture of
Fields, Meadows, Pastures and Woods; and she would, as occasion offered, hunt
too. In all this she was intent upon that which was her main business, the
government of her People, the management of her Family, and of her Revenues,
and the observing the state and condition, the carriage and designs of the
Neighbor States and Princes; which way soever she went, she was sure to draw
upon her the eyes of her People: Innumerable crowds of them met her in all
places with loud hearty Acclamations, with Countenances full of joy, and hearts
equally filled with love and admiration, and this ever attended her in public,
and in private; for what sight in this World can possibly please Mortals, like
that of a just, beneficent, and kind Prince? So that those Places were
accounted the most happy, in which, for the goodness of the Air, or the
pleasantness of the Fields, she was pleased to stay the longest. In her
Progress she was the most easy to be approached; Private Persons, and
Magistrates, Men and Women, Country people and Children, came joyfully, and
without any fear, to wait upon her, and see her. Her ears were then open to the
Complaints of the afflicted, and of those that had been any way injured. She
would not suffer the meanest of her People to be shut out from the places where
she resided, but the greatest and the least were then in a manner levelled. She
took with her own hand, and read with the greatest goodness the Petitions of
the meanest Rusticks. And she would frequently assure them, that she would take
a particular care of their Affairs; and she would ever be as good as her word.
She by her Royal Authority protected those that were injured and oppressed: She
punished the Fraudulent, False, Perfidious and Wicked. In all this variety of
Affairs she was able to keep her temper, and appear with an equal and
uninterrupted serenity and humanity to all that came nigh her; She was never
seen angry with the most unseasonable, or uncourtly Approach: She was never
offended with the most impudent or importunate Petitioner. There was no
commotion to be seen in her mind, no Re-proaches, no Reprehensions came from
her. Nor was there any thing in the whole course of her Reign that more won the
hearts of the People, than this her wonderful facility, condescension, and the
strange sweetness and pleasantness with which she entertained all that came to
her. Thus for the most part she spent her Summer.

She spent her Winter in London in The Winter she spent in London.
the procuring the safety of her People, and that of her Allies and
Confederates. Before day every morning she heard the Petitions of those that
had any business with her; and calling her Secretaries of State, and Masters of
Requests, she caused the Orders of Council, Proclamations, Patents, and all
other Papers relating to the Public, to be read, which were then depending;
and gave such order in each Affair as she thought fit, which was set down in
short Notes, either by her self, or her Secretaries. As often as any thing
happened that was difficult, she called her great and wise men to her, and
proposing the diversity of Opinions, she very attentively considered and
weighed on which side the strongest reason lay, ever preferring that way which
seemed most to promote the public safety and welfare. When she was thus
wearied with her morning work, she would take a walk, if the Sun shined, into
her Garden, or otherwise in her Galleries, especially in windy or rainy
Weather. She would then cause Stanhop, or Sir Henry Savill, or some other very
learned Man to be called to walk with her, and entertain her with some learned
Subject; the rest of the day she spent in private reading History, or some
other Learning, with great care and attention; not out of ostentation, and a
vain ambition of being always learning something, but out of a diligent care to
enable her self thereby to live the better, and to avoid sin; and she would
commonly have some Learned Man with her, or near her, to assist her; whose
Labor and Industry she would well reward: Thus she spent her Winter.

In the Summer time, when she was Her Diet in Summer and Winter.
hungry, she would eat something that was of light and easy digestion in her
Chamber, with the Windows open to admit the gentle breezes of wind from the
Gardens, or pleasant Hills. Sometimes she would do this alone, but more
commonly she would have her Friends with her then. When she had thus satisfied
her hunger and thirst with a very moderate repast, she would rest awhile upon
an Indian Couch curiously and richly covered. In the Wintertime she observed
the same Order, but she omitted her Noon-sleep. When her day was thus spent,
she went late to Supper, which was ever sparing, and very moderate. At Supper
she would divert her self with her Friends and Attendance; and if they made her
no anfwer, she would put them upon mirth and pleasant discourse with great
civility. She would then also admit Tarleton, a famousComedian, and a pleasant
Talker, and other such like men, to divert her with Stories of the Town, and
the common Jests, or Accidents; but so, that they kept within the bounds of
modesty and chastity. In the Wintertime, after Supper, she would some time hear
a Song, or a Lesson or two played upon the Lute; but she would be much offended
if there was any rudeness to any Person, any reproach or licentious Reflection
used. Tarleton, Her Diversions and private Conversation.
who was then the best Comedian in England, had made a pleasant Play, and when
it was acting before the Queen, he pointed at Sir Walter Rawleigh, and said,
See the Knave commands the Queen; for which he was corrected by a Frown from
the Queen; yet he had the confidence to add, that he was of too much, and too
intolerable a power; and going on with the same liberty, he reflected on the
overgreat Power and Riches of the Earl of Leicester, which was so universally
applauded by all that were present, that she thought fit for the present to
bear these Reflections with a seeming unconcernedness. But yet she was so
offended, that she forbad Tarleton, and all her Jesters, from coming near her
Table, being inwardly displeased with this impudent and unreasonable Liberty.
She would talk with Learned Men that had traveled, in the presence of many,
and ask them many Questions concerning the Government, Customs and Discipline
used abroad. She loved a natural Jester, that would tell a Story pleasantly,
and humor it with his Countenance, and Gesture, and Voice; but she hated all
those Praters that made bold with other men's Reputation, or defamed them. She
detested, as ominous and unfortunate, all Dwarfs and Monstrous Births. She
loved Little Dogs, Singing Birds, Parrots, and Apes: And when she was in
private, she would recreate her self with various Discourses, a game at Chess,
Dancing, or Singing. Then she would retire into her Bedchamber, where she was
attended by married Ladies of the Nobility, the Marchioness of Winchester, then
a Widow, the Countess of Warwick, and the Lord Scroop's Lady, whose Husband was
Governor of the West Marshes. She would seldom suffer any to wait upon her
there, except Leicester, Hatton, Essex, Nottingham, and Sir Walter Rawleigh,
who were more intimately conversant with her than anyother of theCourtiers; She
frequently mixed serious things with her Jests, and her Mirth; and upon
Festival Days, and especially in Christmas-time, she would play at Cards and
Tables, which was one of her usual Pastimes; and if at any time she happened to
win, she would be sure to demand the Money. When she found her self sleepy, she
would take her leave of them that were present with much kindness and gravity,
and so betake her to her rest; some Lady of good quality, and of her intimate
acquaintance, always lying in the same Chamber. And besides her Guards, that
were always upon Duty, there was a Gentleman of Good Quality, and some others,
up in the next Chamber, who were to wake her in case any thing extraordinary
happened.

Though she was endowed with all She was subject to be violently angry.
the Goods of Nature and Fortune, and adorned with all those things which are
valuable, and to be desired; yet there were some things in her that were
capable of amendment; nor was there ever any Mortal, whose Virtues were not
eclipsed by the neigbourhood of some Vices or Imperfections. She was subject to
be vehemently transported with Anger; and when she was so, she would show it by
her Voice, her Countenance, and her Hand. She would chide her familiar Servants
so loud, that they that stood afar off, might sometimes hear her Voice. And it
was reported, that for small Offenses she would strike her Maids of Honor with
her hand; but then her Anger was short, and very innocent, and she learned from
Zenophon's Book, Of the Institution of Cyrus, the method of curbing and
correcting this unruly and uneasy Passion. And when her Friends acknowledged
their Offenses, and humbly begged her pardon, she with an appeased mind easily
forgave them many things.

She was also of an Opinion, That Severity Her Severity, and especially to the
Queen of Scots.
was safe, and too much Clemency was destructive, and therefore in her
Punishments and Justice she was the more severe. The worst thing that she did
in all her Reign, was her treatment of the Queen of Scots, who being by her own
Subjects driven into Exile, and not only deprived of her Regal Authority, but
of her Liberty, her Estate, and her Treasures; and coming poor and distressed
into England upon the Queen's promise and faith given, she at first kindly and
hospitably received and entertained her; but afterward confined her, and at
last, upon pretense that the Queen of the Scots was plotting against her, put
her upon her trial, condemned, and at last executed her, making her a sad, and
unheardof Example of her cruel and unjust Severity. Thus she polluted her happy
Reign with the Innocent Blood, not of an Enemy, but of a Guest: The memory of
old Disgusts and Injuries prevailing more upon the mind of Queen Elizabeth,
than the dignity of a Sovereign Queen, the Intercession of the Neighbor
Princes, the Laws of Hospitality, the Tears of a Captive, and a Kinswoman; so
that no Intercession, no Supplications could take any place in a mind
inexorably bent upon Revenge. They that would excuse this mournful Action,
pretend the Queen of Scots was only confined to prevent mischief; but she
entering into a Conspiracy against the Queen of England in her own Kingdom, and
her Designs against the Life and Throne of Queen Elizabeth being thus detected,
there was no other way left to preserve the Life, and consult the safety of
Queen Elizabeth, but by the punishment of the Queen of Scots, and others, who
had conspired to destroy her. That all Precautions were in vain, and therefore
it was absolutely necessary to cut off this Guest, though her Cousin, and the
next Heir after her of the Crown of England; and one, that by her deprivation
of her Kingdom, and her Imprisonment in England, was deprived of all means to
hurt her. If she would have taken the right method to secure her self, she
should have released her Captive, and have sent her away, which would have cut
off the Causes, and the Pretenses of these Conspiracies, and have tended more
to her honor and peace, than the way she took. This Execution of the Queen of
the Scots raised in the minds of the Neighbor Princes an enraged Indignation.
And she her self, when she knew the Fact was done, and could not be recalled,
deplored the united and common Indignation of all the Foreign Princes with many
tears, and gave many signs of her inward grief, laying the blame of this wicked
action wholly upon the Actors; and upon every mention of the death of the Queen
of Scots, she would to her dying day weep bitterly, and lament her misfortune
in it. So great was the force of her Repentance, tho it came too late, and was
altogether useless.

It was thought she brought Leicester Her Severity to Leicester and Hatton.
and Hatton, two of her greatest Favorites, to their Graves, by her hard
usages, and the many Indignities she put upon them. Leicester had offended her,
by attempting to imbroil the Affairs of the United Provinces in the
Netherlands; to that end he had suffered his Soldiers to live very irregular,
and without almost any Military Discipline, and this in a State the most
closely united to her; and he had ambitiously affected the Power of a
Lieutenant^General in England and Ireland; which Burleigh represented to the
Queen as intolerable; and thereupon she became so incensed against him, that
she brought him to a Despondence of Mind, which ended in his Death; the Queen
declining all Reconciliation, that he might be an Example to all others to
consult their own and the Public Interest better than he had done, and not
aspire like him to too great and dangerous Honors. Upon this Repulse he
resolved to retire into the Country, and to live remote from the Court, at
Killingnorth; but on the Road he fell into a violent Feavet, which brought him
to his Grave. He left a Brother behind him, who was Earl of Warwick, and had
the Character of a good man from his Enemies; and he succeeded him in the
Estate, but did not long enjoy it. He left also a Son who laid Claim afterward
to the Earldom of Leicester, but he was then very young, and not owned as
Legitimate. When the Queen heard of the Death of Leicester, she could not
forbear grieving at it: She ordered, however, his Personal Estate to be seized
for Money due to the Exchequer from the deceased Earl; but she got little by
it, the Creditors and others by various Stratagems, and on various Pretenses,
drawing it out again.

Hatton was a very good Dancer, and Hatton's Death.
that was his best Qualification, and was the means of promoting him to be Lord
Chancellor of England. Being in that high and undeserved Station, he became
proud and arrogant, and at last began to favor the Popish Party more than the
Queen thought well of. The Queen thereupon told him, That he was too much
exalted by the Indulgence of his Fortune, which had placed him in a Station for
which he was unfit, he being ignorant of the Chancery-Law, and needing the
Assistance of others to enable him to do his Duty. This Reproach struck him to
the heart, and he resolved to admit no Consolation. When he was almost
half-dead, the Queen repented of her Severity, and went her self in Person to
comfort the Dying Chancellor, and did what was possible to retrieve him; but it
was all to no purpose, for he was obstinately resolved to dye. His Brother's
Son succeeded him in his Estates and Goods, (he dying a Batchellor) and raised
a Family upon this Foundation; and the Queen did not exact from him the Debts
due to the Exchequer, whether out of Respect to the Deceased, or Favor to the
Lord Treasurer Burleigh, whose Niece this Gentleman had Married.

As the Queen was by Nature severe, The Provocations she met with were many and
great.
so she did not want the utmost Provocations to exert her Natural Temper: For
there was in all her Reign a Chain of Conspiracies detected, which were so
outrageous and wicked, that they exceeded by their Cruelty and brutish Ferity
all measures, and seemed to deserve and call for Severity in her punishing of
them; she was also exasperated by Rebellions and Insurrections in both her
Kingdoms, and by most infamous Libels published without any Author's Name,
against the Cruelty of this Prince, with the Infamy of them that writ these
Books. The Reproach of Cruelty would not fix upon her, tho they did what was
possible to defame her, because all men thought the Actors and Leaders in these
horrible Treasons and Rebellions, deserved all the Punishments and Severities
she inflicted on them for their Crimes. However it is apparent, That in her
Reign many of the Nobility were put to Death, some of the most Noble Families
were ruined, and that the Roman Catholics were punished, banished, or forced
to fly into Foreign Countries to escape those Punishments they had drawn upon
themselves by their restless endeavors to undermine her Throne, and subvert
her Government, or to destroy her Person. After all, some of these Papists, out
of a spirit of Slander and Detraction, and a desire to gratify the Pope and
his Party, labored by all ways that they could invent, to have her thought a
Cruel and a Bloody Princess, and with the utmost Impudence represented her as
such in their Pamphlets, tho she was forced to this Severity by their great and
repeated Villainies.

There were some that with an unsusserable Rashness charged her with The
Character of Sanders and others who defamed her.
Unchastity: The principal of which was Nicholas Sanders, one of the basest and
wickedest Slanderers, and of the most hellish and incurable Malice that ever
was born. This Fellow forgot all Modesty, and not content with the defaming her
Mother, and the reviving all those Slanders against her, which had before his
time been sufficiently detected and disproved, or were forgotten, he went on to
slander and defame the Queen too; and to that end invented very many lewd
Stories, and most infamous Satyrs against her and her Ministers, endeavoring
to have the World believe she was guilty of Rapine, villainous Lusts, and
intolerable Frauds for the Subversion of the English Nation. But the Modesty
and the incredible Chastity of her Life, easily dispelled all these black and
noisome Slanders and Reproaches; her worst Enemies having never been able to
discover the least shadow of Luxury or Unchastity in all her Life; which was so
pure and so spotless and unblamable, that it is very hard to believe she was a
Mortal. This her rare Temperance and Continence put a stop to the Lies and
Defamations of this abominable Slanderer, and made all men despise him and his
Writings. Nor did he so escape the Justice of God, which pursued him for this
and his other Crimes, and before his Death deprived him of his Reason and
Understanding, and banishing him from the Conversation of men, he perished in a
desolate place in Ireland, after he had a long time struggled with Hunger and
Cold, and endeavored to preserve himself alive with the Roots of the Herbs
that naturally grew in those Woods he lurked in; nor was there one Friend to
cover his Carcass with a little earth after he was dead, but it was found by
the English in the Woods, and left a Prey to the Wild Beasts; all men rejoicing
that the Justice of God had thus fhewn it self in the Punishment of this
infamous Slanderer, and Impenitent Rebel.

Another virulent Slanderer printed Dydimus Veridicus.
a Book, under the Title of Dydimus Veridicus, being infected with the same
contagious distemper of Lying, and presumed to pollute the ears of men with
most wicked Difcourses, and to attempt the Ruin of the Fame of a most Noble
Princess, which was supported by the united Approbation and Praises of Mankind.
He invented many absurd, false, and incredible things, that were like the
fained Representations of Poets and Painters, so that they appear false at
first sight, and only serve to show the liberty he took of Lying notoriously;
so that he may be left without any answer, to receive his Confutation from the
Prudence of the Reader.

Florimond Remond, another indiscreet Florimond Remond, a French Writer.
Writer, transcribes the Defamations and Lies which Sanders had invented, and
sets down without any Truth, the Imprisonments, Tortures, Punishments, and
Ignominies of the Papists: He impudently writes, That the Public Places and
Streets were washed with their Innocent Blood; that the Priests were tormented,
the Matrons slain, the Layicks hurried away to Death and Tortures; forgetting
or dissembling, that in the short Five years Reign of Queen Mary, there were
more innocent Protestants burnt alive without Mercy, than suffered in all the
Forty four Years of that of Queen Elizabeth, tho convicted of the greatest
Crimes, and executed upon the most Just and Legal Prosecutions, viz. For
disturbing the Peace of the Nation, by Insurrections, Tumults, and Rebellions,
for entering into Conspiracies, joining with Foreign Enemies, or abetting and
concealing Domestic Treasons and Traitors, or for endeavoring to Murder the
Queen. The Moderation and Justice of the Queen has covered these passionate and
false Scriblers with Infamy and Contempt, and it were lost labor to endeavor
to refute them.

Nor ought George Cone, a Scot, to George Conc, a Scot.
be passed over in silence, who in his History of the Life of Mary Queen of the
Scots, has persecuted the Memory of Queen Elizabeth with a rapid Fury. He faith
impudently, That she was born in an Incestuous Marriage, and got the Possession
of England by Force; which Expressions were the effects of a Flattering
Affection to the Interest of the Popish Party, and of Aversion for that of the
Protestants. These Treatments induced the Queen to be very severe against all
Libels and Verses penned to the end to blacken the Reputation of any man; which
she forbad any to read or divulge; and she ordered them to be burnt: And she
extended this her Severity to all Rumors and Reports that were spread abroad
underhand, for fear her People should by these means be excited to Rebellions
or Seditions.

Whilst her Forces in Ireland under Her last Sickness.
the Command of the Lord Montjoy, were struggling hard with Tyrone for the
Reduction of Ulster, and Tyrone was reduced to a necessity of submitting
himself to her, which would have ended in the quieting of that Kingdom, the
Queen was involved in an uncurable and grievous Disease, arising from the
Greatness of her Age: She spent many Nights sadly and restlesly, without any
sleep, in much Anxiety and troublesome Cares; her Stomach being wholly weakened
and decayed, loathed all sorts of Diet; till at last the Anguish of her
Troubled and Afflicted mind, made her despair of a Recovery; so that she
despised the Counsels of her Physicians, and became exasperated and stubbornly
resolved against all Medecines. The most powerful and considerable of her
Friends who waited upon her night and day, and did all they could to consolate
and please her, when they saw the muttering Discontents of her Physicians, and
considered seriously the uncertainty of the Event which might follow this
Sickness of Body and Mind, and the Imbecility of human Nature, they became
anxious, and most earnestly besought her, That she would curb this Disturbance
and Grief of her mind; that she would for the present not fill her mind with
the Arguments of Learned men against the Fears of Death, tho they had the show
of Wisdom; that she would consult her own Reason, and endeavor the
Preservation of her Life, and the Recovery of her former Health: That she would
not increase her Danger by Despondency, or her Distemper by her Obstinacy
against all Medicines; but that she would be pleased to yield to the
Persuasions of her Physicians, and follow their Advices, Eat, and endeavor to
overcome her inward grief with Patience: Lastly, That she would be pleased to
value and endeavor to preserve her own Life, and deliver her Loyal and
Faithful Servants, Nobility, and Subjects, from that Anxiety and Sorrow that
now oppressed them. She made no other Answer to all this Wise and Loyal Advice,
but That she was full satiated with this present Life, and now Her last Words
to her Council.
desired nothing more than to be translated to a state of Immortality, and to
make her escape out of this dark and disordered state of human Affairs. That
Death, which many so much abhorred, was only the payment of a Debt due to
Nature; and that our Spirits were of right to be restored to God from whom they
came. Thus her Body by slow degrees consumed away, and she became very Lean,
Weak, and Faint. Yet after all, her Mind was more afflicted than her Body; She
was night and day troubled with a sorrowful Remembrance of the late executed
Earl of Essex. The Grief of her Mind was increased by the Necessity of her
Affairs, which compelled her to yield to Tyrone, not only his Life and Liberty,
and the Pardon of his Rebellions and Perfidy, but a great part of his Estate;
which she esteemed a kind of rewarding him for his Treasons and Perjuries.

Her Sorrows were every day increased She nominated her Successor.
and made more insupportable, by the Melancholy Humor which then abounded in
her Blood, and the restlessness of her Mind; so that all her Strength being
exhausted, and her Mind, which was filled with Indignation, contributing more
and more to the Disease, she seemed to decline apace by the Weakness which
augmented every day, yet she bore this her last Sickness with a wonderful
Constancy and Patience, which alone deserved very great Commendation. When some
of the principal Nobility of England, the Lord Admiral, the Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal, and one of the Secretaries of State, in the Name and by the Order
of the Privy Council, told her Majesty, That it was their humble Request, That
she would, if not for her own sake, yet for the good of her People, throw off
that load of Grief which oppressed her, and lay aside the Resolution of dying:
That if she should happen to dye by the course of Nature, in the present
Circumstances of Affairs, it would bring Ruin upon England: That they had no
hopes of any Prosperity after her Death, unless the Certainty of the Succession
were fixed by her. If she should leave this to be determined after her Death,
in that flagrant desire men had of obtaining the Sovereignty, there might many
ill things be done and suffered, which would augment the Sorrows of her People
for the loss of so good a Prince: Therefore they most earnestly, and with one
Voice, and united Tears and Sighs entreated her, That in her present
Circumstances she would take care of the Common Safety of her People after her
Death; and that she would be pleased to remember, That so many of the Lives of
her Subjects would be exposed to the utmost hazard if she died without Naming
her Successor. To which she lovingly and modestly replied, That if she died of
this sickness, the Kingdom would not want a Defender, but would be in the same
state of quiet. Nottingham, the Lord Admiral replied, Whom do your Majesty
mean? She looking thereupon steadily on all that were then present, said, I
mean James King Of Scotland, my Dearest Kinsman, and the Right Heir to Henry
the VIIth. This cheared all that were present, and she persisted constantly in
this to her last Breath, That he was her undoubted Heir.

When she had said this, and recommended She spent the last Moments of her Life
wholly in Devotion.
her Name and Memory to her Nobility, she cast off all the Cares of this Life,
and betook her self wholly to the acts of Piety and Devotion; she sent also for
the Archbishop of Canterbury, a Learned, Pious, and Moderate Prelate, who was
then the Guide of her Conscience, and whose Salutary Advices she always much
esteemed and gladly embraced. When this great and good man came to her, he
admonished her to consider the Imperfection of the Human Nature, and therefore
advised her to place all her Hopes in the Merits of Christ. She replied with
some Her last Words to the Archbishop.
difficulty of breathing or speaking, That she was weary of this miserable
Life, which was subject to so many Calamities and Dangers: That from her Soul
she desired to pass to that Eternal Light which overflowed with all manner of
Felicity; and was hastening to her Heavenly Country, to the Presence of her
good Savior, and into his holy Arms. When the Bishop had ended his prudent and
holy Exhortation, she turned her a little, and laying her Head upon her Right
Arm, she composed her self as it were to her Last Long Sleep, with a Quiet
Mind, and a Composed Countenance; nor were her Last Moments unlike the rest of
her Life, but it appeared by the motions of her Hand and Eyes, that they were
spent in the acts of Devotion and Mental Prayer. Thus being at last wholly
spent, she quietly yielded up her Soul to God, the And her Death.
24th. of March, about Midnight, in the year of our Lord 1602. in her Palace of
Richmond, and in the same Chamber Henry the VIIth. her Grandfather died in. She
called this Royal Palace the Warm Box to which she could best trust her sickly
Old Age; and she was now come hither to avoid the over-sharp Winter. She was a
little less than Seventy years of Age, and she had Reigned Forty four Years,
Four Months, and Seven Days. Thus died this Illustrious Queen, which was not
only the Greatest and the Best Woman of the times in which she lived, but
equal, if not superior, to any of her Predecessors, in the Majesty of her Name,
or the Reverence that was paid to her by her Subjects and Neighbors; in the
Art of Governing; in all the commendable Qualities of a Prince, such as
Council, Policy, Magnanimity in Misfortunes, Moderation and Temperance in
Prosperity, Constancy in her Behavior, Maxims, Friendship, and Resolutions;
and accordingly the Glory that followed her, and the Actions of her Reign was
Incomparable. She was lamented by them that then lived, with an unfeigned and
an unexpressible Grief; and the Memory of her Virtue, Learning, and Piety, has
remained fresh and flourishing in all the following Times, and shall do so for
ever. Her Words and Actions are in truth such as will render her Immortally
Honorable, be the Abilities of the Historians that shall truly represent the
same what they will.

So soon as it was known that she The Sorrow for her Death.
was dead, the Court was filled with the Lamentations and sorrowful Sighs and
Tears of her Courtiers and Subjects, as for the greatest Loss that ever befell
any men. There was never any where a greater, a sincerer, a more inconsolable
Grief, than that which then took possession of this Royal Palace; nothing could
stop the torrent of their Tears, nothing could appease or soften their bitter
Complaints. The Noble Ladies which by the Order of the Privy Council were
appointed to take Care of her Body, were scarce able to bear the load of their
Sorrows which oppressed them, but lifted up their Hands and Eyes to Heaven, and
implored the Mercy of God in this their Desolations and Affliction; concluding,
without his powerful Assistance, and favorable Interposition, This Night would
prove fatal to the English Nation; and that nothing less than the Ruin of the
Kingdom, could be the consequence of so great and so deplorable a Loss as this.
The Countess of Warwick, a Lady of great Honor, Virtue, Piety, Sanctity, and
entirely beloved by the Queen, testified her sorrow for the loss of her
Mistress in all the effects of an inconsolable Affliction, and would never be
induced to put off that mourning Habit she had put on upon this occasion. She
performed all the Offices belonging to the Sepulture of the Queen with the
utmost care, piery and fidelity, and by her Example taught all the rest of the
Queen's Servants how they ought to behave themselves in this Mournful Affair.
Those of the Noblemen who were present at the time of her death, expressed
their Sorrows in silent tears, and a deep, but grave sorrow. The meanest of her
Servants were more noisy in their Lamentations, and that Court became in a few
hours a desolate place, very few enduring to stay in that place in which they
had lost their good Mistress, beneficent Sovereign, and their great Benefactor.

When Report had once spread the News of her Death in the City of London, an
incredible Sorrow and Lamentation both of the Citizens and Strangers was
observed, which spread it self to all the Neighbor Nations, as the fame of her
Death was communicated to them. But none more heartily deplored this loss than
the HOLLANDERS, who were thereby deprived of the Author of their Fortunes; the
Defender of their Liberty, and the Preserver of their Peace and Safety. A
Prince she was, that would refuse no Labor, no Expense, no Hazard, how great
soever it were, that the Protestants might live in peace, and enjoy their
Liberty; and this and the many good Offices she had done to them and all the
Neighbor Nations, had made her Name so venerable, that it was no easy Task
for the Magistrates at home, or abroad, to keep the common People in any bounds
in this their outrageous Sorrows; for almost all that heard it were of Opinion,
That worse Times would follow, and that many and great Calamities would ensue
in England, and all the Neighbor Nations.

THE END.

