

The Cities great Concern, In this Case or Question of HONOR and ARMS, WHETHER
APPRENTISHIP Extinguisheth Gentry? Discoursed.

With a clear Refutation of the pernicious Error that it does.

Lam. Jerem. Cap. 3. Verse. 27. Bonum est viro cum importaverit Jugum ab
Adolescentia sua.

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM GODBID, dwelling in Little Britain, 1674.

HONORATISSIMO SENATUI, POPULOQUE, AUGUSTAE URBIS LONDINENSIS.

The Bookseller's Report.
THere has been of late a diligent Enquiry among us, concerning this subject
of APPRENTICES, advising us to a search in our Registry, and Calendar for
Writings of this nature, and we are assured that no Impression has escaped our
view for 40 or 50 years last past; but we find none, except some passages of
the Author in one of his Histories very briefly; which makes us wish the
Publication of this Treatise, for the general good of this famous City and
Citizens, and particularly of some of us, who claim an Interest of Birth
herein, whether it be Bond or Free.

A PREFACE In Defense of TRADE and COMMERCE.
THere is none that curiously observes, and takes notice of the various, yet
neat and orderly Frame of this Terrestrial Globe, but must confess so vast a
Body was not designed for the use of any single person, but even then in its
first Original looked forward to Posterity, whose provision the Great Creator
of all things chiefly had care of, when he enriched it with infinite
conveniences, both for necessity and delight, which the Offspring of Adam does
now enjoy. As therefore the World it self was too great a Patrimony for one
man, had not God been pleased to have given him a large and numerous issue to
enjoy and improve it: so had those secret and immense Treasures, wherewith it
is embellished and enriched, layn still obscure, either in the bowels of the
Earth, or in the vast distances and inaccessible parts of foreign Countries,
had not Commerce and Traffic, heightened by the ingenuity and industry of man,
unlocked these hidden Mines and secret Treasures, and by an easy yet speedy
passage brought them to our very doors. By these it is we come to be as it were
Citizens of the World, and to have correspondence and intercourse with the
remotest Countries. By these then it is the Globe was first inhabited, and
mankind made a Citizen thereof, and the whole World become a common Mart, where
each Inhabitant thereof, though never so distant, may freely commute the
Commodities of their own into the riches and treasures of another. By these
Nations became first civilized by corresponding with Strangers, and learning
from each other those forms of Policy and Government, which might become useful
and profitable. What had become of the Western part, had not Learning, and
other ingenuous Arts been brought to us, either by Strangers, and faught from
them by Noble Spirits of our own.

And surely Nature wisely did forsee the many inconveniences of Idleness, how
that it would convert the World into another Chaos, making the Earth but as one
dull and useless mass, when she hid her Rarities and Treasures in the secret
Bowels thereof, and buried them in the watery Deep, and lodged them at so vast
and remote a distance, that so their worth and Value might be a spur to Labor
and Industry to fetch them thence. Nay God himself is particularly called the
God of the Isles, as looking on them, by virtue of their skill in Navigation,
to be the best factors for the Common Good; and as a blessing upon their
Industry, we find most Isles and Maritime places exceed all Inland Cities and
Countries in Riches; and variety of plenty. But besides his particular favor
to Isles, he has created such a dependence of each on the whole, that what one
Country is deficient in, another does supply. Thus we borrow Silks from Persta,
Drugs from Egypt, Furrs from Russia, Gold from Barbary; and in lieu thereof we
furnish them with Cloth, and Lead, and Tin, and Corn, and other good
Commodities which our Country does afford.

Nor has Religion less honored Trade than Nature; for what has been the
Propagation of the Gospel, but a kind of a Religious Commerce, whereby the
Souls as well as the Bodies of Mankind might be supplied with necessaries for a
better life: for it cannot be imagined that the Doctrine of the Blessed Jesus
was at one time promulged and declared through all the Habitable World, but by
degrees, as places were found out, and men were qualified with Abilities and
Capacities for so great a Work. Hence is it, our Savior made choice of
fishermen, who were to pass as it were through the Zodiac, and disperse his
Precepts; their Calling and Trade rendering them skilful in Navigation, and bold
in adventuring, and their Blessed Master inspiring them with Gifts and Parts to
improve it to the enlargement of his Doctrine and Kingdom. For at first, the
true Religion was confined to one small Spot, but by little and little the care
of Heaven, and the indefatigable Industry of Man, what was then only known in
Judah and Jerusalem, became both the Wonder and Glory of the World. So that we
that live so remote from the first Declaration thereof, are more than
ordinarily endebted unto the pains and travail of those pious and religious
men, who adventured hither, which could not well have been done, had not
Commerce first found out our Coafts, and then Religion civilized them.

Besides, Trade is the very Life and Soul of the Universe, which, like the
vital Blood in the Body, circulates to the health and well-being of the whole.
What were the World but a rude and dull indigested Lump, a noisome and
pestilential Mass, did not Commerce, like the Sun, by its Universal Rays exhale
all its malignant and noxious Vapors, and by a continual motion and
transaction render it wholesome and profitable. What would become of the busy
Soul of Man, had she not found out variety of Employment for its Exercise? How
would each Country become the Sink or common Shore of Debauchery and
Wickedness, did not Traffic divest their Inclinations by the use of Liberal
Arts and Mysteries? So that it is the salt of the Earth, which preserves
Mankind from putrefaction and ruin.

Nor is it only profitable to the whole, but to each single Country, and City,
and Family. It is the strength and glory of a Kingdom, the beauty and splendour
of a City, the sinews of War, the support of Peace, the true foundation of
Honor and Gentility; the best security of a Fortune when got; and the best way
to get it when wanting. I cannot but confess, that in the common repute of the
World, there are several other ways whereby men may arise to Wealth and Honor,
as the Sword and Gown; yet I think, without injury to the credit of either, I
may safely say, that strictly taken those very ways and methods are in effect
Trades and Mysteries, the End of all being Emolument and Profit.

Nay, the Universities themselves are but as it were a learned Corporation, and
Society, each several Art and Science therein not much unlike our several
Companies, and inferior Schools, which fit Youth for those places, but as
Shops, wherein young men are initiated Apprentices, and afterward commence
Masters. There might be much more said in the defense of Trade and Commerce,
but the Book consisting of particulars in relation to the City, and its policy,
an Enlargement here would but anticipate the Kind and Courteous Reader, who
will I hope pardon the length of this Preface, and supply the rest with his own
Candor and Ingenuity.

To the READER.
READER,
I Have been lately put to the Question, which heretofore (some years since) I
have discoursed very briefly, Whether Apprentiship extinguisheth Gentry? And
being now called to an Account, I have not only perused my former Opinion, but
with some addition do confirm my then Assertion, that it does not; with a clear
Refutation of the pretended Reasons, or rather pernicious Errors against it,
swallowed by Erasmus Roterdam, Sir Thomas Smith in his Commonweal, Sir John
Fern in his Blazon, Ralph Brook York-Herald, and others. And I shall clear the
Refutation of that pestilent Opinion, which has some Authority for it, and
many Injurious Partakers; intending to lodge upon the hopeful and honest estate
of Apprentiship the odious Note of Bondage, and the barbarous penalty of loss
of Gentry, to the reproach of our Kingdom's policy, and to the manifold damage
of the Public. For though the Schools and Camps are most proper for Honor and
Arms; yet the Ancient Wisdom, and the like frequent Bounty of our Sages, did
ever leave the Gates of Honor open to City-Arts, and to the mystery of honest
Gain, as fundamental in Common-weals, and the suscepture of external Splendour,
according to the most laudable Example of rising Rome, under her first
Dictators and Consuls. By which their Moderation and Judgment they happily
avoided two opposite Rocks, viz. Tyrannical Appropriation of Gentry to some
certain old Families as in Germany, and the Confusion of not allowing
Hereditary Nobleness or Gentry to any at all, as under the Sultan in Turkey.

I shall not crave any Patronage, or other Acknowledgment, nor repeat here how
the Noble People of Eldest Rome accepted the Book which Guecus Flavius
dedicated to their Name and Use, de origin Juris, in the Caesarian Laws; but
leave the Issue to those that may receive the Honor and Profit thereof; with
this Caution, First, that it belongs only to such Masters or Citizens as are
generously disposed, and worthily qualified Men, who say with Publius Syrus,
Damnum appellandum est cum mala fama lucrum; and then to such among Apprentices
as resemble Potifer's chaste Servant, or St. Paul's converted Onesimus, young
men who say with Statius Caecilius in his Plotius, Libere servimus salva Urbe
atque Arce, meaning by the City, and the Citadel, the Body and the Head of Man.
And there is no doubt that the worthy Citizen shall find his honest Servant not
the less serviceable for this Discourse, but rather the more obsequious. For in
good Bloods, and in good Natures, Praise and Honor prevail more than Rigor and
Blows. And because your selves (for the most part) were Apprentices, ye may
remember herein with Comfort the honesty of your Condition when ye were such,
and the Splendour of what ye are now, in that Right.

The principal Objection against the Publishing of this, or the like Discourse
of this Argument, is, That the Insolency of the Youth, and the Irregular Fry
of the City, may hereby take increase. But it has been elsewhere answered,
That those Apprentices are of the Dregs and Bran of the Vulgar, the ordinary
Balls played by the hands of Justice, into the Prisons, and Places of
Correction; nay perhaps not Apprentices at all, but forlorn Companions,
Masterless Men, and the like, as lately has been made to appear.

In a word, the City of London (which before Rome it self was built) was rocked
in a Trojan Cradle, by the Founder and Father thereof, Heroic Brute or Brytus,
(as the most ancient Monuments, setting aside all late fancies, bear witness;)
and under Claudius Caesar It was the Metropolis of the Trynovants; under other
Caesar's afterward it was Augusta, the Majesterial City, which at this time,
for Hugeness, increase of beauteous Buildings, Concourse, Navigation,
Popularity, and Trade, (notwithstanding the hand of God's Correction by late
Sickness and Fire,) very hardly giving place to any one City in Europe, or at
lest does match and equal them.

This very London, so venerable for Antiquity, so honorable for her Customs,
so profitable for life; noble in Renown, even beyond the Names both of our
Country it self, and of our Nation; the Birthplace of Constantine the Great,
and the famous Recess or Chamber of our Kings; this very CityLondon, whether it
be your local Parent, or loving Foster Mother, shall not grace or honor you
more, than you shall grace or honor. Her, and England also.

To Conclude: In this Discourse, I design nothing, but rest only upon the
Defense and Affirmation, against the Assailers and Deniers of my Arguments and
Reason; with due submission for the Judicial part, to the proper Court of
Honor, heretofore the Illustrious High Marshal of England by Commission; or to
the Approbation of the Learned Heralds, Kings of Arms, and my self to the
favor of the Ingenious Reader.

W. S.

The Cities great Concern, In a Question of HONOR and ARMS, Whether
APPRENTISHIP extinguisheth Gentry?
THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST PART.
1. THE present Question, very important, for many great Causes; Two Crowned
Queens of England, some of the Nobility parties to it; Bullen and Calthrope,
Lord Mayors of London, had their Interests in Royal Blood; what Question status,
and what the least Capitis diminutio is, only the Base neglect it; Honor a
fair star; Disparagement odious; Prevention of Mischief by determining this
Question, Proud City-races unworthy of the City.

2. The Cities Honors in Arms is proved out of Ancient Monuments; The Lord
Fitz-Water Standard Bearer of London. Clauric and Bialle two Terms in old
Blazon.

3. The transcendent power of Opinion; To derogate from the Splendour of Birth
deputed an Injury; whence comes the present Question of Apprentiship.

4. The main reason why some do hold, that APPRENTISHIP extinguisheth Gentry;
Apprentiship no Bondage either in truth, or at all; the case truly propounded;
The skill of honest Gettings a precious Mystery; what kind of Contract that
seems to be, which is between Master and Apprentice.

5. An Objection, that an Apprentiship is a kind of Bondage; The folly of
Erasmus in his Etymology of an Apprentice; The comparison between Servus among
the Civilians, and Apprentices among Englishmen holds not; what the word
APPRENTICE means; Sr. Thomas Smith's error in confounding Servitude and
Discipline.

6. 7. 8. Particular points touching Servus, his Sanctuary at the Princes
Image; Manumission and Recaptivity by Law; None of these points concern
Apprentices, more than Soldiers, Scholars, or Religious Novices.

9. 10. The very final cause denominates the Action, and proves Apprentiship
not to be base; The contrary Opinion pernicious to Manners, and good
Commonwealth, among us chiefly now; The different face of both Opinions in
daily Experience.

Whether APPRENTISHIP extinguisheth GENTRY? THE FIRST PART.
THE present Question, whether Apprentiship extinguisheth Gentry, being now not
so much a Paradox, as grown in secret to be of late a common Opinion, I am bold
to call it a weighty and important Question, unjustly grounded upon the learned
folly of Erasmus of Roterdam, and the incircumspection of Sr. Thomas Smith
Knight, in his Book de Republica Anglorum, and out of certain wandering conceits
hatched among Trees and Tillage, as shall appear hereafter. Weighty and
Important I call it, and it is so; because in looking out upon the concernings
of the Case, I find that prospect so specious, that within the compass thereof
as well the greater as the lesser Nobility of England, are very notably and
very inexplicably enwrapped: what do I say of the subalternate Nobility, when
the Royal Name it self was deeply interessed in the Proposition? For Queen
Elizabeth, though a free Monarch, and chief of the English in her turn, was a
Party to the Cause, which she ingenuously and openly acknowledged, calling Sir
Martin Calthrope Kinsman, as indeed he was, being at that time Knight, and Lord
Mayor of London: as also Sir Godfrey Bullen Knight, and Lord Mayor of London,
was lineal Ancestor to Queen Anne, Mother to Queen Elizabeth, no longer before
than in the Reign of Henry the sixth King of England. Both which Knights being
also Gentlemen born, and of right worthy Families, ascended by due degrees from
the condition of Apprentices, to the greatest Annual Honor in this Kingdom. It
is Weighty and Important, because without much impropriety of speech it may be
called Quaestio status, which in the ancient phrase of the Emperor Justinian,
is as much as to say, a Trial, whether one is to be adjudged bond or free,
servile or ingenuous, and implies that odious and unnatural sequel, which by
Textuists is named Capitis diminutio; whereof though the Roman Laws make a
threefold division, yet in this our question is but only, whether the third and
lowest degree were incurred, (which happens cum qui sui juris fuerunt,
coeperunt alieno juri subjecti.) It is weighty and important, and can appear
none other, because it directly tends to darken, and as it were to intercloud
the luminous body of that beauteous Planet Honor, with foul and lasting Spots.
For what can lightly be a more disparagement, than for the Freeborn to become
a kind of Bondmen, or to come of such? nay there is nothing without it, which
can be of so great disparagement. Finally, it is weighty and important, for
very many other reasons, and particularly because it is not only fit that
states of Opinions should be rectified in this kind, as breeding bad affections
among people of this Nation, (from whence great mischiefs often arise, even to
hatred, quarrels, and homicides;) but that such also as through vanity, or
other distempers of the wit or judgment, disdain to seem either City-born or
bred, or to own any thing of their Worship or Estate, either to the City or
Citizens, may understand their own place and true condition, lest they be
convinced to be among them, who are unworthy of so honest either Original or
Accession as the City yeildeth.

2. But let us first behold the Cities Honor in Arms, as it stands displayed
in Ancient Heraldry, and as it is commented upon out of Authentic Monuments,
in that commendable Survey of London, comprised by its Chronologer and Citizen,
Stowe. The present figure, with the same words as here they stand, is a copy of
that which an old imperfect Legier volumn at the Office of Arms contains.
There needs no greater demonstration of the Cities ancient Honor, and of her
peoples free quality than this, that a principal Baron of the Realm of England
was by Tenure her Standard Bearer, being the Lord Fitz-Water, from whence the
now Lord Fitz-Water is descended. The figure of St. Paul advanced it self in
the Standard, and upon the Shield those famous well known Armouries of the
Cross and Weapon. The like Picture of which Apostle was also embroidered in the
Caparisons of that Horse of War, which for the purpose of the Cities Service he
received of Gift at the hands of the Lord Mayor. Upon the Standard-bearers Coat
Armor, are painted the Hereditary Ensigns of his own Illustrious Family, viz.
Or a Fesse between two Cheverons Gules. Which kind of Field the Ancients called
Clauric, perhaps a claritate, because such Fields as were all of one color
made their Charges more clearly seen and perspicuous. And as they gave to that
species of Blazon a peculiar Name for the Dignity, so did they also assign to
this manner of bearing two Cheverons the term Bialle, or a Coat Bialle, a
numero binario. In which brave times had that noble Gentleman but slightly and
far off suspected, that he displayed that Banner for a kind of Bondmen, or as
for their Service, his great Heroic spirit would rather have trodden such an
offer under foot. In good Assurance therefore of this common Causes justice, we
proceed.

3. Sound Opinion (meaning Doctrine) is the Anchor of the World; and Opinion
(meaning a worthy conceit of this or that person) is the principal Ingredient
which makes words or actions relish well, and all the Graces without it are
little worth. To take the fame from any man that is a Gentleman born, is a kind
of disablement and prejudioe, at least wise among the weak, (who consider no
farther than Seemings) that is, among almost all; consequently a wrong, and if
a wrong, then due to be redressed. To find the Injury we must first enquire,
Whether Apprentiship extinguisheth Gentry?

4. The main reason, certainly the most generally used, to prove it does, is,
That Apprentiship is a kind of Bondage, and Bondage specially voluntary; (in
which case the Imperial Law-rule, Non officit natalibus in servitute fuisse,
may be perhaps defective,) does not extinguish Native-Gentry. But I deny that
Apprentiship is either vera servitus, Or omnino servitus.

For explanation of this The Case in Question.
difficulty, I will set before your eyes the Case as it is. A Gentleman has a
Son, whom he means to breed up in an Art of thrift, not rising merely out of a
stock of Wit or Learning, but out of a stock of Money and Credit, managed
according to that Art; and for this cause he brings his Child at fifteen or
sixteen years of age, more or less, to the City of London, provides him a
Master, and the Youth by his Father's counsel willingly becomes an Apprentice,
that is, he interchangeably seals a written Instrument, that he for his certain
years of true and faithful Service, shall learn that precious Mystery of how to
gain honestly, and to raise himself. Let the legal and ordinary form of that
Instrument (extant in Wells's Presidents, and familiar every where) be duly
pondered, and it will appear a mere Civil Contract, of which, as all the world
knows, a Bondsman incapable. If you would know under what kind or species of
Contract that does fall, I answer, that it seems to be a Contract of
Permutation or Interchange: in which mutual Obligation or Convention the act of
Binding is no more, but that (as Reason and Justice would) the Master might be
(determinately for the time, and sufficiently for the manner) sure to enjoy his
Apprentice. Apprentiship being therefore but an Effect of a Civil Contract,
occasioned and caused by that prudent respect which the Contrahents mutually
have to their lawful and honest Commodity; and such only as are freeborn,
being capable to make this Contract with effect, Apprentiship therefore does
not extinguish Gentry.

5. On the contrary it is urged, that although Apprentiship be not a true
Bondage to all constructions Except.
and purposes, yet that it is a temporary Bondage, and equal (for the time it
lasts) to very Servitude. Of which Opinion Erasmus is, making his Etymology
of our Apprentices to be, for that they are like to such as are bought with
money, pares contisiis; which conceit, as it is more literate than right, so if
it were set to sale, would find few Chapmen, but to smile at it. But we
absolutely deny that Apprentiship is in any sort a kind of Bondage; for
notwithstanding that to prove it be so, they make a parallel between the
ancient Roman Servitude, and the London Apprentiship, yet will these comparata
be found disparata, if not disparatissima. For Servus among the old Romans was
so called of servando, of preserving and saving, and not of serviendo, of
serving, (says the Lawmakers himself, the Emperor Justinian) but the word
Apprentice comes of Apprenti, the French word, a raw Soldier, or young
Learner, Tyro, rudis discipulus, or of the French verb which signifies to
learn, or of the Latin word apprehendo, or apprendo, which is properly to lay
hold of, and translatively to learn; which derivations are consonant to the
thing, and true, however Sir Thomas Smith in his book de Republica Anglorum,
not remembering to distinguish between Servitude and Discipline, Bondage and
regular Breeding, injuriously defined them to be a kind of Bondmen, (meaning
mere Slaves,) and not, as in some places of England, Bondsmen are taken for
such as are in bonds for actionable Causes) and such Bondmen, as differ only
thus from very Bondmen, (whose like words for signification are those foulest
ones, Slaves and Villains) that Apprentices are but for a time, is certain: An
oversight of so grave and learned person, a privy Counselor, and in place of
Secretary to Queen Elizabeth.

Again, that which did constitute a Bondsman among the old Romans, was such a
Power and Right vested in the Lord, over the very body of his Bondsman or Slave,
as descending to him under some received Title, or rather jure gentium, was
maintained to him jure civili Romanorum; by virtue whereof he became
Proprietary in the person of his Bondsman, as in the body of his Ox, Horse, or
any other Beast he had: which Proprietaryship was indeterminable, but only by
Manumission, and that act merely depended upon the will of his Lord, without
any Indentment or condition on the behalf of the Slave, which a right Roman
would never endure from his Bondsman.

Finally, (which in the quality of that Servitude was most base) Servus among
them nullum caput habuit, had no Head in Law, and neither was in censu nor in
lustro condito, as much as to say, that they were out of the number of Men,
their Names being neither put among such as had wherewith to pay in the Rolls
of their Exchequer, or Tables of their Capitol, nor as Bodies wherewith to
serve in the general Musters of their Commonweal, but in brief were reputed
civiliter mortui, dead in Law; Death and Bondage being alike among them;
without any more reputation of being members in the Body Politic than brute
Cattle, for Bondmen were reputed Nobody, Servi pro nullis habiti.

And albeit the Authority of the Commonweal, upon the ground of State,
Interest rei publicae ne quis re sua male utatur, and the Majesty of Sovereign
Princes, merely as in Honor, and as moved with the commiseration of Humane
miseries, did sometime interpose it self upon just cause, as when the Lord did
attempt to ravish his Bondwoman, or the Bondman took Sanctuary at the
Emperor's Statue and Image, or at the Altar of some one of their Gods, (an
Example whereof is in Plautus;) yet the Bondman after Manumission continued in
such relation to his late Lord, that in certain cases (as Ingratitude) he who
was once infranchised, was adjudged back to his Patron, and condemned again to
a far more miserable Servitude, than ever before.

These things considered, and nothing being like it in the matter of
Apprentiship, who is there that lives so careless of the honor of the English
Name, as to bring the Disciples of honest Arts, and Scholars of Mysteries, in
civil Trade and converse for virtuous causes, all of them being called by the
fair Title of Apprentices, into the state and quality of Bondmen? Fair I called
it, because that title is common to them with the Inns of Court, where
Apprentices at Law are not the meanest Gentlemen. Apprentiship therefore is no
voluntary Bondage, because it is no Bondage at all, but a Title only of
Politic or Civil Discipline. Apprentiship therefore does not extinguish Gentry.

So then Apprentices, whether Gentlemen of Birth, or others, whatsoever their
Indentures do import, and howsoever they may seem conditional servants, are in
truth not bound to do or to suffer things more grievous, than young Soldiers
in Armies, or Scholars in rigorous Schools, or Novices in Noviceships, each of
whom in their kind usually do and suffer things as base and vile in their own
qualities, simply and in themselves considered, without respect to the final
scope or aim of the first Institution, as perhaps the very meanest of five
thousand Apprentices in London.

9, 10. The final cause therefore of every Ordination qualifies the course, and
the end denominates the means and actions tending to it. For if that be noble,
no work is base prescribed in ordine, or as in the way to that end; though,
abstracting from that consideration, the work wrought, in the proper nature of
it, be servile, as for a Soldier to dig, or carry Earth to a Rampire, or for a
Student to go bareheaded to a Fellow of the House within the College, as far
off as he can see him, omitting the more deformed necessity of suffering
private or public discipline; or for a Novice in a Noviceship to wash Dishes,
or the like seeming base works, as is usual; If then the general scope, or
final reason of Apprentiship be honest, and worthy of a Gentleman, (as will
appear hereafter that it is,) what can be clearer, than that Apprentiship does
not extinguish Gentry?

I am the more fervent in this case, because this one false Conceit (at all
times hurtful, but chiefly in these latter times, in which the means of easle
maintenance are infinitely straightened,) that for a Gentleman-born, or one that
would aspire to be a Gentleman, for him to be an Apprentice to a Citizen, or
Burgensis, is a thing unbeseeming him, has filled our England with more vices,
and sacrificed more serviceable bodies to odious ends, and more souls to sinful
life, than perhaps any other uncivil Opinion whatsoever. For they who hold it
better to rob by Sea or Land, than to beg or labor, do daily see, and feel,
that out of Apprentices rise such as sit upon them, standing out and pleading
for their lives as Malefactors, when they (a shame and sorrow to their Kindred)
undergo a fortune too unworthy, even of the basest of honest Bondmen.

THE CONTENTS OF THE SECOND PART.
1. APPRENTISHIP is a laudable Policy of Discipline, not a bondage; The
contrary Opinion overthrows one main pillar of a Commonwealth; Severity of
Discipline more needful to be recalled than relaxed.

2. The Adversaries conceits do brand our Founders; Mechanical qualities are
God's special Gift.

3. Of Tubal-Cain, and the dignity and necessity of Crafts; Hiram, the
Brass-founder; S. Paul's handy Art, and the cause showed out of the Rabbis; Of
the Enoblements touching them.

4. The wisdom of instituting Apprentiship defended, by the Argument a minori
ad majus.

5. LONDON, the Palace of thriving Arts; Concerning Hebrew Bondmen; The quality
of Masters power over Apprentices; Masters are not to be cruel, or over severe.

6. The folly of such as object a corruption in Blood, extinction and
disinablement to Gentry; of Bondmen, or Villains in England.

Whether APPRENTISHIP extinguisheth GENTRY?THE SECOND PART.
1. THese things considered, how should it fall into the mind of any good or
wise Discourser, that Apprentices are a kind of Bondmen, and consequently, that
Apprentiship extinguisheth Native Gentry, and disinableth to Acquisitive? For
if that Opinion be not guilty of impiety to our Mother-Countrey, where that
laudable policy of Apprentiship, necessary for our Nation, is exercised as a
point of severe Discipline, warrantable in Christianity; certainly it has in
it a great deal of injurious temerity, and inconsiderance, and why not impiety
also, if they wilfully wrong the wisdom of England, their natural common
Parent, whose Children are freeborn? Surely, notorious inconsiderance is
apparent, because there are but two main Pillars of Commonwealths, PRAEMIUM
and POENA, Reward, and Punishment; and of the first Rewards, Honor is the
highest, according to that most eloquent Tully in his perished Works, de
republica, (as S. Augustine styles them,) as that thing with which he would his
Prince should be fed, and nourished; and in his Philosophy has uttered that
famous sentence concerning the same, Honos alit arts, omnesque accenduntur ad
studia gloriae. Among us therefore Coats of Arms, and Titles of Gentlemen
(which point the Knight aforesaid, howsoever erring in Apprentices estate, has
truly noted to be commodious for the Prince) being the most familiar part of
Honor. But they rip up and overturn the principal of those two Pillars of
Commonweal from the very Basis: a strange oversight, specially of Professors
of skill in the Art of public Government; unless perhaps they speak it,
because they would have things reformed, or changed in this particular of
Apprentiship. But we do not remember, that either Sir Thomas Eliot in his
Governor, or Sir Thomas Chaloner (Leigier Ambassador for Queen Elizabeth in
Spain) in his Books of Latin Hexameters de rep. Anglorum instauranda,
(published with the Verses of the Lord Treasurer Burghleys before it,) or any
other Author, rightly understanding our England, and her generous People, did
ever once tax our Countries Policy in this point. Yea some make it a Quaere,
whether the Cities discipline had not more need to be reduced nearer to the
ancient severity thereof, considering with what vices London flows, and
overflows, than that it should be altered, or removed, though but a little,
from it.

2. Now then, let any one but rightly weigh with what conscience or common
sense, the first Institutors or Propagators of the English form of Government,
could lay upon Industry and civil Virtue (whose subject are the lawful things
of this life, and whose nearest object is Honor, and honest Wealth) so foul a
note as the brand of Bondage, or any the least disparagement at all? Whereas to
quicken and inflame affections in that kind, all wise Masters in the most noble
civil Art of Government, and all Founders of Empires, and States, have bent
their counsels and courses to cherish such as are virtuously industrious, yea,
God himself (the only best Pattern of Governors) has made it known, that even
Mechanical Qualities are his special Gifts, and his infused, as it were,
charismata.

3. For Moses, having put into eternal Monuments, that Jabal was pater
pastorum, (the most ancient Art of increase,) and that Jabal was pater
canentium, (the first of which inventions was for necessary provisions of food
and raiment, and the second to glorify God and Honesty, to solace men toward
sweetning the bitter Curse which Adam drew upon humane life,) it is, thirdly,
underadded in the accomplishment of the three main Heads, to which mortals use
to refer all their worldly endeavors (Necessity, Profit, and Pleasure,) that
Tubal-Cain was malleator, and faber ferrarius, an Hammer-smith, or worker in
Iron, that being one of those arch Mysteries, sine quibus non aedificatur
civitas, as the words are in Ecclesidsticus. Nay, there belonged in God's own
judgment so great praise to the particular excellency of some Artificers, as
that in building of Solomon's Temple, they are registered to all Posterities in
Scripture, and their skill is not only made immortally famous, but a more
curious mention is put down of their Parentage and Birthplace, than of many
great Princes, as in Hiram's case, not the King, but the Brass-founder. And in
the New Testament, S. Paul (being a Gentleman born, of a noble Family, as the
Ancients write, and a Lawyer bred up at the feet of Gamaliel) learned, as an
addition to that perfection, for the relieving of his necessities, the manual
Art of Scaenopaea, commonly Englished, Tent-making: upon which place of S.
Paul's Trade (whereof in his Epistles he does often glory) it is declared to us
out of the Rabbis, that S. Paul (who himself tells King Agrippa, that he had
lived a Pharisee, according to the most certain way of Jewism) was brought up
so, by a Traditional precept, which did bind such as would study Sacred
letters, to learn some one or other Mystery in the Mechanics. And at this
present, among other things which the Turks retain of the Jewish Rites, this
seems one, when even the Sultan himself, or grand Seignior (as all his
Progenitors) is said to exercise a manual Trade, little or much, commonly once
a day. And in fresh memory Rodulphus, the Emperor of Germany,, had singular
skill in making Dials, Watches, and the like fine works of Smith-craft, as had
also a late Baron of England, which they practiced; and other persons also, of
Royal progeny, are at this day excellent in several Artifices.

4. If then such honor be done by God himself (as aforesaid,) not only to
those that are necessary Handy-crafts, but to those also which are but the
Handmaids of Magnificence, and outward Splendour, as Engravers, Founders, and
the like; he shall be very hardy, who shall imbase honest Industry with
disgraceful censures; and too unjust, who shall not cherish or encourage it
with praise and worship, as the ancient Policy of England did, and does, in
constituting Corporations, and adorning Companies with Banners of Arms, and
some special men with notes of Nobleness.

5. And, as of all commendable Arts all worthy Commonweals have their use, so
in London they have as it were their Palace. But into the body of the City none
generally are incorporated, but such only as through the straight gates of
Apprentiship aspire to the dignity and state of Citizens. That the Hebrew
Bondmen were not, in Moses's Law, among themselves, like to our Apprentices
(howsoever the seventh year agrees in time with the ordinary time of our
Apprentices Obligations) is evident, both in the Books of Exodus and
Deuteronomy. For, first, their title to their Bondmen grew to their Lords by a
Contract of Bargain and Sale, which was indeed a kind of Servitude. For, when
the seventh year, in which the Bondage was to determine, and expire, if then he
resolved not to continue a Bondsman for ever, he was compelled to leave his wife
(if married in his Lord's house during bondage) together with his children,
born in that marriage, behind him, though himself departed free, but withal
rewarded also. So that voluntary Bondage is not only de jure gentium, (as the
Roman Laws import, by which a man might sell himself, ad participandum
pretium,) but also de jure divino positivo. By which, notwithstanding it does
not appear, that such a Bondage was any disparagement, or dis-enoblement in
Jewish blood, among the Jews, because in Exodus we read of a provision made for
the Hebrew Bondwoman, whom her Lord might take in marriage to himself, or
bestow her upon his Son, if he so thought good, but might not to violate her
Chastity, as if he had jus in corpus. But the Condition of an Apprentice of
London resembles the Condition of no person's Estate in either of the Laws,
Divine, or Imperial; for he directly contracteth with his Master to learn his
Mystery, or Art of honest living, neither has his Master (who therefore is but
a Master, not a Lord) Despoticum Imperium over his Apprentice, (that is, such a
power as a Lord has over a Slave) but quasi curaturam, or a Guardianship, and
is in very truth a mere Discipliner, or Teacher, with authority of using
moderate Correction as a Father, not as a Tyrant, or otherwise. Immoderate
Correction whosoever does use, is (by a Gracious Statute of the fifth of Queen
Elizabeth) subject to be punished with the loss of the Apprentice, by
absolutely taking him away.

6. Which things so often as I deeply ponder, I cannot but hold it as loose,
and as wandering a conceit, and as uncivil a Proposition in civil matters, as
any: that Apprentiship should be imagined either to extinguish, or to extenuate
the Right of Native Gentry, or to disable any worthy or fit person to
acquisitive Armories; for how can it in God's name work that effect, unless it
be criminal to be an Apprentice? Because no man loses his right to bear Arms,
or to write Gentleman, unless he be attainted in Law, for such a cause, the
Conviction whereof does immediately procure corruption in Blood, which as in
this case no man yet has dreamed of.

Again, when by the old Common Law of England, there are but only two sorts of
Bondmen, Villains in gross, and Villains regardant to a Manor; and it is most
certain, that our Apprentice or Scholar in City Mysteries, is neither one nor
other of them: what ignorance then, or offense was Mother at first, of this,
not Paradox, but palpable Absurdity, that Apprentiship extinguisheth Gentry, or
that Apprentices are a kind of Bondmen? when as the greatest and most famous
Cities of Germany, which were or have been composed of Apprentices, or such as
from them have become Masters, as Norimbergh, Lubeck, Magdenburg, etc. are as
Imperial and free Cities, not thought unworthy to be matriculated into the
Empire, or to have places in their Dyets, as some of the Estates thereof.

THE CONTENTS OF THE THIRD PART.
1, 2. FOR clearer understanding the Question, the Service of an APPRENTICE
described.

3. The four main Points of the Indenture discussed, the Service, the Time, the
Contract, the Condition.

4. The Case of Laban, and Jacob weighed.

5. Of the mutual Bond between Master and Apprentice.

6. An Apprentice proved to be in no respect a Bondsman; Of the right of blood
in Gentry, and of the right of wearing Gold rings among the Romans.

7. The Master's power over the Apprentice's body, objected and solved;
Aristotle's error about Bondmen; Of young Gentlemen, Wards in England; Of
University Students, and of Soldiers, in respect of their Bodies.

8. Apprentiship a degree in Commonweal.

9. Of the Tokens, or Ensigns of that degree, the flat round Cap, and other.

10. Unwisely discontinued.

11. Resumption of Apprentiships Marks, or Habits, rather wished than hoped.

12. The injurious great absurdity of the Adversaries Opinion, and the
Excellency of London.

Whether APPRENTISHIP extinguisheth GENTRY? THE THIRD PART.
1. THough in the premises we conceive to have said enough for the establishing
our Negation in this Important Question, that Apprentiship is not a kind of
Bondage, consequently, that it cannot work any such effect as is before
supposed, yet to leave no tolerable Curiosity unsatisfied, we will set before
us, as in a Table, the whole Condition of an Apprentice, meaning chiefly such
an Apprentice, as being the Son of a Gentleman, is bound to a Master, who
exercises the worthier Arts of Citizens, as Merchants by Sea, Whole-Salemen,
and some few others, which may more specially stand in the first Class of the
most generous Histories, as those, in which the Wit or Mind of man has a far
greater part than Bodily labor.

2. Such an Apprentice therefore, when first he comes to his Master, is
commonly but of those years, which are every where subject to Correction. His
ordinary Services these: he goes bare-headed, stands bare-headed, waits
bare-headed before his Master and Mistress, and while as yet he is the youngest
Apprentice, he does perhaps (for Discipline sake) wipe over night his Master's
shoes for the morning, brusheth a Garment, runs of Errands, keeps silence
'till he have leave to speak, follows his Master, or ushereth his Mistress,
and sometime their young Daughters, (among whom, some one or other of them does
not rarely prove the Apprentice's Wife) walks not far out but with his
permission, and now and then (as Offenses happen) he may chance to be terribly
chidden, or menaced, or (which must sometime be) deservedly corrected; though
all this only in ordine, and in the way to Mastership, or to the estate of a
Citizen, which last worst state of this Apprentice's Condition continues
peradventure for a Year, or two, and while he is commonly but at the age of a
Boy, or at the most but of a Lad, or Stripling; and, take things at the very
worst, he does nothing as an Apprentice under his Master, which, when himself
comes to be a Master, his Apprentices shall not do or suffer under him. Such,
or the like, is the bitterest part of an Apprentice's happy estate in this
world, being honestly provided at his Master's charge of all things necessary,
and decent. The Master in the mean while serving his Apprentice's turn with
Instruction, and universal Conformation, or Moulding of him to his Art, as the
Apprentice serves his Master's turn with Obedience, Faith, and Industry.

3. Here have we a Representation of an Apprentice's being, or rather the
well-being of a Child under his Father, who has right of Correction. Upon view
whereof we demand, why it should be supposed that Apprentiship extinguisheth
Gentry? For if an Apprentice in London (since to have Apprentices is a power,
not derived to Corporations out of Prerogative, Royal Privilege, but out of
Common Law) be in their conceits a kind of Bondmen, it must either be ratione
generis obsequii, or ratione temporis adjecti, or contractus, or conditionis,
or for all together; a fifth Cause being hard to be either assigned or imagined.

For the first point, ratione generis, (which is in regard of the Kind of
Service,) that is but an effect of the Contract, or Bargain, and consequently
depends thereon, or participates in nature with it; which not importing any
kind of Bondage, neither can the Service it self, due by that Agreement, be the
Service of a Bondsman: so that as on the one side we grant, that Apprentices, as
Apprentices, do some things, which Gentlemen would not do, that lived sui
juris, specially upon a necessity to obey; yet on the other side we constantly
deny, that they do any of them, either as servile, or as servilely but propter
finem nobilem, that is, to learn an honest Mystery, to enable them for the
Service of God and their Country, in the station, place, or calling of a
Citizen.

For the second, ratione adjuncti (which is in respect of a certain time, as of
seven years at least, added and limited in the Contract) that is merely but a
Circumstance of the Question. For if Apprentices are not a kind of Bondmen,
abstracting from the time which they are bound to serve, the addition of Time
adds nothing to the quality of the Contract, to make it servile.

For the third, the Contract (which is in regard of the Contract as it raises
a relation, or the titles between two, of Master, and Servant,) if the very Art
of binding to performance be a sufficient reason to make Apprentices a kind of
Bondmen, and so to disenable them to Gentry, either derivative, or acquisitive;
the Masters themselves are also a kind of Bondmen, because suo genere they as
well were, and are bound as the Apprentices one to the other.

For the fourth, conditionis, (which is in respect of the Conditions, either
literally or vocally expressed, or virtually implied in the Contract) there is
in it no proof of Bondage, but the contrary; for in that the Obligation is
mutual, it proves the Apprentice free as from Bondage, though (for the
Apprentice's own good) not free from Subjection to his Master, or Discipline,
because only Freemen can make Contracts, and challenge the benefit of them. The
Verb is not, servire, but the Verb, deservire, (which is of far less weight)
comprised in the Instrument, or Indenture, and containing the whole force of
the Obligation, has only in that place the sense of obsequi and facere, to
obey and do, as an Apprentice, and not according to the ancient sense which it
had among the Romans. This ought not to seem a Paradox; for the word Dominus,
to which Service is a relative, and the word Servus have, in tract of time been
so softened, and familiarized, as they are grown to be words of singular
humanity. And what so common among the Noble, as to profess to serve one
another? But the relation constituted in this Case is peculiar, and proper. The
word Dominus is not there at all, nor Servus, no nor famulus; the relation
constituted is directly named between Master and Apprentice, a clear case that
all Injuries to Blood and Nature are of purpose avoided in the Interchangeable
sealed Instrument it self: so clear a case, that in the Oath which all Freemen
make in the Chamber of London at their first Admission, this Clause, among many
others, is sworn unto by them, That they shall take none Apprentices, unless
they are free born, that is to say, no Bondman's son, which are the very words
of the Oath. And by an Act of Parliament, made in the fifth year of the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth, it is expressly provided, That no Merchant, Mercer, Draper,
Goldsmith, Ironmonger, or Clothier, shall take any Apprentice, except it be his
Son, whose Father or Mother shall at the time of taking such Apprentice, have
in Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments of Inheritance of the clear yearly value
of Forty Shillings, the Children of Laborers, and of persons not being Freemen
or occupying Husbandry. Thus carefully open was the Eye of Institution in this
Noble point of the Cities Policy, to prevent, that no stain, no blemish, nor
indignity, should wrong the Splendour thereof; a thing which could not but
follow inevitably, if when it was provided that no Bondmen's Issue into the
estate of Apprentiship, should themselves, by making Apprentices, make Bondmen;
or should in any sort embase their Blood, whose Masters they were to be, as to
the purpose of coming to be Citizens in time. They never meant to make any man
Bond, who would have none but the Sons of freeborn persons bound Apprentices:
and therefore it shall be wilful ignorance or malice from henceforth to
maintain the contrary.

4. A most memorable example in Scripture, to the purpose of the present
Question, is that of Jacob and Laban, Genesis 29. where the time (seven years,)
yea and the very word (servire) are plain in that Contract, which was made
between the Uncle and the Nephew: yet who did ever say, that Jacob was for this
a kind of Bondsman? The reason why he was not, arises from consideration of the
final Cause, or intention of the Contract, which is recorded to have been
worthy and unblameable; the obtaining of a virtuous Wife, and of an Estate to
maintain her with. Neither, when he was no longer defrauded of Rachel than
seven days after his first seven years, and when for the fruition of Rachel he
served also other seven years, was he a Bondsman; by, as it were a relapse or
cessation of expecting his reward, which he enjoyed in enjoying her? Out of
which it follows, that as Jacob was no kind of Bondsman, though he served, and
served out all his time twice over, so neither are Apprentices. And from this
place of Holy Writ it is unanswerably proved, that bodily service is a laudable
means to atchieve any good or honorable purpose, a means truly worthy of a
Gentleman.

5. Hereunto we finally add, and repeat, that as an Apprentice ties himself to
his Master in the word deservire, that is, to obey and do restrictively to the
ancient reason, and traditional Discipline of Apprentiship in London; so the
Master ties himself to his Apprentice in the word docere, in lieu of his honest
service, to teach him his Art to the utmost. Which Master's part is grown to
such estimation, as that Apprentices now come commonly like Wives, with treble
more portions than formerly to their Masters. If then Apprentiship be a kind of
servitude, it is either a pleasing Bondage, or a strange madness to purchase it
with so much money.

For proof of this Assertion, let me give a late Example. A Gentleman of
quality gave 300l with his younger Son, an Apprentice to a Merchant, and having
continued together for three years, and the Servant not as yet employed in the
particular mystery of Merchandising, himself complained to his Father of loss
of time, and both of them referred their Case to another Merchant for rendition
of such part of the 300l as might turn him over to a better Master. The
Referrer rebuking the Master, urged this as a truth and ancient custom,
defining the Contract as we have intimated, and adding withal, that the Father
had right in Law and Custom to be repaid all his 300l, and good damage to his
Son for the loss of so much precious time, without profit of the Art and
Mystery contracted to be taught him, to the dishonor of the City, and the very
intention of the Contract, and custom of London.

6. An Apprentice therefore, as an Apprentice, being neither ratione obsequii,
temporis, contractus, nor conditionis, in any kind or any respect a Bondsman:
and has therefore no more lost his title and right to Gentry, than he has
done to any Goods, Chattels, Lands, Royalties, or any thing else, which, if he
never had been an Apprentice, either had, might, or ought to have come to him.
Nay, much less can Gentry be lost in this case, than right to Lands and Goods,
how much more inherent the rights of Blood are than the rights of Fortune; for,
according to the Law-rule, jur a sanguinum nullo jure civili dirimi possunt,
unless in cases of Felony or Treason, whereas those other may be dissolved. And
that Gentry is a right of Blood, may appear by this, that no man can truly
alienate the same, or vest another in it, though legally he may in case of
Adoption, which is but an humane invention of Nature, and therefore, in
reiveritate no Alienation at all, but a fiction, or an acception in Law, as if
it were such. So that none can any more pass away his Gentry, to make another a
Gentleman thereby, who was not a Gentleman before, than he can pass away any
Habit, or Quality of the Mind, as Virtue, or Learning, to make another honest
or learned, who was unlearned or dishonest before; for Gentry is a quality of
Blood or Name, as Virtue and Learning are of the Mind. Upon which reason that
rule of Law is grounded, which teaches us, that annulus signatorius ornamenti
appellatione'non continetur.

7. To all this if it be replied, that Apprentiship is a kind of Bondage; for
that, if an Apprentice abandon his Master's service, his Master may both fetch
him back again, as Lord for the time over his Servant's Body, and compel him
also to live under obedience. We answer thus: That such a power over the body
of the Apprentice is not sufficient to constitute a Bondsman, though the Service
of the Apprentice belongs to the Master, God's part in him and the
Commonwealths being first deducted. Aristotle held, that only the Grecians were
free, and all other barbarous, that is to say, all not being Grecians were
Bond. Some among us seem Aristotelians in this point, who as he gloriously
overvalued his Countrymen, so these overvalue their paragon Gentry, and repute
none worthy of Arms, and Honor, but themselves; we supposing on their behalf,
that they are indeed not vain Pretenders, but true dependents from the most
unquestionable Noble Races, howsoever troubled perhaps with some little of the
spirit of vanity, and of too too much scorn of others. But as the Italians, and
their Nobility, in our time, (notwithstanding they think meanly of all who are
not Italians, calling them (in Aristotle's humor) Tramontanes, and in that
word implying them to be Barbarous) do commit an error as well as the great
Philosopher, whilst they themselves do take it to be no disparagement to
merchandise; nor the haughty German Nobility, who although they do believe it
to be dishonorable to marry with the Daughter of a Burgher, or Citizen, do not
refuse gain of Commerce or Merchandise: so these Gentlemen (how eminently Noble
soever) will be likewise found to live in error, for that others may be truly
Gentlemen, for any thing that as yet is spoken in the former Sophism, viz. that
the Master has power over his Apprentice's body, Ergo Apprentices are a kind
of Bondmen; because if such a power be enough to constitute a Bondsman, we will
say nothing of those Freeborn persons being in Minority, whose bodies their
Guardians, in Lands holden by Knightservice, might (not long ago) not only by a
right in Law fetch back, after escape or flight, but give away also in
Marriage; nay, if for that reason, Apprentices, born Gentlemen, shall be
thought to have forfeited their Gentry, in what estate are all the Sons and
Children of all good houses in England? whose bodies in their Minority their
Parents, by a right of Nature, may fetch back after flight, and exercise their
pleasure or displeasure upon them, even to disinhereson of Lands not entailed.
Scholars under their Tutors, or Schoolmasters, are not Bondmen. Nay, in what
case are Soldiers, (to whom most properly, and most immediately the Honor of
Arms does belong) who for withdrawing themselves from their Banner, or Captain
without leave, may not only be forced back to serve, but (according to the
usual Discipline of War) may, by Martial Law, be hanged up, or shot at the next
Tree, or wheresoever deprived at once of life and reputation together? so
absurd it is to dispute, that the power of a Master, by the title of a Contract
over the body of an Apprentice, in case of Discipline, does convince a
Servility of condition in the Sufferer. For if the right to exercise corporal
Correction should absolutely constitute a state of Bondage in the Subject, the
injury of that untrue assertion would reach to persons of far higher mark than
City-prentises, as is most plainly proved. And therefore they must alleged
somewhat else besides subjection of Body, to draw the estate of Apprentiship
into that degree of reproach; which as they cannot do, we having prevented
those Objections, so must they leave it clear from taint or scandal.

8. We lay it down therefore, out of all the antecedences, for a clear
Conclusion; That Apprentices are so far from being a kind of Bondmen, as that
in our Commonweal they then first begin habere caput, and to be aliqui: to be
of account, and some body. For Apprentiship in London, is a degree or order of
good regular Subjects, and out of whose (as it were) Nurseries, or Colleges,
Citizens are supplied. We call them Colleges, according to the old Roman
Law-phrase, or Fellowships of men, for so indeed they are comprehended within
several Corporations, or Bodies of free persons, intended to be consociated for
Commerce, according to Conscience and Justice; and named Companies, each of
them severally bearing the Titles of their several worthy Companies or
Corporations, as Drapers, Salters, Cloth-workers, and so forth. And we say as
before, that Apprentices, in the reputation of our Commonweal, when first they
came to be Apprentices, then first begin to be somebody, and that Apprentiship
is a degree, to which out of Youth and young men, who have no vocation in the
World, they are advanced; and that out of Apprentices, by other ascents or
steps, as donari civitate, to come to be free of LONDON, or Citizens, from
thence to be of their Companies Livery, the Governors of Companies, as Wardens
and Masters, and Governors in the City, as Common-Councilmen, Aldermens
Deputies, Sheriffs, and Aldermen; and lastly the principal Governor, or Head of
the City, the Lord Mayor; yea sometimes also Counselors of State to the Prince
(whereof Stow has Examples) are very orderly elected, and the whole Policy
disposed after as excellent a form, as most at this day under Heaven.

9. True it is, that Apprentiship, as it is a Degree, so is it the lowest
Degree, or Class of Men in London: lowest we say, that it may come to the
highest, according to that of S. Augustine, and of common sense, That those
Buildings rise highest, and stand fastest, whose Foundations are deepest. And
as Apprentiship is the first in order, and meanest in dignity, so can that be
no title to embase the vocation, because there must be a first in all things.

Of this degree, anciently the flat round Cap, Hair close-cut, narrow falling
Band, course side-Coat, close Hose, Cloth-stockings, and the rest of that
severe Habit, was in Antiquity not more for Thrift, and Usefulness, than for
Distinction and Grace, and were original Arguments or tokens of Vocation, or
Calling; which point of ancient Discipline the Catoes of England, grave common
Lawyers, to their high commendation therein, retain in their Profession, and
Professors at this present, even to the parti-colored Coats of Sergeants at
Law, during the first year after they are made, or called; an object far more
ridiculous among the new Mode of our time (enemies of rigor and discipline)
than that of Apprentices. At which retained signs, and distinctive notes, as
among Lawyers, though younglings, and frivolous Novices, may somewhat wonder,
'till the cause be understood, yet is the thing it self so far in it self from
deserving contempt, as that they who should offer it, would themselves be
counted ignorant. For Sir Edward Coke, in the Preface of his third Book of
Reports, has affirmed, for the dignity of the word Apprentice, that a double
Reader, whose degree is next to that of a Sergeant at Law, who is only
inferior to a Judge, and to no other degree of Lawyers, is but an Apprentice
at Law.

10. Here now let me be bold to say, that Apprentices of late seem to have
drunk and sacrificed too deeply to their new Goddess Saint Fashion, a French
Idol, which was always noted fatal to the English; as at the Periods, or
universal concussions of Empire in our portion of Great Britain, may in old
Writers be observed. This they do not without wrong, in our opinions, to the
honesty of their degree, at least wise in so far abandoning their proper
Ornament, the Cap, (anciently a note of Liberty among the Romans) as not to
have, one day at least in the year, wherein to celebrate the Feast of their
Apprentiship in the peculiar Garb thereof; which they should do well and wisely
to frequent, for the suppression and beating down of that ungrounded Contumely
and scorn, by making profession in this wise, that they glory in the Ensigns of
their honest Calling.

11. For revocation of which into use, though we see no manner of hope, yet are
those late Magistrates of the City, who labored to reduce Apprentiship to
practice this laudable point of outward Conformity, not the less to be
commended. And it were to be wished, perhaps, that instead of scattering
Libels, and of discovering Inclinations to Tumult, Apprentices had rather
submitted their Understandings and resigned their wills in this particular to
their loving Superiors, making humble and wise Obedience the glory of their
Persons, much rather than Apparel in the fashion. For they who are not ashamed
of their Professions, ought not to be ashamed of the Ensigns and Tokens of
their Profession, or Degree. They indeed are out of fashion, who are not in the
fashion which is proper to their quality; the flat round Cap, in it self
considered as a Geometrical figure, is far more worthy than the square,
according to that ground in the Mathematics, Figurarum sphaerica est optima,
and in Hieroglyphics is a Symbol of Eternity, and Perfection, and a
resemblance of the World's rotundity: but I will make no Encomium for Caps.
This I say, that as the square Cap is retained, not only in the Universities,
and Chancery, but also abroad among us, as well by Ecclesiastical persons in
high places, as by Judges of the Land when they sit in Court; so the round Cap
being but a note in London of Apprentices, and Citizens of London, as it is of
Students, Barresters, Benchers, and Readers in the Inns of Courts, and chief
Officers in the Court-royal, so the wearing thereof by Londoners cannot be a
Reproach, but an Ornament. But communis error facilius, and how freely soever
these thoughts come from me, out of affection to the preservation of Virtue in
that most Honorable City, which civil Discipline is ablest to do, and
howsoever it may be to wish the best, yet some busy Censurer may think it to be
a vanity to hope to stop the general stream of predominant Custom by private
wishes. Apprentices moreover, and Citizens, because they are always conversant
in the light of action and concourse, and not shut up in Colleges for Studies
sake, may think by this contrary way, the more to honor their City, and to
enjoy themselves.

12. Well may they in the mean time blush at their temerity, who by teaching
that Apprentices are called Apprentices, as if they were pares emptisii, do
dishonor and highly wrong the excellent old Policy of this Land: for they (as
much as lies in the credit of their words) most dangerously discourage
flourishing Industry, who cast such an aspersion upon any Civil Profession, and
Order of men, (assembled to uphold a Kingdom by Commerce, according to the
rules of Law and Justice,) as the least conceit of so hateful a Note as
Bondage. And if it be Temerity to cast it upon any Renowned, or other
Corporations unjustly, it is singular Iniquity (let it not be called Madness)
to lay it upon LONDON, which shines among all Cities within the Empire of
Britain, -- velut inter ignes Luna minores.

THE CONTENTS OF THE FOURTH PART.
1. THE Author means not to erect a new Babylon by confounding Degrees,
Horace's Monster; The Common Law's distinction.

2. Citizens, as Citizens, not Gentlemen, but a particular species; The
Gentleman the natural subject of all Nobility; The Author's meaning explained;
Encouragement of honest Industry; Jus annulorum, that among the Romans with
bearing of Arms among us; The Causes compared; The distinction of a mere
Citizen; Disparagement of Words how to be understood in the case; King Edward
the first his displeasure, an Efficient of what Effects. Armories symbolize
with the first Bearers quality; Antiquities sacred care in points of
Ennoblements.

3. The Author's Apostrophe to Fathers, whether they be Gentlemen born or not;
No cause why the Great should be ashamed of City-beginnings; Martial virtue
principal owner of Armories; The Chamber of the King.

4. Kings of England ennoble the Companies of London with their Persons, by a
singular favor; Henry the seventh his admirable sociability, or configuration
of himself to popular forms; Cloth-workers King James's Brotherhood.

5. London-Companies denominated of their Monopolies, but not infused thereby
of Circensian Games, or Colors. Plinius his complaint; Gentlemen's Means, if
properly entitled, are as mean as London Merceries, nor in that respect any
great disparity between Country and City-Gentlemen.

6. The Ecliptick-line of London Zodiac; The Mind, and not Name is essential
to Qualifications.

7. The Author's second Apology for his meaning in the case; His scope to beat
down injurious Vanity, not to wrong Vocations. London Companies best so called
as they are; The first Roman Consul, not being a Patrician, was free of
Butchers; Where Majesty is there can be no Baseness; The Glory of Wit and Arms
due to London.

All honest Natures love Glory, and no Glory good but as subordinate to God.

Whether APPRENTISHIP extinguisheth GENTRY? THE FOURTH PART.
1. THough thus I have been the Pleader, and Defender, of the credit of the
City, yet I desire not to be mistaken. For it is very far from my Profession, a
Courtier, and by Ancient Desent a Gentleman, by this Apology, or Patronization,
to confound Degrees in Commonweal, so to set up as it were a new Babylon of my
own; I am not ignorant therefore, that Citizens as Citizens, are not Gentlemen
but Citizens: to hold otherwise were to take one Order or Degree of men out of
the Realm, or like Horace's Monster, (a Man's head, and a Horses neck,
shoulders, or body) to treat of a thing which had half one, and half another;
and our Laws give a proper Name both to the Tenure and Person, calling the
Tenure of Citizens in Cities, Burgage, and their Persons Burgenses, among whom
the more eminent of them in London had of old, not only the Honor of the title
of Citizens, or Burgesses, but their Aldermen were called Barons; not honored
or privileged as the Barons of England are, but as men of Reputation within
the verge of their City, and have the Adornment of Golden Chains, which, with
other signals of Honor, was the ancient Reward of Merit among the Romans.

-- Phaleris hic pectora fulget
Hic Torque aurato circumdat bellica colla,
Ille nitet celsus Muralis honor coronae.
-- Here shining stood
One with Trappings on his breast, and there
Another on his warlike Neck did wear
A Golden Chain. This with a Mural Crown
Was honored, etc. --
2. The ordinary Citizen therefore is a degree beneath the mere Gentleman, as
the Gentleman is among us in the lowest degree or class of Nobility in England.
And all Citizens, as Citizens, yea the Lord Mayor himself, simply as a Citizen,
is not a Gentleman, but Burgensis. As the greatest Princes and Despots that
ever were, or ever shall be in the World, considered in their first natural
condition, are at most but Ingenui, or freeborn, in which respect all are
equal, for omnes natura aequales, and their Civil degree or general estate,
which either comprehends all the Orders of Nobility, or is capable of them, is
(among us) the Gentleman. In which respect he who shall say, that this or that
King, or Emperor, is a Gentleman, speaks rightly, and as the thing is; for
Gentleman is the Title, about which all other Titles, as they concern Honor,
and convey no Jurisdiction, are put as Robes and Ornaments. This therefore is
my meaning; that some Citizen may be a Citizen, and yet truly a Gentleman, as
one and the same man may in several respects be both a Lord, and Tenant;
Citizen in regard of his Corporation in London, Gentleman in regard of his
Birth, or of Armories assigned for encouragement of Industry, to ennoble his
honest Riches and Titles of Honor or Worship in that City whereof he is a
qualified Member. Neither is the communication of Rewards, which consists of
painted distinctions, composed according to the received rules of Heraldry,
injurious to ancient Gentry, any more than the promiscuous permission of
wearing Gold-rings on their fingers alike to Freemen, as to Freemen granted by
the Emperor in the Authenticks. Nor is it a new thing in our Commonweal, that
some wealthy and virtuous Citizen, not born to Armories, although the Sons of
Yeomen, Husbandmen, and Cottagers, should have Arms assigned them, and some
undoubtedly born by right of Blood, as descendents of Gentlemen; but other
again as undoubtedly assigned for Excellency in City-Arts. Of which number
there are in this time not a few, whose seri nepotes, whose great
Grand-children's Children are reputed amongst some of the Ancient and worthy
Families of their Countries, without any relation to London, which
notwithstanding raised them; Hence it follows, that as an Apprentice being a
Gentleman born, remains a Gentleman, with edition of Splendour and Title, as
God blesses his labors, so a worthy Citizen is capable of the Honor of Arms,
notwithstanding his former Apprentiship. And by this distinction made between a
Citizen merely as a Citizen, and of a Citizen as he may also be a Gentleman,
that Objection (which some bring out of a Statute, enacted under one of our
Kings, which forbids the disparagement offered by the Guardian to marry the
ward (born Gentile) to a Burgensis) may easily be salved, and answered: for in
that Statute, the word Burgensis is spoken in the native and more narrow sense
thereof, which is of one who is simply Burgensis, without any consideration of
him as he may otherwise be a Gentleman, Esquire, or Knight, which in some cases
happens. As in the famous Corporation of Droit-Wiche in worcestershire, where
he that has a property in a Salt-pan, or a certain Measure, or liberty of
making salt, is ipso facto a Burgess of that Town, and has a Vote there:
Insomuch as an Earl of Shrewsbury, and some of the neighboring Knights,
Esquires, and Gentry, have deemed themselves honored thereby, and at their
deaths, though absent from the place, have the great Bell of Droit-Wiche rung
out for them. And in conferring of Arms, or Coats of Arms upon Citizens not
born Gentlemen, Reason requires, that they should not have Coats of the
fairest Bearing assigned to them, but such as either in Canton, Chief, Border,
or otherwise, might carry some Testimony, Mark, or Sign, to show the Art by
which they were advanced; as Merchants Adventurers to bear Anchors; Grocers,
Cloves; Cloth-workers, a Tezel; Merchant-Taylors, a Robe; and so forth: which
those Gentlemen ought in honesty and thankfulness to chose; and not only to
accept, but rather to strive, to have such Acknowledgment reversed to their
Posterity, who afterward thriving may procure some change to be also made in
the Coat for the better; specially considering what pretty riddance has been
in latter times made of Surcharges in Armory, granted about the end of King
Henry the Eighth, what Encroachments upon Gentlemen's Rights by new Ones;
because their Names, or by the addition, or taking away a Letter or Syllable,
have been made to be the same; and many other Inventions to blanch or beautify
Newness. Which to rectify, diverse Coats of Arms have been delivered from their
Original deformities, surfets, and surcharges, by their proper Physician, the
Provincial King of Arms. So Sir Thomas-Kissons of Suffolk, whose Chief now
simply Gold, was heretofore overladen with three egresses, and they with an
Anchor, (the Badge or Argument of the Original,) and two Lions rampant argent,
as is publicly extant to be seen in Trinity Hall in Cambridge, whereunto he
was a Benefactor. And besides that Gentleman's, the Coat of Arms of some of the
Gentry of this Land, do need the like relief or remedy. The rule of Proportion
seeming carefully to be observed in Antiquities among us, where the principal
and most Noble Charges were not appropriated but to Anological concretences of
honorable quality.

3. Such therefore being the nature of Apprentiship, and such the condition of
Citizens estates, as to the purposes of Honor and Arms; let Fathers, who are
Gentlemen, put their Children, who are not inclining to Arms or Letters, to
Apprentiships, to the Discipline and Art of honest Gain, giving them a Title of
being somewhat in our Country; for it is a Vocation, if not misused, simply
honest, and may prove a stay to Posterity, and give Credit to their Names, when
licentious and corrupted Eldest sons have sold their Birthrights away; for
albeit many Citizens thrive not, yet those Fathers, and such who are in place
of Fathers, provide more probably, who put their Children or Orphans into a
certain Method of Life, than others who leave them at large. And however some
riotous, foolish or unfortunate Citizens miscarry, yet there are more than Ten
to One, which do not; and many of those who are not Gentlemen born, and being
put by their Parents to be Apprentices, that as God may bless their just, true,
and virtuous Industry, so they may be Founders of a New Family, and both raise
themselves and theirs to the title of Gentlemen, lawfully bearing Arms. For
which cause, those who may perchance own their worldly estate, and the
foundation of that greatness or amplitude of means to such as have been
Citizens of London, are not free enough to busy themselves in detracting from
those, whose original Greatness was drawn from the others; nor those others,
whose Originals were from Chivalrie and Martial Service, (the most pure and
proper Nobleness of all, as to the purpose of bearing Arms, and have since been
mixed with Citizens) ought to think it the least disparagement to own their
Ancestors or Benefactors to have been Citizens of London. But it will worthily
become them freely and thankfully to acknowledge so honest Originals, and
accession to Originals, as many parts of this Realm from thence have been
filled with: because among them the Sinews of War and Peace, abundance of
Treasure are stored up, as in the Chambers of the King, when they will be
pleased either by Lone or Subsidy to afford their Sovereign and Great
Benefactor the use of it.

4. Which acknowledgement, besides that it is in the laws of Honor an act of
bounden Duty, they may the rather take it for a Glory. Because some of our
Princes have so far vouchsafed to grace them, as to be incorporated as Members
of some of their Companies of Trade in the City. And King Henry the seventh
(whom all of us will easily confess, to have well enough understood what he
did) is credibly said to have been in Person at the Election of a Master and
Wardens, and Himself to have sitten openly among them in a Gown of
Crimson-Velvet, City-fashion, with a Citizen's Hood of Velvet on his Shoulders
a la mode de Londres, upon their solemn Feast Day, in the Common Hall of the
Company of Merchant-Taylors. Moreover, his Grandchild, Queen Elizabeth (no way
inferior to her Ancestors in high policy) was free of the Company of Mercers.
Lastly, (which is more to our present purpose) our late Solomon, Sovereign King
James, being one of the most Learned of our Princes, (though Learning has been
a Royal Ability in our Ancient Sovereigns, and so flourishing in sebert King of
the East Angles, that Venerable Bede affirms him to have been nec omnia
doctissimus) King James, I say, did honor the Company of Cloth-workers in
London (which if well encouraged, would be one of the most important Companies
of Trade in that City) with a condescension of being accounted a Freeman of
that Company of Cloth-workers, whose Employment is the well-making the greatest
Staple-Commodity of this Kingdom.

5. Nor let the Name of Companies (because they seem not to found honorable
enough, as the Appellations of degrees in Nobility and Gentry) avert the mind
from them, as things ignoble, and unworthy the Dignity of Generous
dispositions, erroneously holden to be so, in Sir John Birne's Blazon of
Gentry, for all Renowned Cities ever had in them Urbana Nobilitas, and yet
their Citizens could not but be distributed into Orders, Tribes, or Titles of
Profession, yea sometimes in their Games. For the Circensian Companies in Rome,
called Factions, that is to say in truth, Companies, and denominated from their
several clothings, as White, Blew, Green, and Red, to which Domitian added two
others, Purple, and Gold, were the special Exercises of Princes and People;
which grew to such Excess, that no longer after than in Trajan's time, that
Plinius secundus held it to be a matter worthy of his Complaint and Censure, so
as in one of his Epistles he says, Nunc panno facient, nunc pannum amant.
Again, such of the Gentry, who live not in the City, and do most of all elevate
themselves with contempt of others in respect of the Arts, and ways of
maintenance, were they but incorporated under the true Titles of their Means,
in which we will not speak of their prodigious eating up of whole Houses,
Towns, and People, by a thousand wicked Devices proper to the mystery of
depopulation, (against whose consuming works so many Statutes of this Land have
long time warred in vain) the Names of those City Brotherhoods, or Companies
would easily sound, in a most curious ear, full out as fair, and well, as Corn,
Cattle, Butter, Cheese, Hay, Wood, Wool, Coals, and the like materials of their
Maintenance, all of them inseparable to Country-Common-weals, and without which
they can no more subsist, than the Drapers, as Drapers, without Cloth;
Goldsmiths, as Goldsmiths, without Jewels or Plate. Neither does it create any
great odds in this point, touching Honor between parties in this dispute, that
Gentlemen by their Officers, as Bailiffs, Reeves, or the like, do order their
Affairs for their more ease, and dignities; for besides, that the wisest among
them exercise that superintendency in their own Persons; so herein, the worthy
Citizen is no way behind, dispatching his business by Factors, Journeymen, or
expert Apprentices, reserving only to himself the Over-view and Control of all
their doings. City-Nobleness so apparent, that the Knights or Gentlemen of Rome
professing Merchandise, and other among them that way bent, had their Hall or
seat of their College or Company upon Mount Capitoline it self, dedicated to
their Patron Deity, or Tutelary Godhead, Mercury. Other incorporated Societies
there also were, as Goldsmiths, and the rest who lived so far from being
excluded out of the power of Commonweal, or from Honors, and signs of
Nobleness, that they forced a right in some Cases to choose out of their own
Body one of the Consuls, before their Emperors times. Yea so mighty were they
grown in respect of Election, and negative Authority, that Clodius, to be
revenged on Cicero, left his own rank of Patricians, and Lords, and turned
Commoner.

6. To conclude, such Gentlemen are much deceived, which no sooner they hear a
man named to be of this or that Society, or College of Trade in London, as of
Grocers, Haberdashers, Fishmongers, or any other of the twelve principal
Monopolies, (the Zodiac of the City, in whose Ecliptick-line their Lord Mayor
must ever run his years Course,) but they forthwith entertain a low conceit of
the parties quality, as too much beneath their own Rank and Order, without
farther examination; when it often happens, that he who is titularly of this
fraternity, never was bred up in it, nor understands more in it than the
remotest Gentleman, their Masters themselves having been Merchants, or of other
Profession of life diverse from their title, under which they are marshalled;
the law of the City imposing an absolute necessity, that all who are free of
the City should carry the Name of some one or other of their Brotherhoods.
Again, what do the Constellations of Heaven shine the worse, or the less,
because they carry the names of a Ram, of a water-bearer, of Fishes, and so
forth? or how many the fewer are their several lights for that? Answerable to
which I say, that if the Partie's mind be adorned with the Star-lights of
Honor and Virtue, what baseness is it for him to be marshalled under any of
the Names comprehending one or other of the honest Arts of worldly life, no
more than the Name of the Great Fabii at Rome, for their usual feeding upon
Beans, or Cicero of Pulse.

7. In disputing thus, let me not be thought to set up an envious Comparison
between these two degrees or qualifications of men: that is very far from me;
for it must ever be granted to the Authority of general Opinion, founded upon
custom among us, that the true Country Esquire, caeteris paribus, is, in his
proper place, before the City Esquire, which with the perpetual clause
beforesaid of caeteris paribus, holds also throughout the other degrees of the
inferior Nobleness in England. I reason here as Reason bids, not against the
right or dignity of persons, either as in parallel, or as in disparagement, but
against the vanity and offenses rising out of causeless Elation, and Arrogance,
and against their Errors, who not understanding the things of their own
Country, are indeed mere Meteoroscopes, and hover in the Cloudy Region of
Admiration upon rude and unlearned fantasies; for which cause, as minds
needing to be healed, so would I sincerely wish that they were healed. Such are
theirs, who would perhaps think the Companies or Monopolies of the City more
worthy of their acknowledgment, if where now they are denominated of some
particular Ware, or Craft, they were named of Eagles, Vultures, Lions, Bears,
Panthers, Tigers, or so forth, as the several Orders of Nobility in Mexico
(which Josephus Acosta writes) under their Emperor. Yet much better, because
more truly, these Fellowships of London carry the Names of Men, and their
Trades, as they have Vocations in Professions, which only Men can execute,
better or more Noble; if those Societies were denominated of Eyes, Ears, Hands,
Feet, or of other Members: as Philostratus, in the life of that Impostor,
Apollonius Tyaneus, says, the Officers, and Instrument of a Philosophical King
his Eyes, Ears, and so forth; so have these Mysteries some one or other
Professor in each of them, from a higher Trade to the lowest, eminently
dignified with the Honor of being the King's Servant, as the King's Mercer,
the King's Draper, and so forth. Again, how much more worthy is the whole than
the parts, because the parts are in the whole; so by that Argument it is more
honorable to be marshalled as a man among Societies of Civil men, than to be
distinguished by Allusions to particular Members; at least wise those Singular
Gentlemen might certainly in their most contempt of the City, remember, that
rare and real worth may be in the Persons of Citizens themselves, seeing
Terrentius (Consul of Old Rome, with the Noble Paulus Aemilius) was free of the
Butchers Company, and our Walworth, Lord Mayor of Old London, was free of the
Fishmongers. And the others were not only the Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen of
Rome, who had voice in Election of their Principal yearly Magistrates, but even
Handicrafts-men, and Artificers, as is most manifest by that place of Salust,
in his Jugurthine War, where Marius was chosen Consul, by the special Affection
of that sort of Roman Citizens, who (says he) sua necessaria post illius
honorem ducebant, preferred his Election by their Voices, before the Trades by
which they earned their Livings. Finally, they may remember, that in the
Posterity of Citizens many Right Noble and worthy Gentlemen are often found;
and that, besides the universal mixture with City-races through the Kingdom, it
may not be denied, that true Nobleness or Gentry shines often very bright
among them, as it did a little before his Majesty's happy Restoration, when a
great number of Apprentices, probably the Sons of Gentry, and such as would not
forget the accustomed Loyalty of their Progenitors, due at all times to their
Sovereign, when these threatened the Lord Mayor to pull him off his horse, if he
would not declare for the King; for even as where the Sun is there is no
darkness, so where Sovereign Princes are interessed Parties, there is no
Baseness. And as the Philosopher's Mercury purges vilest Metals, turning all
to Gold; so the Operation of Princes Intentions to ennoble Societies with their
personal Presences, transmettals the Subject, and clearly takes away all
Ignobility. Which things as they are most true in London, so, for that the
Emperor Constantius Magnus, (if our Ancient Fitz Stephen reports the right,)
Henry King of England, Son of King Henry the second, and that brave Prince
Edward the first, and whosoever else were born in the City, they give to it the
glory of Arms. And Jeffery Chaucer, Sir Thomas Moore Knight, with others born
in London, communicate thereunto the Glory of Wits and Letters. To nourish up
both with Excellent Titles to real Nobility in the City, the Artillery-yard
and Gresham College were instituted. And however some of the Rebel-rout and
Factious part of the Citizens of London made themselves unworthy of the Freedom
and Liberties thereof, by the late Horrid and Devilish Rebellion; yet it cannot
be denied, but that many Loyal and Worthy Citizens were not only deluded,
overawed, and kept under by a false Authority of Parliament, but plundered,
sequestered, and undone for their Allegiance to the King. Mr. Chaloner hanged;
Sir Richard Gourney Knight and Baronet, Lord Mayor of London, imprisoned in the
Tower of London, for not acting against the King; and the Rebellious Party
commanded Sir George Whitman Knight, formerly Lord Mayor, and chosen,
locumtenens, for the Remainder of Sir Richard Gourney's year, to be sent
Prisoner to Yarmouth for the like Loyalty; and James Bunch an Alderman of
London, now Sir James Bunch, Knight and Baronet, imprisoned in the Tower of
London, had all his Estate real and personal plundered, sequestered, and sold,
and ordered by the usurping Powers to be exempted from Pardon, and forced to
fly into the parts beyond the Seas to His now Majesty, with whom he continued
until His Majesty's happy Restoration. And Sir Abraham Reynardson, Lord Mayor
of London in the time of that Rebellion, was imprisoned, and fined 2000l, for
refusing to publish the Proclamation of those Contrivers of all manner of
wickedness, for the abolishing of Kingly Government.

The worthiness of the City is now visible, being not disheartened by the late
Correction, and Loss, of Pestilence and Fire, which after their humble
Acknowledgment to God of their deserving, have reedified the Devastation with
greater Splendour and Beauty. Their Industry we may compare to the Bees, which
Virgil describes;

Quo magis exhaustae fuerint, hoc acrius omnes
Incumbent generis lapsi sarcire ruinas:
Complebuntque foros, and floribus horrea texent.
How much by fortune they exhausted are,
So much they strove the ruins to repair
Of their fallen Nation, and they fill the Exchange,
Adorning with the choicest flowers their Grange.
Sir John Fitzwater's Palace was that Noble Pile, named Baynard's Castle, near
St. Paul's Wharf, lately burned down, from whence in great respect to him the
Lord Mayor takes water, attended with Barges of the several Companies to
Westminster, where he takes his Oath of Mayoralty, and so returns in Triumph to
Guild Hall to his Feasting.

Thus this Question of Honor and Arms, undertaken for affection to that great
City, and their Children, being, as we hope sufficiently discussed; the End of
all is this: That albeit the love of humane Praise, and outward Splendour, in
the marks and testimonies of it, are very vehement fires in all worthiest
Natures, yet have they no Beatitude, nor (so to say) Felicitation, but only as
with reference to this of the Blessed Apostle,

Soli Deo Honor, and Gloria, AMEN.

FINIS.

