A GUIDE TO Eternity: Extracted out of the WRITINGS OF THE Holy Fathers, AND
Ancient Philosophers.

Written Originally in Latin, By JOHN BONA: And now done into English, By
Roger L'Estrange, Esquire

The Second Edition.

London, Printed for Hen. Brom, at the Gun in St Paul's Churchyard, the West
End. 1680

Mauductio ad Coelum. or a Guide to ETERNITY

Written in Latin By John Bona And Englished by Roger L'Estrange.

London Printed For Henrij Brom 1680

F. H. Van. Hou^



THE Author to the Reader.
IT is the end of this Preface, to encounter two Objections, which I expect
shall be charged upon me: First, Why does he not practice what he recommends,
and quit the World himself, before he take upon him to teach others the way to
Heaven? Secondly, What news does he tell us? Truly, no more than what we have a
thousand times over, and better in other Authors: And this with a strange kind
of Temerity and Confidence, he is willing to impose upon us for his own.

My Answer is (in the words of a wise man: (Horace.) -- Fungor vice Cotis,
acutum
Reddere quae Ferrum valet, exors ipsa secand^.
My Business is to whet, not cut.


Or if I may take up the words of another great man: I look upon the whole
World, but as one large Hospital; and upon my self, not as a Doctor, but one of
the Patients. If I can contribute any thing to a Public Good, it is well. But
however, while I write this, I am but talking to my self, and I make my Reader
my Confident. I do not pretend to be a Teaching Master, but a Teaching Scholar.
I am desirous to learn of others, even when I instruct my self; for he that
teaches, learns.

As to the second Objection, I shall prevent it by a most ingenuous Confession
of the naked Truth. There is very little of this Discourse, that I can honestly
call my own. The greatest part of it, is what I have gathered out of the Holy
Fathers, and Ancient Philosophers: And somewhat I have added out of my own
Experience, which I have wrought together into one Confection; a good deal of
it in the very words of the Author; and the rest in my own style, plain and
accommodate to all capacities; for my business is not Rhetoric. but Good Life.
And in order to that blessed End, I have here drawn up a Compendium of Moral
Institutions and Counsels (the best I could) out of the Writings of the
Fathers, Seneca, Epictetus, Antoninus, and others of the Ancients, both
Christian and Pagan. What I have found effectual in my own case, I have here
communicated for the benefit of others; without so much as saying where I had
it, without clogging my Paper with Citations, or playing the or the Orator. My
Design is to work upon the Passions, not the Fancy; and if the Physic be
proper, no matter for the plainness of it, or who mingled the Potion. I might
have enlarged, and I might have expressed my self much better. But a few
Precepts that are ready and at hand, are much more profitable to us, than whole
Volumes that overcharge the Memory, and leave us at a loss where to find them,
when we have occasion to use them. He that knows what belongs to his Salvation,
has learned what is sufficient. I wish with all my Soul, that this poor Essay,
(such as it is) may conduce to a Public Good; but however, that it may not
rise in Judgment against the Author, for not conforming in his Life to his
Precepts.

THE CONTENTS of the Chapters.
Chap. 1. OF Man's last end. The danger of neglecting or mistaking it. The means
and Method of attaining it. page 1 Chap. 2. He that would live well, let him
choose a good Tutor. The Qualities of such a Tutor, and the duties of the Pupil.
6 Chap. 3. Of Purgation from sin. The very disposition to sin, as well as the
sin it self, is to be rooted out. No Remedy more effectual against it, than the
consideration of Death and Eternity. 12 Chap. 4. Of Gluttony, the Evils of it,
and the Remedies: And to know when we have subdued it. 21 Chap. 5. Of Luxury:
The Foulness of it: How apt we are to relapse into it: How to avoid it, 25.
Chap. 6. Of Avarice: The wickedness of it. The Poor and the Rich compared. The
Deceit and the Vanity of Riches. 30 Chap. 7. Of Anger: The Character of an
angry man: The effects, Causes, and Remedies of it. 36 Chap. 8. Of Envy and
Sloth, with their Description and Cure. 48 Chap. 9. Of Pride, Ambition, and
Vainglory. The Description of a Proud Man. The Vanity of Dignities, and the
Dangers. The Evils of High-mindedness, and the Cure. 52 Chap. 10. Of the
Government of the Body, and the Senses. How far the Body may be indulged. The
Lust of the Eye, and Excess in Apparel are condemned. 61 Chap. 11. Of the Guard
of the Tongue. How much it concerns us to govern it, and the Difficulty of so
doing. Certain Directions what we are to observe in speaking; what to avoid.
How to behave our selves in case of Calumny or Slander. 67 Chap. 12. Of the
internal Senses. The use of Opinions. The Mind is to be tinctured with good
Thoughts. Of bridling the Sensitive Appetite, and depraved Affections: Diverse
Precepts to that end. 73 Chap. 13. Of Love, the Nature of it, Causes and
Effects. Its Remedies; and somewhat added of Hatred. 78 Chap. 14. Of Desire and
Aversion, what is to be desired, and what to be declined. 83 Chap. 15. Of Joy
and Sadness. How a good man ought to rejoice. He that looks before him is not
cast down. Several Antidotes against Sorrow. 87 Chap. 16. Of Hope and Despair.
And how we are to moderate both. 93 Chap. 17. Of Fear: The Vanity of it, and
how to master it. Rashness to be avoided; and something more of Anger. 96 Chap.
18. Of the Faculties of the reasonable Soul. The understanding is not to be
employed upon Curiosities. What Study is best. The Evil of meddling with other
Peoples Manners. Not to concern our selves for other men's Opinions. Of
Self-Denial. 102 Chap. 19. Of the state of Proficients. Diverse Helps to
Improvement. The value and the use of Time. God is always present. 109 Chap.
20. Of the Good of Solitude. Ill Company to be avoided. The Vices of the World;
and what they are. Virtue, the study of a Proficient. How to know when we have
attained it. 114 Chap. 21. Of Theological Virtues, Faith is to be manifested in
our Works. In God alone we are to put our Trust. Motives to the Love of God.
The Love of our Neighbor shows it self in good Offices. An Exhortation to
Charity. 121 Chap. 22. Of Prudence. The Necessity and the Difficulty of it. The
duty of a wise man. 127 Chap. 23. Of Justice and Religion: The Acts of both. Of
Repentance, and wherein it consists. 130 Chap. 24. Of Piety and Obedience. The
Commendation of Obedience and Gratitude. How to receive, and how to requite a
benefit. 135 Chap. 25. Of Truth, and the use of it, In commendation of
Singleness of Heart. The Acts of Fidelity. 139 Chap. 26. Of Friendship; the
Qualities and Duties of it. Certain Precepts for Conversation. 142 Chap. 27. Of
Liberality; what it is, and how to be exercised. Wherein it differs from
Magnificence. 149 Chap. 28. Of Fortitude: The Duties of it. A man of Resolution
does contemn death. 152 Chap. 29. Of Magnanimity. The Description of a
Magnanimous man. 158 Chap. 30. Of Patience; The Occasions and Effects of it. An
Exhortation to it, with Instruction how to behave our selves in Adversity. The
necessity of Perseverance. 162 Chap. 31. Of Temperance: How much Modesty
contributes to it. Of Abstinence and Chastity. 171 Chap. 32. Of Meekness and
Clemency: The Excellency and the Duties of both. 174 Chap. 33. Of Modesty,
Studies, and Divertisements. 177 Chap. 34. Of Humility: Wherein it consists.
The Knowledge of our selves. The true Character of an humble man. 182 Chap. 35.
Of the state of the Perfect: The image of a perfect Man. The end of a perfect
Life is union with God. 186
A GUIDE TO ETERNITY.
CHAP. I.
Of Man's last End. The Danger of neglecting or mistaking it. The Means and
Method of attaining it.

I. THe thing I have propounded in this Discourse, is to bring the Reader to
Heaven, that is to say, unto that perfect state of Bliss, to which we are all
directed by a Natural Impulse, as the principal End of our Being; and wherein
there remains nothing further to be desired. As to the matter of Happiness; it
is the common wish and business of Mankind: But such is the blindness of our
depraved Condition, that instead of the True and Sovereign Good, we apply our
selves to vain Appearances and Counterfeits. Some will have it to be in Wanting
of Nothing, and consequently in Riches: Others place it in Dominion and Power:
Some again, in Voluptuousness and Pleasure, a mean and most ignoble Mistake.
Thus we labor and toil to no purpose, and (like men in a wrong way) the more
haste we make, the further from our Journeys end; hardly in any thing more
unhappy, than in not being sensible of our unhappiness.

II. And this, in truth, is our great Misfortune, that we purpose we know not
what. Every man would fain live and die happy: But what true Happiness is, or
how to compass it, there is not one of a thousand that understands. So that in
all our Actions, Wishes and Endeavors we cross our selves, without any regard
to that Immense Good, which ought to be the only and ultimate Object of our
Consideration. The life we lead, is like that of the Pismire, a perpetual and
fruitless Ramble and Agitation; one while up, another while down, and still
empty. The great Creator of all things made Man out of nothing, and he that
gave us all, expects all, and to be beloved and served without a Rival, as the
Author of our Being: And it is all but time lost, that we employ any other way.
And yet, Alas! How small a part of our Thoughts and Actions do we bestow upon
that God unto whom the whole ought to be directed! A Christian should do in his
life, as a Traveller does upon the way: He propounds to go to such a place, to
take up his rest when he comes there, and so makes every step he sets an
advance toward it. The only Resting Place we can promise to our selves, is
Heaven, and we are to bend all our motions and studies that way. Whatsoever
withdraws us from it, misleads us to our eternal Destruction.

III. We ought to behave our selves in this life, as in a Sea-voyage, when the
Ship stops for fresh Water, a man goes ashore, and entertains himself with
shells and trifles by the by, but his mind is still at Sea, and so soon as ever
the Master calls, away he goes, leaves all, and returns to the Vessel. So in
the use and enjoyment of external things, (which are but as shells and trifles)
we are still to hearken after the call of our Master, and never to be so intent
upon this world, as to forget the business of the next. Outward things serve
us, to the end that we may serve God; without which we f^ll from the Divine
Unity, and by giving up our selves to many unnecessary things, we set up as
many Idols, as there are Creatures which we love with an inordinate Affection,
unto which, by a foul Sacrilege we offer up (not an Ox or a Goat, but) our
selves and our Salvation. God will have no sharers, and it is against the Law
of Love, to love any thing with him, but in him, and for him. It is no less
than Damnation, to leave the Creator, and adhere to the Creature.

IV. We may say of Minds, as the Prince of Physicians says of impure Bodies:
The more meat you give them, the more hurt you do them. For in passing from an
ill habit to a better, the Poison of a wicked life must be first vomited up, to
prepare the Mind for receiving the more effectual Aliments of Virtue, which
Purgation is to be wrought after this manner: There must be a kind of Expiation
of sins committed; all Affections toward them withdrawn, all evil Customs
rooted out, all vicious Inclinations, and unruly Appetites are to be subjected
to the Government of Reason: The Flesh is to be kept under; the Necessities of
Nature are to be provided for with Moderation; the Tongue and the Senses are to
be bridled; and whatsoever may give a check or Interruption to the speedy
gaining of Virtue, is to be utterly exterminated. And why should not all this
be done? Where Is the difficulty we fancy? what are we afraid of? A thing that
we have in our own power: (He assisting us indeed, who is all in all, and our
beginning and end) But we must first go out from our selves, before we can come
at him, and the further we remove from the one, the nearer will our approach be
to the other.

V. In the first place, we are to resolve within our selves, whither we are to
go, and what it is we would have. The next Point will be, to learn out the way;
and then to take notice from time to time how we proceed, and what progress we
make in our passage. In order to this, we are impartially to examine our
Consciences, and observe the difference betwixt what we are, and what we ought
to be. It will be too late to consider, when we are in the Snare. We are to
study how to Tame our raging Lusts; how to curb our tormenting Fears: We are to
enure our selves to the contempt of earthly things, by leaving them, before
they leave us, and to part willingly with what we cannot long possess, to the
end, that when our last hour comes, there may be the less matter even for Death
it self to work upon. But whatever else we do, let us be sure to look to the
man; and see that the Soul, which is first in Excellence, be not last in our
Care and esteem. What will it profit a man to gain the whole world, and lose
his own Soul? There can be no gain, where there is loss of Salvation.

CHAP. II.
He that would live well, let him choose a good Tutor. The Qualities of such a
Tutor, and the Duties of the Pupil.

I. AS the Service of God is the chief End of the very Being of Man; so is
there not any thing more necessary for him that would make his Duty his
Business, than to apply himself to the Counsel and Government of a Prudent
Master. Does any man venture to travel in an unknown way without a Guide? Or so
much as to take up a difficult Trade without an Instructor? There may be indeed
some General Rules set down in writing for the benefit of the Absent, or of
Posterity; but in the Particulars of When and How, there is no advising at a
distance; nor without taking in all the Circumstances, and deliberating with
the things themselves. It is in the Diseases of the Mind, as in those of the
Body: A Physician can never prescribe so properly to his Patient, What Diet,
what Physic, by Letter, as by word of mouth, upon feeling of the Pulse, and
enquiring into the state and accidents of his Distemper. And this holds as well
in the Maladies of the Soul. Some there are, which are not to be redressed, nor
in truth discovered, but upon a Personal Conference and Observation. St. Paul
himself (the designed Doctor of the Gentiles) was sent to Ananias, after his
Conversion, that he might learn from him the way of Life. He that undertakes
upon his own single strength, to overcome the Perverseness of corrupt Nature,
to wrestle with spiritual Impieties, and to break through all Obstacles and
Impediments, to make his way to Virtue, will find it a hard and a laborious
Task. It will concern us therefore, to call in some charitable Assistant to our
Aid, that may lay open to us the Dangers we are to encounter, the Frauds and
Stratagems of the Enemy, and teach us how to win the Field in the Day of
Battle. If you ask, What kind of Man must this be? Let him be a Person of
Wisdom and Fidelity: One that has both a Will and a Power to do us good: One
for whom we have a Reverence without Dread: One that seeks rather our Amendment
than our Punishment, and that lives better than he speaks. He that preaches one
thing, and does another, is not worthy of this Trust.

II. He must be no Flatterer neither; no Cajoler of the People, on the one
hand, nor a Frequenter of Great Men's Tables, or the Courts of Princes on the
other. I would have him as well skilled in Manners, as the Goldsmith is in
Moneys; show him any Coin, any Affection, he shall tell you what it is; or like
an experienced Physician, presently make a Judgment of the Disease, and
prescribe you the Remedy. Such a one he must be, as is able to dive into the
Secrets and Recesses of the Inward Man, and to suit himself to the Humors and
Dispositions of those he has to do withal, in order to their spiritual
advantage. One that is not transported by his Passions, but teaches and invites
Offenders in the Spirit of Meekness: One that has learned how to detect, and
disappoint all the Artifices and Crafts of the Devil: One to whom a man may
securely commit the most recondite Privacies of his Soul, and Confess himself
without a blush: One in fine, that can distinguish betwixt good and evil. And
happy is he that finds such a Treasure.

III. With such a Friend we are to communicate in all Conditions, and upon all
Occasions, without any Scruple or Reserve, and to take his Opinion along with
us, in all cases, whether good or evil. Now we are to conjure him to tell us
freely of our faults, wherein we do amiss, without any sort of Difficulty. And
when he spares us, as if we had none, we are not presently to take for granted,
that we are innocent: But rather to impute his silence, either to his lothness
to disoblige us, or to his despair of reforming us. And we are then to press
him with more earnestness, and to show him by our actions, the desire we have
to profit by his Reproofs, and to square our Lives for the future, according to
his Direction. It will be a good sign, if we love him the better for his
Reprehensions, and take delight in them: When we are come to that pass once, we
shall still part with him, either better than he found us, or in a fair way to
it. In the Distempers of the Mind, ^t goes far, if one has but a good will to
be cured.

IV. These are the mutual Offices of the Master, and of the Scholar; that the
one be well disposed to confer a benefit, and the other to receive it: And
truly the former can hardly fail, without the extreme Obstinacy, Impatience, or
Incapacity of the latter. There are some people so over-conceited of their own
Abilities, that they will never endure to be advised by any body else. All this
(they cry) is no m^re than what I could have told you: To what purpose do you
trouble me with what I knew before? But I say on the other side, that it is to
very great purpose. There are many things we know, which we do not at all times
so well heed and consider; and in such cases, the Admonition is not so much
intended to inform the Understanding, as to quicken the Memory; and rather to
do the Office of a Remembrancer, than of a Tutor. In other cases, there is
nothing so evident, but men will pretend Ignorance: So that the Suggestion of
Matters (even the most Manifest) must not be omitted, sor Virtue does then more
vigorously exert her self, when she is touched and provoked. Some people there
are that have not the Face to acknowledge an Error; (a most ridiculous and
unmanly sort of Modesty!) Others have not the Heart to do it, but fret
inwardly, and smoother all in a stomachful silence, falling soul, like Bedlams,
upon the Physician that would cure them. This mischievous Secrecy and Reserve,
proceeds undoubtedly from the Temptation of the Devil, who needs never despair
of gaining his end, so long as he can keep himself close and undiscovered, Our
Ulcerated Bodies, let them be never so offensive and loathsome, we can expose to
the Surgeon or Physician, in hope of Remedy, even without a blush: But what
a stir we make, to hide the blemishes and infirmities of our Souls, as if to
conceal them, were really to take them away? when yet we are not able to hinder
them, even from betraying themselves. He that will not own himself to be
wounded, shall never be cured.

V. Let a Physician tell us: You have such or such a Disease, you are
dangerously ill. Have a Care, you neither eat nor drink any thing to day, but
this or that: So far are we from taking this Liberty amiss, that on the
contrary, we reckon it for a favor, and give him thanks and money for his
pains. But let any man tell us, that we are sick of Burning Lusts, Vain
Opinions, Inordinate Affections, it puts us into a Rage, as if it were an
Affront to be revenged with Fire and Sword. Never such a Dishonor! To tell me
that I am Proud, Lustful, Covetous, etc. An Indignity not to be born by Flesh
and Blood! And where lies the Injury now? Wretched Creatures that we are! Why
may we not as well quarrel with a Glass, that shows us an Ill Face, as with a
Friend that shows us a Vicious Mind? It should be our Business to correct what
is amiss, to amend our Lives, and cleanse our Hearts from all Corruption; and
so to live, that the World shall not condemn us.

CHAP. III.
Of Purgation from Sin. The very Disposition to Sin, as well as the Sin it self
is to be rooted out. No Remedy more effectual against it, than the
Consideration of Death and Eternity.

I. SIN is the cause of all Evils, and he that commits it, is out of his way to
his last End. It is the Seed of all our Miseries, and the Poison of Humane
Nature. The Malignity of it is better understood after the doing of it, than in
the Act it self. The Binding of the Living together with the Dead, to destroy
the one with the Stench of the other, is not much unlike the Punishment which
Divine Justice has allotted to heinous Sinners. They are tied up to their
Plague, and there is no escaping. A bad Action is no sooner conceived, than it
brings forth its own Torment: So that he that will not endure something, that
he may not do evil, must endure a great deal because he has done it. This it
is, that brought Death into the World, and kindled Hellfire. We are therefore
to cleanse our Consciences by Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction: Neither
are we to shun the more grievous sins only, but even those too, which we esteem
as the least and slightest; which though they do not hurry us immediately to
destruction, they do yet, insensibly dissolve our strength, weaken us, and
bring us to ruin in the end. And if the Vessel miscarry, what matters it,
whether it be swallowed up at once, or by taking in water drop after drop,
which being neglected, carries it to the bottom at last. The easier the
prevention, the more shameful is the disaster; and the weaker the adversary,
the greater is the dishonor of being overcome.

II. We must never expect to graft Virtue in the mind, till we have given over
Hankering after even the smallest Vices. It signifies nothing, to have the Body
in the Wilderness, and the Mind in Egypt. It is not enough to forgive injuries,
and to relinquish our more notorious and beastly lusts, if we still take
pleasure in lewd communication, and the vanities of this World. Ill habits must
be torn up by the Roots, that they may never shoot again: It is not the bare
lopping of the Branches that will serve the turn. In some religious fits, we
are apt to say (yes, and perchance to think so too) that we are now absolutely
resolved upon a new life, and to quit the World with all the Corruptions and
Vanities that attend it. Why do we not bolt the door then against them, but
only put it to? Oh how we are troubled to think of the course we have led! And
who is not? I beseech you, Is there any man so wicked as not to disallow
himself in his most beloved sins, even in the very act of committing them? But
what avails it to renounce them in discourse, and yet to embrace them in
practice? No man has a Conscience so seared, as not at some time or other to
reflect upon his wickedness with detestation: But then they are soon friends
again; whereas, he that is truly converted, lays the Ax to the root, and leaves
not the least string behind him. He grows so jealous of his frailty, and so
suspicious of himself, that he starts at the least occasion, at the very shadow
of evil.

III. Why do we so ridiculously cavil then, and urge the frailty of Humane
Nature, in Plea against the Commands of the Almighty? Does not he that made us
what we are, and gave us what we have, know best what we are able to do. Blind
and impious Temerity! That Dust and Ashes should presume to expostulate with
the most high God! As if he imposed more upon us, than we are able to perform;
and designed rather our Misery than our Salvation. By this perverseness, of
pretending difficulties where there are none, we provoke the displeasure of the
Lord against us; who has enabled us to do much more than we imagine; as would
appear, if we did put the strength he has given us to the Experiment. Our Task
is not hard in it self, but our Fears and Apprehensions make it seem so. How
many acccidents and encounters, that were terrible to us at first, has custom
made familiar and easy! Wherefore, let us not undervalue our selves, God will
not desert his Soldiers, but give them (even for the asking) ability
sufficient for any warrantable undertaking.

IV. The readiest way to master our Corruptions, is to propound to our selves,
that every day is to be our last; for there is nothing that so much engages our
Affections to this World, as the want of consideration, how soon we are to
leave it. Can any man be so forgetful, as to behold the daily Funerals that
pass before his eyes, without thinking of his end! And yet even among the dead
themselves, we think of nothing less, than we do of Death. There is not any
thing so frequently seen, and so soon forgotten. But the time is coming that
shall deliver us from the beastly fellowship of the Flesh; dispel this Cloud of
Ignorance, and enlighten our darkness. Let the oldest man alive look back into
the time past, and (if he can) pick but any one day out of his whole life, that
was not tainted with some blemish or defect. Our Childhood we have consumed in
hobby-horses and bawbles; our Youth in levities and lusts; our Manhood in
crimes of a deeper dye; and when we have put all together; from our Cradle, to
our gray hairs, there remains nothing to us but anxiety of thought, and the sad
fruit of our iniquity. Alas! how miserable is that man, that cannot look
backward, but with shame; nor forward without terror. Let him go to his Bags
and his Coffers, that have cost him so much sweat, and trouble: What comfort
will they speak to him in his extremity? or what will all his sensual
Pleasures, his vain and empty Titles, Robes, Dignities and Crowns avail him in
the day of his distress? what would a man give when that dismal day comes, that
he might begin the World again, to lead a new life? but wishes are then too
late. We are to make use of time while we have it; and to forbear doing those
things now, which we shall wish undone hereafter; It is no great matter to deny
our Appetites for a moment, that we may be happy for ever.

V. If a man upon his Deathbed were asked his opinion of his past Life, and
what he thought of Riches, Dignities, and Worldly Delights; you should hear him
tell you quite another tale, than he did in his health; for at that hour men
consider what they say, and speak what they think. Now although this Wisdom
comes with the latest, for him that is upon his exit: It may yet be of great
benefit to us, if we will but learn from other peoples miscarriages, to
correct, or to prevent our own. Who but a mad man, when he may put to Sea in
fair weather, will linger for a storm? or defer all care of himself, till the
last extremity, when he may save all at present, without any hazard? Caution
comes too late when a man is under water, and so does Prudence too, in the
Grave. Those great and holy men that have utterly renounced this World, and all
that is in it, for the love of a better, have made it the study of their whole
lives, to understand how to live, and how to die: And so hard a Lesson have
they found it unto flesh and blood, that many of them, at their last breath,
have not stuck to confess their ignorance. But we (forsooth) account it time
enough in all conscience, to betake our selves to that which is good, when, in
truth, we are fit for nothing at all; and to begin our lives, at an age, to
which few people have prolonged theirs: A prodigious folly, certainly, for a
man to begin at the wrong end!

VI. Monstrous heedlesness! to believe all this, and yet to live on, as we do:
What is Time, but the passing of a shadow? Life, but a point? or less, if
possible. How small a distance is there betwixt the Cradle and the Tomb! Try if
you can make the Sun stand still but one day, one hour, one moment. No, no, it
will not be; Time is inexorable, and will hold on its course till it has
brought all created Nature to destruction. And yet so besotted a Blindness
possesses us, that we prefer this wretched instant, before a glorious Eternity.
In the case of our frail and perishable bodies we lay out for necessaries, and
provisions, and spare for no pains to procure them: But in that of our immortal
Souls, we behave our selves, as if they were none of our concern. Let the Body
be out of order, and there is nothing so troublesome, but we can readily
undergo to remove it; but in the distempers of the Soul, we are not only
neglectful, but insensible. When was it ever said to us, Save your selves by
Sea, or you are lost, and we protracted it? Take off this Potion; it is bitter,
but it is wholesome, and we refused it? It is less than this, that God prescribes
to us, for our eternal good, and we give no heed to it. If we happen to have a
Law Suit, what a bustle we make with our Solicitors, and Breviates, feeing of
Council, and tampering with Judges, to carry on the Cause? But in the great
trial of our Souls at the day of Judgment (which is at hand) and where Heaven
or Hell is the question: There is no care taken, but we live on laughing and
fooling, till we lose our selves beyond all Redemption, for want of
Preparation. Let us therefore betake our selves to our wits, and put our
affairs in order, as if we were every moment to be called to a reckoning. This
is true Philosophy, to separate Soul and Body by wisdom, before they come to be
parted by necessity.

VII. The thing we are principally to intend, (whether busy or idle, in labor
or at rest) is this; to deliver our selves out of the power of Time and
Casualties, by the anticipation of Eternity; which places us in a state of
Tranquillity, that is steady and invariable. The Glutton in the Gospel is still
begging the relief but of one drop of water to cool his Tongue, and condemned
so to beg it to perpetuity, without obtaining it. Eternity is an everlasting
instant, not to be thought upon, or mentioned, without horror: It is a restless
Wheel, it is a continued, and endless, and a still commencing beginning, The
serious thought of it is as Wormwood in our cups of pleasure. It strikes us
with astonishment and sadness; it tames our rebellious spirits, and raises up
the slothful Voluptuary to the love of Virtue; it facilitates all difficulties,
sweetens all our afflictions, and makes our misfortunes seem not only short,
but easy. It is not in the power of man to express or conceive this boundless
Eternity. Were the whole Universe filled with numeral Figures, and as many
Years (nay Ages) taken from Eternity, as there would be found Unites in the
whole sum, Eternity would be still the same, without any diminution. He that
considers the pains of Hell (as they are) to be ever beginning, and yet never
at an end, must have a heart of Flint, not to trouble and repent at the thought
of it.

CHAP. IV.
Of Gluttony, the Evils of it, and the Remedies: And to know when we have
subdued it.

I. THE first Vice we are properly to encounter, is Gluttony. This is the Sin
that brought Death into the World, and ministers matter in a great measure to
the rest. It was the Eating of the Forbidden Fruit, that ruined the whole Race
of Mankind, even before they had a Being: And it is still the weak side where
the Devil lays his most dangerous temptations. From hence proceeds dullness of
spirit, sloth, weariness of every thing, scurrility, babbling, debauchery,
heaviness of mind, and the dissolution of all Virtues, prodigality, beggary, a
long train of Diseases, and Death it self in the conclusion: This is it that
swells our Bills of Mortality; for vicious humors contracted from excess in
meats and drinks, are the food of almost all Diseases. Other accidents may
attempt, and threaten us, but this cuts us off. Gluttony kills more than the
Sword.

II. Oh the infamy of being a slave to a man's Belly! a wretched carcass, with
an insatiable appetite! Our bodies are none of the largest; and yet in
greediness, the vastest, and the most voracious of living Creatures come not
near us, One Wood (we see) maintains a great many Elephants; and a Pasture of a
few Acres, a great many Bulls: But for us, one World is hardly sufficient. The
Air, the Seas, and the Forests must be all rifled, to please our Palates. He
that looks into the Offices of a luxurious Palace, and sees the Troops of
Servants sweating, and hurrying up and down; the massacre of Beasts, Flesh and
Fowl; and every thing a float in the richest Wine; some to order the Plate, and
cover the Table, others to serve up the Meat, so many to marshal the Dishes,
others again to carve, and every man ready at his part: He that sees, I say,
the magnificence, and variety of these Entertainments, cannot but wonder at so
horrible a profusion for the Guts of one Family. Not that I would advise any
man to starve himself; for the Belly is importunate, and must have daily food,
But here lies the snare, we do the business of Pleasure, under the pretense of
Necessity. If we would inform our selves how small a matter satisfies Hunger,
let us consider what we are capable of, and what we have need of; we shall then
understand, that no man is driven upon excess, by necessity. Nature contents
her self with a little, but the cravings of Luxury are boundless.

III. Hunger takes no pleasure at all in complement, or ostentation; let it be
satisfied, and no matter with what: So soon as the Relish is off from the
Palate, the precious and the common are both alike. Let but him eat, that is
hungry, and drink, that is a thirst; whether his Bread be white or brown; or
his Drink plain water out of the next Brook, or the choicest Wine refreshed
with Snow, it is all one to Nature: Stay but the stomach, and quench the
thirst, she looks for no more. All the quarters of the World must be hunted for
Fish and Flesh, several sorts of Wines for the Gusto, and provoking sawces, to
gratify our fantastical Appetites: And what are all these farfetch'd
Curiosities and Delicates in the end; but the Torments of a miserable Surfeit!
Epicurus recommends Temperance to us, if it were for nothing else but the very
pleasure of it. There Is a great deal of difference, betwixt the plainest meat
in the World to a good stomach, and the most delicious to one that is
crop-sick. He that would discharge himself of all superfluous care for the
Belly, let him but consider the end of all, and that he is only preparing a
Treat for the Worms: This methinks should make a man so order his Body, as
that his Mind may be never the worse for it. That Is the best Diet undoubtedly,
which is every where to be had, and without trouble, and neither burdensome to
a man's Purse, nor to his Body. He is a great master of himself, that commands
his Belly. The Body requires Nourishment, not Dainties; and we have been
convinced of the superfluity of many things, by the want of them.

IV. But it is no such mighty business neither, to contemn Superfluities; give
me the man that can cheerfully dispense even with Necessities, that can content
himself with Bread and Water, and with the Herbs of the Field, as well for Man's
meat as for Beasts; that eats only to sustain and strengthen nature, and to
glorify God; that takes his meat as a sick man does his Physic, merely for
healths sake, without any regard to the taste; that declines voluptuous Treats
and Entertainments; and (at least) moderates himself in the Pleasures of the
Palate, since he cannot totally extinguish them; and preserves himself in
purity both of Body and Spirit. The perfection of Chastity is a better proof of
Abstinence, than the bare taking down of the Body.

CHAP. V.
Of Luxury: The foulness of it: How apt we are to Relapse into it: How to avoid
it.

I. LUxury is a Brutal vice: and that, which of all others, puts a man the most
out of countenance? Nor is it so shameful only in the practice, but the Apostle
forbids us the very naming of what concerns it. The foulness of it may appear
in this: That a man (if he has but the least spark of modesty or good nature in
him) cannot forbear Blushing at the very thoughts of any Uncleanness committed,
if he does but imagine that any body else knows of it. Nay, there are many
people fo tender and scrupulous in this point, that they will run any hazard,
rather than trust their very Confessors with so scandalous a secret. He that
falls into this bog, very rarely gets out again; and there is little hope of him
that is infected with this Disease: For alas! what can man do in the case of
Continence, which is the only Gift of God?

II. The first Remedy must be fervent Prayer to the Almighty, for Grace and
Strength: And we are next, to resist the very first motions to Impurity, and to
shake them off, as we would do a burning coal from our Garments. If we come but
once to deliberate, we are lost If we parley, we are upon the point of yielding.
We must have a care of Idleness, High-feeding, Lascivious Objects, loose and
wanton Company. Nothing (in short) is to be omitted in this difficulty. Nay the
very best of men are not without their infirmities; certain latent
dispositions, which though we cannot properly call sins, we find many times to
prove the preludes to Wickedness, and if they gain but never so little upon us,
it will be hard quitting them. He that will be great, must not despise little
things. The least spark is enough to fire the largest City.

III. Let every man have a care of too much confidence in himself. He that goes
on, without doubting, is fallen already. How many Instances have we of brave
and eminent men, that after solemn Confessions, Victories and Exploits, even to
admiration, have yet been surprised, and lost at the sight of a Woman! I do not
speak of Sampson, David and Solomon, those ancient and famous examples of
Humane frailty, but others of fresher date, and which we see daily before our
eyes. And if there were nothing else but a man's own weakness, methinks he
should be so conscious of it, as to be humbled, and suspect himself. What
greater madness, than after so many experiments of the errors of all Ages and
Nations, still to expose our selves to be worsted, in confidence of our own
strength! But this is the fate of our incredulous and stubborn Nature, to give
no heed or credit to the Falls of others, till we are in the Pit our selves.
God made Woman for a helper to Man, but by the subtilty of the Serpent, she was
wrought upon to be his destroyer: She wounds, burns, and consumes him. There is
no Hyaena, no Basilisk, to what she carries in her Voice and Eyes: Have a care
of her Charms, as you love your Soul. The whole Sex follows the old trade of
driving man out of Paradise.

IV. It is an ordinary thing, I know to excuse our selves, by saying, We cannot
avoid it; she is of our Acquaintance, we mean no hurt in it. But under these
plausible pretenses, there lies more mischief than we are aware of: For we fall
by degrees into dangerous Liberties, unwary Discourses, loose Behavior, Wanton
Meriments, enterchanging of Presents, etc. till in the end, by little and
little, we come, from the neglect of Modesty, to just none at all. This License
grows upon us by degrees, and he that blushes and trembles at the very
appearance of a Woman to day, shall look Babies in her Eyes to morrow; play
with her naked Breasts, and feel the Poison at his Heart, before he is sensible
of the danger. Thus by degrees, from dim-sighted, our Reason comes to be stark
blind, and the divine Soul lies grovelling upon the ground, without any
consideration, either of Heaven or of it self, till the fire of our Lusts shall
be swallowed up in that of Hell itself. The sad and miserable end of a beastly
and momentary pleasure: As if we were all drunk with the juice of that Herb
which is said to make people die laughing.

V. Fools that we are! what would we be at? that have neither Wit enough to
advise our selves, or to take counsel of others. Is it Pleasure we seek? God
has provided Pleasures eternal for us in Heaven. Those of the World are
deceitful, transitory and uncertain; shall we lay hold of these then, and quit
our title to those of the next? Where Is our Reason? What is become of our
Understanding? If we look upward toward those that are gone to Heaven before
us; we shall find them such, as here upon earth, mingled their bread with
ashes, and their drink with their tears; beset on every side with persecution
and contempt; holding no intelligence at all with worldly comforts; and making
prayers and tears their daily exercise. Their way to Heaven lay through
Torments and Crosses. But on the other hand, if we look downward into Hell,
among the Troops of the damned, we shall there see (which they feel too late)
the end and the reward of trusting to the false joys of this World, the
delights of the Flesh, and carnal Pleasures. We should do well to meditate upon
this, if we believe it.

VI. But if Pleasure in this World be the thing we covet, why do we not then
give it our selves in the blessing of a well-composed and virtuous Mind? And
that is a Pleasure substantial, sincere, unchangeable, and untainted: whereas
the enjoyments of the Flesh are weak, short-lived, only varnished over,
bedawbed wi^h Wine, and Perfumes, both afraid and ashamed of the Light: lying
most in Bawdy-houses, and Taverns, and such other places as commonly find work
for the Constable. If they are glorious without, they are yet most wretchedly
sordid within: They begin and end almost in the same moment, they perish even
in the very enjoyment. But the Pleasure of the Mind is gentle, noble,
invincible, steady and secure; and attended neither with Satiety, nor
Repentance. It is neither accompanied with shame, nor followed with remorse or
sadness; nor does it ever desert him that professes it. The way to this
Pleasure is to renounce all other; for to contemn Pleasure is the greatest
Pleasure.

CHAP. VI.
Of Avarice; the Wickedness of it. The Poor and the Rich compared. The Deceit
and the Vanity of Riches.

I. IT is the great cheat of Avarice, that it disclaims it self: For there is
not any man will confess himself to be covetous. I have a Family to provide
for, says one: I would fain do some good among my poor Neighbors, cries
another: A third is for building of Almshouses and Hospitals. And these are
our pretenses for hoarding up Riches; and when we have gotten them, we go on to
get more, and spend our lives in the bare acquisition of what was at first
pretended for our comfort or support, but part with nothing. What is a thirsty
man the better for the sight of a pleasant Brook, or dabbling in it perchance
with his finger, unless he take some of it into his stomach to relieve his
drought? Just this is the case of an avaricious man with his money; he sees it,
and handles it, but his mind is no vessel to receive it, and so never the
better for it. God made the Soul only for himself, and it is he alone that can
fill it.

II. Give the covetous man the Treasure of the whole earth; let him not only
possess, but trample upon all that is rich and precious, all that is curious
and costly in the Universe. Alas! the having of all this will but serve him for
an Incentive to desire more. Nature is bounded, but Imagination is infinite. It
is not a pin matter, what Money in the Coffer, or what Corn in the Barn, to him
that is only intent upon what he has not, without computing what ^lready he
has. The World it self is too little for him, whom the whole World cannot
satisfy. If we did but consider the mischiefs that accompany great Fortunes,
and the Benefits they deprive us of, we should soon find, with the blessed
Apostle, that Covetousness is the root of all evil. Thence come Frauds, Wars,
Perjuries, Treason, Discord, Ambition, Robberies, Piracies, public Tumults,
domestic Treacheries, Corruptions in the Seat of Judgment.

III. Look but the poor and the rich man in the face, and compare their
Countenances, and you shall see that the one, in the sowreness of his looks,
betrays the anxiety and solicitude of his thoughts: The others Brow is clear
and open, in testimony of an honest and cheerful mind. The rich man's happiness
is but from the teeth outward, a counterfeit satisfaction, with a Worm in his
heart; when the poor man, without any mixture of trouble, enjoys a continual
repose. The one betwixt the desire of getting, and the fear of losing, lies
exposed to all the assaults of Fortune; (for the more he has, the more he
covets.) The other is rich even in his poverty. His wishes are squared to his
necessities: He fears nothing, for he has nothing to lose that he cares for.
He spends the day merrily, and sleeps soundly at night: Whereas the other, on
the contrary, is never at ease, and the less sense he has of his condition, the
greater is his danger.

IV. A word now to the insatiable Miser, with all his Hoards, brave Houses and
Possessions: The time will come, (the time appointed from Eternity) when he
must part with all his splendid Acquisitions, Life and all; when all those
things must perish too, for which he himself is likewise to perish. He will
then see the error of admiring what he should have despised, and of setting a
value, so childishly, upon Trifles: Childishly, I say, saving only that
Children play the fool upon cheaper terms. Their dotage is employed upon some
pretty Shells, perchance, or Pibbles, that they find by the Seaside; ours upon
Gold and Precious Stones. I do not say, that where Providence has given a man
a plentiful Fortune, the Owner of it should not make use of it: But I would
have it honestly gotten; not by Fraud, Extortion, or Injustice, nor with more
carking and caring than the thing is worth: We may take Money into our Coffers,
but not into our Hearts, to the end that we may cheerfully resign our selves to
the Will of God, either to want, or to abound. No man so rich as he that needs
not riches. We are not to wait for the loss of all by Thieves, perhaps, or
Casualties; but to strip our selves by Anticipation; which is done, if we do
but take away from our selves, by an indifference, whatsoever we might
otherwise lose by violence. No man is master of himself, so long as he is a
slave to any thing else.

V. As to matter of State and Ceremony, we are to lay it utterly aside, and to
conform in our Clothes and Diet, not so much to example, as to Christian
Moderation and Virtue. Poverty it self, with good Husbandry, may be emproved
into Plenty. Let us but keep our selves from Thirst, Hunger and Cold, Nature
asks no more. A may keep a man as warm as a Palace; and there is no absolute
necessity of covering our Bodies with Silk. Is there no quenching of our
Thirst, but in Crystal? no cutting of our Bread, unless the Knife has an Agat
Handle? We may wash as clean in an Earthen Vessel as in a Silver and see as
well by a Candle in a Pewter-socket, as in a Plate. He that values himself for
his Gold, is inconsiderable without it: How much better were it for us, to set
our hearts upon those Riches* which neither Fortune nor Death it self can ever
take from us? Why should any man fear Poverty, that has the Treasure of a
Kingdom within himself? There is the Kingdom of Heaven, in a good Conscience.
He that seeks his own good, let him seek God alone, who is the only Good, the
only Possession, and the only Treasure. The World is of no value to him that
dedicates himself wholly to God.

VI. Oh the emptiness and Imposture, of all that we account delicate and
glorious in this World! To see a man wrapped up in Gold, and Embroidery, with a
long Retinue at his heels, and in a splendid equipage; how wonderfully are we
taken with the Spectacle? And yet alas? All this is but a mere pomp, and
oftentation of vanities, that leave us in the very moment that they please us:
And it is not from the Schools of the Philosophers, nor from the Cross of
Christ, nor from the eternal Wisdom alone, that I draw this Observation; but
from the World it self, and those that have most courted and adored it. What
satisfaction had Haman in all his Wealth, Power and Dignity? No, no, says he
(in a full Audience) I reckon all this as nothing, so long as I see Mordechai
sitting at the Kings Gate. What a Mockery, what a Blindness is this! I have
often read and heard indeed, that the Pleasures of the Flesh and of this World
are as nothing, compared with those of Virtue and Eternity; but to pronounce
them to be as nothing, in respect even of nothing it self, this goes a great
deal further: So that in effect, in the contempt of nothing, we do nothing. But
that we may not want matter to work upon, let us contemn and repress our Lusts,
that we may be better acquainted with Poverty, and learn to measure the true
value of things by the use of them. Now the way to bring our selves with ease
to a contempt of the World, is to think daily of leaving it.

CHAP. VII.
Of Anger: The Character of an angry Man: The Effects, Causes, and Remedies of
it.

I. TO be angry at Anger, is almost the only justifiable exercise of that
Passion: For it is against a most execrable and outrageous Monster; an
Affection so unquiet and turbulent, that if it once seises us, it unmans us. It
is, in one word, a short Madness, that carries a man headlong to Blood and
Revenge, without any regard to Friends, good Manners, or indeed to his own
Security; for, to take away another man's life, he will run any hazard of his own,
and (as in the fall of a House) dash himself to pieces upon the ruins of what
he carries down before him. Neither is it a brutal only, but a most ungraceful
Passion. The Eyes burn and sparkle, the Veins swell, the Hair stands on end,
the Teeth grating, the Mouth all in a some, the Voice shrill and piercing, the
Countenance fierce and terrible, the Brow frowning, the Head joggling and
nodding, and the whole Body in a continual and most uncomely Agitation: To say
nothing of the menacing Actions and Gestures, clutching and striking of the
hands, beating the Breast, stamping and tearing the Hair, rending the Clothes,
and all the Blood in the Body boiling in the Face. How abominable must this be
in the Mind, that shows it self so detestable in the Countenance? The Poets
draw the Furies with Firebrarnds and Snakes, howling and yelling, with hideous
outcries, which might serve for no ill Picture of a Man in choler; if I may
call him a Man, who by his beastual-cruelty, and salvage-fierceness, seems to
have cast off all the Advantages and Affections of Humanity. One may keep other
Vices private, but this breaks out at the Eyes, and discovers it self in the
Air of the Face: Like fire, it devours all before it, and the more we strive to
suppress it, the more furiously it burns. An angry man is utterly incapable
either of Moderation or Reproof.

II. As for other Vices, they are confined, we see, to certain Bounds and
Limits; but Anger flies at all, and there is not any thing that scapes it, be
it never so sacred. Do we not invade Heaven it self, both with open
Blasphemies, and secret Murmurings, against the Power, Goodness, and Providence
of the Almighty? And our Anger extends it self not only to those that we think
have done us an Injury, but to those too, that possibly may hereafter do us
one: So ingeniously do we improve our vain Imaginations, that we fall upon any
man that has the power to disoblige us, as if he had done it already. Nay, we
are many times in a Rage, we know not at whom, or for what, but yet we bluster
and fret; and for want of other matter to work upon, we fall upon our selves.
Nor is it the Injury only that moves us; for we do frequently wreak our spite
upon things inanimate, that cannot (properly either disoblige or affront us.
As, for a Man to cut his Cloak to pieces, throw Dishes and Candlesticks about
the House, split Pens in a Rage, and tear Paper, because things will not go as
he would have them: What can be more ridiculous? The breaking of a Glass is
enough to put many a man out of his Senses; The mislaying of a Napkin, the
Screek of a Table drawn upon the Floor, and a thousand other things, which do
neither deserve our Anger, nor feel it. A Resty Jade, a Barking Cur, the
Buzzing of a Fly in our Ears, the Stinging of a Gnat: These forsooth, are
Provocations to transport us beyond all Patience, and Death without Mercy, to
the poor Animal that offends us. How great a Madness is it, to punish Brutes
and things insensible, for the Transgressions of Reasonable Creatures!

III. If we proceed now to take a view of Anger in the Effects, we shall find
it the greatest Plague that ever infested Humane Nature: How many Murders,
Towns laid waste, whole Nations utterly depopulated, Heaps of slaughtered
Bodies, (as if the Sword vy'd with the Pestilence) and the Rivers running
Blood. Look upon the Ruins of the Noblest Cities of the World, unpeopled
Deserts, Conflagrations, poisoned Fountains, extinguished Families. Consider
all this, and you have here before your eyes; the Fruits and Works of Anger, I
should think, that we are no longer a Society of Men, but a Multitude of
Beasts, were it not that I find Beasts of the same kind to agree among
themselves, whereas Men are still worrying of one another. Now there there is
this further Mischief in Anger; It defaces the Image of God in us, whose Works
are altogether peaceable and calm. It casts a Mist before our eyes, so that we
are not able to discern the Truth our selves; and it makes us stubborn and
uncounselable toward others. It disturbs and distracts all the Faculties of
the Soul, and let the Disease be never so foul, the Reputation it has gotten
with the People, keeps it yet in countenance; for with the Rabble, Anger passes
for the Mark of a Man of Honor. But let us rather consider now, what Remedy in
the Case; and if we cannot utterly take it away, how we may bring it at least,
to some sort of Reason and Moderation.

IV. The best way will be to begin with the Contempt or Neglect of the first
Motive to it; for if we once lose ground, it will be hard recovering it: We are
at the mercy of That, and not That at Ours; when the Enemy is within the Gate,
he will hardly take Conditions of his Prisoner. It is a much easier matter to keep
him out, than to Govern him when he is entered. In the upper Regions of the Air,
we find neither Clouds nor Tempests, but altogether Serenity and Quiet; the
Thunder is below. So is it with a great and generous Mind; It stifles the very
first Motions to Displeasure; It gives not way so much as to a licentious word,
but stands firm in a Station of Tranquillity and Composure; very well
understanding, that by Transports of Anger, Evils are not removed, but made
worse. It is with Choleric men, as with Birds that are lim'd, the more they
flutter, the faster they are, and the more they struggle, the more entangled.
The Anger does us more hurt than the Injury. He that is angry upon the
Apprehension that another man contemns him, does his Adversary too much Honor,
if he values it; and thinks too meanly of himself, if he revenges it. Revenge
is a Confession of Trouble, and it is the part of a narrow Soul, to meditate a
serious Revenge for an Imaginary Mischief.

V. In the Case of lying under a Slander, the question is not, What becomes
another man to say or do; but what we are to say or do our selves. Because
another man is waspish and perverse: Am I to break my peace for it, and to be
froward too, my self? We are to imitate our Maker. How many impious Wretches
does God suffer to enjoy the common Benefits of Nature? And yet among Mortals,
one wicked man will not be persuaded to endure another. Let us apply our selves
to mend all at home; which we may do, without concerning our selves so much for
the Reforming of others, which we cannot do. Are we not Sinners? How little
then is that we suffer, in comparison of the Hell which we have deserved? Are
our Ears so delicate, that we cannot bear a Reproach? The Fault (and the Shame
too) is his that does an Injury, not his that suffers it. The Sufferer is only
to look upon his Affliction as a Portion allotted him from Eternity for his
greater Good. Forgive, and you shall be forgiven, is the Word of God himself.
He that wakens not at this Thunder, is not asleep but dead. It is our Interest
to pardon others, as the Condition of being pardoned our selves.

VI. Among many Incentives to Anger, I reckon Suspicion to be the sliest and
most insinuating of all. Let us away with it therefore upon any terms. Good
Lord (we cry) how coldly, how strangely such a one looked upon me! He would
hardly take any notice of me. He gave me a word or two, and so went his way. Of
this we may be certain, he that is jealous, shall never want matter or color
for it; most people being apt to believe the worst. An ill Construction of
things goes a great way in the very Injury we complain of: We are therefore to
deal plainly, and judge charitably. And we are to say to our selves on the
behalf of the Absent: Who knows but this may be all a Story? In ill Reports it
is not good to be over-credulous, and to take up a Pique at a venture, before
we fully understand the matter. Time and leisure will discover all. In a Trial
at Law, no man is cast without a proof, let the Cause be never so trivial: And
shall we dare then to condemn a Friend without a Hearing? He must be a very
weak man, that presently believes all he hears. Some there are that spread
false Reports with an Intention to deceive; others again, do but tell what they
hear, and are deceived themselves.

What is spoken in private, is almost not spoken at all. What can be more
unreasonable, than to suppress the cause of our Displeasure, and yet publish
the effects of it? It is good sometimes to see and not see, and to hear and not
hear. He that seems not to know of an Injury, is not bound to take notice of it.

VII. When I am told that any body speaks ill of me, my course shall be, to ask
my own Conscience, if I did not speak ill of him first; and then to make it my
own case, How many have I spoken Ill of my self? This Reflection will make a
man moderate; if not for the love of Virtue, yet for his own sake at least.
Shall I play the Epicure my self, and inveigh against Luxury in another? put a
Knight of the Post to declaim against Perjury? Be my self perfidious, and
challenge exact Fidelity from my neighbor? Why should not other People talk as
freely of me, as I do of them? I am to bethink my self, not only what I suffer,
but what I do; and not to reprehend that in another, which I find in my own
breast. We are all bad enough, and to bear with one another infirmities, is
but common Equity. Nay, suppose that we are not as yet guilty, who knows how
soon we may be so? Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall.

VIII. The Wounds of an Enemy, the Offenses of a Friend, the Disobedience of a
Child, the Carelessness or the Treachery of a Servant, are things so familiar,
that we may as well wonder at a Rose in the Spring, or an Apple in Autumn, as
at any of them. A man that walks the streets of a populous City, must expect to
meet with a slip in one place, a stop in another, the Dash of the Kennel in a
third: Just such are the Adventures of Life, and with the same Consideration
are they to be undergone. When a lewd person casts a Reproach upon a Good Man,
let them but both do their parts, and there is no hurt done. It is in the Nature
of the one to do Mischief, and it is the Duty of the other to requite Evil with
Good. We are to try if we can mend him; which is never to be effected by
Revenge, but rather by Patience and Obligations. It may perchance work a through
Reformation upon him; but very probably, it will quiet and sweeten him at the
least: Or however, we our selves shall most certainly be the better for it, if
he be not. Well! There Is such a one is my mortal Enemy, he has spoken the
basest and the most dishonorable things of me. -- How am I now to behave my
self in this case? Why truly, according to the Rules of Charity, and of good
Discretion: I have this but at second hand; I can hardly believe it. Or, if he
did say it, some body has abused him: I am confident he had no ill meaning in
it. Nay, it may be, he said it on purpose that I should hear on it again, and be
the better for it. The truth on it is, he has right on his side, for I cannot
much deny the thing; and I Am even well enough served for beginning with him.
But after all this, what if it shall be found to be mere Malice, and a Design
upon an Innocent Person? Was not my Savior more innocent, and incomparably a
greater Sufferer? I am to say with the Prophet, I was dumb, and opened not my
mouth, because it was thy doing. Let us all look to our own ways, and have a
care, that what other People say or do amiss, prove not unto us an occasion of
falling.

IX. But what is it that troubles us? Opinion? If so; It is but removing that
Opinion, and we are secure; and this methinks might be done by a very ordinary
way of Reason. Nothing can hurt us, unless we join with it to hurt our selves.
The mind is safe and inaccessible; out of the reach of Injuries and Accidents.
It moves it self, and in judging of Externals, it makes every thing only to be,
as it is taken. My Adversary (says one) is certainly the vilest Creature upon
the Face of the Earth. Let him alone then, say I, and leave him to be punished
by some other hand: Or however, he has his Torment already in his
Transgression. He Is a man of Reason, and I wonder he can allow himself in these
Liberties. I prithee wonder at thy self too, and begin the Reformation at home,
upon thy own Impatience, and learn to overcome Evil with Good. But we have
other men's faults in sight, and our own behind us. Oh the Pleasure of Revenge,
says the Vindictive man. Let him take it then, say I; upon condition, that he
fall upon his greatest Enemy first. Let him begin with his extravagant fury and
rage. Is not he a mad man that runs into the Streets to beat Boys for breaking
his Windows, when he has Thieves in his House, that are ready to rifle him, and
cut his Throat? When Plato's hand was up in Choler, to strike an untoward
Servant, he considered better of it, and checked himself; Sirrah, says he, I
would box ye, if I were not angry with you: Judging it more for his credit to
chastise his Passion, before he meddled with his Man; and giving to understand,
that a Choleric Master deserves the Lash better than a Negligent Servant. You
shall very rarely find any man Brave, that is Furious.

X. Judges and Public Magistrates may be allowed to put on a Countenance of
Severity and Displeasure; but if at any time it comes up to Anger, let it be so
ordered, as only to wait upon Reason, but not to preclude it. Offenders are to
be reprehended, and corrected too, but without Passion. So long as there are
bad men in the World, there will be Villainy in it; and he that is resolved to
fret himself for whatsoever he sees amiss, shall never have one quiet hour
while he breaths. We are not angry at the Heats and Colds in their proper
course and season: No less natural are the Indignities we suffer from wicked
men, and no otherwise ought we to concern our selves for them. A wise and a
good man should deal with Malefactors, as a Physician does with mad Men; do
them all the good he can, and let their Extravagancies go for nothing. The only
Revenge for a Slanderer, is to let him alone, as if he were not worth a
Revenge. The less his Calumny works upon another, the more it works upon
himself, by disappointing him of the end and pleasure of his Contumely. But
it is a shame, you will say, for a man to be contemned, and not to vindicate his
Honor. How great a shame is it then, to fear to be contemned? for no man fears
Contempt, but he that deserves it. A wise man reckons nothing disgraceful but
sin; for he governs himself, not according to the judgment of men, but of God.
If any man despise me, if any man hate me, let him look to it; it shall be my
care not to deserve either. Patience is invincible, and triumphs in the end
over Nature it self. It is a kind of Imitation of God himself, who forgives
all, suffers all, and with his Mercies transcends our Iniquities, It is more
glorious to take no notice at all of an Injury, than to pardon it.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Envy and Sloth, with their Description and Cure.

I. THE Envious man is not only the first, but the greatest Plague to himself,
He preys upon his own Bowels, before he meddles with his Neighbors Goods; and
it is not in this, as in other Vices, where the Punishment follows the Sin, for
here it goes before it, and yet keeps it company too, for they go hand in hand
together. A Diabolical Affection! That another man's Happiness must be my
Torment; and that which makes him fat, must make me lean. In other sins, we
find only an opposition to this or that particular Virtue: But Envy perverts
the very nature of things, and professes open Enmity to all Goodness. First, to
God himself, whose Nature it is (humanely speaking) to communicate all his
Mercies and Blessings. Next, to the Saints and Angels, who rejoice in the
Comforts of their Companions, as if they were their own. Thirdly, to Christian
Charity, which bids us do good even to our Enemies. And lastly, to the Law of
Nature, which commands us to wish other people as happy as our selves. Envy is
a kind of blear-eyed Affection, it cannot endure to look against the Light.

II. Satan indeed is envious, but it is against Men, not his Fellow-Devils:
Whereas in our Envy, (worse than the Devils themselves) we fall foul one upon
another: A sign of a mean and abject mind; for we envy nothing but what we
think above us. He that would deliver himself from this Distemper, must take
his heart off from this transitory World, and fix it upon a better. The love of
Eternity is the death of Envy. He that has set his heart upon Heaven, can never
envy any man's Enjoyments upon Earth. It were as if a Prince should envy a
Cobbler. He reckons the World, and all the Glories of it, not worth a serious
thought. We have enough to do (a man would think) to struggle with our own
Afflictions, without vexing our selves at the prosperity of others. No man
shall ever be Happy, so long as the sight of a Happier man than himself can
make him miserable. If by envying the Wealth, the Abilities, the Dignity of our
Neighbors, we could transfer all to our selves, it were something: But this is
never to be done by Envy; by Love, in some measure, it may: For by loving
what is good in another, we make it our own.

III. We may couple Envy and Sloth together; for they both agree in an abject
Heaviness of Mind. The Envious man's Trouble is to see any body else happy; and
the Slothful man's, to despair of being so himself: And none but pitiful
Wretches are subject to either of these Passions. Sloth is the Vice of a
languishing Spirit, that is weary of every thing that is good; and for fear of
blocks and difficulties in the way, shrinks at the very thought of any Generous
Enterprise. It will, and it will not. The Sluggard is various and unconstant; a
burden to himself, a trouble to others: He Is perpetually wishing himself out
of the World, weary of his Life, and the Contriver of his own Misfortunes. He Is
like a Top, in continual Agitation; the Whip drives him about, but it is only
round, not forward. He stops still at halfway, and goes through with nothing.
All his Works are insipid, and (like warm Water) a Vomit both to God and man.
This stupid Drowsiness must be shak'd off, and a generous Resolution taken up
in the place of it, or we are undone for ever. As the Bird is made to fly, so
is Man born to labor: And since Labor and Travel are our Portion, why should
we not rather take pains to be happy, than to be miserable? Let us be never so
lazy to Godward, the World will yet find us work enough to do. One man labors
for an Estate, another for a Title, or an Office; when half that trouble and
diligence would secure us a blessed Eternity, and no body looks after it: But
Vices and Vanities come to a better Market: The greater is our shame, to be so
dull and careless in a matter of that Importance, as not to endure the Labor
of one Moment, for an Eternal Reward. There is nothing so hard, but Courage,
with Gods Blessing, may overcome. We fancy Difficulties, where there are none.
Whatever the Mind imposes upon it self, it obtains. He that does what he can,
does as much as he needs to do. God helps the willing.

CHAP. XI.
Of Pride, Ambition, and Vainglory. The Description of a Proud Man. The Vanity
of Dignities, and the Dangers. The Evils of High-Mindedness, and the Cure.

I. PRide, Ambition, and Vain Glory are Vices that are very near akin: And they
are to other sins, as the Sea is to the Rivers, the Source and Fountain of them
all. When a man comes once to be blown up with this Tumor of Adoring Himself,
farewell all Reverence and Respect, both to God and Man: And if there be no way
to Glory, but by Villainy and Fraud, by the Ruin or Death of his Brother;
That Is the way he will take, without any difficulty or scruple. The Proud man is
abominable to God, and intolerable to Mankind: All his faculties and studies
are bent upon Popular Applause. He takes wonderful Delight in the Contemplation
of his own Abilities, and to think what pity it is, such Men as he are not
employed at the Helm. He Is as bold as blind Bayard; and puts his Oar into every
man's Boat; ever magnifying himself, and despising all others. And yet all this
is done under a Mask of Humility, for fear he should be suspected of Ambition.
If he miss his end, or fall into disgrace, the whole World is too little to
hear his Story, and he makes it his business to stir up brawls and disputes No
man so insolent and domineering to his Inferiors; nor so arrant a Slave to
those that are above him. He Will fawn upon ye like a Spaniel, and you shall find
him as tame a Mutton. If there be any thing in him that is good, he has the
Arrogance to challenge it to himself, as if God Almighty had no hand in it. He
loves to be in at every thing, and to talk loud and Magisterially of matters
that he understands no more than a Goose. He is a great meddler in other
peoples affairs; rash in his Judgment, and severe in his Censure. He Is much
better at spying out his Neighbors Faults, than his Virtues. He has a kind of
disdainful Singularity in his Port, Words, Looks, Actions, and Ways. He is not
to be wrought upon either by Correction, Caution, or good Advice. He wants
abundance of good things, which he fancies he has; and those which really he is
possessed of, are nothing so great as he imagines them. And this it is that makes
him gall and fret himself; as who should say, Good Lord! What an Age are we
fallen into, when Men of Parts are ready to beg their bread, and such as I am,
come to be neglected! He is afflicted with a perpetual Palpitation of the
heart; and it can hardly be otherwise with one that is continually upon the
Tip-toe, and streining at (Honor) a thing which is out of his reach. Pride is
the Foundation of all Evil.

II. If we will know the Difference between the smallest Particle of Eternal
Bliss, and the whole sum of what appears to be desirable in this World
(Kingdoms, Empire, nay the entire Universe it self) let us but lay them in the
Scale, one against the other, and the Earth, with all the Pomps and Pleasures
of it, are not so much as a Leaf, or a Feather in the Balance Let us look
upward then, and address our selves to the end, for which we were created, and
laying aside all vain Opinions of our own Excellencies, let us examine our
selves, and take a true estimate of our Worth and Value. He that is proud in a
mean Condition, certainly if he had been born to a Crown, there would have been
no enduring him. Now I would have every Christian to prize himself, not as the
Son of Caesar, but (which is more) as the Son of God, redeemed by the precious
Blood of Christ. This is an Extraction that is truly Honorable: Why do we not
glorify our selves upon this account, but tather lie grovelling upon the Earth,
to the scandal of our Divine Original? God is our Father, who has elected us
to the Dominion of the Heavens, and the Stars, and given us an Assurance of an
everlasting Possession. Here lies our Glory, our Nobility, our Comfort: Here we
may lawfully boast. Let us therefore raise our Eyes and our Hearts, and frame
our Lives and manners to the Likeness of our Father which is in Heaven. This is
the way that leads to True, and to Immortal Honor.

III. As for Crowns and Scepters, what are they but Golden Fetters, and glaring
Miseries? which, if men did but truly understand, there would be more Kingdoms
than Kings to govern them. A great Fortune is a great Slavery; and Thrones are
but uneasy Seats, and so they find them that possess them, let the Multitude
conceive of them what they please. That Felicity cannot but be troublesome to
the Ruler, that makes him burdensome to his People. And when it comes to that
once, how sick they grow of that Splendour which charmed and dazzled them before!
What Contemplations and Philosophising upon the Blessings of Privacy and
Freedom, and the Vanity of Earthly things! They look then with Terror upon
Death and the Last Judgment: And all the Greatness that they have purchased
with so much Sweat and Blood, shrinks to nothing at the very thought. Let us
therefore so live, that we may appear with Comfort before the Great Tribunal.
He that humbles himself now, shall be exalted hereafter.

IV. He that thinks he shall be safe and quiet, when he is great, is directly
out of his wits. Many Liberties may be taken in a private Condition, that are
dangerous in a Public. The higher we are raised, the more eminent are our
Infirmities: There Is no concealing of any thing upon the top of the House. We
have lost even the Tranquillity that we had before. There Is not a day, not an
hour, that we can call our own. And then the Fall is in a manner from Heaven to
Hell. How can we then expect Peace and Repose in a Station, where all that ever
went before us, have encountered Hazards and Trouble, if not Death it self? How
many Princes have been poisoned at their very Tabls, betrayed in the Arms of
their Mistresses? Caesar was murdered in the Senate House. He that stands high
upon a slippery place, and the brink of a Precipice, God have mercy upon him:
But the man that stands below, upon the firm Ground, needs not fear falling. In
our Greatnesses we are to consider, that every man that admires and flatters
us, envies us too in his heart. What with our open, and our secret Enemies, we
are never secure. We are betrayed by our Servants, our Friends, our Relations.
But these are the sins and miseries of Courts, not of Cottages. He that lies
close, lives quiet. He fears no body, of whom no body is afraid.

V. A man could hardly forbear laughing, to see a Horse or a Dog take upon
himself an Authority over the rest of his kind: And is it not more ridiculous
for a Man to do it, because he has more Money perhaps, or more Power? Proud
Dust and Ashes! to exalt himself upon his own Bottom, when he has nothing good
in him, but what he has received from above. We can call nothing our own, but
our sins. Let us render Glory then, for what we have received, unto him that
gave it. Do we prefer one Horse before another, because he has more Meat, or
gayer Trappings? No, by no means; but we reckon him to be the better, that is
the fleeter. No more is a Man to be esteemed for any thing apart from himself.
But I am a Person of Quality, says one, and the best man in the Company. The
very saying of such a thing, is a Forfeiture of the Honor he pretends to; for
no man is truly Honorable, but a Good man* with whom this Titulor Honor is of
no Account. True Nobility does not advance it self, and the great Ornament of
an Illustricus Life is Modesty. Humility goes a great way in the Character even
of the most Glorious Prince.

VI. If we would but take a measure of our little Bodies, and make a Search
into our Infirmities, we should find much to humble us, and very little or
nothing to brag of. The Philosophers tell us, that the World is but a Point:
And yet we must be dividing even of this Point into Kingdoms and Dominions. The
Earth we trample upon shall ere long be laid upon us; and of all our
Possessions, we shall have only so much left as will serve to cover a cold and
rotten Carcass. And is not here a goodly Foundation, think ye, for all our
great and mighty Projects? This Consideration methinks, should put a Check to
our furious and insolent Passions: There Is no designing of Conquests, and
ranging of Armies in the Grave. When the mad Humor is over, we shall come then
(though too late I fear) to understand the Emptiness of Names and Titles; and
that they are like Glass, the Brighter, the Britler; and the more they shine,
the sooner they are broken. The Oak that has been an Age a growing, is cut down
in an hour.

VII. He that withdraws himself from Company, has cut off one dangerous
Temptation* For Pride shows it self more or less, in proportion to the number
of Spectators. People dress and trick up themselves to be seen. Are not all the
excesses of Luxury, and Magnificence, for Ostentation? Did ever any man expose
the Pomp of his Vanity and Riot in a Desert? Ambition loves to show it self in
the Face of the World; and is never so well pleased as with a Popular Applause.
When the Be has made her Honey; the Horse finished his Course; the Tree
brought forth its Fruit, their Business is at an End: But the Man that is
struck with Vainglory, accounts all the rest as nothing, without making
himself the Idol of the Multitude, and to be adored, flattered, and pointed at
by the Rabble. But certainly did we but daily consider who they are that
commend us, we should hardly think them worth our Courtship. They are a vain
and fickle sort of men, the dregs of Mankind, and made up of Frenzy and
Contradiction. They are short-lived, both the Bestowers and Receivers of these
Applauses. The Earth it self is but a Point, and this is done but in a corner
even of that Point. There were diverse Dissenters too, and scarce a man of all
the rest that knows his own Mind* But it is a brave thing for a Man to make
himself famous to Posterity; that is to say, to those whom we never did see,
nor ever shall. Why are we not as well troubled, that no body talked of us
before we came into the World, as delighted to think how we shall be spoken of
after we are gone out of it. Nay, let us give it for granted, that our Memories
shall be perpetuated, and our Names live for ever. What then? what shall we be
the better for this when we are dead? Or to come nearer, what are we the better
for this same thing called Fame, even while we are living? A man is many times
commended, where he is not, and tormented where he is. The Value of every thing
is in it self; and it self: and it is neither the better for a good word, nor
the worse for wanting it. The Sun would be every jot as glorious without
Spectators, as with them. The Rose is never the sweeter, nor the pleasanter;
the Diamond is never the brighter, for an Encomium. It is a strong proof of a
generous Mind, for a man to be content with himself, and not to depend upon the
Breath of the Common People for his Satisfaction. He that covets Praise, does
not deserve it; for what is there in us, that is Praiseworthy? Frail and
miserable. Wretches that we are! (and at the best, but Unprofitable Servants.)
If there be any man that has the Confidence to justify himself, and say he has
done his duty; let him have a care that he be really what he would be thought
to be; and that he approve himself in that which the World esteems him for. Our
Being, Life and Reason, we owe to Almighty God, and the only thing we can claim
to our selves, is our Iniquity. Nothing we are, and nothing we have to boast
of; and till we acknowledge this, we shall never be any thing.

CHAP. X.
Of the Government of the Body, and the Senses. How far the Body may be
indulged. The Lust of the Eye, and Excess in Apparel are condemned.

I. IN the Entertainment of our Bodies, we are to take care that they be kept
in Obedience to the Mind, on the one hand; and want nothing that is necessary
for Health, on the other. We are to provide for them, but not wholly to serve
them. Give me Meat to lay my Hunger; Drink to quench my Thirst; Clothes to keep
me warm; and Lodging, to shelter me from the Weather; I Will ask no more: Nay, we
are to suspect all Superfluities; for, Whatsoever is beyond a Competence, is a
Snare. He that is over-solicitous for his Body, is thecontrary for his Soul:
And certainly we are born to Nobler Ends, than to be Slaves to our Carcases;
which we are no otherwise to consider, than as the Cages and Prisons of our
Minds. A wise and a good man does not so behave himself, as if his Body were
the main end of his Being; but he takes care of it, because he cannot live
without it. The Body is the Instrument of the Soul; and it is not for a Workman
to neglect his Trade, and spend his whole time in ordering his Tools. It is the
sign of a Sot, to be always tending of the Body.

II. Since it is by the Windows of the Senses, that Death enters into the Soul,
we are to draw them, as much as may be, from the earthly Life, to the Heavenly,
and to keep them from being altogether taken up with worldly Delights. (For we
are to use them as Servants, not as Masters.) In the first place, we are to set
a Guard upon our Eyes. There is not any thing that more powerfully moves the
Imagination, stirs the Appetite, or works upon the Mind, than a wandering
Glance; and the Mischief is done in a moment. Wherefore let the inward Eye
accompany the exterior, that we may see God in every thing we look upon; and
when we shall have once learned to adore him in his Creatures, our next step
will be the Contemplation of his Divine Majesty, and to worship him in Himself.
A delicate well-drest Woman, is an elaborate Luxuy. There Is Death in her very
Looks, and if you stand to gaze upon her, you're undone. Comedies, Balls, and
Public Spectacles do but weaken the Mind, and fill it with Toys, that take us
off from the Consideration of better things. One Error in the Eye begets
another in the Affections.

III. Hearing is the Sense of Discipline; the Gate by which the Notions of
Truth and Wisdom are conveyed into the Mind. If the Passage of the ear be not
narrowly watched, we shall entertain Lies and Fables for Verities, and Folly
for Wisdom. We must keep out all Slanderers, Tale-bearers, New mongers,
Babblers, Busybodies, Idle Impertinents, and whatsoever else is beside our
main Business. As in Music, a Man is not only affected upon the very Instant
of hearing it, but the Harmony leaves an Impression behind it, that works upon
him when it is over; so in Conversation, a lewd Discourse, though it does us no
hurt perchance at present, will be yet running in our heads afterward, and
create in us evil Dispositions. The less we hear Men about our ears, the more
shall we hear God in our hearts. As to Perfumes and precious Odors, they are an
effeminate kind of Luxury. Let us sweeten our Manners, for it is more noble and
manly, to indulge our Souls, than our Nostrils. The Taste is to be humbled by
Abstinence and Sobriety. The Touch by Discipline, Mortifications, and
Austerities. Is it not bitter to punish the Body, and preserve it, than so to
flatter and indulge it, as to ruin both Body and Soul for ever?

IV. One may give a shrewd guess at the humor of a Man by his Clothes: There
is some regard therefore to be given to the decency of our Apparel and Dress. A
Fool is known by his Coat. The ancient Sages among the Heathen would not suffer
a man so much as to hold up his finger, without giving a Reason for it. Now
though I would not be so strict, I could wish yet, that men would be a great
deal more careful in many cases than they are. I do not like profuse Laughter,
Scurrility, Loose Behavior, Antic Motions and Gestures a huddling Gate, nor
any thing whatsoever that may give Offense; as, foul Linen, a greasy Doublet,
an unpleasant Countenance, waggling the Head, or making Apes faces, yawning and
looking about, as if one were weary of the Company; nor (in Conclusion) any
thing to make them weary of us. Many things may be well enough done, that are
not fit to be seen.

V. Man was created naked, and he was not ashamed; for he knew no shame in it.
But after his Transgression, came in his shame; he lost his Innocence, and kept
him in Countenance before, and made himself Breeches to cover his Nakedness.
But that which was originally a Mark of Guilt and Shame, is now become a Badge
of Dignity and Honor. Our Garments, now adays, are not so much for Covering,
as for Ornament, and to entertain the Eyes and Curiosities of others. The
Trimming and Dress is the index of the Mind. It is a scandalous Effeminacy for
a man to spend his time betwixt the Comb and the Glass. If he that is proud, or
enamored of an outside, did but well consider what is under it, I am persuaded,
it would take down his stomach. He that has Virtue in his Mind, never troubles
himself about Lace for his Back. Virtue is best in her native Beauty, without
Arts or Fucusses; and so glorious in her self, that if she were covered with
Jewels, they would but serve her for a Foil, It is a miserable mistake in men,
to bestow so much Cost and Care upon the Body, and leave the Soul in all manner
of Pollution and Uncleanness. To see men load themselves with Chains, and
because they are of Gold, to glory in them too, without any sense of Infamy or
Contempt; as if the Metal made the difference. We are Princes in Golden
Fetters, and Slaves in Iron. Some are only shackled with Gold, others are
riveted and fastened to it. Their ears are bored, where they carry a whole
Patrimony in a Pendent; and that which was in old time a Punishment, is now
become a piece of Vanity and Ambition. There is more pains taken about the
ordering of a Perruke, than for the Security of the very Head it self. And so
far has Folly prevailed upon the World, that we set the highest value upon
those things that ought to be our Scorn. I would have my Clothes plain and fit
for my Condition; such, as I would be neither proud nor ashamed of; not for
Ostentation, but Necessity. It is not Gold and Pearl that will keep any man
from being deformed, who is not clothed with Christ's Righteousness. This is
the everlasting Beauty that shines in the Soul, when the Flesh is Worms-meat.
Who but a Madman will be at the Charge to gild a Dunghill?

CHAP. XI.
Of the Guard of the Tongue: How much it concerns us to govern it, and the
Difficulty of so doing. Certain Directions what we are to observe in speaking;
what to avoid. How to behave our selves in case of Calumny or Slander.

I. THE Tongue has in a manner the Power of Life and Death; and it is of so
great moment, the Government of it, that we are to look very narrowly to it. A
Tongue without a Guard upon it, is like a City without a Wall. There is no
taming of it, without the special Grace of God. Lions, Bulls, Bears, are a
thousand times more easy to be reclaimed. Men are naturally given to be
talkative, and presently to communicate their thoughts, as soon as they have
conceived them: And then, being so near the Brain, the Fancy conveys it self
down, and distills it self into Words immediately. It is not for nothing, that
Nature her self thought fit to enclose the Tongue with the double Fence, both
of the Teeth and Lips. Open the Mouth of a Glass, and the Spirits evaporate:
Open the Mouth of a Man, and so does the Vigor of his Mind. He looks but ill
to himself, that let his Tongue run at random.

II. We are to consider before we speak, and not be blurting out, without fear
or Wit, whatsoever comes at our Tongues end. Let a man deliver himself heartily
and clearly, without any Mystery or Disguise. God Almighty has bestowed the
Faculty of Speech upon us, for the Testimony and Propagation of the Truth. He
that gives License to his Tongue, when he is in a Passion, will speak that in a
moment, that he may repent all his life after: Let him therefore examine
himself, and forbear till the storm is over. When a man's Mind is at quiet, it is
an easy matter to keep his Tongue so too, for there is naturally a fair
Correspondence between them. A sober and reasonable Discourse, is an Argument
of a sound, temperate, and well-composed frame of Mind. And on the other side,
the one blasts the other. The Value of a man is best known by his Discourse.

III. Better not speak at all, than to no purpose. We can make choice of our
Meats, why not of our Words too? We can examine what goes into our mouths, and
why not what comes out of them as well? for the latter is more dangerous in a
Family, than the other in the Stomach. He that converses much with himself, and
little with other people, is the wisest and the happiest man; for more have
repented themselves of their speaking, than of their silence. Nay, even of
Animals, the most apprehensive among them are the least clamorous. Women and
Children are the most given to Babbling. Many vain and unprofitable words are
the certain Indication of a weak and a worthless man. If we loved God, and
studied our own Salvation as we ought, our Discourse would be altogether of
Him, of Virtue and Perfection. Love can neither dissemble nor conceal it self,
and where we truly love, we can talk of nothing else. We are not willing to
treat of Heavenly things, because our Affections are not yet taken off from the
Corruptions of the Flesh. And then for want of Reading and Mediation, we are at
a loss even for matter, if we had never so good a will to the Discourse. Out of
the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks.

IV. When Company meets, the better half of the Conversation is commonly spent
in talking of other Peoples affairs: Where every man has almost as many Judges
to sit upon him, as there be Heads in the Town: But not a Creature that looks
homeward. We are all of us as blind on that side, as we are sharp-sighted on
the other. In cases of Reproof and Scandal, our ears are open to every idle
Srory; but let any thing be spoken to the Honor and Vindication of our
Neighbor, we take no notice of it at all. Detraction is a common Fault, and
the commoner, (like an infectious Disease) the more dangerous. But what have we
to do with other peoples Faults, when every man has work enough at home, to
mend one? Have a care of blabbing Secrets on any terms: or of committing
Secrets rashly to any body; for it has been many a man's ruin. And whether a
man be betrayed by one, or by more, it is the same thing. For a word passes
from one to another, till it comes to all at last. This Facility is commonly
found among people that are full of Discourse, and that love to hear themselves
talk: They are possessed with a kind of Drunkenness, and when their Tongues are
once going, they can hold nothing, be it never so private and sacred. They
interchange their Secrets by turns; first the one, and then the other requires
him as a Seal of the Confidence. If the one keeps Counsel, the other tells all
perchance to the next man he meets, till every body comes to know that under
the Rose, which no body seems to know openly. But in the conclusion, it goes on
so long in a Whisper, till at length the Secret overflows, and becomes a
public Rumor. There is scarce any Evil under the Sun which the Tongue has not
had a share in: We should therefore weigh our Words, and bridle our Mouths, for
fear of bolting somewhat that had been better let alone. It is much more
commendable to be sparing of our words, than of our money. He that squanders
away his Estate, though he does himself hurt, yet others are the better for
him; but the Profusion of the Tongue, every body is the worse for it. To hear
much and speak little is a divine Virtue.

V. There is not any thing that scapes the Lash of a Licentious Tongue. No, not
the Princes of the Earth with all their Power. Not the holy Saints and Martyrs,
with all their Sanctity and Innocence. Nay, our blessed Savior himself, when
he was upon Earth, suffered under Contumely and Reproach. So that we are not
without great Examples, to encourage and excite our Patience. He that behaves
himself as he ought to do, under the Persecution of ill Tongues, may reap an
advantage from them; for Detraction is a kind of Provocation to Virtue, and as
good as a Bridle, to keep a man in the right way; and though it be a great
Wickedness it self, in him that uses it, there is not yet (in the Confequence)
a greater Enemy to Wickedness in another. When any body speaks ill of us, we
are to make use of it as a Caution, without troubling our selves at the
Calumny. He that would disappoint the Malice of a venomous Tongue, let him
slight it; let him but hold his peace, and it does him no hurt. If my
Conscience tells me that I am Innocent. What do I care who tells the World that
I am Guilty? He Is in fine case, that values himself upon other peoples
Opinions, and depends upon the Judgment of Fools, for the peace of his life.
When any man is ill spoken of, let him consider; if I have not deserved it, I
am never the worse; if I have, I Will mend. If a Jewel be right, no matter who
says it is a Counterfeit. It is not the decrying and discrediting of a Crystal
Brook, that will turn it into a Puddle: Nay, if you throw dirt into it, you
shall see it clear again presently. Let us learn Virtue then from the very
Fountains and Rivers, and maintain Tranquillity of Mind, in despite of Censure
and Opposition. It is a womanish Weakness and Levity, to be startled at every
Report. To see a Child in the Mothers Arms tearing of her Hair, striking her,
pinching her Breasts, clawing and slavering of her Face; there is not any body
that will take this for an Affront, because the poor Creature cannot intend it
so, and knows not what it does. No more ought we to be moved in the case of a
Calumny, then Parents are at this behavior of an Infant. He that lets himself
down to be wrought upon by an Injury, does too much honor to his Adversary:
For where it vexes me to be despised, it would wonderfully please me to be
esteemed. This is the humor of a narrow Mind; And no man shall ever be happy,
whom Contempt can make miserable.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Internal Senses. The Use of Opinions. The Mind is to be tinctured with
good Thoughts. Of Bridling the Sensitive Appetite, and depraved Affections:
Diverse Precepts to that end.

I. IT is a main point of Wisdom, not to admit of any Opinion into the Mind,
which is not consonant to Nature or Reason: Wherefore we are to set our selves
against all the Inordinate Motions of Fancy, as the Logicians do against the
Quirks and Fallacies of Sophistry. My Son's dead: I Am not to blame for it; I
could not help it. My Father has disinherited me: And that is the same case with
the other. Well! There Is something that I take very ill: Now this is not well
done, for it is my own Act, and a thing in my own power to prevent. Such a man
bears his Misfortunes with great Honor: He does well in it; for it was in his
own power, and the thing it self is good. My Friend is carried away to Prison:
That Is no great matter. Oh but he has very hard measure (you will say:) correct
Opinion, and there is no hurt in that neither. We should deal with the
Imagination, as we do with a Madman, keep it in Chains for fear of mischief.
For otherwise a wild Beast is not so ungovernable. It flies out, rambles,
extravagates, hunts after Novelties, takes no rest, and knows no such thing as
Moderation. We are to restrain and fix it, if we can; for otherwise, instead of
a clear and constant Reason, all our thoughts and resolutions are to be steered
only by Uncertainty and Opinion. Whatsoever falls not within the Compass of the
Mind, is beside our business.

II. Whenever any thing presents it self to our thoughts, we are thoroughly to
examine the matter within our selves, First, as to the nature of the thing,
simply and in it self abstracted from all things else. And then, as to the
Proprieties, the End, Circumstances, Benefit: How far it may concern us;
Whether it be in our Power, or no? without which we are to give it no
Admittance; but on the contrary, as much as possible, to oppose it. Let every
man remember, that there is a Sear^her of hearts, and take heed of exposing to
Almighty God, those Corruptions in his Soul, which he would blush to own to a
familiar Friend in an honest Conversation. Let our thoughts be peaceful,
sincere, pure, and void of Malice: such (in fine) as if any man should ask us
(on the sudden) what they are, we need not scruple to own them. We are not so
much as to think what we are ashamed to speak. The best way to keep out wicked
thoughts, is to be always employed upon good ones.

III. The greatest Opposite and Enemy to the Reasonable Soul, is the Brutal and
Sensitive Appetite: The Fountain of all Sins and Imperfections, the Adversary
that we are always to fear and struggle with, till we have brought him (as far
as may be in this life) under the Government of Reason, This is a Combat that
admits neither Quiet nor Truce. We have a restless Enemy to deal withal, and it
must be a restless Conflict. An Enemy that lurks in our own Veins; nay, the one
half of us is in a Conspiracy against the other. We are to rescue our Souls
from our Bodies, and to assault our selves: He that subdues his Passions, does
a greater thing than he that conquers a City. I do not ask an Impossibility,
and that we should utterly extinguish our depraved Affections; let us only
learn to govern them: I am not for a Stoical Apathy, but for a Reasonable and a
Christian Moderation. Nature was never guilty of any thing that is vain and
superfluous. Take away all Affections, and you take away all Virtue. Where
there is no Combat, there can be no Victory.

IV. This Dispute, I must confess, is both difficult and doubtful: For our
Passions are a great deal older than our Reason. They came into the World with
us, but our Reason follows a long time after: And when our Affections have a
good while domineered and carried our Wills (blindfold, as it were) into all
sorts of specious Mistakes, under the color of Good: Then up steps Reason (in
process of time, and fortified by Experience) to claim her right of Authority
and Jurisdiction, and to put a check to the Tyranny of our Brutal Appetites. As
to the first Motions of Nature, there is no preventing, no avoiding of them; but
then it concerns us to keep a strict Watch over them, that they do not grow
upon us; and if we find them unruly or impetuous, to subject them to the
Government of Reason. We may better struggle with Beginnings than with Habits.
If we be but circumspect, we may easily keep our selves quiet: For he that
fore-casts what may happen, shall never be surpised. It Is too late to begin to
Arm, when the Enemy is in our Quarters. In the multiplicity of our Words and
Actions, how much is there that might be spared! Let us therefore contract our
selves; the less we have to do with the World, the less will be our trouble.
And it is not for us to say, This or that is a small Business; for I tell ye,
let it seem never so small, It is a great advance, the very first Step that
leads to Virtue and Perfection.

V. If we may compare to a Tree, the old man in us, that derives his Original
from the infected Seed of Adam; we may resemble Self-Love to the Root, a
Perverse Inclination to the Trunk, Perturbations to the Branches; Vicious
Habits to the Leaves, Evil Works, Words, and Thoughts, to the Fruit. Now the
way to hinder all subsequent Corruptions and Wickedness, is to lay the Ax to
the Root, and to begin with Self-Love. Take away that, and the whole Offspring
of Carnal Appetite is destroyed at one Blow. And this is done by Humility and
Contempt of our selves. We must be lowly in our own Eyes, and not fear either
the Scorn or the Displeasure of Men: We must cheerfully submit to what
condition soever God has appointed for us: He that hates himself as he ought,
shall be saved; He that loves himself as he ought not, is in danger to perish.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Love, the Nature of it, Causes and Effects. Its Remedies; and somewhat
added of Hatred.

I. LOve is a certain Delight or Satisfaction we take in that which is Good:
The first Impression that affects the Appetite, proceeding from the Pleasure we
take in a known Good. It is the Cement of the World; the most powerful of all
our Passions; subdue this once, and the rest are easily overcome. The Love
which is divine, aspires naturally toward its Original. All Good comes from the
Sovereign Good, and thither it tends. Let every man call his own Soul to a
Shrift, and see what it is that his Heart is most set upon: For it is either
the God which he should worship, or the Idol which he should not. It is the
Command of God, that we love him with the whole heart, and without a Rival. He
that loves any thing else, with his whole heart, makes that his God.

II. Beside the ordinary Motives to Love, which are Virtue and Beauty, there is
also a certain Agreement and Congruity of Minds and Manners; together with
several Graces and Advantages both of Body and Mind: As, Modesty of Behavior,
Industry, Nobility, Learning, Sharpness of Wit, etc. But the great Attractive
of Love, is Love it self; which, if accompanied with Benefits, is sufficient to
turn, even the strongest Aversion into a Kindness. Men of clear Spirits, warm
and sanguine Constitutions, mild and gentle Natures, are much given to Love.

III. So great is the Power of Love, that it does in a manner, transform the
Lover into the thing beloved. It is a kind of a willing Death, a voluntary
Separation of the Soul and Body. He that is in Love, is out of himself; he
thinks not of himself, he provides nothing for himself, and effectually, he is
as good as no where at all, if he be not with the thing he loves: His Mind is
in one place, and his Body in another. How miserable is that man that loves,
and loves not God! What Proportion is there betwixt a corruptible Object and
the Immortal Soul! The end of such Love is Vanity, and Vexation, and
Disappointment: Whereas he that loves God, lives always where he loves; in him,
in whom all things live; and in a secure possession of an unchangeable Good. In
Carnal Love there is a mixture of Bitterness and Violence; but the Love of God
is altogether humble and calm. The one is full of Jealousies, the other has
none. Here we are afraid of Rivals, and there we pray for them. We are to love
God, if we love our selves; for we are only the better for it, not He. Man is
changeable and mortal, but there is no losing of God, unless we forsake him.

IV. If we would have the love we bear to our Neighbor sincere, it must be
wholly sounded upon Piety and Religion; abstracted from all the common
Considerations of Wit, Likeness, Good Humor, etc. The Platonic Love, which
pretends from the sight of a Corporal Beauty, to raise the Soul to the
Contemplation of the Divine, proves in the end to be the very Bane of Virtue.
It is very rarely that a man stops at the view of a lovely Woman, without a
desire to come nearer; and whether it be a Ray only, or some kind of
Fascination with it, that passes from the Eye to the Object; somewhat there is
that dissolves a man, and ruins him. There Is more danger in a slip of the
Eyes, than of the Feet. The Cure of Love is the more difficult, because the
more we oppose it, the stronger Resistance it makes: And if it be not checked at
the very beginning, it comes so insensibly upon us, that we are in before we
are aware; but if we begin with it betimes, the Remedy is not difficult. One
way of Cure may be by Diversion, and plunging a man's self into business, to put
the thought of it out of his head: But then we must avoid all occasions and
Circumstances, that may mind us of the Person we love. For if we relapse, there
will be no Remedy, but Time and Absence; and we must expect to be perpetually
seized with it, till in the end it is wearied out, and falls asleep. Many have
been cured out of mere shame, to see themselves pointed at, and made Town-talk,
and then perhaps, they may have been brought to a better understanding of the
Dishonor and Hazard of their Proceeding. Others have relieved themselves by
finding out of Faults and Inconveniences, and by enquiring into the Errors and
Imperfections of the thing they love. But the last and surest Remedy, is to
drive out a Carnal Love with a Spiritual; and to turn our Affections to God, to
Virtue, to Heaven, and to Eternity, which are truly amiable. A generous Mind
cannot but be ashamed to set his heart upon a Dunghill, Evil Love corrupts good
Manners.

V. What is it but a kind of Natural Love-Chain, that ties the whole World
together, and the several parts of it? The Stars of the Firmament in their
Motions, the Birds of the Air, and the Beasts of the Field. Now this Sacred
Bond is only dissolved by Hatred, which leads to Division and Dissension, as
Love does to Union. The most subject to this Vice are the Slothful, the
Fearful, and the Suspicious; for they fancy themselves to be threatened with
Mischief, which way soever they look. There are some people of so unsociable a
Nature, that like Birds of ill Omen, they both hate and fear all things
together. These men are a Burden to themselves, and to Mankind, and to be
avoided by all means, but with Pity, not Hatred. And in truth, there will be no
place for Hatred, if we turn every thing to the best; for there is no man so
ill, but he has some mixture of Good in him. There is nothing truly detestable,
but Sin and Damnation. If we turn our Hatred any other way, the harm is to our
selves, and not to the thing we hate. For if we are commanded to love our
Enemies, we are likewise implicitly commanded not to hate any body. The
Wickedness, I confess (but not the Man) we may and ought to hate, and it is
there only that we can justify our Hatred. But if a man we must needs hate,
let us begin at home, for there it is (even in himself) that every man may find
his greatest Enemy.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Desire and Aversion. What is to be desired, and what to be declined.

I. HE that submits himself to God, that desires nothing but with Resignation,
that accommodates himself to his Condition; that says, Whether I be sick or
well, rich or poor, here or elsewhere; Be it, as it pleases God, his will be
done. This is a happy man. But when we come once to expostulate, and say, When
shall I go thither? When shall I have this or that? We are in the ready way to
be miserable. For he that covets what is out of his reach, is condemned to a
Wheel, ever pursuing what he shall never catch. Opinions, Thoughts, Affections,
and some Actions too, are in our own power; but our Bodies, Riches, Honor,
Preferments are not so. No man will pretend to forbid or hinder the former; but
the latter are liable to Impediments, and hinder the Jurisdiction of another:
So that we are either not to desire them at all, or otherwise, to take them
only during Pleasure, and as transitory Benefits which cannot long continue
with us. There is nothing in this World desirable, for the Figure of it passes
away. Nay, if we had our very Wish, Death will come, and then we must leave all
behind us. But within us, is an inexhaustible Fountain of Comfort, if we will
but take the pains to dress it, and keep it open.

II. It was the great business and wisdom of some of the Ancient Philosophers,
the Government of the Passions; and upon the Consideration of the Powers
granted by God unto Man, they came to this Conclusion, that there was nothing
properly to be accounted our own, but our Thoughts and Affections: And by
frequent Meditation upon this matter, they got so absolute a Dominion over the
Motions of the Mind, that by virtue of that Command, they did not stick to
pronounce themselves (and with some Reason too) the only Rich, Powerful, and
Happy men alive: Insomuch, that having exempted themselves from the Empire of
Fortune, while their Bodies were even agonising in the Extremity of Torment,
their blessed Souls were yet calmly exercised upon the Contemplation of
Beatitude. But it was by daily Labor and Practice, that they brought
themselves to this state of Indifference, for external things: And he that has
gained this point, does no more trouble himself for the want of any thing which
he has not, than because he is not Emperor of Tartary, or has not Wings to
fly. Those things that are without us, do not concern us.

III. This may serve to put a check to our Appetites; which if they be not kept
within Bounds, will run out into endless Extravagancies; and the more we grant
them, the more they will crave. What does it signify, to pour. Water down the
Throat of a man in a Fever? when his Grief is not a Thirst, but a Disease. He
that squares his Desires to his Reason, is upon some certainty, but when they
lash out into Vice and Luxury, there is no end of their Importunity. He that
contents himself within the limits of Nature, shall not need to want any thing
he would have, but he that exceeds those limits, shall be a Beggar even in the
greatest Abundance. A very little suffices Nature, but Appetite is insatiable.

IV. We should do in our Lives, as we do at a Banquet; when any thing is
brought about and presented us, we are modestly to take part: If it pass by us,
to let it go; if it be not yet come to us, to wait with Civility and Patience,
till it does come. The like Affections ought we to have for Riches, Honors,
and other External things; at least, if we will pretend to the enjoyment of
such a Serenity of Mind, as no Accidents shall be able to discompose. We are
arrived at a blessed state of Tranquillity, if we can but advance thus far: But
if we bring our selves once to a Neglect and Refusal of whatsoever the World
can pretend to offer us, our work is done, and we are effectually (even upon
Earth) in Heaven already. Every man's Happiness is in his own power, if he will
but keep his Desires within Compass. He is the happy man that can have what he
will, and that may every man, by confining his Desires to what he can have.

V. There are many things we dread and abominate, as the greatest Miseries and
Misfortunes that can befall us, which in the end prove the very contrary. They
are Troublesome, it may be, and go against the Hair, but they are instructive.
Death, Banishment, Want, Disgrace, Labor, Sickness, and the like; they are
neither Evils in themselves, nor in our Power, nor are they properly our
Concern. They are terrible only in Opinion, and not worthy of our Aversion.
Socrates (aptly enough) calls them Bug-bears; only Vizours to fright Children,
and the whole Business is but a Masquerade. Death it self, is it any more than
a Bugbear? How has it been courted (even in the most hideous forms) by
Multitudes of the blessed Saints and Martyrs! Nay by Pagans as well as
Christians; by Socrates, and diverse others of the Heathen Philosophers! There
is not any thing in it so formidable, but only conceit and Opinion. It is the
Fear of Death, and not the Death it self, that is so dreadful; and so it fares
too in many other cases. Let us turn all our Fear, and all our Hatred, to the
Fear and Hatred of Sin.

CHAP. XV.
Of Joy and Sadness. How a good man ought to rejoice. He that looks before him
is not cast down. Several Antidotes against Sorrow.

I. JOY, when it passes the bounds of Modesty, draws on a kind of Dissolution
of the Mind. We must have a care of that, and so to moderate our Cheerfulness,
that if need be, without any Difficulty, we may dispose our selves from Mirth
to Sadness. Our Savior (who was the best Judge of things) says not, Blessed
are they that laugh, but they that mourn. It were a strange Indecency for a
Christian, that professes himself a Follower of Eternity, among so many perils
both of Soul and Body; so many just grounds of Sadness, to spend his life in
Gigling, and making Fools Faces, and transporting himself for Trifles. That
fugitive earthly Pleasure and the Joys we talk of, are very many times the near
Forerunners of Sadness. There is no true Joy, but that of a good Conscience. He
that cherishes, and takes care of the one, shall never want the other; for it
grows in his own breast. All other rejoicing is but Merriment and Frolic,
without any Substance at all, and many a man laughs with a heavy heart. True
Joy is a serious matter; and there must be a good Conscience, honest Purposes
and Actions; a Contempt of Pleasure, and the peaceful Tenor of an unspotted
Life to maintain it. There can be no perfect Joy without Justice, Courage and
Temperance. This is the Method of Virtue, first to mourn, and then to rejoice.

II. Sadness is a Perturbation of the Mind, by reason of some present Evil,
either real or apprehended: But we do oftentimes find more trouble in the
Opinion of things, than in the things themselves. Wherefore be not too
inquisitive into the Qualities of things; as concerning Servants, (for the
purpose) Lands, Moneys, Business; but rather take into consideration the
Opinion and Estimate we have of them. It is not in a man's power to prevent
Disgrace, Robbery, Violence; but to make a right Judgment of these things, and
to satisfy himself, that they are not simply evil, but often profitable; this
is in his power. He that suffers under a present trouble, let him but turn his
thought to a good Conscience, which is a continual Comfort, and there is his
Cure. Nothing can fall amiss to a good Man: Not that he does not feel it, but
he masters it; and considers all Adversity, only as matter for his Patience to
work upon, as the Instrument of Divine Grace, and that which opens him a way to
eternal Glory. A good man may be reputed unhappy, but he can never be so.

III. It does very much abate the edge of a Misfortune, to foresee it; and to
say to our selves, Whatsoever may be, shall be; for he that is prepared, can
never be surpised. Disappointments fall heavy upon people that are agog upon
Prosperity. What if a man should lose half his Estate? What if all? What if his
House should fall? his Corn be all blasted? his Friends forsake him? What if
his Credit should be endangered? his Office taken away? his Gown turned over
his ears? And to all this, let us add Sickness, Bondage, Ruin, Fire; It comes
to no more than what every wise man is prepared for. There is no Calamity,
which he has not thought upon beforehand, and made as easy to him by long
Meditation, as others make it by long Sufferance. That which happens to any
man, may be every man's case. Where Is the Rich man that can secure himself from
Hunger and Beggary? Where Is the Great man that may not fall into Disgrace and
Contempt? Where Is the Kingdom or Nation that may not be overturned and utterly
unpeopled? Have not we our selves lived to see the Head of a great and glorious
Prince under the Hand of the common Hangman, and struck off by the command of
his own Subjects? A most execrable Villainy, and beyond all Precedent! And these
prodigious Changes are not the work of much time neither; There Is but a moment
betwixt Plenty and Beggary; the Court, and the Cottage; a Throne, and a
Scaffold. This is the mutable Condition of Humane Affairs; What was another
man's Lot to day, may be mine to morrow. No man bears ill Fortune, better than
he that always expects it.

IV. In Prosperity, Virtue has little or no occasion of showing her self; but
in the time of Adversity, her power is manifested in our Patience. We are
become a Spectacle (says the Apostle) to God, Angels and Men. And it is a
Spectacle in which God takes delight, to see a brave Man grappling with ill
Fortune, and leading all his Enemies Foreign and Domestic (Passions and
Casualties) in Triumph. It Is nothing to govern a ship in a smooth Sea, and a
gentle Gale. He that is not tried, lives in Ignorance. Most unfortunate men,
(we cry) that ever it should come to this! But on the other side, Most
fortunate men (say I) that have had the benefit of this Experiment! that we
have supported our selves with Honor and Constancy, where others perchance
would have shrunk under the Burden. We are not therefore to yield and render
up our selves in Crosses and Disasters; but to make good our Ground, and stand
firm upon any Accident that can befall us: For it is but breaking of the first
Shock, and we shall find the rest to be only Fancy and Opinion. The Works of
Nature are found in us alike; but for Poverty, Discredit, Contumely, and what
else the common People call Evils; some there are that bear them with Patience,
and others without so much as taking the least notice of them: So that it is
not the force of any Natural Impression that we labor under, but the Influence
of a perverse Opinion. Why should a man belie himself then, and call any
Calamity Insupportable, which he may make easy when he pleases, only by
changing his Opinion of it? Every man is just as unhappy as he thinks himself,
and let him complain of what he will, His Impatience is the greater Mischief of
the two.

V. Is there any Sickness, or any Pain so obstinate and stubborn, but Time will
either abate it, or take it away? Now the Question is, Whether we shall put an
end to it our selves, or stay till it comes to an end without us? For Time will
most certainly do that at last, which ordinary Prudence might better do at
present. Nay, if we had never so great a mind to entertain and cherish
Melancholy, it would leave us at length in spite of our hearts. Grief, it is
true, when it is fresh, may find Tenderness and Compassion; but as it grows old,
it grows ridiculous, and nothing more odious. If a miserable Wretch were ever
the better for sobbing and lamenting, he should have my consent to spend day
and night in Sighs and Groans, beating of his Breast, and in all the Outrages
that were ever exercised by a disconsolate Creature. But if Howling and Crying
be to no purpose, let us betake our selves to an invincible Resolution, and
struggle with our Calamities. The Pilot deserves to be thrown overboard, that
quits the Helm in a Storm, and sets the Ship adrift, at the Mercy of the
Billows: But he that stands to his Tackle, and bears up against foul Weather,
(though he sinks with the Vessel) perishes yet with Honor, and the Comfort of
having done his Duty.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Hope and Despair: And how we are to moderate both.

I. THat Hope which is not placed upon Almighty God, is vain and deceitful, and
in effect, but a waking dream. Why should any man torment himself with the
Expectation of things to come? He that desires nothing, hopes for nothing; and
he that contemns all earthly things, desires nothing; for no man can desire
what he despises. Nor is it enough for any one to tell me, that the thing he
hopes for is easily compassed, or that his Hopes never deceived him as yet; for
let them be what they will, they carry great Trouble, Uncertainty and Anxiety
along with them. A man should no more hanker after, or grasp at things out of
his Reach, than leave the plain Way, to wander among Thorns and Precipices: No
less uneasy is the one to the Mind, than the other is to the Body. He that
lives in Hope, has not one moment of quiet, so long as the Will wants the thing
it hopes for.

II. We should never cast an eye upon any thing, either without us, or about
us, but with this Consideration: It is all transitory and frail. How strangely
do we forget our selves! Are we not born Mortal? And this day, nay this very
hour, what assurance have we of it? Do we not live upon Trust, and is not Death
at the very heel of us? It is by Gods Power and Mercy that we live and have a
Being. From him we have received all, and when he calls, to him it is that we
are to render all without repining. He Is an ungrateful Debtor, that speaks ill
of his Creditor. There is not any thing under Heaven, that we ought to hope
for: And Heaven it self is the only warrantable Subject of our Hope.

III. Despair proceeds from a sluggish Abjection of Mind; too great an
Apprehension of Difficulties; a criminal Distrust of our selves, and a Defect
both of Resolution and Industry. This weakness may be overcome by suggesting
Encouragements drawn from the Examples of those that have extricated themselves
out of greater Straits. Let us begin then, and press forward; for God will
assist our Endeavors, and all Difficulties will be made easy to us, so soon
as we shall have relinquished the false Opinions that have misled us. There is
not any thing befalls us, but what was allotted us from Eternity, and it is
either tolerable or otherwise. If it may be born, we are not to despair, but to
endure it: If not, it will make a quick end both of it self, and of us too, and
we are not to despair there neither. If we cannot endure it, it is short; if we
can, it is light. It is in our own power, to make many things tolerable, by
balancing them with the benefit and convenience that attends them. Affliction
is the occasion of Virtue.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Fear: The Vanity of it, and how to master it. Rashness to be avoided; and
something more of Anger.

I. I Have known many people without any visible, or so much as probable
danger, run raving up and down, as if they were stark mad, upon the bare
Apprehension of some Imaginary Mischief to befall them. The Torment they endure
is unspeakable; what betwixt the Impression of a present, and the Apprehension
of a mischief to come. There are many Misfortunes which we create, and have a
Being only in the Imagination. There are others which threaten us indeed, but a
far off, and they will come soon enough of themselves, without being drawn on
before their time. There are some so weak, as to govern themselves by Dreams
and idle Phansies, without any reasonable ground of Conjecture at all; and to
be startled at every foolish Rumor. A word mistaken is enough to break their
sleep; and the Apprehension of a Great Man's Displeasure, puts them directly out
of their Wits; not so much for the Displeasure it self, as for the Consequences
of it. But these are vain Thoughts, and the vainer, the more Troublesome. For
Truth has its Measure and Limits, but Imagination is boundless. And the main
Difference I find betwixt the Sufferance of a Misfortune, and the Expectation
of it, is this: The Grief for what has befaln us, will over; but the fear of
what may befall us, has no end.

II. He that would deliver himself from the Tyranny of Fear, let him take for
granted, that what he fears will come to pass; and then enter into a
Computation upon the whole matter. Upon this Deliberation, he will certainly
find, that the things he fears are nothing so terrible in themselves, as in the
false Opinion of them. It Is a hard case for a man to be banished, or laid in
Irons. It Is a terrible pain to be burnt alive. And yet we have many instances,
not only of Christians, but Infidels also, that have Despised and Triumphed
over all this; and more indeed, than this amounts to. Stephen suffered death
with a quiet Constancy of mind, and prayed for his Persecutors. Laurence
rejoices upon the Gridiron, and braves the Tyrant. The Virgin Appollonia, leaps
into the Fire. Anaxarchus is cheerful in the Mortar, under the very stroke of
the Hammer. Socrates takes off his Cup of Poison, as if it had been a Frolic,
and drinks the Health to Critias. What is there now so terrible in the Faggot,
or the Gibbet, or in the train of Executioners, and Officers of Justice that
attend it? under this Pomp and Formality, which serves only to fright Fools,
there lies Death: That, which so many thousands of Men, Women and Children,
have not only Welcomed, but Courted. Set aside the noise, the hurry, and the
disguise in these Cases; and let every thing appear in its own shape, we shall
find there is nothing terrible in the matter, but the mere Apprehension of it:
And that it fares with us great Boys, as it does with little ones; our very
Nurses, and our Playfellows, if they be but dressed up with a white Sheet, or a
Vizard, are enough to put us out of our Senses. Nay, and we are the sillier
Children of the two, for we are struck with a Panique Terror, not only at the
Counterfeit of a Reality; but the very Counterfeit of a Counterfeit torments us.

III. Bring it now from a particular to a common Cause; and let every man say
to himself, I have a frail and mortal Body, liable to distempers, sickness, and
in the conclusion, to death it self. All this I have known from a Child, and
the many ill Accidents that threaten me. What have I now to fear? Bodily
sickness? My Soul will be the better for it. Poverty? My Life will be the safer,
and the sweeter for it. Loss of Fortune? Why then farewell all the Cares and
Dangers that accompany it. Loss of Credit? If I suffer deservedly, I shall
detest the Cause, but approve the Justice: If wrongfully, my Conscience will be
my Comforter. Shall I fear a Repulse? or a Disappointment? there never was any
man, but wanted something or other that he desired. Banishment? I Will Travel,
and Banish my self. Loss of my Eyes? It will deliver me from many Temptations.
What if men speak evil of me? It is but what they are used to do, and what I
deserve. Shall I fear Death? It is the very condition I came into the World
upon. Well! But to dye in a strange Country! All Countries are alike, to him
that has no abiding-place here. But for a man to die before his time! As if a
man should complain of having his Shackles knocked off, and being discharged of
a Prison before his time. We are not to look upon Death or Banishment, as
causes of Mourning, as Punishments, but only as Tributes of Mortality. It is a
senseless thing to fear what we cannot shun.

IV. Let us take heed of being over-confident; and venturing at things beyond
our strength; for, no man is more liable to miscarriages, than he that presumes
too much upon himself. All our sufficiency and strength comes from above, and
we can do nothing of our selves, without Gods assistance: Our Presumption
arises from too high a conceit of our selves, too mean a one of our
Adversaries; together with a rash headiness of Nature, that understands neither
Reason nor Business. The wise man is cautious, and adventures upon nothing,
without first taking the measure of his own Abilities: Whereas he that is
overhasty, and presumptuous, falls on without any consideration; and, after
the first effort, when he finds the difficulty greater than he imagined it, his
courage falls and faints: And he comes at last, to an acknowledgment of the
vanity and unadvisedness of his mistake. Security is the forerunner of
Calamity.

V. He that would govern his Anger, must begin with a contempt of the pretended
Causes of it: For it is not the supposed Injury, but the false opinion of it,
that does us the mischief: We provoke, teize and inflame our selves, and then
cast the blame upon others. No man is injured, but by himself. We should do
well to cokes and flatter our Minds, as Nurses do their Children, Be quiet, and
thou shall have it; be not Angry, do not struggle, and make a noise, and thou
shall see, things will be well enough yet. I would have a man set apart some
certain days, and say to himself, I am resolved, that nothing shall make me
angry this day, whatever it be. Let him but proceed then, from a day to a week;
from a week to a month, and so on; he shall soon grow so much the Master of
himself, as to make that his Diversion, which formerly was his Torment. A
gentle and peaceable Humor, is a very agreeable Comfort in Society; but to him
that is endued with it, incomparably a greater Blessing: For in all
Difficulties, it is still cheerful, and in all Conflicts victorious.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Faculties of the reasonable Soul. The Understanding is not to be
employed upon Curiosities. What study is best. The evil of meddling with other
Peoples manners. Not to concern our selves for other men's Opinions. Of
Self-denial.

I. OUr Understanding was given us by Almighty God, to the end that we might
know him, and love him: But sin has given it two wounds, Ignorance and
Blindness; for we are at a loss, first, in the knowledge of Truth; and then, in
the knowledge of Good and Evil. We are therefore (in this state of danger) to
take at least as much care, what we admit into the Understanding, upon the
Recommendation of the Senses; as whom we receive into a Town, in time of a
close Siege, or a raging Pestilence. The Senses make the Tender, and the
Understanding takes, and whatsoever the Judgment allows, is propounded to the
Will. But the Sense presents both Good and Evil; and it belongs to the Mind,
either to entertain, or refuse.

II. We are in the first place, to keep the Understanding from amusing it self
upon vain Subtilties and Curiosities: It was given us for Divinity, and
substantial Wisdom; and it is our part to Husband it, and not squander away so
excellent a gift upon Trifles. He that ventures upon an unknown Herb, to learn
the Temper and Qualities of it, if it prove a strong Poison, his Life is
hazarded in the very scrutiny, without attaining his end: Such is the case of
those that will be prying into impertinent and abstruse Curiosities; they are
lost beyond recovery, even before they so much as know what they would be at To
know that which a man is never the better for, is next door to down right
Ignorance. He that would be truly wise, does not study to get a Name, but to
order his Life; and how to relieve his Mind, rather than how to delight it.
What is any man the better for knowing the influences of the Stars, if he be
still a stranger to his own Infirmities? for all the Flowers and Excellencies
of Elocution, if he has not yet learned to hold his Tongue? Let him that
delights in Novelty, renew himself: That takes upon him to refute other men's
Errors, begin with his own. Let him that delights in History, to see what
other People have done, consider in the first place, what he is to do himself.
Let him that makes it his business to compound differences among his
Neighbors, not forget to pacify his own Tumultuary Passions. We spend so much
time upon Superfluities, that we have none left for things necessary. That Is
the necessary knowledge, that makes us rather Good, than Learned.

III. To what end is it, that we puzzle and perplex our selves about
Controversies, which, for the most part, would be more for our Credit, to
contemn than to resolve. It is the better half of our study, to learn those
things, which we are, in honor, to forget, as soon as we have them. But there
is an Intemperance of Knowledge, as well as of other things. There is no end of
Books: Our Libraries are furnished for Sight and Ostentation, rather than for
Use. The very Indexes are not to be read over in an Age. And in this multitude,
how great a part of them are either dangerous, or not worth the reading? It may
be well enough to take a taste of many; but when that is done, we are to set up
our rest upon a few. It is not so much from Books, as from Practice and
Examples that we are to expect the Improvement of the Mind.

IV. Oh the Vanity of Mortals! to spend our Lives and our Spirits upon Humane
Arts and Sciences, (as if we were never to die) without any regard at all to
the thought of a Life everlasting, which is not to be acquired by profound
Learning, but by Probity of Manners, and Simplicity of Virtue. What are we the
better for the Voluminous History of the World, even if we had it all without
Book? for the Records of all the Tyrannies and Rebellions that ever past from
the Creation of the Universe, to this Instant? How much better were it to check
the growth of our own Iniquities, than to transmit the story of other Peoples.
Geometry teaches us to measure our Lands; but why do we not first learn to
measure our Necesfities? Arithmetic teaches us to count what we have got, but
why do we not rather learn to contemn it, and cheerfully to part with that,
which with so much carking and caring we have scraped together? Music shows us
how to make up a Harmony of several Voices; but it were much more for our
benefit, to learn the Art of Reconciling our Sense and Reason: No^ is the skill
of Flats and Sharps near so much to our purpose, as the Science of moderating
the Affections; so as neither to be puffed up with Prosperity, nor dejected in
Adversity. Not that I dislike the knowledge of these things; for I esteem them
to be very Laudable Accomplishments: But in the second place, and after we have
studied our selves, and what more concerns us. He that knows every thing but
himself, knows in effect as much as comes to nothing.

V. It is a sordid and infamous humor, to be prying into, and meddling with
other Peoples matters; to be observing and descanting, upon Lives and Manners;
and to make the worst of every thing. What have I to do with the Servant of
another, who is to stand and fall to his own Master? The great Judge of the
world, has reserved Judgment to himself; and he that presumes to judge his
Neighbor, invades the Throne of the Almighty: Let every man enter into the
Privacies of his own Conscience, and see what Good is wanting in him, what Ill
abounds; and he will find work enough at home to employ his Pragmatical Spleen
upon, without hunting after the faults of others. And there is no Protection
neither, against the Sting of a Malevolent Wit, and a Licentious Tongue. Was
not our Savior himself, taunted and traduced by the Jews? And is not the Holy
Gospel daily perverted by Heretics? It is with distempered minds, as with
Melancholic Bodies; whatsoever they take, turns to Corruption. The Action is
most commonly qualified by the Intention; and Good or Bad accordingly: But this
is only known to him that searches the heart and the reins. But let the Action
we Censure be never so Foul, and the Person never so Guilty; what is it yet to
us? How Unchristian an Indecency is it, to expose the Nakedness of our Brother
for a public Spectacle? Why do we not rather observe our selves? Judge and
condemn our selves? and turn the point of our Malice upon our own Hearts? He
that is a severe Judge to himself, shall escape the Judgment of the most High
God.

VI. They that are so quick-sighted, to discover other Peoples failings (out of
a desire to be thought shrewd men) are commonly as jealous of being paid in
their own Coin; and of being Hated, Contemned, ill thought of, and ill spoken
of by others. Toward the subduing of this Vice, we are first to Moderate the
Pleasure we take in the Acclamations and Applauses of the Multitude, and then
utterly to cast away all curiosity of knowing what the World thinks or says of
us; for we are many times possessed with a suspicion, that such or such a man
talks slightly, and has a mean opinion of us, who is so far from speaking
amiss, that he says nothing at all of us, nor has us so much as in his thought.
Let a man say with the Apostle, If I pleased men, I were not the Servant of
Christ. It Is little to me that I am judged by you, etc. Such as we are with
God, such we truly are; and neither the better nor the worse for the Opinion or
Discourse of Men. It Is much better to be good, than to be so esteemed.

VII. If we would have nothing fall out contrary to our Will, we must
absolutely lay it down, and Will nothing at all, but in submission to the Will
of God. This is the way that leads to a true Tranquillity of mind, and to a
lasting peace. He that wishes for nothing but what he should, may live as he
would. It is the only Felicity of this Life, to square our Wills to the Will of
God. He who from all Eternity has appointed the end, has likewise appointed the
means; and whether the way be smooth or craggy, through Prosperity, or
Adversity, it is still what God has allotted us, in order to our Eternal Bliss
He that obeys Divine Providence, and follows it cheerfully, does well and
wisely: For let him lag and hang off never so much, he will be forced to follow
in spite of his Teeth. (Beside the Impiety of his Disobedience.) God Almighty
leads the willing, and draws the unwilling.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the State of Proficients. Diverse Helps to Improvement. The value and the
use of time. God is always present.

I. IT is a good step toward Virtue, for a man to be Conscious of his own
Iniquities, and to desire to mend: Without which, we go backward every day,
from bad to worse. When we are once in the way, we must go on as we began; and
the more haste we make, the sooner shall we enjoy the Serenity of Mind which we
aim at. It is a good sign, when a man comes to see his failings better than he
did: As it is in a Patient, when he comes to be sensible that he is sick. Every
man is apt to flatter himself, and therefore let us have a care of being
over-credulous. If, upon the sifting and examining of our Hearts and Thoughts,
we find an Abatement of our Lusts, a greater firmness of mind than ordinary,
and a more absolute command of our selves, we are in a fair way of Proficiency
and Emprovement. It is an inestimable Blessing, for a man to be Master of
himself, and to be at Unity with himself. A good man is unchangeably the same.
A wicked man is perpetually at variance with himself.

II. It is but one days work to arrive at the highest pitch of Holiness, if we
would but turn with our whole hearts, from the Creature to the Creator. Now
whether our Conversion be sincere, or no, we shall know by these marks: If we
be out of love with Vanities and transitory things: If we delight in Solitude
and Contemplation: If that please us best, that is perfectest: If we prefer a
good Conscience to Godward, before an empty Reputation among men. If we do all
this, it goes well with us: But the most powerful inducement to Virtue of all
the rest, is the daily Meditation of the Life and Passion of Christ. That Story
is the Book of life; and sufficient to bring us to Heaven, if all the Libraries
in the World, Authors and all, were utterly destroyed. But it is not yet
enough, barely to know Christ, and meditate of him, unless we likewise imitate
him, and lead our lives in a Conformity to his word and example. The way to
rectify that which is crooked, is to bring it to the Rule.

III. It was well said of somebody, That good order is as necessary to the
Mind, for the gaining of Virtue, as it is to the Body for the recovery of
Health; for there are a thousand things in the way else, to divert and retard
us. As, the inordinate love, either of our selves, or of any thing else:
Impatience in Losses; the overmuch indulging of our selves in our Appetites
and Pleasures, whether in Meat or Drink, Conversation, or the like; the
plunging of our selves over head and ears in the affairs of this World, and
being too much wedded to our own Opinions; rejecting the motions and
inspirations of the good Spirit within us. These obstacles must be removed, and
we are to encounter them, with Resolution and Vigor; we are to proceed with
Readiness, Alacrity, and a good Intention, and with an industry answerable to
the excellency of the work in hand. It is not the number of our Exercises, but
the through doing of them; not so much the thing it self, as the manner of doing
it, that avails us.

IV. Our days are upon the wing; Time flies away, and there is no recalling of
what is past: Our life depends upon the Future, and is still looking forward;
and we consume it in mere Preparation, till Old Age and Death it self over-take
us, unprovided for it. It is in our Lives as upon the way, in good Company. The
time passes away in Chat and Discourse, and we are at the end of our Journey
before we are aware. For, sleeping or waking, we still keep on our pace, and
pass insensibly to our last end, even before we think on it: What is it then
that we trifle for? why do we linger and dally? Time must be laid hold on
immediately, or it is gone for ever. The value of a day, nay, of an hour, is
inestimable, and the loss of it irreparable. If a man comes to enter upon our
Estates, or there falls out any dispute about a Landmark, we must presently to
Law and Arms. But our time and our life is open for any man to take that
pleases; so Prodigal are we in the only case where we may be honestly covetous.
We are not to compute Life by the number of Years, but by the well employing of
them; and let the oldest man alive discount for the time he has spent in Sleep,
Luxury, Quarrels, Visits, Lazy sauntrings up and down; in doing just nothing at
all, or at best, nothing to the purpose, without so much as minding what he
did, and he shall find, that at the end of a hundred years, he dies a Child. We
are apt enough to lament the loss of our Timepast, and yet we lose more still
in the Lamentation: Why do we not rather improve the present, while we have it,
to prevent a late Repentance? why do we lose this instant, which is our own,
and pretend to dispose of the Future, which is out of our power? In effect,
Life is but a moment, and delay is absolute loss. He that puts off to day,
comes too late to morrow.

V. It is to Almighty God, that we are to direct all our Thoughts, Words and
Deeds; to the exclusion of any other Object, applying our selves wholly to his
blessed will. He that takes God for his Guide, shall be sure never to miss his
way: Nor shall he miscarry in any of his affairs, who directs all to Gods
glory; and lives, as in his holy presence: Neither is it possible for any man
to avoid his All-seeing eye, which reaches not only to our Words and Actions,
but pries into the Thoughts of our Hearts. And He Is in a great mistake, that
when the Door is bolted, and the Curtains drawn, reckons himself to be alone;
for there is no place so dark, or so retired, as to exclude the Omni-presence
of God, in whom we Live, Move, and have our Being: Whether we Eat or Drink,
Walk, or Discourse, our thoughts are to be always upon him; we are to do our
utmost, to tender our selves worthy of the favor of his Countenance, and not
to do those things in the sight of an All-seeing God, which even before a
Temporal Judge, we would be ashamed of. Every man should live, as if there were
only God and himself in the World; and cheerfully embrace the lot which
Providence has set out for him, whether Prosperity or Adversity. We are to
seek God, and whether we find him by this or that way, it matters not, provided
that we find him at last.

CHAP. XX.
Of the good of Solitude. Ill Company to be avoided. The Vices of the World,
and what they are. Virtue, the study of a Proficient. How to know when we have
attained it.

1. IT is a great Argument, of a clear and well composed Mind, when a man is at
Unity with himself; for he approaches in some degree, to the Felicity of God
himself, who, in himself is blessed for evermore. Neither can he be said
properly ever to be alone, that is, never separated from Christ. If so it be,
that we cannot hold our Tongues, we may talk to our felves, but let us be sure
then that we talk to honest men. If you would know now, what a man should say
to himself; why truly, the same things that he is used to say to others of his
Neighbors. Let him speak ill of himself, to himself; let him call himself to
an account for all his sins, and punish himself for whatsoever he finds amiss,
and he will never want matter to work upon. Let him retire and give himself
leisure for Contemplation; but let him then conceal his very Retirement. He
that makes Proclamation of his Solitude, retires only to be more public, which
is a kind of slothful Ambition. Now there must be a Retirement of the Mind too,
as well as of the Body, to make it Beneficial and Comfortable. We must withdraw
our selves from all vain Employments, and not only from Company, but from all
things too which do not concern us; we must not admit so much as any Creature,
no nor the very Image or Idea of any creature, into our thoughts, we must blot
out of our minds, all the toys and fooleries of this World, and in the most
secret recess of our Souls, address our selves to God alone. In this Privacy of
mind, in this Oblivion of all idle and impertinent things, we shall gain peace
of Heart, true Tranquillity and Repose. Let this be our retreat then, and this
our business: For we shall certainly find God there, where the Creature is
abandoned.

II. It is rarely seen, that any man is good himself who keeps ill Company: For
there is nothing so destructive of good Manners, as to Herd with the Multitude,
who do commonly leave a man worse than they found him. It is not for a tender
and unsettled mind, to resist the force of ill examples, that break in upon a
man, with a kind of Authority and Credit; for men are apt to run over to the
stronger side. The man of the Gusto, gains upon us by degrees, and takes us by
the Palate. A rich Neighbor strikes us with Envy, or Avarice, and many a man
has been undone by an ill example. Our very Parents, our Companions, our
Servants, draw us some way or other into mischiefs. The whole World is full of
snares and hazzards, and we are no sooner out of our Mothers belly, but we are
encompast with dangers, as if we were dropped into the Quarters of an Enemy.
There is not any man living hardly, that does not either recommend some
Wickedness to us, or imprint it upon us, or at least infect us with some evil
disposition, before we are aware. O the delicious sweetness of those blessed
hours that a man spends in his Private Family or Study; apart, from the noise
and business of the People! How calm! How gentle! not so much as a Cloud, or a
Breath of Wind, to disturb the Serenity of his Mind. But, by and by, some body
calls him out; away he goes, gets more Company, makes up a Club, and never
fails of falling into some excess or other, and returning worse than he went
out. This is the Fruit of Public Conversation; but we are not sensible of the
damage we receive in Company, till we come afterward to reflect upon it in
Solitude. Let us make what have we can then into our selves, before we are
overcome with the Contagion of the Vicious Multitude. The Mind that is most
contracted, is most cheerful.

III. Let a man but imagine himself upon the top of an high Mountain, and there
taking a prospect of the miserable World, he shall quickly see enough to put
him out of love with it, and all that is in it. Nothing but Robberies at Land,
Pyracies at Sea, the Tumults and Horrors of War, Humane blood spilt like water;
Sin and Iniquity broken loose, and beating down all before it: Look into the
Cabinets of great men, and you shall there see such spectacles of Brutal Lust,
as cannot but disgust and nauseate the very Actors themselves; and every where
else, so boundless a License and Disorder, that we would almost swear the whole
world were a Bedlam (but the madmen are too many for the sober) and their
Number is their Justification. The Laws themselves are turned into snares, and
Innocence is there invaded, where it ought to be protected. The Not-guilty is
in more danger than the Guilty: and the Judge more criminal than the Prisoner:
For where there is money, there can be no transgression. A pack of Calumniating
Knaves in one place; a troop of Fawning Parasites in another; here Feuds, there
Flatteries; one man wallowing in his Wine, another stretching himself upon his
Bed. Insatiable Avarice on the one side; Slavish Ambition on the other. In all
Public Assemblies, more Vices than Men: Sins of irreverence toward God,
Injustice toward our Neighbor, and Abuse of the Creature: So that being guilty
of all sins, they are to expect that all* sins will rise in judgment against
them. One would think that this view of the World, might be sufficient of it
self, to take off any man's heart from the love of it: But when a man considers
the difficulty of mastering so many Temptations, and bearing up against so many
ill and powerful Examples, certainly he cannot choose but bethink himself of a
Retreat. It is a hard matter for a man to love Innocence, where Wickedness is
in Authority and Credit: If it does not absolutely corrupt us, it will yet
puzzle and hinder us. The only way to be safe and quiet, is to retire into our
selves, were we may look upon the World, without being endangered by it. He
that has renounced external things, and withdrawn into himself, is Invincible;
the World is to him as a Prison; and Solitude, a Paradise.

IV. But we are never the better for quitting the World, if we do not
vigorously apply our selves to the study and practice of Virtue; without which
we can have no Comfort, no Repose; and having that, we can want nothing. There
are three things that seem to have a fair Analogy, one with the other, in all
things, and above all things, is God himself: Among Sensibles, is Light, and
among the perfections of the Mind, is Virtue. God is the Light and Virtue of
all things: Light is the Virtue of the World, and the Image of God: Virtue is
the Light of the Mind, by which we are called, and become the Children of God.
Without a pure mind, there is no attaining of this Perfection; for Virtue is
the Perfection of a man, that repairs all our failings, and fills us with
delight; she raises up our fleshly Nature, in things spiritual. She is the Rule
of Life, a light to the Blind: She beats down sin, and brings us to Eternal
Life. In the study of Virtue, we are to learn what it is (in the first place)
both in general and in particular: For no man seeks he knows not what. We are
then to keep our selves in the continual practice of it: Like Soldiers that
will be still exercising and skirmishing, even in time of Peace, and without an
Enemy: Very well understanding, that these Encounters, though but represented,
and in jest, keep them in breath and readiness for Assaults in earnest. Let a
man suppose himself under all the Oppression and Indignity imaginable; stripped
to his Shirt, and thrown upon a Dunghill, and let him then make trial of his
Patience, as if this were his very case indeed. He that exercises himself
before the Battle, will be more resolute in it: He that has often lost Blood,
goes cheerfully to the Combat.

V. The Habits of Virtues, are the work of Time: And we shall know when we are
possessed of any of them, by these Tokens. We have made a good Progress toward
any Virtue, when we have extinguished, or at least in a large measure, suppressed
the contrary Vice; when we have brought all our Passions to a submission and
obedience unto Reason; when the practice of Virtue is become not only easy,
but delightful to us; when in contempt of Temporizers, we stand up with a
generous Freedom, in the Vindication of Virtue, against all opposers; when we
come once naturally to abominate those things, which formerly we doted upon,
with a depraved Inclination; when the love of Virtue is grown so habitual to
us, that we allow our selves in nothing that is ill, no, not so much as in a
dream; when we come to imitate what we approve in others, and to abstain from
what we reprehend; when nothing that is amiss seems little to us, but worthy of
our greatest care and diligence to avoid; when we can see our Equals preferred,
without Envy; when we have the honesty to confess our faults, and submit them
to correction and reproof; when we can content our selves in the Testimony of a
good Conscience, without making publication of our good Works. (Which in the
very doing, are their own reward,) when the whole business of our life is
Virtue, which is always in Act, and never tired.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Theological Virtues. Faith is to be manifested in our Works. In God alone
we are to put our trust. Motives to the Love of God. The Love of our Neighbors
shows it self in good Offices. An Exhortation to Charity.

I. FAith is the Basis of all other Virtues, and the Foundation of Christian
Life; without which, no man can please God. This is the Wisdom that has subdued
the World, to which we are firmly to adhere, without any unnecessary Curiosity
or Disquisition. But we are to do, as well as to believe; for Faith without
Works is dead. Now while we are Christians in Profession and Discourse, let us
have a care, not to be Infidels in our Lives and Manners. If we believe the
Gospel, why do we not obey it? If we do believe an Eternity, why do we prefer a
momentary Life and Pleasure before it? What are we the better for believing
that which is True and Good, if in our Actions we be false and wicked? A good
Faith, and an ill Life will hardly stand together: For he that believes aright,
will practice what he believes.

II. Since most certain it is, that all things are ordered and governed by an
Overruling Providence, insomuch, that not a Bird of the Air, nor the Leaf of a
Tree, falls to the ground without it: This methinks should give us Courage and
Confidence in all Extremities; and a full Assurance that our Heavenly Father
will never fail us at a time of need. Let us therefore cast our selves wholly
upon the Mercy and Good pleasure of Almighty God; and not depend upon the help
and counsels of man, which are deceitful and uncertain. What if matters go
cross, and beside our expectation, so as to unsettle the whole course of our
Thoughts and Affairs? What if we should be visited with Sickness, threatened
with false Accusation; perhaps worse Accidents? Our trust is in God, our
dependence upon him: And who knows but the Divine Wisdom has made choice of
these Afflictions, as the means to bring us to Eternal Glory? The Afflictions
of this Life, are as nothing to him, that has his heart fixed upon the
blessings of a better: Whatsoever a man hopes for, he may compass, and reckon
himself as possessed of what he believes.

III. Charity is the Mistress of all Virtues, and is directed either to God, or
to our Neighbor. To God in the first place; whom we are to love with all our
heart, with all our soul, and with all our strength; (merely for himself, and
for his infinite Goodness) above all things that are amiable: For, it is to his
Grace and Mercy, that we are indebted for our Being, Life, Motion, Sense and
Understanding. He it is that has delivered us from the Bondage of Satan,
dignified our Souls with infinite Privileges, and prepared Eternal Life for
us, of his own free Goodness, without any antecedent Merit. The Heaven, the
Earth, the Air, the Water, and the whole Universe, call to us aloud, to love
and serve that God, who has made all these things for our service. If the good
of the Soul be the thing we look for, what need we go further than to God
himself? who is the only, and the Sovereign good, great and desirable beyond
imagination. It is only by Love (though in a vast disproportion) that we can
acquit our selves to the Almighty, in kind. Love is Active, not Idle: It does
not seek its own: It surmounts all difficulties; and, He that loves truly, may
dye, but cannot be overcome.

IV. Nature has implanted in all reasonable Creatures, a love of Society, Which
ought to work more really in Christians, who are called to the same Faith and
Glory, and are Members of the same Body. No man can love God, that does not
love his Neighbor. Now this Love to our Neighbor is exercised in conferring
of Benefits, doing all sorts of good Offices, and going before others in
Humility and Kindness. The grace and value of a Bounty lies much in the
cheerful and the speedy applying of it: For there must be no stop, but in the
modesty of the Receiver; there needs no more to the relief of a necessitous
person, than that we know his wants: For, it breaks the heart of a Generous
man, to be put to beg it; and the Favor is ten times is great, when it
prevents the asking of it. It is rather a purchase than a gift, when a man
receives a Benefit upon a Request. He that gives a Prayer, or a Blush, for a
good turn, pays dear for it. In cases where we could not foresee, or prevent a
suit, we are however to show, that we would have done it, if we could, by our
manner of granting it; which ought to be speedy and cheerful. There must be
good words, as well as good deeds: It must be done frankly, and without either
Vanity or Reproach. It is a great kindness to put a Petitioner quickly out of
his pain, by stopping his mouth, and doing his business, so soon as ever we
know it. And then, we are not to blow a Trumpet, when we give an Alms. The
thing will speak it self; and he that sies in secret, will reward us openly.

V. Among the Acts of Christian Charity, there is not any thing more acceptable
to God, nor any more effectual proof of our Faith, than that compassion to the
poor, which we exercise in giving of Alms. Let us therefore have a care of
despising the poor; who, though necessitous themselves, have it yet in their
power to make us rich. It is a kind of redeeming our selves with our money; and
turning an instrument of Avarice, into an occasion of Mercy: Shall we give more
for a place in a Playhouse, than for a place in Paradise. We pay Duties and
Taxes to Temporal Princes, let there be never so great a Dearth; And can we not
afford, out of our Abundance, a morsel of Bread to the King of Heaven, in his
poor Members? He that is close-handed to the needy in his Distress, is guilty
of his Brothers Blood. He that does not feed him, murders him. Our thoughts
are so much taken up with providing for our Heirs, that we never so much as
think what shall become of our Selves: But we had better abate a little of
their Patrimony, than to hazard the main of our own Salvation. But let us come
to a Reckoning, and see what are our possessions in this World? What do we
pretend to in the Next? In Death we have nothing left us, but what we have sent
to Heaven beforehand, by the hands of the Needy. Men of little Faith! There Is
our Treasure. A Thief may pick a Lock, and break open our Coffers here below,
but Heaven is impregnable.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Prudence. The Necessity and the Difficulty of it. The duty of a Wise man.

I. AS a Workman is nothing without his Line and Level; so, neither are We,
without Prudence. It is the eye of the Soul, the art of life, the guide of all
our Actions, and the Rule of other Virtues: There is no living comfortably
without it; but exceedingly difficult it is, and obscure. It is difficult:
First, in regard of the Comprehension of it; for, it takes cognizance of the
whole Universe, in it self, and in every part of it. Secondly, In respect of
the Uncertainty of Humane Affairs; which, by reason of infinite Variations and
Accidents, and their dependencies upon diverse circumstances, are hardly
reducible to a Rule: Nay, there are many times such contrarieties and
disagreements, as are almost impossible to be reconciled. The Obscurity lies in
this, that we see only the Appearances of things, when the Springs and Causes
that move them, are in the dark: We see only the top of the Building, but the
Foundation is out of sight: Beside, that the good or bad event of things is
concealed in the Unsearchable Decree of the Almighty; so that there are very
few men wise enough, to make the best of their business.

II. Wisdom is the Product of Experience and Memory. The one teaches us what is
best to be done; and the other minds us when we are to do it. He that commits
himself to general experiences, and does not venture out of his depth, is safe.
To do wisely, a man should first take a measure of himself; and next, of the
matter he takes in hand, for fear of over-valuing his own strength. One man is
undone by presuming too much upon his Eloquence. Another runs himself out of
his Fortune, for want of proportioning his Expense to his Estate! A third,
kills himself with laying more upon an infirm Body, than it is able to bear:
Wherefore we are to compare our Force with our Undertaking; and to have a care
of Burdens that are too heavy for our shoulders. We should not meddle with any
thing neither, but what we may hope to go through withal. The next thing is the
choice of our Companions; for, we had need have a very good opinion of those
people, with whom we propound to divide our Lives: And to look narrowly into
their Conversation, that we be not ruined for our good will. We are (in
Conclusion) to examine our selves how we stand inclined to the thing in
Question; for, It Is lost labor, to go about to force Nature.

III. It is a hard matter for a man in Passion, to distinguish Truth and
Honesty from Error and Delusion; so that it is a point of Prudence, not to
enter upon any considerable Action in a Distemper of mind: For there is no
greater Enemy to Wisdom, than Precipitation, which brings many a man to
destruction, beyond recovery: Wherefore nothing is to be done Headily, or
without good advice. Men are naturally unstable, and irresolute: Providence
uncertain; Events dubious: and Experience it self proves many times deceitful.
In the multitude of Counselors, there is safety. There are many easy people
that judge of things by the Gloss and Outside only; and so fall into great
mistakes: But the wise man passes a strict enquiry into the things themselves,
abstracted from all Artifice and Imposture; into the Qualities, and not only
into the Names of things. For, what is Money, Reputation, Title, but a
superficial Vernish to dazzle Children and Fools? We are to place our selves, as
upon a Watchtower, where we may discover all Accidents afar off, without
danger of being surpised, and and crying out with the senseless Multitude; Who
would have thought it! We are likewise to proceed with deliberation, maturity
of judgment, and diligent examination of things; for fear of ill Circumstances:
For there is so near a resemblance betwixt Vice and Virtue, that we may very
well mistake the one for the other; and entertain that for Wisdom, which is
nothing in the world but Craft and Cunning. When we have once made our
Election, we are without delay, to put our purpose in execution: For, good
Counsel, without Execution, is of no effect.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Justice and Religion; The Acts of both, Repentance, and wherein it consists.

I. JUstice is a Glorious and a Communicative Virtue; ordained for the Common
good of Mankind, without any regard to it self. This is it that keeps men from
worrying one another, and preserves the World in peace. It is the Bond of
Humane Society, a kind of Tacit Agreement, and Impression of Nature; without
which there is not any thing we do, that can deserve commendation. The just man
wrongs no body, but contents himself with his own; Does good to all; Thinks and
speaks well of all: Gives every man his due, and is not any man's hindrance.
Where he is in Authority, he commands righteous things; lies open to all;
prefers a public good before a private; punishes the Wicked, rewards the Good,
and keeps every man in his duty. Where he is in subjection, he preserves
Concord, lives in Obedience to Laws and Magistrates; contents himself in his
station, without hankering after Offices and Preferment; and is no medler in
other peoples matters. He is just for Justicesake, and asks no other reward
than what he receives in the comfort of being just.

II. Religion is the most excellent of Moral Virtues; and is exercised
immediately upon the Honor and Worship of God: Of which this is the first
point, to know and believe him; and then to adore him for his Majesty and
Goodness. Barely to know God, is not sufficient; for, the Devils themselves do
as much that hate him: There must be Love and Adoration, as well as Knowledge. I
wish we did but discharge our duty, as well as we understand it. There Is none
of us, but acknowledges Gods Providence in the ordering and governing of the
world; his Omnipotency, Glory, and Goodness, and from his Mercy it is, that we
hope for Eternal Happiness. Why do we not pay him that Veneration then, which
belongs to him? but prefer a little pitiful dirt before him? Religion lies not
so much in the Understanding, as in the Practice. He that is truly Religious,
walks as in the presence of God, and studies perfection. The most acceptable
Worship of God, is the imitation of him, which does, in a manner, unite us to
God, and God to us; but it must be free then from wanderings, negligence and
sin. It is to no purpose to talk like Christians, and live like Infidels. This
was it that made a famous Heathen Philosopher to say, that, There was nothing
more Glorious than a Christian in his Discourse; nothing more miserable in his
Actions.

III. Repentance is that which brings us ^o a Detestation of sin, with a full
resolution of Amendment, which reconciles us to God. To a Detestation, I say,
of our past sins, wherefore the pleasure likewise is past; but the Guilt, the
Torment, and the Condemnation, sticks by us. To conceal our Iniquities, is to
no purpose; for, A Guilty Conscience passes Sentence upon it self. Conscience
is a kind of Tribunal which God Almighty has set up in all reasonable Souls,
where every man is his own Accuser, and both Witness and Judge against himself.
Let us therefore enter into a strict and daily Examination of our selves, and
without hiding, mincing, or slipping of any thing, call all our thoughts,
words, and deeds to a strict account. He that says, Lord be merciful to me a
Sinner, finds mercy. What am I the better for concealing my faults from other
people, so long as I am conscious of them to my self? Unless I had rather be
damned in private, than absolved in public: Whatever we do with our Bodies,
there is no avoiding of our Consciences; when we come once to cast off that
regard, we are most miserable.

IV. Our Life is divided into what is past, present, and to come. The present is
but a moment, and in the same instant, beginning and ending The future has no
Being, but only in prospect; but whatsoever is past, we can summon and call
before us at pleasure. Many people are afraid of their own memories, because if
they look back, their sins fly in their faces. But this should not be.
Frequent Reflection is the readiest way to Reformation. The more we consider our
Transgressions, the more shall we abhor them, and the less will be our danger
of a Relapse. Nothing more ordinary, than for a man that has escaped Shipwreck
in a Storm, to renounce the Sea upon it, and to bless God for the Mercy every
time he thinks of the danger. It would be well, if we had the same sense in the
hazard of our Souls, which we have in that of our Bodies; and say, It was a
great escape: Let us take it for a warning, and run our selves no more upon the
same Rock. God has spared us as often as we have offended; and shall we
presume then, and be the worse for his infinite Goodness? We are many times
plodding and forecasting what we are to do for the future: And why can we not
as well bethink our selves of what we have done already? For we must take
counsel of the time past, if we intend to govern our selves as we should, for
the time to come. Many a man might have come to be wise in the end, if he had
not thought himself so before his time. In the way of Virtue there is no
standing at a stay: He that does not daily advance, loses ground.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of Piety and Observance. The Commendation of Obedience and Gratitude. How to
receive, and how to requite a Benefit.

I. IT is a point of Glory, beyond expression, when a man shall be able to say,
I am the Son that never disputed his Fathers command; but whether it were easy
or hard, submitted to it with Cheerfulness and Reverence: I am the man that
never failed in his duty to his Country, to his Brethren and Relations; but
made it the business of his Life to oblige and serve them. These we call
Offices of Piety, where a man's Country, Parents and Kindred are in the concern.
And what is Piety in this case, we call Observance and Respect in others; that
is to say, in what relates to our Superiors, in Honor, Wisdom, Age, Religion,
Holiness; as Princes, Prelates, Tutors, and the like, to whom we render all
sorts of Reverence; whether by Rising, uncovering the Head, giving the Way,
Alighting, Kneeling, Kissing the Hand or Robe, according to the usage and
custom of the place. Now the higher esteem we have of them, the greater will be
our Reverence; for it strikes us in an aw, and keeps us at such a distance, as
manifests the sense we have of the disproportion betwixt us. All Power is from
God; and what respect soever we render to our Superiors, it falls very much
short of what we owe them, if we consider that we Reverence God in them.

II. As by the Disobedience of our first Parents, Misery came into the World;
so by the Obedience of the Son of God, are we reduced into a capacity of
Happiness, if we will but be obedient our selves. Obedience is the perfection
of all things, and the firmest Connection of them with their Original; passing
by a most admirable Circulation from God, unto God. Our Savior gave it a
preference, above all other Virtues, and parted with his own life to preserve
it. It is a kind of Immolation of the Will, which is said to be better than
Sacrifice. When my Superior, or the Law commands me, I am not to reason the
matter, and dispute it, or desire to be excused; but heartily, and without
delay, to submit, and to do what I am bidden, with an equal readiness and
alacrity, whether it be agreeable or unpleasant; provided always, that there be
no clashing with the Will and Law of God; for in that case, we may be allowed
to be Refractory and Disobedient; but in all others we are to submit, without
expostulation or murmur.

III. Gratitude is the sense of a Debt, for a Benefit received. In the first
place, we are to set an Estimate upon the Benefit which we are to value;
partly, for the thing it self; and in part, for the Kindness and Intention of
the Benefactor. He that lies under an Obligation, should be often thinking of
it, that it may never out of his mind; for the man that forgets a Goodturn,
will hardly requite it; and he that remembers it as he ought, has, in effect,
requited it already. In the point of Gratitude, there is no need of Money,
Labor, Felicity; but the Will passes for the Deed, be the Benefit never so
considerable. Let the Receiver behave himself Cheerfully, and in such a manner,
as that the Benefactor may read his satisfaction in his Countenance, and so
reap some fruit of his bounty in the very act of conferring it. It is a great
delight for a man to see his Friend happy, much more to make him so. The frank,
kind and thankful entertainment of a Favor, is a good part of payment. Some
people cannot endure to think of their debts, and those never had a mind (from
the very beginning) to be Grateful; but he that extols a kindness, and wishes
he could requite it, though he despair on it, has as good as requited it. I have
seen some people look askew, and squeamishly (I know not how) when they have
borrowed money, and take it in so odd a careless fashion, as if they would have
it thought the greatest favor in the World for them to accept of it. He that
is not sensible of an Obligation, does not deserve it; and a cold
Acknowledgement is worse than none at all. It is the part of an honest man, in
the very instant of receiving a Benefit, to bethink himself of a Return; for
he is a Betrayer of his Trust, that will not restore what he has received. Nor
is it enough to give a man his own again; but Kindnesses are to be repaid with
Interest. There is a Gratitude even in the Earth it self, that yields us our
Grain again with interest. And yet we must not be too quick neither in our
Returns: Some there are, that so soon as ever they receive one Present, will be
sure to send back another; as who should say, Now I Am out of your dirty debt:
But this is rather an Affront, than a Requital.

CHAP. XXV.
Of Truth, and the use of it. In Commendation of singleness of Heart. The Acts
of Fidelity.

I. WHatsoever we speak, write, or by any acti^n hint, or gesture give to
understand, let it be Truth; or nothing can be more scandalous than a false
tongue in the mouth of a Christian. It is a vulgar, and an unmanly sin, to
speak one thing, and think another. He that is Generous, will deliver things
simply as they are, without aggravating, amplifying, palliating, shifting or
juggling. Plain Truth must have plain Words: She is Innocent, and accounts it no
shame to be seen Naked: Whereas the Hypocrite or Double-dealer, shelters and
hides himself in Ambiguities and Reserves. The Evil-speaker hates the light, as
well as the Evil-doer. We are not to shift our Opinions, as we do our Clothes,
and to carry one appearance in private, another in public; one thing in the
face, and another in the heart. Nature her self has an Abhorrence for it, as we
see in Children, even before they come to the full exercise of their Reason.
The Lie is one of the first Reproaches they are sensible of, merely by the
impulse of an Inbred Aversion to Falsehood; wherein is remarkable the
Providence of God, that has implanted those Principles in our Souls, and made
those Virtues natural to us, which are of absolute necessity for the support of
Humane Life and Society. It is an abominable thing to belie the Truth, even in
words; but the Lie of Life is the most pernicious of all others. With what face
then can we exclaim against the baseness of a Lying Tongue, when our whole
Practice and Conversation is but one continued Lie all through? It Is a great
matter for a man to consist with himself.

II. Simplicity is a Virtue, scarce known among men, but of great worth and
value in the Acceptance of God; who being Integrity and Simplicity in the
Abstract himself, requires likewise simplicity of heart, in those that worship
and serve him. By this Simplicity, is understood, an invariable Tenor of Life;
which without any disguise, or hypocrisy, is really what it seems to be. He
that is indu'd with this Virtue, makes no scruple of frankly confessing his
Imperfections, where there is occasion. He deals heartily and clearly, without
any fraudulent or crafty design and interest in his proceeding: He believes all
men honest, and suspects no body. But still under the guard of a prudential
circumspection, he makes it his study to be wise to Godward, though the World
calls him Fool for his pains; and the single business of his life to please
God. Why do we trouble our selves then about many things, when there is but one
thing necessary? which is, that by an undivided affection, we may become
acceptable in his sight, who is Unity and Simplicity it self. There is but one
way, to one and the same end.

III. I look upon Fidelity as one of the greatest and most valuable advantages
of Mankind. Take away this, and you destroy Commerce, Friendship, Leagues, and
even Government it self. So necessary is this Virtue, and yet withal, so
scarce, that it is hardly to be found upon the face of the Earth. Witness our
Voluminous Conveyances; the infinite cautionary circumstances of Witnesses,
Hands and Seals, the numberless Provisions of Security, to make a Contract firm
and binding, and all little enough yet, to prevent Subornation and Fraud: So
sordid are most people, that their Faith is not so dear to them as their
profit. How shameful a Confession is this of our Deceit and Wickedness, that we
can neither trust, nor be trusted without Witnesses and Securities! That we
rather commit our selves to our Parchments, than to our Souls. But a man of
Honor and Integrity will sooner break his Heart than his Word; he will betray
no man's secrets; he will not forfeit his Parole even to an Enemy; no, not if he
had a thousand Crowns and Lives at stake. He is not easy to promise any thing
upon the sudden, because he knows that hasty Promises are commonly followed
with speedy Repentance. But when his Word is once past, he stands as firm as a
Rock, unmovable, unalterable; that is to say, unless the Promise were unlawful,
and in that case the Obligation ceases.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Friendship; the qualities and duties of it. Certain Precepts for
Conversation.

I. THere is not any thing more necessary, more commodious, or more delightful
in the course of Humane Life, than Friendship. It is the kindness of two
Persons grounded upon Virtue, and supported by a mutual Communication of all
Comforts and Benefits. Now how great a Blessing this is, let any man judge,
when two minds are so prepared and disposed, that my Friends Breast is as my
own; my secrets as safe there: And in case of my particular good, my own Soul
is the less tender of the two. He is my Companion in Solitude, my Counselor in
Difficulties, my Relief in Sadness, and the joy of my eyes when ever I look
upon him. He is my Confessor in all my Scruples; and I never meet with him (so
much as by chance) but I Am the better for him. There are some little Creatures
that a man takes no notice of at the present, till he finds afterward, by a
Tumor or Inflammation, that they have stung him; And so it is in the
Conversation of a true Friend; we find the Blessing of it in the Effects, but
when or how we received the Impression, we know not. Friendship to be perfect,
must be Reciprocal; but it is nobler to love, than to be beloved; and therefore
we are to consider Benevolence as the foundation of it. The secondary part, of
loving again, may have as much of Justice and Gratitude in it, as of Kindness.
The most Illustrious Friendship of all, is that which is cimented by a
Religious fear and love of God* without any regard to Interest, Passion,
Personal Kindness, Flattery or the like. There can be no susbtantial and
lasting Friendship between wicked men.

II. In the choice of a Friend, we cannot be too wary. The Proverb bids us eat
a bushel of Salt together, before we resolve upon it. But there are four
Qualifications however, which are essentially necessary to the perfecting of a
Friendship; that is to say, Faith, Intention, Prudence and Patience. The first
is a matter of great difficulty and hazard; for there is hardly that man upon
Earth, whom we can safely entrust with the privacies and concernments of our
Lives and Fortunes; and then, if we be deceived, we are lost. In the second
place, the Intention must be pure; for otherwise, under the color of a
Celestial Friendship, there may be advanced some common and beastly design.
There must be great Prudence too, for there occur many niceties in the
enterchange of amicable offices and duties. The fourth Requisite is Patience or
Constancy of Mind, which will enable a man to endure any thing, rather than
forsake a Friend in his distress. If it shall be our good hap to meet with a
person whom we judge to be thus qualified, we are not to rest upon that opinion
without a further search. But to enquire what Friends he has had before, and
how he has used them, and expect that he will hereafter be the same to us,
which he has been formerly to others. A Faithful Friend is a Living Treasure;
Inestimable while we have him, and never enough to be lamented when he is gone.
There is not under the Canopy of Heaven so great a Blessing, as to be linked in
a Friendship with a person that loves a man only for himself, without any
respect to the Circumstances of Fortune, Table, good Humor, or the like; that
sets us right in our mistakes, encourages, relieves and supports us in all
Extremites. There is nothing more ordinary than to talk of a Friend, nothing
more difficult, than to find one. There is not one man of a million, tha^ loves
Gratis; and he that loves for By-ends, cannot properly be said to be a true
Friend. His kindness is only governed by his profit. Take away the Cause of his
Friendship, and that goes too. True Friendship is there most wanting, where we
imagine it does most abound.

III. We are to treat a Friend that stands in need of Reproof, as a Physician
does his Patient; he spares neither Fire nor Lance to cure him. We must behave
our selves with Liberty, Boldness, Constancy, without neglecting or dissembling
any thing. It is a damnable kind of respect, to pay a Reverence to Wickedness.
But still, let the Admonition be private, and manged with all possible
softness, both of Language and Behavior. Before the Friendship is contracted,
we do well to pause upon it, and deliberate; but when the League is struck,
there must be nothing but freedom and confidence. He that speaks to his Friend,
does but talk to himself. The truth of it is, a man should so live, as not to
trust even his own heart with what he might not safely commit to an Enemy. But
seeing that there are many things, which Custom and Decency have made Private,
there is yet subject matter enough for the Trust and Confidence of Friendship.
Some people I have known so sick of a secret, that they's still throw it up to
the next man they meet; and publish in the Marketplace, what was only fit for
the ear of a particular Friend. Some again are so scrupulous on the other side,
that they will smother all, rather than trust the nearest Friend they have in the
World: (no not themselves neither, if they could help it.) They are both in the
wrong, as well for trusting every body, as no body; only the one is the
honester mistake, and the other the safer. But the former is safe enough too,
if we would but turn our care from the Concealment of what we have done, to the
doing of nothing that we care who knows.

IV. There is some Affinity betwixt Friendship and Courtesy, or Affability,
which is a great sweetner of Conversation, and keeps it within the bounds of
modesty and few words. A good man has his ears open, and his mouth shut; and
desires rather to inform himself, than to publish himself; and to be a gainer
by the Company, rather than to squander away of his own. We should to well to
acquaint our selves with the ways and humors of those we converse with, how
irregular soever, and not to take notice of every trivial childish Impertinence
we meet with. It is a low and womanish weakness, only to frequent those that
say as we say, and blow us up with Flatteries and Applause. I would have a man
to speak sparingly of himself, and his own Affairs: not to be over-stiff in
defending his own opinion; nor to talk too magisterially in a style of
Authority. When we encounter any thing that displeases us, let us but try,
before we condemn it in others, if we be not guilty of it our selves. By so
doing, from whatsoever we see or hear, we may draw some advantage. And things
are at a good pass, when one man is the better for a another man's faults.

V. There are a sort of men, that, if they do but see any thing out of the mode
of the place where they live, will presently stand gaping and laughing at it;
and a man of the fashion, passes for little better with them, than a Monster.
This is a most inhumane Levity of mind, to adore our selves, and make a scorn
of others. For we should set an esteem upon every thing, for what it is, and
not for what it seems to be. It is the Novelty, the Artifice, the Rarity, the
Difficulty, the Pomp, the Reputation, and the outward appearance, that enhances
the price of every thing with the people: Whereas the wise man rates it
according to the Intrinsic value, and reckons as nothing, all the rest, which
is so much the Wonder, and the Idol of the Brainsick Rabble. If we do not pinch
and streighten our selves, it is our own fault if we make not some profit of
whatever happens. Why do we not imitate the Comedians? They can Weep without
Grieving; Purchase, without Possessing; Command, without Authority; Threaten,
without Revenge; and Chide, without Indignation. The business is, they Act
other men's lives without any concern of their own; and why we should not order
our selves in Society with the same Indifference, I know not: The whole World
is but a great Theater, where there are as many Playres as Men. Let it be our
care, as much as in us lies, to be rather Spectators than Actors; for the
latter take all the pains, and do but make sport for the other.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of Liberality; what it is, and how to be exercised. Wherein it differs from
Magnificence.

I. I Do not call that man Liberal, who does (as it were) pick a quarrel with
his money, and knows not how either to part with it, or keep it. (For he does
not give it, but throws it away.) He is the Liberal man that disposes of it
according to Discretion and Reason. He proportions his Bounty to his Ability:
He bestows it upon those that want it, and picks his time too, when it may do
them most good. Liberality is a Virtue that may be extended to the receiving,
as well as to the conferring of Bounties, but the latter is here intended; for
it is more Honorable to Give, than to receive. It is not for any man to say,
If I had a Fortune, I would do so, or so; for where there wants power and
means, the very will is sufficient. So sufficient, that in truth, it is the
main point of the Obligation; Which lies not so much in the profit of the
Receiver, as in the Intention of the Donor. Does any man thank the Sea for
letting him sail upon it? or his Orchard for a basket of Apples? or the Wind for
a favorable gale? and yet these are all Benefits, but not conferred upon us by
Voluntary Agents. Moreover when we are in the Bountiful Humor, the Quick-doing
is the Grace: We must not say to a Friend, Come again to morrow; and so torment
him with delay and expectation. He that gives heartily and kindly, gives
speedily. A Generous nature thinks he can never make haste enough. The Favor
is twice as welcome, that meets the Receiver at half way. A Courtesy comes so
hard from some people, accompanied with so much sowreness and insolence, that a
man had better be without it.

II. He that lives only to himself, without any regard to the Good and Utility
of his Neighbor, can never be happy. What is there, that any man shall pretend
to spare, as his own? when all men of Estates, are in effect, but Trustees for
the Benefit of the Needy. The Bags that we keep under so many Bolts, and which
we have extorted from the Fatherless and Widow, by Violence and Blood: If we
reckon upon them as ours, we are exceedingly mistaken: For alas! They are but
deposited with us for the relief of others. Or however, it is but the rifling of
our Coffers to night, and they change their Master to Morrow. If we would
secure them, and make them our own, we must bestow them. Nor is it so much a
Bounty, as a Purchase, the parting with them. For he that gives to the poor,
lends to the Lord; and (for the temporal advantages of Money, Land, Houses, and
the like) secures himself of a blessed Eternity in Exchange. Money is never of
so much value in the Hord, as when it is communicated, and thrown among the
poor.

III. Where the expense is moderate, we call it Liberality; where it is high
and splendid, Magnificence; which arise both of them from the same principle in
the mind: But as to the World, the one shows it self in small things, and the
other in great. A man may be Liberal out of a small Fortune, but to be
Magnificent, there must be Opulency, and Plenty; for Magnificence lies properly
in the glory of the work. If a man should sell a Jewel, and give the product of
it to Charitable uses, this man is rather said to be Liberal then Magnificent:
But if he should bestow the value of that Jewel upon the building of a Church,
a Chapel, or any other splendid and public Structure, he is then said to be
Magnificent. Under this Head are comprehended all works of great expense, which
relate to Divine Worship, common Utility, public Exercises and Entertainments.
In things of this quality, there must be a proportion kept betwixt the Charge
and the Estate. For where a man Borrows to Build, and runs himself in Debt, for
the Reputation of a great Name; such a work is not to pass for a Magnificence,
but a Folly. He is the only Liberal and Magnificent person, who takes from
himself, whatsoever he bestows, or expends upon others.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Fortitude: The Duties of it. A man of Resolution does contemn death.

I. SUch is the softness, and the Infirmity of Humane Nature, that if it were
not for this Virtue of Fortitude, we should all of us most shamefully abandon
our Stations, and never so much as dare to look Danger in the face. It is
commonly divided into Active and Passive; the one emboldning us to encounter
all difficulties, and the other enabling us to support them. It is not the part
of a man of true courage, rashly to throw himself into unnecessary hazards, but
generously to bear up against Misfortune when it comes. He does not pray for
terrible encounters, but he laughs at them; when others are dejected, he holds
up his head, and keeps his legs when others are at their length upon the
ground. It is not Dishonor, Repulse, Exile, Oppression; no, not Prisons,
Tortures, nor even Death it self that can startle him: He has a greatness of
mind, that sets him above all Passions, Distempers and Calamities whatsoever.
He is not to be wrought upon to do an ill thing, by all the fair and foul means
imaginable; Let there be never so many Rubs in his way, he presses forward
still; acquits himself of duty, and goes through with his work, in despite of
all Impediments. He stands upright under any burden whatsoever, and scorns to
go before, when Power, Terror, and Violence shall have done their worst upon
him. His Virtue carries him through all dangers; and what he suffers by the
way, he matters not, so he comes at last to his journeys end.

II. As men at Sea, in fair weather, are still fitting and providing for a
storm, so should we in Good Fortune, be still providing and fortifying our
selves against the injuries of Bad. And this is to be done by putting the case
at worst beforehand, and trying our selves upon the supposition, as if we were
upon the real experiment. My Children are all dead, The Vessel's lost, I am
Banished, Wounded, Tormented, Diseased, Calumniated, Disgraced. Well! and what
does all this now amount to, more than what I have foreseen and contemned
before? Our Joys and our Tears are allotted us from Eternity; and what variety
soever there may appear in the Circumstances and Accidents of our lives, all
comes to this in the up-shot; such as we are our selves, such are the things we
have received, Transitory and Mortal. Now what cause is here of displeasure or
complaint, if when we have lost all that belongs to us, we are yet our selves,
whole and entire? Life it self is a Debt, and when God calls for it in, is it
not better to make a voluntary payment, than to be forced to it? Epicurus is of
opinion, that a Wise man may be happy upon the Wrack, and take pleasure even in
Phalarus his Bull. This is a bold word, and yet no more than we find verified
in the constancy of diverse of our Martyrs; who have died at the Stake with so
much cheerfulness, as if they had felt nothing at all of the Torment. To him
that truly loves God, all Pains are turned into Comforts.

III. The thing, which of all others, most staggers our Resolution, is Death;
and I do not at all wonder at the difficulty of bringing the mind to a contempt
of Life, considering that (short of Heaven) it is of all comforts incomparably
the greatest Blessing. And yet it is not either for a Wise man, or for a
Christian, to reckon Death in the number of Evils; which is, it self, the end
of Evils; and the beginning of Life everlasting. Why should any man be afraid
to die, that is to live again? Or why should he be afraid to die, that is sure
to die? In matters that are doubtful, we may be allowed our hopes and fears:
But Certainties are only to be expected, and none but Madmen, will struggle
with invincible Necessity. Children, and stark Fools, we see, have little or no
apprehension of Death; and shall not our Reason then carry us as far as their
Folly? Death is one Condition of Life; and he that has entered into the
Obligation, must submit to the Condition.

IV. Nature has been so kind, as to allow us the use and benefit of all her
Creatures for a certain season; when the time is out, let us contentedly
depart; and according to the course of Providence, let one Generation make room
for another. Where is the Wise man, that if it were offered him at the last
gasp, to live his life over again, and to run through all the smother of his
Mothers Belly, the crudity and folly of his Infancy, the Terrors of his
Childhood, the hazards of his Youth, the cares of his Riper state, and the
laborious irksomeness of Old Age. Where is the Wiseman, I say, that would
accept of life again upon these terms? Let us therefore consider whether we are
going, and what we leave behind us. If we were in despair of a better Life, we
might then be pardoned the dread we have of the end of this. The truth of it
is, we have misspent our time in Vanity and Sin, without laying up any thing in
this World, to give us a hopeful prospect of the next: We should not otherwise
stand trembling upon the brink of Eternity; if it were not for Death, a good
man had better never have been born.

V. No man entettains Death so cheerfully, as he that has been a long time
preparing himself for it; for frequent Meditation makes it familiar and easy
to us, (I had almost said, and welcome.) It is not the number of days and years
that makes a long Life, but a well composed mind. A Soul that rejoices to think
of leaving the Body, and returning to him that gave it. He that dies well, has
lived long enough; and no man can fail of dying well, that has lived well. He
that would die in peace, must wean himself from all the satisfactions of this
World beforehand. What has he to fear, that has already stripped himself of more
than Death could have taken from him? If we would make Life pleasant, we must
cast off all care of that too, and then let Death come in any shape and
welcome, whether we are dispatched by a Sword, or a Fever, it is the same
thing. No man is so happy both in Life and Death, as he that can every day say
to himself, I have lived; for all that follows, is another Life to him in
surplusage. He that would live comfortably, must die daily.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of Magnanimity. The Description of a Magnanimous man.

I. MAgnanimity is an Heroical Virtue, of an indefatigable force, and undaunted
courage, and never without some glorious design: There is somewhat
extraordinary, methinks, in the very sound of it. If it were not for this
Virtue, most of the rest would fall short of their ends, for want of Resolution
to grapple with the difficulties they are to encounter. This is it that
inspires us with great and generous Inclinations, that animates and supports us
in all hazards and Extremities, and, with God's assistance, breaks through all
oppositions, till it has placed us in the possession of what we desire. He that
would make himself considerable, must offer at something that is so. The more
Danger, the more Honor. Man, when he is truly himself, can do more than we
think for.

II. Great minds are always intent upon great matters: Not what the common
people call great, for that they look upon as despicable. Their care is to do
things that are Honorable in the sight of their own Consciences, but whether
the World gives or refuses them the Honor they deserve, it matters not; unless
in case where duty, or the glory of God requires the contrary. Their business
is Virtue, nor Ostentation; and the reward of well-doing, they find in the
Action it self, without depending upon the voice of the people. They are
Eminent above others, and Invincible, and unalterably steady in all Fortunes;
no Intruders into high places, but content in their own Stations. They are
above Submissions and entreaties to other people, for they need nothing but
what they find in themselves. They know neither Fear nor Flattery; and when
they put themselves forward, to be taken notice of, it is not for Vanity sake,
but to justify the cause of Religion and Virtue. And yet in all this height of
Spirit, and Resolution toward men, they are to Godward the humblest and the
meekest of all Mortals. To him it is that they ascribe all, from whom they have
received all; acknowledging, that of themselves, they have nothing, they can do
nothing, they are nothing. Provided that a man thinks soberly and humbly of
himself, he may be allowed to take some delight (with modesty) in the good
opinion of other people. It is not well to hunt or court Applause; but if it
follows us, neither are we to reject it.

III A great Mind presses to his end, through the thickest of his Enemies, and
upon the very points of their Weapons, without any stop or hesitation. His
behavior toward his Equals or Inferiors, is Temperate and Modest. Toward his
Superiors, he is neither slavish nor insolent: He never passes the bounds of
Decency and Respect; but on the other side he is not to be trampled upon. Where
he Loves or Hates, he owns it publicly, and takes the same freedom in his
Actions and Discourses; for there is nothing in this World, that he either
hopes for, or fears. He does many things that other people do, but not the same
way, and therefore he is upon the Reserve with the Multitude, for he takes no
pleasure at all in their acquaintance. He does not willingly remember Injuries,
and where they cannot be avoided, bears them without any complaints or
submissions. There are not many that he commends, nor many that he would be
commended by; but his care is nevertheless, to do things that are worthy of
Commendation. No man has him at his beck but his Friend, or his Superior. He
wonders at nothing, and the reason is, he meets not with any thing which
appears to him, either Great or New. In case of Accidents. he is safe within
himself, and so the event of things never troubles him. In his motion, spirit
and style, he is grave, slow, steady and composed. He that has but little to
do, may do it at leisure; and there is no place for much earnestness, where a
man is content within himself.

CHAP. XXX.
Of Patience; The Occasions and Effects of it. The Signs of it. An Exhortation
to it, with Instructions how to behave our selves in Adversity. The necessity
of Perseverance.

I. PAtience is a Virtue that enables us to bear Adversity with Equality of
mind; but because there are several sorts of Adversities, there are likewise
several Names given to Patience, answerable to the variety of evils which it is
to be exercised upon. Patience, properly so called, is the gift of bearing
Injuries, without perturbation, and with courage. When it relates to the loss
of Goods and Fortune, it is called AEquanimity: And that which keeps up the
heart, in the delays and disappointments of some expected Good, we call
Longanimity. But the Virtue which fortifies us to all other purposes, and
supports us in all Afflictions and Calamities, Foreign or Domestic, Public or
Private, is known by the name of Constancy; the Virtue of all others that we
have most occasion for. It is not for nothing that the Life of man is called a
Warfare, considering how we are beset with Adversaries, and what troops of
mischiefs break in daily upon us. Not a moment passes without an Assault,
without a Combat; and if we had no Enemies abroad, we should yet find work
enough to do with those in our own bosoms. We breed, and we harbor Enemies
within our selves, that crucify and torment us. We come weeping into the
World, and so we live in it, and so we leave it. It is the first thing we
learn, and we can find tears, when we are capable of nothing else. We have
heard of diverse that never laughed, but not of any man yet that never wept, It
concerns us therefore to arm our selves with Patience, without which, we can
neither be resolute nor perfect: No man knows the value of it, till he reads
it; that is to say, till he falls into Tribulation. Never was any wise man
Impatient.

II. He that never experimented ill Fortune, has the more to fear. Physicians
tell us, that there may be too good a habit of Body, and that nothing is more
dangerous than a Plethory. So at Sea, a dead calm is commonly the forerunner
of a Storm. If we lie under the lash of cross Accidents, we are not to reckon
upon it as a Cruelty, or a Persecution; but a contest: Without a skirmish,
there can be no victory; and without a victory, no triumph. Now if Christ
himself was to suffer, and so to enter into his Glory, shall we pretend to go
scot-free, and be made partakers of what another has purchased, Gratis? He that
thinks to go to Heaven any other way* does most miserably deceive himself. To
do good, and to suffer ill, is the Sacramental Oath of a Christian. To come now
to the signs of a perfected Patience. He that has attained that point, bears
whatsoever befalls him, without reluctation; he does not murmur under the rod,
nor return evil for evil. He loves his Enemies, and prays for those that
persecute him: He sees the hand of God in his Afflictions; and either says
nothing at all, or appeals only to Heaven for relief, with a submission to
suffer, whatsoever the Almighty shall see fit to lay upon him, with joy and
thanksgiving. To conclude, It is a high degree of Patience, to bear with the
imperfections of a weak Brother.

III. In the loss of worldly goods, it is no small comfort, to consider the
frail and uncertain condition of them. Whatsoever we possess, whatsoever we
love, is Naturally Fugitive. It is with us indeed, but it is not properly ours:
And we are not to fool our selves into a passion for an imaginary stability, we
our selves are not firm to any thing, neither can we expect that any thing
should be so to us, Virtue only excepted, which Immortalizes, even our
Mortality; all other things carry their death along with them. Let us therefore
keep a distance betwixt our Possessions and our selves: For when they come to
mingle and incorporate, he that takes our Estate, takes heart and all. A good
man cannot be properly said to lose any thing; for whatsoever can be taken from
him, is no part of himself; but an Accessory or circumstance, that whether it
stays or goes, he esteems himself neither the richer, nor the poorer for. What
a deal of pudder we make, what outcries and lamentations, for the loss of a sum
of money, the death of a Child, the firing of a House! but we can part with our
Modesty, our Honesty, our Constancy, and never so much as change color for it:
And yet here we lose a substantial good; and what' our own too; whereas in the
other case we lose neither: He that grieves for such a loss, deserves no
better. If it were not for an inordinate love, we should not account that we
had lost any thing. What are outward things to the inward man? or what
correspondence betwixt Wisdom and Money?

IV. It would do very well, in whatsoever we go about, to take in all the
Adjuncts that attend it, for there are many circumstances, that for want of
foresight and precaution, may come to trouble us. I call my servant, it may be
he is out of the way, or does not do as I would have him. I Am to make a visit,
who knows but the man may lock himself up? or shut the door against me, and
refuse to be seen? Suppose this before hand, and all is well. It is the wambling
of a Nauseous mind (the Ladies disease) to stand pittering, because (forsooth)
I could not be admitted, as well as such an one: I could not get so much as one
word with him: I was even crowded down to the lower end of the Table, etc. He
that is not affected with this, takes no notice at all of it; and he that does
not understand it to be mere matter of course, is a very great stranger
certainly to the affairs of Humane life: If we can amend it, let us: if not,
let us bear it. We are apt to exclaim against the Malice, the Wickedness, the
Impudence of the Age we live in: And we do very well in it, if we can but
reform the World, and drive before us all the Fools and Knaves out of it. But
if this will not be, we had even as good say nothing: It is no new thing for
people to go on in their own way: Why do we not rather turn the Blame upon our
selves, for expecting any better? The World was never otherwise, nor ever will
be; but faults there must be, as long as there are men.

V. He that labors under any Affliction, should consider, not so much what he
suffers, as what he has done; and what he now takes for a severity, will be
then found to be a mercy: And that it is laid upon him, by Almighty God, for
his good; that is to say, that God chastises him to humble him, try him, harden
him, and bring him to himself. They that take their fill of pleasure in this
World, are commonly reserved for torments in the next. He that wallows in
Abundance and Plenty, who knows how he would behave himself in a condition of
Want and Penury; or with what constancy any man would abide ^he Rage and Odium
of the people, that has grown old in the enjoyments of popular Honor and
Applause? we are forward enough to offer Consolation, and give good Counsel to
others in distress: Why do we not rather apply to our own discontents, and turn
the advice upon our selves? In the case of the Body, we can part with a limb to
a Surgeon, and give him thanks too, and a reward for his pains: Affliction is
Gods remedy, and no less necessary to the Soul, than burning or starving is to
the body: And yet here we are apt to mutter and repine; and to mistake that for
a loss, or a misery, which both in the intention, and in the effect, is a cure.
If Poverty, Sickness, and whatsoever else we call evil, might but be supposed
to enter into an Expostulation, and should ask us, Gentlemen, what is your
quarrel to us? what hurt have we done you? have we taken away any of your
Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, or any thing else that was good, and you could
call your own? may you not live as merrily with us, as without us? we must lay
our fingers upon our mouths, and answer only in Silence. The matter duly
weighed, we take good for evil, and evil for good. And the greatest of our
misfortunes is our impatience.

VI. In another Bodies case, one may dissemble a Resolution and Constancy of
mind, but hardly in our own. We are to weep with those that weep; but though
our Tears be in common, it does not follow, that the cause of them must be so
too. We are as much as in us lies, to comfort and succor the afflicted. If any
man does us an injury, let us consider, that, Every thing has two handles; a
right and a wrong; and take it by the right. The man is unjust. If we take it
by that way, there follows Animosity and Violence. But then on the other side,
he is one for whom Christ died; redeemed by the same precious Blood with our
selves, and called out to the same glory. The turning of our thoughts this way,
quiets all. We likewise pass this reflection upon it; in the matter of reproof,
we may sooner hear the truth from an Enemy, than from a Friend; for it is his
business to find faults, and to explore our infirmities, even more than we do
our selves. If we do any thing that we should not do, or neglect any thing that
we should do, we shall be sure to hear of it from him, and to have the Town
ring on it. Let us therefore make profit of his enmity, and look to our selves,
we shall be the more circumspect, when we know that we have a spy upon us.

VII. Perseverance is the Crown and Perfection of all Virtues. The reward is
promised to beginners, but is delivered to those that persevere. Wherefore,
above all things, let us be firm to our selves; in the mounting of a steep
Hill, if we come once to stop, we slip; and instead of standing our ground, we
slide down again. Let us resolve what we are to do, and pursue it; for it is to
no purpose at all, to do any thing by fits. It is a great weakness of mind, to
be always upon the ramble, and in quest of new company, new exercises, new
places; when the fault's in our selves, not in the Climate, or other
Circumstances. The Plant that is often removed, withers; and the very change of
Remedies, turns into a Disease. If the blessed Apostle found himself at a loss,
in the Contemplation of his duty; what will become of us then, whose Virtues
are scarce comparable even to his Imperfections? The love of Learning is never
to be extinguished. The love of Riches never to be satisfied. The love of
Honor, never to be allayed: So that there is no end of our greediness after
things that are in themselves, short-lived and uncertain; but when we come to
the divine and everlasting Wisdom, the least touch and relish of it, cloys us.
This is not according to his Precept, that says, Be you perfect, as your
heavenly Father is perfect. He that looks up to that pattern, shall never want
place for the increase of his Virtue.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of Temperance; How much Modesty contributes to it. Of Abstinence and Chastity.

I. THE pleasures that arise from the Taste and Touch, are under the Government
of Temperance; which only approves of those that are necessary, and according
to right Reason; and declares against all that is Artificial and Superfluous.
The Infallible Rule she proceeds by, is this: To take that for a measure in
what concerns the Body, which Nature has made necessary; and never for
pleasures sake, to admit of any pleasure. This is it, that keeps a man from
degenerating into a Beast: To this of Temperance, the Virtue of Modesty does
very much conduce. It is the Bridle of corrupt Motions, the Index of good
Nature; the Guardian of purity; the witness of Innocence: Where Modesty has
taken possession, there enters not so much as an unclean thought; much less an
unlawful act. It teaches us to stand in aw of the presence of God within us,
and of our own Consciences: And charms us with the Contemplation of those
Celestial Beauties, that illustrate all the works of Temperance. The man that
is truly and perfectly Modest, will not endure so much as the name of
Intemperance; his house serves him only for a Covering, not a Concealment; as
it does to some others, who lock themselves up, not that they may live more
securely, but sin more privately. But alas! what does it avail us, to shun the
eyes, and the ears of men; when God sees us; and our Consciences accuse us.

II. The Virtues of moderating the use of meat and drink, we call Abstinence,
and Sobriety: But as to what concerns the Touch, we call it Chastity and
Modesty. In the use of Meats, it is no easy thing for a man to keep himself
within the bounds of bare Necessity; for the Belly has no ears, hears no
counsel, and will be still craving and calling upon us for daily relief; but at
how easy a rate we might discharge our selves of that importunity, not one man
of a thousand takes into his thought. Instead of gratifying the Necessities of
Nature, we are on the other side putting a force upon her, to make her
subservient to us in our Luxury; by Irritating that Hunger and Thirst with
Artificial Provocatives; which should rather have been laid, and pacified, by
Remedies Plain and Natural. The Virtue of Chastity is yet of greater difficulty
among so many incentives to Lust, without the singular Grace of God. We must
keep our selves out of all Temptations; set a Guard upon our senses, and
preserve a profound Reverence for our selves; for he that has no respect for
himself, will hardly have it for any body else. Let us have a care of our eyes;
for many a man has been engaged ere he was aware, to love in spite of his
heart. If it be Beauty, or Woman, that we love, there is nothing certainly in
the World, that is so false and fading. Take her in all her Charms and Glories,
and it is but the work of one single moment, to turn all her Graces into
Deformities; all her Sweetness into Corruption, and her very self into worse
than nothing. We must fly ill Company too, and Idleness, and mortify our
Bodies by Fasting and Discipline. In a very ill condition is the Soul of that
man, that takes too much care of his Carcass.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of Meekness and Clemency: The Excellency, and the Duties of both.

I. IT is the Office and the Property of Meekness or Gentleness, to moderate
the violence of Anger, and keep it within the limits of Humanity and Reason.
Anger is as a Sword in the hand of Nature, for the terror and punishment of
Offenders. Now it is as great a Cruelty to spare all, as to spare none; for
Impunity gives an encouragement to Villainy. When matters are come to an
Extremity, and that Justice is to be done upon a Malefactor, there is yet place
for Meekness and Clemency; and we are to show a kind of Unwillingness and
Compassion, even where there is a necessity of Punishment. We are grievous
sinners our selves, and as God has dealt with us, so are we to behave our
selves toward others; that is to say, with Tenderness and Forbearance, in hope
of Amendment. God Almighty does not always proceed to Severity, but contents
himself many times with our Repentance. It is a disparagement to the Physician
to despair of the Patient; for according to his kindness and skill, we are to
judge of the facility of the Cure. Gentleness of Nature, to Anger, is like a
Rock to the Sea, it breaks the fury of it. The Billows may rage and foam, but
the Rock stands firm, and they do but dash and spend themselves against it to
no purpose. Come unto me, and learn of me; says our blessed Savior. And what
are we to learn? not to cure the Sick; cleanse the Lepers; give sight to the
Blind; or raise the Dead. But, learn of me, says he, for I am meek. Such is the
Excellency of Meekness, as if the whole duty of Christianity were comprehended
in that Lesson.

II. As Meekness moderates Anger, so Clemency moderates Punishment. The one is
competible to all men, the other belongs properly to Princes and Magistrates,
in whose power it is to mitigate the severity of Laws upon Offenders, and which
they are to do without any respect to Fear, Profit, Friendship, or the like;
but purely upon a principle of Generosity and Good Nature. Clemency is not only
the Privilege, the Honor, and the duty of a Prince, but it is likewise his
Security; and better than all his Garrisons, Forts, and Guards, to preserve
himself and his Dominions in safety. When a Prince comes to be feared, he is
hated; and when he comes once to be hated, the People wish him out of the
World. His strength lies not so much in his Arms and Magazines, as in the
Hearts of his Subjects: For whoever contemns his own life, is Master of another
man's. Many Executions are as great a Reproach to a Government, as many Funerals
to a Physician. That Prince is truly Royal, who Masters himself; looks upon all
Injuries as below him; and Governs by Equity and Reason, not by Passion. The
greatest minds are ever the most Serene and Quiet.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of Modesty, Studies, and Divertisements.

I. THere is not any thing, that does better become a well qualified mind, than
Modesty. It is the Beauty of Honesty, and the Check of Wickedness; and shows it
self in the very Habit and Gesture, without a word speaking: It Is a strange
discovery that a man makes of himself, even in the smallest things; in a look,
a smile, a cast of the Eye, a particular manner of walking: But whatever the
World may gather from these Circumstances, let us be sure that they may read
Christianity in our Lives. In all our Motions, Gestures, Words, Countenances,
there is a certain Gracefulness or Medium to be observed, betwixt Affectation
and Effeminacy on the one side, and a Clownish Harshness on the other. True
Modesty passes from the Mind, into the Body, and influences all our External
Actions, with its Internal Gravity of Manners. A modest man is the lively image
of God; his very lo^ks compose us. There is both Beauty in it, and Benefit.
There is a Modesty to be used in our very Clothes, Household Stuff, Furniture,
number of Servants; which are all to be suited to our condition. These may pass
for the Ornaments of our Bodies and Houses, but they are the Impediments of our
Minds; why do we glory then in Misfortune and Vanity, and in the multitude of
our Distractions? A man has as many Enemies as Servants: There are so many
Spies upon him; their business is to pry into our Actions, not to wait upon our
Commands. They come humble into a Family; they grow insolent in it, and most
odious when they go out of it.

II. There are two ends of Studiousness. The one is to attemper the Inordinate
desire of Knowledge; the other is to quicken and excite us, to the learning of
things profitable and necessary: We are all of us given to be searching and
curious, by Nature; who knows well enough the Beauty and the Artifice of her
own work, in the Structure of the Universe; and therefore has made us
Spectators of it, that so much excellency might not lie dead and fruitless in
Solitude. But instead of improving this Goodness of Nature, we abuse it; and
spend those faculties upon Impertinent and dangerous Curiosities, which were
given us for nobler ends. Wisdom does not consist in knowing much, but in
knowing things that we are the better for; and those things in the first place
that concern our Salvation: Not that I am against Humane Learning neither;
provided, that a good use be made of whatever we read toward the ordering of
our Lives and Manners. In the reading of many Books, we are apt to take up a
Rambling humor of skipping from one thing to another, and swallowing
abundance; but we digest nothing. Whereas we should rather pitch upon some
certain Authors; take what is good out of them; read them over and over, and
study them, if we would have any thing stick by us. Variety of reading, may be
pleasant; but it is the steady and certain Application of our Studies, that
improves us.

III. And yet we are not to be so intent upon our Studies neither, as never to
give our selves breath and respit. The Mind is to be sometimes unbent; for
there is no living without Intervals of Rest. We see that in all places, there
are days of Recreation set apart, by Authority, for the Refreshment and Relief
of the people. Now the mind may be several ways divertised, according to the
disposition of the person, and according to the occasions. Some peoples
thoughts and spirits are raised by nothing more than a pleasant walk in the
open Air; others again are for the delight of Rivers and Groves; some for a
Country-Retreat, out of the dust and tumult of the City; others, are for
Hawking, Hunting, or the more harmless sport perchance of Fishing. Nay, the
very passing from one Study to another, as from Mathematics, for the purpose,
to a Consort of Music, is a great Relief. Some are for Entertainments of Wit,
as Comedies, or honest Games, as Chess, Tables, etc. But nothing better than a
Cheerful and Ingenious Conversation, that keeps it self within the bounds of
Honor and Modesty: Some there are, of so sour and critical a temper; so
Morose and Insociable, that they would sooner be guilty of a Mortal sin, than of a
Jest Others, on the contrary, are never out of Company; but perpetually upon
the Droll, and playing the Buffoons. Now these extremes are stark naught,
unless they be so qualified and tempered that the one may serve as a cure to
the other. To be always in company, or always alone, is not well; but when we
are weary of the one, we may have recourse to the other. And so it is with
Labor and Idleness; when we are weary of working, let us lie down and rest;
when we are sick of doing nothing* let us up and work. Some there are, that have
no Government over themselves at all; but when they are upon the fit of
studying, day and night is too little for them, till they have read themselves
faint and blind: And as soon as that humor is spent, they fall into the
contrary extreme of Dissolution and Laziness; and are as hard now to be
reclaimed from the one, as they were before, to be diverted from the other.
This comes to pass, because we proceed by leaps, and fly from one Contrary to
the other; for want of setting to our selves certain Rules and Bounds, which we
are not to transgress. Excess, or the overdoing of any thing, is enough to turn
even good into evil.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Of Humility, wherein it consists. The knowledge of our selves. The true
Character of an Humble Man.

I. HUmility is a Virtue, that comes from Christ himself, who published it by
his Doctrine, and taught it by his Example. Next to Virtues Theological and
Intellectual, it holds the first place; for it overthrows Pride, which is the
fountain of all evil. It makes us acceptable to God, whose communication is
with the humble: Without this foundation, our whole spiritual building falls to
the ground. The name of it, it is true, does not seem to import any great
matter; but it is the Virtue nevertheless, without which no man can be either
great or perfect. It is that which puts us upon Illustrious Exploits, without
danger of being pust up; upon difficulties and hazards, without fear; nay, and
without so much as a change of countenance or temper. Humility does not lie (as
the people imagine) in the mere contempt and abjection of our selves; but also,
in the just and moderate pursuit of Honor and Glory: Of Glory, not for
Ostentation, but for the Virtue it self: of which, that Glory is the reward;
all other Glory is false and spurious, and not worthy so much as of his
thought, that knows the value of things, and perfectly understands himself. The
Humble man knows too well, (to affect Honor in it) how little it is that he
can contribute out of his own, to the works of Virtue: Beside that, he is
afraid of seeking, even the Honor that he deserves, for fear of being
insensibly drawn in, to covet more than his due. There can be no less in
despising of Honor, since it is great Honor to refuse it; and greater yet, to
contemn it.

II. The reason why we are not humble is, because We do not know our selves:
And we will sooner believe a mistake in our own breasts, than if it came to us
from the furthest quarters of the Earth. What is man? a weak and sickly body; a
pitiful, helpless Creature, exposed to all the Injuries of Times and Fortune; a
mass of Clay and Corruption, prone to all wickedness, and of so perverse and
depraved a judgment, as to prize Earth above Heaven; Temporal Pleasures, before
Eternal Felicities: Every man living is altogether Vanity. He is one of the
most frail, one of the most furious, lustful and timorous Creatures of the
Creation: What have we then to be proud of? considering our misery and shame,
which we should most certainly consider, if we had but the least spark of
Reason in us. We can never be perfectly humble, till we come to a perfect
understanding of our selves.

III. It is not enough for us to be humble, but we must be vile in our own
eyes, distrustful of our selves, and ascribe all Glory and Honor to God. He
that is humble, takes pleasure in the contempt of himself, and is only proud of
not being affected with applause. He judges of himself, by what is his own, and
he values others, by what they have received from God; so that he always
lessens himself in the comparison. This is his practice, to set his own faults
against his Neighbors Virtues; by which Rule, the perfectest man alive, shall
think worse of himself than of another. He is obedient to his Superiors, not
wedded to his own will: He confesses his infirmities; he bears all indignities
with patience; he does any good office, be it never so mean; he is neither
singular nor talkative. He loves privacy, without any desire to be taken notice
of, he draws himself into a narrow compass; and he places himself both above
the World, and below it. He is modest and circumspect, and speaks little, but
when he needs must, and that too with a countenance, rather disposed to sadness
than mirth: One may read the humility of his heart, in his outside; his face is
grave and modest; his eyes cast down, like those of a guilty person before the
great Tribunal: And betwixt the conscience of his sins, and the uncertainty of
his pardon, not daring to lift them up to Heaven: He stands afar off, with the
Publican in the Gospel, crying, Lord be merciful to me a sinner. To conclude,
he trembles at the thought of himself; he despises the World, and all the
glories of it; for the whole Earth is as nothing to him that does not first
overvalue himself.

CHAP. XXXV.
Of the state of the Perfect: The image of a perfect man. The end of a perfect
life is union with God.

I. HE that wants nothing, may be properly said to be perfect. And what can
that man want, who is cleansed and purged from his sins, beautified with all
divine Virtues, whose heart is set upon God, and his soul united to him to
Eternity? This is the top of Christian Perfection, and the last end of
Christianity it self, to be united to him who is the End and Author of our
Being. But it is not for man to attain this End, without the special aid and
assistance of God; and therefore there are but few that arrive at this
perfection; for there are not many that entertain the Grace when it is offered
them: But however, some there have been in all Ages.

II. We may pronounce that man perfect, whom we see unshaken in dangers;
untainted, with Lusts; cheerful, in Adversity; happy, under Reproach; quiet, in
a Storm; Free, Equal, Constant, Resolute, Generous, Empty of himself, and Full
of God: And so much above the things of this World, that the Hopes and Fears,
which are the Anxiety of other people, do but serve him for Divertisement and
Sport, His Comforts are out of the reach of Violence; and his very Misfortunes
are for his good: He fears neither Disappointments nor Accidents: He values
things by the Nature of them, and not by Opinion: He sees the World at his
feet; he studies, contemplates, and despises it, with an invincible
tranquillity of spirit; and yet his Soul keeps still her station, where she had
her Original. It is with the Conversation of a Good man, as with the Beams of
the Sun; which, though they strike the Earth, are nevertheless at the same time
in the great Luminary that sends them; and so is the Soul of a perfect
Christian in Heaven, at the same time that we enjoy his Company here below. His
mind is like the stare of the World above the Moon, ever serene and quiet. He
knows neither Defects nor Variations; all Ages serve him. The Sun it self does
not look upon the World more impartially than he does, and without cumbering
his thoughts about many things; he takes up his rest in the simplicity and
unity of God himself. He neither seeks nor wishes for any thing without
himself; for he carries his happiness in his own breast. It is to God alone
that he dedicates both his actions and life. He that walks by this Rule, knows
what it is to be perfect.

III. It not for flesh and blood to arrive at this pitch without his
helping-hand, who says, Without me you are able to do nothing. But there is
likewise a necessity of precious Dispositions. An intimate union with God, is
the Accomplishment of a perfect Life; and we must first cast off the darkness
of the Creature; ere we presume to appear before him that dwells in an
unaccessible Light. How shall any man think to partake of the joys of Heaven,
so long as he carries the corruptions of Earth and Flesh about him? Every
Pleasure, every Vanity, every Vicious Affection, is a Remora to him: It stops
him in his full course, endangers the whole Lading, and keeps him from his
Port. God is unity, and takes no joy in a Soul that is divided.

FINIS.
Some Books printed for Henry Brom.
DR. Comber's Paraphrase on the Common Prayer, 4 vol. Octavo.

-- his Friendly and Seasonable Advice to the Roman Catholics of England.

Seneca's Morals in 3 vol. Octavo.

Dr. Heylin on the Creed.

The Fathers Legacy to his Friends, containing the whole Duty of Man

Dr. Du Moulin's Week of Prayers.

Christianity no Enthusiasme.

Dr. Woodford on the Psalms.

--.his Divine Poems.

Precepts and Practical Rules for a Truly Christian Life.

Mr. Camfields Discourse of Angels.

The Reformed Catholic, or the Love of Jesus.

Mr. Claget against Dr. Owen.

The lives of the Grand Viziers.

The History of the Sevarites.

Bp. Wilkins Real Character in fol.

-- his Natural Religion.

The History of the Irish Rebellion, fol.

The Life of the Great Duke Espernon.

Montluck's Commentaries, fol.

Bp. Cousens against Transubstantiation.

Mr. Simpsons Compendium of Music.

-- his Division of Violins.

Several Sermons at Court, etc.

Mr. Banisters Airs.

Dr. Whitby against Host-Worship.

The Fair one of Tunis.

Parbett's Practice of Physic.

Pools Parnassus.

The Scholars Guide from the Accidence to the University.

Mr. Sarazins Works.

Gentum fabulae.

Anatomy of the Elder.

Skinner's Lexicon.

Education of Children.

Sr. Kenelm Digby's Receipts.

Virgil Travesty.

Lucian Burlesque.

The Exact Constable.

The Planters Manual.

The Complete Gamester.

Dr. Glisson's Anatomy.

Glisson's Common Law Epitomis'd.

Dr. Fords Sermon against Forswearing

Five Love Letters.

Conversation or Witty Discourses.

Horace in English, by Mr. Brom and other Persons.

The Wars of Sweden and Denmark.

Several Pieces in Defense of the Church of England.

Mr. Dean LLoyd's Sermon at the Funeral of Sir Edmundbery Godfrey.

Tully's Offices in English. Erasmus Colloquies in English. The History of the
Plot: all three by Mr. L'Estrange.

Dr. Sprat's Plague of Athens.

Mr. Cowly's Lecture to the People.

Toleration Discussed.

Presbytery Displayed.

Vossius of the Winds and Seas.

Crumbs of Comfort.

The Guide to Heaven.

Brief Rule of Life.

Bp. Saunderson's Nine Cases.

Minelius on Horace.

Grotius De Veritare Religionis Christ.

Guillims Heraldry Enlarged.


