A LETTER FROM St. OMERS To a FRIEND in LONDON.
Most Respected Sir,
WHen first imparted to you my design to travel, you desired (which was to me a
Command) to take some observation of the deportment of the Roman Catholics
abroad, in Relation to the English Affairs about the late Plot; and though it is
impossible to have that account of things of this nature, as you might have
from a Person under other Circumstances, (being never out of my native Country
before) yet, in compliance with your request, I have sent you, what occurred to
my observation in that little Society I had with those sort of men, and this
being so eminent a place for correspondence with the English Catholics; I
thought it might most effectually answer your expectation, to spend sometime in
it, for here the whole time (almost) of the Priests is taken up in receiving
and sending dispatches to England, Ireland, and Scotland, so that wherever the
Plot was Coined, we may rationally conclude here it was Milled.

Upon my arrival here, I delivered your Letter commendatory to your Friend,
whom I found very ready in a kind Reception, to afford me a share in the
Company he kept with the Fathers, and others of Eminency, by which in the
General, I was informed, that the late discovered Plot for the killing of the
King and Subversion of the English Government charged upon them, was so far
from being the Invention of the Witnesses, (as some have given out) that it was
the politic Result of grand Councels, influenced principally by those of the
jesuitical Order; who as the Papists say, are the only Men for projects in
Europe; which assertion seems to be confirmed by some Instructions, one of that
Faction gave to some Puny Catholics, lately, deputed from this Place to
England upon the Catholics Service, a Copy of which, by the Assistance of a
Friend, came to my hands, the substance of which (transcribed for your
information) follows.

The Father took for his Theme Genesis 18. verse the 19, from whence, the
Doctrine of equivocation is peremptorily asserted to be according to holy
Scripture, and that when a Persons Integrity, and the Churches interest stand
in Competition, that then it is lawful by the assistance of this Doctrine, to
assert the Churches honor in public; though it be circumstanced with the
highest suspicion of our own sincerity, and this was an undoubted article of
the Catholic faith, which upon pain of damnation, they ought to submit to.

And to prevent any scruple, that might arise about the receiving of this
Doctrine, the example of the holy Patriarch Jacob was urged by the Father, which
he desired they would set before them, and conform to as often as occasion
required, which he told them would be of great use in the work they was to
engage in, for the propagating of the Faith of the Roman Church in England, and
that it might be safely made use of, without any hazard to their Souls, even at
the hour of Death, when the confessing of the truth, would be of great
detriment to the Catholic Cause, upon a steadfast belief of which, the souls of
those Catholics, that died upon the score of the Plot was supported; and made
their souls invincible under all the heretical solicitations, for the
discovering the secrets of Holy Church. It Is impossible to perfect our designs,
but under the shelter of this Doctrine, no ^anquishing of that pestilent heresy
without a firm belief, and an undubitable assent to it; therefore, all the
successes that the Churches interest has met withal in England, since the
miscarriage of that great project, is to be attributed to this, had those of
the Ignatian order owned their guiltiness, and that the charge against them was
consonant to truth, what a Loss had the Church sustained by such a cowardly
deportment, nay so obliging is this upon us, that we don't only secure the
Churches credit by it, and upon that account, it is a debt we all owe her, but
we merit Salvation, likewise together with the obtension of a Crown of
Martyrdom, to be ranked among all those noble Confessors in the sacred
Calendar, where our names shall be perfumed with a perpetual esteem, and have
the honor of being supplicated by the Church Militant; yea those exquisite
Flames of Purgatory, wherein the Patriarchs before the Advent of Christ lay, so
long for a Purgation, are by a serviceable mental Reservation for the advantage
of the Church, excused from undergoing: There is no point so necessary in the
present Juncture as this, nor none so seasonable to be pressed upon; you that
have taken the holy vow of mission, and are appointed to go for England, where
you will find it very serviceable in your Assistance, for the discharging those
important Affairs, that will be committed to your Conduct, the due
consideration whereof, impressed upon your minds, will mingerate your souls for
action, and to wade through the difficulties that may be met with.

The Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, those bitter Pills are easily
swallowed, when gilded with a Mental Reservation, by the help of which, they
may be taken by the Devoutest Catholics, without which, they would be nauseous
to the Palate: No true Catholic being able to take them in their literal
signification, by this Heretical Assemblies may be frequented, and their
Sacramental Administrations joined withal, when it may conduce to the Interest
of the Church, which otherwise would be impractible, by this you may take up
the Cudgels of Episcopacy against Dissenters, and when you see it necessary,
those of the Dissenters against Episcopacy, and yet at the same time seek the
subversion of both, which leads to the main thing I have in Commission, and
that is, to give you some particular Instructions about your Deportment in
England, in the present conjuncture of things, as I received them from a solemn
Consult of the Fathers.

You must upon all occasions decry, that which the Heretics call the Popish
Plot, which was no other but a holy Combination to propagate the Catholic
Faith, and to extirpate that British heresy, the accomplishment whereof, much
honor would not only redound to God, but much emolument to the Church, which
should inspirit the Soul of every true Catholic to engage in it, and to call
nothing by the name of hardship, that tends to the effecting thereof, but yet
secrecy is essentially necessary, and the denial of any such thing of absolute
use, among those Heretical People, who amidst of all the clear discoveries,
they boast of want, the dying Testimony of those Charged, to have been the
Instruments in this Sacred undertaking, who to their eternal honor, be it
spoken, preferred the Interest of our holy Mother, even before their own
Salvation, and were it possible, would have been content to have had the
Infernal Punishments inflicted upon them, rather than to have been guilty of
Revealing those Secrets, the Church have enjoined a concealment of those pious
examples, are proposed for your Imitation, that you should follow their steps;
its no small confidence the Church reposes in you, in sending you of this
Blessed Errand, and having these secrets imparted to you, oh betray not your
trust, remember you have sworn secrecy in the receipt of the holy Eucharist,
and now to divulge those secrets you are entrusted withal, indispensably
concludes under a state of Damnation, you are sent upon the great Affairs of
the Church, and one principal duty incumbent upon you is, to insinuate among
the Heretics, that there was no design against them, by the Catholics; you
will meet with abundance of credulous Souls among them, that will believe you,
and so the work will be the less difficult: Former Success pleads for farther
Attempts, a persuasion the discovered design was but a fiction, makes a future
the more feasible, when we are pitied as sufferers for our Innocence, we
cannot easily be thought Conspirators. You will find those good natured Souls,
even amongst the Heretics themselves, that will join in the Consort in crying
out no Plot, no Plot except it be a Presbyterian one, (which opinion we shall
suddenly take care to confirm), and that it was the indigency of the Witnesses,
that invented all this Bustle about a Popish Plot, these are a sort of Men,
that are in their kind servicable to our Interest, although they don't design
it so, that care must be taken to nourish this Notion among them, and not to
despise this day of small things.

In all your public Discourses, Usher in something about the Procedures of the
Parliament, and Represent them as odious as possible you can, to lessen their
Esteem amongst the People; let 41 and 42 bear a great Part in your Discourse,
and give out that their present Propensions are to repeat those Practices,
devote your selves to compose Pamphlets, against those pestilent sort of Men;
Roger Lestranges elaborate Pieces will furnish you with Sentences to suit your
purpose, scatter Reports, that most of the House of Commons in the late
Parliaments were Fanatics, and that their Votes were highly arbitrary, and
illegal, and that their Phanatical Principles was appearant by making War upon
the conforming Clergy, in their ordering a Bill to be brought in against
Pluralities, which must be represented as the Prodromus to Hudibrasses Cry: no
Bishop by this you will secure the superior Clergy, on your side, especially
those of London, most of which keep their Country Livings, as the Citizens
their Houses; but above all, admire at their Presumption about the Bill of
Exclusion, and that their intermedling with a thing of this Nature, implies a
great Height of Sedition, and Faction in their Body, that every Member that
voted in favor of it, needed a Pardon stamped by Creation, as much as my Lord
Danby. That it was more proper for them to consult the best way, to make
Tangier tenable, and the raising of Money for the Rebuilding af Charles and
Henrietta Forts: This is a work also of indispensable necessity, they being the
great Bull-wark against our Designs, which must by means be battered down,
before we can make any considerable Progress in those various Works, that now
are under our Management.

This has likewise been the continual Employment of Catholics in that Kingdom,
with no small Success; so that some Sort of People question whether there be
any such Constitution in the Government, and others to wish there were not.

You must also mightily inveigh against the Dissenters, from the established
Church among them, and lament the Negligence of Subordinate Majestrates, in not
putting the Laws in Execution against these Sort of People, commend those
Clergy Men most, whose zeal leads them that way, oppose the Union of different
Opinions, as a thing unattainble, and that it proceeds from a spirit of faction
to design it, that it will be the way to ruin the conforming Party, cry out of
dangers, impendant from the Presbiterians against the Covernment; This must be
effectually done, for it is from those Sort of Men, that poor Catholics have
of late suffered most exstreamly, they, being most of wallerising Spirits, by
this, you will strangely amuse and divert the Heretics hot pursuits against
the Catholics, whilst they are in their full Cry, against one another, our
Designs may go on the more smoothly, and unsuspectedly, and the Laws against us
lie down on it, for Designs cannot be so well managed in a Prison, this has
likewise been experienced, to have been mighty succesful since the Discovery of
that glorious Project. In a word make it your Business to expose all, as
infamous Persons, and Enemies to the King and Kingdom, that oppose the Interest
of the Catholic Cause, more especially the petitioning Lords of the Monmouth
faction, who shall in due time have that Retribution for their Pains, as will
make them Repent of being such great Sticklers for Protestantism.

I thought Sir, to transcribe this Paper for your information, that you might
see how innocent these Men are, as to a Plot, and what well wishers they are to
the present Constitution, as a traitorous Peer lately professed upon the
Scaffold, and how infinitely they are wronged, that upon the Evidence of such
Persons, their Lives should be taken away, when their endeavors are not to
justify their pretended Innocence, but to conceal their devilish Guilt, and to
facilitate the perpetration of their hellish Designs against the Protestant
Interest, nothing being more common than when their Company corresponds to
justify their Conspiracies, against the English Government, and yet in
Protestant Countries pretend to abhor any such Proceedings, as much as Sir
Francis Withins does petitioning.

The Priests here was strangely exhillerated at the Receipt of the Lord
Stafford's Speech, to find that he finished his testimony with a Lie in his
mouth, for they looked upon his Lordship as staggering in his belief, as to the
Doctrine of equivocation, and had a mind to outlive Treason as well as B -- but
being constant to the death, has obtained with the Rest to be privately
Laughed, by the subtle Priests, to suffer himself to be so imposed upon, when
as they are not afraid to whisper, that he knew himself guilty, and it was
pleasantly expressed by a Papist, that his Lordship Rode to heaven upon a
Jesuits back.

The Priests of late are mightily transported at their English Intelligence,
and say it will shortly appear to the world, that the Popish Plot was no other
but a Republican, and Presbyterian Design; for all the Gentry in England are
accounted as Presbyterians, that are vigorous against the Papal interest, and
they openly Report that things shall be reduced to those circumstances before
it be long, that those which will talk of a Popish Plot, must do it in their
Closets, and that a grave was making in England, wherein the Protestants
themselves should be forced to bury it; what these things mean, is obvious to
every ones understanding, which God of his infinite mercy prevent.

You cannot, Sir, imagine with what inveteracy of Spirit they mention the
English Nation, and that the Crown has been usurped by all Protestant Kings,
since the Marian days, and that they are therefore in Conscience obliged to
endeavor to recover what the Church has lost by that means, and this they
will by no means call Treason, nor allow to be unjustifiable; to which degree
of confidence, I am informed, they are almost armed in England; there you have
them in pretense, siding with the motions of the Court, in opposition to those
of the Parliament, though implacable enemies to both, likewise in appearance
joining with the Conformists against the Nonconformists, though equally (by
them) are hated, for here they are manifest, and the men appear as they are;
nothing being more frequent, then to hear them mention his Sacred Majesty, with
an irreverence not to be pardoned, with such villifying Expressions, that would
amount to the highest affront, if given to an ordinary Person.

So Sir, that which naturally Results from the whole is this, that the great
Design of these sort of men, is to Ruin that Kingdom, and to divide in order to
the effecting thereof, as a Roman Catholic once told me in Brussels, it was
worth twenty years purchase, after the annuity of St. Paul's Deanery to find
that good Dean leave off his heats against Popery in such a Juncture as this,
and worry and tare his own Irenicum, till he made it cry out, that Separation
was both mischievious and unreasonable, thereby surprising the poor Dissenters
who had a great affection for him, to find the good Doctor loose the Scent of
Popery, in the midst of the Plot, and fall upon them.

Sir, this little account of the Disposition and temper of these Persons, we
may see the absolute Necessity, for Protestants to live in the supreamest
Exercises of Love and good Affection, tho they may dissent in some particulars
Punctillioes in Judgment, in reference to render them the more capable to
withstand the common Enemy of both their civil and religious Privileges; why
should two or three Ceremonies be the occasion of raising Feuds, and
animosities between them? certainly Men are exstreamly to blame, that think
they owe not the Debt of common Love to one another, where these small
Differences are found between them, there being no original Cause in the things
themselves, to produce a dividedness of affection; therefore it must be
attributed not to the Religion of the Protestant Profession (although
considered in those different ways of worship now in England, that there is not
a spirit of love and kindness, as there ought to be, which is so absolutely
requisite under their present Circumstances), but to the ill Tempers and
Passions of Men, the evil Tendency of which, I the more apprehend, in having
this Prospect of the English Affairs in these Popish Counties.

Thus Sir, I have given you this small Account of Matters, as a Testimony of my
Obedience, I shall still have a Sense of my Duty, in imparting any thing else
of moment, that may occur in this or of any other Nature.

I am Sir your most obedient Servant B. B.
St. Omers June the 5th. Still. Nov. 1681.
LONDON, Printed for Langley Curtis at the Goat on Ludgate Hill.


