JUDAS HIS Thirty Pieces NOT RECEIVED, BUT Sent back to him, for his own Bag;
who has betrayed the Lord of Glory, and sold his Master, and Crucified Christ
afresh, and put him to open shame, and now lives wantonly upon the Earth, and
has killed the Just.
BEING Something by way of Answer to a Letter that was sent to John Reins
Merchant of London, from Robert Rich in Barbados, which was for the
Distribution of a certain sum of Money to seven Churches, as he calls them:
Wherein it is manifested, wherefore the People that are the Lords, in the
Covenant of Light, but by the World in scorn called Quakers, cannot partake of
his Gift; as also, in several passages, is mixed a Manifestation, in a way of
Testimony, what that blessed Truth of God is, that they received, and do enjoy,
and for which they have heretofore, and yet still suffer.
Robert Rich,
THere is a Letter come to our hands, sent to John Reins, which bears thy
name, and is for the Distribution of a considerable sum of Money toward the
relief of them that are in such capacity as the Letter in several passages of
it makes mention; wherein we find our Names, amongst others, assigned by thee
to dispose of a part of it, to such as are in need, sickness, or other kind of
adversity whatsoever, amongst us the People called Quakers, so styled by thee;
the consideration whereof, together with the things contained in thy Letter,
caused us deeply to way these things before the Lord, lest we should do any
thing in this matter, that might hurt the Truth, or grieve the blessed Spirit
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which we, blessed be his Name, have received, whereby
we are established for ever; and we stood in fear before the Lord, and were not
hasty in this matter; and some of them whom thou have named in thy Letter were
altogether unwilling that we should meddle with that assigned to us, lest we
should partake of the accursed Thing, which will be spoken to in its place; and
weighing things on every hand, at last, those that have subscribed the
Acquittance did think it meet, that we might at the present receive the Money,
and the only reason that prevailed with us to-take it in our hands, was, lest
any that had been heretofore convinced of Gods Everlasting Truth, but now
turned from it, (as thou art) and yet go under that name; these receiving it,
might in this (as in other things) bring reproach upon the blessed Truth of the
Lord God; which to prevent, we did secure the Money in our own hands, until we
might have an opportunity to sent it back to thy self; Note, The Money he sent
was received by a Stranger, by our approbation, and after receipt, was sealed
up, and the very same sent back to him.
that so the People, who are the Lords for ever in the Covenant of Light, (yet
by the World called Quakers) might stand clear from the accursed thing, which
is the price of blood, as we shall make manifest in due place. Robert thou art
not ignorant that our acquaintance at the first, Note also, This Robert Rich
had a convincement, and was a while among the people of God, called Quakers,
but he soon turned from them, for their way was to strait for him to walk in.
came upon the occasion of thy being convinced and submission to the
Everlasting and Unchangable Way and Truth of the Living God, and we have a
Testimony (and it lives in our hearts) for that pure Way which (blessed be the
Lord) we are established in, although many (as thy self) have turned their
backs upon it: our God whom we serve and bow before, he is Light, unchangeably
so; and we bear witness, in him is no darkness at all; it is written in our
hearts by the Finger of Gods Spirit, that we shall never forget the kindness
and love of God toward us, who had waited and mourned (in the secret of our
Souls) for the appearance of him who is the desire of all Nations; yet to them
that believe not in the true Light that John bears witness of, His Countenance
is more marred then any Man's; but blessed be the Name of God for ever, that we
received the Light, the Way to walk in; we bear witness for the Lord, it is
everlastingly Pure, and the unclean cannot walk therein; it was to us, it is so
to all them that believe in the Light, and abide in it, it is an Everlasting
Morning to the Soul, and gives pure satisfaction; and we are fully persuaded in
the Light and Power of the Lord it is so; we are kept by it, it is the mighty
Power of God to Salvation, to us who believe in the true Light; there is a
treasure in him for all that are in want; oh, that the Nations that are yet in
darkness and blindness of mind were awakened, that they might come to partake
(with us) of the true treasure, it enricheth them that have been poor outcasts,
that had no rest, that had no rest for the weary Soul, we bear a witness and
hold forth a true testimony although the backsliding in heart be grieved
thereby, that Christ Jesus (the Lord from heaven) is come, that delivers and
saves from sin, it is the Comfort and Consolation of them that have been in the
travail, and led into Captivity under the sore bondage of the cruel Enemy of
the Soul to know the Deliverer come, it is so, blessed be the holy Name of the
Lord for ever, we testify of the true Translation, known and come into, which
we have a part in, we know the pure Power of the Son of God taking place in our
hearts, and it has overcome the power of the wicked one; and this is more to
us then ten thousand worlds; and because of the savor of his good ointment, do
ye Virgins love the Lords Christ, and cry Hosanna to him; I mean all who
receive the truth in the love of it, and have kept their habitation in God, he
has been, he still is a stay and strength to the Soul, whereby they are
preserved that they do not faint in their minds, notwithstanding the several
trials and temptations that they have been exercised in and with, and here we
come to anchor, here for ever is our Rest: if Enemies rise on the one hand or
the other, either from the world, who persecute because of the Name of God, and
our worshipping him in Spirit and Truth; or those Enemies that once were
convinced, and saw the gate that is narrow, and the way that is straight, and
have taken offense at the good way of the Lord, yet [mark] to us that abide,
(it is sealed for ever) it is a pleasant way, it was in times past to those
that walked in it, it is to us who love the pure path, in it they did (we do)
find and inherit life everlasting, we said we were come to Anchor and Rest for
ever, there is a consent in the soul it is a durable Rest, to all them that are
come to anchor and rest in the pure living power of the living God, and cease
from their works; blessed be the holy Name of God some have attained by him to
know the Savior come to work in the soul the works that are acceptable unto
God, and standing in the unchangeable truth they are no more their own, but
settled upon the Rock the everlasting foundation where no change is, no
variableness nor shadow of turning; whoever comes into that we speak of, and
dwells in it, they are come to Mount Sion that cannot be moved; does not the
unchangeable Power of the living God, cause the pure mind to mount up above
all earthly things, and to converse in heaven? and so they know this to be true
in him, that he the Lord has made them a willing people in the day of his
power; truly they that abide in it, they run the Race that is set before them,
and do not faint; they walk in the way of Life, and are not weary of following
the Lamb of God that takes away Sin, wheresoever he goes; [mark] our witness
for God is, his Standard is set up, and his Salvation is revealed, and the
certain sound is gone forth, and many have prepared themselves to partake of
the Supper of the Lamb, where the blessedness for ever is known, we declare of
no other Standard but this, the unalterable power of the living God, to be set
up in the heart of man and woman, whereby Salvation may be wrought, and
deliverance from Sin may be witnessed, and the Name of God magnified for ever,
and we speak to the praise of his Name, power from Christ is come into the
hearts of many, whereby they have overcome the devil, For he that is in us is
stronger then he that is in the world, and we are joined in the Covenant of
light, to walk with the Lord for ever; there is a seal of love set upon the
heart by his spirit, the pure force whereof has constrained many to give up,
and they are thoroughly persuaded, that neither heights, nor depths, things
present, nor things to come, or whatsoever can be named shall be able to
separate them from the hope that is in Christ, and that because they are kept
by the mighty power of God, which we have experience of, is above and stronger
then the power of the devil, and in all our trialls and tribulations, although
never so many, we speak in reverence of his holy Name, we have no whether else
to go, nor any thing else to put our trust and considence in, but the power of
the living God, and his Arm has been made bare for our deliverance from that
thraldom and bondage in which we were kept heretofore notwithstanding our
belief, until Christ by the Will of God was revealed in us, to our unspeakable
comfort, and we cannot be removed from the hope of the Gospel, which is the
power of God to Salvation, to as many as truly believe, and know Christ to be
made unto them (by God) Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and
Redemption, and our hope it reaches within the Vail; and blessed be God we are
steadfast in him who is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, but many have
turned aside from the way of Life, and are snared in holes, and some (as in
time past) after they had tasted the good Word of God, and of the power of the
world to come. yet have fallen away; yet (if possible) it is the true desire of
the heeart, they may be restored and brought back into the Light of Life and
fold of Christ, where they may lie down in peace. It is declared before how we
came to be acquainted with thee at the first, some of us very well yet
remember, the first occasion of seeing thy face, it was in owning, and also
bringing on their way those first Messengers of the Gospel that came to us,
that brought the glad tidings of Salvation, dear Edw. Borough, and Francis
Howgel; then at that time thou did appear to have dear and tender love to
that Truth of Christ we profess, and to our great comfort and consolation do
enjoy; and after, it is yet remembered, some of us visited thee, when thou wast
in Prison in Banbury, with dear Richard Farnsworth, and there thou did bare a
witness and restimony for the Living Way and Truth of God; and at that time
thou did appear to have a dear love to, and a tender respect for those People
thou now call'st Quakers, above any People in the World, and as the only
People, and alone Way of God, did thou then own them, not by the name
Quakers, (as the World do) did thou then call them; but as Friends of God,
and Friends to and with thy self in unity and oneness in the Spirit of Truth,
for our unity then was (and all that love Righteousness amongst us, they, and
they only continue and abide in unity) in the holy Spirit of Truth, which,
blessed be the Lord for ever, is become a Guide and a Leader into all Truth.
But it is necessary to enquire what Principle thou art of in matter of Religion
now; we are not ignorant, that after some small space of time that thou had
been convinced, and had in some degree taken up the Cross to thy will and
ways, in which thou had full liberty in the Flesh, before thou came to
believe in Christ, the true Light, who shows and makes manifest sin in the
heart, wherever it is, and to as many as receives him, he gives and
administers power from himself, to overcome all the works of the wicked One;
but thou went out from us, and from the fellow-ship of the Spirit of Truth into
another spirit; there is a testimony in the heart for the Lord, that thou
departed from the Spirit of Truth, (that is a Guide to God, to all that are
lead by it) and joined to an unclean spirit, and in that thou have stood, and
in that spirit thou have been a shelter, and a harbor for them that are in the
same, apart from, and in a separation from the Truth, and the Spirit of it, and
there we find thee yet to continue.

Oh, Robert, when ever thou comes to have a true sense of what thou have
departed from, the Word of Life answered, He is gone from Christ the Hope of
Glory, the Fonntain of Life: There is a cry in the Soul while this is writing;
What, have thou lost the beloved Son of God, in whom he is well pleased? Thou
have murdered and crucified the pure Life of Christ, the Heir in thy self, and
have taken the Government into the hand of the Polluted; and in this state thou
art speaking of the things of Gods heavenly Kingdom, but notwithstanding gone
from the Light in which true fellowship is; for it is now with us, as it was
with the cloud of Witnesses that went before, who said, If we walk in the
Light, as he is in the Light, we have fellowship one with another, and the
blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses from all Sin: So we find thee gone from
the true Fellowship that remains unalterable for ever, which is in the true
Light and holy Spirit, which, blessed be the Lord for ever, we are (whom thou
art got atop of in thy words) baptized into one Body, and have been made to
drink into one Spirit. It is no matter at all of what persuasion in Religion we
were before we came to know him that takes away Sin; but now we are, (let the
Ranters say whatever they will) in him that is true, and the departure of all
them that could not abide and continue with us to walk in the strait Way that
leads to Life, it shakes not our confidence at all; for we bear witness for the
Lord, and our witness will stand and abide, and cannot be prevailed against,
because it is for him, yea, and in him, that we are come to that which all the
Prophets bear witness of, and the glory is come, and he is known that has
established the Soul upon the sure Foundation, and all the proud swelling words
cannot shake us at all; for we will not know thy words, but we will know thy
power, and try that, and there we find thee light, weighing in the Balance of
the Sanctuary: we are called to it to contend for the Truth [mark] once
delivered; blessed everlasting God thou have comforted the hearts of thine in
this, (who are kept by thy power) that they shall never fall, because they are
built upon the Rock Christ: and we knowing that thou art gone from the blessed
Way and Truth of the Living God, and thou wast one of those of the first rank
that departed from the Way Everlasting, and joined with them that got up into
the Imaginations; yet them that were thy Leaders in that particular, there was
some degree of repenting, and God being gracious to them there was a sense of
sorrow upon their hearts, of their sin in dishonouring the name of the Lord,
and in causing his truth to be evil spoken of for your sakes: but Robert, I
never yet heard that thou came to a sense of what thou art departed from, or in
what state thou now stand; but that which thou art departed from, and we
enjoy, gives us light to see thy condition, and what work thou art working in
this thy liberal Contribution; and in this, as to us, what is it more then the
Enemy of the Soul did to Christ our forerunner, when he showed him the glory
of this World, and says, All this will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me: for now we being brought under, as to outward things, by the late
Fire, and thou being in fullness, as to outward things, it seems a sit time to
lay thy snare to entrap our feet, and by this means love, as thou call'st it,
to overcome us, who had (whilst thou were yet in London in that unclean
spirit, to which thou wast joined) denied thee, and that spirit, and thou so
continuing, we are still the same as we were when thou departed from us; and
say, (if thou continue where thou art) Thy Money perish with thee; for we have
learned in all estates to be content; and we know our God whom we serve is
able, and all-sufficient to provide for us: it is our glory for ever, that we
come to know him that takes care for us, and we know he makes provision
according to our need; and so we deny thy Sacrifice, for it is the price of
Blood, (as was hinted before) for thou have slain the pure tender innocent Life
that was arising in thee, the tender Bud, it scarce ever came to blossom, it
was nipt, the subtle Foxes spoil the tender Grapes; that Birth thou speaks of
was strangled before it was brought forth. And all that are baptized, and come
to that Unction the Apostle speaks of, which is true, there is no lie in it;
the Soul even blesses and magnifieth the Lord for ever, that we are come to
that pure Spring of Love and Life that satisfies the Immortal Soul, and there
is no Lie in it, neither will it join or partake of a Lie in another; therefore
all that have been made partakers of it, and come to know the worth thereof in
some degree, they had need walk humbly before the Lord for ever, and prize his
love, and also stand in the watch, lest through negligence or carelessness, they
giving not heed to the pure Light of Life, which is the Gift of God, in which
the Wisdom which is from above is placed; all that come to it, and have kept
their virginity, have not been spoiled through vain deceit, and a false
flattering love, that neither for fear, nor favor of others, but in singleness
of heart are given up to the Lord, to walk with him in the Covenant of his own
Light and Life, [mark] they need not strive after excellency of words, for
their Kingdom is not in that; but they are come to know the Breast Plate of true
Judgment, the Judgment of the Living God is placed in it for ever; and all them
that dwell in the unalterable Truth of the Lord our Righteousness, prize his
mercy to you for ever; Oh, the excellency of the pure Power of the pure Life of
the Son God; and without all doubt, the Virgins that follow the Lamb, the
Light, whither he goes, [mark] they have this treasure in earthen Vessels: Oh,
ye faithful ones that have kept your dwelling, and have abode under the Wings
of the Almighty, exalt and magnify for ever the alone precious, glorious,
living, saving strengthening Power of the Living blessed God, your and our All
is in it; and (without the preciousness of this, in a settled stayed mind, the
want whereof, and the neglect to attain the Wisdom that is from above) that is
for ever pure; it is true in our days, as in the days past, The Sluggard, the
Sloathfull (I in my Soul can desire there were none such) they are clouthed in
Rags; [mark] the pure Life calls and cries out to the Lord, that all, and every
one in the particular would labor and strive and watch to that, so there might
not one that profess the Name of the Lord be barren, but all be acquainted with
the Excellency of Gods Power, and be enriched with it, no one going before
another, but a standing in the unalterable Power of the Lord, for the growth
and comforting of the pure Life in all; this is that we were made partakers of
in the beginning, we did, we do inherit Life, the preciousness whereof is
beyond the utterance of all words, and all the deceitful ones that are gone
out from the pure Appearance of the Lord, and his pure Light, and are made wise
in many of the words of Truth, yet are out, and against the Power of Truth,
although they come amongst us with their lying wonders from day to day,
(Robert) as thou and thy Company did in the beginning; but your sins remains,
and your folly was made manifest, and blessed be the Name of God, Truth, and
the Power of the Lord is established over the heads of all the unclean in
heart; and so we deny thy gift. But, Robert, there is another end in sending
thy Contribution to Seven Churches, as thou call'st them, thou say that
these might more fully discern the mind of thy Lord in this figure of Love and
Amity to them; in the reading thy Letter there was a belief that there was a
mystery in thy imagination about these Seven Churches; it is declared before
that thou wast one of the first that run out in the imagination to the
dishonor of Truth, thou joined to them that could not endure the Yoke, and to
the Ranters; and after some small space of time, when that Cloud of Darkness
was blown over, a second assault from the Bottomless-Pit arises, through that
Poetical Instrument John Perrot, who set up and promoted the keeping on the Hat
in Prayer and Supplication to God, and that was not the only thing by which he
sought to destroy and overturn the precious Truth of the Living God; (but it
will stand for ever) the second thing whereby this Instrument, that was as thy
forerunner in this matter, he wrote that Epistle for Unity and Amity, and to
take away the hedge of Opinions, and so to unite all together in one, this was
the work of this nimble Poet; and afterward, when he could not effect his work
to espouse and join us to the world, that are in wickedness (who were escaped
from Sodom, and were gotten to Soar, the place of rest) then himself, after all
his profession that he made of denial of this World, and the Fashion thereof,
for a more enduring Substance; yet at the last turned into the Earth, and
sought the preferment thereof, and built again the things which before he had
destroyed, and so in that sinful state laid down his body, and so is a warning
unto thee; for, if thou continue in that Apostising spirit, in which thou
went out from Gods Truth, thou also wilt likewise perish; but yet it is the
desire of the Soul that thou may repent, and come to Salvation; and the
glorious Salvation that we testify of, and are joined together in, is the pure
Life and Power of Jesus Christ; and blessed for ever be the Name of the Lord,
we abide therein; and all those that did partake with us of the Grace of God in
the Light of Christ Jesus, and after a while drew back, and fell from it, we
very well know Gods Soul harh no pleasure in them: Therefore, having received
power from Christ, we warn thee in the Name of the Lord, to return to that
which first convinced thee, which was the pure Light and Spirit of Christ, that
thou may know it to cleanse and sanctify thee, and to lead and guide thee in
the Everlasting Way of Holiness, which will administer comfort to thee in the
latter end.

We omitted of purpose the naming of those Persons which thou speak of in
thy Letter of direction to John Reins, because of our intention to make this
Paper sent unto thee public; unto whom thy further request is, to receive the
Thirty pounds, and therewith to provide a Dinner or a Supper, thy words are,
which I chiefly do, for the raising of my dear Friend Lazarus, viz. the Love of
God; we are not unquainted, blessed be the Lord for ever, how the Love of God
was raised up in our hearts; we have in some degree spoken of it before, but
yet its needful to say, that the Lord in an acceptable day reached to our
Souls, to let us see, that without Christ we were utterly undone and lost for
ever; and we had been long seeking him, even through almost all Forms of
Religion, that had a Form of godliness amongst them; but we could not find the
Beloved of the Soul there; for in those several Forms we come to know, that
Christ the Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, his Countenance is more marred
then any man's; but when in the Ministration of the Gospel, and by it alone we
came to be acquainted with the pure Power of the Lord God, we very well yet
remember how that Power of God wrought in our Souls, even to an utter loathing
of all manner of sin and evil, and it begat an everlasting love in our Souls to
the Living God, and to one another, who by a visitation in his Spirit and Power
had drawn us with the Cords of pure Love; and this Spirit and Power of the Lord
Jesus Christ, this, and this only is able to raise up the Love of God in man,
and also to preserve for ever that Love in the heart; for by the Power thereof
are we preserved, and therein do we rejoice, and our Joy can no man take from
us: But what love is that which is raised up in good fellowship, as the World
call it, in eating and drinking, is it not the love of such a god, whose god is
Bellies, who mind earthly things to raise up the Love of the true God in the
hearts of men and women? but undoubtedly a Dinner or Supper in the outward will
not raise up the Love of God in the heart; that which sheds it abroad in the
heart, that alone can raise up pure Love to the pure God, and this we are
acquainted withal: and we do believe that thou speak thy own condition in
those words, viz. Which has been long pining away, through a tedions and sore
famine of contention and strife, even unto death: Robert, we very well yet
remember when thy self, with others, departed from the Unalterable and
Everlasting Living Holy Way of God, what strife and sore contention did you and
your Company make in our Meetings and Assemblies, to the wounding the hearts of
many that did truly love and fear the Name of the Lord, through which strife
and contention of yours, together with the Ranters, to which you were joined,
you made our otherwise peaceable meetings to be a scorn to the World, and
thereby thou lost the pure Love of God that before did begin to be shed abroad
in thy heart by the holy Spirit; and now being gone from it, and from the pure
Light that leads to it, thou would buy the Gift of the holy Spirit with
money, in giving Thirty pounds to make a Dinner or a Supper, for the raising up
thy Friend Lazarus, as thou call'st it; but yet thou can not be in friendship
with the pure Love of the Living God whilst thou art out from the way that
leads to it; and we advice thee to turn to the Grace of God in which the
Salvation is, which, blessed be the Name of God, is become our Teacher, and
has taught us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly and
righteously in this present World; in the beginning we had some knowledge of
thee in this Grace of God, in which the Love of God is for ever, but not to be
bought with money; thou would give Thirty pounds for raising up of the Love
of God in the heart, and Judas received Thirty Pieces of silver for betraying
Christ, the Love of God: so the Traders in Money, for either buying or selling
the Love of God are denied; for they are both from one Root; but we have
learned to abide in the Living Vine, that we may bring forth fruit unto our
Heavenly Father, who has begotten us unto himself by the Gospel, which is a
sure stay to the mind, whereby we are kept in perfect Peace: we shall not
meddle much with thy high words with which thou beatest the air, but surely
there is a belief, that there was never yet such a president in the World
before; it is very observable to us the state of thy mind in this particular,
to advance so great a sum of Money; and weighing the thing in the Balance of
Truth, it is only to draw us back where thou art gone, and join us again to the
World; but we have entered into our rest: Thou would have the Persons of
those thou have invited bid welcome, and also to remember the spirits of them
that were friends to the Bridegroom, and so thy Feast is for the dead and
living; but these so compacted together, thou call the Church of the
Firstborn: and indeed they are the Church of the firstborn of thy
imaginations, for there is no pattern of it before, and thy Brain is the first
that ever pointed out to, or laid a foundation for such a Church, or such a
Congregation, unless the Ranters; and therefore those who are of the Church of
the Firstborn, truly so, I mean those that are translated from death to Life,
from the power of Satan to the Power or the Living God, and by the Spirit and
power of Jesus Christ are born again, whereby they come out of the old Birth,
or rather that Death which is in opposition to the pure Life of the Son of God;
and these now come to know the quickening Power of the Son of God in their
Souls, whereby they are made alive unto God, and although they were in time
past dead as well as others, yet now behold, by the Grace of God they live for
evermore; there abide in Christ the living Vine, and are built on the sure
foundation, ye they are come to the Rock of Ages, the tried Stone, which the
Master Builders of our Age has refused; but to us who believe in the true
Light, he is for ever precious; and therefore the Lord for and in behalf of his
Everlasting Truth calls for acquitting of our selves as men of God, who love
the Gospel of Peace and Salvation, who have received mercy and wisdom from God
in it, whereby we can encounter with the Adversary of Gods Truth and Power,
although he get unto himself proud swelling words of vanity, to make himself to
be admired; yet, in the Name of God, we deny him, for we are not ashamed of the
Truth which we received in the beginning, for we come to know it is the Power
of God to Salvation, to as many as believe, and continue in the pure
unchangable Way, Christ, the Light and Life, who is the same yesterday, this
day, and for ever; there is a presure and pure desire that is in the Soul, that
all the Flock that are come to partake of the unalterable and pure Wisdom and
Life of Christ, would for ever abide and continue therein; the testimony of the
Everlasting God is risen in the Soul, there is no assured preservation, as to
God, out of this Ark: Therefore all that have been acquainted with the pure
measure of the Gift and Grace of God, keep and abide therein; and then, if the
Storms come, and the Floods arise, thou art in that in which the safety is,
even in him which is the Beginning and the Ending, he began the Work of God in
our Soul, he has, he does, blessed be his Name for ever, carry it on in his
own strength, and by his own Arm are we delivered and preserved and we have
learnt of the Spirit of Truth to trust in him, and we have set to our Seal, and
we know him to be the chiefest of ten thousand, and he has made the upright,
the Virgins whose Lambs are trimed, and have oil in them, who have waited for
the Bridegroom of the Soul, his Banner over them is pure Love, every one to
know a rest in that which has no shadow in it; how comfortable is it to that
man or woman that is come to be stayed in their minds purely on the Living God,
for we have seen an end of all perfection under the Son; but surely the
revelation of Christ to the Soul is exceeding glorious in the manifestation of
himself in his dwelling and abiding with them that love his Appearance; it is a
dry place to that Soul, whatever the words are, that is not in the feeling
sense of the pure Life and [mark] unchangeable Power of the Lord God which
keeps the heart entire and upright to God, they are compassed about with
Salvation that can rest alone in that which is everlastingly one and the same,
and all that are tossed about with every wind, every spirit, although in the
depth of confusion, there is a Lamentation for them, in the Soul of the
upright, what will become of them that after a long profession of Gods Truth,
yet not come to anchor and fix in that which is within the Vail? Oh, that all
were come to be rooted and grounded, whereby they might be no more removed from
the unchangeable Power of the Living God. But Robert, thou have given order
that the persons of those that are invited may be bid welcome, but rather the
spirits of the Friends to the Bridegroom, as thou call'st them be remembered:
But in case the Persons of those that are invited to the Feast which thou have
given Thirty pounds to provide a Dinner or a Supper do not appear, how would
thou have their spirits remembered? Must it be as the Papists remember those
that are deceased of their Religion, to say one or more Masses, that they may
be delivered out of Purgatory? Or what otherwise is thy Festival mind to have
the Spirits of them that are fallen asleep remembered? Thou have given a large
some of money for a Dinner or a Supper to Feast together, tell us in plain
terms, Do thou mean to remember their spirits by drinking to them, and so
remembering them in a Cup of good Liquor, as those Fellowships call it? For thou
have given order that the persons, but rather the spirits of those especial
ones be remembered; we must confess, it is such an especial work, and service,
and remembrance, that we never yet heard of before, therefore we had need to
have an Interpreter one of a thousand.

Or would thou, like the Church of Rome, first canonize and make them Saints,
and so remember them by putting up request and supplication to them? If this,
or either of these, and if not, we are certainly distinct from thy Festival
mind and spirit; but undoubtedly it is a word of truth to thee, thou art gone
out from the pure Living Truth and Spirit of Christ, and what, do thou think
to be made perfect by the Flesh, and in Feasting? Thou appearest to have gotten
into a large place, but there is an answer rises, It is ease in the earthly
sensual mind and will; but they only shall be kept in perfect peace whose minds
are stayed on God; if any should not yet understand wherein our preservation
is, and wherein our strength lies, we stand clear before the Lord, it is not in
works of righteousness which we have, or can do, or according to excellency of
speech, or words which we may have of our own, or learn of others, but
according to and by his Grace are we saved, and our comfort and consolation for
ever remains, as we are kept by the Power of God to continue in the Grace of
God, which is our Salvation, and our minds, blessed be the Lord for ever, are
stayed on him; Immortality and Life is brought to light by the Gospel which is
the Power of God, and the saving health that is revealed by the pure Power of
the Lord is come (and blessed for ever be the Name of God) we continue and
abide therein: we testify, in the Name of the Lord, let the dangers, trials or
temptations be never so great, we have nothing else to trust to, or in, but the
alone Arm and Power of the Lord God, which is our Salvation, and we cannot be
drawn aside from the hope thereof: and so all people, who ever they are, that
will partake of Salvation from God, they must walk in the pure Light of the
Lord, in which the pure fellowship is known with the pure God, and one with
another; and all that believe in the Light, and are made children thereof, and
abide therein, they have fellowship with us, and we with them in that which
never alters nor changes, but abides the same for ever; and upon this Rock
Christ, the true Light are we built, and we know the Gates of Hell shall never
prevail against them that are built thereon, and here is our Rest for ever.

THE END.

