February the 10th. 16 79 / 80.
I Do appoint Thomas Simmons and Jacob Sampson, to Print this my Narrative, and
that no other Presume to Print the same, or any part thereof.

Robert Bolron.

THE NARRATIVE OF Robert Bolron, Of Shippon-Hall, Gent.

Concerning the late Horrid Popish Plot and Conspiracy for the Destruction of
His Majesty and the PROTESTANT RELIGION.

Wherein is Contained,

I. His Informations upon Oath before His Majesty in Council, and before
several Justices of the Peace, of the said Design, and the means by which he
arrived at the knowledge thereof. II. Some particular Applications made to
himself to assist those designed in the Murdering of his Majesty, the Persons
by whom such applications were made, and the Reward promised. III. The Project
of the Popish Party to erect a Nunnery at Dolebanck near Ripley in Yorkshire,
together with the Names of some Nuns actually designed for that Employment, and
taking the Profession upon them, as also an Account of a certain Estate of 90
l. per annum given by Sir Thomas Gascoigne to the Nunnery for ever. IV. The
Names of the Persons Contributors to the design of Killing the King, and the
Establishing of the said Nunnery, as also the particular Sums of Money by each
of them respectively subscribed and given. V. The cunning contrivances of that
Party by fraudulent Conveyances to secure their Estates from forfeiture to the
King, if they were discovered to be engaged in the Plot, himself being witness
to one of them. VI. The names of the Popish Priests known by him to have said
Mass, or to be engaged in the Plot.
With other Material Passages relating to the Horrid Plot.

Together with an Account of the Endeavors that were used by the Popish Party
to Stifle his Evidence.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Princes Arms, and Jacob Sampson,
next door to the Wonder-Tavern in Ludgate Street. MDCLXXX.

TO THE KINGS MOST Excellent Majesty.
THE Protestant Party in this Land, though they admit of many subdivisions
amongst themselves, by reason of differences in Opinion and Judgment about
Modes and Forms of Worship (such Disagreements having likewise been, even in
the Purer days of the Apostles themselves) yet do all Unite in their joint
Prayers and Supplications to God Almighty, for your Majesty's Life, and Safety;
your Majesty's Interest in them all being very Considerable (if you please to
improve it,) and I pray God to direct your Majesty's heart to Protect, Value,
and Esteem them, that your Majesty's Interest may be only aimed at, by all your
Loyal Protestant Subjects. I know this is an extraordinary time, and things
verge toward a Crisis, wherefore if my zeal for your Majesty's Service, as
well as Gratitude for my Pardoned Life, does somewhat transport me to some
indecencies in my Address to your Majesty, I hope, as formerly, I shall obtain
your Majesty's Gracious Favor.

This Nation is very sensible, how often your Majesty's Life has been
threatened by the Romish Faction. I have heard Sir Thomas Gascoigne say, That
though some were discovered and Executed for the Plot, yet they would never
give over, until you were taken off; I confess I have been often present in
Popish Cabals, where it has been represented as a chief part of their Policy
to alienate Your Majesty's Affection from Your Parliament; for then (as I have
heard them allege) Exasperations and Discontents would grow high on each side,
and Your. Majesty would be weakened in the greatest part of Your Defense; so
that the Love of Your People would be alienated and estranged from your
Majesty's Interest. For no Homebred Disturbance can ever rationally do Your
Majesty any hurt, as Long as you have Parliamentary Assemblies to second and
stand by you. For then they did conclude that your Majesty's Sword would cut on
both sides, and they thought themselves happy if it did cut but on one side, as
they were pleased to Term it, when Your Parliament was Dissolved, which
procured much rejoicing among the Romish Party.

Being but an Inferior Person, it is above my Sphere to advise, but my Prayers
shall not be wanting, That God would mightily Protect Your Majesty against all
Machinations, and Attempts of Wicked Men, made against either Your Life or
Government. And that he would continue You an Eminent Example of Piety, Virtue,
and Goodness to Your People, (who walk as much by Pattern as Precept) according
to the example of Jehosaphat, whose heart was lifted up in the ways of the
Lord, to Your Establishment and Comfort here, and Eternal Bliss hereafter. For,
God being an Your side, all the Projects of Your Adversaries, though seemingly
not disappointable by human art, are but weak and impotent things, and subject
to a demolition by the least breath of his Mouth, who has suffered them to
proceed so far toward the Destruction of Prince and People.

Your Majesty's most Dutiful Subject, and most Obsequious Votary and Servant,
Robert Bolron.

Advertisement.
THE Narrative of Lawrence Mowbray of Leeds, in the County of York, Gent.
concerning the Bloody Popish Conspiracy, against the Life of his Sacred
Majesty, the Government, and the Protestant Religion.

Wherein is Contained
I. His Knowledge of the said Design, from the very first in the Year 1676. with
the opportunity he had to be acquainted therewith; and the Reasons why he
concealed it so long; with the manner of his discovering the said wicked
Project to His Majesty, and His most Honorable Privy Council. II. How far Sir
Thomas Gascoigne, Sir Miles Stapleton, etc. are engaged in the Design of
Killing the King, and Firing the Cities of London and York, for the more
speeding setting uppermost the Popish Religion in England. III. An Account of
the Assemblings of many Popish Priests and Jesuits at Father Riston's Chamber,
at Sir Thomas Gascoigne's House at Barmbow, with their Consultations and
Determinations. IV. A Discovery of the Erecting a Nunnery at Dolebank in
Yorkshire, by the Popish Party, especially by Sir Thomas Gascoigne, with an
Account of an Estate of Ninety Pounds per Annum, settled thereupon by him. V. A
Manifestation of the Papists Fraudulent conveying of their Estates, himself
being privy to some of them. VI. A probable opinion concerning the Jesuits, the
grand Instruments in these Affairs.
With other Considerable Matters relating to the Plot.

Together with an Account of the Endeavors that were used to stifle his
Evidence, by making an Attempt upon his Life in Leicester-Fields. Printed for
Thomas Simmons at the Princes Arms, and Jacob Sampson next door to the
Wonder-Tavern in Ludgate Street.

The Preface to the Reader.
TWO things render a Discourse grateful and acceptable to the Peruser thereof.

First, The Dignity of the Author. Secondly, The Usefulness of the matter
therein contained.
The second of these will be accounted for in the whole Series of the following
Discourse; but by naming the first, I know I have laid in a great prejudice
against my self, who does acknowledge the Mediocrity of my State and Condition,
insomuch that Silence might have suited my station, rather than Speech,
especially in Print, if the sight of the Danger of the King and Kingdom were
in, had not made a violent impression upon me, as the Peril of Croesus did upon
his Dumb Son; for when such Capital Miseries are threatened, who can be silent?

They that impute Meanness and Inferiority to my charge, are like to have
Confitentem reum; but the consideration I reserve my self upon, is this, That
God oft-times makes use of weak Instruments, having Truth on their side, to
bring about great Designs, that so all the glory may be ascribed to himself.

Notable Mutations in the Government of this World have evened upon seemingly
light and inconsiderable occasions. I shall instance in that which was the talk
of all Europe in its season; And that was the action of Charles the Fifth,
Emperor of Germany, and King of Spain, in resigning up his Empire and all his
other Dominions, and living afterward a private and retired life. He had been
a Prince of great Wars, and (generally) of prosperous Successes, having had the
Pope himself, and the King of France both Prisoners, and extending his
Victorious Banners to the very Indies.

It must needs be some Signal and Remarkable thing you will say, which occasioned
so eminent a Change in such a Mighty Monarch; I Will tell you one great Reason
thereof which the Historian relates: An Old Soldier of his came to him,
desiring a Discharge from his Military Employment: The Emperor demanding his
reason, received this answer, That there ought to be some respite between the
work of a man's Life, and the business of his Death. Which Speech, tho seemingly
light and obvious, yet wrought so great an impression upon his Mind, that he
soon after followed the Old Soldiers example. Far be it from me to equalize
Cases; It Is sufficient, if I can but adumbrate the rude Lineaments of a
Similitude; for alas, what am I? And if it be lawful for me to use the names of
others, what is Mr. Oats, Mr. Dugdale, or Mr. Mowbray, but comparitively mean,
and by some persons slighted, affronted and discouraged Instruments, that the
hinge of so great Discoveries should turn upon us. It is sufficiently known,
That the Design of the Papists has been the issue of the Council of many
years, managed by the skilfullest and deepest Heads of that Faction. Now that
all these productions so long a hatching, should be crushed on a sudden by, as
it were, obscure and unthought of Persons, I will not say it honors the
Instruments, beeause I my self am concerned amongst them, but of this I am sure
it mightily exalts the name of God, who by men, otherwise despised, is pleased
to do his own work. I will not dispute whether Dr. Oats went over to the
Papists upon any conviction of Judgment (that being a point proper for his own
Determination) but for my desertion of Protestancy, it is in part accounted for
in my following Informations. I confess, to my shame, that worldly interests
did concur too much thereof, as the convenience of an outward livelihood and
beneficial employment; and my return to the reformed Religion was partly upon
the guilty cognizance I had of this Black design, and the Roman Priests vowed
approbation thereof; Being so reduced to the Protestant Church, I hope God will
so assist me with his Grace, that I shall be no scandal thereunto, but that I
shall improve the strict and holy principle thereof, even to the exemplifying
of them in my own heart and life, so that I shall no more be deceived by the
lying suggestions of deceitful Priests. For it is no small encouragement to the
dissoluteness which is amongst the Papists, The easiness of those confessions
which they undergo. And Sands in his Europae Speculum page the 11th. will
afford ample satisfaction, who has these remarkable words; I have known (says
he) very devout persons, who by their own report excuse their acquaintance in
matters criminal, having wittingly perjured themselves in Judgment, only
presuming upon this present and easy remedy of Confession, and others of more
then ordinary note amongst them, who when the time of their Confession was at
hand, would then venture on those actions, which before they trembled at, as
presuming to surfeit by reason of the Neigbourhood of a Physician. And as for
penances I have known (says the same Author) page the 12th. That penance for
horrible and often Blasphemy, besides much other Lewdness, has been no other
then the bare saying their Beads thrice over, a matter of some hours muttering
and which in Italy they dispatch as they are going in the streets, or dispatch
business at home, making no other of it then two Lips, and one Fingers work.
And if Sandys be excepted against as a partial Author because of his Religion,
let us hear what their own Casuists say, Layman affirms, That a Confessor is
obliged to absolve his penitent, tho he refuse to perform the penance enjoined
him; the reason he gives is, because no man is bound to satisfy for his Sins
in this life. Insomuch that it is grown a question amongst them mentioned by
Escobar; Whether it be not lawful for a Confessor to leave it wholly to the
will of the Penitent. Add hereunto the doctrines of Pardons and Indulgencies,
and then judge whether a large door for licentiousness and prophanity be not
opened to the Professors of the Roman Church.

These Doctrines of the Papists are so corrupt, that some of their own do
condemn them; and to this purpose read what the Sorbon Doctors say against the
Jesuits. Moral Practice of the Jesuits, page 143, 144. When Bishops and Priests
were not without difficulty induced to proceed to the Reconciliation of
Penitents to God, for fear of binding themselves in those Sins whereof they
pretended to loose others, whom, it may be, the Sovereign Judge had not
absolved; Sinners, tho reconciled, continued in fear and humiliation, having
their sins ever before them; and after the practicing of all sorts of good
Works, and submission to the rigor of Ecclesiastical Discipline, they were
still afraid they had not satisfied the Justice of God. But now as if the most
heinous Crimes were as inconsiderable as the highest faults, and as easily
pardoned as the smallest miscarriages; as if the maladies of the Soul were not
difficult to cure, and as if God had for the future for ever remitted the
severity of his Judgments against Sinners, from the time they followed the
Advice of the Jesuits; The most dissolute Wretches are no sooner absolved by
these Complacent Directors, but their Consciences are in peace for all their
sins past, tho they are resolved to commit them again. With much more to the
same purpose. Judge then, whether the Flood-gate of Impiety be not opened by
these Licentious Tenants. But to return.

The manner how I came to be instrumental in these Matters, deserves a Serious
Consideration, and adds much to the Wonder; for being born of Honest Parentage
at New Castle upon Tine, I was by them bound an Apprentice in the City of
London, where if I had served out my full Time with my Master, I had not had
the opportunity of knowing and consequently of discovering what I now do; but
after some Years Service, upon some private discontents, I left my Master, and
listed my self a Soldier in His Majesty's Army, in which Military Employment if
I had also persisted, I had been abridged of these matters: I must therefore
look upon it as the Providence of God, who made both the Lives of an Apprentice
and of a Soldier uneasy to me, that so I might be carried into that Family,
where the things mentioned in my subsequent Informations, were managed and
transacted; and without my residence therein, as one of their Religion and
Family, I could never expect to know; for the Papists are very Sly to
communicate any thing but to their own Confidents, and that too, under the
strictest Bonds and Oaths of Secrecy.

And indeed they keep their Proselytes in great awe and subjection by those
Sacramental Obligations; I my self am a great proof thereof, who had many such
Ties imposed upon me not to discover the Treason in which I was engaged: And if
it were discovered by others, still to deny it. And I must confess, (if I had
persevered in the Popish Religion, I should hardly have got over the
Obligations I had layn under thereby: But by the Protestant Doctrine I am
better informed, viz. That Oaths binding either to do or conceal unlawful
things, the sin lies in taking, not in breaking them.

Being then by Gods Providence redeemed from those insnaring bonds, I am free
to discover what I know.

It Is true, my Condition did confine me to my Employment in the Country, and
therefore I was not privy to the Consults of the Jesuits in London, until the
Heads of those Consultations were communicated to us in the Country; which I
must needs acknowledge was very speedily done. For the Emissaries of Rome have
an incredible celerity in conveying their Intelligence, not only to the several
Parts of this Land, but even to Rome it self, and all the World over; which is
an old Complaint commenced against the Jesuits by them of the Order of Seculars.

I have heard it affirmed by some understanding men, That the Jesuits and the
Jews, are the greatest Intelligencers in the World; for being both of them
Close and Compact Societies, united by the Oppositions generally made against
them, their Communications are much Circumscribed within their own Bodies,
there being a constant Intercourse, of Intelligence maintained betwixt all the
parts (even as in the natural Body the spirits are diffused through the whole
Compositum) that so speedy Remedies may be applied to any appearing evil, in
the very bud; and opportunities of advantage may be taken by them at the first
hop.

And therein certainly their care and pains (if they were employed about lawful
designs) do not deserve reproof. Rather the too much Supineness and unactivity
amongst Protestants is to be taxed, as giving great advantage to the Adversary
to grow upon them: 'Twere well if this inconvenience were remedied, and that
our Zeal and Labor for the propagation of the Truth did exceed theirs, (as it
ought to do) for the Disseminating of their Errors, Eas est et ab host doceri.

The Jesuits amongst the Romanists are the most Zealous for the propagation of
their Religion in their old Mumpsimus way, and have the greatest abilities and
opportunities to intermix themselves in Temporal affairs, to the Disturbance of
States and Kingdoms, and therefore they are looked upon by this Nation as
destructive to its Interest, their true religious intent being to murder all
Heretical Kings (as they term them) which will not submit to the Pope's
obedience.

Though I do know they do value themselves much upon a Speech of King Henry the
Fourth of France, spoke in his latter days, That to know the Jesuits, is the
only way to l^^ve th^^; though indeed that Monarch, being af^^^ ^^^dered by
their Instigations, was but ill rewarded for his favorable opinion of them:
Mr. Gavan, lately executed, in his dying Speech did extol his Society upon the
account of that great King's Opinion; But if authority and not reason should
take place, we can oppose the Opinion; for our own King James, who in open
Parliament 1605. speaking of Roman Priests and Jesuits, has these words, Thi^
(...) of those who know and observe the whole grounds and scale conclusion of
their Doctrines, can either prove good Christians or good Subjects. And indeed
this Imposture is imposed upon the Jesuits, That like Weather-Cocks, they
change their Opinions, when their Interest requires it; besides, these
excellent Casuists have this rare Policy, to alter their Sentiments and
Conscience upon any occasion when it may be for their profit to change.

I know the Jesuited Ecclesiastics do value themselves much upon the account
of the Spirituality, innocence, and Regular Conversation of their Order; Good
Ep^^^^tes, if they did properly belong to them. This puts me in mind of a
Pleasant Story I have heard of a Jesiut, who was Preaching in one of their
Colleges, and in his Sermon he compared their Order to a Clock, which by the
Regulanity of its Motion did direct all other things; but just as he was
^^^ering his Similitude, (see the mischief) the Clock of their College being
out of Order, struck above 100 times, which being heard by the Auditors,
administered inward ^^^ling and laughter, and was a just reproof to the
Preacher, for his superlative, but ill-timed praises of the Society.

And indeed, such an accidental reflection may operate more on a Jesuit, than a
solid and well formed Argument, in Mood and Figure; For that Sect are great
Fencers in Di^^^tation, and can ward a strong blow by Evasion or Qui^k; But
against such an Occasional and Providential check, there is no Fence.

I will not assume to my self to be able to trace them, in all the Maeanders of
their Projects, but I believe sufficient is herein discovered to convince the
uninterested: As for persons engaged, The more is discovered, the less they
will believe.

The Lord grant, That all True Protestants throughout the Land may impute This
Discovery to his Glory, not out of Animosity against any man's Person, (which I
utterly detest) much less out of a desire of any ones ruin and destruction,
but out of a just Zeal, That Truth may be advanced, and the great Mischiefs,
impending over this Land, may be prevented. So prays

A Servant to all his Country in Truth and Righteousness, Robert Bolron.

The Informations of Robert Bolron of Shipponhall in the Parish of Berwick in
Elmet in the County of York, Gent. taken upon Oath, at several times, before
the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
THis Informant says, That he was born in New Castle upon Tine, and bred up in
the Protestant Religion, that he came to live with Sir Thomas Gascoigne (who is
now about Fourscore years of age) at Barmbowhall in Yorkshire, in the Year
1674. as Steward of his Cole-Works, where he had not long been, but he was
dealt with to turn Papist by Sir Thomas Gascoigne himself, and one William
Rushton a Priest in that Family, and that one Anthony Fulshurst was present in
Parlington-Hall, when Sir Thomas and the said Rushton did use Arguments to
persuade him this Informant, to change his Religion, and to that end Sir Thomas
bade him, this Informant, go to one Alice Carpmell, a Servant in his House, and
to desire her to show him, this Informent, his Chapel, which accordingly was
performed; and he gave him, this Informant, two Books, a Catechism, and a Book
of Saints, wherein it is showed, that Protestants hold Papists were saved, but
Papists declare Protestants are Damned, and therefore they told him, he ought
to turn Roman Catholic.

They also declared unto him this Informant, that great * Miracles were wrought
by their Church, which the Protestants could not perform, especially One
Miracle said to be done at Fra. Johnsons house, in the said Parish of Berwick,
which was told by the said Anthony Fulshurst, to the Informant, to persuade him
to be a Romanist, and is as follows.

Mary Smith then a Protestant, living in Garforth, near to Barwick being (as it
was reported) possessed with the Devil, Mr. Lawson a Romish Exorcist, was sent
for, to Francis Johnsons house to dispossess the said Mary Smith; to which
house several Protestants did come to see it done, amongst which the said
Anthony Fulshurst was one, being a Protestant at that time, and having an
English Common Prayer Book, said, he would not part with it for all Sir Thomas
Gaseoignes Estate. The Party possessed was very unruly, and told the Exorcist,
that he could never do no good of her, unless all the Protestants and Heretics
were put out of the Room, which was accordingly done, except the said Anthony
Fulshurst, who being Sir Thomas Gascoignes Steward, out of Civility they would
not exclude.

Yet after all the rest were excluded, the said Mary Smith told the Exorcist,
that she had yet one Friend left in the Room, meaning Anthony Fulshurst, who
blushing, asked her, Where, or in what, he was her Friend? To which she
answered, In being of the Protestant Religion, and told him several
Circumstances of his life, as also of his being that day in a Field, and about
to come over a Style, that he sat down and considered with himself, which she
related to him again to his great astonishment and amazement; as also his good
opinion of that Book in his pocket, which would e're long bring him to be one
of them; and she thankt him kindly for his kindness in propagating their
Interest, and of the good esteem he had for them. To which the said Anth.
Fulshurst replied, That since he had been so long her Friend, he would be no
longer of the Protestant Religion, and so went home, and burnt his
Common Prayer Book, which before he so highly prized, and immediately turned
Roman Catholic; which Argument they used, as a Motive to persuade him the
Informant, to be a Roman Catholic.

And the said Anthony Fulshurst added, That the Exorcist told him, that the
said Mary Smith was possessed with four Devils, three of them, he quite expulst
out of her; the fourth he brought into her great Toe, which did lie there, and
do the said Mary Smith no harm, which afterward was confirmed by the said Mary
Smith unto him this Informant.

That besides the Chapel in Sir Thomas's house, he the said Sir Thomas had
another private Chapel in the house of William Butcher in Barmbow, which said
William does not go to Church as a Protestant, and the said Sir Thomas
Gascoigne does keep another private Chapel at Lasingcroft, and Thomas Gascoigne
Esquire his Son keeps also a private Chapel at Parlington-Hall, in which said
Chapel this Informant was reconciled, by the said William Rushton, to the
Romish Church, and Laurence Mowbrey came to him, this Informant, who was then
at Garforth Cole-Pits, and did tell him, this Informant, that Sir Thomas had
sent him unto him, and that he must go with him to William Rushton, to be taken
into the Church; which was accordingly done.

That after this Informant had changed his Religion (which was about the
beginning of June 1675.) he married with one Mary Baker, Niece to Mris.
Errington, then living in Sir Thomas's house, whom the said William Rushton did
pervet to the Roman Catholic Religion, as he told him this Informant, and that
upon this Informants Marriage his Wifes Aunt Mris. Errington aforesaid did give
this Informant a house in Shippon in Yorshire, which was held by Lease of the
said Sir Thomas Gascoigne.

That upon some of the Proclamations for Roman Catholics to leave London, and
about Christmas last, to this Informants best remembrance, one Mary Pressicks
(Wife of Tho. Pressicks) who was Sempstress to the Jesuits, and did use to buy
several things for them; as also for diverse Romish Persons of Quality, told
this Informant, that upon a man's following the said Mary Pressicks in the
Street, to apprehend her, she looking back, and espying him, being conscious of
her being concerned in the Plot, she made haste into an Alley, bolting the Door
after her, which the Man perceiving, presently cried out, Stop the Papist, stop
the Plotter; but She got quite away from him, and durst not appear publicly,
but soon after with her Child hasted out of London, where she had dwelt several
years, and came to Mr. Fulshurt in Parlington, in Yorkshire, and there abode
about a week, and then Thomas Pressicks her Husband took two Rooms in this
Informants house at Shippon for her and her Child, where about Candlemas last,
as also about Easter, and Whitsuntide following, this Informant discoursing
with her about Coleman's death, and the Priests then in hold; she did inform
that His Majesty, being beyond Seas, did promise the Monks and Jesuits, that he
would bring in their Religion, if ever he enjoyed his own again, and that it
was upon hopes thereof, whilst the troubles were here in England, that so many
of that Religion did venture their Lives and Estates for His Majesty, and that
thereupon the Monks and Jesuits did so plentifully supply His Majesty's wants,
whilst beyond the Seas; but His Majesty coming home again, and not performing
his promises, thereupon Father Harcourt (who lived in Wilde-street, or
Duke-street, London, but the Informant thinks the latter) and other Jesuits, at
Father Harcourt's Chamber (which was the usual place of their meeting) and
elsewhere contrived this Plot, as Mary Pressicks told him, this Informant.
WHICH WAS TO DESTROY HIS MAJESTY, AND SVCH OF HIS SVBJECTS AS WOULD NOT BE OF
THE ROMAN CATHOLIC RELIGION, and to have ALTERED THE GOVERNMENT AND RELIGION
established, by bringing in THEIR RELIGION. And that Father Harcourt, being
Confessor to the said Mary Pressicks, did tell him, this Informant; that after
the Discovery of the Plot, she the said Mary Pressicks, with several others did
privately keep, and secretly at several times help to convey the said Father
Harcourt, for fear he should be taken especially one time being at a Feast with
the said Father Harcourt, where was none then present but Roman Catholics, but
as the House had ordered; some Protestants coming afterward to the said Feast,
Father Harcourt goes into another Room, but a Child of the said Mary Pressicks,
and another little Boy belonging to the House where the Feast was, said one to
another, Father Harcourt is gone; whereupon one of the Protetestants
immediately stepped out to fetch a Constable to apprehend the said Father
Harcourt, but the said Mary Pressicks, with others, did forthwith help to
convey the said Father Harcourt out of the house, so that, at that time he was
not taken; and she likewise told him, this Informant, that she was very sorry
that the said Plot did not take effect, and that Pickering did not accomplish
his design in PISTOLLING THE KING, and if that had taken effect, all would have
been well; this she said about Easter last, when this Informant's Grandmother
and Wife were present, both whose names are called Mary Bolron, and she added,
That Oats and Bedlow* were Rogues for discovering it.

This Informant also says, That the said Mary Pressicks did affirm unto him,
that the Gun was found wherewith Pickering did intend to kill the King, and
that Gun being found, she feared, was the cause that he lost his Life.

This Informant further says, that Mary Pressicks said, That though this Plot
did not succeed, yet still would they be contriving new ones; for as long as
this King ruled, and until the Plot took effect, and that the Roman Catholic
Religion were established in England, this Nation need not expect any
quietness. And further she affirmed, That most of the Gentry of the Roman
Catholic Religion were concerned, and did know of the Plot, particularly Sir
Tho. Gascoigne of Barmbow Hall, Baronet, Thomas Gascoigne Esquire; his Son, the
Lady Tempest his Daughter, and Tho. Pressicks, Husband of the said Mary
Pressicks.

This Informant further says, That the said Mary Pressicks did say in this
Informants hearing, That the King was but an Ass, and was not fit to Rule, That
he was guide by the Parliament, and what money the Parliament gave him, he spent
it upon his Concubines. This Deponent says, that upon the 30th. of May last
past, being the day after Holy Thursday, he being at Barmbow-Hall aforesaid,
the said Sir Tho. Gascoigne desired him, this Deponent, to go into the Gallery,
where, after a little time, the aforesaid Will. Rushton, who was their
Deponents Confessor, came unto him, and asked him, whether he were at
Pontefract-Sessions? to whom he answered, That he was, and had taken the Oath
of Allegiance; as also several others with him; that thereupon the said Rushton
told him, That he, and all others, that had taken that Oath, were damned, if
they kept the same; and therefore bid him be sure to come to Confession to him,
the next Sunday, to have the benefit of Absolution, for that it was a damnable
sin to take that Oath. Also telling him, this Deponent, That he had power from
the Pope to absolve him, upon his Confession, adding, that few Priests had that
power from the Pope, as he had. And this Informant says, That he discoursed
with the said Rushton, about the Lawfulness of his taking the said Oath, but
the Priest was in great wrath with him, this Deponent, as if he would have
struck him, and told him, he was a fool, and knew not how to judge of that
Oath, for it was a denying of his Religion; to which the said Informant said,
That he thought it was only to be true to his King and Country, which was no
sin; for Mr. Ellis, Priest to Sir Walter Vavesour has written Commentaries on
the Oath, justifying the lawfulness of taking it; Rushton replied. That Ellis
was a Fool, and that his Superiors would call him to an account for the same;
and that he, this Deponent by taking that Oath, had denied the Popes's Power to
absolve him from it; but, said he, The Pope has power to depose the King, and
cause him to be killed, because he was a Heretic; and further affirmed, that
it was a meritorious Act to kill the King, and that he might merit Heaven, if
he would do it; and that he said Rushton would assist him in it, and that the
Pope would absolve him, if he did that Act and Deed.

This Informant further says, that the said William Rushton did quote a
certain Text of Scripture unto him, which as he this Informant remembers, was
the 149 Psalm. The words were, Thou shall bind their King in Fetters, and their
Princes in Chains; Upon which words the said William Rushton did make this
Exposition as follows.

That the Pope had bound the King, Prince and People in their Sins, because
they had denied the power of the Pope, and deserted his obedience, who was
Successor to St. Peter, therefore it was lawful and no sin to depose and kill
the King, or any of his Subjects, and that the Pope may give away, His
Majesty's Kingdoms to any Person whom he pleases, unless the King and his
Subjects would return into the bosom of the Mother Church. To all which this
Deponent replied, that he would not be employed in doing so wicked a deed, and
therefore desired him not to trouble him this Deponent about the same; well
said the Priest, you may hang me if you please for speaking these words, to
whom the Deponent answered, that if he did do himself no injury, he this
Deponent would not do him any; and so the Priest bad him consider what he had
said, and come to him again.

The same 30th. of May, about Six of the Clock in the Evening, Sr Thomas
Gascoigne having left order with his Servents, that the Deponent should not go
away till he came in, he the said Sr Thomas at his return called the Deponent
into his Chamber at his house at Barmbow, and asked, what discourse past
between him and Mr. Rushton? the Deponent said, their discourse was about the
Oath of Allegiance, then the said Sr. Thomas told him in these, or the like
words.

Well man, if thou will undertake a design (which I and others have in
agitation) to HELP TO KILL THE KING, I will send thee to my SON TOM if in TOWN,
who with the rest that are concerned shall instruct thee how thou shall assist
in it, and thou shall have a 1000 l. for thy reward. This Informant further
says, that the said Sr. Thomas Gascoigne did tell him this Informant that
perhaps his Son Tom Gascoigne would not be at London, yet he would give him
such Instructions, that if his Son were gone beyond Seas, that he should find
out the rest concerned in the business, and he bid him, this Informant, not to
fear any danger, for what he did was for the good of the Church, who would
reward him well for his pains, besides what he gave him.

The Informant desires him to forbear to persuade him thereunto, for he would
not have any hand in Blood, neither would he do so wicked a deed. Then the said
Sr. Thomas desired him of all loves to keep secret what he had said which the
Deponent promised, and so they parted, but though he promised secrecy both to
the said Sir Thomas, and the said Rushton, he thought it a sin to conceal so
wicked a thing; That soon after the said 30th of May, he went to Mr. Normanton
Minister of Water-Fryston, who sent him to Mr. Tyndall a Justice of Peace, and
he sent him to Willian Lowther Esquire; another Justice, (who acquainted Justice
White with the Informants business) and upon discourse thereof with the said
Justices, he this Informant did desire he might come up to the Council to
inform them of it; which the said Justices thought was the best way; and
Justice Tyndall wrote a Letter, and sent it by him, to his Brother Tyndall, in
London to carry him this Deponent, to some of the Privy Council, but this
Informant says, he had the misfortune to lose his Letter at Ware, which being
found and opened, was sent after him to Mr. Tyndal at London.

That at his Arrival in London, he went to the Green Dragon in Bishop
gate-street, and was there directed to Sir Robert Clayton, who took his
Examination.

And the Deponent further says, that about 14 Months since he was discharged
from being Sir Thomas's Steward at his own desire, for that he the said Sir
Tho. would have had him, this Informant, for one month to have got in his
debts, and in the mean time to let Hen. Addinson, and Bennet Johnson manage the
Colliery in this Informants room, but the said Informant refused, for he told
him, that they that look to the Pitts should gather in the debts (for that he
would not be concerned with Hen. Addinson, or B. Johnson) who are the
Informants Enemies which was the occasion of their parting.

Neither did this Informant give the said Sr. Tho. any other occasion then
before mentioned to fall out with him, save only that he was about a year since
arrested about his accounts, for that the said Sir Tho. was then indebted unto
this Informant 19 l. which the said Sir Th. refused to pay him this Informant,
until he had delivered in his accounts, but this difference was all pacified in
a weeks time, that he has no malice against Sir Tho. or any others, and would
do no wrong in such a matter for all England, that he has 7l. a year Land of
his own, a Cole-Farme of 30l. a year, a Lime Kilne of 10l. a year.

This Informant further says, that about three years ago, viz. in the year 76.
that he, the said Sir Tho. Gascoigne did send 3000 l. to the Jesuits then in
London, besides 50 l. beyond Seas, which 3000 l. was paid for a design then in
agitation for the good of the Roman Catholic Religion; and the said Sir Tho.
Gascoigne did tell Christopher Midcalf, who then lived in Sir Tho. Gascoigne's
house, that he intended Rich. Phishwick, should return it to London by 300 l.
at a time for avoiding suspicion; And this Informant supposes that it was so
returned, because the said Rich. Phishwick did tell him, that in a little time
they had returned 3000 l. to Land. and this Informant further says, that he
has in that year at several times seen the said Rich. Phishwick, carry to
Leeds several sums of money, to be returned to London, and the said Rich.
Phishwick, when examined, is able to give an account, if he did return it all
himself, or else, who it was, that did return it, and this Informant further
says, that he does well remember that 300 l. of the said 3000 l. was for Mr.
Corker, who was and is a Roman Priest, whom the said Sir Thomas Gascoigne did
say, was a Prisoner in Newgate, and other 300 l. for Mr. Harcourt who was
executed, as also 300 l. for John Cornwallis, who is a Roman Priest, and is
Prisoner in York Castle, where this Informant did see him; And this Informant
further says, that he did hear the said Sir Thomas say, that if it were 10000
times as much, he would be glad to spend it inso good a cause.

This Informant further says, that a little before Easter, in the year 1675.
Charles Ingleby a Lawyer, being with Sir Thomas Gascoigne in his Bedchamber,
the said Sir Thomas Gascoigne told the said Charles Ingleby, in the hearing of
this Informant, he being in the next Room,

That he was resolved to make a Colorable Conveyance of his Estate unto Sir
William Ingleby, Baronet, accordingly as they had formerly discourst about it,
for that he was fearful his Estate should be forfeited to the King; and the
said Charles Ingleby answered, it was best so to do; and that he would have the
defeasance ready against Easter to be sealed, which he would draw with his own
hands; withal he advised the said Sir Thomas Gascoigne, that he must be sure
to bring none but Protestant-witnesses to testify the sealing of the said
Deed, in regard they that were witnesses to the said Deed, must not be
witnesses to the Defeasance, for fear the Conveyance should be discovered to be
but merely Collusive, to whose advice Sir Thomas did assent. And at the time
appointed Matthias Hickeringhill, with this Informant, did attend Sir Thomas
Gascoigne, to the house of the said Sir William Ingleby aforementioned, where,
at the sealing of the said Conveyance, which was the eight day of April, Anno
1675. he did see the sum of one thousand pounds collusively borrowed, which
this Informant did with the Assistance of the aforesaid Matthias Hickeringill
help to count.

And the said Charles Ingleby his Brother holding the Deed with him in his
hand, did read the said Collusive Conveyance, the Contents of which Conveyance
was as follows:

That the Said Sir T. Gascoigne in consideration of the sum of one thousand
pounds in hand paid by the said Sr. William Ingleby did convey away all his
estate lying in Barmbow, Barwick Scoles, with many other places therein
particularly named unto the said Sr. William Ingleby, for seven years, he
paying besides the aforementioned sum of one 1000l. yearly, and every year
during the said term of seven years unto the said Sr. Thomas Gascoigne the sum
of one hundred pounds toward his yearly maintenance, to which Deed of
Conveyance the said Matthias Hickeringill a Servant of Sr. William Inglebyes
with this Informant (being then a Protestant were witnesses. And after the
sealing of the said Conveyance, The said Sir Thomas Gascoigne did go with Sir
William Ingleby into a back Room of the said House to seal the Defeasance which
he heard Sir Thomas Gascoigne and Sir William Ingleby declare in discourse to
Sir William Inglebyes Lady immediately after their coming forth, that it was
accordingly sealed, but who were witnesses to the said Defeasence, he cannot
inform, but believes Charles Ingleby and his Brother who were present can give
an account. This Informant says, that when the aforesaid one thousand pound
was borrowed, and the Conveyance sealed, that he did at that time know that it
was but collusively and pretendedly borrowed of Sir William Ingleby for fear
Sr. Thomas Gascoignes estate should be forfeited to the King, but he this
Informant did not then know there was a design in Agitation against the life of
the King, he then being a Protestant, and therefore he wondered with himself how
Sir Thomas Gascoigne should apprehend himself to be in so much danger (none of
the penal Laws being then put in execution) but says, that after he had
turned Roman Catholic, then the misery was unfolded; for William Rushton at
Confession did discover to him, this Informant, the whole Design of the Plot,
and about the discovery of the Plot, or presently after, he, this Informant,
did hear the said Sir Thomas Gascoigne declare unto Sir Miles Stapilton, that
according unto his, and the Advice of other of his friends, he had done very
well in settling his Estate upon Sir William Ingleby, as aforesaid, because if
they should be discovered to be engaged in the Design of Killing the King, that
then his Estate would have been forfeited, which forfeiture, by this means, he
had avoided, if he were discovered.

The Particular Romish Priests known by this Informant, whose names are as
follows.
1 WIlliam Rushton, this Informants Confessor or Ghostly Father, who at
confession did first acquaint this Informant with the Plot of killing the King,
whom this Informant has several times heard say Mass, and has administered
unto this Informant above one hundred times the Eucharist, having on the usual
Robes when they exercise that Function, he further says, that the said William
Rushton Christened this Informants two Children. 2. Thomas Thwing of Heworth
near York, whom this Informant has several times heard say Mass in Barmbow
Chapel, and give the Sacrament to several Roman Catholics there present, as
also with his wife has received the Sacrament from his hands. 3. William
Hardwick, born at Bransby beyond York, whom this Informant has several time
heard say Mass at both the Chapels in Barmbow, and to give the Sacrament to
several there present, his usual custom is to ride from New-Hall near
Pontefract to Barmbow, and usually comes once in three weeks, and then rides in
the night time, which is commonly on the Friday night, and stays till Monday,
and then returns back again to New Hall, his sallary is allowed him by Thomas
Gascoigne Esquire and his office is to help the poor Catholics near adjacent unto
Barmbow; for as soon as the said William Hardwick was come, he sent always an
old woman, whose name is Ellin Bellas, to give notice to the rest of the
Catholics, that they must come to scowre their Kettles, that is come to
Confession at such an hour, according as the time was appointed; for the poorer
sort of Catholics were not admitted to come to Sir Thomas Gascoigne's house;
therefore the Chapel William Butchers house in Barmbow, was the place appointed
for the help of the poorer sort. 4. Thomas Thwing of Quosque, who commonly
keeps a Boarding-School, for training up Children in the Romish Principles, who
goes commonly more like a Butcher than a Priest. 5. Dr. Stapilton, Brother to
Sir Miles Stapilton, who has said Mass in Barmbow Chapel, and has delivered
the Sacrament to several there present. 6. Francis Blaxton, a Romish Priest,
whom this Informant has heard say Mass, and administer the Sacrament in Walton
Chapel, his man's name is Emanuel Gascoigne, and they do abide now in or about
York, as was told this Informant. 7. John Andrews, a Romish Priest, whom this
Informant heard say Mass, at Mris. Margaret Mitcalfe's house in Rmonby, near
Northallerton, to whom he administered the Sacrament, as also to Mris. Sadler
her Sister to Adrian Mitcalfe, the said Mris. Mitcalfe's Son to Elizabeth
Mitcalfe, servant to the said Mris. Mitcalfe, besides to three others who were
strangers to this Informant. 8. John Pand, alias Cornwallis, whom this
Informant has heard say Mass at Barmbow, having on the usual Robes when Mass
is said, and has seen him administer the Sacrament unto Sir Thomas Gascoigne,
and several others. 9. Thomas Addingson, whom this Informant see Christen a
Child at Lasingcroft, to whom he confessed, that he was a Romish Priest, and
that he had received his Orders from beyond Seas, and used several Arguments to
persuade him, this Informant, to be a Papist. 10. Richard Gascoigne, Priest to
Mr. Apleby of Lynton upon Owse, who confessed to him, this Informant, that he was
a Priest, and that he had received his Orders from beyond the Seas. This Rich.
Gascoigne being at this Informants house (when Mr. George Gascoigne lived in
it) taking opportunity early one morning, did go into this Informants Layth or
Barn, with a dirty Drab, and had there carnal knowledge of her; and another
time also had dealing with her in this Informants Stable, which then belonged
unto the said George Gascoigne, who both times was taken in the Act, yet both
Mornings said Mass, and administered the Sacrament to the company then present,
having not Absolution for his faults. The true Relation of this horrible Deed
he had from the Papists, and the woman her self, who told him, this Informant,
that the said Priest never gave her above twice pence a time, that she always
knew what she was to have. 11. Farneby is Priest to John Middleton of
Stockhall-hill, Gentleman, who told this Informant that he was a Priest, and
that he had received his Orders from beyond Seas. 12. Lodge, Priest to Sir
Miles Stapilton, whom this Informant has heard say Mass in Barmbow Chapel, and
administer the Sacrament to several there present. 13. Robert Killingbeck, born
at Moor-Town, near Leeds, whom this Informant has heard say Mass in Barmbow
Chapel, and administer the Eucharist to several of the company there present.
14. Fincham, Priest to Sir John Savill of Red-hall, near Barmbow, where this
Informant has heard him say Mass, and give the Sacrament to Sir John Savill,
his Lady, and his Daughter; as also to Mr. Abbot, the said Sir John Savil's
Gentleman; this Fincham used to come to Barmbow, to William Rushton, to be
confessed of his sins; and likewise Will. Rushton would go to the said Sir John
Savil's house to be confessed by the said Fincham. 15. Mr. Ellis is Priest to
Sir Walter Vavesour. 16. Robert Dolman, a Romish Priest, who is now Priest to
Sir Marmaduke Constable of Everingham, and as it is told, this Informant that
Sir Marmaduke Constable has petitioned His Majesty's Council for the bringing
over of the said Robert Dolman, whom he pretends to be his Servant. 1. Francis
Gascoigne, Brother to Sir Thomas Gascoigne, who used Arguments to persuade this
Informant to change his Religion.
This Informant further says, That about March last, to this Informant's best
remembrance, Sir Thomas Gascoinge, and Thomas Gascoigne, Esquire; his Son, being
Discoursing about their present concerns, the said Thomas Gascoigne, Esquire; did
tell his Father that he and Mr. John Midleton, of Stockhil-Hall, had been
before the Justices of the Peace, and had gotten License from the said Justices
of the Peace, which said License Sir Thomas read, and it contained as is below
expressed. The one License or Certificate was to permit Thomas Gascoigne, Esquire;
and his man to Travail peaceably to London: for that the said Thomas Gascoigne,
Esquire; his only occasion to go to London was to decide or make an end of a
Controversy, then depending in Chancery, between Sir Thomas Gascoigne of
Barmbow, his Father, and James Nelthorpe, Esquire; living in London; and that Mr.
John Middleton of Stockhil-Hall, had likewise gotten the Justices consent to
Travel into the South, who pretended that his only occasion was to Receive some
Rents due to him in the South parts: and that the Justices upon their Oaths had
given them liberty to the last day of April, or last day of May, but whether of
the two it was, this Informant does not well remember, but says, he thinks
they had their License or Certificate to Travel but until the last day of
April: And he says, That he did hear the said Thomas Gascoigne, Esquire; say unto
his Father, that as soon as he had done with James Nelthorpe, Esquire; and set in
Order that design they had in hand, he and Mr. John Middleton would then fly
into France, for that they were resolved not to return again, but both would
(if it were possible) Cheat the Justices; and that he did hope God would help
and further their design, which did tend so much to the Glory of God; for they
both were resolved to commit the design into such hands as would not fail to do
it, but they would not stay to see the Execution; for they were both resolved
to fly with the first convenience: And the said Sir Thomas Gascoigne did
mightily commend Mr. John Middleton and his Sons Resolutions: And the said
Informant says, he does not know what is become of the said Thomas Gascoigne,
Esquire; or Mr. John Middleton of Stockhil-Hall, but he says that both Thomas
Gascoigne, Esquire; and Mr. John Middleton of Stockhil-Hall, did before their going
to London sell, or cause to be sold their Stocks from off their Grounds: And
that the said Mr. John Middleton did sell his very House-Hold-Goods, which was
only done with an intent to defraud His Majesty of them, for they were in fear
some Discovery should be made against them, and that their Estates should be
forfeited to the King.

This Informant further says, That being with William Rushton at Confession,
who taking occasion to Discourse with him about this Horrid Plot (as he had
done several times before) he the said William Rushton told him, this
Informant, that when he heard at any time the word Design mentioned, that he
must understand (by that word) the Design they had in hand of Killing the King,
for Establishing the Roman Catholic Religion again in England, and that except
at some of their private Consults, he this Informant should seldom hear mention
made of Killing the King, but that only they were resolved when they spoke of
it, to call it by the name of the word Design.

This Informant also says, That Sir Thomas Gascoigne, with others hereafter
mentioned, did in the year 1677. between April and Lammas, to the best of his
remembrance, assemble themselves together at Barmbow-Hall, where was held a
Conference to Establish a Nunnery, which Nunnery they then agreed immediately
to Establish at Dolbanck, in hopes that their Plot or Design should take
effect, which was to have Killed the King, and to alter the Government
Established in England, and to bring in the Roman Catholic Religion, upon
which account they all mutually resolved to venture their Lives and Estates.

1. Whereupon Sir Thomas Gascoigne did promise to give to the Nunnery 90 l. per
ann. for ever, upon which account the rest did agree that Sir Thomas Gascoigne
should be Canonized a Saint, to which they would procure the Popes consent. 2.
Sir Miles Stapleton promised to give 200 l. who made this Excuse, that he was
building his House, which should be made fit for the Reception of Noble
Persons, according to their Degree and Quality; but that in the mean time
nothing should be wanting to his power for their assistance, whereupon it was
unanimously resolved that he should be made a Privy-Councellour, to which they
would procure the Dukes consent. 3. Thomas Gascoigne, Esquire; promised to give 500
l. and it was also there agreed, that he should be made a Privy-Councellour, to
which the Duke should be entreated to give consent. 4. Sir Walter Vavaser
promised to give 200 l. but is since dead. 5. The Lady Tempest said she would
give 150 l. but promised a larger Contribution at her death. 6. Sir Francis
Hungate promised 50 l. who made an Excuse that he had a great many Debts to
pay, but that afterward they should have more. 7. Richard Sherbourne, Eldest
Son of Richard Sherbourne, of Stonyhurst promised to give 300 l. 8. Mr. John
Middleton of Stockhil-Hall, yielded to give 200 l. to the said Nunnery and Plot
of Killing the King. 9. Mr. Charles Ingleby, Lawyer, concluded to give 30 l.
10. Robert Killingbeck, a Romish Priest, was also present at the said meeting,
and did promise in the name of his Master, Thomas Riddal, of Fenham, Esquire; that
he should Contribute Liberally for the carrying on the said Design, and that
his Master had given him such Instructions before he came from home, but does
not remember how much it was he promised for the carrying on of the said
Design.
There was also a Letter read in the said Assembly, wherein Stephen Tempest,
Mr. John York; and Richard, his Son, did excuse themselves that they were not
at the Meeting according to their promises; and that the said Stephen Tempest
was willing to give 50 l. Mr. York and his Son would give betwixt them 50 l.
for the effecting of so Pious a Design: and besides, their well Wishes and
Prayers should not be wanting for the Prosperous proceeding of so Meritorious
and Pious a Design.

There was also present William Rushton, and Thomas Thwing, besides several
others whose names this Informant does not know. This Informant heard also,
that the Lord* Mollyneux had given his Consent thereto, but he does not know
where he lives.

And according to the former agreement Sir Thomas Gascoigne did by Deed
conveigh unto the said Nunnery a certain Estate for ever, which was Purchased
of Mr. Timothy Maceleverer of Arncliffe, and lies at Mauston in the Parish of
Whitchurch near Leedes, and is Rented of Sir Thomas Gascoigne by Alvery
Lofthouse, who enjoys* by Lease the said 90 l. per ann. And he did also in the
said year, between Lammas and Michaelmas, Establish the said Nunnery at
Dolbancke near to Ripley; Broughton-Hall, Hewoyth-Hall, and Mistress Lashals
House in York, were made their places of Refuge, that they might not be too
great a Company together, for avoiding suspicion, till the Plot or Design took
effect. Mistress Lashals was made Lady-Abbess, Mrs. Beckwith her Sister, and
Mistress Benningfield were made her Assistants. Ellin Thwing, a Nun, was sent
for from beyond Seas, to instruct all such as should be made Nuns, Mistress
Bean was made a Nun, Mistress Cornwallis also belonged to the Nunnery: Sir
Thomas Gascoigne did persuade Mary Root and Elizabeth Butcher both of them to
be Nuns, who accordingly did go to the said Dolbancke, and were made Nuns, and
Sir Thomas Gascoigne did say jestingly unto the said Mary Root, when she was
taking horse, there goes an old Maid and a young Nun: Thomas Thwing was made
then Confessor to the Nuns, but having sent to obtain the Popes consent, he in
the year 1678. returns them an Order for Establishing the said Nunnery, as also
his Benediction by John Cornwallis, a Romish Priest, and also declares the said
John Cornwallis sole Father-Confessor to the Nuns, in the room of Thomas
Thwing, who was ordered by the Pope to be Chief Superior or Archbishop, and he
to succeed in the place of him that first dyed, who was a Chief Superior or
Archbishop in England. In the mean time a sufficient maintenance was allowed,
besides 20 l. per ann. the said Thomas Thwing has of his own. This Informant
says he cannot affirm that he did hear Sir Miles Stapleton mention the Killing
of the King; but Sir Francis Hungate, Mr. John Middleton of Stockhil-Hall,
Esquire Gascoigne, and Sir Walter Vavaser, did mention several times the
Killing of the King; and Sir Miles Stapleton was in the Room with them, and
this Informant did not hear him speak against it, but said he would give 200 l.
for the carrying of it on: and Sir Miles Stapleton added, That if the Duke of
York did not please them, they would serve him as they did intend to serve his
Brother; Richard Sherbourne answered it was fit it should be so, if he would
not Pardon the Murderers of his Brother, to which the rest assented. And Sir
Miles Stapleton did in the year 1675. make a Collusive Conveyance of his Estate
to Sir John Dawney, which this Informant did read in Sir Thomas Gascoignes
Chamber, which was made for fear their Design of Establishing the Roman
Catholic Religion in England, should not take effect: and this Informant did
hear Sir John Dawney confess, that he did know of the said Conveyance, and that
it was done with his consent, but that he was not present at the Sealing of it;
and the said Sir John Dawneys confession this Informant can make appear to be
true if your Lordships do require it.

This Informant did also read in the Chamber of Sir Thomas Gascoigne, a
Catalogue of all the names of the Contributors to the Nunnery, which Paper was
Entitled the names of the Actors and Contributors engaged in the Design of
promoting the Roman Catholic Religion, as also the Establishing a Nunnery,
etc. Which List he has heard Sir Thomas Gascoigne, Thomas Gascoigne, Esquire; his
Son, the Lady Tempest his Daughter, William Rushton the Priest, said it was the
List of those that had engaged themselves in the Design of Killing the King.

And this Informant does very well remember, that in the said List, there was
the particular names of Thomas Riddal, of Fenham, Esquire; Sir Marmaduke Constable
of Everingham, and his Son, whose Priests name was Banks, and is the Superior
Priest for Yorkshire, Mr. Richard Isles of Ferry Friston, Robert Stanfield of
New-Hall, near Pontefract, who was said to be designed to have fired
Pontefract: There was also named in the List Mr. Richard Townley of Townley,
who keeps a Priest, whose name is reported to be John Sturdy, and as he is
informed is now with him, Christopher Medcalf, and Thomas Medcalf of
Ottrington, Gentlemen, John Peircy of Stubbs, Gent. whom this Informant has
heard to be very much engaged in the Plot, Doctor Peter Vavaser, Esquire
Doleman, with several others whose names this Informant does not at present
remember: There was also their several Contributions mentioned in the said
List, which was given by them for the carrying on of the said Design, but
because this Informant did not take a Copy of it, he cannot give a further
account of the sums particularly mentioned in the said List, further than he
has before declared.

But this Informant says, That a little after the Discovery of the Plot, the
above mentioned Robert Stanfield, being with this Informant at a place called
Wheldale, or Healdwood, he told him, this Informant, that there was a great
Watch kept at Pontefract, and particularly toward his House, and that the
Mayor of Pontefract had a suspicion of him (as he was informed) that he was to
Fire Pontefract; and he also added that he was mistaken, for he was not to have
Fired Pontefract, unless the King had been Killed, and then he was to have had
five hundred men in readiness to have murdered all the Protestants that they
could meet with.

This Informant also says, That at the same time he delivered a Letter to him,
this Informant, which was directed to one William Hardwick, a Romish Priest,
then at Sir Thomas Gascoignes House, and he desired him, this Informant, to
bring him to his House that night, but to be careful of him for fear he should
be Discovered; and that they had a great many Enemies, but he hoped ere long it
would be otherwise: and he further added, that he very much relied upon him,
this Informant, because that William Hardwick had told him that he was a very
Honest and a Good Catholic, one fit to be trusted.

But this Informant did not convey the said William Hardwick to the said Robert
Stanfields House, but sent his brother Thomas Baker, who conveyed him to
Newhall in the night time, where he left him.

This Informant further says, That the abovesaid Richard Isles, did tell him
(having before showed him, this Informant, his Altar with a Tabernacle upon it,
and other Furniture belonging to a Roman Priest when he celebrates Mass) That
there would never be no good in the Nation until the Roman Catholic Religion
were the chief in England.

And this Informant further says, That after the Discovery of the said Plot,
he did hear the before mentioned Richard York say, that he was very sorry that
the King was not killed, for then they needed not to have feared going from
home, or have been tied within the bounds of five miles.

He, this Informant, further says, That he heard several Papists say, That
Doctor Peter Vavaser was gone to London with an intent to get an Order from His
Majesty and Privy Council to go beyond Sea, for fear he should be discovered to
be concerned in the Plot. He further says, That Sir Thomas Gascoigne, with
others in his company, did several times mention the name of Esquire Doleman,
living in Peaseholme Green in York, as a partner with them in their Designs,
his Christian name he does not remember, but has in his Letters by the
particular order of Sir Thomas Gascoigne, Thomas Gascoigne Esquire; and Lady
Tempest, been desired to recommend them kindly unto Mr. Doleman and Esquire
Doleman, which Letters were directed to William Hornecastle, servant to old Mr.
Doleman, and has likewise received several recommendations back again to Sir
Thomas Gascoigne and Esquire Gascoigne and Lady Tempest before mentioned.

This Informant does also remember, that in the year 1678. there has been held
at the House of Sir Thomas Gascoigne, several Consultations by the
aforementioned persons, for the carrying on the Plot, especially a little
before the Discovery of it, they had a great Consultation by those whose names
are mentioned before. For after this Informant was out of Sir Thomas his
service, he did use the House as much as when he was his servant, and thereby
had opportunity to know it. This Informant does also remember, that he did hear
Sir Thomas Gascoigne say unto the Lady Tempest in the year 1678. about the
beginning of September, that he had ordered one hundred and fifty pounds to be
sent unto Dolebanke, to put the poor Catholics in Arms, he hoping that
shortly the Blow would be given; which money was to be ordered by Father
Cornwallis and Mrs. Lashalls, which money this Informant did hear Sir Thomas
Gascoigne say afterward that he had sent it. And he did hear a Letter read,
sent by Cornwallis, wherein he did desire Sir Thomas Gascoigne's speedy supply
for the carrying on so great a Design, for that that sum of one hundred and
fifty pounds was too little; whereupon the said Sir Thomas Gascoigne sent
immediately thirty pound more.

This Informant further says, That Francis Calvert and his Wife told him that
there was a Design in hand, for the propagating of the Roman Catholic
Religion, and then he hoped the Priests (meaning the Roman Catholic Priests)
might go publicly, and then he said he hoped to be Lord Mayor of York, and she
said she hoped to be Lady Mayoress of York, and they both made a scoffing at
the Parson of the Town, who was then going in that part of the street over
against their House, for then both of them said that he was but a pitiful
Preacher, and no more fit to preach a Sermon than they were fit to say Mass,
and that the Town did not love him because he was a little inclined to favor
the Presbyterian Faction. They further said that they hoped ere long that he
would be glad to hide his head in a corner, and Mrs. Calvert took up a knife
lying upon the shop-board, and said she wished it in the heart of all those
that would not be of her persuasion. And she further said, she could freely
kill the Parson to do God good service. The said Francis Calvert told this
Informant that he did of purpose procure himself to be made Sheriff of York,
that he might the better understand how to rule if he were made Mayor. All
which words were spoken to this Informant by them, another also being present,
whom this Informant thinks was Mr. Calverts Daughter, and it is about a year
ago, as this Informant remembers, since he heard the words spoken.

This Informant says also, that there are several Roman Catholics who do keep
Alehouses, and under that pretense do Lodge Priests in their Houses, and
therefore this Informant leaves it to your Lordships Judgment, whether it be
not fitting to put forth a Proclamation for all Popish Alehouses to be put
down.

This Informant says, He knows by information where there does two or three
Popish Priests at certain times come, whose names are Mr. Winter, Mr. Gerald or
Gerard, and Mr. Jennings, who this Informant does know very well to be Priests.

This Informant does also further declare, That what he speaks here is nothing
but the real Truth, neither has he Malice against any man, nor does he expect,
think, or hope for any reward; but shall reckon himself very well rewarded if
he can but serve his King and Country, and satisfy the World that the snares
of Death were prepared for them.

This Informant does further confess, That he has used his utmost endeavor to
stifle the Plot, and to persuade the world there was no Plot at all, which was
contrary to his knowledge, and does humbly beg His Majesty's Gracious Pardon.

This Informant says that William Banckes a Schoolmaster, living in
High-Holborn, came to the Lodging of this Informant upon the sixth of January;
and being in a Room with him privately, he the said William Banckes did ask
him, this Informant, if Mary Presicks and Thomas Thwing, now Prisoners in
Newgate, were to be tried this Sessions; to whom this Informant replied, that
he did not believe that they would be tried until the next Sessions after
this. Then the said William Banckes said, he was very glad to hear that good
news, that he had been inquiring for him two or three times; and taking him,
this Informant, by his Right Hand, and looking about him with an intent (as he
himself confessed) that no body was near to over-hear our discourse, then told
this Informant that he had a very great secret to communicate unto him, but
that he, this Informant, should solemnly promise him that he would not discover
it; to which this Informant replied (not suspecting any thing) that he would
keep secret what ever he told him, this Informant thinking he would discover
some Priest, or other person that could confirm this Informants Evidence:
whereupon the said William Banckes, told him, this Informant, that if he would
not appear and give evidence against Mary Pressickes, and the others in
Custody, that he would help him, this Informant, to a Friend that would give
him a considerable sum of money, and that it were better for him, this
Informant, to take a sum of Money, than to take lives, and that he was desired
by his Friend to speak to this Informant about it* And that he would engage
that it should not be discovered, that he this Informant did take Money. But if
this Informant would not abscond himself, but appear against the Prisoners,
that then he would lessen his Evidence against them; but not to speak his full
knowledge of them, and to do them all the favor that this Informant possibly
could; but he could wish he, this Informant, would not appear; and that he
would engage him that he should be well rewarded for his pains; and that he was
sure, that if he, this Informant, would not appear and give in his Evidence
against the Prisoners, no other Persons would. These words were spoken by the
said William Banckes several times to him this Informant; to all which this
Informant replied, that he did entreat him to meet him, this Informant, next
Thursday again; and that then he would discourse with him about it, but that he
would not divulge to any the discourse between them.

This Informant further says: That the said William Banckes did promise him
this Informant to meet him again on next Thursday, to discourse with him about
it.

This Informant further says, that he told the said William Banckes, that he
could heartily Wish to have had William Rushton (a Romish Priest) in Custody;
which said William Banckes answered again, that he believed and durst engage
this Informant, that I might have the said Rushton, if this Informant would be
but favorable to the rest: and that he would inquire of his Friend, and bring
him an answer on Thursday next.

This Informant further says; That William Banckes he discourseing about his
Majesty's former Proclamation concerning the 20 l. due for every Priest taken,
the said William Banckes added. That it were better for him, this Informant, to
take 20 l. and not to appear against the said Thomas Thwing, than to have a
hand in his blood.

To which this Informant answered, that he would return him an answer next
Thursday, and that he would not appear against the said Thomas Thwing, if he
could but discover Rushton, so that he might be taken; this Informant knowing
very well that there are several others which have already given Information
against the said Thomas Thwing; there being three besides this Informant to
prove him a Priest, and two of them to prove him a Traitor.

The CONCLUSION.
THus have I in Honesty and Sincerity of heart, Communicated to my Countrymen,
the deep Designs of the Roman parties, and the danger England is in, of
Subverting it is Government by their attempts. I confess my Informations are but
plain in their Language, not couched in a Rhetorical Style, but Calculated for
the understanding of all the Commonality of this Land, how illiterate soever. I
acknowledge my self to be much inferior to many of my fellow Witnesses, in
acquired parts and abilities; yet nevertheless the Spirit of Man, according to
the expression in the Proverbs; is as the Candle of the Lord, searching all the
inward parts of the Belly: That Ordinary reason and understanding which it has
pleased God to bestow upon me, being heightened and advantaged by Conversation,
and Trading in the World; and especially having the opportunity of being
informed in these subtle Intrigues, by my residence in that Family where many
of those matters were Contrived and Acted, could easily make a Judgment,
without much Logic or Philosophy, to what Conclusion such Premises did tend;
whilst I was One with them in the Design, I did often please my self, with some
pretty Evasions and quirkes, which I was taught by my Leaders, in case of
discovery, to evade or at least alleviate the sense of my Punishment. They were
such as these.

That it was lawful for a Roman Catholic to deny the truth, have some Mental
Reservations to himself.

That owning another Power and Ecclesiastical Supremacy, than what is
established in the Land, I was not bound to declare what really I knew,
fancying my Examiners to have no Authority to ask me, and that I was otherwise
obliged by my Religion.

That if I were Guilty of such Crimes that deserved death; yet I might assert
my Innocence, having before received the Benefit of Absolution.

Upon these false Maxims, I was encouraged to proceed, till the Horridness of
the Crimes to which I was tempted, as to be an Agent in the Kings Death, and
the Nations ruin, and that for Money, did stare me in the Face, and God
affording his gracious Conviction, on which I stood, and so enabled me to
Consider how I might find out a way to extricate my self from these great evils.

Hence arose my return to Protestantisme, and my resolution to discover, which
discovery I have undertaken and (...) aged, not out of particular grudge,
animosity, or revenge against any of that Family to which I was related, or any
other person whatsoever ( God is my Wilness, and my own Conscience also his
Vicegerent) much less out of any hopes of gain, privilege or preferment, which
are Motives too for did for Upright and Faithful minds, but only out of love to
Religion, King, and Country, who would be all highly concerned, if such
flagitions and execrable undertakings should attain their designed end.

But as I in my poor Sphere have Contributed to the prevention of those Evils,
so I hope others of that Religion will follow my Example, and be reclaimed from
those Wickednesses (which whatever their Priests talk of Indulgences and
Pardons) would certainly involve them both in Temporal and Eternal destruction.
It Is not in my power to Convert, that is Gods work, and requires an Immediate
concurrence of his Grace, but methinks the present Informations should at least
Convince and stop the Mouths of the most obstinate Gain sayers.

I know many Clammours are, and further will be raised against me, by those
whom I have deserted, as of my being an Heretic, Apostate etc. But I leave it
to the Judgment of all uninterested persons, whether it be not much more just
and equal for me (though of an inferior Class) to speak the Truth, for
preventing such high inconveniences, as are impending upon us, than for persons
of Nobility, eminency, and worth, to be instrumental in bringing such mischiefs
on us.

And as it is a comfort to me that I have aimed at Gods Glory and the good of
this Land in what I have done, so being encouraged and warranted by my
superiors, I shall not shun the Utmost hazard in case I may be further
instrumental for the detection of evil and promoting of good; but still with
this Provisoe, that I would not accuse any man wrongfully, or be a false
witness against my Neighbor, for any worldly encouragement whatsoever.

I grant that many deep heads were engaged in these designs, but they with
whom I conversed had as much Zeal as any, and besides were advantaged by fair
possessions and estates, which they were free enough of, to encourage others in
these black enterprises, that so those who had no Principle of zeal for the
work, but were merely Mercenary, might be engaged therein by Pecuniary
considerations.

I pray God for the future all such Mischievous designs may be prevented, that
the Protestant Religion may flourish amongst us, and that the Kings Majesty may
have a long and prosperous Reign over us in Truth and Righteousness, to the
Glory of God, and the Comfort of Protestant Professors, who though divided and
subdivided amongst themselves, yet have ALL reason to say Amen.

The Particular Names of the Persons accused by Robert (...), Gent. to be
engaged, or Abet^^^^^ the Plot.
1. SIr. Thomas (...) Barronet, in the Homer. 2. Sir M^^^^ Stapylton Barronet,
in the Messengers Custody. 3. Charles Ingleby Esquire in the Kings Bench. 4. Thomas
Riddall Esquire; in Morpeth prison. 5. Sir Thomas Haggerstod Barronet. all out
upon, security.
6. Richard Townley Esquire 7. Robert Doleman Esquire 8. Dr. Peter Vavesour Gent. 9.
Richard Isles Gent. 10. Robert Stanfield Gent. 11. Lady Tempest, 12. Thomas
Pressicks* Gent.
13. Richard Sherbourne Esquire; in Lancaster Prison. both in Newgate.
14. Mary Pressicks. 15. Tho. Thwing, Priest,
16. John Pracid alias Cornwallis, Priest, Prisoner in York Castie* both
Prisoners in Owse Bridge in York.
17. Mrs. Lashalls, 18. John Andrews, Priest,

Corker, Harcourt, and Pinckering are mentioned in the Informations.

Mrs. Lashalls, before mentioned, Mrs. Beckwith, Mrs. Benningfield, Mrs.
Cornwallis, Ellin Thwing, Mary Root, Elizabeth Butcher, all belonging to the
Nunnery.

These following persons, are not as yet apprehended.
Thomas Gascoigne, Esquire Richard Sherburne the younger. Sir Francis Hungate,
Barronet. Lord Mollyneux, Frances Calvert* and his Wife. Stephen Tempest, Gent.
Richard York. These three are deceased.
Sir Walter Vavesore, John York, Christ opher Mitcalfe,

Priests untaken.
Winter. Gerald or Gerard Jennings. John Sturey. Francis Brown, Nicholas Brown,
alias Gascoigne, Benedictine Monks. Robert Killingbeck. Fincham. Francis
Gascoigne. Robert Dolman. Mr. Ellis. Thomas Thwing. Thomas Thwing. Dr.
Stapylton, William Rushton. Farneby. Lodge. John Pracid, alias Cornwallis.
William Hardwick. Francis Blaxton. John Andrews. Thomas Addinson. Richard
Gascoigne. Metham.
FINIS.

