AN ABSTRACT OF THE ACCUSATION OF Robert Bolron and Lawrence Maybury, Servants
against their late Master Sir THOMAS GASCOIGNE, Knight. and Bart. of Barnbow in
Yorkshire, FOR HIGH TREASON: With his Trial and Acquittal 11. February 1679/80.

Fit error Novissimus pejor Priore.

Printed for C. R. M DC LXXX.

TO THE READER.
THou art here presented with the first Essay in the Discovery of the second
Popish Plot brought from the North, and mentioned in the Front hereof. Some
Matters may at first seem alien and novel, but they relate to the Subject or
Persons treated of; for who desires not to have a true account of the
Witnesses? which you will yet further understand by the Trials that are shortly
to be at York, since they prosecute all the Gascoigne Family, as Masters,
Mistresses, Kindred, Servants, Male and Female, nay every neighboring
Acquaintance or Friend, besides 500 more in reserve; for they swear they saw a
List with so many Names in it. You will find the Topics of their Predecessors
(I mean the first Discoverers of the present Popish Plot) handled very fully,
and the Strain not ill followed, considering their servile Capacities; viz.
Consults, Easy Admittance thereto, Hearings, Over-hearings, Letters, Treaties,
Lists, Commissions, Oaths of Secrecy, Firing of Cities, Collections, Money
returned to London, Arms, Privy-Counsellors to be made, Canonizing of Saints,
Regicides to be meritorious, Destruction of Heretics made lawful, A few naked
Papists (being scarce one to three thousand) ready to subdue all the Armed
Protestants of the Nation. Nothing offensive is designed by this short
Discourse; but purely to give satisfaction to those that desire to know the
Reasons of Sir Thomas Gascoigne's Acquittal, who has had this happiness, that
his Witnesses were, except one or two, known Protestants, and have also made
Oath of what they attested in his behalf before a Lawful Magistrate; so that
their Testimony is not now barely Verbal.

Farewell.
An Abstract of the Accusation of Robert Bolron and Laurence Maybury, Servants,
etc.
RObert Bolron of New Castle upon Tyne was bound Apprentice to Mr. Deal, a
Jeweller in Pye-Corner London.

He abandoned his Master in a Twelvemonth, and listed himself a Foot-Soldier
in Tinmouth-Castle. -- He was with others thence put on Board the Rainbow
Frigate, in the second War against the Dutch. -- He got ashore, and came in his
Yellow Coat to Sir Thomas Gascoignes House, having acquaintance with Richard
Pepper, one of his Servants, and thence he went to NewCastle.

He sometime after much importuned the said Pepper to recommend him to Sir
Thomas his Service, upon pretense of his having been used to look after
ColeMines near New Castle; 1674.
and by his means he was admitted to overlook a small Colliery of Sir Thomas's.

Lawrence Maybury, (being the Son of a Day-labouring Forge-Smith about Leeds)
and now of late a Bum-Bailiff) through the means of Francis Johnson (one of Sir
Thomas's Tenants and Neighbors) was preferred to be Sir Thomas his Footboy.

The same Maybury being laid in a Chamber, where was a secret Place, in which
the Lady Tempest (Sir Thomas's own Daughter, upon her going to London about
Midsummer 1675.) put a small little Trunk, and in it some twenty Pieces of
Gold, her Wedding 1675.
Ring, and several little Stone Rings, Medals, and other things, to the value
of about sixty Pounds, and he who was known to all the Servants not to be worth
a Groat, and having but a small Salary, being afterward discovered to have
Gold, Silver, a large Wedding-Ring, and other Rings; and the Lady Tempest
returning about August, and the Trunk being 1676.
gone, and these Particulars talked of he became vehemently suspected to be the
Thief. Howbeit her Ladyship, not having certain Proofs, did not prosecute him;
but upon the 14th of January following Sir Thomas turned him away, both for
suspicion of the said Theft, and for some insolent attempts upon his Maids.

Maybury being discharged in January, clothes himself finely, and sets up for a
Gentleman, goes to the Dancing-School at York, intrudes into the company of
some of the Gentry, appears flush of Money, and at the Sunday after Easter he
called at Sir Thomas's, desiring to be admitted to Prayers into the House, but
was positively denied; others of the Family (having within some weeks after the
said Maybury's being gone) missed 100 l. in a Bag, besides other Moneys, As
lately has been discovered, and Affidavit made thereof.
out of the Place where they kept their Money. Finding himself much eyed and
taken notice of by those who knew him, about May the Spark comes 1677.
to London; and not contented with the Name of Whereof some Letters are extant.
Maybury, as he used to write himself before, he now assumes the more
Honorable Title of Mowbray, takes Lodgings in Holborn, where he spent most
part of that Summer. He gives himself out also to be a great Heir, borrows a
Gentleman's Coach, Courts a Gentlewoman of Quality, having 1500 l. to her
Portion; being refused, he writes Verses (such as they were) against her. About
which time, being in company with some Gentlemen, into whom he had insinuated
himself, he fairly borrowed of them a Sum of Money, (about 70 l.) giving them a
Bill of Exchange on his pretended Merchant in London for Security; but the
Merchant being soon inquired of, had no advice, nor knew neither Maybury, nor
any else concerned in the Bill; which therefore being discovered to be a
Forgery, he leaves his residence above said, pretending to go in all have to
Warwickshire to take possession of 400 l. per Annum just fallen to him; but in
very few days after his old Landlord found him in an obscure House near
Smithfield, absconding for fear of those he had wronged: On the 24th of
December he removes again, pretending to Bishopsgate-street; and in the
beginning of February next ensuing, (having debauched and played away his
Money) as easily as he got it, he made such shift as to return to Leeds, but
with a lighter Purse, and far heavier Heart than he parted from thence; and
having formerly, by the Charity of Sir Thomas, improved his Handwriting, he
now sets up a School for that purpose.

Bolron likewise being after some time more than suspected to be an ill Man,
his Accounts of the Colliary were inspected, and upon the perusal of them in
February 1677/8. he was 1677/8.
found to have received about 300 l. for Coals, and accounted for to Sir Thomas
but 60 l. whereof much more was due. -- That he had defrauded Sir Thomas very
much in other pretended disbursements about the Colliery; -- and that he had
taken out of Sir Thomas his Chamber a Book of Accounts, whereby it appeared how
he had wronged his Master more particularly of other Moneys and Dues, and that
he returned many Persons indebted for Coals, who in truth had paid him:
Hereupon Sir Thomas resolved not only to part with him, but to punish him
according to Law; but upon his earnest beseeching Sir Thomas to show him mercy,
he in compassion accepted of 12 l. and two Bonds for payment of 48 l. Principal
more, and so about April 78. let him go quietly and peaceably away; Sir Thomas
1678.
(like a good Christian) being desirous he might amend, and do better in
another Service.

Mr. Thomas Gascoigne, Sir Thomas his eldest Son, having resolved, by reason of
the troubles to those of his Church, or in general to Catholics, to go beyond
Seas, as many others did; took leave of Sir Thomas in order thereunto at the
end of March; and having obtained 1679.
his Majesty's Passport on the 4th of April following, he went from London to
Dover the 7th of that Month, and Letters were received from him in his way to
Paris, (and as by a public Testimonial since sent) he settled himself there the
first of May following New Style, or 20 April Old Style, and was not yet
departed thence, as many Witnesses now in England can testify. About a year
after his the said Bolrons departure from Sir Thomas, he being still indebted
to Sir Thomas, and also to others of the Family, viz. to Mr. Thomas Gascoigne,
and his Sister the Lady Tempest; and being now become insolent by his own ill
government, he declares himself a Protestant, and accordingly takes the Oaths
at Pontefract Sessions; being also called upon for the aforesaid Payments, he
earnestly pressed one of Mr. Thomas his Servants, with whom he thought he was
intimate, to assist him to steal a Hundred Pound from his Master, or otherwise
to acquaint him where his Masters Money lay, that he might do it himself; but
not prevailing therein, he importuned him at least to steal from Sir Thomas the
Bonds, for which he promised to reward him.

Sir Thomas observing Bolrons declining condition, sent a Servant for him,
whereat Bolron seemed much concerned, and amongst other things told the
Messenger, that he had been reading the Printed Trials, and that he had learned
T. O. The Reader may see in further perusal hereof, that Bolron is not come
much short of his pretended Pater.
his way of witnessing so exactly, that he did not doubt to hang any Man whom
he pleased; but upon the 29th of May he came to Sir Thomas, to tender a
Mortgage of a poor House his Father left him at New Castle; which Sir Thomas
then slighted, having several others bound with him for the Debt, the next day
being the remarkable 30th of May last, (and on which day Bolron had laid the
ground of his Principal Accusation;) Sir Thomas stirred not from about home, and
about six of the Clock that evening one of Sir Thomas his Servants went to the
House of Nicholas Shippen, not a quarter of a Mile from Bolrons House, and
there found Bolron, who said he had lain private there most part of that day
for fear of the Bailiffs; and moreover, that he would now keep himself
concealed, and get into the Cole-pit at Castleforth not far off, where he was
sure the Bailiffs should not find him. --

Bolron having by his Wife (who was formerly a Servant in the Family) gotten
into one of Sir Thomas his Farms, and being in arrear of Rent also, a
Declaration of Ejectment was ordered by Sir Thomas to be delivered him, and on
the 4th of June (following the abovesaid 30th of May) Bolron had notice
thereof, about which time Bolron went to Sir Thomas his House, and slipped up to
Mr. Rushtons Chamber; but at his coming down seemed much in passion, and told
one of Sir Thomas his Servants, that he had been with Mr. Rushton to borrow 5
l. but was refused it, and with a great Oath vowed to be revenged on him, going
away without speaking to Sir Thomas.

Bolron having now resolved revenge, told his Wife he would now pay Sir Thomas
all, by Mortgaging Above three years before Bolron had mortgaged it fully to
one Carr of New Castle, an Alderman.
his House at New Castle, wherein she had her Jointure, if she would give
consent to it; she consenting at length, he brought her a Writing to Sign,
purporting her consent, as he pretended, to her. He likewise pretended to Sir
Thomas his Attorney, that he had gained his Wives consent to Mortgage or sell
the said House, and prayed him to prepare a Deed of Mortgage thereof to Sir
Thomas; and he did so, having persuaded Sir Thomas to accept it; but it proved
ineffectual.

Bolron being become more and more enraged, and having studied the several
Proclamations which had come forth since T. O. supposed discovery of the Plot,
goes to Broderton Tyndal Esquire; Justice of the Peace, and informs him several
things against Rushton; and that Mrs. Mary Presseck, Wife to Sir Thomas his
Servant, had spoken several strange words concerning his Majesty. Afterward he
gave his Information to William Lowther Esquire; another Justice of the Peace. --
After that he attended Mr. Lowther, Mr. Tindal, and Mr. Francis White Esquire; a
third Neighboring Justice of the Peace, and there likewise confirmed to them
what he had said the two former days, and then desired four or five days to
give them a further account.

Bolron attending them accordingly, requested that the former Information he
had given them might be returned to him; but 'twas told him, that the
Informations he had given them were sent up to London; and thereupon he
resolved to follow them, and prayed them to lend him a little Money for his
Journey, (for he was grown very low) and he said they gave him 8 s. 6 d.
toward it, and Mr. Tyndal gave him a Letter of Directions and Assistance to
his Brother in London; but another of them (a Neighbor of Sir Thomas's) gave
him something more to make quicker expedition; but he perceiving that most of
the Justices would give little faith to his Informations, they being made up of
hear-says, contradictions, and improbabilities, and Mr. Thomas Gascoigne, whom
he involved, being gone beyond Sea near two Months before the time hinted of
the 30th of May; and that therefore they would issue out no Warrants against
any whom he had accused, but a Servant, which otherwise (as the whole Country
knows) they would most readily have done, he resolved to mend his Error when he
came to London; and so by becoming a Kings Witness to be above all wants, and
also be revenged on Sir Thomas, and secured from him, and all other his
Creditors; and in order to those good ends, (he gave out in the Country, he
would go to New Castle and sell his House) but in stead thereof he hasted to
London immediately. --

At Ware upon the Road he lost Justice Tyndal's Letter; but getting to the
Green-Dragon in Bishops-gate-street upon the third of July following, he
immediately acquainted the Landlord with his errand, and by his directions
goes in all have to Sir Robert Clayton, and the next day, viz. the 4th of July,
he attended the Right Honorable the Lord President Shaftsbury, and the Lords
of His Majesty's Privy Council, and positively upon Oath accuses Sir Thomas
and others of Consultations in relation to the Kings death; for he swore, that
upon the 30th day of May, he being at Sir Thomas his House, Sir Thomas bade him
go into the Gallery, where Rushton, (though he were so angry with him the said
Bolron (as Bolron swore) for taking the Oath of Allegiance, that he was ready
to have stricken him; nevertheless tempted him in express terms to kill the
King; and that upon his refusing to do it, Rushton prayed him however to keep
it secret. That waiting by Sir Thomas's appointment till his return, Sir Thomas
about six of the Clock that evening took him into his Chamber, and having asked
him what Rushton said to him, Which was a sufficient Advertisement for any Man
in his Senses, if it were true.
Sir Thomas told him, That if he would undertake a design to help to kill the
King, he would send him to his Son Mr. Thomas Gascoigne, who should instruct
him how to do it, and he should have a thousand Pounds reward; but refusing
again to have any hand in blood, Sir Thomas desired him of all love to keep it
secret. Now as to the Account the said Bolron then gave of Sir Thomas his
Servants, he declared, that Maybury went away about suspicion of a Trunk the
Lady Tempest had lost, with Moneys and Jewels in it; for then he had not
pitched on the said Maybury for his second Witness, as afterward in a Month,
or thereabouts, he did.

Their Lordships presently sent away Bolron and a Messenger into Yorkshire for
Sir Thomas; and in the mean time examined those Persons in London, to whom
Bolron had directed them where to find or hear of Mr. Thomas Gascoigne, Son to
Sir Thomas mentioned in the abovesaid Accusation, and when they saw him last.
But their Lordships soon found upon Enquiry, that Mr. Gascoigne was then and
long before gone beyond Sea, having set forward for Dover, viz. on the 7th of
April, and was so far from being seen since in Town by them, that several
Letters had been received from him from beyond Sea by the Post, with the
Post-mark on them, which caused strange reflections on this new Evidence given
by Bolron: and therefore these Persons being seperately examined by the Lord
President, were admonished to take great care what they answered, for that it
was sworn (by Bolron and another) that Mr. Gascoigne was seen at London both
the beginning and latter end of May by several; whereto it was replied by one
of them under examination, That on that 30th of May he assisted in a Cause or
Lawsuit of Sir Thomas's against one Mr. Nelthorp in London, and that his Sons
presence, if he were in London, had been necessary, and that if Mr. Thomas had
been any where near, he would have appeared at it to have supplied his Fathers
place at the said Trial in Chancery: Nay Bolron himself has since deposed, that
one principal cause of Mr. Gascoigne's coming to Town when he left the Country,
was this very Law business with Mr. Nelthrop, how truly the effect has shown,
as well as of the rest of those Allegations.

For he Mr. Tho. went beyond Sea near two months before the Trial with the said
Nelthrop.
The 7th of July Sir Thomas was taken into custody, late at night, out of his
House at Barnbow, fourteen Miles from York, and Bolron caused a Warrant to be
served on his own Wife and Grandmother, to testify before Mr. Lowther and Mr.
Tyndal what they knew of the things they had charged Sir Thomas with; but they
were very unwilling to go, and protested before God, that they never knew nor
heard of any ill by the said Sir Thomas, or any thing in the least ways
concerning any wicked design against the Kings Person, the Government, or
Religion of the Nation. Whereupon the said Bolron being much enraged, swore and
threatened, and then said, if they would go and testify what he had sworn
against Sir Thomas, he should get 500 l. by it; but if they refused to do so,
he should be utterly undone; after this Bolron was very melancholy, and being
asked if his Conscience did not trouble him for what he had sworn against Sir
Thomas, he declared, That if some Persons would pass it by, he would not
prosecute him any further. One of Sir Thomas's Servants went to Bolrons House
that night about nine a Clock, and found Bolrons Wife in bed crying extremely,
complaining that her Husband had lately made her set her Hand to a Writing,
pretending to her that it only concerned her consent to part with her right to
the House at New Castle, which she willingly agreed to; but she now found it
was a Writing wherein her Husband had accused Sir Thomas, and several others,
but had not found proper to produce it as yet.

The 18th of that Month Sir Thomas was examined at the Council Board, and the
day following he was committed to the Tower; now Bolron (who was also returned)
considering that he had often named Mr. Corker, (a Prisoner in Newgate) as a
Man he intimately knew, though in truth he had never seen him in his life; and
thinking also that it was necessary he should be able to distinguish him at
least from other Men, (against the time he should be brought to charge him
about the Plot, and about the Moneys returned to him) he came on the 22d of
July last to the Press-yard at Newgate, in another Man's Name, desiring the
Turn-key to bring Mr. Corker to him; Mr. Corker being informed that a Stranger
would speak with him, very prudently desired a Gentleman then present to step
down, and see who it was; the Gentleman coming into the Box, and asking before
some Protestants that were by, who would speak with Mr. Corker? Bolron
supposing him to be the Man, called him Mr. Corker, and asked him how he did,
pretending a particular knowledge of him, and several years acquaintance with
him; whereat the Gentleman following the humor, sat down by him, and drank
with him; so that the familiarity increasing, Bolron (among other things) told
him he had several times heard him say Mass; whereupon Mr. Corker being made
acquainted with this pleasant Passage, came down to the Box likewise, and sat
by Bolron, who knew him not in the least, but wholly applied himself to the
other; all which the Protestants, and others present, have attested under their
Hands.

-- The like accident happened to Bolron the last Summer Assizes at York; for
there he demanded of Mr. Butler the Jailer a sight of his Prisoners, (a Method
learned of the Confraternity at London (to whom all Prisons were open at their
call) and having there thoroughly viewed and surveyed one Lambert, he at length
saluted him by the Name of one Osbaldestone; who answering that he was not the
Man, Bolron told him that he was, and that he would swear that he heard him say
Mass: Whereon Mr. Butler replied, That he was a rash Man, for that Lambert was
a Tradesman, as several could testify, and besides, Osbaldestone was twenty
five years elder.

At this time Bolron becoming more known in London, and familiar, was
advertised by some of his new Colleagues, Who had perusal of private Papers, and
all Passages for their better information through most Offices.
and Well-wishers, in plain Language, that he had made a mighty false step in
swearing on the 4th of July, That Sir Thomas had said to him on the 30th of May
last, that if he would assist to kill the King, he would send him to his Son
Thomas, who would instruct him how do it, and that he should have 1000 l.
reward; whereas in truth it was found that Mr. Thomas Gascoigne was gone to
Paris about eight weeks before that 30th of May, with His Majesty's License or
Passport, and had continued there ever since in much company. Bolron was
extremely surprised in having so unluckily named Mr. Tho. Gascoigne to be his
assistant to kill the King, at a time when he was not upon the Land, nor of so
many weeks before had been, and which his former Deposition employed, and as he
had assured the Lords on Oath, and they had found it different, Bolron was at a
loss, but his Brethren had bethought them of a Salvo; he confided the Point to
others also, shows them Copies of all, and it was resolved the Redress should
be by a second additional Information (given in about the end of the said July)
to reconcile the former, and to cover the Artifice of it by a latter
Superfoetation of such old and new things as might be proper, and seem natural;
but it is plain, the drift of the said Addition was to make Sir Thomas have
spoken to him in these different words from his former, viz. If thou will
undertake to assist to kill the King, I will send thee to my Son, (if in Town)
who, with the rest that are concerned, shall instruct thee how thou shall
assist in it, and thou shall have 1000 l. reward. Having sworn thus in his
second Deposition, and composed the Matter as he thought, the Consult advised
him to apply now to the greatest difficulty, which was to get a second Witness,
who might confirm what he had already sworn.

Therefore about the beginning of August he sets out for Yorkshire; and
pretending he had many Priests and others concerned in his Plot, he obtained
Moneys and Commissions to seize and secure all such Papists as he found
obnoxious; and under this pretense going to Leeds, he wonderfully caressed his
old Fellow Servants Maybury, informs him of the several Proclamations,
Narratives, and other Transactions at London, shows him how much the World was
mended with him, tells him how easy it is, not only to get a Pardon for any
former Felony, Forgeries, etc. but to make ones Fortunes for ever, and also to
be revenged on all Enemies. And that certainly the Lady Tempest (Daughter to
Sir Thomas Gascoigne) could not be deemed his Friend, who had so defamed him,
and blasted his Reputation in her noise about her Trunk, and the Moneys taken
from the Family, which in time might have a worse effect, and he suffer for it,
when too late to repent the loss of this Golden opportunity to destroy her and
secure himself.

Maybury thus won in few days, declares himself a Witness, notwithstanding he
had few days before protested to several, (who were amazed at Sir Thomas his
Charge) that he believed him to be most unjustly accused; nay Bolron was so
pleased with his new Conquest, that he tells a young Woman, (whom Maybury
courted) that she might marry him now with satisfaction, for that he had
engaged him (the said Maybury) in a Business against Sir Thomas, and that he
should be well rewarded out of his Estate, and come to great preferment.
Methods and Circumstances being now fully settled and agreed upon by them,
Maybury goes to Mr. Tyndal and Lowther, Justices of the Peace, and acquaints
them in short of his business; whereupon the 16th of August the said Maybury
informs them upon Oath, (and as it appears in his Narrative more at large) That
Sir Thomas Gascoigne and Sir Miles Stapleton had made Deeds of Trust of their
Estates, and that about Michaelmas 76. At first Maybury had sworn this
treasonable discourse to have been over heard by him in Spring precedent, when
some of the Accused were not in Yorkshire, -- Now (like Bolron) advertised by
the Brethren of his mistake, and the disproof that would ensue, he turns the
Spring into Michaelmas.
Sir Thomas, his Son Mr. Thomas, the Lady Tempest, and Mr. Rushton, being in
Barmbow Dining Room, he heard them holding several discourses concerning
killing the King, and firing of London and York, etc. -- That there was in the
House one Doctor Stapleton, who coming from another Room, and finding him at
the Door, went in, and in a low Voice He could over-hear low as well as high,
and though at a greater distance than before.
desired them to forbear their discourse, for there was one at the door. -- And
thereupon her Ladyship called him in, and sent him down to entertain some
Strangers; and that he heard several discourses from Sir Thomas and Rushton
about a Nunnery to be established at Dolebanke, and of Sir Thomas his selling
90 l. per Annum for maintaining it.

Whilst Maybury was hugging himself with Bolron, that this Information would
suddenly be at the Council Board, he found more than a fortnight passed, and no
manner of notice taken of him, his impatience prompts him the last of that
Month to write He becomes officious and importune.
to Sir John Nicholas, that there were diverse material Circumstances relating
to his Discovery, which were not inserted in his first Information before the
Justices, which should be declared when the Council should command a full
account from him. Upon this he had a Summons by a Messenger sent him on
purpose, and a Letter superscrib'd To Mr. Lawrence Mowbray, at his House in
Yorkshire; and so repairing to London on the second of October following, he
informed Justice Warcup by Order of Council upon Oath, that he had not
discovered all he knew As his Oath in the Country implied then, whereon a
Remark was made, and something more to reconcile it.
of the horrid Plot, for fear of Yorkshire Papists, whom he was to detect; but
now would do it, conceiving himself under the Protection of the Council, and
hoping that they would intercede for his Pardon: Which was soon after granted
him and his Colleague.
Then he said, That in the Year 1674. he came to Sir Thomas, and was with him
in his Service till January 1676, etc. -- That waiting on Rushton at the Altar,
he was permitted to be in his private Chamber, when other Priests were
consulting with him, etc. as appears more at large in his Narrative and
Informations.

That he took the Sacrament of Secrecy from Rushton, and well remembers, that
about Michaelmas 1676. there was an Assembly of many Priests and others at
Rushtons Chamber, when they all agreed and declared that the King should be
killed, and then Fire and Sword were to be employed against the Opposers of the
Catholic Religion, and all or most Catholics were engaged therein. -- That
Rushton then produced to the Priests a List T. O. his Method to have a grand
reserve or stock for sure Accusations, if his first succeeded.
of 4 or 500 Names engaged in the Design, and he had read many of them, and
remembers very well that Sir Thomas Gascoigne, Sir Miles Stapleton, Mr. Thomas
Gascoigne, the Lady Tempest, Thomas Pressick, and many others were in the List:
That Moneys and Arms But never produced.
were collecting; and that on the first of January 1677. he wrote a Letter (for
so he swore and confirms in his Narrative) to the Duke of Monmouth at
Whitehall, which he sent that day by the Post from Leeds to London, declaring
therein, (not in hopes of Reward, (God forbid) but as a true and Loyal Subject
to the King) that some Papist-Conspirators had a wicked and desperate Design
against the King; and by an immediate Insurrection to proceed with Fire and
Sword, till they had altered the Government, or settled the Crown upon the Head
of some other Person. T. O. by him degraded from the Honor of having the first
knowledge of the Plot. -- And at Sir Thomas's Trial Oats's Reverend Father, and
Bolrons good Mother, had a contest in the Hall about the primacy due to one of
their Sons.
So that by consequence the Death of the King was conspired and sought for. --
That this Conspiracy was to his knowledge contrived almost three years ago, and
now was at the height of a desperate resolution. -- That his Heart was Loyal
and true to the King; but confessed, that through Rushtons persuasions, he
himself had subscribed to this wieked Design, and now was forced by his Loyalty
to his King, and to clear his stained Conscience, to reveal it: That he would
endeavor to procure a List of the Conspirators which he had seen and
subscribed to. That he was certain Mr. Ingoldsby, Sir Thomas Gascoigne, Thomas
Gascoigne Esquire;, Sir Miles Stapleton, with many others, had subscribed it, and
were great promoters of this Act, and are still providing Force and Arms to
carry on this Design. -- That he begged his Lordships pardon for this boldness,
and entreated him to communicate this to whom he thought fit. -- That at
present he durst not subscribe his Name, being within the Whereas by his
Narrative since printed, and Proofs of his constant habitation, it appears he
was in London from Spring to the end of the said year.
Claws of the Papists, but upon protection from them he would acknowledge the
Hand and Mark subscribed. As in his Narrative, fol. 15. says York; but ibidem
P. 21. says it from Leeds.
-- York 1. January 1677/8. yet sent from Leeds as a few Lines before he had
deposed. -- This is the effect of the pretended Letter, which forsooth never
came to the Dukes Hands; and yet I etters we find do as seldom miscarry here,
as in any place of the World; but the whole design is (Reader) so vain, that
one would wonder how a Man could fancy such a childish Fable would take and
salve his not discovery of the Plot before; for he not only lay dormant three
whole quarters of a year, I mean the whole time between the date of his wifes
Letter, and T. O. his appearing in the World, but almost a year after the full
discovery of the Plot, notwithstanding the encouragements the Witnesses had by
the Kings Royal Proclamations, and the misery of the Catholics in England were
in: But to be short, it appears by what is already said and showed, that this
Maybury was so far from writing any such Letter at that time from York or
Leeds, (and he swears both) that he was then actually at London, (as several
Protestants here are ready to testify.) So that his design and ambition was
not only to equalize, but also to exceed and out-go those of the Kings Evidence
that had got the start of him in the supposed Discoveries.

Sir Thomas Gascoigne being committed to the Tower, as has been mentioned, an
Indictment was preferred at Leeds before especial Commissioners of Oyer and
Terminer, on the 7th of November, against him and Sir Miles Stapleton, for that
they, with several others, on the aforesaid 30th of May 1679. at Barmbow
contrived to kill the King, etc. and that Sir Thomas then solicited Bolron
to it, and promised him a thousand Pounds for it; upon the Evidence of Bolron and
Maybury it was found; and Bolron being then asked, if Maybury had not been
suspected of stealing Money and Jewels, he said, No; (and that the things
supposed to be stolen, were his the said Bolrons) so that the denial is a new
escape, and directly contrary to what he found by his Copies he had sworn
before the Council, of the said Maybury parting from Sir Thomas on suspicion of
Theft.

The Prisoner was under infinite disadvantages, he being about 85 years of age;
he had of late years almost totally lost his Hearing; his Memory was mightily
decayed; his Sight bad; his Hands shaking; his Body crazy; his Mind so little
intent to public business, that he was not in London but once in thirty years,
and that was in passing to France and back, which happened about 14 years ago.
This poor Gentleman now finding that these Persons had sworn positive Treason
against him, and understanding by some who were intimate with them, and had had
a sight of their Papers, that they had positively contradicted themselves in
their several Informations, he thought fit to petition for Copies of the said
Informations, but was denied them; so that all his dependence, under God, was
his Innocence, and in the assistance of Mr. Charles Ingoldsby a Lawyer, and his
near Kins-man, and therefore to him he committed all the management of his
Affairs.

On the 24th of January he was arraigned at the King's Bench Bar, where, first
crossing himself with his Hand, he answered. In the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen. Not Guilty. Now he prayed the Court,
(some of his material Witnesses being at Paris) that his Trial might not be
till they could conveniently be sent for, for he feared the day appointed for
them was of the soonest, and so it proved, for they came not till a day or two
after. Bolron finding that Sir Thomas relied wholly on Mr. Ingoldsby, (as has
been said) what does he, but informs against him as a Conspirator, and so got
him seized by a Messenger, which fell out whilst he was actually penning Sir
Thomas his Breviate, which amazed not a little every body; for Mr. Ingoldsby
had not only openly frequented London and the King's Bench Bar every Term since
the Plot was first talked of, but was at home in Yorkshire when Sir Thomas was
accused and taken with the rest; nay he was publicly at York Assizes, (as Mr.
Justice Dolbin acknowledged) when Bolron came thither with Commissions to
apprehend whom he pleased: Nay yet more, was in a Room where Bolron came to
search, and yet took no notice of him there neither.

The 11th of February Sir Thomas was brought to his Trial, Sergeant Maynard and
Mr. Attorney, Mr. Solicitor and Mr. Recorder being of Counsel against him; and
there Bolron swore, that he came to his Service in the year 1674. -- That a
Deed of All Catholics do the like, when they fear any fresh persecution, or
renewing the Poenal Laws.
Trust was executed to Sir William Ingoldsby by Mr. Charles Ingoldsby's advice
about April. 1675. and that Sir Miles S. said it was well done. -- That in
1676. Sir Thomas said that he would send 3000 l. to the Jesuits at London for
carrying on the Design; but if sent or not he knows not. -- That in 1677. Sir
Thomas, Mr. Thomas Gascoigne, Mr. Ingoldsby, Lady Tempest, and others, met at
Sir Thomas's, and agreed to establish a Nunnery. -- That Sir Thomas was to give
90 l. per An' toward it, and be Canonized, his Son Thomas to be made a
Privy-Councellor, etc. -- That they were six hours in consultation to carry on
the Design. -- That in March last Mr. Thomas told his Father he had gotten a
License to go to London. -- That he would fly into France, and commit the
Design Bolron his variation from his first Deposition, and uniting with the
second to salve the former.
to those would not fail to do it: And Sir Tho. approved it. -- That on the
30th of May he went into Sir Thomas his Gallery, and Rushton chid him for
taking the Oaths of Allegiance, and told him it was meritorious to kill the
King, and he would assist in it; but, he, Bolron would have no hand in it. --
That having staid by S^r Thomas his order till he returned, Sir Thomas took him
into his Chamber about six a Clock that night; and having asked him the
discourse between him and Rushton, which was so contrary to the present
purpose, yet said, if thou will undertake to assist to kill the King, I will
give thee a thousand Pounds, and send thee to my Son Tom, if in London, or else
to others concerned therein. But he refusing to have his Hands in Blood, Sir
Thomas prayed him Bolron renews his Salvo for his first Deposition.
to keep it secret, and he promised it.

Bolron being asked by the Lord Chief Justice, when he first discovered this to
any body? he said, that about a week or a fortnight after he went to Mr.
Tyndal, and upon Oath in writing informed him that Sir Thomas offered him a
thousand Pounds to kill the King; and that Mr. Tyndall said he would give the
Council an account thereof, and issued out his Warrant against Pressick, but
not against Sir Thomas: Whereat his Lordship seemed to wonder yet more, as well
he might. To see so little credit given to his Information, as not to seize Sir
Tho. in so important a Case.
-- That in the latter end of June (he should have said the beginning of July)
he came to London, and was examined by Sir Robert Clayton, and carried to the
Lord Shaftsbury the fourth ditto, -- and there he might have told how that he
then made a full Information upon Oath; and that upon the 29th he made the
amendment, both which he has now united into one, as he had done in his
Narrative, lest he should offend the Critics with his humane frailty, and want
of memory in so fresh a matter; but he thought better on it, and that it would
be a discovery of his chiefest Masterpiece.

Maybury being next sworn, deposed, That he came to Sir Thomas's Service in
1674. and lived with him till January 1676. that diverse Priests came to Sir
Thomas's, and he serving at the Altar, was permitted to be with them. -- That
1676. he heard them discoursing of bringing in Popery by Fire and Sword, if it
could not be done by fair means. -- That York and London should be fired, and
the King killed for a Heretic. -- That Rushton said so, (Sir Thomas not being
present) but Sir Thomas, and his Son Thomas, and the Lady Tempest, and Stephen
Tempest, received first the Sacrament of Secrecy, It is but rare in History,
that Emperors, and the greatest Princes have taken the Sacrament, on occasion
even of ratifying Articles of peace, leagues, and marriages of State. But
amongst Catholics in private the very word Sacrament of Secrecy is not
understood; or seen practiced, as Millions can testify.
and then were made acquainted with it, who all agreed to kill the King, and he
the said Maybury received the Oath of Secrecy also.

That about Michaelmas 1676. he saw a List with 500 Names; that the Title of it
was, The Names of them engaged in killing the King, and setting up the Popish
Religion; that Sir Thomas Gascoigns Name was to it with his own Hand, as also
the Lady Tempest, Mr. Thomas Gascoign, Mr. Stephen Tempests, Sir Walter
V^^^sou^^, Sir Francis Hungates, the Townleys, and several others. -- That they
discoursed of Commissions, Indulgences, and Pardons from the Pope for it. --
That about Michaelmas 1676. Sir Thomas, his Son Thomas, the Lady Tempest, Sir
Miles Stapleton, and Rushton, in the Dining Room at Barmbow, declared they
would do their utmost to kill the King, and would venture their Lives and
Estates therein. -- That Doctor Stapleton coming from some other part of the
House, went in, and told them, that, he, the Deponent, was at the door; that
thereupon the Lady Tempest bade him go down and entertain Sir Miles his
Servants. -- Being asked why he discovered it not long before? he answered,
That about Michaelmas 1679. he discovered it to Mr. Tyndal, but durst not do it
of three years before, for fear that Papists should kill him. He further added,
That he turned Protestant about the time that the Plot first came out; which
occasioned the greater wonder in the Auditory, considering him a twelvemonth
silent, when Oats and the rest had broken the Ice with such success and
encouragement, and a whole Nation with their Representative Besides His
Majesty's Proclamations and Assurances of Reward to the further discoveries,
and his having lived in London about a year. His Habitation and Conversation
known since to many.
standing at his back.

Several of Sir Thomas his Almanacks, which were taken from him, were produced
also against him, and there it appeared, (by his own writing) that from the
21st of July 1678. Mr. Corker had received from him 900 l. and directions were
there also how to send Letters to Mr. Harcourt, and about buying Heworth, and
likewise about buying the Reversion of Heworth for his Niece Thwing; as also a
Memorandum to acquaint Thomas Thwing with his design, and other Notes; as also
a Paper of the 9th of June 78. which had been taken out of Sir Thomas's
Chamber, was produced against him likewise, being a Letter from John Prasset,
and a Paper to Mr. Benefeild, with a Proviso, that if England should be
converted, then the whole 90 l. per Annum should be applied to purchase
Heworth, and the Writing to be made without any alteration. Moreover the word
Yes, on the side of the said Paper, was written by Sir Thomas himself.

There was also a Letter of the 24th of May last from Mr. Prasset produced,
wherein he he declared the taking of the Oath, as now worded, damnable; but
some Letters that were for Sir Thomas his advantage, and would plainly have
made appear some of Bolrons Informations to be most insulse and inconsistent,
were suppressed and kept from the Prisoner, and from the view of any.

After this Richard Fishwick was sworn, who declared, that he had served Sir
Thomas about six years, and a Writing was shown, which gave an account of his
returning in six years 6000 l. to London. This the said Fishwick Formerly
Servant to Sir Thomas.
owned, and that part thereof was Sir Thomas his own Money, part of it was Mr.
Thomas Gascoignes, and the Lady Tempests, and that Mr. Thomas Gascoigne had 4
or 500 l. per Annum, and the Lady Tempest 3 or 400 l. per Annum. -- Mr.
Attorney General produced an Account out of Mr. Mawson's Book, That from March
1674. to December 1677. there was returned from him to Sir Thomas 2500 l. and
that several Sums thereof were paid to Mr. Corker, which Sum was taken as part
of the 6000 l. returned from Yorkshire, as before mentioned: And here Mr.
Attorney ended, saying, that he would give no further evidence at present, till
he heard what the Prisoner would offer in his defense.

Sir Thomas, who all this while understood not one syllable from the Witnesses
themselves of what they had sworn against him; but having by his Solicitors,
hollowing in his Ear, an imperfect apprehension of some Particulars, prayed the
Court, (after he had a little considered his Breviate) that the Witnesses
following might be examined; who being called, testified to this purpose. --

Mr. James Babington testified, and offered to depose, -- That he was, and for
several Protestant.
years had been Attorney at Law to Sir Thomas Gascoigne; and by his direction
sued Bolron in May last upon his two Bonds of 20 l. and 28 l. and that Bolron
desired him to forbear suing him for a fortnights time, and promised to pay the
Money due upon the said Bonds, or to secure the same. That Bolron also offered
afterward to make a Mortgage of his House at New Castle for Sir Thomas his
security; but that his Wife refused to join therein, unless the Bonds were
cancelled. -- That on or about the 13th of June last, he, by Sir Thomas his
direction, delivered Bolron a Declaration in Ejectment for the Farm he lived
in, and told him that he had Orders from Sir Thomas to proceed against him; and
Bolron said, -- By God then will I do that which I did not intend.

Obediah Moore testified, That he being bound with Bolron in the said Bonds,
pressed him Protestant.
for Counter-Security; but Bolron told him, that he need not fear; for if Sir
Thomas offered to sue him, he would be revenged on him, and inform against him.
-- That after this, he the said Moore sued Bolron, and that upon the 29th of
May last several Bailiffs by his appointment attended to arrest him.

Stephen Thompson testified, That he was likewise persuaded by the said Bolron
to be another of his Securities for payment of the said 48 l. Capital Money to
Sir Thomas; and that Protestant.
he prayed the said Bolron to keep him harmless from the fame; and Bolron
thereupon told him, if Sir Thomas Gascoigne sues me, I will do his work for
him. Whereupon he asked Bolron how he would do it, and if Sir Thomas was in the
Plot? Bolron said no, he is as clear of the Plot as the Child unborn, but he
would inform against him for harboring of Priests. -- That after Sir Thomas
was imprisoned, the said Bolron declared, that what he had said of Sir Thomas
his not being in the Plot was false, and was spoken by him when he was a
Papist, and could say any thing. That now he was offered Money for discovering
the Plot, but would not take it till he knew what Oats and Bedlow had done. --
That before he gave his Evidence he would have as much Money as they had; and
further, that he would thereby discharge the said Debt; and then the said
Bolron desired him not to declare what he had spoken.

William Backhouse testified, that upon the 7th of July last he was charged by
Warrant to Protestant.
carry Bolrons Wife before Mr. Lowther, but that she was sick in bed, and
cried, and refused to go, saying, That she knew nothing ill against Sir Thomas:
That thereupon Bolron threatened her, telling her she must go and swear against
him, or else he would draw her thither at the Carts tail,

Cuthbert Hemsworth testified to the same effect. Then -- Protestant.


Nicholas Shippen testified, That upon the 29th of May last he was at Garforth
Horse-race, and that night he saw Bolron, who asked him if he had seen any
Bailiffs abroad; that he told him he had seen Obedia Moore, and two Bailiffs,
going toward Bolrons House that Evening; whereupon Bolron wished that he might
escape them. That the day following (being the very 30th of May, or day on
which Bolron swore, he had those treasonable discourses with Rushton and Sir
Thomas; Bolron came to his the said Shippens House about two a Clock in the
Afternoon, and stayed there till two hours after Sunset; and that Bolron was
never out of his sight all that time, having told him that he came thither to
send a Letter to Newcastle, for that he durst not carry it himself to the
Post House for fear the Bailiffs should take him.

Roger Grigson testified, That in August last Bolron said that Sir Thomas would
come off well Protestant.
enough, only it would cost him Moneys; and in case Addison that Rogue had not
examined, and taken his Accounts, he would never have done what he did against
Sir Thomas.

William Bateby testified, That about the beginning of August (he and George
Dixon being Protesant.
together, and Bolron and Maybury in another Room) he heard Bolron say to
Maybury, that Sir Thomas and the Lady Tempest had been severe against them, and
now they had an opportunity to be revenged on them. -- That Maybury said Sir
Thomas was an honest Man, and that he knew no ill by him, nor had ever done him
harm; but that if he knew any thing against the Lady Tempest he would hang her.
-- That Bolron replied to Maybury, that if he would be ruled by him, he would
advise him how to accomplish his desires; and added, that he was sued by Sir
Thomas, and that if he made not out something against him, he should be ruined.
That if they both joined and struck at them, it might be effected, nothing
being to be done against them, but by the Testimony of two Witnesses. -- That
in case Maybury would come to his House, he would instruct him therein, and
that he would engage he should have a good reward out of Sir Thomas his Estate;
and thereupon he heard Maybury agree thereunto.

George Dixon confirmed this Testimony; whereupon -- Bolron answered, That upon
Protestant.
the Oath he had taken he had never seen the Witness. And Maybury said to the
same purpose; which seemed not only ridiculous, had their Assertion been true,
(for a Stranger may over-hear as well as an Acquaintance) but caused the
Witness in indignation at their impudence to declare, that they were well known
to each other; and this several can testify.

One of the Judges urged against the Prisoners Witness, why this Combination of
Bolron and Maybury was not sooner made known to some body; and it was
immediately replied to his Lordship, That it was very early communicated to
their Acquaintance, and named some regardable, being Protestants also.

Mrs. Deborah Jefferson testified, That about the beginning of August last
Maybury said to Protestant.
her, That Sir Thomas was a very honest Gentleman, and that he believed he was
unjustly accused.

Mr. Matthew Hickeringal testified, That Maybury was generally suspected to
have stolen Protestant.
several considerable things from Sir Thomas Gascoigne, and the Lady Tempest;
and that in September last Maybury told him that Sir Thomas and the Lady
Tempest had endeavored what they could to take away his Reputation and Life:
That they deserved as much from him, and he would now requite them.

Mr. Peebles testified, -- That Bolron had done several ill Actions, and that
he had complained Protestant.
of the Judges the last Affizes at York, as not regarding him, nor admitting
him to speak with them. That both Bolron and Maybury had no good Name among
their Neighbors, and that he could say more against them, but that he was
unwilling to it, in regard they were the Kings Evidence.

William Clough testified, -- That upon the 24th of May last he arrested Bolron
by the directions Protestant.
of Mr. Hickeringal, (Steward to Sir Thomas) and that he then declared, that he
would be revenged of Sir Thomas, if he got free from that Arrest, for that he
said it was through Sir Thomas his means that he was arrested.

Francis Johnson testified, That Bolron had much wronged Sir Thomas in his
Accounts, whilst he was in his Service, and looked after his Cole-pits, and
mentioned some particulars.

Alice Carpmel testified -- Bolrons malice, and Maybury being suspected of
stealing of Money; and would have proceeded, but was interrupted on directions
of the Kings Evidence of being a Plotter.

Mr. Edward Hobart testified, That Mr. Thomas Appleby married one of Sir Thomas
his Daughters, and by her had Issue Mary and Helena, and that toward raising
of Portions for them, after some years previous provision, their Father had
granted out of his Estate a Rent charge of 200 l. per Annum to Sir Thomas for
21 years, and he produced the Deed in Court, and said, that 4 or 500 l. thereof
being in arrear, Sir Thomas commenced a Suit in Chancery, and the Arrears were
thereupon paid him, and the 900 l. aforesaid, which were sent to Mr. Corker,
were part of the said Mary's Portion, who is now in a religious Convent beyond
Seas, and were returned by him to her, for no other purpose whatsoever; he the
Deponent having drawn the Acquittances for the same; that he was privy thereto,
and constantly entered the same in his Account-Books. -- That the other Sister
Helena was disposed in Marriage, and 2000 l. of her Portion was likewise paid
not long after. That he was likewise privy to Sir Thomas returning 1988 l. to
Mr. Mawson, and that the same was paid to Mr. Trumbull and Mr. Mauleverer for
the Purchase Sir Thomas made of an Estate at Manstone in Yorkshire; that he
was at Mr. Trumbulls executing the Conveyance thereof, and drew the Acquittance
for the said Money. -- That 200 l. more of the said Purchase-money was paid to
William Errington, and 80 l. more thereof to Widow Coston, in pursuance of
directions from Sir Thomas. That he the Deponent had several Letters by him,
directing Payments to several of Sir Thomas his Brothers, Sisters, Children,
and Grandchildren abroad, which Payments to his knowledge were made
accordingly, and that the same amounted to no less than the 6000 l. which Mr.
Fishwick deposed he had returned in so many years, and that the said Moneys
were paid to no other use, than as he had before declared.

Sir Thomas had many more Protestant Witnesses in and about the Court; but by
his not hearing from the Mouths of the Parties themselves what had passed
either for or against him, and especially the interlocutory discourses, (which
in a false accusation ever afford main advantages) and by his being
dim-sighted, so that he could not readily nor methodically follow his Breviate;
as also tired with long standing, and stunned too with the often hollowing in
his Ears, he became so amazed and confounded, that he was wholly unable to help
himself. Nor was any body suffered to call his Witnesses, till he had named
them; and therefore several never appeared. Nay the hurry was at length so
great in Court, that some of them were dismissed before they had half done;
some being called too quick after the others, that the latter got in first, and
the former called lost admission; which the Prisoner not perceiving, and his
Friends not permitted to re-mind him, was a great disappointment in many
material occurrences; amongst other things, those Witnesses which happened to
be omitted stood ready to testify and make out the Thefts of Which though
before suspected, were only discovered fully the night before the Trial of Sir
Thomas.
Maybury: Others his Cheats, and manner of living at London: Others the Gold
and Medals sold and changed by him: Others the ill opinion Sir Thomas and his
whole Family had of him, and Bolron also especially after their departure much
increased: Others how the said Bolron threatened his Wife, if she would not join
to accuse Sir Thomas: Others how much he feared to be sued and arrested hy his
Bonds-men: And others of Mr. Thomas Gascoignes being constantly at Paris, or on
his Journey thither from the 7th of April (which was almost two Months before
the aforesaid 30th of May) till that day of the Trial; which was wholly
inconsistant with a moral possibility of Sir Thomas his directing Bolron to his
Son Thomas, then to assist him in the pretended Proposition of killing the
King, as Bolrons first Information sworn to did run.

Those that were called by Mr. Attorney in behalf of the Kings Evidence, were
-- first Bolrons Wife; who said, -- That her Husband never threatened or
endeavored to force her to swear any thing against Sir Thomas. Secondly,
Bolrons Grandmother, who witnessed, that he was a very honest good Man. And
lastly, Fishwick, who declared, That whilst he the said Fishwick lived with Sir
Thomas, he knew no dishonesty by Bolron. Now it seems Fishwick had left Sir
Thomas his Service long before the Examinations of Bolrons Accounts, and the
other matters afterward laid to his Charge, were made.

Mr. Justice James (by reason the Lord Chief Justice was gone to try Causes in
London) summed up the Evidence; and having done it with the usual Tope of
showing not only the Principles and Practices of the Papists, generally
supposed to be believed, but the positiveness of the two Witnesses Oaths for
the King; and then discending to some Particulars in behalf of the Prisoner, he
left the whole matter to the Jury. After Mr. Justice Dolbin had remembered him
of a thing forgotten in the re-capitulation, very considerable, -- viz. That
Sir Thomas (as had been proved by Protestant Witnesses) did sue Bolron not only
before the 30th of May, but just after also; and yet he had then (as Bolron
swore) proposed the killing of the King to him. But in Counterpoise to Justice
Dolbins Remark, Mr. Justice Pemberton offered the great tie of Sacramental
Secrecy, A thing unheard of amongst the Catholics, as hundreds of them
reconciled to the Church of England can testify.
which he said as if neither Life nor Death, Heaven nor Hell, nor any other
provocation could move Catholics to break, or to that effect.

This done, the Jury withdrew, being, as the Law intends, Gentlemen of the
Neighborhood; and therefore knowing not only Sir Thomas, but his Accusers
also, they considered that the said Accusers were decayed and necessitous
Persons, who had left their Master (as the whole Country knew) upon very ill
accounts: -- That they timed the Fact in a very unlikely season, seeing the
Protestants of England were not only long alarmed, and upon their guard against
so small, naked, and distracted a Party, but that most of the considerable If
one Recusant to 500 Protestants can be said considerable.
Papists were retired beyond Seas, and the rest (which were but a handful)
disarmed or in Prison, or in as low and dejected condition as could be well
imagined. That a Pardon of all past Crimes, and an assurance of future Rewards,
were great temptations to Men of an ill repute. That no body of those since
accused by Bolron and Maybury had ever fled or absconded, unless (Rushton the
Priest) who had refused to lend Bolron five Pounds in his necessities, and was
obnoxious to the Law, purely on account of his being in Orders; and in common
sense ought not to appear.

That Bolron was indebted to Sir Thomas, and others of his Family, as also sued
by him both before and after the 30th of May: That he was at the Afternoon till
ten at night on the said 30th of May at Shippens House for fear of Bailiffs;
and yet pretends that at six that afternoon he had the treasonable proposition
made him by Rushton and Sir Thomas. That both Bolron and Maybury had declared
an ill will to their Master, and that they would be revenged on him and his
Daughter Tempest. That their very confederacy procuring to make them guilty of
the Plot, was overheard by two Protestant Witnesses. -- That they had not only
accused all Sir Thomas his Family and near Sir Tho. Gascoigne, Mr. Gascoine his
Son, Lady Tempest his Daughter, Sir Miles Stapleton, Mr. Charles Ingoldsby
Cousin, Nich. Gascoigne, Francis Gascoigne, Stephen Tempest his Nephew, Ellen
Thwing Niece, Tho. Thwing Nephew, Tho. Pressick Servant, James Verley Servant,
Alice Carpmal Servant, Mary Root Servant, and others, as in their Printed
Narratives, and at the Trials affirmed.
Relations, Friends and Servants, to render him destitute of all help, comfort,
Witnesses, and defense; but had now just before the Trial most unreasonably and
impudently seized upon his Cousin and Counsel Mr. Charles Ingoldsby, who was
public even at York Assizes in Court, and never was touched, though Bolron
came then with Authority to apprehend whom he pleased, and was often in Court
also, where, as well as in other places, Bolron might have secured him.

That as for Maybury, he had been suspected in the Country of the aforesaid
Thefts; that he had long been forbidden Sir Thomas his House, which could not
be imagined, had he been a Conspirator. -- That the List of the 500 Persons,
and the improbable Title to it, viz. -- (A List of those that are engaged to
kill the King,) was so extravagant and foolish, that 'twas sufficient of it
self to invalidate all his Testimony. -- That his lying still so long after the
Proclamations and known Encouragements to all Witnesses in relation to the
Plot, showed his idle The Letter in his Narrative being then printed and
published.
Letter, and all he had now said to be an invention, and of a late date also.
-- That Sir Thomas had above a dozen Protestant-witnesses, who proved most
important matters in his defense, and had evidently made out the Uses for which
he had returned the 6000 l. to London; and that as for Dolbank, it might have
been bought with the Money and Portions of some Nuns, for they are known
sometimes when they have it, to lay out their Money in this manner, that so
they and their Community may be maintained abroad with an Annual Income, and
consequently have always some Relation or other for their Trustee, who acts as
they direct, -- Besides, they considered that a positive Oath by blasted Men,
without any material Circumstances proved effectually, or produced, is of
little force. -- That the very neighboring Justices did not issue Warrants
against Sir Thomas, though Bolron had accused him of Treason. -- That Bolron
had mended and altered his first Deposition most corruptly. And lastly, That to
swallow this Evidence might be of a most pernicious consequence, and would
settle such a stock of Credit and Belief on these vile Persons, as might after
the destruction of the Gascoigne Family extirpate Root and Branch many others
in their List of 1500 in reserve, whose Loyalty to their Prince has been
eminent in the memory of the Living, and was not at all doubted of hitherto.

The Jury declared Sir Thomas not Guilty, and accordingly he was acquitted.

There wanted not several of different Conceptions, who (on occasion of the
imperfect and defective management of this Trial, by reason of the Prisoners
being decayed, as well in Mind as Body) did speak and vote variously of the
Success, so that some of the Jury moved at it, did give out Minutes of the
Trial, and the Reasons which led them to their Verdict, to many of their
Acquaintance, and in reality who conversed the Prisoner more intimately did
perceive he was become very incapable and unfit for such a performance, being
dosed with Years, his Sense decayed, and his Mind disused and abstracted of
late from Conversation. The Pamphlets of the Age have made him since his Trial
a Fugitive beyond Seas; but his unsatiable Prosecutors have him in fresh
pursuit here on new pretenses, and have wearied the Attorney General with
search and exposition of the Laws, to bind and fasten him on some new Tenter;
yet the old Gentleman prays for them and the Nation; his Life is at the Kings
Service, and his Soul traveling to his Creator, who has also witnessed for
him, giving him length of days on the Land, a Blessing promised of old to those
who honor and obey their Superiors, as he professes to have done, and hopes it
will appear better when some of those Persons come upon their last Pillow,
where God grant them his Grace and true Repentance.

Magna est veritas and praevalebit.
FINIS.
An Attestation of a certain Intercourse had between Robert Bolron, and Mr.
Thomas Langhorne, (mistaken by Bolron for Mr. Ja. Corker) wherein is manifested
the Falsehood and Perjury of the said Bolron.
ON the 22d of July 1679. there came to the Press-yard adjacent to Newgate two
Persons, the one called himself by the Name of Baker, and the other called
himself by the Name of James. Baker declared he was the Man who had accused
Mrs. Preswike, and Mr. Thwing, and is now known to be Bolron. These Persons
told the Turn-key they came to speak with Mr. Corker: Hereupon they were lead
into a Drinking-Room, and Mr. Corker was called; but he having experienced the
falsified Oaths of others who had never seen him, and happily reflecting these
might be such, desired Mr. Thomas Langhorne (who was by chance there) to go
down and see who they were; the which Mr. Tho. Langhorn did; and coming into
the company of Bolron, this discourse followed. Mr. Langhorn said, Would you
speak with me? Bolron answered, Your Servant Mr. Corker. Mr. Langhorn said, Do
you know me? Bolron answered, Yes, I know you well, you will not deny your self
to be Mr. Corker? Mr. Langhorn said, Deny my self? what are you? what is your
Name? Bolron answered, You know my Wife well, and I know you well, and I have
known you several years, and seen you in such and such Places, (which Places he
named.)

After some time spent in discourse to this and the like effect, Mr. Corker
himself, together with an under Clerk of the Press-yard, came into their
Company; but Bolron neither owning nor knowing Mr. Corker, the discourse
continued, amongst other things, (Bolron* still addressing himself to Mr.
Langhorn) affirmed several times, That he knew him to be Mr. Corker, and
confirmed it by often calling him Mr. Corker, and saying to him, I have seen,
you sometimes in the company of Mr. Hubbert, and sometimes in the company of
Mr. Pepper, in the company of Mr. Haskit, and several others; I have seen you
in London, and in the Country in Yorkshire. Using further expressions of a
long indeared familiarity with him. At length Mr. Corker, wearied with his
impertinences, going out of the Room, Bolron inquired who that Gentleman was?
Soon after the Turn-key coming by chance in, with Wine and Tobacco, Bolron in
the presence of the said Turn-key, Mr. Thomas, Langhorne, and the said under
Clerk* called Mr. Langhorne by the Name of Mr. Corker, and said he knew (...)
and being (...) of him he again possitive (...) he knew him; and added in the
presence of the aforesaid Witnesses (...) know ^ou to be a (...), (...) have
(...).

The under Clerk admiring the impudence of Bolron, herein jestingly told (...)
he pretended so much friendship and acquaintance with Mr. Corker, he would do
(...) do him a kindness in not revealing what he knew; and if you do him a
Peny-wor^^ (...) kindness, said the said Clerk, Mr. Corker will give you a
Pound for it. Bolron answered, Aye, then something may be done. Mr. Langhorne,
who all this while was supposed by the said Bolron to be Mr. Corker, replied, I
will give nothing by way of Bribe. Bolron* answered No, I will take nothing by
that Name. This is the substance of this intercourse, and will be attested to
be true, as it is here respectively set down.

Now notwithstanding this so often repeated-confident asseveration of Bolrons
intimate acquaintance and familiarity with Mr. Corker, seconded here by so many
pretended circumstantial Instances of known friendship with him; yet it is most
certain, that he never knew saw Mr. Corker, till this before mentioned
intercourse at Newgate: As is palbably manifest* both in that he took Mr.
Langhorne for M Corker, and conversed with him as such in the very presence of
Mr. Corker. And also in that Mr. Corker being brought to Bolrons face before
the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council on the 13th of this present October,
he denied Mr. Corker to be the Man who was shown to him at Newgate. And after a
long and full view had of Mr. Corker, he durst not positively affirm, that the
Person there present was he against whom he had any thing to say; but
expressing himself doubtfully, desired time of deliberation in it.

These notorious undeniable Contradictions, will, it is hoped, convince
judicious Men, that no credit ought to be given, in a Matter of no less than
High Treason, to an indigent Wretch, of a lost Conscience, and condemned of
falsehood by the Testimony of his own Mouth.

We underwritten do respectively testify, That what is here said of the
Intercourse had between Mr. Bolron, and Mr. Thomas Langhorne, is true in the
Whole, and every Part thereof: Witness our Hands the 12th day of January 1679.
Witnessed in the Presence of E. Smith. Jonathan Grove. Francis Leea. Thomas
Matchet. Book Bookey. Tho. Langhorne.



