THE PAPISTS Bloody OATH of Secrecy, AND Letany OF Intercession For the
Carrying on of This Present Plot. WITH THE Manner of Taking the Oath, upon
their Entering into any Grand Conspiracy against the Protestants. As it was
Taken in the Chapel belonging to Barmbow-Hall, the Residence of Sir Thomas
Gascoigne, from William Rushton, a Popish Priest, by Me Robert Bolron.
Together, with some further Informations, relating To the PLOT, And MURDER of
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey.

Jovis 16th. die Decembris, 1680.

Ordered, THat Mr. Robert Bolron have Liberty from This House, to Print and
Publish the said Oath of Secrecy and Letany,

William Goldsbrough, Cler. Dom. Com.



LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, 1680.

Jovis 16th. die Decembris, 1680.

A Petition of Mr. Robert Bolron, desiring Leave from This House, to Print the
PAPIST's Oath of Secrecy, and Letany of Intercession for England therein
mentioned, was Read.

Ordered,

THat Mr. Robert Bolron have Liberty from This House, to Print and Publish the
said OATH OF SECRECY and LETANY.

William Goldsbrough, Cler. Dom. Com.

BY Virtue of this Order abovementioned, I do Appoint Randal Tailor, near
Stationers' Hall, London, To Print this BOOK: And that no other Person or
Persons, do presume to Print the same.

December. 17th. 1680.
Robert Bolron.
The Farther INFORMATION OF Robert Bolron, Gent. Containing The Oath of
Secrecy and Letany, With Other Matters of Moment, in which he was concerned,
when Engaged in the Horrid Popish PLOT.
AFter the Ancient Piety, Zeal, and Strictness of Life, exemplary in the
Primitive Christians, had in a measure put the Dominion of this World, and the
Keys of the next into the hands of the Clergy; care of gaining Souls became
(in a few Centuries) Obsoleted: The former Illustrious times of Virtue
vanished, and a gloomy night of Ignorance soon overspread the Universe. The
Clergy (the Authors of this Unhappiness) finding their Religion and Greatness
must be maintained by Power and Policy; and Conscious to themselves, that their
Lives and Doctrine held no good Correspondence with the Purity and Poverty of
their Predecessors, took a course (because they had little left of their Own)
to Trade with the Piety of the Ages past, and prop up their own Ignorance and
Sloth by that means. To work they go; They make Gods of the deceased
Propagators of Christianity, and Enshrine their Rotten Bones, or those of
others in Cases of Gold and Silver. The next thing was, to persuade or Compel
the People to Adore them. In this Erecting a new Order of demy-Gods, they
imitated the Pagans in their Wickedness, but not in their Virtue or Valor, and
Clapped the Festivals of these new Pa-Gods into the Calendar in places of the old
Holy Days of Saturn, Minerva, and Bacchus, etc. This Project answered
expectation; they grew greater, but not better. The Miracles pretendedly
wrought at those Shrines, and multitude of Ceremonies, dazzled the Vulgar,
supported the Reputation, and supplied the Defect of the Clergy. The glorious
Lives, Wonders and Martyrdoms of the Ancients were made into Mantles to hide
the Ignorance, Lust, and Avarice of worthless Impostors; and Laws made every
where, were made to restrain Men from peeping into the Ark of the Church. And
to strip Princes privily of their Power, and to draw their Subjects to other
dependencies, numourous Orders, and Societies are Conjured up (as though the
Laity had not groaned enough under the Seculars) to Erect a Kingdom in every
Kingdom for the Pope, and to supply him in every Corner with a Villain
Spiritual, to Stab or Poison what Potentates he pleases.

Things thus Jog'd on till the days of our Grandfathers, when in England the
Pope and his Clergy were secluded; And it was made death for any Romish Priest
to enter the Realm; yet since, they have not only come hither, but by help of
Factors and Proselites acquired great Estates in these Kingdoms, and Arrived
to a height of no less Confidence than of ruling the Roast, destroying us all,
and introducing Popery. This is as clear as Noonday, by many Testimonies,
among which, this Oath following is a most Notorious Evidence, on which I shall
make some Remarks.

The Oath of Secrecy, given by William Rushton, to me Robert Bolron, the Second
of February, 1676/7.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.
I Robert Bolron, being in the presence of Almighty God, the Blessed Mary ever
Virgin, the Blessed Michael the Archangel, the Blessed St. John Baptist, the
Holy Apostles, St. Peter and St. Paul, and all the Saints in Heaven, and to You
my Ghostly Father; do declare, and in my Heart believe the Pope, Christ's Vicar
General, to be the true, and only Head of Christ's Church here on Earth, and
that by Virtue of the Keys of Binding and Loosing, given his Holiness by our
Savior Christ, he has Power to depose all Heretical Kings and Princes, and
cause them to be Killed. Therefore, to the utmost of my Power, I will defend
this Doctrine, and his Holinesses Rights, against all Usurpers whatever;
especially against the now pretended King of England, in regard that he has
broke his Vows with his Holinesses Agents beyond Seas, and not performed his
Promises in bringing into England, the Holy Roman Catholic Religion. I do
Renounce, and Disown any Allegiance as due to the said pretended King of
England, or Obedience to any of his Inferior Officers and Magistrates; but do
believe the Protestant Doctrine, to be Heretical and Damnable, and that all are
Damned which do not forsake the same; and to the best of my power, will help
his Holinesses Agents here in England, to extirpate, and root out the said
Protestant Doctrine, and to destroy the said pretended King of England, and all
such of his Subjects, as will not adhere to the Holy See of Rome, and the
Religion there Professed. I further do promise and declare, That I will keep
Secret and Private, and not Divulge directly or indirectly, by Word, Writing,
or Circumstance, whatever shall be proposed, given in charge, or discovered to
me, by You my Ghostly Father, or any other engaged in the promoting of this
pious and holy Design; and that I will be Active, and not Desist from the
carrying of it on: and that no hopes of Rewards, Threats, or Punishments, shall
make me Discover the rest concerned in so pious a Work; and if Discovered,
shall never confess any Accessaries, with my self concerned in this Design. All
which I do Swear by the Blessed Trinity, and by the Blessed Sacrament, which I
now purpose to Receive, to perform, and on my part, to keep inviolable: And do
call all the Angels, and Saints in Heaven, to Witness my real Intention to keep
this Oath. In Testimony whereof, I do Receive this most Holy and Blessed
Sacrament of the Eucharist.

It is manifest, that the Grandees of the Roman Church make no more account of
Religion, than the profit and convenience it brings along with it, are able to
compence: Yet they ever begin with a Holy Canticum, In nomine Patris; by such
means inducing the People to swallow their gilded Pills, or Poisons rather, to
the destruction oftentimes of Body and Soul too.

In this wicked thing called an Oath, they Blasphemously set up the Blessed
Mary, St. Michael, St. John, St. Peter, St. Paul, and Rushton the Priest, in an
equal Classis with God Almighty; But mention not Christ, till they come to
declare the Pope to be his Vicar, and that thereby the Pope has
Letters Patent to empower him to do what he shall think fit, in Heaven, Hell,
Earth, and in Purgatory, to Depose and Kill Heretick-Kings, yea, and Catholic
ones too, when he wants opportunity to advance a Harlot, a Bastard, or a
Nephew. In such cases, a Chastel, a Clement, a Ravilliack, or a Pickering, are
ever ready to transmit whom he pleases, into another World, whilst himself,
without such help, but not without Money, puts a Soul into Heaven, or pulls one
out of Purgatory.

Indeed this Oath is its own Herald, It is its own Comment; every word of it is
Rebellion, Treason, and Murder, styled hypocritically Pious and Holy Designs;
it was stamped in the Mint of the Jesuits, and is a very notable Comment, upon
that Oath (which Blessed Ignatius Loyola) imposed upon his Spiritual Mamaluks,
and may give us to understand, that Romish Wickedness is sublimated since these
days, into a much higher spirit of Treachery and Impiety. The Oath then made to
the Father General is as follows.

Ego N. Professionem facio, and promitto omnipotenti Deo, coram ejus Virgin
Matre, and Universa caelesti Curia, ac omnibus circumstantibus; and tibi Patri
Reverendo N. Praeposito Generali Societatis Jesu, Locum Dei tenenti, and
Successoribus tuis, vel tibi reverendo Patri, vice Praeposito Generali
Societatis Jesu, and successoribus tuis, locum Dei tenenti, perpetuam
paupertatem, Castitatem, and Obedientiam, and secundum eas, peculiarem Curam,
circa puerorum Eruditionem, juxta formam vivendi in Litteris Apostolicis
Societatis Jesu, and in ejus Constitutionibus contentam; insuper promitto
specialem Obedientiam Summo Pontifici circa Missiones, prout in eisdem Litteris
Apostolicis and Constitutionibus continetur. Which is Englished Thus:

IN. Make my Profession, and promise to the Omnipotent God, before his Virgin
Mother, and all the whole Court of Heaven, and all that here stand by, and to
you our Reverend Father, the Father General of the Society of Jesus, God's
Lieutenant; and to your Successors (or to you Reverend Father in place of the
General of the Society of Jesus, God's Leiutenant, and his Successors)
perpetual Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience; and accordingly, peculiar care in
the erudition of Youth, consentaneous to the form of Living, contained in the
Apostolic Letters of the Society of Jesus, and in the Constitutions thereof.
Moreover, I promise special Obedience to the Pope, concerning Missions, as
contained in the same Apostolic Letters and Constitutions. Our New Explanation
or Exposition, far exceeds the Old Text, and is a Superstructure upon that
pristine Foundation of Villainy, erected since those times. The Blessed Trinity,
the Holy Sacrament, and the whole Host of Heaven, are made stalking Horses for
impious Mortals in the ungodly, uncharitable, Antichristian Works of ruining
Kings, Kingdoms, and all Mankind besides themselves, only to set up the Court
of Rome, and a despotick Power. These horrid Impieties (but that we are
promised the gates of Hell shall not prevail against them) might make
conscientious men, with Trembling, presage and dread, That the Ruin of
Christianity is not far off. These men, when they swear their misled Proselites
into Treasons, Murders, Fellonies and Secrecy, little mind to consider what is
taught in Holy Writ concerning an Oath, Jerem. 4. 2. And thou shall Swear, The
Lord lives in Truth, in Judgment, and in Righteousness, etc. What regard
these Oaths have to Truth, Judgment and Righteousness, let the Reader take
notice and proceed to observe one unparrallel'd Clause in the Oath, viz. And
that no hopes of Reward, Threats or Punishments, shall make me Discover the
Rest, concerned in so Pious a Work; and if discovered shall never confess any
Accessaries with my self concerned in this Design.

Here they lead their Proselites into a Laberynth of wickedness; but then they
leave them no way or means to dis-ingage themselves, or others out of it, and
consequently to be Hanged and Damned afterward. This may learn the most Wilful
and most Obstinate Charity, to have a care how it extends it self, in believing
the words of the late dying Jesuits and others. Dicite Justitiam Moniti, And
let it teach all good Protestants the nature of of these Romish Wolves, who
though they change their Hair, will never change their Hearts.

Now having given an Account of the Oath of Secrecy; next I will render you an
Account how the Jesuits and popish Priests do insinuate themselves into the
hearts of those, that they ensnare to engage in this damnable Design: which
particularly being exemplifi'd in my own self, may serve as instructions, how
others were induced and encouraged to propagate their Hellish Principles; The
relation is as follows.

About the latter end of January, 1676. Thomas Thwing a Priest, and William
Rushton, another popish Priest, who was my Ghostly Father, came to my House at
Shippon-Hall, in Yorkshire, and did there examine me how I was affected and did
like the Romish Religion, since I was of it, and if there were any occasion,
what would I do for the good of that Religion? To whom I replied, that I was so
well affected to the Romish Religion, that I would venture my Life and Estate
in the Manageing of any Design whatsoever, for the good of that RELIGION. The
Priests then said, That they were glad to hear me in so good a Humor, and did
heartily wish, that all the Catholics in England were of my mind, and further
did tell me, that all England in a little time would be Roman Catholics; for
that the Duke of York, next Heir to the Crown, had renounced the Protestant
Religion. Therefore force was to be used for the more speedy bringing him to
the Crown. But added, that before I could be any further acquainted with the
particulars of this, Design, I must first take the aforementioned Oath of
Secrecy, which all good Catholics must take; for if any Catholics did refuse
it, they could not be admitted to know of their Designs and Contrivances: For
that Sir Thomas Gascoigne, Thomas Gascoigne Esquire, and other Gentlemen, had
taken the same, and engaged themselves, and given Security for their respective
performances.

Then I told the said Priests that I would not deny to take it, for I would
obey my Ghostly Father in all things. And on Candlemas day 76. I did
accordingly go to Barmbow-Hall, as was formerly agreed, where I did hear Mass,
and take the Oath of Secrecy from the hands of my Ghostly Father, to be
private, and keep secret the Design of killing his Sacred Majesty, and the
destruction of all such Protestants, as would not be of the Romish Religion;
Which Oath of Secrecy is before related, and is the true Copy of the said Oath
as I got it from the said Rushton accidentally, the very same day it was
Ministered it unto me by him.

Before I did take the Oath of Secrecy, I did go to Confession, where my
Ghostly Father in my said Confession did tell me that I must Believe, That it
was a Mortal Sin to Reveal what was told me by my Ghostly Father in my
Confession, and that I was certainly Damned, if ever I did Discover the
concerns of this Design, or taking the said Oath of Secrecy.

But after I had taken the said Oath of Secrecy, and was Acquainted with the
Design, when ever I went to Confession, my Ghostly Father would be sure to
Examine me, how I had kept my Oath; upon which, if my Father Confessor did
judge, that I had not so truly kept the same, as I ought to have done, then must
I have taken the same Oath over again. Besides, my Ghostly Father did
frequently Teach me how to make use of Equivocations and Mental Reservations.

First, How to defend my self against the Protestants, if I were ask't by a
stranger whether Mr. Rushton were a Priest; That then I might lawfully deny it,
or upon Oath before a Magistrate, I might possitively deny my knowledge of
Rushton to be a Popish Priest: but then I must privately to my self make use of
this Equivocation, That I did not see the said Rushton take his Orders beyond
Sea, therefore could not swear him to be a Priest. And then followed the
benefit of Absolution for this or any other service done for the good of the
Romish Religion.

And indeed my Penance in Confession, was once enjoined me by Father Rushton to
lash my self with a Cat of nine Tails, or Discipline, because I did not deny
with Asseverations to one Mr. Burman that he was no popish Priest; although I
did not confess the same to Mr. Burman, yet he alleged, that I did it but
faintly, and therefore that should be my Penance.

Secondly, If Reproacht by the Protestants; that they of the Romish Religion
made no Conscience to destroy those that were of contrary Opinion to them.

Then with Imprecations I might lawfully deny the same; only making use of this
Reservation to my self, that I must deny any thing which is against the
Interest of the Church: besides, if I should own it to be the Doctrine of the
Romish Church, that then the Protestants would beat out my Brains, as was
taught me by my Ghostly Father Rushton.

Thirdly, That since the Discovery of this Popish Plot, if I did at any time
hear the Protestants discourse, that they of the Romish Church did Teach the
Murdering of Kings and Princes, and that the King was to have been Murdered
by the Papists, that then I must Vindicate the Romish Religion, Arguing, that
such Doctrine the Papists held not, with Reservation to my self, that I must
not Own such a Design, unless effected, believing that Protestants being
Heretics had no power to examine me, neither was I obliged to Answer directly
to the Question.

The Ceremonies, Manner, and Form, used in the taking of the said Oath of
Secrecy, is thus.
AT the Chapel Door, I did Sprinkle my self with Holy Water, and then went
into the Chapel, where Bowing toward the Altar, I made the Sign of the Cross,
and said, Sprinkle me with Hysop and I shall be Cleansed, wash me and I shall
be whiter than Snow; Then kneeling, I made the Sign of the Cross, and said, In
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen. After
that, I said certain Prayers used before Confession, and at the Conclusion,
made again the Sign of the Cross; which being ended, I went into the Vestry,
where Kneeling, I ask't my Ghostly Fathers Blessing, as Children usually do
their Parents. Then after that, I made again the Sign of the Cross, and then
had the benefit of Confession, and Absolution from my Sins, and then I went
into the Chapel, and said Prayers before Receiving the Sacrament.

But when Mass was said, I did not Communicate with the rest there present,
although the Sacrament was Consecrated for me, but after the rest were gone,
then William Rushton, my Ghostly Father, called me to the Altar, where bowing
my Body and kneeling, I made the sign of the Gross; then I kissed the Mass Book,
and laid my Right Hand upon it, and so had the Oath of Secrecy given me by my
Ghostly Father Rushton, repeating it after him. But at these words, In
Testimony whereof I do Receive this most Holy and Blessed Sacrament of the
Eucharist, Rushton put the Sacrament into my Mouth, and said this little Latin
Prayer following:

Corpus Domini nostri Jesu Christi Custodiat animam tuam in Vitam Eternam.
Amen. Then again I kissed the Mass Book, held in the Priests Hand, but held my
Hand on the Mass Book all the time I was taking the Oath aforesaid; and after
that, rising, bowed my Body to the Altar, in an humble manner, and so returned
to my place again.

Now after I had taken the said Oath of Secrecy, Rushton went again into the
Vestry, to say his Prayers on his Breviary, but I continued still in the
Chapel to say my Prayers used after the taking of the Sacrament. Then after
Rushton my Confessor came forth out of the Vestry, he went toward his own
Chamber, whither I followed him; but Sir Thomas Gascoigne hastily calling the
said Rushton, he laid down his Breviary in his Closet (to which was no Door,
and is situate near his Chamber) which said Breviary I taking up, found
therein the said Oath of Secrecy; of which Oath I had a sufficient time to take
a true Copy, and it is the real Copy which is before recited; although when I
took the Copy of the said Oath, never intended that any Protestant should have
seen it.

The same day, were Hallowed for my self two Pistols which were to be made use
of, for the destruction of the Protestant Party, if the Roman Catholic
Religion ha^ prevailed in England. There were also Swords, Gun^ and Pistols,
Hallowed for Thomas Gascoigne Esquire, an^ others engaged in the Popish Plot.
And in the sa^ Month of February, I had an Indulgence, or Pardon, for Thirty
Thousand Years, given me by the said Rushton, my Ghostly Father, for my
Encouragement in my Proceedings of being so Zealous against his Majesty, and
Government; and the Penance enjoined me, was to say every day a Letany, for the
Intercession, and Conversion of England: but if I did twice a day say the said
Letany, then should I each day Redeem a Soul out of Purgatoty. But I have heard
my Ghostly Father say, that some Catholics had their Indulgences for Fifty
Thousand Years, others a plenary Indulgence to encourage them to be firmer to
this Design. Such a Plenary Indulgence, I did see in the Hands of Mr. Mowbray,
about the latter end of January, 167 6/7. And the Letany of Intercession for
England, is as follows.

The Letany of Intercession for England.

LOrd have mercy on us, Christ Hear us. Christ have mercy on us, Lord have
mercy on us, O Christ Hear us. O Father of Mercy, and God of all Consolation,
Have Mercy on England. O Son, Redeemer of the World, and of all things in
Heaven and Earth, the Pacifier, Have Mercy on England. Holy Mary, Mother of
God, and Mother of Mercy, Pray for England. Holy Mary, who have destroyed all
Heresies, Pray for England. Holy Virgin of Virgins, Famous in England for many
Miracles, Pray for England. St. Michael, Prince of the Church, Pray for
England. St. Gabriel, Privy to the Mysteries of God, St. Raphael, Faithful
Guide of Travelers; Holy Angel, Prince of England, St. John Baptist, Master,
and Form of Penance, All Holy Patriarks, and Prophets, Friends of God and
Preachers of Truth, St. Peter, Pastor of Sheep, and Prince of the Apostles, St.
Paul, Doctor of the Gentiles in Faith and Verity, St. Andrew, Friend, and Lover
of the Cross, All Holy Apostles, and Evangelists, and special Increasers of
Christianity, Faith, and Unity, All Holy Innocents Slain for Christ, St.
Stephen, Pray for England. St. Lucius King, St. Alban, St. Amphibale, St.
Sophias, St. George, St. German, St. Coleman, St. Kylian, St. Adrian, St.
Ethelred, King, St. Tancon, St. Isenger, St. Edmund, King, St. Edward, King,
St. Thomas of Canterbury, All holy Martyrs of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
St. Fugatius and Damianus, St. Gregory, and St. Augustine, St. Ethelbert, King,
Pray for England. St. Patrick and St. Columbe, St. Pethno, and St. Cuthbert,
St. Furseus, and St. Malachy, St. John, and St. David, St. Brandon, and St
Fiaker, St. Archibald, and St. Macarius, St. Marianus, and St. Alexander, St.
Bennet, St. Boniface, and Saint Bede, St. Dunstan, St. Henry, and St. Robert, St.
Richard, St. Roger, and St. Hugh, St. Gilbert, St. Lanfranck, and St. Anseline,
All Holy Bishops, and Confessors of England, Scotland, and Ireland, Pray for
England. St. Helen Queen, St. Ursula, and St. Agnes, St. Bridgit, St. Buryen,
and St. Tecla, St. Agatha, St. Mechtil, and St. Maxentia, St. Christine, and St
Winifred, St. Ethelred Queen, and St. Margaret Queen, All Holy Virgins, and
Martyrs of England, Scotland and Ireland, All Blessed, and Holy Saints of
Places, Be merciful, Spare England Good Lord, Be merciful, Hear us O Lord, From
all Iminent Perils of Sins, and Backslidings, Deliver England O Lord. From the
Spirit of Pride and Apostasy, From the Spirit of Ambition, From the Spirit of
Rebellion, From all Hardness, and Blindness of Heart, From all Surfeiting, and
Drunkeness, From the desires, and Liberty of the Flesh, From Hatred, Contempt,
and Neglect of Sacred Things, From Profaning of Churches, and from all
Sacrilege, From the Tyranny, and Cruelty of Heretics which it now Groans
under, From Wicked and Pernicious Councils. We Sinners, O God of Pity, do
beseech Thee to Hears us. That thou would direct the Popes Holiness, and all
Prelates, to Pacify and Govern the Church, O Lord, we beseech thee Hear us.
That thou would be pleased to bring again into this Kingdom, the Ancient
Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Faith, That thou would put into the Hearts
of all Christian Kings and Princes, Unity, Peace and Concord, and that their
servent Zeal may be stirred up to put their helping Hands to Reduce it to the
Obedience of the Holy See of Rome. That thou would Comfort, and Fortify, all
such as suffer Imprisonment, loss of Goods, or other Affliction, for the
Catholic Faith, O Lord, we beseech Thee to Hear us. That neither by Frailty or
Enticements, or any Torments, thou permit any of us to fall from thee, That
thou would give us perfect Patience in our Afflictions, and to make Ghostly
Profit of all our Miseries, That thou would Mercifully hasten the Conversion
of England, Scotland and Ireland; from the Infection of Heresy and Infidelity,
That thou would deliver and keep in these times of Persecution, the Pastor
of our Souls, from the hands of their Enemies, That thou would daily Augment
in them the fire of thy Love, and the Zeal of gaining Souls, That thou would
preserve all the Catholics of this Land in Holiness of Life, and from all
manner of Sin and Scandal, That thou would so Adorn us with Holiness of Life
and Conversation, that our Enemies seeing our good Works, may Glorify Thee Our
Heavenly Father, That thou would Reduce from Error, and Heresy, our Parents,
Friends, and Benefactors whom thou have so dearly bought with thy precious
Blood. That thou would Illuminate the Hearts of all Schismatics, which live
out of the Church, to see the grievous Danger of their Estate. That thou
would Mercifully look down from Heaven, upon the Blood of so many Martyrs,
as have given their Lives to Convert us unto thee, Jesus Christ, Son of God,
and of the Virgin Mary, We Beseech Thee to hear us. Jesus Christ, Savior and
Redeemer of the World, We Beseech Thee to hear us. Lamb of God, that take
away the Sins of the World, Spare us O Lord. Lamb of God that take away the
Sins of World, Hear us O Lord. Lamb of God that take away the Sins of the
World, Have Mercy on us. Lord have Mercy, Pater Noster, etc. Christ have Mercy,
Et ne nos inducas, etc. Lord have Mercy, Sed libera nos a malo.

About the latter end of October, or the beginning of November, 1678. my
Occasions called me to Leeds-Market within four Miles of my Habitation, and a
Market that I frequently used: after my particular business was done, my
curiosity lead me (as usually I did) to a Coffee-House; where, amongst other
News and Reports, I heard that one Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey, a Justice of Peace
at London, was missing, and that it was suspected and feared, that he was
Murdered, or made away by the Papists.

At my return home, I repaired to Sir Thomas Gascoignes House at Barmbow, one
quarter of a mile from my House, and there meeting his Son Thomas Gascoigne
Esquire, I Acquainted him with the News I heard at Leedes.

Who thereupon took a Letter out of his Pocket directed to himself, which he
showed me; which Letter was Subscribed I. Corker, wherein he acquainted the
Esquire in words to this Effect: That Sir Edmund-bury Godfrey had been a very
busy Man, and a great Enemy to the Catholics, therefore they had procured him
to be Destroyed.

And some few Days after, we had the same thing confirmed in Print, viz. That
he was Murdered. Upon which, my Ghostly Father (William Rushton) sent for me,
to come to Mass at Sir Thomas Gascoignes House; and at Confession, did charge
me to give out, That I heard, that Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey was a Melancholy
Gentleman, and in a Discontent went into the Fields, and there Murdered himself
with his own Sword.

Which accordingly I did, as occasion offered, in all Companies I happened
into; but was Contradicted by many; and by some, that it could not be, for,
that his Neck was broke, which he could not do after he had Murdered himself;
nor be capable to do it, if his Neck was broke before: And being thus run down
in my Assertions, I Acquainted my said Ghostly Father (William Rushton)
therewith, who told me, he had received New Instructions, which he showed me in
Writing, and were to this Effect:

That Sir Edmond-bury Godfrey was a Gentleman who had often attempted to
Destroy himself; that he did really Hang himself in his own Silk-girdle, in his
Chamber at the Beds-feet; which being Discovered, two of his Servants
acquainted his Brothers therewith; who coming thither, Contrived his taking
down, and the carrying him to the Place where he was found, where they run his
Corpse through, on purpose to throw it on the Papists, thereby to save the
Estate to themselves, and from being Forfeited to the King: and that the two
Servants had Fifty-Pounds a piece given them to keep it Private. He also said,
that one of them, which was a Maidservant, did offer to Discover this
Contrivance to his Majesty and Council, but that she was by them rejected:
Nevertheless, for all this (at the same time) Rushton did own to me, that he
was Murdered by the Papists, but by what hands he knew not; and further, he
seemed much concerned that it was done; wishing it had never been done, because
it would make the Murder of the King, the more difficult to be performed.

Robert Bolron.

A Farther INFORMATION BY Robert Bolron, Gent.
I Being sent down by an Order of Council bearing Date the Seventeenth day of
October, 1679. to Search several Papists Houses in Yorkshire, Lancashire,
Bishopprick of Durham, and Northumberland; among other Houses, Searching the
Mansion House of Richard Sherborn of Stony-hurst, in the County of Lancashire,
Esquire. in the Chamber of Edward Cottam a Jesuit, or Popish Priest, I found the
Paper hereunto Annexed.

This same Cottam (upon the Death of Henry Long, mentioned in the said Paper)
was by the said Mr. Sherborn entertained as his Domestic Priest, in the stead
and place of the other, who (as the Papists gave out) did Drown himself; but
was rather made away by the Romish Party, as being one that was Discontented in
his Mind, and of whom they had a Suspicion, That he would Discover this
Damnable Popish Plot, carried on by the Papists; who therefore, as I have heard
from several Understanding Papists, engaged in the Plot, procured his Death.

The Original Copy being in Latin, it was thought convenient to Print it in
that Language.

-- Celebrare quis astringetur.

Postremo, Ut evidenter testetur, quod omnes ad hoc Opus pium assentiantur, has
Constitutiones propria manu subsignabant.

-- Every one shall be bound to Celebrate.

Lastly, That it may be evidently Testified, that all do Unanimously Assent to
this Pious Work, they did under-write these Constitutions with their own Hands.

Ricardus Moorus, Petrus Giffardus, Henricus Long, Jacobus Markland, Ricardus
Sallins, Marmaduke Dalton, Rogerus Anderton, Thurston Anderton, Edvardus
Anderton, Ricardus Barton, Edvardus Mollineux, Thomas Eccleston, Petrus
Goodenus, Henricus Holden, Georgius Catterell, Johannes Mollyns, Johannes
Holden, Gulielmus Gerard, Edvardus Blackburne, P. Winder, Johannes Urmeston,
Thomas Hugonis, Georgius Brown, Georgius Rich, ai: d: s: onus.
Quando Omnes unanimiter consentierant his Constitutionibus, die 28 Februarij
1675. Hi designabantur Superiores.

When all had Consented to these Constitutions, the 28. day of February, 1675.
These were designed Superiors.

Reverendissimus Dominus Ricardus Moorus, D. Johannes Holdemus, D. Johannes
Mollyns,
Thesaurarii. D. Petrus Giffardus, Secretarius. D. Rogerus Anderton, Collector
pro sex Hundredis pro Derbiensi. Collector for Six Hundreds in Derbyshire. D.
Ricardus Bartanius, for Layland. D. Tho. Hugonis, for Amounderness. D. Ed.
Blackburn, for Loynsdale D. Petrus Goodenus, D. Henricus Long,
for Blackburn Hundreds in Lancashire.
Having thus given the Reader an Account of this Paper, how I came by it, and
in whose Custody I found it, I shall leave it to the Consideration of any
person of Impartial Judgment, what should be the Design of so many Priests and
Jesuits to make such Orders and Constitutions among themselves? And for what
Reason those Orders must be Confirmed by so many Manual Subscriptions?
Certainly the Orders of their Society needed no such Confirmations. This must
be then some Eccentrick Business, for so many Priests and Jesuits to Meet and
Cabal in the Remote parts of the Nation; and there also to appoint Treasurers
and Collectors, not ordinary persons neither, but such as could not be Named
without the Title of Most Reverend Lord; which imports them not the Treasurers
of Alms, but of Contributions. Now, Contributions signify Sums; and Sums, it
cannot be imagined, should be Collected in those parts for the Jesuits to Build
Colleges in England.

It remains then, that These Collectors were Appointed for the Collection of
Considerable Sums (the Largesses of Blind Zeal, and Deluded Piety, or the price
of Indulgences for Fifty Thousand Years, and Exemptions from Purgatory) to
carry on the great Work of their Damnable Plot, which (it is apparent) was
Hatching in the Year 1675. and long before.

And this I hope, may in a large measure serve to prove, and make good, that
part of my Information already given; Wherein I have Declared, That in the
Counties of York, Lancaster, Northumberland, and Bishopric of Durham, there
have been no less than Thirty Thousand Pounds Collected by the Jesuits and
Priests, (which were, no question, the Effects of such Orders and Constitutions
as these abovenamed) for the more speedy bringing to pass, the Destruction of
His most Sacred Majesty, and the Protestant Religion.

As for Long, Dalton, Thurston, Anderton, Tho. Eccleston, and Urmeston, I know
them to be all Jesuits; and so, that it is but Rational to believe all the rest
of the same Stamp.

London, December the 6th. 1680. Robert Bolron.

FINIS.

