MEDICINA INSTAVRATA, OR; A Brief Account of the true GROUNDS And PRINCIPLES of
the Art of PHYSIC.

With the Insufficiency of the Vulgar way of Preparing Medicines, and the
Excellency of such as are made by Chemical Operation.

Whereto is added, a short, but plain Discourse, as a Light to the true
Preparation of Animal and Vegetable Arcana's.

Together with a Discovery of the true Subject of the Philosophic Mineral
Mercury, and that from the Authorities of the most Famous of Philosophers.

As also some small Light to the Preparation and Use of the said Mercury, in
the dissolution of Minerals and Metals, for a Physical Use.

By EDWARD BOLNEST. Med. Land.

Also an Epistolary Discourse upon the whole, by the Author of Medela Medicinae.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey at the Mitre within Temple-Barr. 1665.

TO HIS GRACE GEORGE, DUKE, Marquess, and Earl of BVCKINGHAM, etc.
MY LORD,
I PRESENT not this small Piece unto Your Grace, with so large a Confidence and
good Opinion, either of my own, or its worth, as to think it a Composure that
Merits your Patronage and Protection; it is only out of Gratitude, and a
Compliance with that good and just Adage, Qui aquam hauris puteum corona. Your
Grace, being the greatest and most constant Incourager, and Fautor, (that this
Age has produced) not only to Ingenuity in general, but also to my particular
Self, (though the meanest of Nature's (now) Numerous Disciples.) Give me leave
to make it my Opportunity to return an Acknowledgment for that signal Honor of
Your Princely Countenance, and other Favors You have been pleased to confer on
me; I offer it not (My Lord) for your Instruction, You are One whom Nature has
already admitted, and her Self taught You in her own Schole, the Tract of her
most Secret Operations; and being, as You are, (even to Admiration) above
others, of a most subtle and quick Apprehension; and one, who by Your own most
Noble and Acute Genius, Conceptions, Observations, and constant Manual
Operations, have not only discovered the Vanity of the Galenick way, but
rendered Your Self most Perfect, as well in the Practick, as Theory of
Experimental Philosophy, and consequently are abundantly Stored, and Enriched
with those two worthy and commendable Attributes of the Learned, Judgment and
Candor. I cannot appeal to such another Judge, and Patron: Be pleased therefore
to accept of this my Mite, and from an improvement of my Talent, You may justly
expect and challenge, and shall accordingly receive, a more large and ample
Offering. In the mean time, I beg pardon for this trouble and presumption, who,
in all faithfulness, am

My Lord, Your Graces most humble, and most devoted Servant, Edward Bolnest.

To Doctor Edward Bolnest, at his House in Jewen-street, near Cripplegate.
My honored Friend,
THat you have vouchafed me the Sight of those Papers which you intend for the
Press, it is an Argument of extraordinary Friendship; and a submitting to my
opinion shows, that your Humility is as great as your Knowledge in the noblest
part of Medicine. There are many other persons of our Society, you might have
pitched on (to whom I pay a reverence and submission in point of Chemical
Philosophy) whose long labors in the Fire have qualified them to a degree of
Eminency far above me, and on whose Judgment you might have more surely rested;
but since it is so, that you have singled out me, the meanest of our Colleagues,
I will be free with you, and you and all the World shall have my Opinion,
whether it be worth any thing or no.

One thing in the Front pleases me exceedingly; and that is the name of that
Excellent Person, my Lord Duke of Buckingham, one that knows you well, and how
to value you; a Prince by Merit as well as Title: for whether you take him in
the Chemical, or in his Politic capacity, he appears no less in either; and
yet he can be greater, if he please, because with so rare a Wit and other
Abilities of mind, seated in a comely Body, I know not what he may not effect
in Philosophy and Polity, by plying his Laboratory at Home, and another at
Court. Therefore it is fit he should be your Patron, because he is able to be
your Judge.

And as for those Noble Preparations, of whose virtues you give some Account to
the World, whatever others may think, I can by Experience say, that in several
Cases I have found them the best that ever I met with. This is to do you Right,
not to flatter you, because you are above it; and (...) cause it is, that I
have been Instrumental to pull you out of your privacy, and by persuasions
brought you upon the public Theater, that men may know how learnedly and
judiciously you can write, as well as operate; and that being thus openly
engaged in the Cause of Chemistry, the Adverse party of Calumniators may be
ashamed, while they go about and tattle among the Women, and weaker sort of
Men, that we are a Company of Illiterate Professors; and this, because we have
admitted some Persons to associate who have not been hooded in an University,
though it is known they every day mend the work of their Worships, and cure
what they leave off as incurable by Galenick Remedies (of which it is like the
World may shortly have sufficient Information;) and if men may be justified by
their Works, it will appear (how mean soever their Book-learning be) that the
least of them has skill enough in Medicine, to furnish a score of the ordinary
Master Drs. In the mean time, it is well we are not wanting of others who have a
Reputation for Letters, and that we have you (Sir) for a Champion, you that can
Instruct a College, if need be. Therefore Macte tua virtute, go on as you have
begun, that the Profession of Physic may be redeemed from that obloquie which
the usual unprofitable Learning, and idle pride of the Professors, has brought
upon it among the People; and that from your Pen men may know, there is a way
to true Physical Learning, which lies quite out of the Common Scholastic Road;
and that we must pass through the fire to it, while the fine Fellows are afraid
to follow for fear of singeing their Scarlet. And yet it is pretty to observe,
how some of them, now at last, perceiving most of the great Lords, and other
Noble Gentlemen of Learning do prefer our way before the Galenick, are not
ashamed to cry out, that themselves also are Chemists, and so no need of
erecting a new Society upon the account of Chemistry; but alas, what hope is
there of a due Reformation of Physic by Chemical Principles and Operations, in
the hands of such as make pretense of owning them, merely to put by others that
are fast friends to the work? had not we, and our fellow laborers, bestirred
our selves, to erect a New College to give credit to the State of Physic, by
putting People into a readier way of ease and Security, for their lives and
Purses, there had never been found a Pretense in the mouths of those men, as if
they all on a sudden were become the only Cordial, and the most Excellent
Chemists, and that there needed no more toward the Public good in this way of
Medicine, than what they know; which, how little it is, God knows, and you
(Sir) of all men, are most able to make appear.

And give me leave to say, whoever reads and understands what you have written,
will be of the same opinion: If not, it is because they are peevish, and are of
the number of those that have been drawn in to pay five and twenty Pounds as a
Test of their being the lawful Sons of those two great Dreamers, Hippocrates
and Galen. You and I (Sir) have both been University men, and may (no doubt)
pay our Fees when we please, and bring our formalities to London; but truly I
would not willingly have you, nor my self, lose one Afternoons operation in
your Laboratory, for all the Honors Academical, and the Venison that helps to
make them; and because we have a mind all the days of our lives to be Learners,
therefore we are not at leisure to cross the Sea, and return Doctors as wise as
we went. Not that we despise those Academick Honors, but must needs sigh to
see what a matter of course it is grown, to see all manner of men proceed, some
of which it were a Disease to converse with, while they bring home little else
besides the vices, and the Atheism, or the Scholastic Pedantrie of other
Nations; which Nations, in conferring those Academick Titles so easily, do as
good as tell us, it is not the formal Accoutrement of a Doctor that makes Him
one indeed, but it only inables him with a fair show to think well of himself,
and gull the Vulgar, who not being able to penetrate into the substance, are
apt to court the shadow, and admire an empty Title, and to expect somewhat from
Master Doctor, because by the sound he seems to be Somebody: But I have heard
it said, that the Rectors of diverse foreign Universities, when they have created
such a Doctor, have oftentimes laughed in their Sleeves, and given him this
Farewell, behind his back, Accepimus Aurum,
Dimittimus Asinum.


But with what Opinion soever they dismiss Him, it is plain enough here what we
find Him, and he usually so far forgets his own Country, that when he comes
home again, he falls to practice upon English Bodies with Exotic Principles,
Methods, and Medicines.

As to our own Universities, I believe they are the most refined in Europe, and
deserve all the honor we can give them, because they appear more wary in
distribution of Degrees; but it is a shame to see, that the great Body of
Practicers should be made up of such Titular things as have been foisted up
among Foreiners, or else by Alliance at home, the favor and recommendation of
some Father, or Uncle, or Cousin-Doctor, that has had a Name, though perhaps
little more of true Knowledge in Medicine than the Novice that he prefers; or
else they come in Play, by listing themselves in the number of some numerous
party, or by colloguing with Midwives, Nurses, and old Woman and courting or
humouring the Younger, in order to the getting of a Name. And thus they proceed
Doctors again, after they come from the Universities.

Really, (Sir) to see, and talk of these things, as You and I have done, would
make any Man almost forswear the Study, if not the Practice of Physic, whose
own Internal worth will not permit him to descend so low, as to use these
little Arts, for the gaining of a Trade, and yet shall find very small
Doctorated Fellows which use them, to rise equal to himself, and sometimes
above him, in the noise of the World. And thus it will always be, while Physic
has no other Advance in the World than what the Galenists can give it: For, to
say truth, our Art must needs be at a stand, while old Notions and Medicines
are in fashion, and while old Authors are set up as the only Standard, whereby
to try Doctrines and Experiments both Philosophical and Medicinal; and there is
no way to redeem our Profession out of the hands of old Women, and others, but
by setting the whole frame of Physic upon a new foot of Operative and
Experimental Philosophy, because the common Methods and Remedies are every
where to be had in Print, and, in a Twelvemonths time, any Person of good Parts
and Industry, may as amply be acquainted with them, as most of the
Master-Doctors that walk with their Patients in the wonted Road to another
World. And hence it is, that the Galenists are so eager for a power to hedge in
the Common, for fear it may be over-stock'd, and to suppress, or deterr, all
others from entering into what they would fain make their own Propriety, seeing
it is an easy matter for ingenious Men, that have a mind to quit other
Employments, to betake themselves to this, and in a short time to be as Wise as
any that would be thought the only Learned, upon the account of having read the
Galenick Institutions, Commentators, and Practicers; whereas on the other side,
we, who profess Chemical Principles and Operations, are never better pleased,
than when we hear of numbers of Professors and Operators coming in to us,
because we know the Harvest is great, and the true Laborers few; there are in
the field of Nature, yet undiscovered, Secrets enough for Ages to fetch forth,
and to find work for all the World, so that it were happy for us, if all the
great Lords, and Gentlemen of England, would (as the King himself, and diverse
of the Nobility, have given an excellent example) erect Laboratories of their
own, and spend time in the invention of Remedies more sufficient, and of a
Philosophy more conducible, to cure the Diseases of this Age; for, then those
noble Personages finding by experience, how much more of worth and use is
attainable, beyond what is contained in the Galenists Books, or is in Vogue
among such idle Book-men, would soon spue them out of their Houses, and in
their stead entertain the true Sons and Laborers of Art and Nature, who are in
Truth, if not in Title, the only Doctors, because they are able to teach the
other what Physic is indeed.

And this you (my noble Friend) have sufficiently shown in your Learned Papers:
They, whether Learned or no in their Own way, are obstinately ignorant of Ours,
and so, not competent Judges of Us or Our faculty; We, for our parts, dare
profess as much of Scholastic Learning in their way as most of themselves, and
so take our selves to be the more competent Judges of the state of Medicine,
because, besides what we know of our own way, we are also Masters of theirs;
and we ought the rather to be believed, if, after having had a through
acquaintance with theirs, we have cashired it, and pitched upon the Chemical,
as the most safe, satisfactory, and beneficial for Mankind. Therefore, before I
return the Papers, give me leave to kiss some passages of yours; as when you
profess you have not taken up this way of Physic, but after a strict (though
fruitless) search for satisfaction in the other;

That, having found the vulgar Medicines so composed, that the nobler part in
them, being clogged with foeculential Impurities, is made ineffectual, there
appears a necessity of freeing Materials Medicinal from them, and of exalting
those to a more Active and Spirituous nature;

That, after a due consideration of Vegetables and Animals, you found greater
Virtues are contained in the later; yet after these, considering the Mineral
and Metalline Subjects, you found by experience, as well as reason, that they
are endued with far greater Virtues, and that, if rightly prepared, they are of
all Medicines the most safe and efficacious; And that, after long inquiry and
diligence, into the way or method how to purify and exalt the restaurative
Powers of all the three sorts of Subjects, having attained it, then at length
you fully resolved to leave the old Galenical Road, and betake your self (for
the main) in your practice, to the use of Chemical Remedies.

This judicious proceeding of yours is most highly to be commended; and he, who
has tried, or shall try the Excellency of your Medicines, shall find you have
said the Truth. Alas, these few that you intend to publish, are but a small
part of those noble Preparations which I know you to be Master of, and of which
the World is not worthy; and how great a Master of Reason, as well as a
Workman, you are, may be seen by your Philosophising upon the nature of
Vomits, and the causes of Agues, and Fevers, as also by your profound Discourse
touching the grand Mercurial Liquor, or Essence, a Menstruum that will dissolve
and radically reduce all Metals to their first moist and unctuous form, by
which, wonders may be effected in Physic, and otherwise; and, if ever our
Nation come to see those great Things, which others but cloudily talk of, I
that have seen you in your Way, and daily Labors, have cause to tell Men,
that, I believe, you are the Man we must be beholden to for the discovery.

Thus much to you (my dear Friend) without Flattery, for, you know, I abhor it,
and have in my Nature (like you) too much of a Satyr to be a Flatterer; I shall
now only add a few words concerning some Intimations that you have given me.
The first is, of a Book in Answer to my Medela Medicinae, which the Author,
very unknown (unless it be at some certain Coffee-Houses) is pleased to entitle
Medela Ignorantiae, and in his Title Page he thinks fit to tell the World I am
Illiterate; but who or what he is, scarce any body can tell, and so it is
imagined he has taken this course to provoke me to make him known; therefore I
suppose the only way to be revenged on him is, to spoil his design by not
vouchsafing to name him: And in Letters at length he styles himself Doctor of
Physic, as perhaps he may be; for, there are too many slight fellows about
this Town, that bring no credit to Universities, yet have the confidence to
wear the Title, the Generality of the Gang being mere Insects and Imperfect
Animals in the Faculty, to say nothing of their Idleness. I remember, in
Scaliger's Epistles, he having been told, that an obscure Fellow had written
malepartly against him, expresses himself thus, Mihi relatum fuit, Scarabeum
quendam contra me scribere, cui respondere neque dignitatis est, nec otii: I
have been told (says he) that a certain Scarabee writes against me, to whom I
have neither leisure, nor does it become me, to give an Answer. Indeed the
Fellow is as unfortunate in his Attempt, as one can be, by pretending to answer
me, yet I perceive, he has not so much as touched any main string of my Book;
only he endeavors by railing, and with whole Pages of Greek, (for edification
of the English Reader) to justify the Aphorisms of Hippocrates, and other
things of his and Galen's, which I said (and still say) are grown out of date,
as most is that they have written; which. I can, and will make good, against
all the Galenick Societies in Europe; and though he hardly allows me more than
English, yet I can find Greek enough (and had at fourteen years of Age) to
serve him and twenty more of the same Tribe. But alas (Sir) hard words cure no
Diseases, unless they be Characteristick Charms, and without such as these, not
a man of the old Faction knows how to conjure down a poor Ague, whilst the old
Women and Mountebanks every where do shame them, even quite out of City and
Country.

In the mean time, as Illiterate as I am, I am content to share in the
Imputation with other Brethren of our Society; the whole Business of the old
Brotherhood is now to brand us with no Letters, but they shall find we have;
and this vir Trium Literarum may in time come to understand it, as well as the
rest. I hear also, that there are other small Beagles at the Press, ready to
open against me; but those little Doctoral, Fellows are to know, neither I nor
the Book-buyers shall take notice of them, in a Contest which it rather
concerns their grave and formal Leaders to clear, if they can, and the World
has reason to expect it from them. But if what I have done will not serve to
settle their minds, I promise you they shall have enough; for as my manifold
diversions give leave, I am collecting for them.

As to the Reports sown up and down by some of the Grave Sirs, as also by their
Pedees of the Faculty, as for example, That I was chidden rather than
countenanced at our Audience at the King's Council Table; you know the
contrary, and with what Princely Grace an ear was given to every man of us: so
that things are like to thrive with our Adversaries when their Refuge is in
Lies. But they go further yet, and whisper up and down, that I proclaim all
people to have the Pox, and I know not what; whereas it is plain, I maintain in
my Book no more than this, that since the prevalencie of that disease in the
Nations of Europe it has exceedingly altered their Nature, and the Nature of
all diseases, so that the old definitions of the Galenists, and their dull
Remedies, do not reach any considerable Maladies; but if you, and I, and others
that I know, be Masters of such Specific Medicines as will do the Work, when
theirs cannot, I suppose it is easy to conclude from the Nature of our
Medicines the Truth of my Position, That even those who never were formally
infected, may yet by Contagion at a distance, Inheritance, and diverse other
ways, come under a Fermental Change in the Frame and Constitution of their
Bodies.

Others there are of the Faculty, that would fain seem to be more wise than
their Brethren, and they forsooth do acknowledge, There is such an alteration in
the State of Diseases as I contend for, but they withal tell men, that they
knew so before, and that I needed not have taken so much pains to convince them
of it: But if they did know so, the more -- They for concealing it; and why
then do they not alter the State of Medicine, exclude the Old unprofitable
Remedies, and introduce new ones more effectual, Agreeable to such Alteration
of Maladies? Why is it that the Bead-row of Antiquated Remedies, invented by
Foreign Authors, and Calculated for other kind of Climates, is still held forth
as sufficient under the name of Pharmacopeia, seeing (as I hope shortly to make
appear) there is not one Medicine in the whole Book that will reach any one
radicated or deplorable Distemper?

But they say, That what ever is wanting there in Virtue of Medicine, they can
supply in the use of them by strength of Wit, which is that they call Method.
Oh, here is the Diana, the great Goddess Method, or the Round of the
Mill-horse, which every one can run that has bought Sennertus, or Riverius in
English; and that is the Reason why other Folk spoil their Trade much more than
the Chemists do, and for thirty or forty shillings worth of Books, soon learn
to become as complete Methodists as themselves: Whereas you know (Sir) that
Medicines should alter as Disease alter, and should be so made as to command
Method, and when a Noble Medicine is once found, it admits in the usage no
Method but what is peculiar to it self, and results out of its own Natural
power and propriety, and thereby inables him that is acquainted with its
energie, to puzzle and fool him that sails only by the Card and Compass of
Books. And if Men will not believe words, those few Medicines which you mean to
publish, and more which you and I know of, and others of our laborious
Associates, will abundantly convince them, if they please to observe the
admirable Operations and effects, in little time, and small Quantities.

They say also, after they have abused the Apothecaries in public, when they
lately endeavored to get a power to inslave them, that I chalk out the way to
the undoing of their Trade; whereas the Truth is, I only point out the way they
must go to preserve their Trade; for, I know none of our Society that ever
thought of disobliging them, but when we have settled our public place or
College, with a grand Laboratory suitable to so worthy an Undertaking, we
purpose (God willing) to turn the stream of Practice out of the Galenick
Channel, and furnish the Apothecaries with such Preparations at reasonable
rates, upon the credit of our Society, as may enable us to correspond with that
ingenious Company, by sending our Bills to them, and employing them with a
fuller Trade, more for the Reputation of the Profession of Physic, and of
themselves, as such of them who will loosen their dependence upon Formalists,
and come over to us in compliance, shall quickly find; in the mean while, it is
but reason they should practice with their own Medicines, seeing the Road and
Method of using them is open and plain to every one that can read; and more
Trust is to be given to the Skill that comes by observation in the present
time, than by following the Authors of other times and Countries, who could not
possibly leave directions in Books, to fit the present State of Men and
Diseases.

Consider that deplorable disease the Lues Venerea; of what Value are all the
Rules and Remedies of writers? He that in this Age, when the Disease is quite
another thing than it was twenty or thirty years ago, shall attempt the Cure of
it with the old Messes, or the common Mineral Preparations, will be extremely
mistaken, and that is the reason of so many Semi-Cures and Relapses. What
signify all the tedious Decoctions of Guajac, Sarsa, etc. which you never
used, and I have long since given over? A few of your Solar Pills, no bigger
than Pepper-corns, shall effect far more than Firkins of Diet-Drink, to say
nothing of other high Arcanaes which no wit can reach that has not your Skill
and Industry in Operation, with which I have seen dreadful Diseases Removed, as
it were by Enchantment.

The World has no cause to suspect You, or Me, to be out of love with
Learning; and yet I say, the common Learning, that is in use for gaining
Knowledge in Physic, serves rather to puzzle and confound than inform a
Student, especially the single fangle Notions about Anatomy, forasmuch as the
Investigation of Causes, and the Accommodating of Curations, Secundum Ductus
Anatomicos, and Secundum Artem, have Slain their ten Thousands, and will do
more, if Matters be not amended by Men of other Principles, and who labor
night and day another way, to apprehend the manner of Nature's Operations, with
the various Phenomenon of Diseases in Man's Body, and how Medicines may be made
of so comprehensive a Power, as to answer all particulars, and supply all the
defects of Ratiocination or Opinion, which is generally the mere product of
Phant'sie.

It Is not fit (my Friend) I should quite tire you; I shall only add, that what
I have Written in my Medela, I have no Cause to repent of; Habent sua fata
Libelli, Books have their Fates, and mine has had the Luck (so great is the
force of Truth) to find a general acceptance in the Land, especially among the
Nobler and the Learneder part, (from many of which I have received Thanks) yea,
and among all Physicians that are not of the Interessed Faction; and yet even
some of them have been so Ingenious, as to confess, I have in many things done
well, only they say, I should not have published so much in English: But I
would ask them, Why am I faulted for this? Did not the Old reputed Princes of
the Profession write all they wrote in their own Country-Languages? as
Hippocrates, and Galen in Greek; the Arabian Avicen and his Fellows in Arabic;
therefore, if I have espied faults in the common Doctrines and Practice, why
should not our Countrymen be made acquainted with them, seeing they are the
Persons that are concerned, and most likely to promote that which the splendid
Faction oppose? Who would fain hold up the old Mystery, not the Art, but the
Craft of Physic.

One would wonder, after all the reason that has been given against the
frequent spilling of precious Blood by Phlebotomie in our Climate, some Men
should still have the madness to deal with us, as if we were in France, Italy,
or Spain. For God's sake (Sir) do you take them a little to task; for, I am
weary and sick of them, and I every day see the people begin to be so too:
Their main shelter now is in some few noble Houses; for, the generality decline
them. If you would once more take Pen in hand, I dare say you would be able to
give them a final Passport; and this I hope you will do, as soon as we have
settled the Affairs of our Society or College, which we hope, in as conspicuous
a manner as the Galenists, suddenly so to manage, as that it may conduce
effectually to the end we aim at; which is the honor of Physic, by Men of
sound Chemical principles, Laborers, and Learned. If any Persons among us
chance to be Defective in the common Literature, we ought not to value them the
less, as long as they have so much of a better sort of Learning, as inableth
them to the inventing excellent Remedies, such as the vulgar Letter-men never
had the honor to be acquainted with, by any Endeavor or Operation of their
own.

Forgive me (my noble Friend) all this tedious Discourse, for, I could say a
thousand times more, and think you never the worse of me, because I am zealous
in this Matter; but let me prevail with you to print your Papers as soon as you
can; for, the true Sons of Art will be exceedingly pleased with it, and among
the meanest of them, I that honor you, who am

SIR, Your faithful Friend and Servant Mar. Nedham.
From my House in Thomas Apostles, 10 May 1665.
Some Errata's have Slipped the Press, which those that are not Malicious will
Correct as they Read.

Licensed,

20th. April 1665.
MEDICINA INSTAVRATA; OR, A brief Account of the true Grounds and Principles of
the Art of PHYSIC.
FInding by a daily experience the small virtue, efficacy, and power of the
generality of Medicines, and the great uncertainty of performing any notable
and worthy Cure, by their means and operation; I resolved upon a more diligent
search and inquiry after such Medicines, as, with confidence of some good
effect, I might more fully rely upon, after a serious consideration therefore
of the cause why vulgar Remedies, or Medicines, so rarely or seldom performed
the promised and expected Effects; I at last found the true and only cause to
be the great quantity of dross and impurity by Nature in their production and
growth strongly united with the Medicinal or Restaurative Essence, choking and
overpowering the true Physical part of them, so that it cannot, as it should,
perform its Office, and produce the desired Effects it was administered for; for
the body of Man being already clogged and stuffed up with Obstructions, and
Nature's royal course and prerogative being by that means hindered and opposed,
the Body by little and little feels the approaching decays of Nature, and
accordingly calls for a powerful and able assistance to free her (if possible)
from those Enemies of Life, that so Nature, (Spiritus innatus and custos
corpori^oeconomus) the enlivening Inhabitant of the Body, being by some timely,
sympathetical, and friendly aid and assistance (before her too great
Debilitation) again empowered and reinforced, may be able to eject and cast out
her potent and destructive Antagonist, and again reassume her wonted and
desired course, and so restore the pining, pale and decayed Body to its
pristine blithe, healthful, and flourishing condition. Being by these
considerations, and other most strong and undeniable Reasons, sufficiently
confirmed what kind of Medicines Nature required, as most absolutely necessary
and needful; as also that the true cause of the weak effect of common or vulgar
Medicines, was the Physical parts being so much over-ballanced and debilitated,
and, as it were, extinguished by the multiplicity of Dreggs and foeculential
Impurities, closely joined and mixed with it in its Creation and progressive
Growth, I at last of necessity concluded, that the freeing of Medicinal
Subjects (or those things we would use in a Physical way) from some part (if
not all) of those their foeculencies, drossy, and terrene parts, must
undoubtedly (in reason) render the Medicine of much more Efficacy and Power; of
more power, because of more purity, and, consequently more spiritual and
penetrating; and because more spiritual, therefore more fitting to assist the
decayed and fainting Spirits of the infirm and languishing Body, and so (as
being of her own condition or quality) reinforce, enable, and assist Nature
(the Body's preserver) to expel and drive out her prevalent and
health-destroying Opposers: And this certainly was the intent and meaning of
Hippocrates, where he tells us, Contraria contrariis curari debent: Contraries
must be driven away, and cured by contraries, viz. Corruptibilia per
incorruptibilia, immunda enim per munda and non per immunda mundantur, and
purificantur: Pure things only are fit to purify, and not dirty and impure;
Diseases are the beginnings of the corruption of the Body, and to remove
corruption by corruption, or corrupting and corruptible things, the way and
means rather to promote and hasten it, to me seems (in reason) impossible, as
doubtless it is, and therefore could no ways be imagined to be the meaning of
so Learned a Physician; his meaning therefore must consequently follow, that
the Cure of Diseases (the destruction and corruption of the Body) must needs be
performed by something of a contrary nature, viz. Incorruptible and pure: If
therefore we would either preserve from, or drive out, Diseases and Corruption,
it must surely be by something that is of a pure and incorruptible Balsamic
nature and property, which the generality of Medicines (as prepared) are so far
from, that few or none of them (except some few Chemical, or having some of
their Ingredients in some measure purified) are able to preserve themselves
from a total Corruption, or at most a great diminution of their Virtues the
space of one poor Year, though with much care and vigilance secured and
fortified by a close stoppage, from the ingression of Air, the Introducer of
Corruption into all Porous and corruptible things: The more pure the Medicine,
the more potent its Virtue, and consequently the better able to assist and
strengthen our continually exhausted and spent Spirits, especially when
assaulted by a too powerful distemper (the effect of some corruption) their
professed Enemy: And this Galen (that pretended Oraculum Medicinae, did we, as
we ought, as much mind his Precepts, as make use of his Name for a cavilling,
superficial, unprofitable Discourse) most plainly tells us, Lib. undec. de
simpl. med. facult. cap. undec. His words are these; Quae tenuium sunt partium
medicamenta, iis quae sunt crassarum partium pl^s habent efficaciae, etiamsi
parem sortita fuerint facultatem, nimirum quia melius penetrant. All which in
brief tells us thus much, That those Medicines which are of thin or subtle
parts, are of greater Efficacy and Virtue, than those which are of a gross
quality, (and the Reason he also gives) because by their thinness and subtilty
they are the more apt and able to penetrate. Thus this once great and
experienced Physician; he also much desired to have the Ethereal and hot pure
Substance, or Spirit of Wine, and also the Secret of Extracting and Separating
it from its more gross, earthy, and watery parts, (an Artifice not known unto
the Physicians of that Age) for considering how excellent, reviving, and
cordial a Liquor Wine of it self was, he according to his former Opinion also
concluded, that the hot, pure, and ethereal Substance of it, viz. Its Spirit,
separated from its foeculential and drossy Impurities, must of necessity be a
most high, efficacious, and truly Cordial Medicine. If then the more thin,
subtle, and ethereal Medicines are the most effectual and powerful, the
Subtilisation of thick, gross and impure, dull Physical Subjects, must of
necessity render them far more penetrating and noble Medicines: And in this
does that most acute Philosopher and Physician, the noble Paracelsus, also
second and confirm the forementioned Aphorism of Galen, only with a little
addition, or raising unto the height of it the purity of the supreme of
Elements; his words are these: Tum demum medicamenta corpori accommodanda ad
ignis naturam reducta, per hoc enim elementum omnis aegritudo consumi debet a
quolibet medico, Lib. de Vita longa [in 4.] Page 134. The sense thus: Then,
says he, are Medicines fit to be administered, when by a due preparation they
are made most pure, and exalted to the Nature, or Quality of Fire; for by this
Element, (or Medicines of the nature and property, or condition of this
Element) ought Physicians to cure Diseases. All which is no more than a
Physical Precept, Aphorism, and Instruction, sufficiently high for the
preparation of Medicines, which ought to be of the nature of Fire, that is,
most pure, subtle, spiritual and penetrating; for Fire is the most subtle,
pure, and noble of the Elements, (in quo Deus omnium rerum Creator sedem and
Majestatem suam posuit,) and indeed the Seat and Chariot of the Divine and
Incomprehensible Majesty of God, etc. We have here then the Precept and Opinion
of the greatest of the old Physicians, harmoniously agreeing, that the most
subtle and pure Medicines are the most noble and efficacious, and therefore
most fit and proper for the curing, extirpating, and rooting out of Diseases,
etc.

The means to render Medicine capable of the subtle, thin, and penetrating
Quality, of assisting and strengthening our over-oppressed and fainting Spirits,
I found most certainly to be by purifying (as I said before) of the Medicinal
or Physical Subject designed for the Cure; this Purification, (or Purgation) I
after much thought and meditation concluded, could no way so advantagiously be
performed and obtained, as by those excellent, incomparable, and truly
Philosophical preparations we usually call Chemical, a way of making Medicines,
(as well as a gate to Nature's choicest Secrets) of all other the most noble,
and every way able to answer, yea, superlatively to exceed, the greatest and
highest of our desires. Consider (O Artist) the power and excellency of any one
thing or subject as Nature has prepared, created, and given it us ready into
our hands! Consider also with the excellency of it, as it is, what a heightened
purgation and purification may exalt it to! Consider the virtue and
inexpressible power of spiritual and pure things! Consider also what they may
be, and do, being (after purification) fixed! Thou have here a very large Field
for contemplation, and as large a Gate opened to give thee entrance into the
Closet, or inmost Recesses of Nature, and her infinite Treasures, etc. But I
may not enlarge any further.

After a firm resolution of the way of improving, heightning, and exalting the
virtue and efficacy of Medicines, I also fell to consider (after a full
knowledge of the true Physical and Essential parts of things) what Subject or
Species might yield these healing and restaurative Essences, in most and
greatest abundance, and of most power and virtue; I perceived at last that some
Vegetables did yield them in far greater plenty and quantity than others, and
of a stronger and speedier operation. After these, I considered the use of
Animals in Physic, and learned the great efficacy, virtue, and strength of
them also, and that in them the Quintessential and Physical parts, were yet in
greater plenty than in the most of Vegetables, and of a higher and more intense
operation and perfection. I yet (after these) considered the third and last
Kingdom of Nature, ( viz. the Mineral, or Metallin) and found by many Arguments
(after a mature and deliberate Meditation, seconded by Experience, a most sure
guide and teacher) the great power, excellency and strength, bestowed upon, and
implanted (yea, concentrated) in them by Almighty God, (their great Creator,
and Eternal fountain of overflowing and inexhaustible Goodness) and have since
by a continued Series of experience, (and that in several more than ordinary
Cases and Cures, as well as by the very ample, and yet deserved testimony of
most eminently Learned, both ancient and modern, Physicians, the only true and
painful, but ingratefully rewarded, discoverers of Nature's unvaluable and
admirable mysteries and power) even to admiration, been fully and often
satisfied, that the virtue of Minerals and Metals (if rightly prepared) are of
all others the most (safely) Efficacious, and far exceeding the power and
virtue of Animals or Vegetables; yet are these two last named such safe,
potent, and benign assistants, and preservers of the present, and restorers of
the impaired and decayed, health of Man, as, if well ordered, or prepared, and
rightly applied, he shall have but little need of Minerals or Metals, though
the noblest and best of all Physical Subjects, etc.

Having by this continued and diligent Inquisition, not only discovered and
found out the cause of the too sluggish, dull, and ineffectual operation and
success of the bulk of ordinary and vulgar Medicines, but also attained unto
the knowledge of the most Physical Subjects, both in the Animal, Vegetable, and
Mineral Kingdom, together with the way and method of improving, advancing, and
raising their Innate power, and Medicinal restaurative faculties, to a very
sublime degree of purity and perfection; I fully resolved with my self, to
leave the old Galenical road, and apply my self in my practice (...), to the
use of Chemical Medicines, some of which I shall in this small Tract give some
short account of, and their virtues: For, considering that (care being first
had of my particular and private concernment) there was also (as not being Born
altogether for my self, nor to bury my Talent delivered unto me by Almighty
God) somewhat of a duty incumbent upon me in relation to my doing somewhat
toward a general good; I at last thought fit (being also by several of my
Friends, who with much satisfaction and benefit had used and made trial of many
of my Medicines, especially my Solar Pills, daily persuaded and urged
thereunto,) to communicate somewhat in a more public way, as well for others
good, as my own private benefit, which as the Law of Nature commands, and
allows, as most necessary first to provide for; so I will not in the least
deny, or pretend a disowning of. I here therefore present my Country with an
offer, of six most noble, purified, and efficacious Medicines, pleasantly and
safely powerful in preserving the present, and restoring (if God please) the
decayed and lost, health of Man, all prepared by the aforesaid means and method
of Chemical purgation and purification: The true and full intent, scope and
design of Chemistry (what ever other definition or interpretation may enviously
or ignorantly be put upon it) being no other, nor to any other end or purpose,
than to cleanse, purge and refine whatever the Experienced and Learned
Philosopher and Physician intends for a Medicinal use, and to raise, exalt, and
advance to a more than ordinary degree of purity and perfection.

As to the Medicines spoken of in this Tractate (or small Piece) I shall not by
way of Apology or Preface, much enlarge my self, but both briefly and
confidently assure Thee, They are such, as, if rightly used, will sufficiently
speak their own worth; The first ( viz. the Solar Pill) will prove it self
second to none, except that great and famous Medicinal Elixir, or Arcanum of
the Philosophers; Its goodness being the same after an hundred years as at the
first day of its making, Time rather adding than robbing or detracting any
thing from its first native virtue, excellency and perfection.

The other five are truly of such useful and noble Quality, that enough cannot
be said of them; I shall therefore as earnestly, and truly, as concisely,
affirm them to be most friendly, and as powerful as friendly assistants unto,
and preservers of a desirable, healthful condition, and constitution of body,
and as effectual in in restoring (by Gods blessing and permission) the decayed
and lost health of Man, and indeed such precious and admirable Remedies (and
Medicines) as cannot sufficiently be esteemed and valued; their virtues (if but
any thing carefully and neatly kept) not wasting or decaying by the length of
Time (that universal destroyer of all corruptible things) and the reason is,
because they are true Quintessential and pure Medicines of a true balsamie
nature, and such as do not only defend and preserve themselves, but all other
things, from the entrance of Corruption and Putrefaction; of what use, power
and virtue therefore they may be to the infirm and sickly, languishing under
any tedious, troublesome and chronick Disease, I leave thee at leisure to
consider, and by the consideration to improve thy knowledge of them and their
worth.

I. Pilula Solaris.
THis Noble and Excellent Panacaea, is so wonderfully a Friend unto the
continually decaying Nature of corruptible Man, that whatever unnatural,
destructive, and health-opposing humor it shall in the whole body of Man meet
with, be it as the most Learned of the Galenists do assure us, either of
Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy, or Impurity, or Corruption of blood, or proceeding
or springing (as the most acute and indefatigable Nature-searching Paracelsians
do inform us) from a Saline, Sulphurous, or Mercurial matter, be it from
whatsoever Cause, Source, or Fountain it will, and in whatsoever part of the
Body it will (for it thoroughly searches, and in searching purifieth, both
Center and Circumference, that is, both the Stomach and other chief bowels,
together with the extreme parts) it does by its truly cleansing and renewing
quality in time radically extirpate and drive it out, and in its place
constitutes, induces, or rather creates (may I so say) a most sound, florid,
and healthful constitution of body: Its effects I have found so truly, and (to
miracle) admirable, that I cannot but in full measure give credit to those most
high, and yet as highly and largely deserved testimonies, which many, and those
the greatest of Physicians, have given of the bare Subject out of which it is
prepared; I shall for brevity instance the Attestation of four or five only,
and begin with the noble and most expert Paracelsus, whose testimony of it runs
thus Essentiam in se continet quae nihil impuri cum puro relinquit, nec ullus
tam insignis and peritus spagirus est qui vires and facultates ejus indagare
queat, in prima enim Isle adeo exaltatum est and inter subjecta ab aqua producta
adeo praede inatum est, ut virtus and facultas ejus nullo diluvio, instar
aliorum aqueorum crescentium, imminuta aut absorpta sit, adeoque omnibus aliis
praestat, hoc seipsam purgat, and una secum etiam alia: quod si nihil boni in
subjecto reperitur, impurum corpus in purissimum transmutat. Paracel. de vita
longa, page 146. 147. Arch. lib. 4. p. 221. The sum of which in English tells
us thus. It contains in it self an essence, which will not suffer any thing of
impurity to remain with that which is pure; nor can the most skilful of
Spagirists fully search out, discover, and manifest, the virtues of it: for in
its first Isle, ((...), or first most remote matter, for so I suppose he
means,) it is so exalted and amongst all other Subjects produced by the
Water, so predestined, that its efficacy, power, and virtue, cannot, like
other products of the water, be at all consumed, or diminished, it therefore
excels all others, it purges it self, and with it self all others; and
though almost nothing of good, of purity, be found in what we would apply it
to, or better by it, yet it transmutes the impure into a most pure body.

A second, and he a most conscientious and knowing Author, of the same Matter
or Subject tells us thus: Studiosis optime innotescit hocsubjectum, non unius
gemmae solummodo, sed omnium lapidum pretiosorum, omnium Mineralium and
Metallorum vires and virtutes in se continere, etc. The sense of which in
English take thus; It is well known to studious Artists, that this (Solar)
matter, does not contain in it self the virtue of one Gem alone, as others of
this kind do, being attributed to one, but it universally contains the virtues
of all Gems, Minerals, and Metals whatever; and by reason all virtues are in
it, the life of man is too short ever to learn and discover its high and
wonderful Arcana's. Ba. Va. Mo. C. T. A. etc.

A third both Famous and Modern Physician, with admiration of the same,
delivers himself thus: In eo sunt Sexcentae proprietates variae ac praestantes,
ut, etc. Ita ut nunquam satis laudari queat hoc medicamentum. Quercetan in
Tetrad. Cap. 51. In it, says he, are six hundred various and excellent
properties, etc. And is, indeed, such a Medicine as cannot sufficiently be
commended.

A fourth, being the excellent and most acute Philosopher and Physician, Peter
Faber, though concisely, yet most fully of the same matter, delivers us his
Opinion and Judgment (with his most profitable experience) of it thus, etc. In
hoc solo virtus and proprietas Naturae Animalis, Vegetabilis and Mineralis,
tanquam in Arca quadam, pretiosa and Arcana, conclusa est, credat qui velit:
Talentum a deo mihi concreditum libenter, propter humani generis salutem and
necessitatem, omnibus communicare non erubesco: gratias agent qui hac de re
experientia certiores facti juerint; usus sum per viginti annos, and adhuc
utor, in curatione omnium morborum, and nunquam adhuc delusus fui ab ipso
medicamento, nec delusi fuerunt aegroti mei, qui ab ipso solo medicamento
liberati sunt a morbis quam maximis incurabilibus, etc. Pet. Johan. Faber. Sap.
univers. lib. 3. p. 201. 202. 227. etc. The English to this effect: In this
alone (he says speaking of a Physical preparation of the same subject) is the
entire virtue and property of the Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral Nature, as it
were in a Chest or precious Cabinet, closely shut up and contained: those that
will may believe it; I most willingly, for the good of Mankind, deliver the
Talent bestowed upon me by Almighty God, those who by experience shall find the
truth of it will be thankful: I have used it, now, this twenty years, and do
still use it, in the cure of all Diseases; Nor have I or my Patients ever yet
been deluded or deceived by it, but by it alone have been cured of very great
and indeed esteemed incurable Diseases, etc. Take yet the testimony of a fifth
most laborious Artist and unwearied Searcher into the Secrets of Nature, who
from his large experience of it and its wonderful effects in Medicine, does
boldly and plainly deliver his knowledge of it thus: Omnes rerum vires in
omnibus Animalibus, Vegetabilibus, and Mineralibus sigillatim dispersae,
cunctae in hoc uno subjecto concentratae and perfect unitae inveniuntur, ita
ut inter subjecta medicinae apta, primum nobilitatis locum obtineat Auri primum
Ens verum; in hoc enim omnium Animalium Vegetabilium and Mineralium vires,
virtutes, and facultates collectae and plene concentratae invenientur, I. R. G.
Pharm. Spag. part. secund. p. 61. and. aliis, etc. This is the most high and
significant, and yet compendious Character which the above mentioned Author
delivers of it: The whole Efficacy and Virtue, (says he) found dispersed in
all Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals, is fully and perfectly united and
concentrated in this one Subject, so that among all Medicinal and Physical
Subjects or Drugs, this Primum Ens Auri, or true Solar Embryon, is indeed the
most noble; for in it are the powers of all Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals,
closely heaped up, and, as it were, gathered into one bundle, etc. To confirm
and second these most ample Testimonies already cited, together with my own
experience of this Medicine, and the Subject out of which it is prepared, I
could yet add the Vogue of many most famous and learned (both Ancient and
Modern) Physicians; but what is already said, will (I am certain) be sufficient
to the Learned, if at all Chymically and Physically studious, to know not only
the matter out of which it is prepared, but also the truth of what I have or
shall yet assert of it. To others (if rational and ingenious) a plain and
honest declaration of its Virtues, which they may in a due use of it (by God's
blessing, find most true) will (I am confident) prove the highest and most
convincing satisfaction, etc.

The Virtues and Use, etc.
THis most efficacious (and yet most safe) Medicine, as prepared, if taken in
its usually limited Dose, does not at all produce any Purgative, Emetick, or
Cathartick operation, that is, it purges not either by Stool, or Vomit: that
being a little exceeded, it (happily) manifests its force, in some by Urine, in
others (if they continue in their Beds, as they may that can) by a gentle
breathing Sweat; (for it keeps not one constant progress and course of
operation in all Ages, Distempers, and Constitutions, but according to
necessity and Nature's best advantage, sets it self to work.) In other some
again by a more than ordinary or usual Spitting, (yet not as by a Mercurial
Salivation, from which as dangerous as common practice and operation it is
altogether free) yet in none of those so much as to cause any disturbance or
weakening to the Body, the proportion of the Dose being yet raised, and the
Stomach ( and coquus, coquina and culina corporis, both Cook and Kitchen of the
Body) with the other Bowels, being much clogged with Vicious and
Excrementitious obstructions and humors, and its Attraction of those humors
(for it mightily attracts) being greater than Nature can suddenly dispose of,
or carry downwards, it perhaps may cause an easy dis-burthening of the
Stomach, either upwards by some few gentle Vomits, or downwards by a Stool, or
two, or more, according as the nature and constitution of the Patient, and most
convenience for the Evacuation of the offending humor, shall require; but this
last and greatest quantity is not always in all Distempers and Diseases
absolutely necessary, and therefore is very rarely or seldom administered,
unless in Chronick, very obstinate, deeply radicated, stubborn, or contumacious
Diseases: As the Leprosy, Gout, Dropsy, Pox, Agues, Fevers, etc. In all
which, it is altogether, yea, absolutely requisite and necessary, that the
Patient (his Age and Strength permitting) do for some days, (yet with
intermission, but a more continued taking of the Pills in a smaller dose)
resolve to take the highest proportion, which (as I acquainted you before) may
cause, as it will, some gentle Vomits and moderate Stools, and thus to continue
until the Disease do gradually decline, and at last totally vanish, together
with its Cause, Fountain, and first Original.

Some may happily say, If this be the manner that your Pill performs its Office
in, (viz.) A resolution of the ill Humors in the Bowels, and drawing them into
the Stomach, and afterward casting them out by Stool or Vomit, what need have
we of this Medicine, or in what is it better than other Purges that perform the
same thing?

I answer, Though all Purges have in some measure the same property, yet they
perform it in another way than this my Pill does; this does not only operate
upon the more loose and easily ejected Humors, but also upon the more fixed,
obstinate, and stubborn, which cannot possibly be done by any of the best of
Purging Vegetables, without a very high preparation and purification: And
besides, Vegetable Purges being administered in small quantities or doses,
operate not, but rest in the Body, and there do more hurt than good; but this
Pill, though given in the smallest proportion imaginable, does not only not do
any hurt, but insensibly performs its desired Office, and produces, in time,
its noble Effects: So that I have not in the whole Vegetable Kingdom, no, not
in all Nature, found a Purge in the least comparable with this, etc.

But to return to the business it self, This extraordinary, or highest dose,
and proportion, is also convenient, when common Distempers shall suddenly, or
in short time, too much grow upon and invade the Body; as also, when
debilitated and prostrate Nature shall of necessity require a present and
strong assistance for overcoming her too prevalent Enemy. Some may possibly
here object, and say, that Vomits are too violent a course, and that this is
the way utterly to destroy and overthrow Nature, and her remaining forces: For,
Omne violentum naturae inimicum and contrarium est, and Motus violentos naturam
non pati, absque laesione manifesta. That is, What ever is violent is inimical
and destructive to Nature, and Nature is not able to endure violent motions.

To which I shall first answer, from a consideration of Nature's own course
(the best of Reasons in a case of this nature) seconded and backed by
Experience; and next give you (for brevity sake) the Opinion of one most
eminent and experienced Physician only, etc. Nature, (we may observe) if any
way disturbed, clogged, and annoyed in her fortress the Stomach, and her
adjacent conveniences, begins (though insensibly almost at first) to dislike,
and in some measure reject what is there received, (or more properly from her
impotency and disability to dispose of) and (as she should and would digest it
for the Body's nourishment) suffers, (or rather causes by her begun dislike,
desire, and resolution, to eject and throw out what she perceives she cannot
well master by her Digestive heat) a kind of small sickness or indisposition in
the Stomach; and this it may be for an hour or two, or thereabouts. Time, and
her not opportune succor and aid, to free her from those beginning
Obstructions, that diminish her Digestive heat and faculty, gives gradually an
increase to this first small Indisposition or weak Digestion; and by a
continued contraction and increase of those Excrements of Digestion, falls to a
higher and higher dislike, disgust, and lothing of her usual food, or at least
the usual proportion of it: And from this at length (after a receipt of any
small quantity of it) proceeds not only to the now usual indisposition of
Stomach, but to a kind of motion to Vomit, which now increases daily more and
more, and from a motion arives to a flat desire, and from this desire, yet
further to the act it self, an evacuation by Vomit, by which means Nature would
unload and disburthen her self of (Obstructions in the Stomach and chief
Bowels) the cause of this indisposition and over-powering of both the retentive
and digestive faculty; yet cannot well, without the assistance of some friendly
Medicine or Remedy, fully clear her self, and attain her desire, (or return to
her wonted indisturbed condition.) Nature has here by this Essay and endeavor
of her own to free her self by Vomit, sufficiently demonstrated and plainly
pointed out unto us, the means that she her self (as being her own both best
Judge and Physician in her own case) would thus make use of, and is
consequently most proper for us to follow for her aid and assistance, and
recovery from this impotency and indisposition she now suffers under: Vomits
then being her own voluntary and elected way, cannot in reason be thought
(whatever some inconsiderate and self-conceited may affirm) to be so
destructive, and altogether inimical to Nature, and her prosperity: But, indeed
(especially when directed by her own motion) the only agreeable and direct
course to succor and relieve her in this her distress and impaired condition;
and this my Experience has often confirmed unto me by its happy success, to be
no way destructive, but a truly friendly way of assisting Nature to expel and
overcome her Opposites, approaching Diseases. Vomits then (though esteemed, and
accordingly by many unadvisedly shunned, and altogether avoided, as Operations
too violent and repugnant to Nature's safety and relief) being the course and
method hinted and showed unto us by Nature her self, and her Archeus, for the
cure of many Diseases, cannot certainly be so offensive or disturbing to her,
as that we should so contumaciously reject and condemn the use and prescription
of them: For Nature doubtless would not put her self upon any motion to injure
and impair her self, and what she by her own attempts endeavors to perform
by a Vomitive course, is certainly the best tract for us to follow, to give
assistance and relief unto her decayed forces, and consequently to restore her
to her just and full power and prerogative; the effect of which is a sound,
strong, and healthful condition, and constitution. I argue not, nor contend,
thus strongly for Vomiting Potions, as being absolutely needful in all trivial
Distempers; but as being very much, yea, absolutely necessary for the full and
perfect cure of some Diseases, and no way so destructive, or weakening to
Nature, (though in strength of Operation somewhat exceeding the more mild and
ordinary motion of only downward purging Potions, Boles, Electuaries, or the
like, good also in their kind) as that they (being a way we only follow the
tacit prescriptions and directions of Nature her self in) should to the utter
loss of many sick people (by this way only recoverable) be wholly exploded, and
altogether excluded out of a Physical course and prescription, as too many yet
think and practice, etc.

Take also to second these operations of Nature, and Experience, the Authority
of the truly learned and judicious Faber (answering the same Objections) in his
own words; Hoc philosopho ridiculum videtur, nam natura facili negotio and via,
violentos patitur motus, ut mortem ipsam evitet and se ab ipsa tueatur, mors
enim omnium motuum violentissima est, and natura, ut hanc effugiat, caeteros
quoscunque mavult sequi, and pati motus, and si laedatur aliqua ratione, facili
via a laesione illa sublevatur, quocirca non timenda est illa laesio, cum plus
utilitatis hinc exsurgat quam nocumenti: Pet. Johan. Fab. Sap. univers. lib. 3.
p. 300. in Cap. primo de obst. Intestinorum, etc.

This, says he, (meaning the former Objection) will to one, seriously and
truly considering the course of Nature, seem most ridiculous, for Nature does
very willingly and voluntarily suffer and thrust her self into many violent and
passive Motions, that she may escape, keep off, and defend her self from Death;
Death is the most violent of motions, and rather than she will endure that, she
will suffer any the most violent of disturbances and preternatural motions
whatever: And if she be by these unnatural irritations somewhat for the present
put out of frame, debilitated, and weakened, she will again recover her self;
and those small disturbances (so that she may acquit and discharge her self of
Death, her grand Antagonist) are rather profitable, than any way
disadvantageous or hurtful unto her, etc. Post nubila Phoebus. And this also,
the wonted and continued course which we daily may see Nature of her own accord
make use of, to free her self from her encroaching Enemies, (Distempers and
Diseases, the effect of Corruption) may strongly and sufficiently demonstrate
unto us: For example, consider those two preternatural motions in a Tertian and
Quartane Fever, (viz.) the cold and hot Fit as we call them. Which are not, as
the Vulgar will tell you, because they are so seldom and rarely cured by
Physicians, and therefore their shame and scandal, as well as the Gout,
Dropsy, Leprosy, etc. Devils, or Witches, or I know not what of the like
Nature; nor do they, as the Schools do generally tell us, proceed from their
four Humors, Phlegm, Choler, Melancholy, and putrefaction of Blood, as
Quotidian from Phlegm, Tertian from Choler, and Quartane from Melancholy; nor
as some particular Physicians do affirm, ab effervescentia Sanguinis, (viz.)
from a Boiling of the Blood, (ab inflammato Sulphur) from an Inflammation of
the Sulphur in it, in which last they as much mistake the effect for the cause,
as in the first, one cause for another; true it is, the Blood is inflamed, and
that (sometimes) even to an extreme height, by which the Body, in which it
runs, is (as it were) almost burned up, but yet this effervescentia Sanguinis,
is not the cause effervescentiae Sanguinis, but indeed an effect of the true
cause, (viz.) an Obstruction of Nature, by the Excrements of Digestion, left by
the debilitated Bowels, and other particular Parts, in their several Offices of
Digestion, accelerated (perhaps) by a stoppage of the Pores by some excessive
Cold, (or other ways) from which arises Obstruction of Nature, and her
Archeus, in her Prerogative Royal, and free passage and progress through the
Body, for its preservation and conservation in its due equation of Elements,
which obstructions and excrements Nature to free her self from, (after a
Concentration, or Collection of her Forces, according to her abilities) does by
a sudden Excursion, or Sally, from her Fortress, the most Inward parts,
voluntarily, and with premeditation (may I so say) cause this violent (
effervescentia Sanguinis or) Passion, or produces it by her powerfully issuing
forth, with her Recollected forces, to free her self from those incroaching
Obstructions which began to diminish her Royal course, and consequently to
corrupt, and putrefie her Mansion, and the passage of her Progress; Wonder not,
that Nature (by Nature, I here mean the Life, Spirit, Spiritus innatus, custos
corporis oeconomus) wonder (or marvail) not (I say) that Nature should be of
such power, to cause so great an inflammation, scorching heat, or combustion in
the Body; for consider, she is Life, and Life is Fire, and Fire the most pure,
powerful and strong of all the Elements; consider seriously her Power, and how
she can (otherways also) both cure and cause even the greatest of Diseases, and
this by the sole power and strength of her own fancy, without any previous
matter in the Body for the cause, or production; nor does here end the extent
of her Power, for it can perform even Miracles: If you believe not me, believe
yet Christ himself, who tells us, that if we have Faith but as a Grain of
Mustard Seed, what we may do by it; if you will say, that this is not meant of
the Spirit, but of the Soul, which medleth not with the curing of Bodily
diseases, hear yet our Savior himself; Go, (says he) thy Faith has (healed
or) made thee whole; and again, Be it unto thee according to thy Faith: You see
here that Faith is no other than the strong power of the (Soul or) Spirit; This
the most knowing (and as Religious as knowing) Paracelsus (whatever his
ignorant Antagonists report of him, branding him with the Name of Atheist, from
which also (as their due reward) themselves in the general Opinion escape not
free) does most plainly tell us, De fide Christus haud frustra tanta nobis
inculcat (viz.) adeo efficacem esse ut nos vel sanos vel aegros facere possit,
imo quod majus est, per eam vel salvi vel damnati fieri possumus, prout ea
utimur; legimus ipsum sanatis omnibus dixisse, creed and sanus eris, aut fiat
tibi secundum fidem, etc. Paracel. lib. Principiorum. Cap. 10. etc.

Thus this most Conscientious and Christian Physician: Yet some of his idle
Enemies (viz.) such as from others reports and mouths only hear (but falsely)
what he was, have, in my hearing, affirmed that in his whole works, from one
end to the other, He never so much as mentioned the name of God, or Christ,
which how false a thing it is, who ever shall please to peruse his works, must
of necessity conclude them either very Envious, or very Ignorant of him, and
what he wrote; for there is hardly a Page in some part of his Works, in which
he does not, and that more than once, or twice, with a true Christian regard,
and reverence, name and mention both the Name of God, and also of our Savior
himself: But to return to this most excellent Physician's delivery in the
aforesaid words, He tells us thus, that Faith is most powerful, and can both
cause, and cure Diseases, nay more, it will both Save and Damn; it was not
therefore (says he) in vain, that Christ spoke so much of the power of Faith,
who, when ever he cured any of Diseases, said, Believe, and thou shall be made
whole, or Be it unto thee according unto thy Faith, etc. Wonderful certainly is
the secret power of the Spirit. (But of this enough.) I could even with the
greatest of truth be here Voluminous, as to the stupendous effects of Faith,
or strong persuasion and imagination, and what power we have by it, not only
upon our own Bodies, but also on the Bodies (and not only the Bodies, but also
the Spirits) of others; for it is said of Christ himself, that he did no great
Miracles there, because of their Unbelief; at Cynthius aurem vellit, neque
omnia in vulgus ratio suadet.

And returning to the power of Nature, and to confirm it by some familiar
example; consider, as I said before, the hot and cold Fit, (as we call them) in
Agues, etc. Nature finding her power begin to decay by some Obstructing matter
or other in her passages of Circulation, Perambulation, or Progress, calls in
all her Forces to the Center; Her forces (the Spirits) being called, and
withdrawn from their several stations, or parts of the Body, (of which they
are the Life and only Preservers) those Outward parts are oh a sudden
over-taken with a Chilness, (or, as we call it, a cold Ague fit) the true
effect of Nature's calling in her Forces, there to Concentrate and Muster them
up together, that by her sudden Sally, or Return with those her united Forces,
and utmost Strength, she may expel and drive out (either in part, or wholly)
her Incroaching and Death-threatning opposite; the Body is now again by this
means, (viz.) Nature's Return with her united Strength to expel her Enemy, by
degrees overspread with a fiery and flushing heat ( viz. the hot Fit) a most
certain effect, and sign of the Spirits again re-entring and assuming their
former Stations, and with all the power and force she is possibly able to make
against her powerful Adversary; This Contest, or Duel, lasts as long as Nature
is able to maintain and bear it out; and having for that time done her utmost
devoir, (for according to her Strength she will with greatest vigor maintain
the Battle with her Antagonist) she cease, and is for some time (and this
according to her remaining strength and ability) more quiet and calm, than in
the heat of her past Passion, (or Spiritus exscandescentia) which is not as
improperly termed preternatural, for it is really natural, and the work of
Nature (or the Archeus) her self, and is only preternatural, quoad gradum non
quoad calorem, for it is the Archeus irritated, or advancing her self beyond
her usual course, etc. If she be strong, she will by a Quotidian Fever (or
contest) endeavor to free her self of those Obstructions she feels begin to
oppress her; If her strength be more slack and remiss, by a Tertian; if
feebler, and yet more weak, by a Quartane; and if not able every second, or
third Day, etc. to fight or encounter her Enemy, she will yet as often as
possibly she can, and this (perhaps) but once in ten or fourteen days, but then
is she weak indeed.

That this is truth, a daily Observation of these passages in the Sick, will
sufficiently assure and convince us, (viz.) that the stronger Nature is, the
more frequent her Encounters, and Excursions are against her Opposite: Our own
vulgar Observations, and Rules, or Maxims, will also testify and inform us the
same; for we account a Quotidian Ague (or Fever) more easy to cure than a
Tertian, and a Tertian yet more easy and facile than a Quartane, for if it
vary (or alter) from a Quotidian to a Tertian, we think the worse of it; If
from a Tertian to a Quartane, we account it yet worse, and of more dangerous
consequence, and much more difficult to remedy than the former; and why is
this, but only that we esteem Nature the more weak, and the Cause greater, and
more hardly to be removed; and consequently Nature (though well assisted) will
have the harder task to expel it; for though Nature may not be yet very much
weakened and debilitated, yet the Disease, (viz.) Obstructions of Nature's right
and privilege, being strong, and stubborn, Nature will the more hardly be put
to it in the conquest and extirpation of it, and cannot therefore so often draw
forth her impaired strength and forces (being already in some measure
infeebled) to expel and force out her yet prevailing Destroyer; but what she
does, she must do by degrees, and as her power and strength will bear, allow,
and admit of; and this is Nature's daily course: Thus you see that Nature her
self stirs up, and that voluntary, (even to the utmost of her power, and
strength) those conflicts and inflammations in her Habitation, that so she may
free, and quit her self of those unwelcome, and unpleasing Guests, which would
otherwise turn her quite out of her Possession.

This is my Opinion, and I think not disagreeable to Reason, however I want not
to back it the Authority of two great Lights, most Eminent, Expert, and Learned
Modern Physicians, Van Helmont, and the most acute Faber, from whom, whosoever
desires more satisfaction, may peruse their several Tractates, de Febribus, etc.

But to return from this Digression to the two former Assertions of Nature's
most willingly, and resolvedly Suffering, or rather throwing, and putting her
self into preternatural Motions; Consider the violent disturbance in the
Epileptical insultus, or in the Falling Sickness, with the like violent
motions, perturbations, and preternatural, and unusual disturbances, more or
less, in all or most Maladies, Distempers, and Diseases whatever. If therefore
violent, and preternatural, unaccustomed Motions were altogether destructive to
nature, why would she make so constant and certain an irritation of them by her
Archew, as we daily in most Distempers may perceive, and observe she does? If
it be answered, it is not Nature, but the Disease that does it, and is the
cause of it, and that it is no way pleasing to Nature, but altogether opposite
to her: I answer, I well know that the Disease is in some sense or part the
cause of it, but how? the Disease is not the Agent that stirs up those violent
and unnatural Motions of it self, but is the cause that excites Nature to do
it, to free her self from the Disease, and drive it out before her, by those
her violent Motions and Passions, which she thus willingly and of her own
accord stirs up and suffers, that she may overcome and conquer the cause,
(corrupting Obstructions and Excrements) the opposites of her royal and wonted
indisturbed progress; and this will appear most evident, as well in her
conquest or victory over the Disease, as in her final overthrow and destruction
by Death it self: For if Nature, either by the strength of her own force, and
Archeus, or by a timely and powerful assistance, do extirpate, overcome, and
master the Disease, she is then quiet, and no longer frets, wearies, and vexes
her self, by such violent Motions, but quietly keeps her wonted, desired, and
usual course and progress; if by the Distemper she be at last overcome, and
Death drive her to forsake her Habitation, neither does the Body then suffer
under any violent motion or disturbance; for (the Spiritus innatus, custos
corporis, is departed, and) there is no Life left, and where there is no Life,
there can be no such Motion, though the cause of the motion be still left as
copiously in the Body as before; I mean the cause that moved Nature to stir up
these past violent Motions, and Symptoms, to have freed her self, (if possibly)
from that most violent of motions, Death it self, which at last she is forced,
nolens, volens, to undergo and submit to; for it is appointed for all Men once
to Dye.

The virtues of this Solar Pill.
THe Operation of it is managed sometimes in a sensible, sometimes an
insensible manner, according to the quantity administered; but if kept in its
usually prescribed and limited Bounds or Dose, it is, I say, rather insensible
than any way perceptible, unless in its wonderful Effects, by which it gives
perfect Cure unto the Headache, Vertigo, Apoplexy, Lethargy, Epilepsie,
Convulsion; with those many other Distempers that usually afflict the Head, as
difficulty of Hearing, noise in the Head and Ears, etc.

Most effectual also it is in opening all Obstructions of the Stomach, Liver,
Spleen, and other the noble Bowels, the true original and foundation of many
high Distempers, and grievous Diseases.

Excellent are its effects in the Cure of Agues, and Fevers of all sorts, as
Quotidian, Tertian, Quartane, etc. (but taken in the highest Dose, if the
Patient's strength and age permit, etc.

Most powerful also, and never failing in the Cure of that loathsome and
troublesome Disease the French Pox, though of long continuance, and gotten even
into the Bones. Nor does it thus admirably Operate in these more common and
ordinary Distempers and Diseases, but also in those desperate and (almost)
accounted incurable Maladies, (viz.) the Leprosy, Gout, Dropsy, etc. all
which it in time perfectly Cures, and radically takes away the Cause.

A most noble and effectual Antidote it is in keeping out all ill Airs, and
that most swift and poisonous Infection the Plague, and, if taken, a most
potent Medicine to expel and drive it out again, provided it have not wholly
seized and over-powred the Vitals.

To Women, a more safe and powerful Medicine cannot be given, it being almost
an universal Remedy for those many Distempers, that usually attend their weak,
unhealthy, cold and moist Bodies; all which, I out of respect to their modesty
do here purposely forbear, and omit the reciting. A most admirable virtue and
faculty has God given it, to render and make fruitful even the most barren of
Women, provided the cause be in themselves, and accidental, as in most, (that
is, by some remediable indisposition of Body, and not natural, or by the will
of Almighty God) and being used after Conception, (but taken in the small or
insensibly Operating proportion) it wonderfully avails in strengthening those
that are apt to miscarry, and makes them bring a most sound, healthful, and
thriving Child into the World, though the Parents be of an infirm, and a most
sickly constitution, and disposition of Body, etc. And this I have often to my
own and others great satisfaction and content Experienced, by many of my
Friends, Acquaintance, and Patients, to whom I have in this point most
successfully administered them.

In Virgins, it speedily eradicates, and takes away the cause and fountain of
the Green Sickness, ill habit, and constitution of Body, caused by Obstructions
of the Bowels, and Nature's due and wonted course, and causes in them a
lively, fresh, and cheerful countenance, with a most sound and healthful
condition, etc.

To Children, it is a most potent preservative against the Convulsion,
Falling Sickness, Worms, Measles, Smallpox, together with those other too
numerous Distempers, usually afflicting, and snatching them suddenly from their
sorrowful Parents.

This Medicine is so truly safe and excellent, that without any the least
danger it may be given to the most Aged, most Weak, and also to Infants,
(though but new Born) one half or the fourth part of one of the Pills, for
Children, if weak, in a little of the Mother's milk, as most fit and proper for
it, which, then taking it, shall never after be troubled with Epileptical or
Convulsion-fits; if they are taken with those Fits, it shall, being rightly
administered to them, by degrees gently and safely mitigate, and at last quite
take them away; most excellent things therefore for Women, Mothers of Children,
to have still by them in their Houses: And for my own part, I seldom, either
for my Self, or any other of my Family, (or Friends) really depending upon my
care upon any Distemper, (which, by God's blessing upon a convenient use of
this Pill, or Medicine, does rarely happen, though I have many other excellent
ones still in readiness by me) do use any other than this one, (as a true
cleanser of the whole Body) with two other pleasant refreshing Cordials,
hereafter mentioned, which I once in a quarter of a year, with much freedom, do
give unto the least Child I have, and in the highest proportion, but suitable
to their Strength and Age, besides an oftener taking of the Pills in the
ordinary insensibly operating Dose and quantity, according also to their Age
and Disposition; and truly, I think there is not either in the City, or within
twenty Miles of it, more healthy, lusty, and thriving Children than they are;
all which, next to God Almighty's providence and blessing, I cannot attribute
to any thing more, than to the Virtues of this Medicine, and a due and moderate
use of it.

It exceedingly cleanses, and consequently strengthens all the principal
Bowels and Members, and by that means eases and cures all afflictions of the
Head, Stomach, Ventricle, Liver, Spleen, etc.

It extremely promoteth, and pleasantly helps forward, the Cure of all
internal and external wounds, in short time bringing them to perfect Cure, and
that by its Balsamic and cleansing Quality; and to most outward wounds or
hurts, (with the daily use of these Pills in the insensibly operating Dose) you
need only defend the hurt, or wound from the Air and Dust, with a plaster of
pure Beeswax, fresh Butter, Turpentine, and some Mineral or Metallin flowers
or calx; and so you will see a very quick and sure Cure, etc.

It miraculously accelerateth the Cure of all Ulcers, Cancers, Fistulaes, Noli
me tangere, Wolf, Scrophulous humors, or King's Evil, and the like troublesome
or filthy Maladies, totally consuming and drying up (as the Sun does the
Earth's superfluous moisture) the very root, cause, and corrosive fountain from
whence they spring.

In short, this most noble Medicine is so potent a purifier of the whole Body
of Man, and that by its true cleansing and searching Quality, that no Distemper
(God Almighty's determined and appointed time being not yet come) is able long
to withstand and resist the effect of its power and virtue; but time (to this
as to all others, though never so good) must be given for the manifestation of
its effects, and a course and continuance answerable to the Distemper, allowed
and observed in the taking of it; especially in Chronic Diseases, or Distempers
of deep radication and habit.

The simple, rash, and inconsiderate, hearing the admirable Virtues of this
Medicine, will without doubt as much desire it as any; but imagine, that as
soon as they have taken it into their Bodies, or at farthest within three or
four days, that their Infirmity, Distemper, or Disease, of what kind, degree,
and nature soever, and of what continuance soever, must of necessity presently
vanish and be gone, without any the least sign, symptom, or relict of it
remaining, which no ingenious or discreet person must or will expect; but
according to the nature, radication, habit, and continuance of the Malady or
Distemper, Age, Strength, and Constitution of their Bodies, to bear its
operation in a greater or smaller Dose, expect the desired effects, in the
restoration of their health, which (by God's blessing, and an orderly use of
this Medicine, a due time) they will most assuredly find. I have already
exceeded my intentions in this discourse, and should be too tedious, indeed,
should I give a relation of the many notable Cures, which by my self, and
others, that have had it of me, have been performed by it, which truly have
been such, and so great, that I (though well acquainted with the strangeness of
its effects) have many times extremely wondered at them, that it should in such
small Doses as it usually was given in, produce so great and extraordinary
effects, etc.

If (perhaps) the Pills do in the time of their Operation, or Working, cause
any small Griping, either in the Stomach, or other Bowels, as possibly in some,
they may sometimes do, let them not therefore presently unadvisedly slight,
reject, and dislike them, as supposing them (from thence) an unsafe, dangerous,
and ill-prepared Medicine, and a too harsh, strong, and violent sort of Physic
for them, (or their Constitutions) but rather let them conclude it (as justly,
and truly, they may) to proceed from some error or other of their own, either
in the taking, or disordering themselves in the time of their Operation, or
else that their Stomach, or other Bowels began to be obstructed, or filled,
with a Slimy, Clammy, or Viscuous matter; (or substance) which would not easily
be Evacuated by the Medicine, without that small trouble and inconveniency,
(well to be tolerated, or born with, in respect of the great benefit they will
reap by it, viz.) the prevention of some greater Mischief, (or Distemper) which
might suddenly have assaulted, and invaded, even Life it self, if not by this
means dispersed, and so prevented of so bad a Consequence; and that this is
true, I have sufficient, and large Experience, knowing many, who have suffered
some such small trouble in the first taking of them, but their Bodies, by a
continued, and moderately repered taking, (for some time) being fully emptied,
and free of those Stubborn, Gross, and Viscuous humors, (Matter, or
Obstruction) they afterward felt not any the least trouble, disturbance, or
Griping by them; for the more obstructed, clogged, and foul the Bowels are, the
more will they Operate, and possibly cause (in some) such small Gripings, (a
profitable inconveniency) the more free, and clear, the Body is, the more
mildly, gently, and with less trouble do they perform their Office in Operation.

Though I well know, that no Disease, or Distemper whatever, is indeed
(naturally) Incurable, unless the immediate hand of God, for some cause or
other, do hinder and oppose the Cure; and also by Experience have often found,
that these Medicines come not at all short, but far exceed what I have here
said of them. I yet also, as well know, that the most precious of all Medicines
are of no force, power, and validity, against the decrees, will, and pleasure
of Almighty God; all things, both in Heaven, and Earth, must submit to his
call, and appointment; the most powerful of Medicines, when He will call for
our Souls out of this Vale of misery and corruption, is then no longer able to
do us any good, or prolong our Life one minute beyond the time and period
appointed by himself; It being appointed for all Men once to Dye, to Live again
(according to his good will and pleasure) to another Life. Medicine is indeed a
great blessing, created, and plentifully bestowed upon us by Almighty God, but
can serve us no further than to preserve, and restore Health, so long as he in
his Goodness shall afford us Life; for, though without the knowledge, and help
of good Medicines, we may long linger, and lie under Diseases, and by the help
of them, being well known, and as well prepared, quickly expel, and quit our
selves of them; yet ought we not to dote upon, or put greater confidence in
their Virtue, (though of greatest excellency, and perfection) than with, and in
the use of them, to crave his blessing, and for the effects, wholly to rely and
cast our selves into the Arms of his Mercy, who, if he calls, we should as
willingly resolve to be dissolved, and return unto him; if not, we cannot but
in reason (and with his blessing) expect, and assuredly (in time) find the
desired effect, (viz.) the return, and restoration of our Health, from the due
use of pure, powerful, and safely efficacious Medicines, of which number these
are none of the meanest, but truly noble Remedies, and most safe, pleasant, and
friendly assistants unto human Nature, and therefore I shall give a brief
Account of the Virtues of the other five in order.

II. Quintessentia Sali Balsamica, etc. OR,
A Most excellent Balsamic Oil, or Quintessence of Salt, highly impregnated,
tinged, and Philosophically united, with the true and pure Essences of the most
Aromatic and Cordial of Vegetables. So that the essences of the Vegetables are
by the Spirit of Salt improved, heightened, and exalted to a more than ordinary
degree of efficacy and perfection, and the Spirit of Salt made Cordial by the
essences and power of the Vegetables, by which means it as well refreshes the
Spirits, as opens them a passage through the whole Body, etc.

The Virtue of this Aromatised precious Liquor, or essence of Salt, are such,
and so many, as no one is able fully to render an account of them. I shall
therefore give you only some few heads of them, according to my own knowledge
and experience of it: which may lead the Ingenious to a farther consideration
of the infinite excellency of it.

1. It renews the whole Mass of Blood, and so purifieth it, that with a
continued (prescribed) moderate use of it, for some time, it does in a
wonderful manner revive and strengthen the whole Body, rendering it vigorous,
lusty, and of a florid and strong Constitution; it extremely quickneth the
Senses, helps the Memory, and makes lightsome the whole Body, and this by its
cleansing the Stomach, and strengthening both the retentive and digestive
faculty, etc.

2. A most excellent and certain Arcanum (or secret) it is in Curing the Stone,
either in the Reins, Kidney, or Bladder, or any Tartarous obstruction, or
degenerate Salt humor in the whole Body; it retardeth Old Age, keeps back
Greyhairs, and preserves the Body in a healthful and flourishing condition: It
is a most pleasant and safe extinguisher of all preternatural heats, as in
Fevers, and the like, none almost comparable unto it, either in preservation,
or restoration.

3. It opens all Obstructions of the Body, kills all manner of Worms,
Stomach-worms, Maw-worms, etc. It prevalently advances and promoteth
fertility, (or fruitfulness in Women) and is exceeding good and profitable for
those already with Child, with much safety preserving them from many
troublesome and dangerous Distempers (and Symptoms) incident unto them; highly
restaurative and strengthening to the Consumptive, Ptisical, Hectical, and all
this because it preserves, nourishes, and increases the humidum radicale of
the Body; It is so excellent a Medicine, that it cannot almost in any kind of
Malady, Distemper, or Disease whatever, either Inward, or Outward, without some
eminently profitable success and advantage, be made use of. I shall therefore
say no more of it, but recommend it to the Ingenious and Discreet, as a most
high gift of Almighty God, freely and in great Plenty bestowed upon us; for
should we be diligent searchers into Nature and her Treasury, the great
blessings of a greater and most omnipotent Creator, we should clearly see, that
those things we have most need of, and which would do us most good, are every
where by God in greatest plenty spread before us; but we are blind, and also
hate knowledge, and to have our way directed unto us, by those whom God has
been pleased out of his Goodness to enable to be a light and guidance unto us,
etc. Salt in its gross Quality, and involved or mixed with those Impurities
which Nature presents it to us accompanied with, is so noble a Creature, as
(except the Soul of Man) there is nothing sublunary, equal, or comparable unto
it. And this those many excellent uses it daily serves us for, will (if we
consider them) sufficiently inform us of, Christ himself said, there was none
good but God; Yet of Salt he says, it is good, Salt is good, etc. If so
excellent then, and truly good, as it is gross and impure by reason of the
Dreggs and Impurities mixed with it, what may it be by a Philosophical
purification, purgation, and other convenient Chemical preparations advanced
and exalted to. I will not tell thee my utmost thoughts of it, for so great
Mysteries depend upon a true knowledge of Salt, and its purification, and
preparations, as the Vulgar would count fabulous, and therefore as unfit for
their knowledge, as beyond their reach and contemplation; it is (even as
Nature, the Servant of the most high Creator, prepares it for us) so great and
high a blessing, as we are no way capable of returning him sufficient thanks
for, etc.

Concerning the virtue and excellency of Salt, besides that grand, most signal,
and high Character and Epithet of GOOD, bestowed upon it by Christ himself,
and by him denied to all but God himself; I could also at large (if not too
large for my present intent) give you the Testimonies of Paracelsus in his
Herbar, (in Quarto) page 3, 4, 5. page 103, 104, 106. etc. of Peter Faber in
his fourth Book, Secret. Chymicon. page 443, to page 448. also in his Mirothe.
Spagiricum, lib. 3. from page 613, to 616. See also the said Faber in his
Panchimic, lib. 4. from page 574, to 576. Who also pleases, may at leisure, in
their several Works, peruse the ample and wonderful Virtues ascribed unto it by
Scroder, Glauber, Crollius, Sennertus, Agricola, Beguin, Untzer, Hartman,
Tentz, Gluckraht, Kesler, Querortan, Kunrath, and many others. There lately
came to my Hands a sheet of Paper printed in December last, (the Publisher I
know not) entitled, The excellency and usefulness of the true Spirit of Salt,
being a Collection of the Attestations of several Authors and Physicians, of
the eminent Virtues of Salt. It treats only of the simple Spirit of Salt,
well prepared, which doubtless, even in that state and condition is a very
excellent Medicine; but that you may know I write not of the Spirit of Salt
simply of it self, I have in the Title told you, it is impregnated, tinged, and
Philosophically united with the essences of the most Cordial and Aromatic of
Vegetables; by which means it is exalted, and become a far more noble,
pleasant, and efficacious Medicine, etc.

The use of this Philosophical Spirit of Salt, is thus: Let the Infirmed (or
Sound) that is pleased to take it, put so many drops of it into a Glass of
Wine, Beer, Ale, or the like, (as after stirring them well together, will give
a pleasant relish) and let them Drink it twice or thrice (or only once) a Day,
if they will, before, or at Meals, and with thus using of it for some time,
they will assuredly find (unless stupid and void of perceivance) its noble
Effects; those that would use it outwardly, must mix it also with Wine, Water,
or some other Vehiculum, fit for the purpose it is intended for; and if it be
for Sores, or the like, wash and bathe the place affected, and they will also
in short time perceive its cleansing, healing, and wonderful Balsamic quality,
even to their great benefit and admiration, etc.

III. Pilula nobilissima Purgans.
BEcause some, either to gratify their own Fantasy, or Conceit, or otherways
deterred therefrom by the too great Folly (or other ends) of some Physicians,
or else more dreading the small trouble in a Vomit, than valuing their own
Health, had rather have such a Medicine as may operate only by Stool.

I have also taken the pains, to prepare, and have in readiness, such a Pill,
or Medicine for them, pleasant in Taste, and very mild in Operation, yet very
profitable in all, or most Distempers, that our frail Bodies do commonly labor
under.

IV. Tinctura Mirabilis, etc.
VEry Numerous, and (indeed) as Great, and Excellent, as Numerous, are the
Virtues ascribed by the most Eminent of Physicians, unto the bare and
unprepared Subject of this noble Tincture. I shall in brief acquaint you with
some of them, together with my Authors, and then give you a Glimpse, (and but a
Glimpse) of those most desirable Effects, which it is by this Subtilizing, and
Exalting preparation yet farther enabled, (after a due administration)
Convincingly to produce and benefit those by, that shall rightly make use of it.

This Jovivenerean Subject has been, and still is, by all knowing, diligent,
and industrious Physicians, much esteemed, and highly valued. Paracelsus (that
Monarch of Medicine) has (and that doubtless from his great Experience of it,
and its Virtue) given it this very ample Character; It is (says he) most
efficacious, and powerful against all inward Affects whatever, Radically
plucking up, and rooting them out. Most prevalent against all Fascinations,
Incantations, Night-frights, Poisons, Epilepsie, Melancholy, and does restore
the Body with a kind of Celestial vigor, to a most temperate Habit, exquisite,
and most sound Constitution. Nor is this the Testimony of the Experienced
Paracelsus alone; but also of the Knowing and Learned, Hartman, Crollius,
Penotus, Sennertus, Basilius, Valentinus, Kunrath, and Quercetanus, with many
other most industrious, expert, and eminent Physicians. Take now the Virtues,
Efficacy, and Power of it, as here prepared, (and presented) such, and so great
is the Potency, Efficacy, and Virtue of this noble Tincture, both in purifying
the Blood throughout the whole Body, and resisting all Effects, proceeding from
the Corruption of the same; that it is with admirable success given in all
Distempers, arising from a corrupt, and putrified Blood; and this by reason of
its sweet Balsamic, penetrating Salt, and noble Tincture; from hence it
moderates, and in time quite takes away, both the Leprosy, and its root, or
fountain, an impure and degenerated Blood. It stops all preternatural
Fluxes, both in Man, and Woman, and this by reason of its Styptick Salt, and
Mature Sulphur, hid in its Blood-like Tincture. It comfort, and strengthens
the Heart, and Stomach, restores, and cherishes, our humidum Radicale, and
this by its own humidum Radicale, which is in a manner very like, if not equal
with the humidum Radicale of our Bodies. It dissolveth congealed Blood, and
this by its Spirit, and dissolved Salt, most profitable in all poisoned Wounds,
and a high remedy for all Ulcers, if mixed with any Balsam, because by its
Styptick, and Blood-cleansing Salt, it accelerateth the Cicatrization, and so
produces a perfect Cure. In brief, it is so noble a Medicine, that it deserves
a far higher Character than I shall now trouble my Self, or the Reader, with an
account of; for, it mundifieth the Blood so powerfully, and thoroughly, that it
may in all affects, distresses, and debilitations, or weaknings of Nature
whatever, most safely and successfully be made use of, and administered, and
this both to Old and Young in some appropriate Vehicle, etc.

V. Balsamus Vitae.
THe Virtues of this pure Quintessential and Balsamic Liquor, are also so
numerous and large, that enough cannot be said of it, being such a one as would
(were it possible) restore even the Dying to Life: Of how great benefit
therefore it may be to the Living, languishing under painful, tedious, and
lingering Infirmities, (which otherwise, by the help of good Medicines might
soon recover) I leave to the Judicious to consider. In short, it exceedingly
restores the Aged, Ptisical, Hectical, Consumptive, etc. and beyond expression
strengthens, comfort, and raises those that are spent, and almost quite
wasted by a tedious and long fit of Sickness: In short time (respect being had
to their low condition) reviving their low and decayed Spirits, and restoring
the Body to its former desired and healthful condition. In brief, it is so
excellent a Balsamic, and Cordial Liquor, and of so pleasant and fragrant a
Smell, sweet and grateful a Taste, that it far excels the most famous Syrian
( Egyptian, or Mechaan) Balsam, which is of so high worth, that three or four
pound of it is Yearly a Present for the great Turkish Emperor: Yet as precious
as it is, it is far exceeded by this most excellent Cordial, and pleasant
purified Quintessential Liquor, etc.

VI. Specificum Anodynum Nobilissimum.
THis most noble, (specific) and benign Medicine, is so truly friendly unto
distressed Nature, and her oppressed and debilitated Forces, that even in the
moment almost that it is taken, (unless Nature be irrecoverably spent, and no
way again to be reinforced for a longer continuance in her clayie Mansion) it
does not only afford a present succor, and relief, (and that by a most
Sympathetical) and not cold Stupefactive means, (as some may happily imagine)
but proceeds, and that by its most truly genuine Specific quality, to an utter
Extirpation, and Eradication of the Disease, by its powerful opening unto
Nature, her Obstructed passages, Royal walks, and Circulations, and this
through all parts of the Body, by which Nature's frequent, voluntary, unusual,
and preternatural Passions, are presently allayed, and Nature most quietly
again assumes her wonted course, and undisturbed progress.

I can with much confidence give the same Character of it, that Quercetan once
did of another preparation of the same Subject; Hoc praestantissimum
medicamentum omnes ardores extinguit, and arcet, omnes defluxiones sistit,
omnesque dolores mirum in modum sedat, atque hoc totum ut calorem nativum non
extinguat quin potius conservat and tuetur (imo multiplicat) Spiritus innatos
corroborando, tantum abest quod ipsos stupefaciat, vel (quod dictu ridiculum
est) partibus adimat, sed mira qua pollet facultate vires juvando, etc.
Quercet. in Respons. ad Aubert, etc. This opportune and friendly Operation by
some (to render it more taking and facile to ordinary apprehensions) has been
called a laying of the Disease to Sleep, or a mitigation of the Disease, which
indeed it is; but how? Not by Stupefaction, but only by its prevalent
assistance, and inabling Nature to do that, which, with her own feeble and
overpowered Forces, she was no way able to perform, and so she cease, or
leaves off, her further furious assaults, and struglings, (called a Disease)
with her now vanquished and departing Antagonist; hence, it is most useful in
all Diseases, Distempers, and Maladies attended with extremity of Pain, and
want of Rest, as Fevers, Agues, Frenzy, Deliriums, etc. where Nature, by her
continued Duel and Combat, has so infeebled, both her Self, and Residence,
that no other remedy almost will give her that present succor, relief, and
assistance, that her deplorable Condition of necessity calls for, and requires.
I shall say no more of it than this, that it is a truly noble Specific
Anodyne, safely assistant, and friendly unto spent Nature, and her wearied and
languishing Archeus, being such a one as may, without the least doubt or fear,
be made use of in any Condition whatever.

A word touching the State of Physic and Physicians.
HE was never yet Born that could please all, it is therefore but Folly to
expect it; nor indeed ought a wise Physician so much to study ways for the
satisfying every Nurse, old Gossip, and the indiscreet Patient, as truly good
Medicines (together with his Care) for the performance and discharge of the
Duty that lies upon him; and whereas the Ancient Physicians were had in great
esteem and respect for the worthiness of their Calling, it is now altogether
contrary, and this through the great Folly of (even) Physicians themselves,
each one seeking to Ingratiate himself, and this by Insinuation, by mean and
pleasing Concessions, in plain English a servile Sycophancy, though not at all
profitable to their Patients, rather than really to perform that Duty that a
true Physician ought to discharge, seeking more to please the Fancy than Cure
the Diseases of their Patients, thereby Curing in a short time, instead of
their Patients, their own sickly, and almost expiring Purses; and he that does
otherways is not now esteemed, such is the Folly (and so much does Custom
prevail with the generality) of people;

And if any Physician be so honest, and careful, as industriously to seek for,
and prepare, good Medicines, he is presently as it were excluded out of the
number of the putatitious Doctors, more honored for their Name, and some
formal outward Accoutrements, than any thing in them, that may in the least
render them worthy that Honorable Name they assume, and usurp, or is otherways
without their Desert put upon them; many other are the reasons of that great
Dis-respect, and Cloud, that this most worthy Profession does now lie under;
but doubtless, there are many, both industrious, and ingenious Persons now of
it, which are (and will as Pillars uphold and maintain) the Life of it, and the
time (I hope) is now approaching, wherein it will recover its due Esteem and
Splendour; for many of the most Learned, Sober, and Discreet Junior (Doctors or)
Physicians, of this Age, well observing the great Dis-esteem it now suffers
under, and considering the Cause of it, do find, that it is partly from the
small benefit their Patients receive from their chargeable Visits, or more
truly, from their most ineffectual (though most chargeable prescribed)
Medicines; observing (I say) this Defect to arise (and that most undoubtedly)
from the great inefficacy of their prescribed Medicines, they do now begin
(though but privately, as being partly ashamed) to quit their former obstinacy,
refusal, and contempt of the only pure (Chemical) and well prepared Medicines,
and partly for fear of being Esteemed by others Deserters of the Old (and as
they have strongly pretended, the only safe, though indeed most ineffectual and
rotten) foundation, and method of Physic. They begin, (I say) though but
secretly, to consider, open, and ransack the Treasuries and rich Caskets, and
Cabinets of Nature, thence to draw forth, and prepare, those most excellent
Arcanaes, and Quintessences, there stored up, and in plenty bestowed upon us by
Almighty God; by which, doubtless, the infirm and languishing (though it may be
afterward ungrateful) Patient, will quickly be restored to his former Health,
and the Doctor not so frequently, as now of late, hear, Thus, (his Patient's
most earnest entreaty) For God's sake put me not into a tedions and chargeable
course of Physic; This being performed, (viz.) the rich Storehouse of Nature
being unlocked, and opened by the skilful and learned Physician, then will
Physic, and its Professors, again acquire that due Esteem, Reward, and Honor,
which the Ancients so deservedly reaped by it; But this advantage and
restoration must this Science receive, only from those which Paracelsus calls
Astrales discipuli, its Astral disciples, or those by God, and Nature fitted
for it, with a Genius, disposition, inclination, and real ability for an
unwearied and deep search into Nature, and her inmost Recesses; It is not a
Superficial Academick Learning, and Fruitless disputation, (of ens, and non
ens) nor is it, as Paracelsus (in his Epistle to Christ. Clauser. Med. and
Philoso.) tells us, Titles Eloquence, the Knowledge of Tongues, or the Reading
of many Books, but a profound Meditation, and Knowledge of Nature, and her
Mysteries, which easily supplies all other Defects, and alone is able to make a
true Physician. I would not from this Citation of Paracelsus, be thought to
vilify, slight, contemn, and discountenance Learning, and hereby excite, and
encourage, every Dull-pated Mechanic (fit only to be a Mechanic) to the Study
of the most abtruse, sublime, and mysterious Secrets of Nature; No, I am one
that truly esteem and highly honor Learning, and all those that are enriched
and adorned with so desirable a Jewel, as being not ignorant, but well
weighing, and knowing how great an advantage (and as great an Ornament) it is
to those, whose propitious Fates have added it (as a blessing) to their other
most acute and great natural Abilities; yet do I not, for all this, Idolize,
and so Adore it, as to dis-esteem those modest and truly ingenious Spirits,
whose unhappy Stars have deprived them of that which they not only own as an
(almost) incomparable Treasure, and being sensible of the want of it, and their
great Deficiency by that want, do not only prise, but earnestly desire it, and
at last obtain (by a continued diligence) no small Portion, or Improvement in
it; for I very well know, and have often found, even admirable Conceptions in
such as have scarce attained to the reading of their own Mother Tongue, God
bestowing extraordinary natural parts, as well in Cottages, as in Regal Courts,
on Peasants, as on Princes, which, if polished, by the Artifice, and advantage
of Learning, would (doubtless) prove even the wonders of their Age, etc.

These I esteem, and would also encourage and cherish, and not those impudent
and ignorant Fellows, whose Ignorance prompts them, and their Confidence and
Impudence imboldens them, to bid Defiance to all above them, and will tell you,
that it is not Greek, Latin, and such stuff and trash, that will cure Diseases.
This the Wise well know, and yet as well know, that those most Confident, and
Impudent (and as Ignorant as Impudent) Boasters, must be, and are beholden, (if
at any time they have any thing that is good) not only to those that have the
advantage of them in Latin, Greek, and other improving Education, but also to
those that have neither Latin, Greek, nor any thing of what the World calls
Learning, more than themselves, and yet far exceed them in all, but a more than
Brutish confidence, etc.

These (I mean these modest, and ingenious Spirits, though not improved by the
most desirable help of Learning, and Education) may certainly, (with these who
exceed them in so great an advantage) not improperly, be accounted in the
number of those Astrales discipuli, which Paracelsus, and others, tell us, are
only fit for the study, and search of Nature, and consequently the true, and
only able Physicians, being, says he, (ad hoc a Deo nati) created, and sent
into the World only for that work and purpose; and that this is true, variety
of Examples in every or all Ages may sufficiently convince us, etc.

These, and these only, are those that Providence has ordained for the
restoration of Physic, that most noble, and mysterious of Sciences. But to
recede, and give period to this Digression, which my just and natural Zeal to
the prosperity of this laudable Science, has led me unto; My request (as a
truly well wisher) to all the Learned, Diligent, and Industrious Professors of
Physic, is, that they incessantly labor to repair the breaches of their
Profession, which indeed is no way to be performed, but by a serious conversing
with the Wise; I mean the Books (or Monuments) left unto us by the Ancient,
Learned, and Nature-searching Philosophers, to which, as a Test and proof of
the reality of their Theorical knowledge, they would also add a most unwearied
Manual operation, which only is able to manifest the verity of the highest of
their Speculations in a Physical way, and detect, and produce, the most large
and admirable of Nature's infinite Secrets; for God has not included any thing
in the Creature, but he has given absolute power unto Man, (as Lord of the
Creation) to make himself fully Master of it, and that in its highest degree of
Purity and Perfection; then will they attain unto such noble Secrets, and
Medicines, as shall easily expel, not only the smallest, but also the greatest,
and most contumatious, or stubborn, venomous, and chronick Diseases, provided
the Infirm have not yet attained ad justam metam aetatis, to the just and
utmost limits of time appointed by God himself, for then the slightest,
smallest, and most trivial of Distempers is (as Paracelsus, in his Book of the
Mystery of Worms, tells us) Introitus ad mortem, an Inlet to Death, which (as
being the Will of the Almighty) there is no farther resistance against, nor
redemption from, nor can any, even the best of Medicines, prevail against it;
Otherways pure Nature is strong enough, to assist and strengthen Nature to the
expulsion of the most violent of Diseases, such is the power of pure Arcanaes,
which being had as altogether necessary for the Cure of chronick and contagious
Diseases, there will then be no need of the now too numerous Physical
Mustardpots, nor of the dubious Diacritick and Diagnostick part of Physic, but
only a true knowledge of the strength and dose of the Medicine; and this the
most honest (and as learned as honest) Faber tells us, Habito uno Arcanorum,
vel Animantium vel Vegetabilium vel Mineralium, non est opus scire and
cognoscere undenam morbus oriatur, and qua via procedat ad interficiendum
hominem, sed opus est scire dosim Arcani, and propinare ipsam cum jusculo aut
vino, in quocunque morbo; tunc temporis enim ab ipsa propinatione Arcanum
jungitur naturae, and Natura roborata and fortior facta ab ipso Arcano, morbum
aggreditur, and expellit materiam morbificam quacunque in part resideat; nam
semper natura morborum est Curatrix, etc. Pet. Fab. Sap. Universa. lib. pri.
cap. 21. etc.

Having (says he) any one Arcanum, be it either of the Animal, Vegetable, or
Mineral Kingdom, there is then no need of the uncertain Indications,
Diagnosticks, Prognostics, and the like Verbal impertinences, (frustra fit per
plura quod fieri potest per pauciora.) We need then do no more, but learn in
what Dose, and Vehicle, to administer such a Medicine; we need not then trouble
our selves whence the Disease sprang, or which way it proceeds, for such a pure
Medicine will effectually do all that is requisite to be done, to corroborate
debilitated Nature, and cast out the Morbifick matter, or Nature's opposite,
and obstructor. Nor is this his single Testimony, of the excellency and power
of such pure and quintessential Arcanaes, but a confirmation of the Testimonies
of all others that have had, and been Masters of, such exquisite, Celestial,
and pure Medicines. From the same consideration doubtless did the incomparable
^arace sus thus advise us, Elementum ignis in omnibus morbis summum est
Arcanum, and quicunque medicorum Elementum ignis in sua (liceat ita loqui)
arcanitate (sive Medicina) non habet, is seipsum verum and probatum (adeptum)
medicum non jactet, sed tyronem and loculorem expilatorem. Paracel. in Tract.
de Sulp. Emb. etc.

That Physician (says he) that has not raised his Medicines to the Nature of
Fire, ought not to assume the Name of a Physician, for he (indeed) is no other
than an Impostor, and Cheat, for the Element of Fire is the great Arcanum in
Curing all Diseases. Take yet his farther Instruction, though in a more dark
and Philosophical manner of expression, Benedictus sit deus altissimus and
gloriosissimus qui ex immenso ejus amore and summa miserecordia tales medicinis
purissimis concessit oculos quales medicis, etiamsi peritissimis, negavit.
Paracelsus in Xenodoch, (nondum typis excus.) Blessed be (says he) our most
high and glorious God, who of his Infinite love and mercy toward us, has
given those Eyes to good and pure Medicines, which he has denied to the most
able and skilful of Physicians. What these pure Medicines are, he has already
told us, (viz.) Medicines exalted by purging and purifying, (viz.) Chemical
preparations, even to the nature of Fire, (viz.) the highest purity and
perfection; for then are they Galen's medicamenta partium tenuium, or Medicines
fit to be administered for the freeing oppressed Nature, from her languishing,
and infeebled Condition, etc.

Great is the favor these most excellent Men have in the foregoing Aphorisms,
or Instruction, afforded us, but we are both Foolish and Ungrateful, for while
we thirst after Wealth, we neglect the only Men and Means that would direct us
to it, and do not, with the wise King of Israel, first seek and desire the
fountain that would effectually, and plentifully bring us, not only those
smaller Streams, or Rivulets, we so much desire and pine after, but also the
full Streams of the highest of all sublunary Blessings.

But to return from this Digression to our Arcanaes, and the Subjects fit for
such a degree of Exaltation, you may, if you please, consult the most expert
Paracelsus in his Mannuale de lapide Physico; His Archidoxis lib. de vita
longa, and other places of his Writings, to which you may add, and peruse,
Quercetan, Faber, Helmont, Sennertus, Hartman, Crollius, Fernelius, Marsilius,
Ficinus, Basilius, Valentinus, with (almost infinite) others, who, with much
Charity, and Sincerity, have delivered unto us most admirable Secrets, would we
with an answerable and requisite Diligence, peruse, elaborate, and make use of
them, etc.

If some (happily) should object, and tell me, that it cannot possible be, that
Medicines, how highly soever elaborated, and prepared, can effect such
Miracles, and sudden Cures, as are attributed to them; Let me tell him from
the wise Hermes, that, quicquid superius est, idem est etiam inferius; if there
be power in the Planets, or Stars, those great Ministers of Almighty God, the
Angel Guardians, and successive Rulers of the World under him, as certainly
there is, and far beyond even the best and largest of our wishes, to all
intents and purposes whatever, then can we not despair (if we will credit
Hermes) of obtaining (upon a diligent inquisition) the utmost aim and ends of
our desires; for, doubtless, he has not placed any influence, or virtue
whatever, in those superior Bodies, that we should suppose impossible for us to
procure, and attain to, (for our own good, and his glory) because they are out
of our hand-reach placed in the Heavens; for whatever is below, has the same
Virtue with that which is above has, and that which is above, but the same
with that below; whatever is above has its likeness below, and what we have
here below in our reach, and power, has in its Center and Purity (as being
produced by the Superior rays and influx) the same virtue, efficacy, and power,
that those most bright, and superior Bodies, we so much admire and gaze at,
have, and contain in them, would we begin where Nature leaves, and help her in
what she cannot perfect for us: At hic labor, hoe opus est, This is a work only
for the Wise and Prudent. If any one shall yet Cavil at this Doctrine, and tell
me, this is no way agreeable with the Instructions; and Method left unto us by
Galen, Hippocrates, and others, the only Founders, and Pillars of Physic,
whose prescriptions direct us to diversity of Medicines, for diversity of
Diseases, and that they made no use of poisonous Minerals, and Metals, but of
the most safe, and wholesome of Animals, and Vegetables, etc. To those that
shall thus object, let me tell them, That I think they have as little Versed
themselves in the Writings of those whose followers they pretend themselves to
be, as in theirs, whom they are only able, through Ignorance, Malice, and
Custom, to rail at, and revile, but no way able to Confute, or in the least
overthrow their Doctrines, established, and built upon the Rock of Reason, and
confirmed by daily innumerable examples of Experience; and this in the most
desperate of Diseases.

As to their using only the most wholesome and safe of Vegetables, and Animals,
let them call to mind their Hellebor. Albus and Niger, Elater. Colocynth.
Tithymal. Thapsia. Turpethu. Bryon. Scammo. Cyclamen, with several others of
the like violence in Operation, which, without a due Correction, and Chemical
preparation, come not much (if at all) short of the most violent, and (as
termed) most venomous of Minerals: but because we will also let them see how
well grounded and perfect they are in their Master's precepts, that tell us of
our Venomous and Health-destroying Minerals; and would so silence our new
Doctrine, as they very Gravely are pleased to call it; Let them consult
Myre^sus in his Book of Collections, of the choicest, and most excellent
compositions of their (Hodg-podg) Antidotes, and these from the most select and
able of Galenists, and they shall there find few less, if not somewhat more,
than an hundred of those Antidotes, which have in them, as their chief
Ingredients, Ground, or Basis, either Minerals, Semiminerals, or Metals, and
those in a most crude and unprepared condition.

See now the great Obstinacy, joined with a no less Ignorance, of many, that
pretend themselves the strict followers of those sedulous and most laborious
Founders of Aesculapius his Temple. And seeing nihil perfectione in principio
gaudet, certainly those Men, Galen and Hippocrates (to whom we cannot but
acknowledge our selves extremely engaged, for delivering over unto us, their
then more than ordinary Light, and Knowledge) intended not their Labors (so
freely communicated for the good of Posterity) as Herculean Pillars, or a non
plus ultra, to the endeavors of those ingenious Spirits that should succeed
them, and by decree of Providence enter upon the Stage of the World after them,
and that for the manifestation of the Glory of Almighty God, as the Men and
means provided, and designed by him, for the discovery (or manifestation) of
some larger part of those innumerable Treasures of Wonders, and Knowledge,
which he is (infinitely beyond the apprehension of all Mortals, that ever were,
or shall be) able to draw forth, and bestow upon frail Man, for his solace,
comfort, and admiration, to his Creator's glory. And this will well and clearly
appear by the Ingenious confession (or rather admonition, and excitation) of
Hippocrates, to a farther discovery and improvement; whose Concession, let us
take for the unanimous consent of all those most acute (...) or ancient
Founders of that Fabric, which we ought with all diligence and sincerity (for
a public good) to build up, and adorn. Medicina (says he) non eam assecuta
est adhuc perfectionem, cui nihil addi possit, sed in qua semper vel aliquid
modo reprehendi, modo corrigi, modo addisci queat, Hippocrates, etc. In this,
this great and knowing Physician tells us, that Medicine (or the Science of
Physic) had not then attained to so great Perfection, that nothing could be
added to it, but that it yet stood in such a condition, as might well admit of
reprehension, correction, and farther inquisition and addition. Words truly
worthy, so worthy a Person, and such a one, as, were he now in being, would (I
dare be confident) not only allow of those rational and real amendments which
Posterity has added to their Labors, but with greatest Alacrity, and
Cheerfulness, embrace the means and knowledge of adding yet a greater
Perfection to so absolutely necessary, and laudable a Science; and not, as some
of their wilful and perverse Disciples, and Successors, maliciously stop both
Eyes, and Ears, against what only would make them what they should be, (viz.)
Physicians in Knowledge, and Deed, and not only Putatitious (and solum nomine
and togaetenus) pretenders to the greatest of Contemplations, and Nature's
Secrets, of which they yet know nothing, but only by their (Methodical)
Ignorance keep the generality of people in a Maze, and servile adoration to
their empty Noddles.

This only to those pretended Galenists, who use the name of Galen, and
Hippocrates, together with other most deserving Learned Men, their followers,
only as stalking Horses, to shadow and hide their Ignorance from the World's
Eye, and a Warrant (at pleasure and large) to rail at, and cast ignominy and
reproach on the Names and Repute of such most excellent Hermetick Philosophers
and Physicians, as themselves are no way worthy to mention, and whose Works,
(the only means and evidence left us to judge of Antiquity) together with those
of their pretended Patrons, Galen, and Hippocrates, they have as little
perused, as they have studied the Turkish Alcoran, much less concocted, to make
a right use of them, to the benefit and assistance of their languishing
(deceived) Patients, etc. I think not thus of all that are diligently Studious,
and most strict followers of those Fathers of Physic, Galen, and Hippocrates,
for I know many of them most learned, judicious, and discreet Persons; and what
they are not yet satisfied in, or cannot yet well assent to, they will not
however presently with a rash Malice, conclude, and condemn as Erroneous; Many
of them also (sometime strong Assertors of the Ancient Dogmatical method of
Physic, as the only safe, and most effectual way) have at last thought it no
shame to give place unto their better Considerations, and allow of Purity as
the only means to Perfection, and accordingly owned, and professed themselves
Med. utriusque studiosos, Persons allowing, and Studious as well of the
Chemical, as Galenical way of Medicines. Othersome of them have been so much
farther (from a daily clear Experience) convinced of the excellency of
Medicines purified, and separated from their dirty and drossie Parts, (which
are the only Obstructors of those admirable effects, they would otherways
produce) that they think nothing fit for administration in a Physical way, that
has not (in some measure) passed the Test of Chemical preparation, and
purification, which, (in brief) let the Sons of Art (I mean such as have made
some happy progress in their Labors, and so apprehend in few words things of
great moment) accept of, and receive from me as follows: As to the
preparation of Medicines, out of Vegetables, or Animals, thus. If thou would
have an Arcanum of Vegetables, first bring them, (viz.) the Vegetables, to a
due putrefaction, and fermentation; then abstract the volatile Parts; separate
their Phlegm, and other Impurities by due preparation; then, after a due
Incineration, or Calcination of their Cap. Mortuum, or Faeces, extract, and
purify the more fixed; join the fixed, and volatile in due order; digest, and
fix the Arcanum by fitting degrees of Heat; increase, or multiply it both in
virtue and quantity, by a due Nourishment, ex quo aliquod nascitur ex eodem
nutritur; do the like with Animals, except in fermentation, which, in their
preparation may be excused: As to the preparation of Metals, Bodies of all
other the most compact, and (almost) incorruptible, much might be said, not
intended at this time to be divulged; of Minerals, I shall at present say
nothing, and only give a short (and but a short) account of the preparations of
Metals for Physic, and to a Medicinal use; As to the making of most rich
Perfumes, we commonly assume the most pleasing and Odoriferous of Nature's
products; so doubtless, the best of Animals, and Vegetables, must of necessity
be the fittest Subjects to make, and prepare into the best of (such) Medicines;
We will also (as in reason we ought) suppose the like of Metals, and therefore
for Metallic Medicines, or our Metalline Arcanaes, assume and take the best of
Metals, (viz.) Gold, and Silver; The manner and method to prepare these, is
various, I shall only touch at two, and leave the rest to the search of those
that shall not in these find the Satisfaction they desire. The one is by a
Retexion, unweaving, or opening (may I so say) of what Nature so carefully
has, as it were, bound up, and concocted, and wholly, or in part, fixed,
(after her utmost preparation of Purification.) This by some has been called a
reduction of the subject Philosophical into its first matter, Sulphur, and
Mercury, (a Spiritual Body) etc.

This by othersome (and those such as think themselves no mean Proficients in
the search of Nature, and her choicest Secrets) has been laughed at, and
esteemed only a Philosophical fable: However, I dare, and do here affirm the
truth, and possibility of it, etc.

This Reduction, or Retexion of so perfect a Body as Gold is, has by one most
excellent English Philosopher (G. R.) been called a passing it per Rotam
Philosophiae, a carrying or passing it through the Wheel (or subtle
preparations) of Philosophy; and as Nature had her own Fire for the production
of this Physical Subject, (viz.) Gold, the perfectest of her Works, so (to
shorten somewhat our intended Operation) may we use the same Fire for the
Destruction, Reduction, Retexion, Regeneration, and Improvement of this her
utmost Masterpiece, to bring it to that height, which she of her self could
not advance it to, but left the Mastery to Art's Industry, (viz.) the
heightning her begun (and ended) Operation, to a supernatural degree of purity
and perfection, and that in a double, treble, ten-fold, or an hundredfold
degree, etc. beyond what she was of her self able to exalt it to.

I say, to this Operation we may (as most necessary) make use of her Magical,
yet natural Fire, the true Universal and Balsamic ignis Naturae, (or rather
contra Naturam, as here to be used, yet) the Original preservation, and
conservation of all products that the Eyes of Man do behold. The second, and
last preparation, I shall point at, is, the Reduction of our assumed, Medicinal
Subject, (viz.) Gold, by its Specificated humidum Radicale, (a true Metalline
fire) in speciem Naturae, into the same species of Nature, with this Metallic
volatile Fire, which, being by a true Philosophical skill, brought to this
pass, and Nature, it will not then be any hard matter to make a true Union of
our now Spiritual Body, with its true (Specificated) humidum Radicale, etc.

This is that great Philosophical Labyrinth, whose Clue has been sought by
many, but found by few. This is the Key that only opens unto us a Gate into the
greatest of Nature's Medicamental Secrets; It has therefore been very
sparingly mentioned by Philosophers, and if at any time touched upon, as
suddenly (as it was frugally, and sparingly discovered, or unveiled) again
clouded by some following Sophism. The most profound Lully is (indeed) herein,
somewhat more charitable than most others have been, where he tells us,
Spiritus non potest misceri cum corpore perfect, nisi eductum fuerit corpus in
speciem Naturae, idcirco qua do vis miscere corpus cum spiritu, reducendum est
corpus illud in speciem Naturae per vinculum amoris naturalis, etc.

A Spirit (says he) cannot be rightly joined with a Body, unless that Body be
first brought in speciem Naturae with that Spirit. If therefore thou would
(at any time) join a Spirit with any Body, thou must bring that Body into an
equality with that Spirit, etc.

Consider now well what I have here given thee a Light to; and weigh well the
great Charity of the said Venerable Lully in the following sentence, Corpora
praeparanda and reducenda sunt ad unam aequalitatem cum spiritibus, and ita
simul ponantur, and fiat verum matrimonium and conjunctio; nisi enim corpora
and spiritus quae conjungere vis, sint reducta ad unicam essentiam and unam
Naturam, non permiscentur and conjungantur, ut aqua cum aqua; decipiuntur
igitur Stulti, qui putant posse conjungere spiritus cum corporibus, in eorum
crassitie and diversitate Naturae, quoniam non fieri potest, donec deducantur
in unam aequalitatem formae.

Those Bodies (says he) that thou would join with Spirits, thou must first
reduce to the Nature of Spirits, so may they be put together, and a true
Matrimony, Union, or Conjunction be made; and herein are those Fools deceived,
that think to join Spirits with Bodies, in their grossness, and diversity of
Nature: This is altogether impossible, and therefore are they deceived in their
intentions. To strengthen this most rational Counsel of the most expert Lully,
take yet the farther advice of that great and knowing Philosopher Calid, Non
morabitur spiritus in corpore, nec cum eo ullatenus remanebit, quousque ipsum
corpus habeat ex subtilitate and tenisitate, ut habet spiritus, nam cum corpus
attenuatum fuerit, and subtiliatum and a sua densitate exierit, spissitudine,
crassitie and corporeitate ad spiritualem essentiam, tunc commiscebitur
spiritibus subtilibus and imbibitur in iis, and sic uterque evadit unum and
idem, and non separabuntur, sicut nec aqua mixta aquae, etc.

Then (says he, speaking of the conjunction of Spirits and Bodies to a
Physical use) will Spirits remain with the Bodies (thou would join them with)
when the Bodies are first brought back to the nature of Spirits, and a
Spiritual Essence from their gross and heavy Bodies, then will they remain with
one another, as Water with Water, inseparably, and never again be parted, Nam
natura Natura gaudet, and simile simili jungitur, etc. I have here given you
the Unanimous advice of two great Philosophers, toward the preparation of
Gold, and Silver, into the most excellent of Medicines. What I have here, with
the Authority of two such eminent Philosophers, intimated, (or rather plainly
declared) will happily by some be thought too trivial, and of small moment, or
concernment, toward the discharge of my promise in this point; and further,
demand how this is to be done, and when done, how farther to proceed with them
to the true conjunction, and creation of Medicine.

To these I shall answer, (in brief) thus, That, which I have here, in relation
to my promise declared, though I give it them (for their better satisfaction
and opinion of the thing) in the words of so great Authors, and not as from my
Self, and in my own Style and Dialect, (which I could also well have done) is
not, as they may deem it, an Admonition slightly to be passed over, and
forgotten; but such an one, as, if seriously considered, may in time bring them
no small way toward the enjoyment of their best of wishes.

As to the way and practice for the performance, I have also said more than
will, without much meditation, and consideration, be presently discerned: To
those that think I have done too little, I have done too much, and shall
therefore, lest I receive a worse reward, for a better and larger discovery,
leave them to their own Inquisition after that they desire. To the Grateful,
Modest, and Ingenious, I may possibly hereafter make some farther Explanation
of my meaning, and the true method, and means (but in a Philosophical style) to
attain to their desire (in a Physical way.) For I expect not in the generality
of the Students of Physic, the subtility of Geber, nor the profoundness of
Raymond Lully. I shall therefore hereafter (happily) in my (intended) Aurora,
give the Students of Physic, and searchers into Nature's admirable and most
mysterious Secrets, those advantageous Instructions, which my present Discourse
will not allow of; and therefore, if not yet understood, must (till then at
least, for any thing from me) remain a Secret, and indeed, such an one, as
being the Gate into the (Physical) Rosary of Philosophers, is only attainable
by the Astral Disciples, and Sons of Art, or those by Providence designed for
it, by their own endeavors: But to give (if possible) some present
satisfaction to the more quick apprehensions, how the second way of reducing
Gold into a Spiritual nature, by its proper Specificated humidum Radicale, (in
its natural form, or dissolved) and after into a most noble, and fiery (purple)
Medicine, may be performed: Take the following most clear light, and
instruction of Bernard, Trevisan. Nulla aqua (says he) naturali reductione
speciem metallicam dissolvit, nisi illa quae permanebit ei in materia and
forma, and quam metalla ipsa (dissoluta) possunt recongelare. No water (says
he) will naturally dissolve the Metallic body, (Gold, or Silver) but that,
which will, after dissolution, remain inseparably with it, both in matter, and
form, and which will afterward be congealed with (or by) the Metallic
dissolved Body, etc. The weight and clearness of this Instruction, I shall not
more insist on; I have now opened the Gate, where thou may enter into the
most spacious, and delightful of Nature's Courts; nay, I have farther led thee
into the path that will bring thee into her own choicest of Secrets, where I
also hold up the Curtain to thee, to behold ( Magnalia Naturae, or) Nature in
the greatest of her Majesty; but I forbear to speak more of these Mysteries,
known unto so few, lest I too much violate the just, and most reasonable
Injunctions of the Wise. I have said more than enough to the Ungrateful, and
sufficient to the Grateful, and Ingenious, Qui oculos habet videat, Qui aures
habet audiat, and capiat qui capere potest, etc.

If any one, from what I have in this friendly manner communicated as to the
preparations of Metals (and indeed the best of Metals) to a Physical use, shall
so far mis-construe my Instructions, as to imagine them to have relation to
Medicines, as well for Metalline, as Human Bodies. It lies not in my power to
command (or set bounds unto) his Thoughts, nor would I, if I could; let him
therefore freely, and fully use his liberty, and, if he can, make a benefit of
it beyond my Intentions, which are only Physical: He shall not yet fail of my
well-wishes to attend him, and his labors; Nor should I at all envy, but
rather rejoice at his happiness, that out of so poor a Mine, could draw
something toward so Rich a Jewel; and though they are things I pretend not to,
yet will I not rashly deny the possibility of them, (being in some measure
sensible of the great Riches, and Treasures of Nature) and as I will not deny
their reality, so neither will I affirm their certainty, but (whatever my
accidental, yet possible as much satisfactory, as wished for, or desired
experience in some small things (for I aim not at great ones) may have gained
upon my belief, and confidence of them) leave them in their own inestimable and
unvaluable worth, to be judged by more able and judicious Persons, etc.

I have happily said more than Discretion would I should, or than I shall receive
thanks for; of the Foolish, Empty, and light Critics, I expect it not: To the
truly Ingenious I know it will be as acceptable, as it is freely delivered; To
those only I write, and to those also I wish a prosperous success in their
honest endeavors and Search into the superabundant, and most inestimable,
Treasures of Nature.

A Continuation upon farther Consideration.
TO give the Ingenious yet a farther Testimony of my good and candid Intentions
toward them, and their prosperous success in Chemical Elaborations, and to
prevent the lasie, empty, and impertinent Critic, of his seemingly just Cavil
against my Obscurity; (as possible for want of Knowledge he may call my
(rather) too clear, and open Instruction) I here offer, both the one, and the
other, a most free and honest Exposition of my former hints and admonitions,
and that in the very words of the greatest and most able Masters in Physic and
Philosophy.

The specified Humidum Radicale of Metals, which I before spoke of, (to be now
more plain, and charitable than there I was) points only at the common
Quicksilver, or vulgar Mercury: For, that being first rightly prepared, and as
rightly dissolved, and distilled into a clear whitish Silvery and Crystalline
Liquor, is then the Specific, and only true Metalline dissolving Menstruum, or
Philosophic Mercury, amicable, or friendly to all Metals, and that only that
can radically reduce them and all Minerals to their first moist and unctuous
form and Essence. And now I have told them thus much in my own ruder Style, I
will yet, for their greater and fuller Satisfaction, let them also hear what a
most charitable and honest Adept tells us of the same thing, Ex mercurio vulgi
miris modis fit aqua and oleum, albissimum, veluti lac, cui si imponitur vel
aurum vel argentum, dissolvitur, and aurum and argentum in eo liquore, sicut
glacies in aqua calida, liquescit, and ita in sua principia seminalia
reducuntur and tunc summam cum principiis vitae nostrae conformitatem habent.
Et hoc modo, and tuta and efficacissima adversus quoscunque naturae nostrae
morbos reddere possis. Sunt quam plurimi qui hanc essentiam Mercurialem
conficere norunt, and perinde non opus est ut hic doceatur, and omnibus
communis and vulgaris fiat; etsi vulgaris esse meretur propter necessitatem in
Medicina: praestantissimum enim, imo divinum Medicamentum est, quo doctus and
prudens medicus and laudem and gloriam sibi comparare queat; Nihilominus cum
haec st totius Alchymiae Margarita, neque prostitui neque indignis communicari
debet. Secreta omnia Alchymiae ab illa dependent; is igitur qui eam cupiet,
studeat Alchymiae and ejus operibus secretis.

In this as candid as plain Sentence, he tells us, that out of the Vulgar
Mercury or Quicksilver may, after a wonderful manner, be made a Water, or Oil,
in which if we shall put either Gold, or Silver (first rightly thereunto
prepared) they will sweetly (and sine strepitu) be dissolved in it, as Ice in
warm water, and are thereby reduced into their first seminal principles (or
moist Essence) and have then a most near affinity, or conformity with our
Archeus or principles of life (or more plainly with our life it self) and are
also thereby rendered most safe and Efficacious Medicines against all diseases
whatever that afflict our weak bodies. There are (says he) many that know how
to prepare, or make this Mercurial Liquor, or Essence, and therefore it shall
not be taught, and made common to all, though truly for its admirable
Excellency, and virtue in Medicine, it deserves to be made public; for it is a
most noble and a divine Medicine, and such a one as by which the Prudent and
Conscientious Physician may acquire both praise, and glory; yet seeing it is,
as it is, the only Pearl, or great Arcanum of Alchymie, it must not be
prostituted (viz.) communicated to the unworthy. All the secrets of Alchymie
depend upon it. He therefore that desires it, let him diligently apply himself
to Chemistry and its secret Operations etc.

I shall not here spend time to answer the objections and cavills of those that
will perhaps tell me, that the Philosopher's Mercury is not the common Mercury,
nor is it prepared out of it; this in some sense is true, and I well know (and
it may be better than themselves) that the Philosophers point at and direct us
(though aenigmatically) to another Mercury, and also a compound of Mercuries,
or Mercurius duplicate called also their Mercury. But I as well know that, that
is not (always) their crude, acute, and sharp Menstrual, or dissolving
Mercury: But as Rich. Anglus, Albertus, Rhasis, the minor Rosary, and all
others, do inform us, their matured or sweet concoct, and Congeling Mercury;
cum mercurio seu argento vivo dissolvuntur corpora, eorumque naturae reserantur
and aperiuntur, and in primam materiam reducuntur. Mercurius autem ex
corporibus congelatis hoc facere non potest, quia illud sulphur per
congelationem alteratum est in Natura, quod non corrodit sicut primum. Rich.
Anglus, etc. And again, aqua quae in auro, and argento est, est dulcis, nec
dissolvens est, sed potius coagulans, and consolidans, quia est dulcis, non
habens virtutem acetosam. Albertus magnus; Omnia corpora ex mercurio suam
originem habent, and ex ipso generantur, and iterum in eum convertuntur; aurum
quod ex puro and vivo mercurio generatur, iterum ac Mercurium vivum
convertitur, and hoc solummodo per Argentum vivum and nullam aliam rem, omnia
corpora in Argentum vivum convertuntur; attamen, Argentum vivum ex auro long
majoris virtutis est, figitque citius quam illud argentum vivum quod nunquam
fuit, corpus, quia hoc ab isto multum superatur, quantum ad vim sulphuream,
quia argentum vivum ex auro calidum est, masculinum and siccum: Attamen ista
duo, quoad materiam, nullam habent differentiam; solummodo secundum digestionem
differunt, in quantum alterum istorum per calorem naturalem in visceribus
terrae decoctum est, Rosar. minor, etc.

You may now, by what I have thus freely produced from several Authorities,
easily discern the difference of their Mercuries; the one called their Crude
and dissolving, the other Concoct and congeling; this congeling Mercury (as one
rightly tells us) is called theirs, Sicut filius patris, quia non producitur
absque adjutorio Philosophi; quare merito dicitur ipsorum, quoniam eum usque ad
effectum producunt. This their congeling, or sweet coagulating Mercury, is
Mercurius aut auri aut argenti (viz.) the Mercury either of Gold or Silver;
that is, those bodies reduced into a running Mercury, or Quicksilver, and this
by some is sometimes (subtly) called only Theirs, amongst which R. L. in
effect tells us the same.

Nos dicimus quod Argentum vivum vulgar non potest esse argentum vivum
Philosophorum quocunque modo praeparetur.

It is true; common Mercury in this sense cannot be made their congeling
Mercury, or Mercury of bodies, because it is Crude, and never was yet a
perfectly decocted body, and so cannot be their Mercurius corporum, or Mercury
of bodies.

Yet does this not hinder but it may be made their dissolving or Menstrual
Mercury; for, though they tell us that the Mercury of bodies is altogether
necessary, yet do they not tell us (except delusively) that common Mercury is
not needful, and this R. L. is so charitable and genuine as really to confess
and declare unto us, where he thus says in Theorica Testamenti in clausula,
quae dicit quod argentum vivum vulgi non valet unum ficum putridum; hoc diximus
quia multum valet: and further affirms, that absque hac aqua Gloriosa argenti
Vivi nullum Sulphur naturae sublimari potest. But to return to our congeling
Physical Mercury, the bodies of Gold and Silver being reduced into running
Mercury will then Inseparably (and as R. L. tells us) per vinculum amoris
naturalis, join, unite, and mix with the common Mercury prepared, which then
(compound) Mercury is also many times called theirs. Sometimes their Rebis,
sometimes their red, and white Oil, and this is animated either with Gold, or
Silver: Sometimes by one Name, and sometimes by another: But to be short, what
ever they tell us of these Mercuries (as Geber does in a close Philosophical
way, Mercurius Mercurio facilius jungitur, and Mercurius Mercurio adhaeret is
only to inform us, that not the bodies, but the Mercuries of those bodies, or
the Mercury extracted out of those bodies, or those bodies reduced into
Mercury, will then radically, and inseperably unite with the Vulgar Mercury, or
Mercury of Jupiter, or Saturn, first Philosophically prepared for such a
Conjunction; which, while they remain in their gross bodies, they will never
do; for, nullum corpus (as ^^^er tells us) in natura sua manens Mercurium
coagulare potest etc. Corpora cum spiritibus minus conueniunt, neque
radicaliter conjungi possunt, quousque corpus habeat ex Natura spiritus, and in
unam aequalitatem naturae deducuntur.

Then, and not before, will they duly unite and join for the creation, or
production of Medicine; and then will the Mercury of the body, whether of Gold,
or Silver, which in opere Philosophico is loco masculi, because calidus and
siccus, congele, dry up, and fix, the common Mercury, or Mercury of imperfect
bodies, together with it self, into a most Noble Medicine, etc.

The reasons why, are too tedious (if not too great) here to be declared; but
my intention being to inform, (or at least to communicate my apprehension and
small abilities with) the ingenious Pyroes, and diligent Searchers into the
Science, and its Meandrous paths, not weary my self with opposers, (if they
believe not what is already said, and produced, as to the dissolving Menstruum,
or Metalline Mercury of Philosophers) I desire yet to lead them as it were by
the hand a little farther, and let them hear the Modern (but most ingenious) D'
Espagnet, Lunam Philosophorum (says he) sive eorum Mercurium, qui Mercurium
vulgar dixerit aut sciens fallit, aut ipse fallitur; Mercurium enim
Philosophorum argentum vivum esse, non tamen Vulgar, sed ab e^ extractum
ingenio Philosophico, Geber^ scripta nos docent.

If this suffice not, let them with patience hear him yet again in as clear a
discovery, Mercurius ex imperfectis metallis solus tincturae solis and lunae
suscipiendae in opere Philosophico aptus est, ut ipse tinctura plene imbutus
caetera uberrime tingat^ De Espag. Opus Arcan. Hermet. Scient. And M. S. in his
Nov. Lumen Chymicum tells us that Luna nostra est (non argentum vulgi) quae
recipit semen Auri -- What this Luna is you have but just now been informed by
D' Espagnet (viz.) that it is their Mercury, and their Mercury is their Luna,
and this Luna is common Mercury prepared. But this way, though it be to the
same effect and end with that intended by me, yet it is not the same manner of
process with it; for, this is by a reduction of the perfect Bodies, (viz.)
Gold, and Silver, into running Mercury, by vulgar Mercury prepared, (then
called theirs) and Mercurius animatus, or Rebis; or else a reduction of those
Bodies by some Philosophical Artifice into running Mercury, which was also
called, as I have said before, (^^cut filius Patris) their Mercury. This
Mercury, loco masculi, because calidus and ficcus, they joined, or united with
the common Mercury prepared, or the Mercury of the other imperfect Bodies, and
so proceeded farther, according to their secret Cabalistical and Philosophical
instructions: But there being (as Experience as well as Geber assures us) more
ways than one to one and the same end and purpose in this most noble Art, My
intention is to give some glance, or glimmering Light, to another way, which
some (from a more deep consideration of Nature, and as proceeding to a higher
Subtilisation, both of the vulgar Mercury, and also of the Bodies by it) have
given the name of Universal to; whereas the other, (they thought) in respect of
this, merited only the name of particular, which particular was, doubtless,
that of Bernard. Trevisan already cited, Nulla aqua Naturali reductione, etc.
But this of Trevisan being not (as I said) the method by me driven at, though
to the same purpose, (viz.) the production of a most excellent Medicine, both
for conservation, and restoration of Health: I will not longer withold the
desirous Reader from what I intend, and I hope will be for his Instruction, and
Advantage.

I have already declared, (my Thoughts) that the common Mercury prepared, and
afterward dissolved into a clear, milkie, Crystalline, and Silvery liquor, or
water, is the true Menstrual, or Metalline dissolving Mercury of Philosophers.

I have also already, by some eminent Authorities proved the same, (viz.) Ex
mercurio vulgi miris modis fit aqua and eleum, etc. But if that most rational
Instruction be invalid for the begetting a belief of the Verity of it, hear to
second it, the most profound R. Lully, Super omnes aquas mundi Aqua mercurii
vulgi necessaria est, quoniam si haberes omnes aquas Mundi (praeter hanc) non
potest cumillis transire, quiaista aperit and claudit nostram artem, and secum
portat clavem, and seram; ideo charissiman habeas, and nulli reveles, quia
esses excommunicatus a deo and Maledictus; Arcanum enim est, et donum Dei, and
Deus qui cognoscit corda hominum tribuit illud quibus illi placet.

Those that are not yet convinced, and satisfied, as to the Subjects, for the
production of the Philosophers both dissolving and congeling Mercuries, must
(for any thing from me) acquire their content by their own pains; if we must
and ought to believe Artists in their own Art, as most requisite it is, till
either our own reason, or experience, can better inform us, then doubtless if
we will meddle with Chemistry, and expect good from it, or our attempts in it,
we must for our instruction, and satisfaction, give credit to those that have
been, (or at least so accounted) the chiefest, and choicest Masters in it; upon
this score then, surely we may with more than common confidence, trust to, and
believe the forementioned Authors, not as the meanest, but most profound,
learned, and experienced in their Art; and consequently undoubtedly conclude,
that That most famous, and as much hidden as famous, and necessary Menstrual,
or dissolving Metalline Mercury of Philosophers, (for, I mean not their
congeling Mercury) is to be prepared out of the common Mercury or Quicksilver.
I pretend not my self a Master in these things, I only give my Conceptions, and
my Authority, or Ground for them, and so will not engage my self in the least,
as to a discovery of the preparation (whatever my Thoughts, or Experience may
warrant me to do) either of the vulgar Mercury, as to the Universal, or of the
Mercury of Bodies, with the Vulgar, to the particular; but I suppose, first
method of the Ancient Philosophers. In the preparation, if we may credit D'
Espagnet, Herculeus libor operanti incumbit; Nor indeed does it require less
skill than pains, nor a meditation inferior to either, for indeed these things
call for an immense Meditation, and invincible Patience, as well as an
Herculean labor, especially to the inexpert, and seeking Artist: But not to be
too tedious, for I have much exceeded my first intentions, which allowed not
the giving my Thoughts in so plain a Discourse as I have.

What I have done, I dare presume will save the Ingenious (not too Incredulous)
no small time, cost, and labor, which happily he might in vain spend about
Extraneous matters, besides that perplexity, and vexation of Spirit, which
most, with very little of satisfaction, do undergo in the search of it.

But to be yet a little more charitable, by a freeness in delivering of my
Opinion and Thoughts to the more diligent Inquisitors after real Knowledge in
this Art. I will yet give them the Admonitions of the most Knowing in it,
together with my own Conceptions (and indeed my Experience from some often
repeated Experiments) on them; and this to dissuade them from a fruitless
expense, both of time, cost, and labor, in the dissolution of Metals, for the
preparation of any noble Medicine, by Corrosives, Salts, or Saline liquors; of
which, how high an esteem soever some may have, I dare presume, their future
Experience, will, with their loss, reduce them to my Opinion, and a Grateful
acknowledgment of the honesty of Philosophers, in dissuading them from that
Destructive deceptory, and Erroneous way. First therefore, let us hear R. L.
Qui cum aquis fortibus dissolvunt, ignorant vegetabilia (viz. salia eorum)
menstruum nostrum ( Vegetabile viz. aut Minerale) acuentia; ignorant etiam
aquam Mercurii vulgi quam nos scripsimus in Testamento nostro; dissolutio enim
quae cum aquis fortibus fit, Non est sicut Natura postulat; aurum and argentum
dissolvuntur cum rebus radicalibus sui proprii generis, Non autem cum aquis
fortibus quae corrumpunt potius, quoniam illae aquae repugnant Naturae.

Hear to second it, Arnoldus, that plain and honest Master of the subtle R.
Lully; Aquae solutionis ex salibus, Aluminibus, and id genus aliis confectae,
quae cum metallis nullam cognationem habent, species metallorum non conservant,
at e contra destruunt and dissipant; His aquis contraria est aqua
Philosophorum, quae metalla conservat, subtiliora reddit, deinde dissolvit, and
magno consensu naturae ea in primam materiam transfert.

You have now the advice and caution of two of the most eminent Masters in
Physic, and Philosophy, that precedent Ages have produced, seriously
admonishing, not to endeavor a solution of Metals into their first Matter, by
corrosive and saline Spirits: What then is to be done, or what is the means and
way to dissolve Metals, and Minerals, radically to a Physical use. Certainly,
no other than, cum rebus Radicalibus, as R. L. tells us, (viz.) by their true
Specificate humidum Radicale, or first Matter, which (whatever some may imagine
to the contrary) is no other than common Quicksilver, or vulgar Mercury. He
that will, has liberty, without my regret, to slight what I here freely offer;
I value it not, I have already my reward, and command, for this my good will,
and seek it not from him, or any other: I deny not, but some Corrosive (or
Corrosives, in some sense) may be helpful to the Physician, or Philosopher,
toward the dissolution of Metals, and Minerals, to their Physical intents: And
this R. Lully tells us, Quamvis aliquantulum repugnat Naturae dissolvere per
ignem contra naturam, tamen siquis noverit iterum confortare per ignem Naturae,
opus complebit, etc.

To imprint yet the most necessary Use and Virtue of vulgar Mercury prepared,
in the Artist's good liking and opinion, and this for his own, not my
advantage; I desire him to hear yet this following short sentence of the
expert, and knowing Avicen. Argentum vivum, dum vivum fuerit, habet quaedam
opera; cum Mortuum, alia quaedam; cum autem dissolutum fuerit, habet opera
maxima. Sapientes faciunt ipsum spectare ignem, and tunc facit opera mirabilia,
and transmutationes, quia sicut mutatur, mutat, and sicut tingitur, tingit.

Quicksilver, or Argent vivum, (says he) while it is in its running form, or
vive Nature, has one kind of Operation; when mortified, other Operations; but
when dissolved, it performs the highest, and greatest of all. (And this R.
Lully also affirms, in Mercurio dissoluto absconditur magnum Secretum.) Wise
men know how to make it abide the Fire, and then it performs Wonders: For, as
it is changed, it changes, and as it is tinged, it tingeth; That is, as it is
impregnated, or animated, either with Gold, or Silver, (viz.) either of the
Luminaries, to a Physical use; so does it not only receive, and radically
unlock, or open their Bodies, but is the Vehiculum that transfers their Virtues
to us in a Medicinal way; and this for the preservation of Health, and
restoration of our infirm and decaying Constitutions.

Though I have thus fully, (and boldly) because warranted by the Authorities of
the most Eminent, and Experienced of the Philosophers, (and possibly by
somewhat of Experience) asserted the Verity of vulgar Mercury, or Quicksilver
being the true Subject, out of which their Mineral Philosophic Mercury, or
Menstruum, is to be had, and prepared; yet am I not ignorant, but well know,
that some of them, and especially R. Lully, does in most of his Writings point
at, and direct us to another more excellent, and noble Physical, or
Philosophical Menstruum, which he sometimes calls his Aqua Caelica, sometimes
his Menstruum Circulatum, sometimes his Menstruum Caelicum, sometimes his
Menstruum Vegetabile, sometimes by one name, and sometimes by another, by
which, all the Metals may be radically reduced into their first Matter; Cum
conservatione formae Vegetativae, and without which, the common, or vulgar
Mercury is not easily to be prepared, and made their Philosophic Mercury, or
Aqua gloriosa, as R. Lully has before called it.

Nor does here end the bounds, or extent of their Mercuries, not being confined
to one, or two; for, they have had several, (besides the Universal) as the
Mineral, Vegetable, and Animal Mercury; sometimes both joined in one, I mean
the Mineral, and Vegetable, which produced that potent dissolvent, or G.
Vegetabile of Raymund Lully, which few yet have well understood, or perceived;
of this, hear the profound Raymund himself, Et potest altum ingenium miscere
modos Mineralium and Vegetabilium and i^a Medicinas breviore via componere; an
ample and acute Genius, may, by the commixtion of the Mercuries, much shorten
the Works in production of Medicines, etc. But of these last Mercuries, or
Menstruums, I intend not at present to enlarge, they being the Gate into the
greatest of Chemical secrets; Let it suffice the Ingenious, that I have here
given him a Manuduction to the Fountain where I now leave him to draw, and
refresh himself with the Healing, and Physical waters, etc.

I once more request the Ingenious, not to interpret any thing, either of my
own Conceptions, or Instructions, or the Authorities of Philosophers produced
by me, to be by me understood, to speak such a thing, as now, even the Thoughts
of the Vulgar are much busied about, but little understand, (viz.) the great
Elixir; What I mind, is only Physical, and in relation to a Medicinal use, for
infirm and languishing Nature, which I firmly believe, was the intent, and only
chief intent, of the Ancient Philosophers, and not the Transmutation, (or more
properly) as indeed it is, the Maturation of imperfect Metals, and Minerals,
into Gold, and Silver.

We now daily see the great benefit that is received from Metals, and crude
Minerals, in a Physical way, though indeed very little, if any thing more than
externally altered from their Mineral, and Metallic form, and especially from
those of a Solar, and Lunar Nature, as Gold, Silver, Mercury, Antimony, etc.
Which, even by those crude and rustic (for I cannot well call them
Philosophical) preparations, do show, and exert their wonderful power, and
virtue, (and that most safely being rightly and discreetly administered) in a
Medicinal way. What then would they not do, if more Curious Artists did
Philosophically, and prudently prepare, open, and exalt them by such
preparations (as certainly they may, or can) to a height of Purity, and Virtue,
a thousand times beyond what those trivial and weak preparations do give them.
And if Crude Mercury may safely be administered, and also to good effect, and
somewhat prepared yet, to a better effect; and if Gold in its firm and solid
body, as the Galenists tell us, only boiled in broth, be so restaurative and
comfortable; what may not these and the like Metalline, and Mineral subjects be
exalted, raised, and advanced to, for Physic, by a true Philosophic knowing
Artist? Certainly they must needs be (and I think I may with confidence affirm,
that they will then be) the true Aurum and Argentum Medicum of Philosophers,
and Physicians, or the true Potabile, or universal Medicine sought by many, but
found by few.

I have now said all I yet will, and (as I said before) much more than I at
first intended. It is very plain, and indeed too plain, if I did not know that
a Providence attends the Actions of all, and that it shall be for their good,
and light only, that are Astrales discipuli, and whom God intends (and has
fitted) for it; to whose alseeing Providence, guidance, and tuition I commend
it, and under that seal do leave and bequeath it, to those prepared for it, and
a fundamental inspection into the secrets of Nature. Let none imagine I know
more than I have here delivered, and so attempt in vain (by subtility of
discourse) a farther discovery from me, I aim not at great matters; to know
God, and the Natures of the Creatures, is all I seek, and all I desire in this
World. My intention, and highest ambition in the prosecution of a discovery of
Natures secrets by Chemical Operations, is only Physical, and more I will never
pretend to, nor acknowledge, what ever I may be blessed with. Let none
therefore expect that from me that I own not my self Master of; he that does,
and fails of his expectations, let him not hereafter blame me, but himself. I
wish happiness unto all, but more particular unto the industrious, and
ingenious, and while I live, will not be wanting in some measure by my mean
abilities, advice, and acquired experience, faithfully to admonish, and further
them, in their laborious search and inquiry, into Nature's Medicamental and
Magical secrets, and her ample (and indeed) infinite treasures, and this to
render our lives both happy and healthful, till God call for our Souls.

I court not any for their good Opinion of me, or what I have done; If any
traduce me as immethodical, I am not displeased with his Censure: Such a one
thoroughly knows not either me, or my intent; by this discourse I shall please
those I intend it for; for others, as I leave to their humor, so I desire them
freely to allow me my Liberty. Velle Suum cuique est, nec voto Scribitur uno.

An Expostulatory Conclusion to my Ingenious Countrymen, in behalf of Chemistry
and Chemical Medicines.
WHen I consider how great an opposition truth and knowledge do yet find, and
that even from those that pretend themselves the only and greatest advancers of
her Ends, and Interest, I am no less amazed at their unworthiness than at the
dullness, stupidity, and folly of others, that suffer themselves, like
Children, to be cheated with Pebbles, instead of Pearls. I freely and from my
heart protest, I have not any thing of prejudice, or envy toward the Persons
of any; what I now do, or hereafter (possibly) may do, is only out of an innate
Zeal I have to truth, and real knowledge: That which we Cordially fancy, we are
all of us apt to defend, and speak well of; for my own part, I do above all
things under the Sun highly and truly esteem and value knowledge; nor have I
spared either time, pains, or means (according to my ability) to improve those
small Talents bestowed upon me by Almighty God. Nor shall I, as long as God
shall please to continue me amongst the living, think any thing in this world
comparable unto it; it has been, is, and I hope always shall be (with King
Solomon) the sum of my petition unto my Creator, that he would vouchafe me
Wisdom, and a knowing Heart, and with the wise Trismegistus in his Pimander,
Deum cognoscere rerumque causas; To know God and the causes of things. To know
God (except by immediate inspiration of his holy spirit) I know not, nor have
the wise hitherto found, any better way or Medium, than by a diligent search
into Nature, that so per visibilia invisibilia, by the work, the workman might
in some measure be known unto us: Or the great Creator, by the many small
Creations set before us. If this be true, and Knowledge the only desirable Jewel
for us, to seek and search after, I hope none can blame me for my good intents,
nor think other ways of my opposits than Scientiae inimicos; and Scientia non
habet inimicos nisi ignorantes, etc. Simile simili facile jungitur, Natura
Natura laetatur and gaudet, and contrarium suum contrarium non minus facile
oppugnat.

As for Chemistry, in whose defense (without envy unto any) I purposely intend
these few lines, it has been, and still is most deservedly esteemed by the
Wise, the most excellent of Arts, and Queen of Sciences, and has therefore
been still kept secret amongst them, and such Papers, or Manuscripts, as
treated of it, or the excellency of it, still delivered from one to another as
their chiefest Testimonies of favor and friendship, and accordingly with
greatest care preserved amongst their choicest Jewels, and this because it was
the only Gate that led us into the greatest of Natures most admirable secrets,
and unvaluable Treasures, and that not only in relation to external
accommodations, and the large benefits which might many ways be attained unto
(as daily experience does now testify unto us) but also for that it gave us
the means to prepare us such most wholesome, safe, and efficacious Medicines as,
by their quick, safe, and pleasant curing both external, and internal maladies,
and distempers, might render our lives much more happy than otherwise they
could possibly be without them. Innumerable, certainly, are the benefits we
receive, and still shall receive, by Chemistry, and Chemical preparations; for,
taken in its true genuine definition and intention, it is no other than an Art
that does both teach and enable us (for our exceeding good and benefit) to
separate Purity from Impurity, exalt, and advance what God and Nature has
given us, to a farther and higher perfection than we receive it endowed with;
in which sense, if we shall well and truly consider it, what have we in this
curious, and nice Age, either for Back, or Belly, Pleasure, or Necessity, that
has not in some measure been obliged to Chemistry, and its beneficial
Operations, for that perfection we receive it in? What calling may be said to
have attained to the perfection, and height it now glories in, without her help
in some one or other of her (more sublime, or trivial) Operations? Consider our
daily Viands, Consider our Bread, our Beer, our Wine, our sweet Confections;
consider even what you will that can any way render our lives happy or
satisfactory; consider it seriously, and you will find it in one degree or
other to have passed under the hand of Chemistry, and her various Operations or
Preparations. Can we then be thus insensibly led to admit of her daily help and
assistance in things of smallest value, and can we be so stupid, dull,
ignorant, and blind, as to neglect her assistance in things of greater moment,
and the greatest of Concerns? And not only neglect her advice, but deny her
friendly, and most profitable hand in those things which above all other (our
reason will tell us) we most need her help in? Nay, we do not only deny her to
make us happy, but we seek by all means possible to disgrace, slander, and make
her contemptible, nay, odious to the whole World. Doubtless, in these our
Follies, (for I cannot call them otherways) we declare our selves, either very
Ignorant, (which we all shun, and hate to be esteemed) or else very Self-ended,
and Malicious. Can we, with Alacrity, and the greatest of Content, admit, and
allow her favors, (nay, greedily seek after them) to improve, and maintain our
Purses, and Pleasures? and cannot we admit, and embrace her help for the
preservation of our Health, without which, the other will be of little benefit,
and less pleasure? As for my self, I am resolved to follow the Dictates of
Reason, that only and sure Balance, given Us by Almighty God, to weigh what
may be most for our present, and future good: Et Ratio sat luminis habet and
ipsa Lumen est, quo res omnes ut se habent percipere possumus. Faber, cap. 33.
Panchim. lib. 2. Nor will I in the least oppose her sacred Admonitions; I own
her as my Mistress, and will accordingly stand for her, Amicus Galenus, Amicus
Hippocrates, at magis amica Ratio, veritas, et sapientia; I acknowledge the few
favors we received from Galen, and the little good we reap by Hippocrates, but
yet will not deny Verity, or forsake Wisdom in favor of either. I acknowledge,
we are obliged to their Labors, for the Knowledge left unto us by them, but
think not my Self, or any other, at all engaged there to set up our Rest, and
Herculean stops, or a non ultra, to all farther inquisition and search after
Knowledge. God is still the same, and has infinity of Knowledge yet to bestow
upon Man in his own good time of Providence, and Dispenfation, and therefore
not to be bounded, or confined in the narrow Pages of a London Galenical, or
any other, Pharmacopaea; and this we daily are, or may be, convinced of:
Therefore, whereas I in some measure honor Galen, and Hippocrates, and have
also a due esteem for those that profess themselves their followers, and truly
more should have, were they not so strong Assertors of their failing Doctrines;
yet cannot I think those of them Unblameable, who so Vigorously, and
Obstinately oppose Truth, and a farther manifestation of VVisdome. Why should
we not as readily admit, nay, with all our power encourage an improvement in
the Science of Physic, or Medicine, as in all other Mundane affairs? If to
render our Lives happy, in the time of Nature's greatest Vigor, we must not
only admit, but studiously endeavor all such ways as may continue and promote
our Health; Why may we not with as great (if not greater) care and reason, do
the same in the time of her impaired Forces, debilitation, and fear of her
utter loss? If our usual Food be rendered by several Chemical, or preparing
means, much pleasanter for our Pallats, and fitter for our Stomach's Digestion,
where Nature and her Archeus are yet powerful; Can we in the least question,
but Physic may also be rendered much more safe, delightful, and proper for her,
(by the same means) when she most needs out assistance, and utmost help? And if
Nature by some decay be weakened, and oppressed, that she cannot accept of her
usual and accustomed Food, so as she would, and ought to dispose of it for the
supply of her Spirits, and the maintaining of her Habitation; If she cannot, (I
say) here in her ordinary course, so play the Chemist, as usual; Doubtless, she
is less able to do it, in that which the very Name, as well as the Nature of
it, makes her utterly to abhor, and reject; and, if she be not strong enough to
separate the Quint-essence of her daily and accustomed Food, how shall she
extract any thing from her Physic, that may give that relief her present
Condition requires, and calls for? She has here a double task to perform,
first to extract her relief, and then to make use of it. It would doubtless,
therefore, in this case, be far better, to save her that labor of separation
in this her weakened Condition; for, of necessity, either the Physician, or
Nature, must officiate, or act, as Chemist, before Nature can have, or receive,
what she calls for, and requires for her help, and assistance. Who therefore,
not Drowned in Ignorance, or Drunk with Malice, and Envy, would so strongly
oppose so great a Good, as Chemistry is the Author (and sole Author) of? How
loathsome is even the very name of Physic unto debilitated Nature! and what is
the reason? Doubtless, the hard task she has put upon her by it, and even when
she is least able to perform it, and has more need of succor, than of a
farther trouble. How shall she receive so great a Potion of loathsome Medicines,
being weak, when, even in the greatest of her Strength she would loath (not
only) to take (but also be troubled at the sight of) it! and this from a secret
Sense and Antipathy, her Archeus has against its nauseating and foeculential
Quality, as well as the greatness of its Quantity. What remedy is then to be
used? Certainly, no other or better can any way be found out or propounded,
than to fit and prepare those Subjects we intend for her relief, and that, by
such means, and ways, as may make them fit for her weakest of Conditions, and
they can no way else be so fitted, as by Chemistry, and its (Spagirical)
Operations, which seperates all Impurity, from the pure and Medicinal part, and
so renders it apt and fit for Nature's more easy Reception; and the end she
requires it for. Why then should any so Obstinately oppose so clear a truth, as
the Excellency of Chemistry, in the preparation of Medicines, if compared with
the other most rotten, and ineffectual foundation of Physic? Or why do the
Galenists cry out against us in things they understand not? Or, if they will
say, they understand them to be such, as they incessantly rail at them to be,
(viz.) Dangerous, Poisonous, and no way fit to be administered; Why do they make
any use of them? Why do they steal our Extractum Rudii, (alias, Extract
Catholicum Paracelsi?) Why our Laudanum? Pilula Alaephang? Why have they any
thing to do with our Oleum Vitrioli, Oleum salis Communis, Oleum Sulphuris per
campanam, Mercurius Vitae, Infusio Croci Metallorum, Mercurius, sublim. Dulcis,
Mercurius praecip. Dulcis? Why our Chemical Distilled Oils, as Oils of Spices,
Oils of Woods, Oils of Seeds? Why administer they, or prescribe they any of our
simple, or compound Distilled Waters? Show me any of these Oils in Galen, or
any of those Cordial Spirits in Hippocrates. Why do they Rail at us, and yet
make use of our Medicines, as the best and most effectual they have? and can
they thus make use of our worst of preparations, and yet enviously slander the
best? Certainly, it savours of much Malice, and more Folly. But to give Limits
to this my just Zeal, for Truth, and a public Good, I shall give my
Countrymen (yet Ignorant of the benefit of Chemistry, and Chemical Medicines)
some small and brief account of Chemistry, in its Genuine, and true Sense; and
some Reasons for the excellency of Chemical Medicines, above those we usually
term Galenical, and then leave both the one, and the other, to their better
consideration. Chemistry, that most noble of Sciences, and beneficial of all
Arts, is not (as yet falsely by many supposed) a Tractation, or Operation only
about Metals, but it is an Art invented, and adorned, by the continual
Meditations and Labors of the most Wise and Prudent of Men, and such a one as
teaches us to improve, and make use of, as well Animals, and Vegetables, as
Minerals, and Metals, both to Physical, and all other necessary Uses, though at
first indeed intended more properly to Physic, and a Medicinal use. The word
is a Greek word, which is (...), its Derivation or Composition from (...) and
(...), id est, (quasi) Salem fundere, to melt Salt, or a fusion of Salt, or
which was, and is more properly the true Sense of it, and intent of Chemistry
in it, as to Physic, to prepare Medicine so, as to bring it to the nature, and
form, of a fixed, and fusible Salt, Quo habito (sive ex Animalibus,
Vegetabilibus, aut Mineralibus) Laudandus sit Deus: and so indeed ought all
Medicine to be, before it can be said to be perfect Medicine. Now separation,
as well as several other Operations, being most necessary for the Completion of
this ultimate intent, and perfection: The Art was also by the Wise called Ars
Spagirica, that is, Ars Separatoria, from (...) Separo, because Purification,
which must of necessity also precede the ultimate intent of this Art, could not
be performed without due, and often repeated separation. See now in two or
three words, the true and full intent, scope, and design of Chemistry, that
most excellent (and therefore most unworthily despised) Science. I shall not
therefore be tedious, I shall now give only a small Light, as to the excellency
of Chemical Medicines, (above all others) if rightly prepared, and accordingly
commend them to my Country, as the most safe, most pleasant, and most
effectual, and which is also no small argument for their welcome, (all things
considered) the most cheap of Medicines.

Chemical Medicines are, of all others, being rightly prepared, the most noble,
and excellent, and this will appear as well by Reason, as daily Experience; the
later is now so common, I need not say more of it: As for Reasons, take these
few following, Let us consider, what it is that gives eminency, and perfection,
to any one thing we esteem as excellent, we shall find that it is the purity of
it, and that, either in the Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral Nature; if we
consider then, what we are now speaking of, (viz.) Medicine, prepared by
Chemical preparations, we must also conclude its efficacy, and excellency, to
proceed from its purity, or purified Nature. Let us yet farther consider what
it is for; it is to help, and restore decayed Nature, and her languishing
Archeus. What is this Nature, and her Archeus? It is the most subtle, and pure
Spirit of Man, or Woman, and therefore no way to be assisted, but by that which
is of purity, and likeness with it, (viz.) Medicines of a pure, subtle, and
penetrating Nature. The consideration of Nature will tell you, what her
Medicines ought to be; and a true consideration of such Medicines, will teach,
and tell you, what Nature is, so that the quality of the one, will inform you
what the Nature, and Essence of the other ought to be; a serious consideration
then of Nature, will tell you the quality of the Medicines you ought to use for
her relief, and assistance, which is, that they be of most subtle and thin
parts. This made Hippocrates tell us, that the excellency of Medicine consisted
in its subtility, and thinness, by which it was the more able to protect, and
assist, decayed Nature in her disturbed Condition; and though amongst many
things, (or Species) some may be said to be of more thin, and subtle parts, in
respect of some others; yet the most thin, and subtle, as Nature produces
them, come extremely short of that subtility, which this Art, by its purging
preparations, can raise even the most dull, and gross of Specificks to: Herein
then is the excellency of Chemical Medicines, above Galenical, Chemistry being
able to exalt the most dull, and inactive of Medicines, to the greatest of
subtility, and far beyond what Nature presents them to us in. Nor does she thus
exalt their purity, and efficacy, as to the Cure of all, both inward, and
outward Distempers, but renders them (may I so say) in a manner Immortal, that
is, Incorruptible; Which, the best of Galenical Medicines, cannot in the least
boast of, few, or none of them being able to continue one poor Year, without
some notable (if not a total) expiration of their Virtue. How then should these
poor, dirty, and drossie Medicines, answer those great Ends we administer them
for? How shall they root out inveterate, fixed, and chronick Diseases? How
shall they purify the Impure, or help the Infirm, who are not yet Cured of
their own Corruption, and Infirm condition? If it shall be, as usually it is,
unadvisedly, and very inconsiderately Objected, that their Medicines are safe,
and that ours, either quickly Cure, or quickly Kill; Let me tell them, they in
this very Objection, grant much more than they are aware of, for nothing can
quickly Cure, but what is really Efficacious, and fitted for so great a good,
which, nothing can be, that is not in some measure pure, and like unto the
Nature it shall so assist; Herein then, inconsultly do they affirm, the
excellency of our Medicines. If they say then, they as suddenly Kill, I must
return them this answer, that it is, when administered by their hands that know
them not. Ex quovis ligno non fit Mercurius, Galenists are not fit to use
Paracelsian Medicines, (until they have entered the Chemical Schools, and
Laboratories) which, by reason of their excellency, subtle, and enlivening
Faculty, are not to be administered by Quarts, or Pints, but by Drops in proper
Vehicles; not by Pugils, or Ounces, but by Grains, half Drachms, or Drachms,
(at most) being to help Nature, not stuff up the Body, (already too much
Obstructed) and so hinder, rather than farther her Restoration. However,
knowing sufficiently the dullness, and inefficacy of their own Medicines, they
must still be nibling at ours, and yet revile them, when they have answered
their desires; and, if at any time they are too Keen for their Skill, and
Knowledge, they are then most Damnable, and presently to be Cursed with Bell,
Book, and Candle, and not one of them to be left in their Galenical
Antidotaries. I would, they would turn them quite out, or else acknowledge
them, (as indeed they are) the best Flowers in their Garden; Let them not use
ours, and we will faithfully promise them never to make use of theirs. Ours
decay not by length of time, theirs putrify, and corrupt, even in a Years
time; Ours safely, pleasantly, and quickly Cure, theirs do rather hinder, than
farther Nature in her own Operation, and can only, when Nature has Cured her
self, rob her of the praise and glory of a Cure, which she her self has
performed: But I hope the time is now coming, when Ingenuity shall flourish,
seeing many of those that not long since opposed this so noble a Science, do
now at last begin to appear its real Friends, Defenders, and Propagators; and
when declaredly such, I shall wish them their utmost due, with a continued
remembrance of their Names unto succeeding Generations, as the worthy Promoters
of so public and great a Good.

A POSCRIPT To the Ingenious and Physically Studious READER.
I Intend also (how soon I cannot yet say) to present unto the Ingenious,
Industrious, and Knowledge-Seeking-English, whose sullen Fate, slender and mean
Education affords them only the benefit of what is published in their own
Mother Tongue, a small, but very plain, and Methodical Treatise in English, as
the (smaller Radii, glimmering Beams, or) Aurora, to a greater approaching
Light, teaching a Spagirical (or Chemical) preparation of Animals, Vegetables,
Minerals, and Metals, to a Physical use, (viz.) the Separation of their
Quintessential, Medicinal, Fixed, and Volatile parts; the Purification,
Reunition, or Conjunction, and Coction of the said parts, into most noble,
efficacious, and powerful Medicines, Arcanaes, and Physical Elixirs, and this
in a higher, or lower degree, according to the Subtle Genius, Industry, and
Prudence of the Artist; Most useful, and beneficial for the Preservation of the
present, and Restoration, or Recovery, of the decayed, or lost Health of Man.
The improvement, and farther consideration, may (happily) prove a Gate to other
Secrets; Yet, if any One, in the mean time, either diligently Studious of
Physic, or otherways curious in the search of the secrets of Nature, and Art,
be desirous to be instructed in the Grounds of Chemistry, or the Spagirick Art,
and shall in a reasonable and modest way request my instruction, and assistance
in it, I do hereby promise him a faithful Manuduction, and Introduction, and
that by plain Demonstration, and Practice, to the true and full grounds,
intent, and scope of Chemistry, and this either as to Physical preparations, or
other Nature-searching, delightful, and pleasant Operations; Chemistry being
the most noble, and transcendent of Arts, and, by which only, and not
otherways, and this in a more sublime, or mean degree, according to the Acute
Ingeny, Patience, Prudence, and Neatness of the Operator, whether in Medicinal
preparations, or other choice Arcanaes, may something of excellency be
expected, and produced, and perhaps the wished perfection, utmost aim and end
of our desires (at last) be obtained. My earnest desire of advancing,
improving, and promoting (more for a general Good, than my own private Benefit)
this so noble a Science, and opening a Gate for entrance into the infinite
Treasures of Nature, both for Health, and other Happiness, closely shut up and
contained in the Creature, is the chief inducement to this Additional proffer,
and the public Notice of

E. Bolnest, Med. Land.
From my House in Jewen-street, near Cripplegate, April 14th. 1665.
Books Printed at the Theater in Oxford, and Sold by Peter Parker at the Leg
and Star right against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, viz.
A Fair Printed Bible, with Bishop Ushers Chronology, with the Common Prayer
and Apocripha, or without them: in 4to.

1. The third part of the Bible, viz. Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and
Canticles, of a fair Print; to which may be added the Common Prayer, New
Testament and Singing-Psalms, in Octavo. 2. An English New Testament, with a
Fair large Print, for weak eyes, in Octavo. 3. Another Testament, in Quarto. 4.
Another Testament in Twelves, of a fair Print for Children to learn by. 5. A
very curious Church Bible, with the Chronology of a fair large Print, in
Foiio. 6. A Latin Testament of a fair Print in Twelves, for the use of Schools.
7. Senecae Tragaediae, in Twelves, 8. Elegantiae Poeticae, in Twelves. 9.
Cornelius Nepos, in Twelves. 10. Justini Historici, in Twelves 11. Homeri
Illias notis Didymi, in Octavo. 12. Plinii Epistolae, in Octavo. 13.
Quintiliani Declamationes, in Octavo. 14. Theocritus in Greek, in Octavo. 15.
Maximus Tyrius, in Twelves. 16. A Greek Testament with Curcelleus's and others
Notes, in Twelves. 17. Salustius cum notis, in Twelves.
There is now in the Press at the Theater, a large Quarto Bible of a fairer
Character than ever yet was extant, with Chronological Notes and other useful
tables.

Books of Divinity Printed at London.
The Key of the Bible, unlocking the richest Treasury of the Holy Scriptures;
whereby the Order, Names, Times, Penmen, Occasion, Scope, and principal Parts;
containing the Subject matter of the Books of the Old and New Testament, are
familiarly and briefly opened, for the help of the weakest capacity in the
understanding of the whole Bible: A Book singularly useful for private
Families. By Francis Roberts D. D. Rector of Wrington in Somersetshire, in
Folio.

Nineteen Sermons, being the first Legitimate Essay of the Pious Labors of
that Learned Orthodox, and indefatigable Preacher of the Gospel Mr. Josiah
Shute, Published by Dr. Edward Spark, in Folio.

Sions prospect in its first View, presented in a Summary of Divine Truths,
consenting with the Faith professed by the Church of England, confirmed from
Scripture and Reason, illustrated by Instance and Allusion: Composed and
Published to be an help for the prevention of Apostasy, Conviction of Heresy,
Confutation of Error, and Establishing in the Truth. By Robert Mossom Dr. in
Divinity, in 4to.

Index Biblicus, or an exact Concordance to the holy Bible according to the
last translation, whereunto are added the marginal readings, with the
acceptations, and various significations, of the principal words contained in
the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, composed in a new and most
comprehensive Method, and adorned with diverse significant and and pregnant
Scripture phrases, By John Jackson Minister of the Gospel at Mulsea in Surrey,
in Quarto.

The works of Mr. Richard Allen Late Minister of Batcomb in Somersetshire, in
four parts, viz. Vindiciae Pietatis, or a Vindication of Godliness in the
greatest Strictnes and Spirituality of it, from the imputations of Folly and
Fancy, together with several Directions for the Attaining and Maintaining a
Godly Life, in Octavo.

Secondly, The Godly man's Portion and Sanctuary, in Octavo.

Thirdly, Heaven opened, or a brief and plain discovery of the Riches of Gods
Covenant of Grace, in Octavo.

Fourthly, The World conquered, or a Believers victory over the World, laid
open in several Sermons, on 1 John. 5.4. in Octavo.

The Pagans debt and dowry, or a brief discussion of these questions, Whether,
how far, and in what sense such Persons of Mankind amongst whom the letter of
the Gospel never came, are notwithstanding bound to believe on Jesus Christ?
with some other particulars relating hereunto. Whereunto is added the Authors
opinion concerning Election and Reprobation, the Death of Christ, the Grace of
God in and about Conversion, the Liberty or Power of the Will or of the
Creature man, the Perseverance of the Saints, etc. By John Goodwin-Minister of
the Gospel, in Octavo.

A Metrical Paraphrase upon the Four Evangelists, being the History of our Lord
and Savior. By Elisha Coals. in Octavo.

The best Acquaintance and highest Honor of Christians, or a Discourse of
Acquaintance with God, upon Job 22.21. Acquaint thy self with him, and be at
Peace, etc. By Matthew Newcomen late Minister at Dedham, in Octavo.

St. Paul's Progress upon Earth about a Divorce betwixt Christ and the Church of
Rome, by reason of her Dissoluteness and Excess, recommended to all
Tender-Conscienced Christians, A fresh fancy full of Various strains and
suitable to the times. Translated out of Italian into English in Octavo.

Divine Meditations upon several Subjects, whereunto is annexed Gods Love and
Man's Unworthiness, with several Divine Ejaculations. By John Quarles. in Octavo.

The Prayer of Prayers, Or the Lords Prayer Expounded. By Thomas Bevan. M. A.
in Octavo.

Historical Contemplations, as also Scriptural and Occasional Observations,
together with their Divine Improvement and Applications. By Caleb Trenchfield,
late Minister of Cheapsted in Surrey 8o.

The Murderer punished and pardoned, or a true Relation of the Wicked Life,
and shameful happy Death of Thomas Savage, Imprisoned, justly condemned, and
twice Executed at Ratcliff, for his bloody Fact in killing his Fellow Servant.
On Wednesday October 26. 1668. To which is annexed a Sermon preached at his
Funeral. in Octavo.

The Souls preparation for Christ, or a Treatise of Contrition; wherein is
discovered how God breaks the Heart, and Wounds the Soul in the Conversion of a
Sinner to Himself. By Thomas Hooker, Twelves.

The Supplications of Saints, A Book of prayers for every day in the week, and
for all conditions, by Thomas Sorocold, the 39th. Edition, Twelves.

Sacred Principles, or a Manual of Devotions made up of three Parts, 1. The
Grounds of Christian Religion, and the Doctrine of the Church of England, as
differing from the now Roman, and the new Reformed ones. 2. Daily and weekly
Forms of Prayers, fortified with holy Scriptures, Meditations and Rules, to
keep the Soul from the common Roads of sin, and carry it on in a mortified
course. 3. Seven charges to Conscience, delivering (if not the whole body,) the
main limbs of Divinity, which is the Art not of Disputing, but living well, by
Will. Brough, D. D. late Dean of Gloucester, twelves.

The return of Prayers, A Treatise wherein this Case how to discern Gods answer
to our Prayers is briefly resolved, with other observations upon Psalm. 85. and
the 8th. concerning Gods speaking peace, by Thomas Goodwin, D. D. twelves.

Several pieces written by the Author of the Whole Duty of man, viz.

The Ladies calling, in Octavo. The Government of the Tongue, Octavo. The Art
of Contentment, Octavo. The Christians Birthright, Octavo. The Sinners Tears,
made up of Meditations and Prayers, by T. Fettiplace. Twelves.
Books of Philosophy, Physic, Husbandry, Mathematics, etc.
MOsaical Philosophy, grounded on the Essential Truth, or Eternal Sapience
written by Robert Flud, Doctor in Physic. In Folio.

Maxims of State and Government, in diverse Politic discourses written in
Italian by Paulo Paruta, A Noble Venetian. Englished by a Person of honor.
Folio.

The Anatomy of Melancholy, What it is, with all the Kinds, Causes, Symptoms,
Prognostics and Several Cures of it, in three partitions with their several
Sections, Members and Sub-sections; Philosophically, Medicinally, Historically
opened and cut up by Robert Burton, with a Satirical preface conducing to the
following discourse. The 9th. Edition Corrected and Amended, Folio.

An English Dictionary, Explaning the Difficult terms that are used in
Divinity, Husbandry, Physic, Philosophy, Law, Navigation, Mathematics, and
other Arts and Sciences, very useful (for such as are ignorant in the Latin and
Greek Languages) for the better understanding what they read. By Elisha Coals
late of Magd. Col. Oxford. in Octavo.

Cottoni Posthuma, diverse Pieces of that Renowned Antiquary, Sir Robert Cotton,
Knight and Baronet. in Octavo.

The Manner of Raising, Ordering, and improving Forest and Fruit Trees: also
how to Plant, Make and Keep Woods, Walks, Avenues, Lawns, etc. with several
Figures proper for Avenues and Walks to end in, and convenient Figures for
Lawns; Also Rules and Tables showing how the ingenious Planter may measure
Superficial Figures, with Rules how to divide Woods or Land, and how to measure
Timber and other Solid Bodies, either by Arithmetic or Geometry, showing the
Use of that most Excellent Line, the Line of Numbers, by several New Examples;
with many other Rules useful for most Men, by M. Cook, Gardener to the Earl of
Essex. 4to. to which is added a Treatise of subterranean Treasure, by Sir H.
Platt.

An Introduction into the Greek Tongue, in most plain manner, delivering the
principal matters, of the Grammar thereof, so far forth as may help toward the
understanding the Greek Text of the holy Gospel, composed for their sakes that
understand not Latin, and yet are desirous to have some competent knowledge in
the Original Sacred Scripture. By Edmund Reeves, Dr. in Divinity, and
Instructor in the Oriental Tongues. 4to.

A Treatise concerning Tongues, appertaining to learning the Hebrew, Greek,
Latin, Chaldean, Syrian and Arabian Tongnes, showing and in how short a time a
student may receive such Instructions and Directions in any one of them, as
whereby he may proceed in the understanding of the Language, using the books
requisite thereunto, etc. by Edmund Reeves. 4to.

Certain Grammatical Chapters serving to introduce into the Common Grammar,
whereunto is added a brief declaration, how this and some other Grammatical
Books are to be used. By Edmund Reeve. 4to.

The construction of those Rules in the Latin Grammar, which were omitted in
the book called Lillies Rules and Syntaxis construed, being helpful to young
Scholars, also to others for their further progress in the Latin Tongue: by
Edm. Reeves. 4to.

Observations on the present manners of the English, briefly Anatomizing the
Living by the Dead, with a useful detection of the Mountebanks of both Sexes.
By Richard Whitlock Doctor of Physic. Octavo.

Morbus Polyrhizos and Polymorphaeus, a Treatise of the Scurvy. Examining the
different opinions and practices of the most solid and grave writers concerning
the Nature and Cure of this Disease, by Everard Manwaring Doctor in Physic.
Octavo.

Unheard of Curiosities, concerning the Talismanical Sculpture of the Persians,
the Horoscope of the Patriarchs, and the reading of the Stars, written in
French by James Gaffarel, Englished by Edmund Chilmead Master of Arts and
Chaplain of Christchurch Oxon. A Piece so excellent that it was thrice Printed
in France, in the space of six Months. Octavo.

Tachygraphy or Shortwriting, the most easy exact and speedy, by Tho. Shelton.
Octavo.

The newest, plainest, and shortest Shorthand containing, 1. A brief Account
of all the Shorthands already extant, with their Alphabets and Fundamental
Rules. 2. A plain and easy Method for beginners, less burthensom to the memory
than any other. 3. A new invention for contracting words, with special rules
for contracting Sentences, and other ingenious Fancies, both pleasant and
profitable unto all, let their Character be whose or what it will, by Elisha
Coals, Schoolmaster, in Octavo.

The Academy of Eloquence, containing a Comple at English Rhetoric
exemplified, common-places and formula's digested into an easy and Methodical
way to speak and write fluently, according to the mode of the present times,
with letters both Amourous and Moral upon emergent occasions, by Thomas Blunt
of the Inner Temple Barrister, the 4th, Edition, in Twelves.

A Collection of the newest Songs, Poems, and Catches; now in Vogue both in
City and Country.

Maxims of State with instructions to his Son, and the Sons advice to his aged
Father, whereunto are added observatious touching Trade and Commerce with the
Hollander and other Nations, proving that our Sea and Land Commodities enrich
and strengthen other Countries against our own. By Sir Walter Rawleigh, Knight
Twelves.

A Dictionary English-Latin and Latin-English fitted for the use of young
Scholars, by Elisha Coals Schoolmaster, in quarto. A Book much commended by
most Schoolmasters in this Nation, price 7 s.

History Books, Romances, Poetry, etc.
THe History of the Island of Barbados, illustrated with a Map of the Island,
as also the principal Trees and Plants there set forth in their due proportion
and shapes, drawn out by their several and respective Scales, together with the
Ingenio that makes the Sugar, with the Plots of the several Houses, Rooms, and
other places that are used in the whole Process of Sugar-making, viz. the
Grinding-Room, the Boyling-Room, the Filling-Room the Curing-House, Still-house
and Furnaces, all described in Copper Plates, by Richard Liggon, Gent. Folio.

The State of Christendom, giving a perfect and Exact account of many Political
Intrigues and secret mysteries of State, practiced in most of the Courts of
Europe, with an account of their several Claims, Interests, and Pretensions.
Written by the Renowned Sir Henry Wotton Knight, sometime Ambassador in
Ordinary to the most Serene Republic of Venice, Folio.

Cassandra, the famed Romance, the whole work in five parts, written Originally
in French, and now Elegantly rendered into English, by Sir Charles Cotterel
master of the Ceremonies to his late Majesty, and dedicated to our present
Sovereign Charles the Second, Folio.

Hymen's Praeludia or loves Masterpiece, being that so much admired Romance
entitled Cleopatra written in French, now rendered into English by Robert
Loveday, in Folio.

Irragguagli di Parnasso, or advertisements from Parnassus, in two Centuries,
with the Political touchstone, written in Italian by that famous Roman Trajano
Bocalini, and Englished by the Honorable Earl of Monmouth, the Third Edition,
in Folio.

Lucans Pharsalia, or the Civil Wars of Rome, between Pompey the Great, and
Julius Caesar, by Thomas May, Esquire; in Octavo.

Juvenals sixteen Satyrs, or a Survey of the manners and Actions of Mankind,
with Marginal Notes, and Annotations, clearing the obscure places out of the
History, Laws and Ceremonies of the Romans, by Sir Robert Stapleton Knight, in
Octavo.

The Passion of Dido for Eneas, as it is incomparably expressed in the fourth
Book of Virgil, Translated by Edward Waller, Esquire; in Octavo.

The Rape of Lucreece, committed by Tarquin the sixth, and the remarkable
judgments that befell him for it, by that incomparable Master of our English
Poetry Will. Shakespeare, in Octavo.

Europae Modernae speculum, or a view of the Empires, Kingdoms, Principalities,
Seignieuries and Common wealths of Europe, in their Government, Policy,
different Interest and mutual aspect one toward another, from the Treaty at
Munster, 1648, to this present year, by J. H. Gent.

Olor Iscanus, or a Collection of some select Poems and Translations, written
by Henry Vaughan Silurist, in Octavo.

The life of Adam, written in Italian by Giovanno Francisco Loredano a Venetian
Noble man, and rendered into English, by J. S. in Octavo.

Men-miracles with other Poems, by Mr. Lluellin Student of Christ's College in
Oxford, in Octavo.

State worthies, or the Statesmen and Favorites of England, since the
Reformation, their Prudence and Policies, Successes and Miscarriages,
Advancements and Falls, during the Reigns of King Henry the 8th. Edward the
6th, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles the first, by D.
L. Mr. of Arts, in Octavo.

Poems by Thomas Stanley Esquire; Author of the History of Philosophy, in Octavo.

The Trial of King Charles the First, with a Catalogue of the names of such as
sat as Judges. with His Majesty's Reasons against their usurped power, and his
last Speech at his Execution, etc. in Octavo.

Regale Lectum Miseriae, or a Kingly bed of Misery, in which is contained a
dream, with an Elegy upon the Martyrdom of Charles late King of England of
blessed Memory, and another upon the Right Honorable the Lord Capel, with a
curse against the enemies of Peace, and the Authors farewell to England, by John
Quarles, in Octavo.

The new help to discourse, or Wit, Mirth and Jollity intermixed with more
serious matters, consisting of pleasant Astrological Astronomical,
Philosophical, Grammatical, Physical, Chirurgical, Historical, Moral and
Poetical Questions and Answers, with several other varieties intermixed,
together with the Countreymans Guide, by W. W. in Twelves.

The Academy of Complements with new Additions of Songs and Catches, a la mode,
stored with variety of Complemental and Elegant Expressions; also witty and
ingenious Dialogues and Discourses, with significant Letters upon several
Occasions.

A new set of Cuts for the Old and New Testament in 4to. price 10 s.

With several other School-books Printed at the Theater, and beyond the Seas.
Sold by Peter Parker at the Leg and Star over against the Royal Exchange in
Cornhil.

FINIS.

