SOME CONSIDERATIONS ON THE Principal Objections AND ARGUMENTS Which have been
Published against Mr. Lock's Essay OF HUMANE UNDERSTANDING. By SAMVEL BOLD,
Rector of Steeple, Dorset.

Re enim intellecta, in verborum usu faciles esse debemus
Cic. de Fin. l. 3. LONDON: Printed for A. and I. Churchill, at the Black Swan
in Paternoster Row. 1699.

SOME CONSIDERATIONS On the Principal Objections and Arguments
Which have been Published against Mr. Lock's Essay of Humane Understanding.
I. IT is no Disparagement, I conceive, to any Book, nor an Attributing more to
Mr. Lock's Essay of Humane Understanding, than it most justly deserves, to say,
That Essay is a Book the best Adapted of any I know, to serve the Interest of
Truth, Natural, Moral, and Divine: And that it is the most Worthy, most Noble,
and best Book I ever read, excepting those which were writ by Persons Divinely
inspired. This excellent Treatise having been published several Years, and
received through all the Learned World with very great Approbation, by those
who understood English, a mighty Out cry was at last, all on the sudden, raised
against it here at Home. There was, no doubt, some reason or other, why so many
hands should be employed, just at the same time, to Attack and Batter this
Essay; though what was the weighty consideration, which put them all in motion,
may, perhaps, continue a long time a Secret. Several Persons have discovered
their Inclination to find fault with this Treatise, by nibbling at several
passages in it, which it appears they did not understand, and concerning which
they have been at a loss how to express themselves Intelligibly. Some have
spoken handsomely of the Author, others have treated that Incomparable Gentleman
with a rudeness peculiar to some, who make a Profession of the Christian
Religion, and seem to pride themselves in being of the Clergy of the Church of
England. But whatever Reputation may accrue to them on either of those
accounts, their Conduct does not contribute any thing to the Honor either of
the one or of the other.

II. The principal Passages in this excellent Treatise, which have been
insisted on as faulty, are these two: First, Certainty of Knowledge is, to
perceive the Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas, as expressed in any
Proposition. This ( says Mr. Lock) we usually call Knowing, or being certain
of the Truth of any Proposition. Essay of Humane Understanding, B. 4. c. 6. 3.
Secondly, We have the Ideas of Matter and Thinking, but possibly shall never be
able to know, whether any mere natural Being thinks or no; it being impossible
for us, by the contemplation of our own Ideas, without Revelation, to discover
whether Omnipotency has not given to some Systems of Matter fitly disposed, a
power to perceive and think, or else joined and fixed to Matter so disposed, a
thinking immaterial Substance: It being, in respect of our Notions, not much
more remote from our comprehension to conceive, that God can, if he pleases,
super-add to our Idea of Matter a faculty of thinking, than that he should
super-add to it another substance, with a faculty of thinking; since we know
not wherein thinking consists, nor to what sort of Substances the Almighty has
been pleased to give that power, which cannot be in any created Being, but
merely by the good pleasure and bounty of the Creator. Essay, etc. B. 4. c. 3.
6. To which I will add, the better to show Mr. Lock' s sense, the following
words, which he immediately subjoyns on this occasion; which those, who have
thought fit to excep^ against what he says here, have thought fit always to
omit, how fairly I will not say. Mr. Lock' s following words are, For I see no
contradiction in it, that the first Eternal thinking Being, or Omnipotent
Spirit, should, if he pleased, give to certain Systems of created senseless
Matter, put together as he thinks fit, some degrees of sense, perception and
thought; though, as I think, I have proved, lib. 4. c. 10. it is no less than a
contradiction to suppose Matter (which is evidently in its own nature void of
sense and thought) should be that Eternal first thinking Being.

III. Against the first passage, viz. Certainty of Knowledge, is to perceive
the Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas, as expressed in any Proposition. There
are two Charges exhibited: First, That the Proposi^ion is not true. In
consequence of which, the way of Ideas is condemned as no way at all to
Certainty, or Knowledge; and in opposition to the way of Ideas, we are told,
That to argue or make Inferences from Maxims, is the way to Knowledge or
Certainty. Secondly, That the Proposition is inconsistent with, and of
dangerous consequence to the Articles of the Christian Faith.

IV. First, It is said that the Proposition is not true. Now, in o^der to make
a right determination, whether the Proposition be true or no, it may be ^it to
consider in what the Truth of a Proposition does consist: For, I suppose it
will be allowed, that our being certain of, or knowing the Truth of a
Proposition, does consist in our perceiving that wherein the truth of the
P^oposition does consist; otherwise we may know, or be certain, that a
Proposition is true, though it be not true, which carries such a sound with it, I
conceive few will be ambitious to grant it, whatever way they take to attain to
Certainty. The truth of a Proposition consists in words being so put together
in the Proposition, as exactly to express the agreement or disagreement of the
Ideas they stand for, as really it is. This Mr. Lock calls Certainty of Truth,
just before those words in his Book which are pretended to be fa^lty. This
passage I take for granted, will be permitted to pass for true, not only
because no obj^ction has been started against it, after so strict a scrutiny,
to find out something from whence a color might be taken, to give the Book an
ill Name, but because otherwise it must be owned, that a Proposition may be
true though it is not true; or though the agreement or disagreement of the Ideas,
signified by the terms which make up the Proposition, is not such as the
Proposi^ion does express. And if the truth of a Proposition does consist in
what has been related, it is most evident that our being certain of, or
knowing the truth of a Proposition, must consist in our perceiving that the
Ideas, for which the words, which make up the Proposition (or of which the
Proposition does consist) do stand, do so agree, or disag^ee, as the
Proposition does express. For there is no way, by which we can attain to be
certain, or to know that the Ideas do so agree, or disagree, as the Proposition
does declare they do, but by perceiving that they do so agree, or disagree,
unless certainty, or knowledge of the truth of Propositions, may be had without
perception, or without perceiving the truth of what is expressed. And if it may
be had, without perceving the truth of what is expressed, perception is of so
little moment, or use to certainty, or knowledge, that those who can digest
that Notion, may easily be of the opinion, That Matter considered merely as an
extended, bulky, figured Substance, may be certain of, or know the truth of
Propositions, though it cannot think or perceive. This I suppose may suffice, to
manifest that Mr. Lock's Proposition is true; and consequently, that the way of
Ideas is a sure, and indeed the only way to Cer^ainty or Knowledge, so far as
Men are capable of attaining to know the truth of Propositions. Yet because
another way to Certainty or Knowledge is proposed in opposition to the way of
Ideas, viz. The way of Maxims, or of Arguing, and making or drawing Inferences
from Maxims, I will briefly consider that way, and what opposition it has to
the way of Ideas. But several Propositions, commonly reputed and looked on as
Maxims, being not true, unless taken in a very limited sense, I will change the
term Maxims, and place Self-evident Propositions in its room. Now Self evident
Propositions have this in common with other Propositions, That they consist of
Words, which stand for Ideas. And there is no way, by which a Person can be
certain, or know the truth of a Proposition, we call Self-evident, but by
perceiving that the Ideas, signified by the words of which the Proposition does
consist, have such a connection or agreement, or repugnancy, or disagreement,
as the Proposition does express; for though the Proposition be such, that no
other Idea is needful, or can be made use of to help any Man to a certainty, or
knowledge, that the Proposition is true, because the Ideas signified by the
words, have, by an immediate comparison of them, a visible agreement, or
disagreement, yet no Person can be certain, or can know that the Proposition is
true, who does not perceive that the Ideas, signified by the terms of which the
Proposition does consist, do so agree, or disagree, as the Proposition does
express. Nor can it be said to be a Self-evident Proposition, to him who does
not perceive that the Ideas do so agree, or disagree, as the Proposition
declares they do. And if there can be no way, by which Persons can attain to be
certain of the truth of those Propositions we call Self-evident, but this of
perceiving the agreement or disagreement of Ideas, as expressed in them, the
only way, by which we can attain to know the truth of other Propositions, must
be that of comparing Ideas, that being the only way whereby we can attain to
perceive their agreement or disagreement.

V. A Person's being certain of the truth of a Proposition we call
Self-evident, does not make him know the truth of another Proposition. It may
be a great help to his attaining to know the truth of other Propositions, but
it will not contribute any other way to his being certain of the truth of other
Propositions, than as it helps him to perceive that the agreement, or
disagreement of the Ideas, signified by the words which make up those
Propositions, is such as the Propositions express. He that knows the truth of a
Self-evident Proposition, may, by the help of that Proposition, easily attain
to be certain of the truth of another Proposition, which has an immediate
connection with it; but his knowledge of the truth of the latter Proposition,
will consist in his perceiving that the Ideas, signified by the words of which
it consists, have such agreement, or disagreement, as the Proposition does
express: For, if he does not perceive that, he cannot be certain that the
Proposition is true, though he is most certain that the former Proposition is
true. If the Proposition he would know the truth of, be somewhat remote from
the Self evident Proposition, by the means of which he may attain to know the
truth of it, he must make use* of intermediate Ideas: And whether the process
be from the Proposition to be proved, to the Self-evident Proposition, or from
the Self-evident Propositi^n to that he would know the truth of, all the
intermediate Ideas must have a Self-evident agreement, or disagreement, with
one another, throughout the whole train of the Argumentation: And this
agreement, or disagreement, must, all along, in every step be perceived, or
ce^tainty of the truth, of the Proposition to be proved, cannot be obtained. If
any one of the intermediate Ideas, have not a Self-evident agreement, or
disagreement, with those next unto it; or if it have such agreement or
disag^eement with them, but the Person who would know the truth of the
Proposition does not perceive it, his knowledge will unavoidably stop there,
and cannot possibly proceed any fur^her, any more than the parts of a Chain can
hang together, when one of the Links is broken and lost; or than a Person can
from One, make up the Num^er Five, and yet leave o^t either 2. 3. or 4. This I
take to be demonstratively certain, unless Certainty or Knowledge may be had
without Perception. Perhaps it will be pretended, that we come to Certainty or
Knowledge, not by perceiving the agreement or disagreement of Ideas, but by
Inferring, or making Rational Deductions from known Self-evident Principles, or
Propositions. To this I answer, That he who does Rationally infer any thing, or
makes a Rational Deduction, does not do it, that by that means he may attain to
Certainty or Knowledge, but that he may assist and help others to that
Knowledge or Certainty he has already obtained, by laying before them, in a
train of Proposi^ions, the connection of all the intermediate I^eas, whereby
the first and the last are tied together. For a Person to make a deduction
Rationally, does suppose his being Certain, or Knowing, or perceiving that what
he deduces, has such an agreement or disagreement, with the Propositions from
which he does deduce it, as his Inference does express. If a Man will infer,
and make deductions Rationally, he must antecedently perceive the agreement, or
disagreement, of the Ideas about which he is concerned, otherwise he can have
no reason to make Deductions: And if he does make Deductions, and they prove to
be Rational, it is merely by chance that they do so; and he cannot be properly
said to have made them Rationally. If a Man will infer, and make Deductions at
all Adventures, before he can be certain that his Inferences are true, he must
examine them, and compare the Ideas in the Proprositions from which he has
deduced them. He cannot be certain that his Inferences, considered barely as
Propositions, are true, any other way, than by perceiving that the Ideas,
signified by the words of which they consist, do so agree, or disagree, as
those Propositions express. He cannot be certain that they are true, considered
as Inferences, any ^^her way than by perceiving the agreemen^, or disagreement,
they have with the Proposi^ions from which they were deduced. Inferring, and
making Deductions, seems not to me to be the only way to Certainty, but
comparing Ideas, which is the only way to perceive their agreement or
disagreement. And Self evident Principles, or Propositions, and the use that
can be made of them to help us to Certainty, are so far from having any
opposition to the way of Ideas, that neither their Truth can be known, nor any
Profitable Use (with respect to Truth) be made of them, but by the way of Ideas.

VI. The second Charge produced against this Proposition, is, That it is of
dangerous consequence to, and inconsistent with the Articles of the Christian
Faith. This Charge seems to be grounded on the last words of Mr. Lock's
Proposition, viz. As expressed in any Proposition. Now some Propositions come
to us by Divine Revelation; and several of these Propositions are such, we
cannot perceive by comparing the Ideas, signified by the words of which they
consist, that they do so agree or disagree, as the Propositions do express. It
follows therefore, from Mr. Lock's Proposition, that we cannot be certain of,
or know the Truth of those Propositions* and this is said to be inconsistent
with, or of dangerous consequence to the Articles of the Christian Faith, but I
cannot understand for what reason it is said to be so. For as the truth of all
Propositions, come they to us by what way soever, consists in what has been
before mentioned, so our being certain of, or knowing the truth of any
Proposition, let it come to us by what way soever, must consist in that,
wherein our being certain of, or knowing the truth of any Proposition does
consist: For the way how a Proposition is brought to us, does not alter its
nature, considered as a Proposition, nor the nature of Certainty, or Knowledge,
which are fixed, and unchangeable, and always the same, and therefore cannot
make Certainty, or Knowledge of its truth, to consist in any thing, but what
Certainty or Knowledge of the truth of a Proposition, brought to us some other
way, does consist in. If it shall now be asked, Whether, seeing there are
certain Propositions which come to us by Divine Revelation, and we cannot
perceive that the agreement or disagreement of the Ideas, signified by the
words in those Propositions, is such as the Propositions express, Mr. Lock's
Proposition is not inconsistent with, and of dangerous consequence to those
Articles of the Christian Faith? I answer, That when an account is given of the
determined Ideas, for which those phrases, inconsistent with, and of dangerous
consequence, do stand, whether they are used in different senses, or both be
designed to signify one and the same thing: And what that, or those precise
Ideas are, which are meant by them, distinct and proper Answers may be given to
the Question, or Questions propounded. If by inconsistent with those Articles,
is meant inconsistent with the truth of those Articles; and so the Question
amounts to this, Whether that Proposition of Mr. Locks can be true, and those
Articles true too? The Answer is Yes, very well; for the truth of those
Propositions does not depend on our being certain of, or knowing the truth of
them. If by inconsistent with those Articles be meant, that we cannot be
certain of, or know the truth of those Articles, then the Question will be,
Whether it will not follow from Mr. Lock's Proposition, that we cannot be
certain of, or know the truth of those Articles? To which the Answer is, Yes.
But the Proposition, for all that, is inconsistent enough with those Articles,
though it cannot con^ist well with Peoples pretending to know what God has set
out of their reach, and which they cannot attain to know. It is no wrong at all
to those Articles, to say we cannot be certain of, or know the truth of them;
it is a speaking of the truth, and an attributing unto them the pre^eminence
which God has given them. If Persons are resolved they will use this phrase,
inconsistent with Articles of the Christian Faith in this sense, there is no
help for it; yet Mr. Lock's Proposition will continue true, and cannot do any
injury to any one Article of the Christian Faith. But what will become then
(may some say) of those Articles of the Christian Faith, or of those
Propositions which come to us by Divine Revelation, and the truth of which we
cannot be certain of, or know? Answer: They will continue just as they are,
very great, even Divine and Incomprehensible Truths; and they are to have all
the Entertainment given them by us, that Divine Revelation designs they should
have. Whatever Propositions are brought to us by Divine Revelation, and
proposed to us by it, to be the Objects of our Knowledge, they are so formed,
that we may perceive that the agreement or disagreement of the Ideas, signified
by the words of which they do consist, is such as the Propositions express. And
we have no other way to be certain of, or to know the truth of those
Propositions, but by perceiving that the Ideas do so agree, or disagree, as the
Propositions express. But as for those Propositions, which come to us by Divine
Revelations, and are such, that we cannot perceive that the Ideas, signified by
the wo^ds of which they consist, have such agreement or disagreement, as the
Propositions express, they are not proposed to us, by Divine Revelation, to be
Objects of our Knowledge, but only of our Faith. And though we do not, nor can
know, or be certain of the truth of these Propositions, yet if we do firmly,
and with full assurance, believe them to be true, because we have good
satisfaction that God has revealed them; and if our belief of their truth,
has all that efficacy and influence on us, which Divine Revelation requires,
we do fully answer the design of Divine Revelation, with respect to these
Articles of the Christian Faith. But is not Faith (may some say) a Reasonable
Act? Yes: But all reasonable Assent is not Certainty or Knowledge. My assent to
the truth of a Proposition, or my believing it to be true, is a Reasonable Act,
not because I am certain, or do know that it is true, but because my Assent is
founded on such Evidence that it is true, as is every way sufficient to
justify my Assenting to it. There cannot be a more Reasonable Act, than to
believe the truth of that Proposition, which we are on good grounds satisfied
is declared to be true, by that God who cannot Lie. Let any Man produce a
Proposition, that Divine Revelation has brought to Light, and make it appear
to me that it came to Men by Divine Revelation, I shall believe it, or assent
most firmly to the truth of it, though I cannot know the truth of it; and my
doing so, will be a most Reasonable Act, because my assent will be grounded on
Divine Testimony* But let that Person, or any other Persons, frame another
Proposition in Philosophical Terms, concerning the same matter, and then
pretend, that that Proposition declares something more concerning that matter,
than God has revealed concerning it, if I cannot perceive that the Ideas,
signified by the words of that Proposition, do agree or disagree as the
Proposition expresses, I cannot be certain, or know that the Proposition is
true; nor will my assenting to the truth of it, upon his or their saying it is
true, be a Reasonable Act. For the Proposition being about a matter out of his
or their reach, I have not sufficient evidence to assure me that it is true;
yet, notwithstanding the latter Proposition does consist of different words
from the former, if it be declared that neither more nor less is meant by these
words, than is signified by those in the other Proposition, I can assent to the
truth of it, and my assent will be a Reasonable Act, because though they are two
distinct Propositions considered as to the words, yet as to sense they are but
one, and exactly the same. Well, but at this rate, what becomes of the
Certainty of Faith? Answer. Certainty, and Faith, are two words, which stand
for, or signify two distinct Acts of the Mind; and they can no more be
properly affirmed of one another, than those distinct Acts can be said to be
one and the same. Indeed, a Person may use the word Certainty, or Knowledge, if
he please, for Assent, grounded upon probable Evidence, or for Assent founded
on Authority, or for any other Idea he has a mind to call by that Name; and if
he certifies what the Idea is, he has a mind to signify by that word, his
Discourse may be Intelligible, if he constantly use the word in that sense. But
if he will oppose another Person, who has declared that he uses the word
Certainty, and Knowledge, strictly taken, in the same sense, and does not
declare that he takes the word Certainty in another sense, his Discourse will
unavoidably be very obscure, if not perfectly unintelligible: For it will be
presumed he uses the word in that sense, in which the other Person had
declared he did use it, when all the while he means another thing by it.

VII. When it is said that Mr. Lock's Proposition is of dangerous consequence
to the Articles of the Christian Faith, if something else is signified by it,
than what was meant by the former phrase, a distinct Account should be given of
what is intended by this phrase. If any shall pretend that the true and just
consequence of Mr. Lock's Proposition is this, That the Arcles of the Christian
Faith are not to be believed, the Proposi^ion pre^ended to be deduced is a very
wicked Proposition. But then it is as plain, and certain as any thing can be,
That it can no way be drawn from Mr. Lock's Proposition, which has no relation
at all to any Articles of Faith, or Belief, either Christian, or other. If Mr.
Lock's Proposition can concern, or affect any Christian Articles, they must be
Articles of Christian Knowledge, not of Christian Faith. And his Proposition is
so far from being of dangerous consequence to Articles of Christian Knowledge,
that it gives the true Account wherein the knowledge of those Articles does
consist, as will most evidently appear, when any of those Articles shall be
instanced in and considered. If it shall be pretended, that from Mr. Lock's
Proposition it may be regularly inferred, That no Man ought to believe, that
any Proposition is true, but what he can attain to know the truth of, and that
he ought not to assent to the truth of it, till he attains to be certain of, or
to know the truth of it, and that this is what is meant, when it is said to be
of dangerous consequence to the Articles of the Christian Faith; then, in the
first place it is to be acknowledged, that the Proposition intended to be
regularly deduced from the other, is certainly of most dangerous consequence to
those Persons, who shall ^uf^er themselves to be enslaved by it, and this with
respect to Articles of the Christian Faith. But then, in the second place, it
is great Injustice to charge Mr. Lock's Proposition with that, which can only
in Justice be laid to the charge of another Proposition; especially to do so
before it is proved, and made to appear, that that dangerous Proposition can
regularly be inferred from Mr. Lock's Proposition, which is a point altogether
incapable of being proved, for there is no possibility of showing any
connection between them: The two Propositions are as far distant from one
another, as the East is from the West. From what has been already said, I
think it may with reason enough be concluded, that the principal Accusations,
advanced against Mr. Lock's Proposition, are altogether groundless.

VIII. Certainty, or Knowledge did, and will, always consist, in what Mr. Lock
declares it does consist; and the way to attain Certainty was always by
comparing Ideas. What measures of knowing soever those have, who speak most
slightingly of the way of Ideas, all their knowledge is owing to it, how little
soever they are aware of it, or how strongly soever they are inclined to
attribute it to something else. There were Persons, in all Ages, who attained
to certain measures of knowledge, and were never able to declare distinctly and
fully how they came by their Knowledge. They generally stopped in their
Accounts, at the Artificial Methods, whereby they were assisted in comparing of
Ideas, (though they took no notice of that) which was the true and natural way by
which they perceived their agreement or disagreement, and obtained knowledge.
Mr. Lock is the first Person I have heard of, who has observed, and acquainted
the World, in what Knowledge, or Certainty does consist. By which discovery he
has done Mankind so great a kindness, in directing Men plainly to the most
certain, easy, ^and speedy way to attain Knowledge, so far as they are capable
of it: And how to bound their Enquiries, so as not to spend their Labors in
fruitless Endeavors, to know what is out of Humane reach, and what they can
never attain to certainty in, that Men will never be able to pay him thanks
enough, for the good Offices he has done to the World, nor to testify
sufficient Praises unto God, for the Light and Favor he has reached forth,
and imparted unto Mankind by him*

IX. The second passage which has been thought faulty in Mr. Lock' s Essay of
Humane Understanding, is this: We have the Ideas of Matter and Thinking, but
possibly shall never be able t^ know whether any mere Material Being thinks o^
no; it being impossible for us, by the contemplation of our own Ideas, without
Revelation, to discover whether Omnspotency has not given to some System^ of
Matter fitly disposed, a Power to perceive an^ think, or else joined and fixed
to Matter so disposed a thinking immaterial Substance. It being in respec^ of
our Notions, not much more remote from our comprehension to conceive, that God
can, if he pleases superadd to our Idea of Matter a Faculty of Thinking, than
that he should superadd to it another Sub^stance, with a faculty of Thinking,
since we know not wherein Thinking consists, nor to what sort o^ Substances the
Almighty has been pleased to give tha^ power, which cannot be in any created
Being, bu^ merely by the good pleasure and bounty of the Creator* etc. Essay of
Humane Understanding, B. 4. c. 3. 6. Against this passage, two things are
offered: First, It is suggested that it is not consistent with the Souls
Immo^tality; or at least, takes off very much from the evidence of its
Immortality. Secondly, It is pretended, that from the Nature of Matter, it may
be proved to be false.

X. First, It is suggested, that what Mr. Lock has here said, is not
consistent with the Souls Immortality, or at least takes off very much from the
evidence of its Immortality* for if what Mr. Lock does say be true, it cannot
be Demonstratively proved that the Soul is not Material. And if the Soul be
nothing but a Material Substance, it must be made up as others are, of the
cohesion of solid and separable parts, how minute and invisible soever they be,
and must be dissolved when Life is ended. And it takes off very much from the
evidence of Immortality, if it depend wholly upon God's giving that, which of
its own nature it is not capable of. Answ. 1. The Immortality of the Soul does
not depend on our knowing, or perceiving by demonstrative proof, in the way of
Reason, that it is Immaterial; nor does our having a Rational Persuasion, that
the Soul is Immortal, depend on our knowing that it is Immaterial.

XI. Mr. Lock does not say that the Soul is Material: He owns that we have the
highest degree of probability that it is Immaterial, but that we cannot attain
to demonstrative Certainty or Knowledge, by comparing the Ideas of Matter and
Thinking, that the Soul is an Immaterial Substance, though we may this way know
that it is a Spiritual Substance. What Mr. Lock says is this, We cannot, by
the contemplation of our own Ideas, without Revelation, discover whether
Omnipotency has not given to some Systems of Matter, fitly disposed, a power to
perceive and think; or that we cannot demonstrativel^ prove, by mere Principles
of Reason, or Philosophy, either the Materiality or Immateriality of the Soul,
but that the point is above our Reason, and what we cannot be fully assured of
but by Divine Revelation. For this his Assertion, he has produced some
Reasons, which have not been proved to be invalid, or weak, by any of those
Authors I have seen, who have declared their dislike of this Assertion. And if
the Reasons he has given for his Assertion cannot be refuted, but are solid
and unanswerable, it will not be easy to prove that his Assertion may justly
be blamed. To prove Mr. Lock's Proposition false, either the Materiality, or
Immateriality of the Soul, should be demonstratively proved, for he denies that
either of them can be demonstratively proved. The surest way to prove the
falseness of a Proposition, which denies that a thing can be demonstrated, is
to demonstrate that thing. I know an Attempt has been made, by one who
condemns the way of Ideas, as no way at all to Certainty, to demonstrate that
Matter cannot Think, or that God cannot superadd to any System of Matter a
Power of Thinking; which demonstration is managed in the way of Ideas. But though
what is offered there, for demonstration, would sufficiently prove that
Solidity is not a Power of Thinking, if that needed proof, yet I think it does
not afford any sort of evidence that Omnipotency cannot superadd both Solidity,
and a power of Thinking, to one and the same Substance, which was the point to
be demonstrated. Besides, the way of Ideas being condemned, as no way at all to
Certainty, those who are of that mind, cannot with any reason pretend, that
what has been offered for a demonstration of this point, is ^eally a
demonstration of it. For if they can think it to be a Demonstration of the
point, they cannot avoid being obliged to renounce their other thought, and
think the quite contrary, whether they may judge it proper and convenient to
acknowledge the same openly or no. If what has been offered for a
Demonstration of this point, be really a Demonstration of it, the way of Ideas
is undoubtedly a way to Certainty; yea, and a way to Certainty about a point,
which I am inclined to think cannot be demonstrated any other way.

XII. 3. If the Soul were nothing but a material Substance, what follows those
words in the objection might perhaps pass with some for a plain Truth: but for
my part, I cannot comprehend how any thing, that has life, should be nothing
but a material Substance; for Life is no part of, nor has any necessary
connection with the Idea, signified by these words, Material Substance. Nor do
I perceive any necessity, that a Material Substance endued with Life, must lose
its Life, because by some Accident, or within a certain period, the gross and
sensible parts of it must fall off from those more fine and insensible parts
which God has ordered to be the Seat of Life. And those who think they can
prove demonstratively, that the Soul is a created Immaterial Substance, must
take heed of affirming that the Soul is nothing but a created Immaterial
Substance, lest that Assertion prove of dangerous consequence to, and
inconsistent with the Articles of the Ch^istian Faith; for if the Soul be
nothing but a created Immaterial Substance, it is not a Spiritual, or Thinking
Substance; for the power of Thinking, is a power which God superadds to our
Idea, whether of Material, or created Immaterial Substance, and which neither
the one, nor the other can have, but merely by the good pleasure, and bounty of
the Creator, as Mr. Lock most Judiciously and Piously observes. But Mr. Lock
does not any where say, That the Soul is nothing but a Material Substance, or
that we cannot know, by contemplating our Ideas, that the Soul is nothing but a
Material Substance. Indeed, Mr. Lock has these words, We have the Ideas of
Matter and Thinking, but possibly shall never be able to know, whether any
Material Being thinks or no. From these words, Any mere Material Being, some
may, perhaps, in their haste, have taken occasion to think, that Mr. Lock's
Notion was, that for ought we could know, the Soul might be nothing but a
Material Substance. To rectify which mistake, I think it may be sufficient to
note, that mere Material, in Mr. Lock's Sense, is not opposed to a power of
Thinking, (which we cannot know but God may supperadd to our Idea of Matter)
but to an Immaterial Substance, considered as joined to a Material Being.

XIII. 4. It is not very easy to comprehend what is meant by these words, It
takes off very much from the evidence of Immortality, if it depend wholly upon
God's giving that, which of its own nature it is not capable of. For no created
Substance can have any thing more, than God is pleased to give it. It is not
very intelligible to me, that God should give to any thing, that which its
nature is not capable of, especially if by Nature be here meant, what I find
some Persons do sometimes mean by that word, viz. Substance; for what Substance
is capable of, even after that solidity is added to it, is more than any Man
can know. And if Omnipotency can add a power of Thinking to solid Substance
^itly disposed, no Man can be certain that solid Thinking Substance is not of
its own nature capable of Immortality; but whether a created Being shall be
Mortal or Immortal, is not to be determined by our considering its nature, but
by understanding the pleasure of God concerning it. The Humane Nature is the
same now it was in the first Ages of the World; but that Men do not now
ordinarily live above a hundred Years, is not to be resolved into this, that
the Humane Nature is not capable of being continued longer in Life, than that
space, but into the pleasure of God, that now Men shall not ordinarily live to
a greater Age; for Men did ordinarily, in the first Ages of the World, live
many hundreds of Years; and that they did so, was purely to be attributed to
the Divine Pleasure. And had it been the pleasure of him, who kept Men then so
long in Life, that Men should not die, they would have been Immortal. If the
evidence of Immortality, consists in Immateriality, the Immateriality of the
Soul must be demonstratively proved, before Persons can perceive the evidence
of the Souls Immortality. For if any person takes it for granted, that the
Souls Immateriality may be demonstratively proved from, or by certain
Principles of Reason, and from thence persuades himself that the Soul is
Immortal, and upon after-trial and examination he shall find that his
Principles he depended on are uncertain, and cannot afford him such proof as he
was persuaded they would yield, his discovering the uncertainty of his own
Principles, which he went upon in point of Reason, will, according to a Notion
lately advanced, weaken the Credibility of the Souls Immortality, when
considered purely as a Matter of Faith. And if this be true, great and speedy
care should be taken to produce demonstrative proof, that the Soul is an
Immaterial Substance, not only to make Men certain that their Souls are
Immortal, but to secure the Credibility of Divine Testimony. But blessed be
God, we have a sure Foundation for our Faith to rest on; for the Testimony of
God will never fail, but always remain firm and true, how short soever the
Principles of Reason may fall, of bringing us to Certainty or Knowledge,
concerning several Articles of Faith, or Propositions, which come to us by
Divine Revelation. It may be proved, to the highest degree of probability, that
the Soul is Immaterial; but no demonstrative proof being yet produced in the
way of Reason, that the Soul is Immaterial, I cannot understand why any person
should pretend it must follow that the Soul must be Mortal, if it be a Material
Substance, with a superadded power or faculty of Thinking; and in that respect,
or on that account, a Spiritual Substance, though not Immaterial, for Material
and Mortal have no necessary connection. And therefore we cannot be certain, by
contemplating the Ideas those words stand for, that every Material Substance
must be Mortal. And he who shall affirm, that every Material Substance must
necessarily be Mortal, will, if he adhere to his Assertion, find himself
obliged to deny, at least, two Articles of the Christian Faith, or two
Propositions which come to us by Divine Revelation, 1. That Man became Mortal
by Sin, or that the Wages of Sin is Death; for it is past doubt, that one part
of Man, when first created, was Material. And if every Material Substance must
necessarily die, Man must have died, though he had never sinned. 2. That after
the Resurrection Men will be Immortal; for, after the Resurrection, one part of
Man will be Material.

XIV. Secondly, It is pretended that this passage, in Mr. Lock's Essay, which I
have been discoursing of, may from the Nature of Matter be proved to be false.
I will, 1st. Say something of this point in general; and then, 2dly. Consider
particularly what the last Author I have seen, who finds fault with this
passage, does say concerning it, who I think takes in the whole strength of
what others have proposed, who have on this Account formed objections against
it.

XV. First, I will say something concerning this point in general. Substance, I
conceive, will be acknowledged on all hands to be rightly divided into Material
and Immaterial; but how many various, different Powers, or Faculties, these
sorts of Substances are capable of receiving, is what surpasses Man's
Understanding. Yet whatever Powers they are capable of receiving, God can give
or superadd unto them if he pleases; whether he has given to either sort all
the Powers it is capable of, is more than we can be certain of, by the bare
Exercise of our Reason* He may, for any thing we know to the contrary, give to
certain Material Systems fitly disposed, some Powers, which he also gives to
Immaterial Substances. Amongst these we may reckon the power of Thinking, which
neither Material, nor Immaterial Substances, can have, whether God will or no.
And whether it has been his pleasure to superadd this power only to the Idea
we express by Immaterial Substance, or also to the Idea we express by Material
Substance, is a point we cannot be fully assured of but by Divine Revelation.
The power of Thinking, added to a Substance, whether Material, or Immaterial,
makes that Substance, Spirit. Material Substance, Immaterial Substance, and
Spirit, are terms which stand for three distinct Ideas. And though Spirit, or
Spiritual Substance, does not imply Matter, or Material Substance in its Idea,
yet the power of Thinking being superadded to Matter, will make it Spirit, or
Spiritual Substance. Just as Spirit does not imply Immaterial Substance in its
Idea, yet the power of Thinking being superadded to Immaterial Substance, makes
it Spirit or Spiritual Substance, which it could not be, without a power of
Thinking added to it. To ask therefore peremptorily, whether Matter can think
or not? is to propose an obscure Question which wants explaining. If by the
Question be meant, Can God add a power of Thinking to Matter or no? The Answer
will be, We have no demonstrative proof for either part of the Question; and
therefore cannot be certain concerning the Matter. But if by the Question be
meant, Can Matter Think without having a power of Thinking superadded to it?
The Answer is plainly, No. But the way of Arguing, that then the Substance
which Thinks must be Immaterial, is not very clear, for Immaterial Substance
can no more Think, than Matter can, without a power of Thinking added to it:
And whether it be Material, or Immaterial Substance, to which the power of
Thinking is added, that Substance thinks, though it be by virtue of a power
superadded to it, without which it could not think, or considered barely as
Material, or Immaterial Substance. Solidity, and a power of Thinking, are
perfectly distinct, and quite different Powers; yet if God can superadd a power
of Thinking to a solid Substance, there is no necessity that the Substance
which Thinks must be Immaterial, for Substance, and a power of Thinking, are as
distinct as Material and Immaterial. The Material Substance thinks, though not
precisely under this consideration, but as having another Power added to it,
whereby it is enabled to do that, which it could not do without it, viz. to
Think. And though the Idea of Thinking will not prove the substance which thinks
to be immaterial, it will, if superadded to Matter, prove that the substance
which thinks has another power than that which made it Matter, and will as
certainly prove it to be a Spiritual Substance, as Solidity can prove it to be
a Material Substance; Solidity, and a power of thinking, are very different
powers, but they are not contradictory. And there is no inconsistency, in
supposing that the same substance may have more distinct modifications than
one, let them be ever so different one from the other, whilst they are not
contradictory. We cannot attain to Certainty, that God cannot add a power of
Thinking to Matter, though we may that he cannot make the same substance to be
material and immaterial at the same time, because this latter is a
contradiction.

XVI. Secondly, I will now consider what the last Author I have seen, who finds
fault with this passage in Mr. Lock's Essay, does say concerning it. This
Author is the Reverend Mr. Ienkin, who having quoted out of Mr. Lock's Essay of
Humane Understanding, part of what I have before transcribed out of that Book,
has (in the 46 and 47 pages of his Preface before his Reasonableness and
Certainty of the Christian Religion) the words which shall be marked all along
as I come to them, as these following words (with which he begins his Reply to
what he quoted out of Mr. Lock) are, But it seems not intelligible, how God
should superadd to Matter this faculty, or power, or modification, of thinking,
unless he change the nature of Matter, and make it quite another thing than it
is, or join a substance of another nature to it. Answ. It is very common, even
with noted Authors, to express themselves in such a manner, that though at first
view their Sentences seem to have a very plausible appearance, yet, upon a
stricter consideration, their Sense proves to be so uncertain, and
undetermined, that it is very hard to know what they do mean. I will suppose
that here, by, It seems not Intelligible that God should, etc. is meant, That
Men cannot understand, how God should, or can superadd a Power, etc. of
Thinking to Matter, but either, by changing the nature of Matter, or by joining
a Substance of another nature to it. And I think it not Intelligible, how this
proves any thing against Mr. Lock's Proposition, to which it is opposed. For
though we cannot understand how God should do this, but by one of the ways
beforementioned, (and it seems supposed by this Author that we can understand
how God can do it, either of those ways) yet he may do it some other way, which
is not intelligible to us. And if he can do it, in a way, which we cannot
understand how he should do it, it is most certain, that we cannot know, or be
certain that he cannot do it. God has done, and does do many things, which we
cannot understand the manner how he did, or does do them. Therefore it is no
proof that God cannot do a thing, because we do not, or cannot understand the
manner how he can do it. But seeing God can do things, and we cannot understand
how he can do them, this is a very just and good Reason, why we should not
pretend to know he has not done such a thing, when we cannot allege any thing
more to justify our pretense, but this, that we cannot understand how he
should do it. If we could understand how God might superadd a power of Thinking
to Matter, this would not prove that he has done it. In like manner, our not
being able to understand how he should do it, can be no proof that he has not
done it. These words considered as they are offered for an Answer to what Mr.
Lock has said, seem to carry with them two suppositions, which should be taken
for true: 1. Here is supposed, that God has not done any thing, which we
cannot understand how he should do; which supposition is apparently a mistake,
and void of Truth. 2. Here is supposed, that it is intelligible how God should
add a Thinking Power to Matter, either of the ways here assigned, but with this
intimation, That it can be demonstratively proved, that he has not done it
either of those ways, and therefore that he has not done it at all. Without
these suppositions, I think it not intelligible, how these words can concern
what Mr. Lock has said, who does not side with either part of the Question,
Whether God has, or has not, added a Thinking Power to Matter, but says, That
neither part of the Question can be demonstratively proved. To prove this way,
against Mr. Lock, That God has not added a Power of Thinking to any System of
Matter, the truth of both the Suppositions should be made undeniably plain and
clear, and then the intimated demonstration should be produced. The
demonstration not being laid down, no Judgment can be made of it, nor by it.
But the two ways assigned, by which it is supposed intelligible how God should
add a Power of Thinking to Matter, may be a little considered. The first way by
which it is supposed intelligible, how God might add a power of Thinking to
Matter, is, by changing the nature of Matter. And by changing the nature of
Matter, I conceive, by the words following, we are to understand, making it
quite another thing than it is. Now, I think it is altogether unintelligible,
how God should superadd to Matter a Power of Thinking, by making it quite
another thing than it is; for then it must cease to be Matter. Indeed, it is
not intelligible that God should superadd a Thinking Power to Matter, and not
make it another thing, (though not quite another thing) than it was before that
Power of Thinking was superadded to it. But though by superadding that Power to
it, it would be made another thing, yet it would not cease to be what it was
before: It would still be Matter, though nothing but Matter. A new Power cannot
be superadded to any thing, but that thing must continue what it was before,
though by that super-addition it has what it had not before. Should Matter cease
to be Matter, no Power or Faculty could be added to it. Mr. Lock says, We
cannot be fully assured, any other way than by Divine Revelation, whether God
has, or has not, super-added a Power of Thinking to any System of matter fitly
disposed. Now to say in opposition to this, That God cannot do it, but by
making matter quite another thing than it is, does carry along with it an
unintelligible Supposition, or rather an express Contradiction, viz. That God
can super-add something to matter, by making that same matter cease to be
matter. But it is undeniably certain, that if solid Substance be capable of
having a Thinking Power super-added to it, God can super-add that Power or
Faculty to it, though we cannot understand the way or manner how he should do it.
And we cannot, by comparing our Ideas, attain to Certainty, or Knowledge,
whether matter is capable, or not, of having a Power of Thinking super-added to
it, because we cannot this way reach to know the utmost Capacity of matter. And
if matter be capable of having that Power super-added to it, we cannot be fully
assured any other way than by Divine Revelation, whether God has super-added
that Power to any Systems of Matter: For God is not necessarily obliged to
super-add to any thing, every Power it may be capable of.

XVII. The second way proposed, how God might super add a Power of Thinking to
Matter, is, By joining a Substance of another nature to it. Answ. 1. The
joining of a Substance of another nature to matter, will not super-add a Power
of Thinking, unless that Substance of another nature has the Power of Thinking
joined to it. The Power of Thinking, is a Power super-added to Substance,
whether the Substance be material, or immaterial, to which God is pleased to
super-add it. 2. The joining of an immaterial Thinking Substance to Matter, is
not a super-adding to ma^ter the Faculty of Thinking. The Faculty or Power of
Thinking in this Case, is appropriated to the immaterial Substances, and is not
a Power super-added to matter. 3. It is every jot as unintelligible to us, how
an immaterial substance should be joined to a material substance, as ^ow a
Power of Thinking should be super-added to a material substance. And I think it
altogether unintelligible, that God should super-add a Power of Thinking to
Matter, this way. Though we cannot understand how God should ^oyn an immaterial
Thinking Substance to some Systems of Matter, yet this cannot be a good Reason
why any Man should pretend to be cer^ain, or to know that God cannot, or has
not ^oyned an immaterial Thinking Substance to some Systems of Matter. Neither
is it a demon^trative proof, that God cannot, or has not, ^uper-added a Power
of Thinking to some Sy^tems of Matter, because, for ought we know, ^e can, or
has joined an immaterial Thinking Substance to some Systems of Matter. We
cannot attain to Certainty concerning what he has done as to these matters, nor
can we be ful^y assured what he has done, but by Divine Revelation. Tho, as Mr.
Lock says, we have ^he highest degree of probability, that the Power of
Thinking is super-added to immaterial substances; and that those Systems of
Matter, in which there is a Power of Thinking, have an immaterial substance
joined to them, to which that Power of Thinking is super-added.

XVIII. But the Question is, Whether a Faculty of Thinking can be produced out
of the Powers, and various Modifications of Matter? Answ. If this be the
Question, it is a very dark and obscure one. The Question, as here worded,
seems to suppose, or grant, that Powers are super-added to our Idea of Matter,
upon its being variously modified. And then enquires, whether out of those
Powers, another Power ( viz. The Power of Thinking, if that be the meaning
here, of the Phrase, a Faculty o^ Thinking) distinct from them, can be
produced? Now, as one Power cannot operate on another Power, so neither can one
Power be produced out of other Powers. To talk of one Power of Matter being
produced out of another Power of Matter, seems to me altogether unintelligible;
for I cannot imagine what can be meant by it, unless it be either that one
Power of Matter contains, in the Bowels of it, another Power, which may one way
or other be extracted out of it, the former still continuing^ which I conceive
is not consistent with good sense; or that one Power of Matter does contribute
to its having another Power, which is a little intelligible as the former. And
is much the same thing, as to say, That that Power o^ Matter which makes it
Iron, contributes some^thing to its having that Power which makes i^ Gold: Or
that that Power which makes Matter to be Wax, contributes to its having that
Power which makes it a Loadstone: Whereas the Powers which make Matter to be
Gold, and Loadstones, are as perfectly different from the Powers which make
Matter to be Iron, and Wax, as they are from that Power which makes Matter to
be Wood, or from those Powers which make Matter to be any of those other things
to which we assign other Specific Names. As Matter being modified a certain
way, has a certain power super-added to it, which it had not before it was so
modified, so, being modified another way, it has another power super-added to
it, different from the former. Now it is not possible we should know how many
powers may be super-added to Substance, whether having, or not having, the
modification of Solidity, unless we could accurately understand how many ways
it can be modified. A thousand Questions may be proposed concerning Powers,
whether they can be super-added to a Substance that has the modification of
Solidity upon its being variously modified, to which no Answer can be given,
which can be demonstratively proved. And amongst other Reasons, because we
cannot know the precise modifications, on which those Powers must depend, we
are not admitted so far into the Secrets of Nature, as to be able to take
cognizance of all the various real Constitutions, on which all the Powers,
which may be super-added to our Idea of Matter, may depend. If before any Man
knew any thing of the Loadstone, this Question had been put, viz. Whether God
had super-added to a System of Matter, fitly disposed, a power to draw Iron to
it? No Man then living could have given an Answer to it, which he could have
proved demonstratively. Had the Question been answered negatively, we are now
very well assured, the Answer had been false. If the Answer had been
affirmative, though it had been really true, yet the Answer could not then have
been proved demonstratively. The Question, with relation to what Mr. Lock has
said, seems to me to be this, Whether a demonstrative proof can be produced
that it is, or is not the pleasure of God, that a Power of Thinking shall be
super-added to our Idea of Matter, upon a System of Matter being modified in a
certain manner? And this Question cannot be satisfactorily resolved any other
way, than by producing a demonstrative proof either of the one part of the
Question, or of the other; for till the demonstrative proof is produced, we
must continue uncertain, and ought to acknowledge, that the point surmounts our
view, is too difficult for us to resolve demonstratively, and that it does not
come within our notice. Mr. Lock does not discourse there, of what may be
produced out of the Powers, and various modifications of Matter, but of what
God can super-add, if he please, to Matter fitly disposed: So that, the
Question here cannot be, Whether a Power of Faculty of Thinking will
necessarily result out of the Powers of Matter, upon its being in a certain
manner modified? But whether Omnipotency cannot give to a System of Matter,
fitly disposed, a power of Thinking, which could not be produced out of the
Powers and various Modifications of Matter? There is no reason at all to
imagine, that the Power of Thinking must be produced out of the Powers and
various Modifications of Matter, because a System of Matter, fitly disposed, is
taken notice of as requisite, or necessary, in order to its having a Power of
Thinking super-added to it. For that the Matter be fitly disposed is necessary,
whether God give the power of Thinking immediately to it, or mediately, viz. By
joining to it an immaterial Thinking Substance. And as it does not follow, that
because the System of Matter must be fitly disposed, to have an immaterial
Thinking Substance joined to it, therefore this immaterial Thinking Substance
can be, or is produced out of the Powers, and various modifications of Matter;
so neither does it follow, that because the Matter must be fitly disposed, to
have a Power of Thinking, given or super-added to it, therefore the Power of
Thinking can be, or is produced out of the Powers and various Modifications of
Matter. Which ever way it is, that a power of Thinking is lodged in, or
super-added to a System of Matter fitly disposed, there is something added to
the System of matter so disposed, by the good Pleasure and Bounty of God, which
could not be produced out of the Powers, and various modifications of matter.
But how God does it, which ever way it is, is alike unintelligible to us; nor
can we demonstrate which way it is.

XIX. And we can have no more Conception, how any modification of matter can
produce Thinking, than we can how any modification of Sound should produce
Seeing. Answ. Allowing all this to be true, it is no demonstration of that for
which it is brought. If there is any strength in this Proposition, with
relation to what it should prove, it must lie either in the term How, or in
these words, We can have no Conception; or else, In the comparing of the
Modifications of Matter, with the Modifications of Sound: And Arguing, or
Inferring, that because, or if no modification of sound can produce Seeing,
then no modification of matter can produce Thinking. That which this
Proposition should prove is this, That the Power of Thinking cannot be
super-added; or that it is not the pleasure of God, that the Power of Thinking
shall be super-added to Solid Substance, let it be modified in what manner
soever. Now, first of all, If the force of the Proposition brought to prove
this, do lie in the term How, it must derive its force from this Supposition,
That no power can be super-added to Solid Substance, however modified, but what
we can conceive How it should be super-added to it. That is, That no System of
Matter, whose real Constitution we cannot accurately understand, can have any
power; which is, in effect, to affirm, That solid Substance cannot have any
power super-added to it. For all the Powers that all Systems of Matter can
have, depending entirely on their real Constitutions, to which we are perfect
Strangers, none of them must have any powers at all, because we cannot conceive
how any powers should be super-added to solid substance, or cannot conceive
their real Constitutions, or not exactly understand the precise modifications
of Matter, whereby they are made such Systems. Secondly, If the force of the
Proposition spoken of, consists in these words, We can have no Conception, then
it derives its force from this Supposition, That no power can be super-added to
solid substance, but what we can conceive can be super-added to it, though we may
not be able to conceive how it can be super-added to it. Now this is a
Supposition that makes all the Powers of all Systems of matter, to depend not
on their real Constitutions, but on our Ability, to conceive that they can have
them; whereas there are innumerable Powers super-added to solid Substance,
which we cannot conceive can be added to it, because those Systems of Matter,
which have them, come not under our observation and notice. This must needs be
acknowledged by all, who do not fancy that all Material Beings fall under their
inspections, and that they can take a Survey of every one of them. Moreover, we
can conceive certain Powers to be super-added to certain Systems of matter,
which are not super-added to them; of which, a multitude of Instances might be
given, there being nothing almost more common, than for Persons to conceive
that certain Systems of matter have such Powers as they really have not.
Thirdly, If the force of this Proposition does lie in comparing the
modifications of Matter with the modifications of Sound, and inferring, that if
no modification of Sound can produce Seeing, that then no modification of
matter can produce Thinking, then the term How, and these words, We can have no
Conception, are super-numerary; for if they cannot impart any strength to
either part of the Proposition considered absolutely, they cannot add any
weight to the comparison. Leaving out therefore those words, the Proposition is
thus, Any modifications of matter can no more produce Thinking, than any
modifications of sound can produce Seeing. This Proposition is true, both the
parts of it are so; but then it is not any thing to the purpose, for which it
was intended. Turn it into an Hypothetical Proposition, that it may have the
form or appearance of an Argument, and it must run thus, If no modification of
sound can produce Seeing, then no modification of matter can produce Thinking.
Here both the Antecedent and Consequent are true, but then the Consequence can
never be proved; there is no connection between the Proposition inferred, though
it is true, and the Proposition from which it is inferred, though that also is
true. The reason why both the Antecedent and Consequent are true, is, because
no modification can produce an Act: And therefore, had the Proposition run
thus, If no modification can produce an Act, then no modification of matter can
produce Thinking, then the consequence had been unexcep^ionable. But in the
^ormer Proposition, the Inference has no ground at all to support it, because
the deduction is not from this, That modifications cannot act, but from such a
sort of modifications, as could not produce the Act specified, supposing that
modifications could produce Acts; for if a modification could produce an Act, a
modification of matter might produce Thinking, though no modification of Sound
could produce Seeing* But Thinking* and Seeing, being both Acts, they must
suppose Powers, and the enquiry not being whether modifications can act, for it
is past doubt that modifications cannot act: For not modifications, but
substances so and so modified, or having such and such Powers, are Agents, and
do produce Acts. The Proposition will come nearer to the subject we are
discoursing of, if it* be worded thus, If no modification of sound can produce
the power of seeing, then no modification of matter can produce the power of
thinking. Now because I do not know what Notions some Persons may have of
modifications producing powers, or in what sense they may understand those
words, I will state the present Enquiry as plainly as I can, and then consider
this Proposition or Argument more particularly. We are very sensible that it is
the pleasure of Almighty God, that solid substances being variously modified,
should have several Powers, by which Powers they are ^itted and enabled to do
several sorts of Acts, or produce various Effects. The Enquiry therefore is,
Whet^er it can be demonstratively proved that it is, or is not the pleasure of
God, that matter being in a certain manner modified, should have a power of
thinking, whereby it may be enabled to think? And to demonstrate that it is not
the pleasure of God, that matter, however modified, should have a power of
thinking super-added to it, this Argument is proposed, viz. That if no
modification of ^ound can produce the power of seeing, then no modification of
matter can produce the power of thinking. The sense then of this Argument must
be this, If it is not the pleasure of God, that a power of seeing should be
super-added to sound, what way soever it can be modified, then it is not the
pleasure of God, that a power of thinking should be super-added to matter,
whatever way it can be modified. Now, this is apparently so unconcluding a
Proposition, I cannot think any Man will insist on it, or pretend, that by
modifications of sound producing a power of seeing, can be meant producing that
power in it self; but that, because various modifications of sound do produce
variou^ sensations in other things, therefore produ^ing the power of seeing,
must be understood of producing it in other subjects. Let the Argument then, to
its utmost advantage, run thus, If it is not the pleasure of God, that a power
of seeing should be super added upon any modification of sound, to those
subjects in which the various modifications of sound do ordinarily produce
certain sensations, then it is not the pleasure of God that a power of thinking
should be super-added to solid substance, in what manner soever it can be
modified. That I may neither pass over this Argument, without taking any notice
of it, nor yet bear too hard upon it, I will only offer these three
Considerations concerning it* 1. That supposing the Argument to have any
strength in it, it would labor under this unhappiness. That it would prove a
great deal more than it should. 2. That such a Reason may be assigned, why no
modification of sound can produce Seeing, or why it is not the pleasure of God
that a power of seeing should be super-added upon any modification of sound,
etc. as the like cannot be assigned, that it is not the pleasure of God, that a
power of thinking should be super-added to matter upon its being in a certain
manner modified. 3. That we cannot argue regularly from the modifications of
sounds, to the modifications of matter. First, That supposing this Argument to
have any strength in it, it has too much: It would labor under this
unhappiness, That it would prove a great deal more than it should, and quite
over-turn the whole course and order of Nature, and the ordinary Providence of
God in the material World. For the Argument cannot be restrained and limited to
the power of thinking, but must, and will reach, to all powers in matter, and
so prove that it is not the pleasure of God, that any power should be
superadded to matter, upon its being any way modified; which, to me, has this
sound with it, That though it is the pleasure of God, that matter may be
variously modified, yet it is not the pleasure of God that it should have any
power at all, i. e. Be capable of any Action. Place any other powers in the
room of those which are named, the Argument will be every jot as good as it is,
and the Propositions, of which it consists, will be every whit as true as they
are with these that are mentioned. And therefore I forbear to reflect on the
fundamental Error that presses the Argument, and on that faulty Presumption
this way of Arguing imports, in undertaking to determine what is, or is not the
pleasure of God, without any either Real, or Verbal Discovery from him,
concerning it. Secondly, Such a Reason may be assigned why it is not the
pleasure of God, that a power of Seeing should be super-added upon any
modification of sound, to those Subjects, in which the various modifications of
sounds do usually produce certain Sensations; the like to which, c^n^ot be
assigned, Why it is not the pleasure of God that a power of Thinking should be
super-added to matter, upon its being in a certain manner modified, for Sound,
and the various modifications of it, are only Ideas in our Minds, and are in
the Bodies we denominate from them* only powers to produce those Sensations in
us, to which we give the Names by which we call them. Loud, Shrill, etc. In
Idea, are but the certain Bulk, Figure and Motion, of the insensible parts in
the Bodies themselves, which ca^se those Sensations in us. They are but certain
Powers, that are in Bodies, by reason of the particular Constitutions of their
primary Quali^ies, to operate after a particular manner on one certain Sense,
or Organ of Sense, viz. The Ear, by agitating variously the Animal Spirits,
which are in that Organ when duly disposed to receive their impressions. The
same modification of matter may produce in it a power, which will produce in us
different Sensations, but by operating on different Organs of Sense, fitted to
receive its impressions. One and the same modification in the external Object,
may produce different Effects or Sensations in us, because it operateth on
different Organs, adapted in us for different purposes. The various
modifications of sound cannot produce in us seeing, because it is the pleasure
of God, that the Ideas those Bodies communicate to us, which we call in general
various modifications of sound, should be conveyed to us not by the Eye, but
only by the Ear, from whence they are distinguished from those Ideas we are to
receive by our Eyes. We have in this matter a plain real discovery of the
pleasure of God, but we have not the like in the other case, about which the
Argument I am speaking of is concerned. But the true reason why no modification
of sound can produce a power of Seeing, is because neither sound, nor any
modification of it, can produce any power at all: They can no more produce a
Power of Hearing, than they can a Power of Seeing. Let the Organ of Hearing be
disordered, and have no Animal Spirits in it, that can be agitated by external
Objects, no sounds, nor modifications of sound, can produce a Power of Hearing
in it. Thirdly, That we cannot argue regularly from the modifications of sound,
or of any sensible qualities to the modifications of matter; and the reason of
this is evident, viz. Because they do differ Toto Coelo. The modifications of
sounds, are only Ideas in our minds; the modifications of matter, are the real,
but unknown Constitutions of things existing in Nature. If there can be any
room to argue concerning Thinking, from the modifications of Sound, it cannot
be concerning the Power of Thinking, but only about the modifications of
Thought. Thus, if any Man should offer any thing concerning the modifications
of Thought, so incoherent as this is, viz. That the modifications of sound can
produce Seeing, this obvious inconsistency may be made use of regularly enough,
to convince him, and others, of the Absurdity and Incoherence of the other
Assertion. But to say that a power of Thinking cannot be super-added to the
substance of matter in any case, because the Ideas we receive only by one
sense, cannot be got by another sense, has no connection at all, and is so far
from being a demonstration, it is not good sense. In short, the whole of this
Argument amounts to no more than this, If secondary qualities cannot produce
Powers (which i^ is certain they cannot) then God cannot, by the modification
of its primary qualities, give Powers to matter; whereas all the Powers of
matter, so far as we can observe, depend on them, as their Source, Spring, and
Original, by the Pleasure and Ordination of God, as appears by the whole Series
and Order of Nature and Providence. These words, We can have no more Conception
how any modification of matter can produce Thinking, than we can, how any
modification of Sound should produce Seeing, must be understood concerning the
Reality of a Consequent or Effect, following upon a System of matter being
fitly disposed or modified, either to receive a Power which it had not before,
or to occasion an Act in a Subject endowed with a certain Power to Act in a
certain manner upon certain occasions. Now, I conceive, it is past all doubt,
that various modifications of matter are necessary to occasion, if not produce,
certain different Acts in Subjects which are endued with Powers to exert those
different Acts, on different Occasions, though we may not know how those
different modifications of matters do occasion or produce those different Acts.
And though no modifications of matter can produce Thinking in the System of
Matter, which is the Subject of those modifications, yet a certain modification
of matter, may be requisite and necessary to the preparing and making a System
of Matter meet to receive a Power of Thinking. And I think it equally easy to
conceive, how any modification of Sound should produce Seeing in the Bell, or
Harp, etc. that makes the sound, as how it should produce Hearing in it.

XX. All Modifications of Matter are the same as to this point. Answ. If it is
not the pleasure of God, that a Power of Thinking should be super-added to our
Idea of Matter, upon any modification of it, then all modifications of Matter
are the same as to that point. And it is acknowledged very probable, that it is
not the pleasure of God to super-add a Power of Thinking to matter any way
modified. Yet bare saying, that all modifications are the same as to that
point, is not proving it; and it is not probable proof we are looking after,
(though such has not yet come under consideration) but demonstrative proof. Mr.
Lock says we have the highest degree of probability; those therefore who will
oppose him, ought to take care, that what they offer be true demonstration,
otherwise all they say will be to no purpose. That Matter being variously
modified has different Powers, the several Objects we converse with do clearly
demonstrate. And we shall hardly be able to demonstrate, that all modifications
of matter are the same, as to the power of Thinking, till we attain to know
what are all the Modifications and Powers that Matter is capable of, unless we
can give such true Accounts of the nature of Matter, and the nature of Thought,
as will domonstrate that these two are incompatible; which we cannot do,
without understanding exactly in what the nature of each does consist. All
modifications of Matter are no more the same, as to Matter having a Power of
Thinking super-added to it, than they are the same as to Matter having an
Immaterial Thinking Substance joined to it. And I believe all modifications of
Matter are not thought by this Reverend Author, to be the same as to this
point; for if they be, a Thinking Rock, or a Thinking Post, would be every whit
as intelligible as a Thinking Man.

XXI. And Matter may as well be made no Matter, by modifying, as be made to
Think by it. Answ. This is Affirming, but not Demonstrating. That Matter should
be made no Matter by modifying it, is altogether unintelligible, and
impossible; for let it be modified ever so many ways, it will still be Matter.
It may be proved Demonstratively, that Matter cannot be made no Matter, by
modifying it; and if demonstrative proof were produced, that Matter, however
modified, cannot have a Power of Thinking, the Dispute would be at an end. But
that Matter, under a certain modification, should think, when a Power of
Thinking is super-added to it, is consistent enough, and as intelligible, as
that it should exert any other Act, when it has a Power super-added to it, to
exert that Act. It is not said that Matter is made to think by any
modifications, that are proper to it considered barely as Matter, though by some
of these modifications of the Substance, which we know not, it may, for ought
we know, be disposed and made fit to have a Power of Thinking super-added to
it, by which it shall be enabled to think. This Power of Thinking is not proper
or peculiar to material Substance; nor can we prove demonstratively that it is
so to Immaterial Substance; but for any thing we know to the contrary, it may
be super-added both to the one and to the other. For if the same Substance may
be so modified as to be sometimes material, and sometimes immaterial, (as is
granted in this very Dispute) it is not impossible to suppose it may have the
Power of Thinking, when it is material, as when it is immaterial: For as the
Power of Thinking, when super-added to Immaterial Substance, does not make it
cease to be Immaterial, so being super-added to material Substance, it does not
make i^ cease to be material; though being super-added to both, it makes both to
be Spiritual Sub^^ances, which neither of them could be wit^out it*

XXII. This is just as if a Man should maintain, That though all Immaterial
Substances are not extended and divisible, yet some of them may possibly be; or
Omnipotence may super-add to them a Faculty of Extension and Divisibility; for
Immaterial Substances may become Divisible and Material by the same Philosophy,
by which we may conclude that Matter may Think; which is the same thing as to
become Immaterial, and to surpass all the Powers and Capacities of Matter.
Answ. Our Author is here got as far from his point as he was before, when upon
the Modifications of Sound; for here he is gone from the Modifications of
Matter, to the Transmutation of Substances. That I may do this Paragraph, and
the Point discoursed of, what Right I can in a few words, I will, 1. Offer one
Consideration concerning the Subject of our Discourse. 2. Show what I apprehend
is the great mistake of those who write against what Mr. Lock has said
concerning it. 3. Take notice of some mistakes in this Paragraph. First, I will
propose one Consideration concerning the Subject of our Discourse, viz. That
the Power of Thinking being a Power super-added to Substance, and all Substance
being either Material or Immaterial, the Substance to which this Power of
Thinking is super-added must be of one o^ those sorts. It is not made either
the one or the other, by having that Power super-added to it; though being
super-added, it makes the Substance, to which it is super-added, Spiritual
Substance. As the Power of producing in any Sensitive Animal the Idea of
Blueness or Acidity, or any other distinct Power being super-added to any solid
Substance, does not make that Substance Matter, but only makes it to be a
Substance to which such a Denomination will belong, as does arise from its
having such a Power super-added to it, when the Substance is considered
precisely as having that Power. The precise Denomination to be added to
Substance, upon its having any Power super-added to it, is to be taken from the
Power which is super-added to it, without considering what other Power that
Substance has; from which it will be denominated, when considerd as having
that Power. If it be said, that to be Immaterial, and to Think, be the same,
that is not true, for the Negation of one Modification in Substance, viz.
Solidity, is not the Position of another Modification in Substance, viz
Thought. Immaterial Substance is alike capable of having Solidity, or Thought,
or both those Modifications, or any other Modifications super-added to it,
which it shall please God to super-add to it. Perhaps, it will be said, that
the same Substance has indeed a Power, or is capable of Thought, or of
Solidity, whenever God pleases to bestow either of them on it, but that God
cannot give Solidity, and Thought, to any Substance both together. Now, this is
the very Question in Debate, and remains to be demonstrated. If it be said that
Actual Thinking is to Immaterial Substance as Actual Solidity is to Material
Substance, inseparable from it, these two things are to be demonstrated, 1.
That God has created any Substances that must be always in Action, or else
cease to be Substances, i. e. Substances of such a nature, from which God
cannot take away the Action they have, without destroying the Substance it
self; or that God has created a Substance that must always Think, for Thinking
is an Action. 2. That if it be so, how it will ^ollow from thence, that because
God has made some Substances not Solid which Think always, therefore he cannot
give to Substances, that have the Modification of Solidity, a Power to Think
sometimes. Solidity, and Thinking, are evidently distinct Ideas, and we not
knowing what Modifications may be super-added to our Idea of Substance without
Solidity, cannot prove that every Immaterial Substance has the Modification of
Thinking super-added to it; and therefore we cannot prove that it has the same
proportion to Immaterial Substance, that Solidity has to Material. If it be
said, But we know that some Immaterial Substances have the Power of Thinking, I
answer, true. But can we thence demonstratively in^er, that the Power of
Thinking cannot be super-added to any Material Substances without making them
Immaterial? We know th^^ Mobili^y is super-added to some Material Systems, can
we thence demonstratively infer, that Mobility cannot be super-added to
Immaterial Substances, without making them Material?

XXIII. Secondly, I will mention what I apprehend is the Grand mistake of those
who argue against what Mr. Lock has said concerning this Point. Their
Discourses seem to intimate, that they think that there are but two sorts of
Modification which can be super-added to our General Idea of Substance, viz.
Solidity, and Thinking. Hence I conceive it is, that they make Immaterial, and
the Power of Thinking, to stand for the same Idea; and that they are so
positive, that should a Power of Thinking be super-added to Matter, Matter
would be made no Matter; and that some, with an express rejecting of the
consideration of modified Matter, do ask, Can Matter Think? Which Que^^^on so
put, seems to me, to be in other words, T^is, is Solidity, Thinking? If Matter
can Think, it is not by virtue of Solidity, but by vir^^e of such a Power
super-added to the Substance, under a certain Modification, that it may Think,
though it be Solid. If the Power of Thinking can be super-added to Matter, it is
not the Power or Modification which can Think, but that ^o which the
Modification or Power is super-added, viz. The Substance which has the
Modification of Solidity. To ask therefore, whether Matter can Think, and at
the same time expressly exclude all consideration of the Power of Thinking, is
to ask whether Substance can Think by the sole virtue of Solidity? Or whether
the Power of Thinking is included in our Idea of Solidity? Which is much what,
as to ask whether Substance can produce that Act by virtue of one Power, which
it cannot produce but by virtue of another. What occasion can there be to ask
such a question, unless it proceed from an opinion that Substance, having the
Modification of Solidity, cannot have any other Power super-added to it, but
what must depend upon its Solidity? For if it can, and amongst others this of
Thinking, then though solid Substance cannot think merely as it is Solid, yet
having the Power of Thinking super-add^d to it, it may think. How many sorts of
mod^fications can be super-added to our Idea of Substance, surpasse^ our
comprehension, but any modification super-added to it, will entitle it to a
denomination answerable to that modification; and that denomination, together
with another Name, or with words signifying a denial of it, added to substance,
will as perfectly divide substance* as the Terms Material and Immaterial do.
Upon another modification being super-added to either of those kinds of
substances, another denomination will belong to it, when conside^ed merely with
relation to that modification. Should the modification of Mo^ion be alone
super-added to our Idea of substance, it would make it Substance with motion.
And Mobile and Immobile Substance, would as perfectly divide Substance, as
solid and unsolid Substance, i. e. Material and Immaterial do. This Mobile
Substance could not certainly be concluded by us to have either the
modification of Solidity, or of Thinking* by reason of its Mobility. Should
Mobility be super-added to a substance, which has the modification of
Solidity, it would be a substance with Solidity and Mobility. Should the
modification of Thinking be super-added to a Substance which has those other
mod^fications, it would be a substance with Solidity, Mobility, and the Power
of Thinking. That which would move, and think, would be Matter, or solid
Substance; the super-adding of the modification of Thinking, would not destroy
the other modifications; that which would think would be Matter, as well as
that which would move: For the modification could not think, but that which had
the modification of Solidity, viz. The Substance. We are sensible that it is
the pleasure of God, that various Powers should be super^added to solid
Substance, upon its being variously disposed or modified. How many the Powers
be, which it is the pleasure of God shall be super-added to our Idea of Matter,
upon its being va^iously disposed, we cannot tell. Hereupon this Question is
put, whether it is the pleasure of God, that the modification or power of
Thinking shall be super-added to some Systems of Matter fitly disposed? Mr.
Lock says, The Question is too abstruse and difficult for us to resolve
demonstratively. In opposition to this, or to prove the contrary, it is asked
whether Matter, without any regard to modifications, can think? Now can this
import any thing else, than either that the super-adding of modifications, to
our Idea of Matter, signifies not any thing to Matter's producing certain Acts,
or that no modifications can be super-added to our Idea of Matter? If
modifications can be super-added, neither this Question, nor the Answer that
belongs to it, can contribute any thing to the proving that the modification of
Thinking cannot be superadded to our Idea of Matter.

XXIV. Thirdly, I will mention some of the mistakes which may be observed in
the Paragraph before set down. First, It supposes several things, every one of
which is wrong, as 1. The words referring equally to both the parts of the
sentence which goes immediately before them, and taking them to be the same in
sense, though different in words, suppose Mr. Lock to say, in effect, that matter
may, by modifying, be made no matter; for which there is not any ground, but a
mistaken Imagination. 2. It supposes that it has been demonstratively proved,
that the modification of thinking cannot be superadded to a solid substance. 3.
That it is as Intelligible, that Immateriality may be superadded to our Idea of
Matter, as that that modification, which makes substance to be matter, may be
super-added to our Idea of substance. 4. That Mr. Lock concludes, that the
modification of Thinking may be super-added to matter, whereas he says it
cannot be demonstratively concluded. 5. That Immaterial, in the strictest sense
of that Term, as contradistinguished from matter, (for so the word is to be
understood in the present Dispute) and the Power of Thinking, stand for the
same Idea. 6. That we can know all the modifications or powers Matter is
capable of; for without that, we cannot know what surpasses all the Powers and
Capacities of Matter, except what is a contradiction to our Idea of Matter,
which a Power of Thinking cannot be proved to be, by bare saying, That
Immaterial, and a Power of Thinking, are the same. In short, the point is thus:
We have full Conviction that there is a Power of Thinking in some Systems of
Matter. Hereupon a Question arises, Whether this modification of Thinking be
the modification of the same substance that has the modification of Solidity,
or the modification of another Substance, which not being solid, is united to
the material substance? Some answer it is a modification of the substance of
that matter; others answer it is a modification of an Immaterial substance,
joined to those Systems of Matter. Mr. Lock says the Question cannot be
demonstratively determined, but that the highest degree of probability is on
their side, who say it is a modification of an immaterial substance. This
displeases: Therefore to demonstrate that a Power of Thinking cannot be
super-added to our Idea of Matter, or be a modification of Matter, we are told
that Immaterial, and a Power of Thinking, are the same Idea; and that a Power
of Thinking cannot be super-added to our Idea of matter, but matter must be
made Immaterial, or no matter. Now, it is most evident, that Immaterial, and a
Power of Thinking, are as distinct Ideas, as Material and Immaterial be. And
that should Matter be made no Matter, or be changed into Immaterial Substance,
Substance would only lose that modification which made it matter, and that it
could not think till the modification or power of thinking should be superadded
to it. Secondly, The Instance proposed in this Paragraph is not rightly stated:
If we would propose a Case concerning Immaterial Substances, that should be
parallel to that which has been under our consideration, we should first fix
on some positive modification, which is as essential to all Substances which
have not the modification of Solidity, as Solidity is to all those which are
material. To say, the modification of Thinking is so, is but saying. How can we
know that every substance that is not solid, has the power of thinking
super^added to it? Having fixed on this modification, we should fix on another
modification, that the Question being proposed, Whether it is a modification of
immaterial substance, or no? More probable Arguments might be produced on the
one side than on the other, but no demonstrative proof could be brought either
way. If in this case, some should be positive that it is a modification of
Immaterial Substance, and the highest probability was on their side, others
should be as peremptory on the other side; and at last, a Person of greater
Consideration and Temper, should s^y the point does not admit of any
demonstrative proof^ but probability carries it for them, who say, it is a
modification of Immaterial substance, and that therefore we must leave the
point (till demonstrative proof can be produced one way or other) as God has
laid it before us, and follow, and be contented with probability, whilst God is
not pleased to afford us any greater Light concerning it; what damage would any
way redound from this persons saying thus? Would that Wise, Prudent, and Good
Man, and Lover of Truth, deserve to be evilly reflected on, because he would
check Peoples vain Curiosity, convince the Materialists that they fight against
the highest degrees of Probability, and put others in mind that they should not
give the Adversaries to a good Cause, the Advantages they do, by presuming to
know more of the point, than it is the pleasure of God they should know of it
in this imperfect Estate? I speak not this with respect to the Reverend Mr.
Ienkin, (who concludes his Discourse with these words, But though I have, upon
this occasion, mentioned this Gentleman here, yet it would be a great injury
done him, to rank him with the Authors of the Oracles of Reason) but some other
Writers, who have on this occasion Indulged a Licentiousness, which Moral
Heathens would be ashamed of. Thirdly, There is not any thing in this
Paragraph, nor in all that this Learned Author has said, with relation to what
Mr. Lock has delivered, that can any more prove that the modification of
Thinking cannot be super-added to our Idea of Matter, than it can that other
modifications cannot be super-added to it. For Instance, Let a Person, who has
a mind to affirm that the modification, or power of active moving, or motivity,
cannot be super-added to our Idea of Matter, but that it is a modification
peculiar to Immaterial Substance, place a power of moving in this, and the
foregoing Sentences, in the room of a power of Thinking, and those very words
will as fully demonstrate his point, as they do the other.

XXV. That which may be regularly deduced from the passage in Mr. Lock's Essay
of Humane Understanding before quoted, and on which so many have thought fit to
reflect, is this, That People should not pretend a demonstrative certainty
concerning Things, which cannot be demonstratively proved; which is a very
great Truth, and which would be of extraordinary good use, would People
strictly and rigidly govern themselves by it. The greatest Service that can be
done to Truth and Godliness, is to preserve our Reason within its proper
Bounds, and to let Faith have its just scope. I very much question, whether any
thing can give bad Men greater advantage in their endeavoring to promote
Skepticism, and in their opposing and talking against the Articles of the
Christian Faith, than Christians, and especially Divines, or Clergymens
detracting any way from the Credibility of Divine Testimony, and making an
Ostentation of knowing Things which God has placed perfectly out of Humane
reach; And treating others scurrilously, who are more modest, and more
inquisitive than themselves, because they will not acknowledge that the Truth
of certain Propositions can be demonstrated, merely because they say, They can,
though they will not be prevailed with, to be at the pains to demonstrate their
Truth.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. l. 33. for Natural r. Material. p. 12. l. 10. r. Consistent. p. 13. l.
11. r. Revelation. p. 16. ^. 27. r. pretended. p. 17. l. 18. r. knowledge. p.
22. l. 20. after ^^y r. mere. p. 31. l. 29. after though r. not. p. 33. l. 10. r.
Substance. p. 46. l. ^. for offer r. affirm.


