A Testimony in that which separates between the precious and the vile. And is
for the friends and brethren who love the lord Jesus Christ in sincerity and
truth.
LEt it not seem as a strange thing to my friends and brethen, that any thing
of this nature should come forth from me, for I have a testimony in my heart
from the living God, that it is in unfeigned love to the Everlasting Truth,
which we recieved in the beginning, and am clear in this matter before the Lord
who searches the heart and tries the Reins. That I have been very often in
fear, least that precious Truth of the living God that we received in the
beginning with gladness of heart should by the subtilty of the Enemy if
possible be made void; (which could never be) who has been very restless and
has left no means unattempted either for the overthrowing the truth and
righteousness of God, or the undermining of it; that so the blessed Truth of
God, might not take place in the hearts of the sonns of men; surely strong
cries have been put up to the Lord, that the Enemy of the Soul might never be
able to hinder or stop the breaking forth of the Gospel of Peace, which has
again been published in our Age; and our Eyes have beheld the glory thereof;
blessed be the name of God for ever. To you my brethren that are so in the
truth, I can freely open my heart and declare the State of my mind to; It is
now about fiveteen or sixteen Months since the Lord called for this service and
testimony from me; and there was in me a very great deal of backwardness to
it, and a fear in me least I should do hurt in this matter, and still when I
laid it by, the Lord in some further appearance in his light, calls for the
testimony that he had made to appear within, must be brought forth for his
names sake, and in this matter I have lingered long till almost as in the
judgment of some now almost if not altogether to late, yet as the mercies of
the Lord have been very great to give many fatherly admonitions, and yet to
spare so not only now to accept, but also as at the beginning to call for it,
in this my wittness for Gods precious truth, what ever my words are, yet no
touch of bitterness in my Spirit against any man's person but a true love to
all, that there may be a returning by them that have erred from the straight
way to the pure path of life. The testimony that God called for was, that
notwithstanding I had professed his name and suffered many things, for bearing
witness to the Gospel of Salvation. Yet that which he now required was; that I
must leave my witness amongst my friends and brethren, for the everlasting and
unchangeable truth of the pure God, that whenever the Lord should remove me
out of this house of clay, and take me more fully into the bosom of Eternal
rest, that this may signify unto as many as shall come to read these few
lines, what is the ground and cause, which I and all the faithful brethren and
friends have so deeply suffered for, many in our own Country and some in
foreign parts. Which suffering of his chosen ones although despised and
persecuted in this Generation, yet God has a tender respect to, and it will be
more manifest in due time. My truly beloved brethren and friends I have in the
diligence of my soul weighed and considered, as concerning that Truth which we
received in the beginning, which we have so earnestly contended for, and that
with so much hazard and danger even the loss of outward estate and liberty, and
the life of the natural man, and whatsoever else may be dear unto us in this
present world; Yet not to use many words in this case but rather few and also
plainness of speech, because I find our cause our witness and testimony in this
our generation to be very weighty and of exceeding great concern, in as much as
it concerns the Truth of God in this world. And although our trials and
sufferings have been very great, yet at this time they need not be reckoned up,
because the sufferings and hardships we have undergone for the Truth, or in the
present generation and so are fresh in memory and we yet feel the so art of
them, and what we may yet further undergo for the same cause; we freely leave
it to our God, from whom our strength is; and in weighing the thing before the
Lord, what it was at the first that so engaged us to suffer and what we
received that made us in the patience, and meekness to und^rgo, what was laid
on us by the Enemy, this Answer arose from the Lord in my heart; the truth as
it is in Christ Jesus and in the word, there was and is a soul satisfying
fullness. Then I considered further in my self how it was the Truth as it was
in Jesus Christ, and the word further was that which never changes. Now my
dear friends and Brethren was it not so that in the beginning we did in Truth
receive the truth as it is in Jesus Christ, blessed be God you are not ignorant
of it, that we received the Truth in the love of it, as it was in the
Everlasting light of Gods power, and the way thereof is known, and a stranger
to it cannot intermeddle with our Joy let his words be what ever they will, and
the Truth has been further made known to us by the effects of it; and
therefore I shall speak a few words to you, whom God has called and raised up
by his living power, in the present generation, to bear witness to his holy
name, it is not only fresh in my memory, but I feel the virtue of it still
(blessed be the Lord God for ever) how the Truth as it is in Jesus, at the
first more abundanly then ever we knew before opened our hearts to God, and he
by his living power has kept them so that the Enemy with all the hard usage
and grievous persecutions (which we have undergone) could never yet be able to
stop the springs of life in us, and did it not revive our very souls, and it
was indeed a true translation from death to life, and so we came to know what
the true Love of the brethren was, surely it was so at that day, we were (mark
that) joined to the Lord in the Covenant of light, in which our fellowship with
the father, and the son is, and one with another; you that have kept your
integrity to the living God, and his precious (mark that) unchangeable Truth,
how was it with us in the day, when we gave up our names to the Lord to be his,
with what we were, and had in this present world, did not the Lord gain into
himself a full consent with the whole mind to be Gods, and not our own, and to
give up for his names sake, All that was dear to us in this present World, you
that know the truth and the first love and also kept your habitations in the
Everlasting and unchangeable light of the pure God, and love a dwelling place
therein: I can say with you, and it has been often with me (when I have been
alone as to man) although persecuted in this world, to Conclude in my soul in a
settled judgment, my lot with yours was fallen to us in a good place, and
whatsoever the Enemy can, or God shall permit him to be able to do to us
abiding in the Truth that never changes, yet still to keep our habitation, and
as God in his Everlasting mercy has chosen us to be heirs of the inheritance
which is incorruptible, and fades not away, so has he made us willing to
undergo, whatsoever the Enemy shall be further able to lay on us: Now my dear
friends and brethren I was not persuaded in my mind that the bare testimony of
the Truth of the living God, would be unpleasing to any amongst us, but that
which appeared so to me is yet behind and that is in short, it is so. God bears
testimony in my heart by his Spirit whom my soul loves, because its holy, but
as he called me to bear witness to the Truth as it is in Jesus Christ that
never changes, so also he called me to testify, and to leave my witness for
God, in this way, against the false and deceivable Spirits that is crept in
amongst us; you are not ignorant that after we had received the Truth, as it is
in Jesus Christ in the Love of it; in the first publication of it in London,
that within a short time after how the Devil in an instrument fitted for that
purpose, begun to sow tares, and to bring in that which did not gather to
Christ the true light, but did and was a means to scatter abroad, as it appears
to this day, and it is needful for the sake of the simple hearted ot say
something as to that appearance of the Enemy amongst us the Lambs of Christ
that were newly brought forth to God and were of a harmless Nature, who knew
little more as to a settled judgment, but only the heart melted and truly
broken before the living God which in that day was accounted of great esteem
amongst us, then came forth the Enemy in the spirit of Exaltation, and what
for? but to draw disciples after him, as in that day I heard it said by him; my
Father will give me a People out of you but he Lord God who is rich in mercy,
and full of Compassion to all that in Truth of heart depend upon him, preserved
a People to himself in that day, and kept them chaste in their hearts to the
living God, who made a full discovery of the wiles of the Enemy of the soul in
that appearance; and shame and confusion came upon all those that were gathered
into it. But my dear friends the Enemy retains his old Nature still, he goes up
and down seeking whom he may devour, therefore if he appear as an Angel of
light, let his form of words be whatsoever they will, we who have a habitation
in the pure light of Jesus Christ, whom God has manifested his mercy to
whereby we are preserved in our first love to God and his Everlasting pretiuos
Truth; surely it makes the Truth as it is in Jesus Christ, exceeding precious
to all that fear and love the Lord, in sincerity of heart. The Enemy of the
soul (as I said before in his first appearance from amongst our selves after we
had received the light, and the good old way that whosoever walks in it finds
rest to the soul) in the Spirit of exaltation lifting up himself, yet is
manifest to be of another seed then the seed of Abraham.

When God had overturned the work of the Enemy in that appearance, and
sufficienly laid him open not only to the friends of God amongst our selves,
but also to all sober people in the Nation that had heard thereof. Soon after
this, the Enemy whose work it is to go up and down, seeking whom he may
devour, deing disappointed as I said in that appearance, now takes another
form to himself, and now manifestly appears to be of that seed whom God has
cursed, in tempting Eve to eat of the forbidden fruit, and in this Appearance
the Serpent comes out in part like himself, and says I am a Worm, a Creeping
thing the least of Creeping things, yet in his work he clearly manifests
himself to be of the Serpents seed whose work it was and is to draw out from
God, and from fellowship with them that walk in the light of God, for in the
beginnning when the Truth as it is in Jesus was preached unto us and we
receiving the same with gladness of heart, what sweet communion and fellowship
had we together in the Spirit of holiness, and in that day the Spiritual
Israel of God, were as a flock that came out from the washing, prepared in
heart by God to be a living sacrifice to the Lord and to walk in the good old
way which is the light in which the fellowship is with the Father, and with the
son and one with another. And I testify for the Lord in that day we knew no
jarr or division amongst us, but our souls preferred a living in the truth
above all earthly things; and this I can say the Truth (as it is in Jesus
Christ) is not less beautiful now then it was in the beginning although we
have been deeply tried in our testimony for the living God, and after a true
clear settlement of the friends of God, in the Everlasting light of holiness,
into which they had been gathered and where they stand not to be tempted
neither by preferment in this World nor ease to the flesh, nor any other thing
whatsoever, from the love to or walking in the Truth as it is in Jesus, then as
I said before comes forth the Enemy in the second appearance, creeping on his
belly, but still to deceive and draw from the simplicity of the Gospel, but the
Lord God Everlasting that ever is a near Rock of refuge to all that depend upon
him, who have no other helper on the Earth, he is rich in mercy, and his
Compassions fail not, I testify it is so. And what says he of this creeping
thing; the word of Truth to me was, It is a self seeking and a self separating
Spirit; And what was the glory that this Spirit would have drawn us to? and
which he was moved as he said, ^s not ^s the ^ound of ^^vision ^ongst
when he was in Rome to lay before friends in England and else where, this was
the mighty matter, that was to be brought forth by it, to keep on the hat in
prayer to God, and the ground and reason was because the Church of Rome in
their traditional Worship in the fall did keep of their hats in prayer, And
while this Spirit would be pleading seemingly against the practice of the
Church of Rome, would in the mean time strike at the very life of Christ, into
which (let it never be forgotten by us) we were brought and this was the
heavenly place, which we were set down in, glory honor and praise be to God
says my soul for ever. But in this the Enemy blessed be God, was disappointed
(mark that) in all them that love and fear the name of the living God; And
when that could not take effect, but the creeping thing was discovered to be an
Enemy to the precious life by them that were upon their watch Tower and were
gathred out of all Romish Traditions to Christ the true light, that lights
every man that comes into the World; but the Enemy he is restless still, and
since he has gotten some disciples in his first attempt, but what says my God
of them (It must be borne I say since it is the will of my heavenly father)
they are wandering stars, and wells without water and if they return not to
that in which the true unity and fellowship is with the father and the son
and the one with another; there will be a lamentation for them in my soul, and
that because I love and desire the good of all men and not the hurt of any. The
Enemy in the second attempt labored to break down our hedge and fence wherein
and whereby God has compassed us about and made a true separation between us
and all those that are not yet come to believe in the true light, for that
which separates us from the World is that which we have owned (Mark that) in
the sight of Nations and which we have so deeply suffered for in our own
Country and from our neighbors and kindred according to the flesh, is it for
any thing else, but that the light, Spirit and power of Christ might not only
take place in our hearts for a time, but also bear rule in us and over us for
ever. But the Serpent that creeps on his belly he would pluck up our fence and
lay us in common again with the World (which he can never do for it is upon the
root) and take away our Crown (which is to live to God by virtue of his power)
and that by writing an epistle for the most pure unity and amity, and the
taking away the hedge of Opinions as is there expressed, And what is it that this
creeping thing counts the Quakers hedge that is but an opinion that separates
us from others? truly I know nothing but the light, and power of the living
God, and if the creeping thing could robor take away this precious pearl from
us which we have sold all for, and yet there is no repenting in our hearts that
we have so done, and that because the light and power of the living God has
woonn our hearts to follow God as dear children, and not to return to this
present World, but the Serpent that creeps on his belly, and dust is his meat
he would bring us, who are as the first fruits unto God into conformity unto
this present World, and if the Sects of which he speaks that are but yet in the
opinions will come over to us and believe in the light, that they may be made
partakers of the Power of the living God, which only can deliver from sin, then
they together with us may partake of fellowship with the Father and with the
son, for till People come to that truly, they cannot have fellowship with us
in the things of our God, let the Serpent do what ever he will and blessed be
God we are not of them that are given to change and tossed about with every
wind of doctrine, it is so my heart rejoices in it for ever, there are by the
grace of God, that are established upon the rock of Ages let what creeping
thing soever, under never so fair pretenses Come forth, neither the instrument
of the evil one under color of a higher dispensation, we look not for another;
for I can say and speak the truth in Christ and lie not that my heart together
with yours is fixed and not to be removed no not by persecution of the Enemy
without us Although they have nothing justly to charge against us, unless a
good Conversation from the hope that we have in Christ, the true light that
lights every man that Comes into the World neither by those Enemies for so
they are that are gone out from us, and truly were never of us, in as much as
there still is a dissenting spirit Maintained even to this day, and that from
the ground of division in the keeping on the hat in prayer to God which clearly
manifests that there is not a unity (mark that) in the true root, for this was
the glory of the Ancient spouse of Christ in the days of the Apostles, they
had one Lord that ruled over them, one hope that was in them, one faith, one
Spirit, into which they were baptized, and being built upon the true rock and
perfectly Joined together to be a holy habitation for the living God to dwell
in. And friends what is there in that Spirit that stands in the division that
is not in the unity in the comely order, and in the unity in the body, I
testify for the Lord this day I cannot, I dare not keep it back; It is the old
Ranting Spirit that was in Mildred and others that rose up against Friends and
truth in the days of J. N. and as then called by the Lord to bear my testimony
for him and against that Spirit, so has the Lord called me to bear witness
for the Truth against this (mark) that which is but one in the ground with the
former, and to you who are of an upright heart, who love the unchangeable Truth
of the living God, and are not given to change, but abides in the living vine,
for unless I and you^ continue in him, we as well as others cannot bring forth
fruit to the living God, for I have rejoiced in all my trialls that although
mocked and scorned, and as a fool in this World, yet it is for Christ the Power
of God and the wisdom of God, for it is so, we are by him brought to Mount Zyon
that cannot be moved, we come to know that scripture fulfilled in us and to us,
he will keep him in perfect peace whose mind is staid on him, and you my
friends who are friends of God, and whom God has magnified his mercy to, in
calling of you, out of the World and bringing of you near to himself and in
making of you vessels of honor, fitted by him for his Masters use, You that
have been faithful in your testimony for God in the day of trial and have not
joined with the Enemy that has risen up from among our selves, whereby your
strength in the living testimony was not abaited to you, I speak although but a
Babe in him, yet one that is brought forth by the heavenly father in the
Everlasting and unchangeable light to live and die with you, your faces have
been pleasant to behold, but the degenerate Spirit, that which took occasion
and forsook the Assemblys of the Saints under what pretense soever, as also
that spirit, that is a self seeking, self separating Spirit that under
pretense of being moved, and thereby laid a ground of division amongst them
whose faces were turned toward Zyon; The testimony that is given me to bear
and leave behind me, when I shall be no more, (as to that which is Mortal) is
I have no part with them, and you who are dear in the sight of the Lord, this I
have to say to you, I am often comforted when in the retiredness of my mind I
am more with him who is the life, that God will lift up and exalt the dominion
of Jesus Christ over all that which is contrary amongst us, and the Truth as it
is in him, that never changed but abides the same for ever shall remain and
continue.

J. B.

THE END.
A Postscript.
THe power of the Lord God is over all them that keep on their hats in prayer,
and they do not keep on their hats in prayer neither by motion, power of God,
nor by the Spirit of God, but (by an earthly dark Spirit) against it, and them
that be in the power of God: This was the first Ground of it both in Jo.
Perrot, and his Company, when he run out, and J. N. when he run out; and this
first it was done in opposition to them that was in the Truth, and in the power
of God; but the power of God will crush to pieces that fained dark earthly
Spirit, to pieces, and to the earth and pit it must go, with all its fained and
false pretenses; and the power of the Lord God, and his Truth, reigns over it
all.

The first that got up into this posture of keeping on their hats in prayer
against friends, was the Ranters; the next was J. N. but he quickly, by the
power of the Lord, saw it, and judged it; and the next was Jo. Perrot, whose
end was according to his work, and so will those that continue in it; for the
power of God is over them, and their dark earthly Spirit; and the power of God
was before they were, and will remain when that they be gone, and it reigns:
and this is the word of the Lord God to you all. And for my part I had as leive
to see a Priest to stand up in a Meeting, as one of these dark earthly Spirits,
with their hats on their heads, when that friends pray, for they cannot deceive
friends. For I have been more burdened with their dark, subtle and sophisters
Spirit, than with the Priests, which had no more show of reverence to God (in
that) than to a horse; whose outward seeming righteousness has deceived many:
but the power of God, (which destroys the deceiver) undeceiveth and brings
people to that which did first convince them. And them that kept on their hats
when friends prayed, after a while some of them ran to the Priests to be
married, and some to hear them in the Steeple Houses, then this dark earthly
Spirit could bow, and put off its hat to its own; the dark Spirit which kept on
the hat in the assemblies of the righteous, in opposition against the Spirit
and power of God: And so this Spirit has led people into a feignedness, and
love, and liberty, which the power and Spirit of God cannot own, but judge, and
stand over, and reign over, if they keep their habitations in the power, and
life, and truth of God which reigns.

If they that are and have been in this dark earthly Spirit, had but had a
regard to the power of God, and his Truth, they would have been tender, and
afraid of giving any occasion or offense, both to them that be within, and to
them that be without, to draw out their minds to look at that which their
earthly Spirit has promoted; and so to lay stumbing blocks, and set up an Idol,
and an Image to look at, which draws peoples eyes from the witness of God in
themselves; but the power of God is gone over it, and will break it down: And
so this Belials Spirit, which would be wthout yoke, cries (to such as in love
exhorts them, and judges it) You Lord over us: And so this earthly dark Spirit,
(which is gotten above the witness of God in themselves, which is not sensible
of the moving Spirit and power of God) it sets up its own earthly form, which
the power of God never set up, but judges; And this earthly Spirit judges all
that are gathered together in the power, and that are constained by the power
and love of God, in a familiar way, to take one another by the hand, through
the dearness and nearness of the love of God, and the pure, clean and holy
life; and also are moved by the power of the Lord God to put off their hats in
prayer. This dark Sophister, earthly Spirit, thus has judged these practices
of the people of God aforementioned, to be but a form, which are done in the
power of God, it being out of the power it self, and the fellowship and unity
of it. And because they that are in it, are gone (from that which first
convinced them) into outward things, and into their form in the earthly Spirit,
it judges those that will not follow them that have lost the power of God; and
thus many of them are darkened with a cankered rusty Spirit, which will corrupt
them, and has destroyed many: And this is that that has brought the plague of
hardness of heart, through which there has been strangeness, and not unity, nor
familiarness, nor nighness in the Truth; for how should it, when they are gone
from that which first convinced them? To that all must come, before they have
fellowship and true unity in the power and truth of God; which if that had been
minded, it would have lead to follow whatsoever things are comely, whatsoever
things are decent, whatsoever things are of good report, and such things as
make for peace: but this Spirit has followed the contrary, and therefore the
power of the Lord God is against it, and over it gone, and reigns, and the life
and truth.

And you, with your earthly Spirit, and earthly form, have given occasion to
the world to say, that the people of God called Quakers are divided, some with
their hats on, and some with them off, and so they are opposite one to the
other. And this is the fruits of the earthly Spirit, which would bring darkness
and earth over all; But the power of God is over all this dark and earthly
Spirit, and the world, and them that be in it; and looks upon them, and the
world, one against the truth, and the power of God. And the people of God
called Quakers, are one (and not divided) in the power of God, and his truth;
and in Gods power and Spirit they are in unity in the truth and power of an
endless life. This I was moved of the Lord God to write.

G. F.

The End.

