Christ carrying cross to Golgotha Principia et documenta Vitae Christianae
Golgotha

Matthew 16: Ver: 24 If any man will com after me let him deny him self and
take up his Cross and follow me

F. H. Van. Houe* feci^
(...)



PRECEPTS AND Practical Rules FOR A truly Christian Life.

BEING A Summary of Excellent Directions to follow the narrow way to BLISS.

In two PARTS.

Written Originally in Latin By JOHN BONA. Englished by L. B.

LONDON: Printed by M. Clark, for H. Brom, at the Gun in S. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXVIII.

TO The Reverend Mr. Thomas Ken, PREBENDARY OF THE Church of Winton, etc.
SIR,
YOU are known to be a Person of a very Charitable and Generous Spirit, ready
and desirous to oblige the public: yet had you been aware your commendation of
this Book, would have drawn upon you the trouble of this address, it may well
be doubted whether you would not have kept it secret to your self, without
promoting its being divulged in our vulgar tongue, for the benefit of others.
But Sir, that you may not repent this good deed, I will spare you as much as is
possible, and leave it still to public fame to proclaim your great worth: only
pray give me leave to offer that to you, to which you had most right. It will
not only be an Act of justice, but a kindness also to them that love good
Books: For they will be sure this is one, when they shall know, so Pious and so
Learned a man, has recommended it for such. And I may well expect, this will
prevail with others to read it gladly, when it was that made me undertake the
greater trouble of Translating of it.

I know not whether I should deprecate for the more than usual liberty I have
in some places taken: but Sir, either I could not follow my Reader in his too
lofty flight: or else I thought plainness might be of a more general
usefulness: or it may be I judged it convenient that speaking another language,
he should somewhat alter his sentiments. It may be no difficult matter to win a
Jansenist not now biast by worldly Considerations: and however it is a good work
to draw a good man from a bad party. So that I am almost confident that what I
have done in this, will not only have your pardon, but your approbation also:
and then I shall not need fear the censure of any judicious Reader.

Sir, I am well assured, your name will more than answer all the objections
that might be raised against this Book on the account of its Author; as for the
matter of it, it is most excellent; and if my Translation be but tolerable, it
cannot but do good, and be acceptable to all good Christians. I know 'twas your
design it should, and I wish it may: and that this Dedication may be looked
upon as a Testimony of my great respects for you, worthy Sir, whom unknown I
honor, as a Person well known to deserve it, remaining

SIR, Your humble Servant L. B.

THE Translators Preface TO THE READER.
I Know we have great plenty of good Books already, but the number of the bad
ones increases daily, and we must not suffer the tares to choke the good seed:
for the new ones are read and enquired after, though for nothing but merely
Novelty. I know likewise that for the best of modern Authors, we need not be
beholden to strangers, we have many of our own, more excellent than any can
come from abroad: But why should we be greedy of such foreign things as minister
to vanity, and neglect such as advance true goodness? Why should we teach Poets
and Romancers to speak the English Tongue, and not acquaint Christian
Philosophers with the graces of it: If I wanted Apologies for this Translation,
such as these would sufficiently plead for it: but indeed I rather want words
to set forth its due praise, for it is very good in it self, and designed to a
good end; I mean the instructions of it, which if attended to, cannot but be
very serviceable, in promoting Holiness and true Religion.

I know some will be ready to ask with Nathaniel, John 1.46. Can there any good
thing come out of Nazareth? But I Answer with St. Philip, Come and see. Believe
not my report, but come and satisfy thy self, and judge as thou shall find
cause. It Is true we may not go to school to the Devil: but we may receive truth
from whencesoever it comes. I mean only that we should not seek to dissenters,
to learn from them those things wherein we disagree: but in those things which
we know to be true, we may use their counsel and their assistance: and we are
all agreed that unfeigned holiness and Christian virtues are absolutely
requisite to make us true Christians, and to make us happy. We may therefore
use all such means as tend to this end, without inquiring whence they come;
Israelites may go down to the Philistines, to sharpen their mattocks, their
shares and their axes: and where we know the right way, there is no danger in
being forwarded therein, by any strangers help.

It Is not to be denied but that the Church of Rome maintains many Doctrines
very injurious to God, and destructive of Holiness and true Piety: but withal,
it must be granted that many of her members admit not of the direful
consequents, but still believe and press the necessity of a good life, and
obedience to the Gospel-precepts: and were it not for this 'twould be
impossible for any good man to live in so erroneous and so corrupt a society.
But however, fear not to read and to follow the Christian Directions contained
in this Book: for it has past through such hands, as would not have made it
public, but for a public advantage: and withal, it is not so much the Authors
composure, as his Collection from Ancienter and more Orthodox Writers.

But Blessed God! how different are the tempers and procedures of men? Not a
few in the Roman Church, are grieved for, and very sensible of the corruptions
crept in, and established amongst them; and yet they are meek and peaceable,
silent and subject under their worst Constitutions: and this purest of
Churches, the Church of England, against which nothing reasonable can be
objected, is clamoured against, torn and distracted, even by some that would be
thought the best of Protestants. There they impose a heavy yoke, and teach
things apparently designed to gratify their Pride and their Ambition; and yet
they are obeyed: here the Church is indulgent, and plainly aims at nothing, but
the Salvation of Souls and the Glory of God; and yet it is rebel'd against and
persecuted. And I profess, but that the Gospel it self is slighted, and Heaven
not cared for, I must eternally wonder, that the Church of England is not loved
and reverenced, and most gladly followed, by all that have the happiness to
live within the limits of her enclosure.

But I say, this wonder must cease, when we consider that men can stand out
against the mercies of their Redemption, the infinite Love and Charity of the
Blessed Jesus, and the glorious rewards and promises offered to all that will
be true Christians. While men shall be so stupid as to neglect these, 'twill be
no hard matter to impose upon them: and it must not seem strange that the means
are despised, where the end it self is disregarded. Until Christians make it
their first and chiefest business, to secure a blessed Eternity, by living holy
lives, it cannot be expected they should make wise and serious enquiries into
those truths which are more disputable and less necessary. For the mixing
secular interests with things of Religion, first made, and still maintains the
errors and breaches of the Christian world: and the way to bring to an end many
controversies, is not so much to decide as to bury them; at least to make them
give place to those things, which are much more plain, and much more requisite
and beneficial.

And here again, I might have a just occasion to commend this Church we live
in, for the best guide of Souls: for either she meddles not with many disputes;
or else she always stands on the much surer side of the question: holding that
which even her Adversaries cannot but acknowledge for truth: and never amusing
her Children with unnecessary speculations, or unprofitable contests. But as it
is her great design to make us obedient to the Gospel of Christ, and bring us
to a sincere practice of all holy virtues: so I shall conclude this Preface,
with an Exhortation to the same purpose.

That thou would seriously and often consider, that thy life is short and
uncertain, and that the world passes away, and all things here below: and that
thou resolve thereupon, not to lose, not to venture thy portion of good things
above, for any earthly enjoyment. That thou would bear Eternity in mind, and
weigh the importance of these two words, which conclude our Creed, Life
Everlasting: and that afterward thou resolve carefully to follow the way that
leads to it; the Doctrine and Example of our Blessed Savior, who has purchased
and promised it, to all that love and follow him. Live therefore as one that
follows the King of Eternity, to a blessed Eternity: and despise the world. Use
diligently such means as will make thee know thy duty, and encourage and assist
thee in the discharge of it: and amongst them good Books, which read with
attention, and a design to make their goodness our own, are very useful
instruments of Virtue and Religion. This I hope will somewhat conduce to their
advancement; Nay, I am sure thou shall be much bettered by it, if thou will
transcribe it with thy Life, as I have with my Pen: and make it thy hearty
Endeavor, as I do my Prayer.

L. B.

THE Authors Dedication TO ALL TRUE CHRISTIANS.
WIth due Reverence, I offer this small volume to you blessed Souls, vessels of
honor and mercy, elect and holy, Children of God predestined to glory before
the foundation of the World: who being redeemed from death by the blood of
Christ, and from sin, by the gift of grace, are not ashamed to own the despised
Cross of your Redeemer. For to you it is given to know the mysteries of the
Kingdom of Heaven; to you that are not born of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. You are called by the Father to a
portion of the inheritance of the Saints in light, that ye might be holy and
unreprovable in his sight in love: and in Christ you are chosen, according to
the purpose and good pleasure of God, not for your own works and merits. For
you the Blessed Jesus prayed, when being ready to leave the world and go to the
Father, he said, I have manifested thy name unto the men whom thou gave me
out of the world: thine they were and thou gave them me. I pray for them, I
pray not for the world, but for them which thou have given me, for they are
thine.

He prayed not for the world, because all that is in it, the lust of the flesh,
the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, are not of the Father. And
therefore they that are of the world hear not, or at least will not regard and
understand the words of eternal life, for the natural man receives not the
things of the Spirit of God. And though Christ be the true light which lightens
every man that comes into the world, yet the world sees him not, nor knows him,
neither can it receive the spirit of truth. On this will be grounded the just
judgment of the wicked, This will be their condemnation, that light came into
the world and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were
evil, and every one that does evil hates the light.

Now if Christ was a light in his life and doctrine, he was so much more in his
sufferings; he did shine on the Cross most gloriously to all the world. The
tree of death to which he was tied, became his pulpit whence he preached his
divinest Sermons, teaching us that great lesson dying, which he set while he
was alive: He that does not take up my Cross and follow me, cannot be my
disciple. Therefore to take up our Cross and follow Jesus, is our greatest
safety as well as duty, our surest title to glory; the Cross is the highest
pitch of Christian learning, to know Jesus Christ and him Crucified.

I heartily wish that they that shall read the ensuing Precepts and Practical
Rules may have sanctified affections and a clear understanding, that by the
divine grace they may be brought to know and to follow the truth. And my prayer
for them is, that God would strengthen them by his good Spirit in the inner
man, that love may abound in them more and more, and that they may be sincere
and unblameable, replenisht with the fruits of righteousness, pleasing to God
in all things, without contention and without offense. I also beg for my self
of the divine goodness, that the glorious light of Christ may enlighten and
guide my mind, and that his strength may be perfected in my weakness, lest
after having preached to others, I my self should become a castaway, by acting
contrary to my own instructions. And therefore I also beseech you, good friends
of God, Blessed Christians, who are the sheep of his Pasture, remember me in
your Prayers, that what I teach I may fulfill; that the precepts contained in
this Book may be my practice, by his divine grace and assistance, without whom
we can do nothing, who with the Father and the Holy Ghost, lives and reigns
one ever glorious and adored God.

Amen.
Imprimatur.

Geo. Hooper. R. P. D. GIL. Ep. Cant. a Sacris Dom.
May 29. 1677.
THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST PART.
PART I. Of the Christian Life, and of its end and offices. Page 1
CHAP. I. OF the distribution of all Christians into three ranks; good,
middlesort, and bad. ibid. CHAP. II. A further Description of the Wicked and
their Wickedness. 4 CHAP. III. That Original Sin is the spring whence all Evil
proceeds. 8 CHAP. IV. Of the Occasion and Drift of this Book. 10 CHAP. V. The
Cause why so many learn the Rules of Christianity and follow them not. 12 CHAP.
VI. That the Rules of Evangelical Perfection are intended for all Christians.
14 CHAP. VII. Of the Usefulness of this Book, with an Exhortation to follow
after Perfection. 17 CHAP. VIII. Of the Folly of them that neglect their last
End, and how necessary it is to consider it seriously. 19 CHAP. IX. The Reasons
why all men are not happy, being they all desire it. 22 CHAP. X. That with an
upright intention we must use all things, and refer all our Actions to God. 24
CHAP. XI. That men trifling about things Eternal, and being so earnest about
the World, is the cause why so many attain not their main end. 26 CHAP. XII.
How men suffer themselves to be deceived by a fair outside, and false
appearance of good. 29 CHAP. XIII. How men spend themselves and their time, and
abuse all things to their own Ruin. 31 CHAP. XIV. That the right way to Heaven
is, every one to remain in the station Providence has appointed him, and
therein bear the Crosses which he meets withal. 33 CHAP. XV. How man's last end
or supreme happiness is qualified, and how so many mistake and miss it. 35
CHAP. XVI. Another Reason why so many miss of their End; their living too much
by Sense. 38 CHAP. XVII. That we being the Children of God, ought to be guided
by his Spirit and by the example of Christ. 41 CHAP. XVIII. The Just lives by
faith, not by the laws of flesh and blood. 43 CHAP. XIX. That Faith works in a
Christian self-denial and contempt of the World. 46 CHAP. XX. Of the desperate
folly of men, who willingly run to ruin, by their inconsideration. 48 CHAP.
XXI. The Character of a true Christian. 50 CHAP. XXII. Several useful cautions
how a Christian should undertake and perfect his works. 53 CHAP. XXIII. That to
discharge the Duties of our station is the best thing we can do. 56 CHAP. XXIV.
How Christians are to live and to be sincere. 57 CHAP. XXV. That a hearty
affection is the life of good actions. 60 CHAP. XXVI. Whence the goodness of
our works proceeds. 62 CHAP. XXVII. How useful and comfortable is the
consideration of God being always present. 63 CHAP. XXVIII. Why the Imitation
of Gods Saints appears difficult. 66 CHAP. XXIX. How we should in all things
aim at Gods Glory. 68 CHAP. XXX. Self-Love is the Root of all Evil. 70 CHAP.
XXXI. That Self-Love is that Babylon out of which God has called us. 72 CHAP.
XXXII. How men naturally seek themselves even in their best works. 74 CHAP.
XXXIII. Things which every Christian is bound to know in order to Obedience 77
CHAP. XXXIV. The difference betwixt the outward and the inward man. 79 CHAP.
XXXV. How dangerous it is to be governed by Opinion and false apprehension of
things. 81 CHAP. XXXVI. Three things very profitable and necessary to every
Christian. 84 CHAP. XXXVII. That Repentance is necessary to all Christians. 86
CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the signs and effects of true Repentance. 88 CHAP. XXXIX.
Remedies against ordinary failings, and greater sins. 90 CHAP. XL. Clergymen
have some special obligations, though all are bound to endeavor after
perfection. 93 CHAP. XLI. That Prayer is necessary to all, and what
dispositions are requisite to make it acceptable. 96 CHAP. XLII. Why many are
not profited by Prayer, and that we should study to Pray well and frequently.
100 CHAP. XLIII. How to Pray, and avoid distractions, and fix the intention.
103 CHAP. XLIV. The great advantages of Prayer. 106
THE CONTENTS OF THE SECOND PART.
PART II. Of the moderation of our affections, and the study and endeavor
after true Virtue.
CHAP. I. That Voluptiousness and Vanity are to be avoided, and Truth sought
for in things Eternal, after Christ's Example. Page 1 CHAP. II. That to attain
Perfection nothing must be neglected. 4 CHAP. III. That Self-denial and the
Cross is absolutely necessary to all Christians. 7 CHAP. IV. That Self-denial
is the Character, and the principal duty of a Christian. 10 CHAP. V. How we
must fight our corrupt nature and depraved affections. 13 CHAP. VI. Of the
right use and moderation of our outward senses. 16 CHAP. VII. Of denying our
Sensual appetites especially Intemperance. 19 CHAP. VIII. Of Talkativeness and
Silence. 22 CHAP. IX. Of true and false delights, and of self-complacency in
virtue. 25 CHAP. X. That we are led too much by Opinion. 27 CHAP. XI. That the
Doctrine of Salvation is much slighted, even by some who pretend to it. 30
CHAP. XII. That Self-will is a great Evil and must be renounced. 32 CHAP. XIII.
Of the advantages of Solitariness and Retirement. 34 CHAP. XIV. Of the Danger
of Riches, and that the desire of them is to be mortified. 36 CHAP. XV. Of the
use of Riches, and how to know we love them not. 39 CHAP. XVI. Of Poverty in
Spirit, and the contempt of the World. 41 CHAP. XVII. Of the Necessity and the
Measures of Almsgiving. 44 CHAP XVIII. Of Patience in Bearing and Forbearing.
48 CHAP. XIX. Adversities are occasions of Virtue, and must be Patiently
endured. 51 CHAP. XX. That we must bear patiently the little Vexations that
happen daily. 53 CHAP. XXI. That we should Rejoice in Triublations. 56 CHAP.
XXII. That Detractions and Derisions must be endured and derided. 59 CHAP.
XXIII. Remedies against Discontent and Anger for what abuses we receive. 61
CHAP. XXIV. Remedies against Impatience. 64 CHAP. XXV. Of Humility the proper
Virtue of Christians. 66 CHAP. XXVI. From God we turned away by Pride, to him
we must return by humility. 69 CHAP. XXVII. The Character of a proud man. 72
CHAP. XXVIII. Motives and Reasons for Humility. 75 CHAP. XXIX. That the Humble
man judges himself and not others; with a Character of him. 79 CHAP. XXX. Of
the Conformity of our Will to Gods. 83 CHAP. XXXI. Of the Resignation of our
selves to God in all things. 87 CHAP. XXXII. That the Hope of our Salvation
must rest upon God. 91 CHAP. XXXIII. That Love is the Spirit of Christian
Religion. 93 CHAP. XXXIV. Of the right Placing and Ordering of Love. 96 CHAP.
XXXV. Of the Necessity and Measures of Loving our Neighbor. 98 CHAP. XXXVI.
True Friendship and the true Offices of it. 101 CHAP. XXXVII. Of the several
Acts of Charity to our Neighbors. 105 CHAP. XXXVIII. Charity is also due to
our Enemies. 107 CHAP. XXXIX. That the love of the Supreme Good, comprehends
all goodness. 109 CHAP. XL. Wherein consists the Love of God. 112 CHAP. XLI.
That there is more of Love in Practical Knowledge than in Speculation. 115
CHAP. XLII. That by Love Holiness is to be perfected. 117 CHAP. XLIII. That the
Consideration of the fewness of the Chosen, ought to make us very wary and
diligent. 120
PRECEPTS AND Practical Rules FOR A truly Christian Life.
PART I. Of the Christian Life, and of its end and offices.
CHAP. I. Of the distribution of all Christians into three ranks; good,
middle-sort, and bad.
1. WHen in my meditation as from a watchtower, I consider the whole multitude
of Christians in the universal Church, with their manners and principles, they
appear to me as divided into three distinct bands or orders. The first contains
them who following the doctrine of Christ and his blessed example with a sincere
and hearty affection, and daily reaching forward toward the highest pitch of
Evangelical perfection, thereby approve themselves to be Christians indeed;
constantly serving God, and meditating in his Law, they crucify the flesh with
the affections and lusts, and are not cast down by adversity, nor puffed up by a
prosperous fortune. Now among these, some are more eminent in virtue than the
rest, and seem to be even more than men; abstaining from all delicious fare,
and being temperate even to a perpetual fast; keeping themselves pure and
unspotted even to the refusing of lawful pleasures; exercising themselves in
patience, so as to go manfully through fire and the worst of pains; mortifying
and denying themselves, as being their own enemies; despising wealth and
riches, so as freely to bestow in charity all that they possess; being filled
with the love of God, as much as is possible in this life; and possessing all
virtues in the highest degree, so as to be the admiration rather than the
example of others, who with shame acknowledge their own weakness, when they
consider how far short they fall of these Heroic Christians. But the number of
these is not great, and they are commonly unknown, being dead and crucified to
themselves and the world, their conversation being in Heaven, and their life
hid with Christ in God.

2. In the next rank are they who rest in the profession of the true faith, and
think that all Christian duties consist in outward acts; they fear God, and yet
retain and worship their secret Idols; they often come to the Sacrament, but
with so much unpreparedness and indevotion, that their frequent receiving
profits them not; they abstain from great and crying sins, and neglect lesser;
outward Acts of Religion they omit not, but their affections are immerst in the
World, they are acted by Self-love and Self-interest, and they are unacquainted
with the inward peace and beauty of a Spiritual life; they know not what it is
to endeavor after Christian perfection; they are, and will be strangers to
that Heavenly mindedness and renouncing of all things, without which Christ
declares none can be his Disciple; and so sadly deluded they are, so unhappily
besotted with inconsideration, that if you exhort them to a stricter and more
holy life, they will bid you go and preach to Monks and Hermits, and remain
unconcerned and the same as before.

3. In the last order come all such as are called Christians, only because
born of Christian Parents and Baptized; their Lives and Actions being
scandalous, and they themselves wicked and abominable, worse than infidels; of
these, the number is great and innumerable.

CHAP. II. A further Description of the Wicked and their Wickedness.
1. THese are they that confess God with their mouth and constantly deny him
with their deeds, who so study to gratify their appetites, and so resolvedly
live after the flesh and the sinful customs of the World, that the revelations
and laws of the Gospel can make no impression on them, they being rather
ashamed and almost sorry that they are Christians. They daily indulge to their
Lusts, and their vilanies growing customary deprive them of all sense of human
modesty. They relish nothing but the Earth; they take their account of good and
evil by carnal pleasures, and they so order the course of their lives that like
brutes they follow nothing but their bodily senses. Riches they value at a
mighty rate, and right or wrong seek to obtain them; they esteem nothing base
and unworthy that advances their profit or their preferment; and as one said
of some Greeks, they build as though they were never to die, and live as if
they were weary of their life.

2. This they do, because they believe not what our blessed Lord has revealed,
and because being unmindful of the uncertainty of our condition, they promise
themselves many years to live. They rest satisfied with the enjoyment of
transitory things, which soon shall be possessed by others: and things that abide
for ever they slight and neglect, because they think not of Eternity. They are
tormented by ambition, and weakened by lust, swelled with pride and racked by
Envy; Passions and unsatiable desires toss them to and fro, and they are so
averse to all righteousness, that they not only neglect, but even hate the just
laws of God. Christ pronounces them Blessed that are poor, and mourn, and
suffer persecution: they contrariwise esteem them blessed that are rich, great
and prosperous, and generally honored by men. Christ declares that none can be
his Disciple, who is not ready cheerfully to forsake all that he has for him:
but these men place their affections on their wealth; keep it nigardly, part
with it sorrowfully, and are ever greedy of more, ever ready to invade others
right, and to get what they can from them.

3. Even some Professors, that have chosen Christ for their portion, and
pretend to be devoted to him, even some of these there be, who, unmindful of
their Sacred Promises, endeavor nothing more than to increase their wealth,
and oftentimes enjoy greater riches under Christ the great Exemplar of Poverty,
than they could have done in a civil Calling under the greatest Monarch of this
World. Neither are some of these more careful to obey than to imitate, for
instead of loving their Enemies, and rendering good for evil to them that hate
them, as our Blessed Lord has commanded us, they return hatred for ill will,
and are ever ready and desire to revenge the least injuries. Who is there that
obeys Christ's counsel or injunction of turning the cheek to him that smites
us, and suffering him that strives for our Coat to take our Cloak also? or
rather who is there that does not slight and deride it? Let who will take an
exact account of the Evangelical precepts, and of the observers of them, he
shall find that they are very few that live by the Rules of the Gospel, few
that regard and esteem it as they should. Nay few there be that care to read or
hear it; Fables Romances, and Idle Discourses are generally preferred to the
Word of God; whereby the vain World make it appear, that they belong not to him
whose voice they care not to hear, that they hear not God's Words, because they
are not of God.

4. It Is the Duty of every Christian faithfully to believe what God has
revealed, to follow his Counsels, and sincerely obey his Commands, whence it
clearly follows, that he is no Christian who neglects or scorns this Duty, for
Faith without Works is dead, and except our conversation be suitable to our
Profession, the most glorious Names and Titles shall avail nothing. Life and
manners, as well as Faith, make a difference betwixt a Heathen and a Believer;
by Works the distinction is made betwixt the true Religion and the false. For
what manner of Faith is theirs, who so believe in God that they despise and
reject his Commands? are they not like the Devil who believes and trembles? or
rather it were to be wished that they were no worse; for his Faith begets an awe
and terror, but these boast of Faith, and yet do not so much as fear God.

CHAP. III. That original sin is the spring whence all evil proceeds.
1. NOW of the cause of all this wickedness none can be ignorant, that has but
heard of the transgression of our first Parents. For by their fall original
Righteousness being lost, human nature utterly depraved and shut up under
condemnation, their offspring fell into evils of all sorts so great and so
many, that they can be neither expressed nor numbered. Hence that deep and
dreadful ignorance which like a black cloud darkens the mind and lies upon it;
hence that brutish and untamable Lust which like a heavy weight sinks the soul
to the ground and there keeps it fast; hence that aversion from God, and
conversion to things perishing; hence those anxious cares and foolish joys,
those dissensions, quarrels and enmities, those perverse Heresies, greedy
Sacrileges, and unsatiable Lusts; and hence the Eternal ruin and damnation of
all Mankind. For this was the just vengeance of Man's impious Disobedience and
Rebellion, that God should forsake him, who by Pride lift up himself against
God; that he that would not when he could, make a good use of his free will,
should be deprived of it, and become incapable of doing what was infinitely his
duty and his interest to perform, except he be prevented and assisted by the
divine grace and mercy.

2. Thus Man left to himself in the state of Nature, is by self-love drawn to
himself, seeks himself only, and in his wretched self alone sets his rest and
his satisfaction. This is a sad truth, and it is much to be wished all Christians
did well consider and understand it, for if they were sensible of their
weakness and impotency, how incapable they are of themselves to do any good,
then it is like they would daily by fervent prayer beg his gracious help, that
works in us to will and to do; from whom comes all our light, our strength, and
our sufficiency. But alas too many in a deep death-like sleep, rest in carnal
security, and unhappily abused by vain delusions, love their blindness and
their disease too, dreaming that they are safe and sound, because they have no
sense of their distemper.

CHAP. IV. Of the occasion and drift of this Book.
1. Whilst I often thought of these things, and in the bitterness of my Soul
called to mind the lost years of my life, I was grieved and perplexed both upon
the account of the time which is past, and of that which shall follow
hereafter. Looking backward on those days which are gone, and examining
seriously how I have spent them, I was seized upon with horror at the sight of
my many soul prevarications against the laws of my gracious God, and my great
unfaithulness to Christ my Savior, in the breach of those sacred vows I made
when I gave up my name to him, in holy Baptism: I was ashamed and confounded to
have thus requited my God, and abused his Grace. And when I turned my self to
the future, to those things that are coming upon me, I could not but dread the
dreadful judgments of my offended God, and tremble exceedingly at the greatness
of my danger, and the uncertainty of that pardon I want, and am so much
unworthy of. In these straights I resolved by God's help, first to help my
self, and then others that are in the same case; to prescribe what might easily
be had, and yet be effectual; things ready at hand, which being often read and
considered, might be remembered and followed: that they that seriously design to
be happy and to take the safest way that leads to Heaven, might find it here,
without the trouble of a long and laborious search.

2. Now because Physicians have their Aphorisms, and Philosophers their Axioms
or sentences: and in all inquiries after truth, we must begin at certain
principles, which are short and comprehensive, and as it were, the seed and
marrow of the whole discipline; therefore I purpose in this little book, to lay
down briefly and clearly those chiefest Rules and instructions for to lead a
holy and a religious life, which more at large are scattered in the sacred
books of Divine Scripture, and in the works of the Holy Fathers and other good
Authors. For when all is done, this is our first and our greatest concern, that
one necessary thing on which all depends, to know how to live well, to live
like Christians. For what shall a man be profited if he shall gain the whole
world and lose his own soul? and what shall a man give in exchange for his
soul? Mat. 16.26. Nothing more perverse and unreasonable can be imagined, than
to own our selves Christ's disciples, and live quite contrary to the example
and the precepts of Christ. The name of a Christian will avail nothing, where
the life is Antichristian.

CHAP. V. The Cause why so many learn the Rules of Christianity and follow them
not.
1. MAny without difficulty can read and learn the Gospel-precepts, and even
often think of them: but it is much to be lamented that few understand well
their force and their full importance. We easily grant that the only way to
heaven lies through self-denial, fasting, watching and praying, keeping under
the body, and going patiently through many tribulations: but when it comes to
the proof of action, we seem to be of another mind. We can readily say and
affirm that it is a Christian's duty cheerfully to endure reproaches and
persecutions, torments, and even death it self: but when these evils are at
hand, and our life comes to be in danger, then things appear not as they did
before, we cannot see that we are obliged to resignation and sufferance; what
before was a very clear case, is now at the best but very doubtful. We can be
humble when no body reviles us: and when we meet with no vexation then we are
patient. We assent to the doctrine of Christ, and his severest injunctions,
when we are not concerned: but when they come to regard us, and press upon us a
present duty, then the inticements of lust, and worldly vanities alter our
resolutions and disturb our minds; and by a corrupt gloss or lazy
interpretation we elude the unpleasing precept.

2. Truth is as it were, wrapped up in a cloud, and men hate it, because it
reproves them, their sinful depraved nature cannot abide its rigor and
austerity. They find in virtue something rough and bitter, and in sin a mixture
of sweetness; that offends, and this gratifies their distempered palate, and
they brutishly follow the bait, run into all dissolution, and so reject truth
to embrace a lie. If at any time they give ear to an honest and plain monitor
who lays the truth open before them, and be so far worked upon, as to be
sensible that they are in darkness, and to have some desire after light: yet
like men that would fain awake, but are oppressed by a heavy slumber, and so
presently fall to sleep again; they soon after close their eyes, and exclude
the light, to return to their beloved darkness.

3. No wonder therefore, if we propound to do many things, and effect nothing.
For we not foreseeing the difficulties which commonly occur in well-doing, when
we come to meet with them, we presently draw back, and our courage fails;
again, we trust in our own strength more than in the divine help and
assistance: and when temptations grow strong we lose heart and are soon
worsted, and learn by a sad experience, that when we overcome, it is not by our
own virtue, but by the power of God's grace. Lastly, we give much to notion and
speculations, and take little care to affect our will and affections; the
Christian laws of well-living we learn as a science, rather than as a matter of
conscience; we study Divinity, not to obedience and conformity to God's will,
but to vain glory and ostentation. Now it is altogether in vain to learn wisdom
and yet live foolishly.

CHAP. VI. That the rules of Evangelical Perfection are intended for all
Christians.
1. MAny that have no mind to perfect holiness in the fear of God, by living
according to the strict precepts of our Savior Christ, pretend that they
belong not to them, but only to Clergymen or such as are shut up and recluse
from the World; this is their excuse and their plea, but as I shall soon make
it appear, it is altogether void of truth and vain. For though it is to be
acknowledged, that some by new vows and engagements are more particularly
devoted to God, and under greater obligations to live Religiously and tend to
perfection; yet certain it is that all Christians tend to the same end, though
their way may differ in some circumstances: and as to what regards the practice
of Christian virtues, contempt of the World, poverty in Spirit, and the loving
and bearing of the Cross, they are all equally concerned; they have the same
Gospel, and are equally obliged to obey its dictates. Charity which is the band
of perfection, comprehensive of all other duties, God requires of all
Christians alike: and lust or self-love which is the root of all evil, is
likewise generally forbidden; no exception of persons; no difference is made
betwixt any. Our Blessed Savior has injon'd we should abstain from idle
words, of which an account shall be rendered in the great day, that we should
not be angry with our Brother, nor covet what belongs to him; he makes no
distinction betwixt Clergymen or Laymen, or persons of any rank or calling;
nor yet when he says, Woe unto you that laugh and blessed are ye that mourn:
nor when he teaches that we must always pray, that we must forsake all and
follow him, that we must hate our own life, deny our selves, suffer injuries
patiently, and enter in at the straight gate; in these consists Christian
perfection, and yet from these he excludes no man.

2. Saint Paul likewise writing to all Christians, such as were cumbered with
worldly affairs, and had the care of large families, gives them this strict
Ascetick Rule, to be content with food and raiment. 1 Timothy 6.8. Than which
nothing more was ever required of any Hermits. Saint Peter also exhorts all
believers, to be holy in all manner of conversation, as he that has called
them is holy. 1 Ep. 1.15. So does Saint James 1.4. to be perfect and entire,
wanting nothing. And our Blessed Savior before them all, preaching to the
multitude that followed him, Be ye perfect, says he, as your Father which is
in Heaven is perfect, Mat. 5.48. Thereby recommending the highest degree of
holiness, to all that would be his Disciples; that as many as are reputed
children of God, by grace and adoption, might live accordingly endeavoring
after the example and perfection of their Heavenly Father. And so has our
Blessed Lord laid upon all Christians infinite obligations to live holy lives,
to be strict and virtuous to the highest measure and possibility, which they
may not neglect without forfeiting his favor, and excluding themselves from
his Heavenly Kingdom.

CHAP. VII. Of the usefulness of this Book, with an exhortation to follow after
perfection.
1. NOW then let us despise and forsake all those things, wherein worldings
place their felicity, and make it our only study to pursue after the prize of
our high calling, the height of Christian perfection, in following the blessed
steps of our Blessed Redeemer. This is the aim of this little volume; to this
purpose are designed all the instructions here laid down, that we may overcome
the temptations and allurements of sense, attain to the knowledge of the truth,
and so return in some manner to our primitive station, that Paradise wherein we
were created, to triumph over sin, and at last reign to Eternity. The children
of this World would fain have it believed, that that perfection or sincerity
which the Gospel requires, is very hard to come by, and hardly to be found in
any man living, thereby endeavoring to make Christians faint and remiss, loath
to venture upon an attempt, which they would have them think is wholly
impossible: whereas nothing is difficult to him that is truly resolved and
willing, and whatever is hard in it self, is made easy by that grace of God,
which is always ready to assist us.

2. The truth is, there is so much of delicious beauty in virtue and
righteousness, so ravishing a joy in a glimpse of heavenly light, so glorious a
brightness in the sight of God's eternal truth, that the enjoyment of these for
one day, may justly be preferred to many ages of the greatest pleasures this
world can afford, for one day in thy Courts is better than a thousand, as the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 84.10.

3. Now here would I caution my Reader, not to wonder, if perchance he finds
the same thing repeated more than once in this little book, for that cannot be
avoided, there being so close a connection and affinity betwixt the precepts of
several virtues: and withal it may be an effect of the great power of truth,
that the nearer we view it, the oftener we are drawn to review it. Likewise if
something herein seems too Angelical and high, or more harsh and difficult than
the frail nature of man can well bear, let him remember that the Kingdom of
Heaven suffers violence, and that the sufferings of this present time are not
worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us. Our labor
is but short, but our promised reward is infinite and eternal.

CHAP. VIII. Of the folly of them that neglect their last end, and how
necessary it is to consider it seriously.
1. IT is not to be thought nor expressed how ignorant and careless many
Christians remain about their great and last end; if there were no Eternity,
and if nothing after this life were to be feared or hoped for, they could not
live more loosely than they do. Few they are that seriously consider that their
great interest and their chiefest business which should take place of all
other, is to attain their proper end; that end which is desired for it self,
and beyond which we shall wish for nothing, of which S. Philip says, Joh.
14.8. Lord show us the Father and it suffices us: For this end, which is God,
the beatifical vision of him, will be all-sufficient, because that it will have
no end; all other things are mere trifles, vanities and vexation of spirit.

2. The very shape of our bodies does admonish us of the end for which we were
born; for God made us with our face upwards, that looking up to heaven, we
might know that thence is our origin, and that there is our rest and country.
And yet for all this, many like brutes look down and grovel upon the ground,
and can relish nothing, nor desire nothing, but what is earthly; nay more, like
men in a deep lethargy, they can hardly be waked by the loudest clamours and
the fear of a rageing approaching fire; and what is worst of all, if they
somewhat lift up their head, and speak imperfectly two or three words of sense,
they soon fall again into their slumber, and no longer will hear, or mind what
concerns their life and safety.

3. It is the counsel of our Blessed Savior, Mat. 6.33. Seek ye first the
Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and all other things shall be added unto
you: but we slighting and neglecting that blessed Kingdom, seek for money,
pleasures, and preferments, and mind nothing else. Christ tells us, that one
thing is necessary, Luke 10.42. but we cumber our selves about many things,
which for the most part are only hindrances to our salvation. He commands us,
Mat. 7.12. To do that to others, which we would they should do unto us: But we
generally do those things to them, which we would think most grievous to suffer
our selves. He forbids us to judge, Mat. 7.1. But we love to censure others,
and to condemn them very severely; we take notice of motes in their eyes, and
perceive not beams in our own: and to sum up all in this, he requires we would
love him above all things, with all our heart and soul, Mat. 22.37. But we dote
on pelf and riches; we are lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God; to him
we prefer any thing that gratifies our lusts and our sinful affections. Thus,
in as much as in us lies, we make the preaching of the Cross to be of none
effect, the Incarnation of the Son of God to be to no purpose, and sacraments
to be vain and insignificant: because we will live as if we had no knowledge of
God, no thoughts of heaven nor hell, no remembrance of our latter end. The life
of every creature consists in acting suitable to its own nature; now that
which we are to do, as men, wherein properly consists our duty and our dignity,
is to know God, and to love him: therefore to be employed in this, is our
proper work, our life and happiness; to do any thing else, is vain and useless;
and to do any thing contrary, is infinitely pernicious.

CHAP. IX. The reasons why all men are not happy, being they all desire it.
1. IT is the constant sense and design of all men that can use their reason,
to aspire after happiness; but what that is, there are and have been many
opinions and disputes; and Philosophers have spent much time and industry to
find out the way to Blessedness, the desire whereof is natural, and common to
all, of what parts or persuasions soever. Yet Christians alone know it, they
being taught by the doctrine of Faith, that God is the fountain of all
felicity, the fulfilling of all rational desires, that Summum Bonum or last
end, which is to be preferred and loved, and sought before all other things, as
that wherein alone we can find perfect rest and satisfaction. Notwithstanding
it is to be confessed and sadly bewailed that multitudes of Christians are so
wilfully blind and perverse, that though they passionately wish for happiness,
yet they do nothing whereby to obtain it. They are so grossly cheated by a false
appearance of Bliss, the deceit and illusions of things present, that they
aspire to nothing above sense, and therefore they would, and yet cannot be
happy, because they aim not at the right end; their actions and pursuits have a
tendency to misery, and thither necessarily lead them, though it be much
against their will.

2. As in a circle, though never so ample, there is but one center, which being
alone in the middle, seems to have dominion over all the lines that can be
drawn from the circumference, and to be their proper place of rest: thus is God
the one only center and rest of our souls, and if they turn from him, they may
wander eternally, other objects being finite and altogether unsatisfying.
Therefore God requires only that we should seek after him, because that alone
is absolutely required to our well-being. Whatever else is wanting, we may be
well without it; life it self is not necessary: and if not life, much less
lesser enjoyments. And so he that lives as he should, aiming at his right end,
must live to God alone, to serve and to glorify him. For this is the nature of
man, and a law appointed to him which cannot be changed, that he that desires
and pursues after that supreme, eternal, uncreated good, thereby becomes happy:
whereas he that any ways turns from it, becomes necessarily miserable.

CHAP. X. That with an upright intention we must use all things, and refer all
our actions to God.
1. IN that we are pilgrims and travelers going to our country, it is
altogether necessary we should always advance thitherward, and seriously
inquire whether we follow the right way, whither we are going, what end we
propound to our selves in all our labors, and what it is we now aim at by our
present studies and endeavors: for man undertakes nothing, but to a certain
end and purpose, which the better it is, the better also is the undertaking; it
is a good intention that makes a good work, and that good intention is that,
which is directed by the rule of faith. It is the voice of the wicked, Wisd.
2.6. Come on therefore, let us enjoy the good things that are present. Whereas
the best of creatures are only for use; and God alone for enjoyment. The
Creatures are as so many steps, or rounds of a ladder whereby we might ascend
up to God; thus at least he intended it: but by our depravation and folly, they
became obstacles in our way to him, they turn us from the path to life and
happiness, and as the Wiseman says, Wisd. 14.11. The creatures of God become
stumbling blocks to the souls of men, and a snare to the feet of the unwise. Of
the unwise, he says, such as will not take God for their guide, such as turn
their eyes from his glorious light, to enjoy the shade and obscurity of
creatures: thereby falling in love with darkness, and so becoming incapable of
ever abiding the divine saving light.

2. Now if all creatures are created for this, to be as helps and means whereby
we may obtain our end, then are we to take off our affections from them, to
place them upon the Creator, who is the end we should aim at. For the end
should be loved and desired without end, and without competitor, in goodness
being independent, supreme, and alone satisfactory: whereas means have no
farther goodness, than as they help to obtain the end. A Christian should
therefore refer to God all his thoughts, and words, and actions, and that, not
lazily or verbally only: but with a strong affection, and with a pure heart:
avoiding thereby the cheat men often put upon themselves, in being deceived
with their own formalities and specious pretenses, when even in Religion and
spiritual exercises, they often seek and please themselves, rather than God.
Upon this account the Scripture calls the way to life, straight and narrow,
because depraved man refers all to himself, and can hardly follow the pure and
direct ways which God prescribes, being naturally averse to an upright
intention. But when this aversion is once overcome, by an assiduous diligence
and delight in the law of God, then divine commandments are not grievous, the
way to life is wide, and the yoke of Christ is light and pleasant.

CHAP. XI. That men trifling about things Eternal and being earnest about the
World, is the cause why so many attain not their main end.
1. THat the number of fools is past number, was rightly affirmed by the Wise
man: For indeed infinite multitudes of men trifle away their days so simply,
act so childishly, or rather so much like mad men, that their intolerable
follies cannot be sufficiently deplored. They set the flesh above the spirit;
they prefer time to Eternity, and Earth to Heaven, till the unhappy Comedy of
their sinful lif^ ends in a sadder Tragedy of death, and they go down to Hell
in a moment. If a suit at law is to be determined, or an estate gained, or a
place of honor obtained, then they spare no cost nor labor, no search, no
diligence, no study: but if Heaven is to be purchased, and eternal life and
glory made sure, then no man stirs; they are all asleep and unactive; no
regard, no care is had of it.

2. In things that touch and afflict the body, as hunger and thirst, heat and
cold, pains and infirmities, our senses are quick, and can never be deceived:
and therefore with all our might and industry, we presently occur to those
evils, and endeavor to remove them. But if our soul suffers under the same or
the like spiritual evils, we are not sensible, and we care no more, than if
that nobler part of us whereby we live, and are rational and like to Angels,
had no being at all. And this, because the flesh has got the upper hand: and
we value this sport, uncertain life, more than life eternal: and we make it our
first and sole employment to rescue that carcass from death, for a few moments,
which certainly must soon become its prey.

3. One cause of these preposterous doings, is the gross and brutish ignorance,
or rather inconsideration of too too many, who will neither know nor consider,
to what end man was created, what it is he should seek and design in the whole
course of his life, and what way he should take that he may not miss of his
great aim, Jer. 12.11. The whole land is made desolate because no man lays it
to heart, i. e. because no man considers wisely. Another cause of this
mischief, is the great number and power of those Enemies that perpetually
assault us, whose snares no man can possibly avoid, without God breaks them,
and delivers him: for we are continually besieged by a frail flesh, a
flattering world, and legions of devils, who seek to devour us.

4. Lastly, our folly and misery proceeds partly from our blindness; the whole
World being in darkness, we want light to guide us, and yet will not beg it of
God, and pray him devoutly, he would lead us aright, who alone is able and
willing to do it: and partly from our sloth and inconstancy; for we are
virtuous in wish and not in effect, because we are lazy to work, and when it
comes to the practice, we find difficulties, and being soon tired and
disheartened, hastily give over, before we have effected any thing. All
Christians no doubt would be glad to come at last to Christ, but they have no
heart to come after him: they would be glad to enjoy him, but care not to
imitate him: fain would they come to him, but not follow him. Men would obtain
riches without labor, and Crowns without fighting; they like well of rewards,
but they would take no pains.

GHAP. XII. How men suffer themselves to be deceived by a fair outside, and
false appearance of good.
1. THis World's felicity put all together, with all those things that are most
esteemed by the generality of mankind, the whole is but like a coarse picture
which seems to have something pleasing and inviting, when you look upon it with
a false light, or in a place somewhat obscure, or with a small blind candle,
such as is the dim and deceitful light of present time: but if you bring forth
the picture, and view it before that glorious sun that shines for ever, the
radiant brightness of Eternity, there it will appear deform and unfinished, a
dark and imperfect shadow which represents nothing, a confused heap of strokes
and lines drawn without order or design. For though the light of the Gospel
enlightens the World, yet it remains in darkness; men will not see the glorious
discoveries which the Gospel makes; The light shined in the darkness, but the
darkness comprehended it not.

3. Yet that light it is, and none else, that clearly shows the great
difference betwixt good and evil, btwixt vile and precious, betwixt truth and
appearances; how we may know and choose the one from the other. By this blessed
light of Christianity which dwells in the heart and instructs it, and abides
for ever, by it we are taught not to cleave to the creatures because of their
attractive beauty: but so to consider their perfections, as to be by them led
to the fountain whence they proceed, to the love and admiration of the glorious
maker of all things. And the same divine light it is, makes me see that it is
good for me to hold me fast by my God, and to put in him alone my whole
confidence, and not in Princes or Friends, or even Brothers: who as they have
all a distinct being, have also different ends, and seek from us every one his
own advantage, being ever ready to forsake us, as soon as they shall think we
are become useless to them. This light therefore we ought gladly to receive and
follow, that appearances and pleasing illusions put not a cheat upon us, and
make us seek for happiness in the creatures which are as if they were not, and
have no value, but what the ignorant vulgar attributes to them: and make us
forsake God, who remains for ever, who is the fountain of all being, and the
author of all good things, out of whom there is no rest, no peace, no felicity
to be had. He that departs from the supreme happiness, thereby becomes
miserable in the highest degree.

CHAP. XIII. How men spend themselves and their time, and abuse all things to
their own ruin.
1. THE Life of man runs round and spends it self within this circle, they eat
and drink, they sleep and wake, that they may return to the same again; they
scrape together as much as they are able, and there is no end of their
acquists; they will live as merrily as they can, and die as late as possible
may be; betwixt their baptism and the hour of death there lies a confused heap
of acts of sin and acts of Religion, of penitent confessions and wilful
relapses, of Sacramental vows and breaches of them. No day passes over without
they add to the number of their transgressions; and they all go on heedlesly
without considering what will be the end of their course of life; and they all
run, when but a few care, how they come to the end of their race: because they
consider not what reward and glory is prepared in Heaven, to them that remain
faithful to their Christian engagements, overcoming the world and the flesh,
for to follow Christ.

2. God created the whole universe, and in it man to his image, giving him an
understanding to know his maker, a will to love and obey him, a memory to think
of his laws, faculties to serve him, and a tongue to praise him: but then as he
made man for himself, so he created the whole world for man, that he might use
all things for his own happiness, and for the glory of God, the giver of all.
But ungrateful man, unmindful of his duty, drawn by the deceit of
voluptuousness, minds only his sensual pleasure, uses or rather abuses his
knowledge and reason, his riches and honors, his health and life and all other
enjoyments, to the displeasure and dishonor of God his gracious benefactor,
who freely granted him all those things, that if he would make a good use of
them, they might be instruments of his present ease and well being, and of his
future eternal happiness. So great is the folly and perverseness of man, that he
abuses that to his own ruin, which God intended, and gave him for his greater
good.

CHAP. XIV. That the right way to Heaven is, every one to remain in the station
Providence has appointed him, and therein bear the crosses which he meets
withal.
1. EVery man that aims at the right end, must guide his course thither by the
measures of Eternity, and that in a way suitable to the circumstances of his
condition. This necessary Rule is not observed by all, for many following their
own fancies, unadvisedly forsake that way wherein Divine providence had brought
them, and take some other of their own choosing. Like Naaman the Syrian who,
though he much longed to be cured of his leprosy, yet refused to use the easy
remedy prescribed by the Prophet, and preferring what he himself had fancied,
had gone away in anger diseased as he came, had not his wiser servant hindered
it. After this manner, many following their own heads, undertake many things
which they cannot perform, but which only vex and distract them: being above
their abilities, or inconsistent with the necessary occupations which they lie
under; so that they can neither act, nor advance toward the desired end, but
spend themselves in unprofitably wishing that things were otherwise than they
are.

2. But the short and ready way to Bliss, is that which our Blessed Savior
has showed us, saying, Let him that will come after me, take up his Cross and
follow me. His Cross, he says, not that which was to be another man's burden;
the Cross which God lays upon him, and has fitted for him, and given him
strength to bear: not that which he foolishly shall take up, and soon after
poorly sink under. These two things must therefore carefully be heeded, first
that a man understand perfectly what is the right end at which he should aim;
without this, all deliberations concerning the means, are to no purpose: and
secondly that knowing that good end, he keeps his mind intent upon it, and take
that plain path toward it, which lies before him, and agrees with his state
and condition, therein bearing his Cross cheerfully, as the Lord has
commanded. Now this is every man's Cross, to discharge well the duties of his
place and of his several relations, to bear patiently those afflictions which
he daily meets in his way, and constantly, by doing better and better that
which belongs to his province, to endeavor after the highest perfection
attainable therein. Every man in his proper station, in that calling wherein he
is called, may best become a good Christian, perfect holiness in the fear of
God, and at last obtain happiness.

CHAP. XV. How man's last end or supreme happiness is qualified, and how so
many mistake and miss it.
1. THese be the inseparable properties of the last and highest end at which
man should aim, that it be perfectly good, and perfectly satisfactory, so that
being once obtained, nothing else is wanted, and nothing else desired; for
whoever wants any thing, desires it also, and he that desires is not satisfied,
is not yet come to that last end beyond which his wishes can go no further;
that is, is not possessed of God, who alone is infinitely good, and can alone
replenish all our desires and capacities. I shall be satisfied when thy glory
appears, says the Psalmist, or I shall be satisfied with thy likeness. Psalm.
17.15. that and nothing else can perfectly do it.

2. Yet such is the perverse and incurable folly of man, that he will have that
to be best which he loves best; though by the testimony of others, and the
conviction of his own conscience he knows it to be evil. And therefore many,
either ignorantly or perversely pursue after that which is good only in
appearance, and forsake that which is good indeed. And they thereby become
disorderly, wretched and criminal; enemies to God, lovers of the thorny
pleasures of sin; and lovers of that fatal darkness which hides their sorrows,
the snares among which they walk, and covers their misery and danger, so that
they neither see nor fear the dreadful tribunal of that just Judge, who will
condemn all Apostates, that turn from the right way. They walk, says the
Apostle, in the vanity of their mind, having the understanding darkened, being
alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because
of the blindness of their heart: being past feeling, they have given themselves
over to lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness, Ephesians. 4.17.
They count their life a market for gain, and say, we must be getting every way,
though it be by evil means, Wisd: 15.12. And then it often happens by a just
judgment, that their faith comes to be as debaucht as their life; that having
long said it by their wicked deeds, they at last say it in their heart, that
there is no God.

3. I have already, and cannot too often note the cause of this evil; that is
Adam, who by his sin, not only lost the uprightness of his will, but also the
true light of his understanding: so that in him, who was the stock and root
whence all men grow, we were deprived of both. And now this corruption of the
will, inclines man to self-love, vain glory, and an imperious pride; to
covetousness, sloth, sensuality and looseness: And in the darkness of the
understanding exposes him to ignorance, and false apprehension of things, to
doubts, errors and lies, and makes him have an aversion to good and serious
thoughts. Thus man is become earthly, weak, and distemperd, unable to resist
the sinful motions of his own heart, and unable to know or to attain true
felicity: but rather, as it is written, His ways are always grievous, and God's
judgments are far above out of his sight, Psalm. 10.5. And he now being
alienated from God, to whom all things should be referred, is also a stranger to
virtue, which consists in the intention, in being designed to please God,
rather than in the act. But that Soul which by the Grace of our Blessed Jesus,
is redeemed from this power of Satan and slavery to sin, is also enabled to
cleave steadfastly to God, in whom it enjoys Peace and joy, and full
satisfaction, all that can make him entirely happy; for he is unreasonable and
too unsatiable, to whom God is not sufficient.

CHAP. XVI. Another reason why so many miss of their end; their living too much
by sense.
1. WHereas reason it self teaches, and all men freely confess that things to
come should be preferred to things present, heavenly things to things earthly,
and things eternal to things that last but for a short time: it is hard to
conceive why so many who believe and acknowledge this, yet by their actions
strongly deny it. In worldly matters, and such as concern this present life,
they are very active, very wise and very laborious; in others they seem to have
neither sense nor reason. If you speak to them of God, of Holy-Living and Life
Eternal, they understand you not, or they presently forget what you said.
Things material and perishing are sensible, and therefore more regarded and set
by; though oftentimes experience will force them to know that all human
concerns are flitting, uncertain, and very deceitful, yet men follow sense, and
they soon return to embrace those things which custom and a familiar converse
has made dear to them.

2. The fall (as I said) of our first Parents, is the head-spring whence all
this mischief flows; from it proceed all temptations, as also the darkness and
inconstancy of our minds: but the more immediate cause of it, which I now
consider is the imbecility, depravation and weakness of the faculties of our
souls, which have no right apprehension of the things of God, and but an
imperfect confused notion of the amazing concerns of Eternity. The loveliness
of virtue and the great deformity of sin, the terrors of death and the dread of
God's righteous judgments, the joys of Saints above, and the grievous torments
of the wicked in hell: these are but words which we hear, we have dark and
narrow conceptions of them, we understand not of how great an importance they
are, and therefore we are not so affected with them, as to be made wise unto
salvation. Of things offered to our consideration, we only mind that least
outward part which falls under the reach of sense: but we attend not to that
which is less sensible, though more considerable and apt effectually to work
upon the mind. Thus in sin, we look most of all to what is temporal; we are more
concerned for the impairing of our same and the diminution of our worth or
self-complacency, than for having offended God, and made our selves obnoxious
to an infinite pain. Likewise in a dying man we most observe what is in view,
outward symptoms and accidents, little regarding the more essential adjuncts
which concern the soul, and are of far greater moment. And we conceive of the
last judgment and the unquenchable flames of Hell, which are imperceptible to
sense, as of things which are nothing to us, and which we have no interest to
mind.

3. The same deception also extends it self to things present which gratify
our appetite; we take notice only of that outside which pleases us, and so
deplorable is our sottish mistake, that we count our selves very happy to enjoy
that for a moment, which must make us eternally miserable. Every man knows his
Soul is immortal, and many Philosophers have writ great things upon that
subject: but where are they that are solicitous for its well-being after death?
Do not most men neglect their soul, and live as if it were to die with the
body? The mischief is, that generally men live neither by faith nor by reason,
they follow blindfold and brutishly just as sense leads them: avoiding
carefully what is now troublesome to the flesh, as if nothing else were to be
done here, and nothing else feared hereafter,

CHAP. XVII. That we being the Children of God, ought to be guided by his
Spirit and by the example of Christ.
1. IF a man should rightly understand and seriously consider, that God by a
gracious adoption owns him for his son, that he is redeemed by the Blood of
Christ, and born again by Holy Baptism into the hope of Eternal Life, he would
doubtless esteem it his noblest title and his greatest honor, he would despise
all earthly advantages, and mind and value nothing but what is Divine and
Eternal, and passionately desiring to come to his Father, he would do nothing
unworthy of him. As he that acts the King on the stage, though it be but a vain
show to delight vainer people, yet is careful to do and to speak nothing but
what befits a King: so, and much more careful should a Christian be to do
nothing unworthy of that honorable name, which makes him a brother and
disciple of Jesus, and an heir of his Heavenly Kingdom. And as a picture-drawer
when he is upon a great design, fixes his eyes and mind on that Original which
he means to copy: So should a follower of Christ in all his words and actions
set before himself his Master's Life, as the most perfect exemplar he is
resolved to imitate, and never to swerve from.

2. Now he that professes Christ and remains in him, should walk as he walked,
carefully observe and follow the steps of his new and better Lord. For as
whilst we remain in the state of Nature and follow its instinct, we are
Children of wrath, and are slaves to Satan and to our own lusts: so now we are
redeemed from that unhappy slavery by the blood of Christ, his Grace must be
the principle of all our actions, we must carefully follow him whose members we
are. 1 Cor. 15.47. The first man is of the Earth, earthly; the second man is
the Lord from Heaven: therefore as we have born the Image of the Earthy, we
should also bear the Image of the Heavenly; making that our first and chiefest
care, that we walk worthy of our high calling, as being led by his Spirit from
whom we have our highest title, for if any man have not the Spirit of Christ,
he is none of his, says the Apostle, Romans 8.9.

3. Now he alone has the Spirit of Christ whose outward and inward life; that
is, whose act^ons and affections are according to the Pattern of Christ's
blessed example, who endeavors always to speak and act, as Christ his Master
did. According as we are exhorted not to walk after the flesh, but after the
Spirit, being created anew in Jesus Christ unto good works. We should look unto
the Rock whence we are hewn, not living after the methods of depraved man, but
walking in the ways of that righteous God, from whom we have our being: that we
being holy in all manner of conversation, may be owned to be the children of
our Father which is in Heaven. For he certainly is no child of God, who is not
led and sanctified by the Spirit of Christ.

CHAP. XVIII. The Just lives by faith, not by the laws of flesh and blood.
1. FAith is to all virtues and to a Christian life, the same thing as the root
is to the tree, the foundation to the building, and the Spring to the fountain:
for it is the first lesson of Christianity from whence we learn all the rest,
there we must first begin, and without it it is impossible to please God, for
the just lives by faith. The Commendation Job gives to wisdom, Chap. 28. is
justly due to Faith, Faith being the principle of it: and likewise it is
evident and granted by all wise men, that Solomon's high Encomium of Wisdom
does but set forth the Divine excellencies of Faith; Wisd. 7. Gold in respect
of her is as little sand, and silver shall be counted as clay before her, she
is a treasure unto men, that never fails, which they that use, become the
friends of God. She is the brightness of the everlasting light, the unspotted
mirror of the power of God, and the Image of his goodness. The doctrine of
Faith apprehended by Faith teaches us all Truth, informs our Souls what we
ought to love, what to shun and what to pursue. It teaches us that what the
world counts good, is evil: And that worldly calamities are good, if endured
patiently. It teaches us to despise things visible and temporal, and all that
which is for no use but to the material part of us. It teaches us to know God
and to know our selves, which is the true saving knowledge, and the highest of
our wisdom. And it frees us from the pernicious errors of this foolish world,
and from its wretched slavery, to make us wise unto salvation, and set us at
perfect liberty.

2. There is a vast distance and great contrariety betwixt the instructions of
faith and the customs of this present world; but then, Christ who delivers the
first, being ever true and infallible, it is clearly our duty and interest to
live by faith and not by sense, to follow the holy light of our holy faith, not
the wicked example of this wicked world. And withal it is much to be observed,
that depraved as we now are, there is nothing in us, nothing in our nature but
what is contrary to the principles of the Christian Faith, and altogether
destructive of them. For it is the constant dictate and endeavor of flesh and
blood and natural reason, to procure by all means possible, a well-being to our
selves in this present world, without taking any further care of a better life,
and a blessed Eternity. This evil men have from Adam, and from those lusts
which reign in their mortal bodies, and the best of men have still some cause
to groan under the sense of it. Romans 7. The good that I would, I do not, and
the evil which I hate that I do; O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from the body of this death? St. Paul answers, the Grace of God through our
Lord Jesus Christ will deliver us: For by Grace we are saved from our blindness
and impotency, and enabled to see and choose that which is good, and to perform
the same: and the first and chiefest work of that grace is faith, whereby we
are united to Christ, and receive a new life from him.

CHAP. XIX. That Faith works in a Christian self-denial and contempt of the
World.
1. GReat is the power and strength of Faith, for it makes the faithful
Christian to be as it self is, unshaken and unmovable. The true believer whose
faith is lively and active, regards and seeks nothing but God, and in him alone
finds light and peace, delight and full satisfaction: but in the world and in
the sons of men, he finds neither rest nor pleasure; for in time of need there
is no help in them. They are like all other things under the Sun perishing and
unstable, so that he that relies on them must expect the same destiny: whereas
he that trusts on God who is unmovable, is established for ever. As the Saints
that see God as he is, become like unto him: so should our life express the
holiness of our belief, our actions should be a lively representation of what
we see by faith: and we should glory in nothing but in the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which to the lovers of this present world, is a reproach and an
offense.

2. The first man indeed in the state of his innocence might have come to Bliss
by a free and lawful use of those good creatures which God had prepared for
him, in the delights of Paradise: but after he had rebel'd against God and
infected his unborn posterity with sin, the Divine Wisdom appointed another way
to Bliss; that is, the way of the Cross and Self-denial, through which Christ
himself past, and appointed the same to all his followers, saying, Luke 9.23.
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross
daily and follow me. And again, Luke 14.26, 33. If any man come to me, and hate
not his father and mother, and wife and children, and brethren and sisters,
yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple. And whosoever he be of
you that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my disciple.

3. This is the groundwork and the true institution of a Christian life, and
this is that excellent knowledge of Christ, which is difficult and unpleasant
to natural men, and contrary to the Spirit of the World. This is the highest
Philosophy, which exceeds the capacity and knowledge of the wise men of this
world; and this is the highest perfection, and the certain way to Bliss, to
know and to follow Jesus Christ and him crucified; to hate ones self and the
world, with all its pleasures and vanities, and to love poverty, contempt,
sorrows and tribulations. But to understand well this plain lesson, or first
principle, requires a great measure of Grace; and more yet to relish it with
pleasure; most of all, to practice it, to live accordingly in the whole course
of our conversation.

CHAP. XX. Of the desperate folly of men, who willingly run to ruin, by their
inconsideration.
1. ETernal torments being prepared for none but such as will be miserable, and
by their free and wilful wickedness, choose Hell for their portion; on the other
side, Eternal joys above being offered to all that will partake of them: who
would not think the Prisons of darkness and sorrow should be wholly empty, and
Heaven infinitely full and thronged? Who could imagine any man should be so
desperately mad, as to choose eternal misery, when he could easily be happy for
ever? Yet so it is, few there are that enter the Kingdom of Heaven, and many
there are that go down to Hell; insomuch that the first, compared to these, are
but a small number, whom our Blessed Savior calls the little flock. The folly
of men is so strange and amazing, that the greater part of them prefer Eternal
woe to Bliss Eternal, though you shall not find one how thirsty soever, that
would sip of that cup, he should suspect to be poisoned, yet many every where
may be found, who greedily commit those sins, which, not doubts or opinions,
but a certain faith assures them, must be punished with ever-burning flames.

2. This unheard of madness, many attribute to want of Faith, which though it
may be true of some amongst us, yet daily experience and observation puts it
beyond all doubt, that the greater part of them that perish, perish for want of
consideration. For though they believe that there is a Hell, and that therein
none shall suffer but such as will enjoy the pleasures of sin while they live,
yet they soon forget this important truth; their fancy and their affections are
fixed to this earth, they only please their appetites, and live so sensually,
that their reason can hardly look beyond the present; the notions of Eternity
are kept out, and their understanding made incapable and unwilling to consider
wisely, that their short joys and delights will soon end into bitterness and
endless sorrows, and that it is very easy for us whilst we live, to avoid
that dreadful misery, and obtain Eternal happiness. And would to God, men would
seriously mind and observe this; O that they were wise, that they would
understand and consider their latter end, and live accordingly. It is man's
property and his privilege, to think and meditate, and sure his thoughts and
meditations should of themselves run, first of all, to his chief end, to that
which is his own greatest interest. No error or ignorance is so pernicious, as
to neglect ones own Salvation.

CHAP. XXI. The Character of a true Christian.
1. HE is a Christian indeed that owns the Faith of Christ, and obeys his
precepts, and follows his Blessed Example; for to this we are obliged by our
Christian Profession, to raise our selves above these earthly things, to live a
Divine and Heavenly Life. Because that the Grace of God which brings
Salvation has appeared unto all men (says the Apostle, 1 Tit. 2.11.) teaching
us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live in this present
World Soberly, Righteously, and Godly: looking for that Blessed Hope and the
glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar People zealous of good Works. Therefore, as he cannot justly
be called Doctor, who is not so much as a Scholar; as he deserves not the name
of Captain, who understands not Soldiery; and as he is not an Artist, that
has not the skill of it: No more can he with truth be called a Christian, who
is not a true follower of Christ.

2. They therefore only are truly Christians, who having renounced the vanities
and sinful desires of this World, love God with all their heart, and with all
their strength, and their neighbor altogether in God and for God, preferring
not themselves to any others, because that in our second and better birth we
are all made equal: They that strictly observe the rules of justice and
sobriety; in all things behaving themselves so innocently as not to give a just
cause of offense to any Person: they that use the creatures for necessity, as
sick men do Physic, coveting nothing but that only which cannot be taken away
from them: they that seek not to please, and fear not to displease any, but God
alone: they that hate their own flesh, in that it is the body of sin, and
therefore daily chastize and keep it under, lest it grow petulant and
masterless: they that are ever constant to their resolutions, and being above
the World cannot be terrified by any threats or persecutions: they that in
prosperity and adversity are always the same, peaceable and even, able clearly
to see and to follow truth: they that longing after things Eternal, despise
things present, and living upon Faith, Hope and Charity, believe therefore what
they see not, hope what they have not, and love that which as yet they do not
possess: they that so love God, that for his sake they refuse no labor, and
are always ready to expose themselves to any dangers, without any other design
but only to advance his glory: they that from the testimony of a good
conscience, and their confidence in Gods mercy, cheerfully expect Christ's
coming in his Heavenly Kingdom, and can joyfully say with the Apostle, 2 Timothy
4.7. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith, henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord
the Righteous Judge shall give me at that day: They alone have a right to the
Title and the Blessedness of Christians, that do all these with sincerity.

3. Such men as these rejoice when they are counted worthy to suffer for the
name of Jesus, and they count that day lost, in which they have not done and
endured something upon his account. They make their Glory, their Felicity,
their Wisdom, to consist in such things as the World accounts Shame, Misery and
Folly. They detest the false Principles on which proceeds carnal prudence, as
that we must be Rich and Great, honored by the World, and above others: and
they love and heartily embrace the Christian verity which teaches us to
despise riches, to deny our selves, and to glory in nothing, save in the Cross
of our Lord Jesus Christ. In a word, their conversation is in Heaven, and they
so live that all their actions seem to speak aloud, That their Kingdom is not
of this World. These things indeed are high and difficult, but the Kingdom of
Heaven suffers violence, and is only to be taken by force: and withal it well
deserves all our labors, and noblest contentions.

CHAP. XXII. Several useful cautions how a Christian should undertake and
perfect his works.
1. ALL the actions of a Christian should be done in peace and meekness, and he
ought to consider the circumstances of time and place and persons, and
especially of the end of that he is about: but withal let him take care of
being rash and hasty, of following sudden motions of nature rather than reason,
Grace and Religion. Let not his mind be light and inconstant, easily wandering
after vain projects: but let him attend and be ready to entertain and to obey
the illuminations and motions of the good Spirit: When he is about to begin any
work, let not his mind be too busy and distracted with other thoughts, for
then he must expect to want his wits and fail in many things, which afterward
will grieve him, when it will be too late. When he first enters upon any
design, let him humbly beg that God would guide and assist him, and let him
seriously consider what share God has in the business, and how much of it is
on his own account. In the carrying on of his work let not self-complacency
turn him from the good end he proposed: and in the finishing thereof let him be
cautious that all he has done be not marred and spoiled by self-applause and
vainglory: above all, let him be seriously intent upon this, that he seeks not
the praise of men, but the glory of God, keeping down proud thoughts, in the
consideration of his being nothing.

2. He should not meddle with any business, except God by his Providence calls
him to it; and then he ought to go through with it cheerfully and diligently;
and with noble designs of charity to men, specially to their souls: considering
that the bliss or perfection of this present life, consists not in the full
enjoyment of God, but in the conformity of our will to his, in the doing and
suffering his pleasure. Except necessity compel him, let him not undertake any
thing that is above his strength, that if it be possible he may lose nothing of
his peace nor of the freedom of his mind: for to be too intent, and too much
taken up with things without us, commonly quenches the Spirit of God, and
deprives our Souls of tranquillity. Rather as the Angel which is said to have
accompanied Tobit, though it was always ready to serve him, yet nevertheless
attended to the will of God, and was always present to him: so should a good
Christian mind the necessary concerns of this life, and be outwardly troubled
and employed about them; when yet his heart should be with God, and his soul in
Heaven, there to be free from the distractions and all the affections of the
World.

CHAP. XXIII. That to discharge the duties of our station is the best thing we
can do.
1. TO do that which our place and calling requires of us here, and that which
will make us happy hereafter, may be said to be one and the same thing; for no
man more certainly works out his Salvation, than he that honestly, and
diligently works in his proper sphere. Therefore the Devil commonly lays this
snare in our way to Christian perfection, to make us aspire after the doing of
great matters which are no parts of our office, thereby to busy and distract
our mind, that we may not attend to our proper duty, which lies before us, and
the doing whereof is our greatest virtue.

2. He therefore greatly deceives himself, that would fain change his
condition, imagining he could better serve God if he were here or there, or so
or so, after Providence or a prudent choice have otherwise determined it. It
does but make him lazy and negligent in doing what he should, whilst he thinks
of what belongs not to him; it makes him to sit idle, and do nothing in the
place where he is, whilst he projects to do great feats where he is not.
Whereas the unblameable integrity or perfection at which a Christian should
aim, depends upon particular actions, they that are negligent and incurious to
do them well, set themselves backward and make no progress; for their heart
being absent, and their thoughts employed somewhere else, they do but little
where they are, and yet that little is done after a dreaming careless way. Such
men are always beginning, or about to begin to live well; they contrive many
things, but bring nothing to perfection; they are all leaves and no fruit. Like
Trees that are often removed, they no where take firm root, and so remain every
where useless.

CHAP. XXIV. How Christians are to live and to be sincere.
1. CHristians should not indulge to the Lusts of the lower belly or to the
pleasures of a nice or gluttonous palate; they should abstain from all vanity
and undecency in their Apparel, and from all idle sports that are too expensive
of time; and their life should be free from sloth and negligence, from ambition
and pride, and from covetousness and desire of riches. Anger ought not to lodge
in their breast, and they should never do that to others which they would not
have done to themselves. They should do nothing carelessly, nor yet rashly,
least of all deceitfully and hypocritically. Christian duties and acts of
virtue that are not done in Spirit and Truth, with attention and a good
intention, are mere dissembling and pageantry. In some places where Religion is
made a Theatrical representation, you shall often find men of wicked lives act
the highest virtues of the greatest Saints; one the constancy of Martyrs,
another the modesty of the Blessed Virgin, or perhaps the heroic actions of
Christ and his Apostles: but the end of the play puts an end to their fine
dissembling; they no longer appear those holy men they were, but presently
return to their nature, to their profaneness and impurity. Just so are they
that have a fair specious outside, appearing precise and godly, to be seen and
praised, or drive an interest; they are mere jugglers and stage players, they
put a fair vizard over an ugly face, holiness outwardly, inwardly unmortified
lusts and perverse passions; Their lives are nothing but a Comedy, that will
have a Tragical end.

2. For indeed, this is the cause why so many are not so perfect and holy, as
their Christian faith requires and would enable them to be, that they are not
sincere, but want truth in the inward parts. The false opinions of the World,
are of greater power with them, than the precepts and the examples of Christ:
and those moral virtues which nature it self recommends, are commonly made sin,
or subservient to it, by the depraved judgments and customs of men. We
therefore that live in a crooked and perverse generation, among corrupt and
deceived persons, ought seriously and often to make this inquiry; whether we
our selves do know the right way, and whether we truly follow it? Now that way,
which is the way of truth, is one and altogether unchangeable, and they that
will keep it without change; must not look to the World, but up to Heaven; must
not follow the example of men, but must directly follow God, who alone is the
way, the truth, and the life.

CHAP. XXV. That a hearty affection is the life of good actions.
1. WE must have a special care that the sensitive part of us have not the
principal concern in our good works, and that we be not led by sense in our
actions: for sense is the great deceiver, the fountain of error; therefore it is
said, that the mortification of sense, is the life of truth. And hence it is
that we cannot be confident, ever to have done any thing perfectly good and
without defect, because that we bear a part in our best works, and as far as
they proceed from us, they are stained with imperfection, although they be done
upon Gods account, and by the impulse and assistance of divine Grace. Thus it
was said to the Angel or Bishop of Sardis, Rev. 3.2. I have not found thy works
perfect before God: and thus it might be said to any other. For our Prayers,
Fastings, and Alms, and such like good works, though they may appear complete
before men, who see nothing but the outside, yet before God who searches the
heart, they are defective; and cannot be acceptable in the least, except they
be done with a pure and sincere intention to please him.

2. Of ten Virgins mentioned in the Gospel, five foolish were excluded from the
wedding; not but that they were Virgins and had lamps, that is, works: but
because they wanted the oil of good intentions and holy affections. This may
well be the case of every one of us; our works will be dead before God, and
unpleasing to him, except we breath life into them, by our inward sanctified
spirit, and fervent love to God. In outward acts and appearance, all Christians
are almost alike: but as the hand of a watch is moved by the hidden springs,
and as the color of the face depends on the secret constitution of the body:
so the good are distinguished from the bad by their inward spirit, or the hidden
man of the heart; for the Kingdom of God is within us.

CHAP. XXVI. Whence the goodness of our works proceeds.
1. AS many that eat much, yet are feeble and infirm and lean, because they
overcharge their stomach, so that their nourishment is not well concocted: and
as many that eat very moderately, yet because they digest well, are strong and
healthy and long-lived: So likewise some Christians there are that do many good
things, and yet themselves become little better, because they go not the right
way to work. They think that by doing much, they must become great proficients,
though they do it remisly and incuriously: whereas to do our duty every day
with greater fervency and exactness, is the right way to perfection; a few
things well done profit more, than heaps of works done negligently.

2. For so, there are others that compared to these first do but little, and
yet increase much in the love of God, because they endeavor always to work
with greater affection, and a more upright intention: so that at the end of
every good action, they may in some manner, use that expression of Christ on
the Cross, Joh. 19.30. It is finished; I have in this, as far as was possible,
done what God required of me, as perfectly as my infirmity would allow, and his
free grace enabled me, who gives us to will and to do, and without whom we can
do nothing. They so spend each day, that at night, they can say, It is
finished: and they so spend their whole life that when it is ended, they can say
with an holy and humble confidence, I have now perfected that work which God
had appointed me to do. He that lives so, lives like a Christian, and he shall
not fear in the evil day.

CHAP. XXVII. How useful and comfortable is the consideration of God being
always present.
1. NOthing will more prevail to make perfect our works as much as is possible,
than to consider that God is present every where, and that from him and in him,
all things have their being, power and motion. This is the most pressing
Argument why we should always act with the greatest circumspection, that God
sees the things, that are in secret and we can never be hid from his eyes; that
in him we live and move and have our being, and that he never forsakes us, till
we forsake him to turn our affections upon the creatures. For this is the
unhappy effect of our original corruption, that our senses are so affected and
pleased with material things present, that our mind is drawn from the
contemplation of Gods presence and things as yet invisible: whereas, if the
love of this world did not bear too great a sway in our heart, we could see God
in every place; holy affections would always see him who is the Author of all
holiness; according to the saying of our Blessed Savior, Mat. 5.8. Blessed are
the pure in heart for they shall see God.

2. For indeed it is not to be expressed, how sweet and comfortable is the
goodness of God which he has laid up for them that fear him: but laid up it
is; none have a sense of it but they that love God; they alone taste and see
how gracious the Lord is. For it is not enough to have a treasure, we must know
we have it, before we can be rich, and we must know the use and the worth of
it: Now such a treasure we have within us, as is of an inestimable infinite
value, and yet we seem not to know it, for we run after motes and shadows, and
catch at painted drops that cannot quench our thirst, as the Psalmist says, O
ye sons of men, how long will ye love vanities and seek after lies? Thus we are
cheated and understand not our own happiness, for God is present to us every
moment and we could always enjoy him; we are rich and we know it not.

3. We could if we would anticipate the joys of Heaven; we could now have a
taste of the felicity of beatified Saints, but that we indulge Sense to the
prejudice of the Soul; we shake off the thoughts and the comforts of Gods
presence, because it puts a restraint upon our appetites: And when at any time
Spiritual joys are denied us, we presently seek for Earthly pleasures; because
we open not the eyes of our Faith to see God present, and we embrace him not
with devout affection, and we care not to converse with him. This is the way to
Perfection which God himself showed to Abraham, to have always a sense of the
Divine presence; Genesis 17.1. I am the Almighty God, walk before me, and be thou
perfect: Holy David likewise made a great use of this, to be always mindful
that God is with us, Psalm. 16.8. I have set the Lord always before me, because
he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved. He can never but be happy, that
dwells with the Author of all happiness.

CHAP. XXVIII. Why the imitation of Gods Saints appears difficult.
1. WE think it a matter of great difficulty to follow the example of those
Christian Worthies that have gone before us, because we represent them to our
selves, as being now of another nature, freed from the body, inhabitants of the
mansions of bliss, whence anger, lust, and all temptations are for ever
banished, and where they enjoy peace and joy and eternal felicities. But if we
really desire to follow their steps, and to conform our lives to theirs, then
are we to consider, that as we are so were they, mortal men, cumbred with the
uneasy burden of the flesh, infected with sin, tempted by sinful affections,
and exposed to miseries and dangers: but that by Faith they overcame all these,
subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, and by fighting obtained the Crown.

2. Elias (says St. James 5.17.) was a man subject to the like passions as we
are, and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain: and it rained not on the
Earth by the space of three years and six months: and again he prayed, and the
Heaven gave rain, and the Earth brought forth her fruit. The same may be said
of any other Saints, that have done the greatest wonders; they were like us,
made of the same clay, and subject to the same passions and temptations, while
they were on Earth. They were only above us in this, that with great and
assiduous pains, they conquered pride and lust, and escaped the snares of the
Devil, by diligent care and invincible resolution. Why then do we draw back and
make delays? to them that are truly resolved and willing, it is not difficult to
become Saints, by the imitation of those that have gone before us; if shaking
off our sloth and laziness we would seriously endeavor, we might by the help
of Divine Grace arrive to the same height of Sanctification and bliss, as they
have. For he has proceeded far toward holiness, that sincerely desires to be
holy.

CHAP. XXIX. How we should in all things aim at Gods Glory.
1. IT is the precept of St. Paul, that God should be the end of all our works,
that they may be good and acceptable. 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat or drink, or
whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of God: and again, Col. 3.17. Whatsoever
ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to
God and the Father by him. For a good work which is not done upon Gods account,
does become evil, it being the nature of virtue to receive its form from the
end, rather than from the act. And if we cleave to the creatures and love them
for their own sake without reference to God, this is that lust or sinful love
which Saint John condemns, 1 Ep. 2.15. Love not the World, neither the things
that are in the World; love them not so as to rest in them. For here we are
Pilgrims, Travelers going home, to our Fathers house, to our God: and so what
creatures we meet in our way, we may use them as conveniences to carry us
forward, toward him: but we may not dwell with them, as if we were at our
journeys end. God alone is to be loved for himself, he alone being infinitely
good, and the last and best end we can propound to our selves; in him alone our
appetites shall rest satisfied, our enjoyment shall be secure, and our joys
undisturbed for ever. Whosoever knows not and pursues not this end, knows not
why he lives, nor how to live well: but he that knows it, knows whither to
direct his intentions, and whither to tend in all his actions.

2. It is granted that some natural actions, as to walk, to eat, to sleep, and
such like, are of themselves neither good nor evil: yet all Divines teach that
they become sin, if we do them not to some further and better end, that is, to
live to serve God; whose glory should be the ultimate design of all men's
actions, because as he is the beginning, so should he be the end of all things.
The light of the Body is the Eye (says our Blessed Savior, Mat. 6.22.) if
therefore thine Eye be single, thine whole Body shall be full of light: but if
thine Eye be evil, thine whole Body shall be full of darkness. This Eye is the
intention of every man in his actions; if it be not good, they become works of
darkness: and good it cannot be, except it be referred to God, the supreme
goodness. Every good thing comes from God, and whatever returns not to him is
evil.

CHAP. XXX. Self-love is the root of all evil.
1. AFter our first Parent, by preferring himself to God, committed that
grievous transgression, whereby all mankind became obnoxious to death; lust and
ignorance: darkness and evil propensities seized upon our nature, man forsook
God, and turned to seek himself, and having lost all sense of spiritual
comfort, ran dissolutely after carnal pleasures. Hence Self-love the greatest
Enemy to virtue, came to tyrannize over men, who to comply with it, seek
nothing now but wealth, honors, and sensual delights. And now, says the
Apostle, Romans 8.7. The carnal mind is not subject to the law of God, neither
indeed can be; for all its instincts and impulses have a tendency to sin, and
to sin only.

2. And yet self-love which seeks so much our own ease and satisfaction, is
indeed its chiefest hinderance; for God having created us for his glory, and
enjoined us to design it always; when by self-love we seek only our selves and
our own advantage, we do nothing whereby to obtain Gods favor and eternal
life, but rather fall into a wretched state of damnation; We are debtors, not
to the flesh, to live after the flesh (says Saint Paul, Romans 8.13.) For if ye
live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the spirit do mortify
the deeds of the body, ye shall live. Now to this mortification, we are
strongly obliged by Christian Religion; its great design is to bring us out of
our selves to God, that as we yielded our members servants to uncleanness and
to iniquity, even so now we should yield them servants to righteousness unto
holiness; as it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy, says the Lord. Lev.
11.45.

3. Now as Christianity checks and restrains self-love, so does self-love keep
men from understanding and approving the Christian doctrines; for how can he
that seeks and loves himself, rightly apprehend that whatever the world dotes
upon, is mere vanity: that Estates and Honors bring great vexations and great
slavery: that to forgive Enemies and do good to them that hate us, is the part
of a noble and generous mind: that it is better to despise than to possess
riches: that it is more honorable to be subject where God commands, than to
bear rule and to domineer: that for a man to restrain his appetite and conquer
himself, is more glorious than to win battles and take fenced Cities? These are
Paradoxes, hard and incredible sayings to the self-lover, whose fondness of
himself ties him fast to this earth, to whatever can be useful and any ways
pleasant to the flesh: whereas the Children of God live to God, being not led
and governed by the flesh, but by the spirit: they live in the flesh, but not
after the flesh; some of their actions are natural, whilst they are in the
body, yet they proceed from a supernatural principle, and are designed to a
nobler end; for they continually deny themselves and mortify all sensual
unruly desires. Self-lovers hold, a great regard should be had to the flesh;
it is true, but it must be such as Christ has taught us; to keep it under:
otherwise Saint Paul has declared, that to be carnally minded is death.

CHAP. XXXI. That Self-love is that Babylon out of which God has called us.
1. GOD at first placed man in Paradise, but Adam, in whom we all sinned,
transported us into this world out of Paradise, out of Jerusalem into Babylon,
out of our freedom into slavery, out of integrity into corruption, out of our
country into banishment, and out of life into death. Thus from truth and
perfection we fell into vanity, we are now like unto vanity, nay, every man is
but vanity, as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 39.6. Man is vain in his body, which
ends in death and corruption; vain in his soul, which being enslaved to sin, is
obnoxious to death eternal, and vain in all his outward enjoyments, which all
perish, or must be forsaken when he dies. Yet man strangely dotes on this
vanity; he passionately runs after these transitory things which are all cheats
and lies, whereby he is drawn into thousands of pernicious errors, and out of
the Heavenly Jerusalem, into a Hellish Babylon.

2. Now these two Cities are built by two sorts of love; to love God, so as to
despise our selves, makes the City of God: and to love our selves so as to
despise God, makes the Devils Babylon, the City of this World. The way to this,
is broad and short; to that, is straight, difficult and long: because dull and
earthly as now we are, we more easily fall on the earth and descend down to
Hell, than we can raise up our selves and ascend to Heaven. Let every man
therefore examine himself and find out what he chiefly loves; for if he loves
God, so as to deny himself, he is doubtless a Citizen of the Jerusalem which is
from above; but if he loves himself, so as to prefer his own desires to God,
it is plain he belongs to that Babylon out of which God has called his
Children. For thus the Scripture cries aloud, Go ye forth of Babylon, and
remove out of the midst of her: (Isa. 48.20. Jer. 50.8.) and again the
Psalmist, Psalm. 137.8. O Daughter of Babylon who art to be destroyed, happy
shall he be that takes and dasheth thy little ones against the stones. We come
out of Babylon when we leave the confusion of sin, forsaking our disorderly
course of life: and we dash the children of Babylon against the stone, when our
love to Christ overcomes our ill desires and ill inclinations. Self-love is the
death of the Soul, and the love of God is its life: therefore he does not truly
love himself, who by self-love destroys himself.

CHAP. XXXII. How men naturally seek themselves even in their best works.
1. IT may seem strange to observe, that whereas men's opinions and inclinations
are so various and different, yet all men are agreed in this, that none appears
vile to himself, none is willing to yield and submit to others, none though
never so mean but thinks himself somebody, and is desirous to be taken notice
of; every one seeks to be higher than others; every one is indulgent to
himself, and severe to others: all men will have their will and their saying;
all applaud to their own inventions and conceits, and censure others; they
count their own follies, wisdom; and notwithstanding their great ignorance,
there is nothing but what they think to know. They carefully hide their own
faults, and pretend to those virtues, they know they have not. And what is most
of all to be wondered at, even good men who endeavor to please God, and seem
to aim at nothing but his honor and glory: Even they, sometimes in their best
actions, by a secret and natural instinct, almost unknown to themselves, seek
their own comfort and complacency, most of all; and the more excellent are
their works, the more subtle and undiscernable is this snare, which self-love
sets to the most spiritual.

2. What better than to obey God, to read his Sacred Word and preach it, to
receive and administer his Holy Sacraments? Yet these duties are commonly
stained with some secret desire of praise: and except the Christian be very
watchful over his own heart, he may easily lose his better reward. Though I
speak with the tongues of men and Angels (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.1.) and
have not Charity, I am become like sounding brass, and a tinkling cymbal. And
though a man should give all his goods to the Poor, and even his Body to be
burnt, yet without Charity, without the love of God has purified his heart, it
will profit him nothing. According to the saying of the Prophet Haggai, 1.6. Ye
eat, but ye have not enough: ye drink, but ye are not filled with drink: and he
that earns wages, earneth wages to put into a bag with holes: for thus good
works avail nothing, if done out of respect to our selves, and not to please
God. This being therefore the bent of our corrupt nature, to draw us to our
selves, we ought carefully to examine our selves, and search the hidden corners
of our hearts, that there lurk not in them some ill purpose of vainglory or
self-interest, to mix with our best actions, either first or last. This is the
Rule of a true Christian Life, always to seek and love the things of God, and
never his own.

CHAP. XXXIII. Things which every Christian is bound to know in order to
obedience.
1. EVery Disciple of Christ ought to know those Divine and Human Laws under
which he lives, and the which he is obliged to observe. The Divine are
contained in the Ten Commandments, and in the New Testament, which contains the
precepts of Faith, Hope, and Charity. Faith obliges all the Faithful to
believe the doctrines of Christianity, as they are sum'd up in our Creed. By
Hope we trust, by the grace of God, and our own sincere endeavor, to obtain
and use all necessary means of Grace, and Eternal Life at last; all which, in
this assurance, we heartily beg in the Lord's Prayer. And Charity requires of
us to love God above all things, and our Neighbor as our selves. A Christian
by these three virtues is made a new and holy creature; Faith inlightens and
directs his understanding: Hope raises him up, and sets his will at work for
God: and to God Charity unites him wholly. It is also necessary to understand
the necessity of Baptism and the Lord's Supper, and true Repentance, which are
all Divine Institutions, indispensably necessary to all that will be saved. For
except a man be born again of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. Joh. 3.5. And Except we eat the flesh and drink the blood of
Christ, we have no life in us. Joh. 6.53. And as for Repentance, it is the only
remedy we have for the sins committed after Baptism, that by it we may be made
clean again.

2. Lastly, there are also Human Laws, Enacted by the Church or the State we
live in, and them we are also to know and to observe with meekness and
humility, and for Conscience sake. But no man of himself is able to keep all
these Laws which God has bound upon us; none can obey them without the true
light from above enlighten and guide him, as it is written, Psalm. 94.12.
Blessed is the man whom thou chastnest, O Lord, and teach him in thy Law.
For ever since sin came into the World, men without the light of Faith, sit in
darkness and the shadow of death, and take an account of good and evil, not by
the measures of truth, but by their lusts and depraved passions. We must
therefore earnestly beg the divine assistance, that he that commands what he
wills, would enable us to do what he has commanded: healing our blindness and
impotency; destroying self-love and filling our hearts with devout love to him:
for the end of the Commandment is Charity: and he that truly loves God keep
his Commandments without hypocrisy or reservation.

CHAP. XXXIV. The difference betwixt the outward and the inward man.
1. OUR Christian hope is not for this World, nor for this present time, and we
were not created to enjoy that Earthly happiness which the World only seeks:
but God made us for that Eternal Bliss which he has promised, and whose
excellency we cannot as yet understand; For eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
neither is it entered into the heart of man, what things God has prepared for
them that love him. We therefore that are called to the possession of that
Kingdom, which was prepared for us, from the beginning of the World, ought not
to govern our selves only by human reasons, and live by natural instincts,
after the common manner of men, who are unacquainted with the ways of Eternity,
and the motions of Divine Grace. But happy are they that wisely dive into the
depth of things, who live to God and commune with him in their hearts, and
suffer not their thoughts and affections to range and dwell abroad.

2. These men live an inward life, they are recollected and dwell at home;
always disposed to hear Gods voice within them, and to understand his secrets.
Whereas they live an outward life that are most affected with outward things:
having fair pretenses for their worldly-mindedness, being greedy of news, and
curious sights, and sensual pleasures, walking (says the Apostle Ephesians. 4.17.)
in the vanity of their minds, alienated from the life of God, through the
ignorance that is in them. For the more a man profits in carnal wisdom, the
more ignorant he becomes in the things of God. As much as we love the
creatures, as much we lessen our love to the Creator.

CHAP. XXXV. How dangerous it is to be governed by opinion and false
apprehension of things.
1. HE is a wise man that weighs things justly, and then esteems them according
to their intrinsic value: for every thing in the world has a twofold aspect
or a double face, the one natural and real, and the other disguised and
fallacious. The first is what God judges and has revealed it to be: and the
second depends on men's passions and false opinions. Thus for Example; the
Dignity of a Bishop is in effect and according to Gods appointment, a high and
Angelic office, of such a weight as should make human strength tremble and
shrink under it; it is a place of great honor, but also it requires the
greatest labor and diligence, to watch for the Souls entrusted with the
dignified Prelat, who shall give a strict account for them in the day of
judgment. But in the Worlds account, a Bishopric is only a degree of honor in
the Church, which promotes the owner of it to riches and greatness and temporal
advantages. Hence it is that they that rightly apprehend what the office is,
fear and avoid it, and are so far from seeking, that they refuse it when
offered: and it is much to be feared that they follow the worlds judgments,
and seek themselves, that seek it, and make it their aim, and the object of
their passionate desires. The same may be said of all other dignities and
places of trust, in Church and State; Generally men have a wrong notion of
them, and understand not their definition: and hence the confusions and
malvorsations that are in the world, that men mistake things, and hate truth,
and will not see nor follow divine light, but the darkness of their own
perverse hearts.

2. Such names are commonly used amongst men as are consecrated by the Blood of
Christ, and the highest virtues of his greatest Saints; as that some be called
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Monks or Hermits; Some Kings, Princes, and
Magistrates; and all together, Christians: but who is there that duly considers
the great worth, the strength, and true significations of those names? what
virtues, what perpetual care, what duties, they require from such as bear them;
the bare Titles, with a vain shadow of the things remain, but the reality and
significancy of them is vanished: few men are in truth what they call
themselves, few live according to the name of Christian, because few make it
their first care to follow the example of Christ. This unhappy deceit is also
an effect of the first and worst of evils, Self-love, the most crafty deceiver:
hardly found out by the wisest, and seldom quite conquered by the best of men.

3. The truth is, that the good and evil things of this present life, are so
mixed and confused, that if we take an exact view of the nature of them, we
shall hardly discern the one from the other: for they are all vain and
uncertain, and in a moment they come to nothing. Wherefore David the man after
Gods own heart, passing by all temporal things, entertained his meditation with
things Eternal, I have considered the days of old, and the years of Eternity,
Psalm. 77.5. And Solomon his Son, the wisest of men, after a long and
comprehensive enumeration of all things good and bad, under the Sun, concludes
that all is vanity, vanity of vanities. Eccles. 1.2.

CHAP. XXXVI. Three things very profitable and necessary to every Christian.
1. THat we may be faithful to God as we are obliged, we must of necessity
attend to these three things. First, to watch and observe our selves and our
actions, at all times, that we turn not aside out of the right path, into
by-ways, difficult and unpassable, seeking for happiness where it is not, in
spite of all admonitions. By reason, a Christian differs from the brutes, and
by Faith from unbelievers; so that when he does any thing rashly and basely
merely to satisfy his unruly passion and his appetite, so far he becomes a
beast and cease to act as man: and likewise, when for vainglory or
self-interest he is drawn to action, in this he acts like a Heathen, Faith has
no hand in it. As Arts are attained and perfected by working according to the
rules of them: so a man becomes Wise, Just, Sober and Patient, by living
according to the prescript of those Virtues.

2. The second thing recommended is a good and careful use of our time, on
which depends Eternity. Philosophers would have us not only know things useful,
but also be studious and watchful to take hold of all opportunities of virtue:
because time passes away and comes not again, and once lost is lost for ever.
Time flies away, and the unwise man considers not, that it is never to be
recalled, and that with time he loses more than he can think or ever recover.
It may be pleasant indeed to pass away the time in sports and merry company:
but so does our day go away, and the night comes when no man can work, and we
lose the acceptable time, that time that was given us to obtain our Pardon and
work out our Salvation in. We must give an account for every idle word, much
more for that time which is spent idly,

3. The third thing we are carefully to mind, is to make a right use of the
Sacraments, especially that of the Lord's Supper, which if frequently and
devoutly received, would be to us a fountain of grace, profitable beyond
expression: and the more, in that penitence as a Sacramental is joined to it,
whereby we are humbled and cleansed, and our hearts prepared to entertain
Christ, whom we receive in the Holy Communion, and from whom we receive
increase of love to God, and of meekness and charity to men. As a covetous man
minds nothing but gain and money, and is always gasping after it: so the devout
Christian duly and often receives the Blessed Eucharist, always pants and longs
after God, and cannot without trouble mind any thing but him. And it is the
principle of a heavenly life, to despise and forsake all things that have not a
relation to God.

CHAP. XXXVII. That Repentance is necessary to all Christians.
1. EVery Christian ought so to live and die, in such continual regret and
mortification, as to make it appear he is a true Penitent, who endeavors to
make what satisfaction he can for his sins, and entirely to be cleansed from
the guilt of them. This was the beginning and is the sum of the Gospel, Mark
1.4. John did baptize in the Wilderness and Preach the Baptism of Repentance,
for the Remission of sins. And the Blessed Jesus himself, the Author and
finisher of our Faith, made it the first subject of his preaching; Verse 14.
Jesus came into Galilee Preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God and saying,
the time is fulfilled and the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, repent ye and
believe the Gospel: Or as Saint Matthew relates it, 4.17. Jesus began to preach
and to say, Repent, for the Kingdom of God is at hand. Repentance was first
sent to prepare men duly to entertain the Gospel, that their Souls might be
purified and fitted to receive Divine Grace, which never enters wicked hearts,
nor abides with them that yield their bodies to be instruments of
unrighteousness.

2. But Penitence is a Sacrifice well pleasing to God, when a man is sensible
of his sin, and confesses it with shame and sorrow, and with a broken contrite
heart begs Pardon of his offended God. For the greatest evil in sin, is a
contempt of the Divine Majesty; to live in sin, is to live in enmity and
defiance against the Great and Holy God: and to this desperate impiety men are
betrayed by infidelity, and by inconsideration. For who is there so mad and
presumptuous that would dare transgress the Divine Laws, if he believed and
understood that God is Almighty and infinitely Good and Glorious, and that an
offense against so high a Majesty is heinous beyond expression? But to this
height of wretched folly, men are carried by original depravation, that as
being seized on by an unhappy frenzy, they have a secret aversion to God the
chiefest good, and delight themselves in impure shadows, in base and false
enjoyments; and this because they see not the truth, or they have not power to
follow it.

3. How great and deplorable is this blindness and impotency, we cannot well
understand, except we seriously consider, that the guilt and malignancy of sin
was so extreme, that nothing could make expiation for it, but the bitter death
and passion of the Blessed and only Son of God. This if we believe, and if we
are sensible of the intolerable burden of our sins, we are to pass our days in
sorrow, and to spend our years in mourning, thereby to own our selves guilty,
and that we have deserved the worst, the greatest of evils. For God readily
forgives those sins which penitence and amendment endeavor to undo.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the signs and effects of true Repentance.
1. WE shall never be in a capacity to avoid sin when the temptation comes,
except the soul has conceived a great horror and detestation of it: and our
penitential exercises will soon be at an end, except we hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, so as never to be satiated without it. Therefore when we humble
and punish our selves, and when we make our confession to God or his ministers,
we should, besides contrition and a resolution in general to sin no more,
design the extirpation of some one particular sin, to avoid and prevent the
occasions of that one sin which is most dangerous and importunate. Hence will
accrue to us a great advantage of our penitence, and we shall the better bring
forth fruits worthy of Repentance, such as these; fear to offend and displease
God any ways, a great dread of his just judgment, to check and reprove our
selves with shame and confusion of face, to be ready to make all satisfaction
and amends possible for past offenses, to restrain and mortify all sinful
appetites, carefully to avoid all the ways and allurements to sin, to humble
our selves and willingly to bear contempt, frequently to examine our conscience
and search the secrets of our hearts; to root out, as much as is possible, all
vicious desires and inclinations, and to set in their stead all virtuous and
holy affections.

2. They that make this their serious and constant employment have their own
sins before their eyes, but have no eyes for the sins of others; they grieve
for their own offenses, and punish their own follies, but they pass by or
excuse the faults of others; they see their own danger, and are always afraid
of falling, and always watchful not to fall. For our necessary converse with
the World, our ill customs, and our dwelling with baits and temptations,
exposes us to sin, and yet takes the sense of it from us: especially our evil
inclinations, which being born with us, have a strong party in our hearts, and
begin by times to deprave or harden Conscience, that it shall hardly have any
feeling of sins daily committed. And then this is the unhappiness of
contracting ill habits, that the oftener we act by them, the more we confirm
them, and the less we observe our faults and errors.

CHAP. XXXIX. Remedies against ordinary failings, and greater sins.
1. TO fall into those sins which some call Venial, or sins of daily incursion,
is hardly to be avoided; and yet even those sins cannot be said to be little
that are committed against a great God, and for which we must suffer Eternal
Torments, if we our selves were to make expiation for them. But though there is
pardon for those unavoidable errors which without a special grace, we cannot
but commit at some time: yet ought we to endeavor with all our power daily to
lessen the number of them, and to prevent them by acts of contrary virtues, one
by one. To that end, we should be as careful as men are in contagious times,
who not only avoid infected persons, but also all that has touched and been
about them: so should we in the case of those sins that are counted light,
avoid and stop all the ways and avenues that lead to them, Lest we falling
frequently, at last fall into the pit of death.

2. Every moment almost we have some temptation to vain talk or vain
inquisitiveness, to anger or unseemly jesting, to contention or impatience, to
idle thoughts and distraction, or to such like sins, which are the more
difficult to be avoided, that being mixed with all our worldly affairs, they are
hardly to be discerned. Therefore we must at least secure this, that however
our nature stands affected to any of those lesser sins, yet our hearts may not
entertain any love for them, lest our own affections hinder us, carefully to
watch and strive against them. Without this, our after-Repentance and our
Sacramental vow will signify little to obtain remission of them, or victory
against them. I know that it is said of these failings, that the just man falls
seven times a day: but yet certain it is, that the just man endeavors against
it, and that he never falls, but by frailty or by sudden surprise.

3. Likewise for vices or greater sins, to conquer them you must stifle them in
the birth, suppress the first motion to them, and meet the temptation with an
act of virtue contrary to it. As for example, if you be abused and provoked,
refrain the first stirring of Anger, and then busy your mind with some act of
Patience and Humility, considering that you suffer that, and less than that you
deserve, praying for him that does you wrong, and resolving to do him any
kindness you can. For thus we best avoid evil by studying to do that which is
good, and the last is as much our duty as the first: and that servant deserves
no great reward who does not strike and revile his master, if he does not
withal, faithfully serve and obey him. In this many deceive themselves, who
think to have made sure work of their Salvation, because they have not been
wicked, when yet they have neglected positive duties, and have not done those
good works which God required from them. Cease to do evil, learn to do good,
both are equally commanded, not to transgress by omission no more than
commission.

CHAP. XL. Clergymen have some especial obligations, though all are bound to
endeavor after perfection.
1. THough the same institutes of Christian perfection be delivered to all, and
all are to walk by the same rule, as has been showed before, Chap. 7. Yet it
cannot be denied, but that Clergy-mens obligations to a strict devout life, are
much enforced upon them, by their particular calling: For they are not only
obliged to be holy themselves, but also by their life and doctrine to set forth
the glory of God, and set forward the Salvation of all men. In order to which,
they must be very careful so to follow after virtue, and all things that are
honest and of good report, so to live, and so to converse with men, that their
words and actions may speak them, and others may acknowledge them, to be indeed
the sons of God, and ministers of Christ: and to this the least neglect and
remissness will be very prejudicial, because they are observed by all, and men
generally are apt to judge and to follow the worst.

2. They must remember that as all Christians are but Stewards and have nothing
of their own, and must use the World as not possessing it, and as being ready
to part with it: so they more especially are to count nothing their own, and
that little they have as well as themselves, must be subservient to the design
of their function. They must remember that they are not only as others obliged
to live by the Gospel-Rules, but that besides, they have devoted themselves to
the service of the Church, and have vowed obedience to its constitutions, and
so far are barred from their own will, which must comply with that order and
commission they have taken. And most of all let them remember that Christ
himself, whose servant they are, humbled himself, came in the form of a
servant, became of no reputation, became poor for us, though he were Lord of
all, and became obedient to the death, Professing he was not come do his own
will, but the will of him that sent him.

3. What will it avail to read the instructions and examples of Christ and his
Saints, if we follow them not? those things were written for our learning and
are set before us for our imitation. It has been said by some, that no
Christian comes to Heaven, that is not a Martyr; we must all be prepared for
it, and indeed that mortification and self-denial, which all Christians,
especially spiritual guides are obliged to use, is a kind of Martyrdom without
blood; is the Crucifixion of our desires and appetites. Too many, it is to be
confessed, live irregularly in their calling, Christian and Ecclesiastical,
unmindful of the obligations of that blessed order they are entered in; their
indevotion deprives them of the sense and the comforts of Piety, so that they
are fain to seek for pleasure abroad, in the enjoyment of the world, because
they find it not in their own heart, and the doing of their duty. Many they are
that go a stray, and judge that to be best which is done by the most, and
follow the broad way in a crowd: but few they are that with sincerity follow
Christ in the narrow way of the Cross. It is a great folly to be careless and
secure in that way, wherein the best and wisest men have trembled, and walking
with the greatest wariness, have found it very hard to go right.

CHAP. XLI. That Prayer is necessary to all, and what dispositions are
requisite to make it acceptable.
1. SUch is the necessity of Prayer that it is become an approved saying, that
without it none can be saved. For who can obey the divine call, leave all and
follow me, without the assistance of grace? and who can obtain it without
begging for it? therefore we are taught by Holy Scripture, Luke 18.1. 1 These.
5.17. That we should always pray and not faint, because that always and in all
things we want the help and assistance of God. Now he may be said to pray
always, who every day has his set hours of Prayer, which as they return, are
observed duly. He Prays always, who in all things walks uprightly, and with an
holy intention designs Gods glory; for Prayer is the elevation of the Soul to
God. He Prays always, who in his heart preserves an habitual devotion, and
always desires to Pray; that very desire is a good Prayer. Lastly, he prays
always who always lives well; a good life is a continual Prayer.

2. No man ever became wicked, profane or heretic, who did not first neglect
and cast off this Holy Duty. Prayer is the pipe or conduit which brings Divine
Grace into our Souls; take it away, and Grace has no passage, and the Soul is
parched and withered, and at last by degrees must die. Neither is it enough to
mumble over a few orisons, and recite them only with the voice, as too many do,
without attention, without reverence, and without devout affections. Of them
God complains by his Prophet and his Son. Isa. 29.13. Mat. 15.8. This people
honor me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. On them shall come
the imprecation of the Psalmist, 109.6. Let his Prayer be turned into sin.
Their words are lies that work wickedness, and yet sing with Holy David, That
they hate sin and love the Law of God: and they whose God is their belly, and
yet profess with him, Psalm. 102.4. My heart is smitten and withered like grass,
so that I forget to eat my bread: And they that spend their time in mirth and
laughter, and yet say with that penitent Prophet, Psalm. 42.3. My tears have
been my meat day and night: And they that neither regard nor obey divine
precepts, and yet pronounce with David, Cursed are they that depart from thy
Commandments and are far from thy Law. Such Prayers are mere mockeries, they
are an abomination to God, and they provoke his wrath, rather than appease him.

3. No man deserves the name of a Christian, except at least twice a day,
morning and evening, he lift up his Soul to God in devout and fervent Prayer:
spending as much time therein for the comfort and benefit of his immortal soul,
as he commonly does for the feeding of his mortal body. And let none intermit
or lessen the duty, because he finds himself dry and dull, and wants that holy
relish and liveliness of holy affection, which sometimes he has felt; for true
devotion does not consist in tears and tender passions, and overflowings of
sensible joys, which may be felt by such as pray to images and false deities:
but true devotion consists in a ready and well disposed will to serve and obey
God, and abstain from all sin. God is known and worshipped by Faith and not by
Sense.

4. I do not find fault with those rules and directions how to Pray, which are
given by pious men; they may be useful, but alone they are not sufficient: For
Prayer is not to be learned as a Trade, by imitation of the work that lies
before us. No, the Art of it is in the Heart, in a careful watch over it, and
over our senses. For how can he have the Spirit of Prayer, whose Spirit is let
loose to vanity? How can he approach God, duly to deal with him concerning the
Salvation of his Soul, whose Soul is all day taken up with the World, with idle
talk and idle business? It is a great error to think that of a sudden a man of
clay can raise himself up to Heaven, can do that work which is most Spiritual
and most difficult, without serious attention and preparation, nay with the
obstacles and distractions of a whole days employment about earthly things. No,
Prayer does require a pure and well composed heart, free from the Images of
Worldly concerns, fitted and desirous to entertain it self with God: and the
best preparation to this Blessed Duty, is a good and upright life, with a meek
and peaceable conversation. He that would daily pray better, should so value
Heaven and Heavenly things, that therein may be his comfort, and he may be dead
to the World. That Prayer which is accompanied with true Faith and humility is
ever accepted.

CHAP. XLII. Why many are not profited by Prayer, and that we should study to
Pray well and frequently.
1. MAny receive little or no advantage from their Prayers and Meditations,
because they entertain and cherish affections contrary to what they Pray and
Meditate; and they make reservations, and do not wholly devote and offer
themselves to God, to comply in all things with his good pleasure. They desire
that God would teach them to know and to fulfill his will, and yet they cease
not in many things to neglect and to oppose it: having as it were, a double
heart, one they offer to God when they Pray, the other they reserve to
themselves, and cannot say with the Psalmist, With my whole heart I have sought
thee. Others acted by curiosity and the spirit of Pride, seek after high
Speculations and abstruse learning, which signifies little or nothing to the
knowing themselves, and the mastering of their sinful passions: and if at any
time their Spirit be softened and they find some delight in sighs and tears; yet
soon after that delight is gone, they remain impatient of their Humiliation,
they return to their former ways, and still remain tangled in their follies and
their vicious habits.

2. Hence it is that those sudden changes or conversions are not durable, which
proceed from sudden and strong commotions; for the violence of that passion,
which carried away the Heart, coming to abate, it returns to its former and
more pleasing affections, and soon repents of its Repentance. Some seek
themselves more than God, in their Prayers, because therein they find some
refreshments and Spiritual delights: and some seek after abstractions and
extatick raptures, to be therein raised up to Heaven and know great mysteries:
but all these will signify nothing without Contrition and Humility. The great
benefit of Prayer is to find the World lose its power and its repute in our
Hearts, and to find our wills more resigned to God, to patience and to
obedience. He Prays best that desires to know nothing and to obtain nothing,
but Jesus Christ and him crucified.

3. It is a common error to think that meditation is a thing exceeding
difficult, when indeed every man is daily occupied about it, for to meditate is
to revolve and view things in our minds; and that we always do, vain and
worldly, and often sinful things. Why cannot we then as well consider the
mysteries of Faith and the concerns of our Salvation? Sure we could easily, if
we would seriously endeavor to expel the world out of our hearts, then there
would be room for the things of God, and we could fix our thoughts upon them.
Want of this makes us unfit for Prayer, and unwilling to be crucified to the
World, and to bear the Cross and Reproach of Christ. We pretend indeed that our
occupations are necessary, and perhaps good and profitable, so that we have a
good warrant to dispense with prayer and meditation: but there is a time for
all things, and however the business of the Soul is our chiefest concern, and
it is a great folly to neglect it upon any account.

4. The body without nourishment soon decays into weakness and death, so does
the Soul without its proper food, which is prayer: and it wants it the more
frequently, in that it has many more and greater necessities than the body
has. For heat and cold, hunger, thirst and sickness, and whatever afflicts the
body, does also vex and prey upon the Soul which is compatible with it: and
besides that, the Devil, the World, and the Flesh it self, are all Enemies to
the Soul, and daily conspire its ruin, and it has no strength nor defense, nor
comfort, but from prayer only. We ought therefore always to pray, and devoutly
to call upon God, in the inner-man, in the inward recesses of our Souls, which
are the Temple of God, wherein he is pleased to dwell. We need not always words
in our private Closets, God sees our thoughts, and hears our secret desires.
Yet they may use books to good purpose, that are not used to mental prayer. And
however the public Devotions of the Church ought to be said and sung aloud,
and to be constant and unalterable. That all the Faithful may agree in them,
and edify one another, by joining their voices as well as minds, to send up
their praises and petitions to God: Yet still the heart is the house of prayer,
and the Kingdom of God is within us.

CHAP. XLIII. How to Pray, and avoid distractions, and fix the intention.
1. THat our Prayer may be truly good and acceptable, we must endeavor to ask
all things out of love to God. For though a thing be good in it self, yet the
surest and better way it is to desire and demand it upon Gods account, because
it will please him, that Self-love may not be the principle and purpose of our
petitions. The ground on which our prayer must rest, is a lively Faith, and a
sense of the presence of God, whom we must approach with an humble simplicity;
as much as may be like an Infant brought to his Mothers breast. He is not
altogether intent to his devotion, that considers himself praying; for whilst
he reflects on his prayer, his mind is diverted from God to whom he prays, and
sometimes he is distracted, endeavoring to avoid distraction. Therefore I say,
simplicity is best in prayer; to think of nothing but God, to look to none but
him whom we worship.

2. For his mind shall hardly be drawn to other objects that shall consider God
as present; the immensity of divine perfections will absorb his thoughts; they
shall sail in that boundless Ocean, and find no limits, and all other things
but God will be out of sight. But the perfection of this, is reserved for a
better State; here we must expect distractions, and if we duly strive against
them, they shall not make our prayers to be unprofitable: For God will hear
them and assist us, whilst we contend with our infirmities. Yet we shall
sooner be freed from ill and idle thoughts, by slighting them, and taking off
our minds from attending to them, than by fencing and fighting against them:
for sometimes whilst we stand to confute them, they make the deeper
impressions on perplexed and timorous hearts. A Prayer dry, without relish and
comfort, is the more acceptable to God, in that it is unpleasing to Nature.

3. As Travelers always bear in mind the place whither they would go, so they
that pray should always be mindful of the design of Prayer, which is to be
united to God, as much as is possible in this life; to have our will made
conform unto his, in all things; to aim at any thing but this, is to lose our
labor. Now prayer may be said to be of two sorts, the one common and ordinary,
performed by our endeavor and diligent application, together with the
assistance of Grace; For no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the
Spirit: the other extraordinary and infused, more secret and mysterious, with
sighs unutterable. We may beg the gift of both, for God is free and very
gracious: yet we must apply our selves to that which is more common, and
wherein we have a part to act; which consists in a blessed disposition to
lift up our Soul to God, and entertain holy affections, and pour out our hearts
before him. This God is ready to grant to such as trust in him, and are of a
meek and humble Spirit; for every good and perfect gift is from above, and
comes down from the Father of Lights. Therefore ought we to begin our prayers
with an humble acknowledgement of our being nothing but misery and impotency,
and wretched sinfulness: and withal, we should take care to fix our intention
aright, that God may be glorified, and his will may be done, and we may
cheerfully fulfill it. Now this is the Will of God, even your Sanctification.

CHAP. XLIV. The great advantages of Prayer.
1. WHat is written concerning Wisdom, may very well be said of Prayer. Wisd.
7. I preferred her before Scepters and Thrones, and esteemed Riches nothing in
comparison of her; I loved her above health and beauty, and chose to have her
instead of light, for the light that comes from her never goes out: All good
things together came to me with her, and innumerable riches in her hand: and I
rejoiced in them all, because she goes before them, and I knew not that she
was the mother of them; she is a Treasure unto men, that never fails, which
they that use become the friends of God. For indeed, Prayer is a fountain of
grace, a parent and nurse to all virtues; it increases the joy of them that
rejoice, and gives comfort to sad hearts; it is the light of the
understanding, and the food of the Soul, and the procurer of all happiness.
Prayer appeaseth Gods Wrath, obtains pardon for our faults, overcomes our sins,
delivers us from dangers, inkindles the holy fire of divine love in our hearts,
and is an act of all virtues together. It is an Act of Faith, for thereby we
declare our belief of God's being present, ready to hear our prayers, able and
willing to grant our devout petitions. Hope also is quickened and confirmed, for
by Prayer we rely upon God, and profess our trust in his infinite mercy. And
Charity likewise is increast; whilst we consider and call upon the divine
incomprehensible goodness, we are inflamed with the love of it, and other
things lose their esteem with us.

2. Devotion teaches us to fulfill all Righteousness, and to weigh things
wisely in the balance of the Sanctuary. Prayer is an Act of Courage and
Christian Fortitude; whilst we resolve to serve God, and be faithful to him,
whatever we suffer for it. It is also an Act of Temperance; for the devout
heart having a foretast of Heavenly joys, despises the World, and all its
pleasures. Prayer gives a clearer sight of things Eternal, and manifests the
secrets of Divine Wisdom. By it the Soul approaching God, is penetrated by his
light, and so learns the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven. By it we exercise
our Charity whilst we pray for others, our fear of God, whilst we humble our
selves at his feet, and our love and constancy to our Dear Redeemer, whilst we
profess we would die, rather than displease or deny him. And so Prayer is an
abstract of many Virtues, and he that Prays much, is much a Christian.

The End of the First Part.
PRECEPTS AND Practical Rules FOR A truly Christian Life.

BEING A Summary of Excellent Directions to follow the narrow way to BLISS.

PART II.

Written Originally in Latin By JOHN BONA. Englished by L. B.

LONDON: Printed by A. C. for H. Brom, at the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCLXXVIII.

PRECEPTS AND Practical Rules FOR A truly Christian Life.
PART II. Of the moderation of our affections, and the study and endeavor
after true Virtue.
CHAP. I. That Voluptuousness and Vanity are to be avoided, and Truth sought
for in things Eternal, after Christ's Example.
1. ALL men generally commend and desire truth, but few know where it dwells:
and should they know it, they would love and pursue nothing else. But certain
it is that truth is not in things Earthly and perishing, because they soon
decay into nothing, whereas truth alters not, but abides for ever. We must seek
it therefore in things immortal, which have a constant being and remain to
Eternity. Truth is to be found in Virtue, which is the Image or Transcript of
it, and varies not according to the circumstances of Human Life; but continues
the same in all conditions, always above vanity, always absolute Regent over
all Passions and sensual desires.

2. That man is acquainted with truth, whose mind and affections are guided by
reason, and his reason by revelation, by Faith, by the Spirit of God: Whereas
he that is a Caitif to his Lusts, and a Slave to his Passions, is altogether
vain, being tossed by continual troubles and contrary perturbations: sometimes
fears and sometimes desires, sometimes anxious thoughts or perhaps vain joys;
now grief for losses, by and by greedy pursuits after new acquists; grievous
vexation now for being injured, worse soon after in seeking for revenge. These
unruly passions are the springs of all our miseries, and the offspring of
vanity and voluptuousness, the great disturbers of our Peace and tormentors of
our unhappy Souls. Vanity begets impatient desires of being honored and
esteemed, high conceits of our selves, contempt of others, and a secret
aversion to Truth. Voluptuousness inclines men to ease and sports, to the Lusts
of the Palate and the lower belly, to all things that can please the body and
gratify a sensual mind. Hence looseness and dissolution, and worldly
mindedness; whilst the Soul estranged from God pursues after outward comforts,
seeks after Vainglory, idle talk and idle pastimes, and is altogether taken up
with toys and vanities.

3. These are the things that make the Christian Laws, the Gospel-Rules
unacceptable to the World, to all carnal men; that the Gospel injoyns nothing
more than Humility, and corrupt nature inclines them to Pride; the Gospel
requires broken penitent hearts and reformation, and men abhor nothing more. So
that without Faith it is impossible to find out and embrace those great and
saving truths; Faith is our victory over the World. The Blessed Son of God to
attest the truth of this his Heavenly Doctrine, that we must take off our
affections from the World, confirmed it by his Life and Example as well as by
Miracles. For whereas men labor to be rich, he chose to be poor; whereas they
aspire after dominion and high dignities, he fled and hid himself when the Jews
would have made him King; men think it most grievous to bear injuries, and he
patiently suffered the greatest; they will not abide to be ill spoken of, and
he was most falsely and unjustly condemned. His sufferings and his
conversation, were our lesson and instruction: and we never sin but when we
seek those things he despised, and flee from that which he willingly endured.
He doubtless is much abused and deceived that thinks felicity consists in what
Christ taught us to despise.

CHAP. II. That to attain Perfection nothing must be neglected.
1. YOU shall hardly find a perfect Christian, because they commonly that have
overcome the greater sins, neglect the lesser; they will not watch and offer
violence to themselves for small matters (as they count it) and by degrees they
approach the brink of the Precipice, and perchance afterward get a grievous
fall. Heinous and crying sins affect us with horror at first sight: but we
easily admit of ordinary failings. None will be so desperate as to cast away
all his hopes and spend his whole stock of Grace at a time: as none would be so
mad as to send his whole Estate going in one day. No, men use to say, this is
no great cost, this will hardly at all sink the bag: or in another case, it is
but one glass, one bit more, that can do me no hurt: but by little and little
they at last spend all, and come to poverty, or else they surfeit and are
drunk: and likewise the same fate in Spiritual things attends the same neglect
and unwariness. Occasions of heroic virtue and doing God extraordinary
service, do seldom occur: but almost every moment we have an opportunity of
doing some good; therefore we should despise nothing, because almost every
thing puts it in our power to exercise some virtue and do something to please
God. We should rather observe every motion of our heart, and mind to rectify
the least irregularity of our affections, and take all occasions to mortify
pernicious self-will and self-love. No man of a sudden grows wicked, but he
that despises small things, shall fall by little and little. Eccl. 19.1.

2. Every human comfort, though never so innocent, yet in some manner excludes
the divine: but he that can pass by all outward things, and entertain himself
with Christ, choose him for his only portion, who alone is all-sufficient, his
joys shall be solid and lasting. As Philosophers say that whenever you take
one body, another succeeds in its place, lest there should be a vacuum in
nature: So, and much more certain it is, that when the soul empties it self of
all affection to creatures, it is soon replenished with God, and all divine
consolations. But alas, it is to be confessed that we having used our selves from
our infancy to delight in material things, which are present and perceived by
sense: we afterward grow very unapt to entertain and please our selves with
objects Spiritual and Supernatural, which are far out of sight and can be
apprehended but by Faith only. Hence it is that we lie grovelling on the ground,
and attend to nothing but the dictates of flesh and blood, and remain
inconstant and unable to raise up our selves above our depressed nature: until
having shook off the vain comforts of transitory things, We turn our selves to
God and settle our rest in him, who is our peace and our joy, and the end and
center of all things.

CHAP. III. That Self-denial and the Cross is absolutely necessary to all
Christians.
1. THE Life of every Christian should be a perpetual Self-crucifixion, yet the
deliciousness of the Cross is understood but of very few, such as have been
intimately acquainted with it. They only know that have tried, how much
pleasure follows contrition and self-abnegation, insomuch that they find it
most bitter when they any ways depart from their humble penitent temper, to
return to the life of sense. The World indeed counts them unhappy, because
commonly they are poor, afflicted and despised: but they rejoice in their
tribulations, and find themselves happy, being well pleased with what happens
to them, because they desire most of all, that God's will may be done in all
things. Is it his pleasure to make Poverty their lot? they freely accept of it.
Will he have them afflicted? they submit. Are they to be scorned and disgraced?
they are not unwillign; come what will they like it; therefore they are most
happy that have all things at will. As for the wicked that seek after the
pleasures of sin, though they have what they wish, and appear prosperous to
envy and admiration: yet they really are unhappy, because they wish what they
should not, what is unjust and dishonest, and will bring sorrow at last.

2. The Cross is the Center of our holy Religion, the most mysterious and
profitable doctrine of it, both for belief and practice; he that seeks not for
the Cross when he becomes a Christian, understands not as yet what the Gospel
designs. Christ at first concealed many things from his Disciples, because they
could not hear them: yet weak and ignorant as they were, he acquainted them
with the scandal of his Cross and ignominious passion. St. Paul likewise to the
new Converts would give milk and not meat, yet notwithstanding would preach to
them Jesus Christ Crucified, to the Jews an offense, and to the Gentiles
foolishness; nay, he himself with all his learning, professed that he did not
care to know any thing, save Jesus Christ and him crucified. And the Primitive
Church, for some time concealed many things from the Catechumens, and yet never
the Cross of Christ. Nay every Christian is, and was of old signed in his
forehead with the sign of the Cross, in token he should not be ashamed of
Christ crucified: And God forbid we should glory in any thing save in the Cross
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is made unto us, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption.

3. As he has redeemed us by the Cross, so none can receive the benefit of his
Redemption, but by bearing the Cross. Hence the absolute necessity of patience
and self-denial, so that whoever does not renounce himself cannot be Christ's
Disciple. If any one (says he) will come after me, let him take up his Cross
and follow me: and if he does not hate (that is, be ready to forsake) father
and mother, wife and children, and even his own life, he cannot be my disciple:
for whosoever will save his life shall lose it, and whosoever will lose his
life for my sake, shall find it. Mat. 16.25. He does not only say that a
Christian must deny pride, intemperance, luxury, injustice, pomps and riches,
and such things that are without us, but himself; he must deny himself, that
is, his natural desires and affections, his own will, the suggestions of his
own carnal mind. These he must oppose and mortify, and overcome; Crucify the
flesh with the affections and lusts; and make his life an image and
representation of the Crucifixion of Christ. These things are hard to flesh and
blood, but in them consists our Faith and our Salvation.

CHAP. IV. That Self-denial is the Character, and the principal duty of a
Christian.
1. IN the Spiritual building Self-denial is the first Stone; for what will
raptures and high-flown thoughts signify, what will avail communions and
familiar acquaintances with God, and what the precisest virtue, if in all these
we seek our selves, aim at our own glory, and puffed up with Pharisaical pride do
despise others? He is wiser than all the Philosophers, who in his heart owns
himself simple and ignorant; he is higher than the greatest Monarchs, who
reputes himself the meanest of men. Our virtue, perfection and safety consist
not in lofty expressions, nor yet in things wonderful and extraordinary; but in
the Cross, in bearing reproaches, in self-abjection: and no man can obtain here
true virtue and sanctification, and hereafter glory, except, renouncing his own
desires, he prepare himself to suffer, and be made conformable to Christ
Crucified. Yet we must observe that as Simon the Cyrenian did bear the Cross of
Christ and yet not die with him: so many bear a heavy Cross without true
mortification; in what they suffer they have some other design, than to
glorify God and to submit to his blessed will.

2. Who would think that self-love should be found in the Cross, which it
abhors so much? Yet so it is; not a few there are, who willingly or otherways,
can endure much, that they may boast of it, that they may be seen and praised
by men. Such men indeed do bear the Cross, but they will not be crucified with
Christ; they deny and afflict themselves, but because they will not trust God
for their reward, they have none at all, they lose their labor and themselves.
Many others there be that complain, that their affairs and necessary
employments abroad, keep them from minding what is good, by depriving them of
their inward peace: but the things that disturb the tranquillity of the Soul,
are from within, because we will not break with our selves, because we are too
sensual and too much seek our ease and advantage. From hence proceeds that
inward and vexatious war betwixt the Spirit and the Flesh, which can never
cease till Reason and Religion reign in us, and the inferior appetites be
brought to obedience and perfect subjection, to the higher rational faculties.

3. If a man had a friend so dear and intimate, that he could not eat, nor
rest, nor live one day without him, and a faithful and creditable Monitor
should tell him that his pretended friend is false and treacherous, and designs
to ruin and to murder him; would not his love presently cease, and be turned
to hatred and thoughts of revenge? Christian Reader, such a friend is our
flesh; we gratify and indulge it, and use it with the greatest kindness: and
at the same time, under pretense of friendship it deceives us, and designs to
deprive us of immortal life, and to bring to Eternal death. Yet this false
friend sleeps in our bosom; we are not to war with strangers and with far
distant Enemies: but with one that dwells with us at home, and accompanies us
wherever we go, and always lies in wait to take advantage of us, and do us
mischief. Let a man forsake himself and come out of himself, and then he will
find no obstacles in his way to Heaven.

CHAP. V. How we must fight our corrupt nature and depraved affections.
1. WE must be very careful to observe what is the object of our love or fear,
and what of our joy or sorrow; for these four affections have the absolute
power of our heart: and God by them is the master of it, when we love and fear
nothing but him and for him, and when he is the cause and the measure of our
joy or sorrow. When these motions of our mind are disorderly and tend where
they should not, we become unruly like beasts: but when they are ordered and
directed right, then they are highly serviceable and they make us holy and
happy like Angels. For in this consists the perfection and happiness of man,
to have his affections and desires guided by truth and reason; for then his
love and his joys become instruments of bliss and virtue: whereas the same
affections, when guided by corrupt nature alone, become pernicious and
vexatious, degenerate into wild lusts, monsters which we must always fight, and
with our utmost strength endeavor to conquer.

2. But to this purpose, it will not suffice that we in general endeavor to
reform and keep under our appetites and unruly passions; for corrupt nature is
well enough pleased with all the apparel and formalities of mortification,
self-denial, and victory over sinful passions; and Philosophers grow in love
with the fair Ideas of virtue, in this pompous attire: and many in this have
deceived themselves, and boasted of conquest over their evil inclinations,
because they find not in themselves an aversion to virtue and good desires. But
when it comes to trial indeed, and they are no longer to fight with the notion
of sin in general, but with a present urging lust, with a pressing uneasiness
and necessity, with some provocations to anger or to impatience: then it
appears how vain, how weak and insignificant, were their great thoughts and
fine resolutions. Better it is therefore carefully attend to every particular
occasion of vanquishing our selves and restraining our depraved appetites, and
to do it seriously and to purpose; for so by degrees we shall rectify and
amend every defect, and bring all our passions and desires under the power of
right reason, or Christian Religion.

3. But this is not to be done without an ever-watching diligence, an unwearied
patience, a great application, and a persevering courage and labor: that by
offering a perpetual violence to our evil propensities, as they show
themselves, we may go to the root of them; and quite pull them up. For now in
our state of depravation, every holy affection and the lifting up of our Soul
to God, is violent, being against nature, against the bent of our sensual
appetites: so that we must renew our endeavors and add new vigor to them every
moment, else we fall down, and nature easily prevails, and we soon return to
our selves.

4. As weeds in gardens may be pulled up, and yet not hindered from growing
again of themselves: so by care and by keeping a strict hand over our vicious
affections, we may so keep them under, that we shall think they are quite
destroyed: but do what we can, the ground of our corrupt nature, will always be
apt to produce ill weeds, and sin of it self will be growing again; so that we
must never give over fighting, never cease to mortify and purify our selves
whilst we live. And yet, if by God's assistance we can once do some one noble
act of Christian virtue, report one noted victory over our selves: that alone
may be sufficient to assert and enlarge our liberty, and obtain us grace,
whereby we shall afterward easily overcome all our aversions to virtue. Some
holy men have been so encouraged and strengthened by one great and difficult
triumph, that afterward without fear and with little trouble or danger, they
have overcome all enemies and oppositions. So great a thing it is to fight with
fortitude, and maintain once a noble contention, till we have conquered.

CHAP. VI. Of the right use and moderation of our outward Senses.
1. BEcause the eyes commonly are an inlet to sin, we ought to turn them from
tempting objects with the same care and quickness as a man would remove out of
a house infected with the Plague. Now human eyes wherewith created things are
beheld, may be said to be of three sorts. The first altogether Sensual or
natural, when viewing the outward beauty of an object, we are pleased with it,
and consider no farther. The second may be called Rational or Philosophical,
when we making reflections upon the symmetry and other properties of things
visible, are moved thereby to search and to know the nature of them. And the
third we may say, are Christian or Religious, when by the beholding of
creatures, we raise up our Souls to the love and contemplation of the Creator.
With these eyes pious Souls viewing the beauties of the universe are led to the
consideration of its glorious maker, who is the fountain of all beauty and
perfection, as the author of all subsistence and being.

2. Now as the life of the body depends upon its union with the Soul, so does
in some manner the life of our senses depend on the presence of their proper
objects; as things visible to the eyes, audible voices to the ears. The
pleasure which those senses receive from a beautiful sight, or a sweet harmony,
may be called their life: and their death or mortification, in proportion to
this, is their being deprived of those objects, whereon they act with delight;
which deprivation is very useful, if not altogether requisite, to arrive to a
state of virtue and sanctification. For nothing is more destructive of a
Christian Life, than a life of sense: the imagination being as it were in the
middle betwixt the soul and the senses, when these work upon her, as they are
moved by outward objects, she likewise works upon the soul, and draws it to
assent to the voluptuousness of lower faculties: and this is not to be avoided
without we bar our senses, by a strict restraint, from those things which
affect them with sinful delights.

3. In this consists the death of sense, which is to be considered as twofold;
the first Natural, when there is such a real separation betwixt sense and its
object, that they cannot possibly meet: The second Moral, when sense perceives
but enjoys not its object, being restrained from the pleasure of it. The first,
some judge to be less difficult and more safe: it being easier to avoid all
occasions of sinful pleasure, than to keep a due moderation when we engage in
them: but in this discretion and due measures are to be observed. The second is
accordingly thought to be more dangerous, because sensual pleasures are very
enticing and insinuating, and are known by sad experience to have a great
prevalency over the Soul and nobler affections.

4. And then farther, it is to be considered, that we sucked the poison of
voluptuousness together with our milk; from our very infancy we learned to
indulge sense: and though we have often experimented that its delights and
satisfactions are short, and vain, and unsatisfying, and withal pernicious and
highly afflictive to the Soul: yet still we have the same notions of them, they
stick close to our mind: and those pleasing though false apprehensions which
first entered our hearts, will not be rectified, nor be gone, till we have a
long time, used serious reflections and considerations, till by many acts of
self-denial and contrary virtue we have imprinted in our minds the true
principles of Christianity. God is a Spirit, and a spiritual life is the way to
him; to chastize and restrain the fancy, to keep under the body, and be guided
by divine precepts, is the way to spiritualize our selves and to come to God.

CHAP. VII. Of denying our Sensual appetites, especially Intemperance.
1. IT is no difficult matter for a man who truly loves and fears God, and
studies to please him, to despise and forsake all worldly pleasures, pomps and
vanities: but to abstain from all food is not to be done, for by it our bodies
are rescued from death, and the necessity of it returns upon us daily. But
because there is something of delight in the satisfying of this need, there is
danger also lest luxury mingle with it, and pleasure which may follow after, be
the leading cause to our refection: therefore though we cannot wholly forbear
eating and drinking, yet we must take great heed of the voluptuousness of it,
that necessity be not the pretense, and pleasure the design of eating. Nature
is satisfied with a little, but greediness or daintiness are always craving:
and sometimes we know not whether want or wantonness call for food, and we are
glad and willing to mistake, that we may have an occasion to gratify the
unruly appetite. In these we must daily watch our selves, because these
temptations do daily return: and we must diet our selves with such moderation,
that we may nourish our bodies, and not feed our lusts. Plain, abstemious and
frugal food is the health of Soul and Body: and he that pampers not his flesh,
by the quality or quantity of his meat and drink, may easily master all carnal
desires.

2. To seek after feasts and dainties, and to make them the matter of our
discourse and our meditation, is the part of an Epicure, of one whose God is
his belly, and who minds earthly things: but a Christian should be indeed, and
also live as a penitent; pressing necessity should bring him to his table, and
thither he should come as if bread and water were his only allowance; that
whatever is superadded may relish better, and he may be more content and
thankful, and also moderate. This we might easily do, if we would duly consider
how abstemious primitive Christians were, how much our blessed Lord fasted, and
how for us he tasted vinegar and gall. This if we would often call to mind, and
seriously set our selves to the imitation of their Blessed examples, our
conversation would be in Heaven, and our thoughts would be far enough from
dwelling in caves and kitchins. As for the other fleshly lusts which also war
against the Soul; all occasions to them are to be avoided, and idleness also; a
strict watch over our senses must be kept; the rules of a severe modesty must
be observed; and especially we must shun all frequent and familiar converse
with the other Sex: for this without our knowledge and against our will,
kindles a dangerous and secret fire. And lastly we must take great heed that we
be not confident of our selves: for in such a slippery way, he is in some
manner already fallen, that fears not to fall.

CHAP. VIII. Of Talkativeness and Silence.
1. THE Evils of the tongue are past number, therefore says the wise man,
Prove. 10.19. In the multitude of words there wants not sin, but he that
restrains his lips is wise. Indeed talkativeness is a fountain and a torrent
of iniquity. It is a mark of ignorance, it betrays much folly, and is a great
enemy to serious thoughts and recollection. Men's words for the most part
proceed from something of Pride, for they commonly speak to teach others and to
show their own wisdom and great parts. Every one thinks he knows much, and to
make it appear and be thought somebody he commonly outs with more than he
knows. As bad air drawn in, does in time affect, infect the body: so does the
breath of many words much prejudice the Soul. It dissolves the spirit, and
breeds quarrels and contentions, and utters lies and detractions, and brings
forth loose unseemly jesting and jeering, and evils of all sorts. In vain does
he endeavor to be devout and to have peace within, who does not refrain his
tongue and set a watch before his lips. In vain does he endeavor to amend
himself, that censures and speaks ill of others. This is a snare wherein many
are caught, to be indulgent to themselves and severe to others, to boast and
magnify what is theirs, and slight as much what relates to others. Few there
are that wholly renounce to this vice; few that lead so incorrupt a life, as
not willingly to tax others corruptions. The propensity to this sin is so
great, that many counted good Christians, who have overcome diverse temptations,
and mortified their other lusts: yet fall here, and cannot bridle their unruly
tongue, the last gin the Devil sets to catch Souls: and it has been observed
by men of great piety and great experience, that a great talker was never very
good, or never persever'd to be so.

2. Silence therefore which sequesters us from men's vain converse, that we may
entertain our selves with God; silence which sanctifies all our persecutions,
sorrows and infirmities, must needs be highly advantageous to every one that
makes a right use of it. For when in any case we suffer wrongfully, and yet
hold our tongues, we then offer to God our Souls and Bodies, goods and good
names, as a sacrifice: we follow the example of Christ, who opened not his
mouth, but was led as a lamb to the slaughter: and we possess our Souls with
patience, and free our selves from clamours and perturbations. Sometimes indeed
a just defense of our selves may be requisite: but we must be very cautious
that we exceed not the due bounds of Christian meekness and humility. And yet
this can happen but seldom; as when we are called to answer, by the
Magistrate; when the slander would make us incapable of exercising, or useless
in the exercise of a public office; or when it would be others detriment; in
these cases we may speak with truth and meekness: in others we had best hold
our tongue. And that it may be to purpose, we must also refrain and quell our
inward passions: that the tumult within make not the outward peace
insignificant. I kept silence even from good words, says the Psalmist: if from
good words sometimes we must refrain, much more always from vain and ill
language. He is a wise man that can hold his tongue, for it is less difficult to
kn^^ how to speak well, than how to be silent.

CHAP. IX. Of true and false delights, and of self-complacency in virtue.
1. VIrtue alone is the true and lasting pleasure of rational creatures; other
things are pleasant but in appearance, and for a short uncertain time, and
according to men's various opinions: for worldly pleasures proceed not from
reason, which is constant and common to all, but from corrupt appetites which
always do change and differ. As a sick Palate cannot rightly discern of the
relish of meats, no more can a vicious man feel and understand what is true
pleasure, which proceeds only from virtue, to which he is too much a stranger.
Sensible delights indeed by natures instinct, are pleasing to all, and few
justly know how to use, and when to refuse them. But man was created to a
nobler end, than only to gratify sense: he was made for the sight and the
fruition of God, the last and sovereign good. It Is true indeed we cannot
contemplate truth and spiritual things, but by the help of those Ideas and
representations which we have from sense, and our rational faculties cannot
well discharge their function, when the organs of the body are discomposed: and
therefore we must have such care of our bodies, as may render them fit
instruments for our souls, and preserve them so.

2. But we sin grievously and pervert the order which God and nature have
appointed, if we make bodily pleasure the end of our natural actions: whereas
we should design them, and make them subservient to those nobler offices for
which we were created after God's Image. I confess we cannot long subsist
without some pleasure, corporal or spiritual: and we cannot divide our Souls
equally betwixt both: but then this obliges us to aspire the more after
heavenly joys, and to delight our selves so much the more in God, in the sense
of his favor and the hope of his glory, that we may despise and disrelish the
pleasures of sense and vanity.

3. But let it be observed also, that some love virtue more for its glory, than
its goodness sake; they aspire after God, because it is a thing high and
transcendent; they live a strict and severe life, because it denotes a brave
and generous spirit; they preserve inward peace, because it is pleasant; they
inquire after the way to Heaven, and to that purpose consult many Books, that
they may enlarge their knowledge and satisfy their curiosity; and they walk in
the narrow way to perfection, that they may delight in themselves, and admire
their own excellencies. All this these men do for to please and magnify
themselves; when they think most of all to serve God, they only serve to their
own pride; and when at last they shall expect great rewards, they shall find
their hands empty of good works; and their hearts full of nothing but
Self-love. God is therefore to be sought with humility, with singleness of
heart and a sincere Spirit; he is to be loved above all things, and for his own
sake. This life is the valley of the shadow of death, a state of warfare, a
place of perpetual labor: rest and peace, and joys eternal are reserved for a
better life.

CHAP. X. That we are led too much by Opinion.
1. THat we generally live by opinion, is known and acknowledged, but how great
is the force and the prevalency of it, is not perhaps so well understood.
Opinion in many cases and after a strange way, does exercise a great power, or
rather tyranny over men. It makes them as it pleases healthy or sickly, poor
or rich, miserable or happy: for no man is either of these but as he thinks
himself. Opinion brings joy or sorrow, not so much according to the reality of
good and evil, as according to the fancy: for experience tells us that what we
wished or feared was nothing so pleasant or grievous as we imagined. More than
that, Opinion not only gives a kind of present being to things that are future:
but also unites together things that are far distant, and makes us feel in one
moment the goods or evils of many years to come, and which perhaps shall never
be. Opinion alone for the most part, brings credit and praise to men and their
actions: and if all the dignities and the riches of the world were united
together, they could not content one single man, except his opinion were also
satisfied. Hamans wealth was exceeding great, and he was first in the Court of
King Ahasuerus, and yet he thought himself the unhappiest of men, because
Mordecai a poor Captive, would not stand up and honor him, when he came into
the Palace.

2. Another great mischief of opinion is this, that it lengthens the present
time, and makes its duration in some manner interminable; as if our life and
worldly enjoyments were to have no end: and that contrariwise it contracts
Eternity, and lessens to almost nothing those incomprehensible, amazing,
everlasting ages that follow this uncertain life. Men also commonly take an
account of moral good and evil by the measures of opinion: and whilst they seek
to avoid one extreme, they too often fall into another. As some from a dull
lazy life, become too restless and busy; from prodigality many fall to
covetousness; and from superstition to profaneness and irreverence. The last
cheat of Opinion I shall now reckon, is that it generally makes us judge and
esteem our selves, not according to our own sense and consciousness, but
according to the vain thoughts and talk of other men. We defer so much, not
only to our own, but also to others opinions, that except they will count us
happy, we cannot be so. We are not contented to live to our selves, but we must
also entertain a troublesome imaginary life to please we know not whom; people
that perhaps know us not, and to be sure, care not for us; whose judgment we
our selves slight in other things. Thus neglecting that true and real life
which we our selves enjoy, we make it our care and endeavor to preserve and
adorn that life which depends on others, and has no subsistence but in ours,
and other men's fancy: and so far does this delusion prevail that what we our
selves feel and know, is nothing to us, except others be acquainted with it.
From all these mischievous errors and deceptions of opinion, we cannot be freed
by the power of natural reason, without the supernatural light of the Divine
Grace enlighten our minds: For our opinions become true or false according as
is the light that guides us.

CHAP. XI. That the Doctrine of Salvation is much slighted, even by some that
pretend to it.
1. ALL knowledge is good that agrees with truth, but he that would work out
his salvation with fear and trembling, had need learn first what concerns it,
because our time is short, and great learning in other things is great trouble
and great vanity. It is the saying of S. James, that to him that knows to do
good and does it not, to him it is sin: 4.17. As if he should say that it is
ill to eat and not digest. For as indigested meat nourishes not, but rather
hurts: so much knowledge not concocted and converted to use by the fire of holy
charity, fills men with pride and such peccant humors, and at last ends in
death. These two things men are to care for whilst they are in this World,
first to keep the life of the Soul, which consists in the grace and the favor
of God: and secondly to preserve their temporal life: but for the first, many
are unconcerned; let what will become of the Soul, their study and all their
labor is that it may be well with the body. And so they run blindfold after
their lusts and sensual enjoyments: being wise indeed, as children of this
world, but having none of that wisdom which makes men wise unto Salvation.

2. They that speak doubtfully and deceitfully are odious to men (says the Son
of Sirach,) much more are they odious to God, that live so; whose very life is
a lie, as well as their words. They pretend to know God and his holy ways, and
vainly boast to follow them, when yet they go quite contrary; they reprove and
tutor others, not themselves; they cunningly dissemble their vices, and make a
show of those virtues they are strangers to. But they cannot deceive God who
searches the heart, and their hypocrisy cannot be hid from him, who sees the
things that are in secret, and at the last day will bring all to light. And O
that men would view their stains and imperfections, in the great and eternal
light of that terrible day, for then they could easily discern, and as easily
cleanse and amend them. We have but these two ways to take notice of our
defects and deformities, either in the light of our own reason, comparing them
to our selves: or in the light of Divine Revelation, bringing them forth before
the bright and glorious presence of the most holy God. The first is like a
winter days light, dim and cold: but the second is the sunshine of a
summer-day, so clear as to make the least mote visible, and hot enough to burn
and consume all our dross. But to see this saving divine light, a man must come
out of himself and go to God, in whom alone is truth and wisdom, and out of
whom all things are mere impostures and follies.

CHAP. XII. That Self-will is a great Evil and must be renounced.
1. ALL our actions contrary to God's will, and in compliance to our own, are
the fuel for that fire which is unquenchable. For self-will may be said to be
the maker of Hell and the leader to it, the Author of all the evils which
eternally afflict all the wicked that rebelled against God. As likewise even in
time, the less a man follows his own will, the farther he is from being
miserable, the nearer he comes to true happiness. And he that has wholly
renounced to his own desires and inclinations, has the greatest assurance that
can be had here, of being eternally happy hereafter. How this is to be done,
our Blessed Savior taught us when he said follow me: for he himself, as he
testified came not into the world to do his own will, but the will of the
Father that sent him: so that to follow him, we must follow his obedience,
forsake our own will to comply with his; to follow him we must take up and bear
his yoke and his Cross, which to the flesh is indeed hard and afflictive, but
to the Spirit is comfortable and delicious.

2. This our Christian profession does require from us, that in all our works
and undertakings, we may heartily say, Not my will, but Gods will be done: This
also is the design of the supreme eternal will of God, in creating and
preserving men's wills, that they may freely serve him, and in all things fulfill
his good pleasure. And truly it is the greatest and most blessed freedom, to be
in subjection to God, to be able from our hearts to say in all events, Even so
Father, for so it has seemed good before thee. My only will is, Gods will may
be done. He is infinitely good and wise, I freely resign my self to him, and
desire evermore to have an entire dependence on him, and to be contented with
all the disposals of his Providence, and that in all things his blessed name
may be glorified. All men's troubles and vexations proceed from their
unwillingness to submit to God, for there is not a greater pain or grief than
to be what we would not be.

CHAP. XIII. Of the advantages of Solitariness and Retirement.
1. TO be much alone in quiet silence, and there to examine and instruct ones
self, is the way to have our senses and our thoughts well composed. Therefore a
wise man hates much talk and much company, keeps his eyes close to curiosities,
and his ears to flying reports, and cumbers not himself with too much of the
world: remembering the saying of wise Ben-Sirach, that he shall become wise that
has little business, ( Ecclus. 38.24.) God is but one, and he can best commune
with God that dwells by himself. And if a wise man be called forth to some
outward employment, by necessity or by Gods glory: yet his thoughts will always
tend homeward, to dwell in peace with the inner man, in an humble and quiet
heart, wherein there is always a sense of Gods gracious presence. Whereas he
that is too intent and busy about the circumference of unsettled creatures,
shall not be able to come to his proper rest and center, which is God.

2. To the ignorant foolish World it is very grievous to be alone and converse
with themselves but for a few hours: they are afraid of themselves, and they
make it their chiefest care to be engaged abroad, and to avoid their own
company. They spend much of their time upon the necessities of this present
life, and yet what remains of it, lies upon them like a heavy burden, and they
are glad to find out occasions to throw it away. They dread to look within, and
to hear the voice of their own conscience: and finding nothing in themselves
but fearful apprehensions, vexation and tediousness of spirit, they range
abroad, and go for comfort to other creatures. Serious thoughts are a terror to
them, and consideration is as bad as death: because their Soul lies naked and
deformed, loaded with sins and miseries, and they have just cause to avoid the
sight of such a Spectacle. No wonder therefore, if but a few men love to be
private and to be sequestered from the World, when so many desire to be in a
crowd and a perpetual hurry, and esteem themselves unhappy when they must be
alone: as indeed unhappy they are and must be, until they rectify many things,
and learn to confer and live with themselves, and by inward purity invite God
to dwell in their hearts, that there they may rest in him. We are told that
many are called and but a few chosen, that we might learn to forsake the many
and live with the few, and with fear and diligent care, make our Calling and
Election sure.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Danger of Riches, and that the desire of them is to be
mortified.
1. HOW apt Riches are to corrupt a good Life, how pernicious is the love of
them, our Blessed Savior taught his Disciples, when he affirmed with an
asseveration, as being a thing of great moment, and much to be noted, Verily I
say unto you, that a Rich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
Mat. 19.23. And that this terrible sentence might make the deeper impression
upon their hearts, he exemplifies Rich men's danger by this Parable; It is
easier for a Camet to go through the Eye of a Needle, than for a Rich man to
enter into the Kingdom of God. The Door of the Heavenly Kingdom is narrow and
can give no entrance to such as are loaded and cumbred with fardels of Wealth.
We should therefore love and desire Riches, as a sick man does a bitter Potion;
it is necessary to recover health but it is unpleasant, and if he could be well
without it, he would let it alone, and however he takes no more than needs
must: so should every Christian be affected to the things of the World; they
are the staff of our Pilgrimage, and our necessities require the use of them:
but yet they are vexatious and dangerous too, and therefore we may wish we
could live without them, and we must take no more of them than is requisite to
supply our wants; for as the Apostle says, 1 Timothy 6.6. Godliness with
Contentment is great gain. And 'twas the Counsel of a good man, Fear not my
Son, though we are made Poor, for thou have much wealth if thou fear God, and
depart from all Sin. Tob. 4.21.

2. He is truly Rich, that is Rich to Eternity, and has a Treasure of Good
Works in store. But they can hardly be Innocent, that will be Rich in the
World; for the love of Riches is the Root of all Evil. Men care not what sins
they commit so they may get Wealth, and when they have it, its great use is to
purchase therewith the satisfaction of their Lusts; the Lust of the Eyes, the
Lust of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life, which are the Idols of the World. But
as some that play with pibbles and pins, are very intent to their game, when
yet they value not the instruments of it: so should we care for our
necessities, and yet not set our hearts upon those things that supply them; we
may use money to that end, but we may not inslave our affections to it, except
we will become most base and miserable. We see when Nuts are thrown among
Children, they will greedily scrape and fight for them, and Men will stand
unconcerned and despise such trash: so should we, as many as fear God and are
true Christians; when Riches and Honors are to be got, and men that know and
expect no better, will crowd and strive and sweat for them, let us laugh and
pity their folly, those things are but Nuts, not worth our stooping; if any
fall into our bosom, we may break it and eat it, but it is below us to scramble
for them; all Worldly things are mere deceit and vanity. When the Son of God
became Man, he would have no Riches, to teach us how much we should despise
them. The Children of this World like not of this, they rather despise Christ
and his Divine Doctrine, because they love and esteem Mammon: but the Children
of light gather their Treasure in Heaven, where neither moth nor rust
corrupts, and where thieves cannot break through nor steal. He is Rich enough
in this World, that wants not Daily Bread.

CHAP. XV. Of the Use of Riches, and how to know we Love them not.
1. FEW understand or consider how to use their Estates aright; that they are
the provision for this present short Life which a good man obtains without any
wrong to others; and own without Pride or Covetousness, and preserves without
anxious fears, and distributes without regret or nigardliness, where Charity
and Necessity call. Now the measures of Necessity are to be taken from the
Man's state and condition. For some by birth or by place, are Noble and
dignified Persons, who in respect of their ranks, which should be Honorably
maintained, have greater wants than their inferiors, who may have sufficient
with a lesser Portion. Yet however, we are all but Stewards of what we possess,
and we should all study Alms and Moderation, that God our great Landlord may
find us faithful. For he is the true owner of all that we have, we are but
Servants under him, who should use all for his glory, and in the midst of our
plenty be voluntarily Poor as to our selves: And when Riches increase should
not be proud nor set our heart upon them.

2. Nature has hid Gold and Silver in the bowels of the Earth, and the
Covetous that seeks for those beloved metals, is bowed down and stoops to the
ground, and can hardly raise up himself to look to Heaven: but the wiser
Christian looks upon all inferior things as perishing and soon ended, and
therefore sets his affections on the Riches above, which are true and
everlasting. There he seeks for Honor, where it is given to none that are
unworthy of it; he expects that Kingdom which being obtained, expells all fears
and all dangers; all his possessions here, he offers to God with himself: being
ready freely to be in want, if Providence shall please.

3. Now by these tokens it will appear that our hearts are free from
Covetousness and the love of Mammon: If we are persuaded that they are a
cumbrance and a heavy burden; if we slight them, and are very well pleased to
be without them; if when we have them we are not pust up with Pride and
Vainglory; and if we look upon fine Houses, and rich Furnitures and such
things, as the vain Monuments of Men's Vanities, and the great obstacles to
their Salvation. Happy are they that are free from the love and desire of those
things, they shall live in peace and safety, and trouble and fear shall not be
able to take hold of them. As it is better to sleep well in a mean narrow Couch,
than to be sick and restless in a stately Bed: so is it much better to be
content and quiet with a little, than to have much, and therewith much of
vexation. He that is content, is Rich and Happy.

CHAP. XVI. Of Poverty in Spirit, and the contempt of the World.
1. OUR Blessed Savior has assigned the Kingdom of Heaven to them that are
Poor in Spirit, Mat. 5.3. Blessed are the Poor in Spirit, for theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven. Such are they that neither desire to be Rich, nor place
their Peace and Contentment in Riches; whose wishes and possessions can never
fail nor be taken from them; who are more afraid of having their good things in
this Life, than others are of being Poor; and whose Heart raised above all
created things can truly speak in this manner. I am Rich, praised be God, and
have more than sufficient for my needs, and more than I desire: and my
affections cleave not to what I have; I have the use but not the trouble of it,
for I can freely part with it, without pain or regret. I am truly inricht with
the possession of that Divine Truth which is from above, in it all things are
contained, and it is all-sufficient of it self; for in it I perceive that I
have right to nothing, that I am nothing, and that I can do nothing of my self.
That Blessed Truth tells me that I must not place my Contentment in Earthly
Transitory things, which like shadows will soon pass away and would deceive me:
and that nothing can happen to me, but by that Gracious Providence of my
Heavenly Father, which brought me naked from my Mothers Womb, and naked will
bring me to the Dust again. This is the Wisdom of the Just, infused from above:
theirs only is the Kingdom of Heaven, for they only despise this Earth.

2. Would to God Christians were thus wise and did well understand this Truth;
for then none of them would seek after the perishing Riches of this World, and
none would love them: but as few are chosen, few are Wise, and but few Poor in
Spirit. Blessed is the Rich that is found without Blemish, and that is not gone
after Gold; (says the Son of Sirach) Who is he? and we will call him Blessed,
for wonderful things has he done among his People. Ecclus. 31.8. For indeed
you shall hardly find one man that can possess the things of this World, as not
being his own, and that can be Rich and Content under Poverty. Few they are
that come to this Perfection, because men love the Vanities and Conveniences
of this Life, which are purchased with Riches: and few they are that regard the
Precepts of Christ, Mat. 6. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and its
Righteousness, and all other things shall be added unto you. And, Be Content
with your Food and Raiment and be not solicitous for it, for your Heavenly
Father knows that you want those things. Why then don't we believe our loving
Savior, and trust the Providence of our Heavenly Father? because we suffer our
desires to run over the World, and we consider not that the way to Heaven is
straight and narrow: and because we give ear to our Lusts, and will not hearken
to the Truth, nor be guided by it. The broad way is for them, that carry the
World before them, or at least carry it in their hearts: but the narrow way is
for the naked, such whose Spirit is free from the cumbersome Riches of the
World. What will the false Mammon avail, if we are destitute of the true
Riches? We are Strangers and Pilgrims traveling homeward through a straight
and difficult way, and great loads can be but great hindrances.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Necessity and the Measures of Almsgiving.
1. SUch Riches as are not employed in a moderate supply of our necessities,
according to our quality, may not be kept nigardly, nor spent profusely upon
Pride or Luxury: but they belong to the Poor, they must be spent in Good Works
and Pious uses, for the advancement of God's Glory, and the benefit of men's
Souls and Bodies; and he much indangers his Salvation that does not dispose of
them on this wise. Money kept in bags is but dress, its worth consists in the
use of it: and if it serves not for the relief of the necessitous, and the
gathering Treasures in Heaven, then it becomes mischievous, and the guilt of it
does exceed its weight. Lands, Moneys, and other movables are generally called
Goods, not that they make a man good of themselves, but because the owner may
do good with them, and thereby make himself better and happier: as it is
written, Psalm. 112.9. He has dispersed, he has given to the Poor, his
Righteousness endures for ever. For, The ransom of a Man's Life are his
Riches, (says Solomon) Prove. 13.8. And as water will quench a flaming fire, so
Alms make an atonement for Sin (says the wise Ben-Sirach) Ecclus. 3.30.
Nothing suits better with our Christian Profession than to pity and help the
afflicted, remembering and relieving the infirmities of our common Nature in the
afflictions of others: and nothing is more unnatural and Antichristian, than
to refuse comfort and assistance to others, or even to our selves in our wants,
that we may increase our Wealth and enrich our heirs: but the worst of all is,
to lose our share of the joys of Heaven, and damn our Immortal Souls, that they
that shall seize upon our Riches, may have wherewith to be Prodigal and Vicious.

2. I shall not undertake to determine, when and how far every one that can,
should deprive himself, that he may spare for Charity, this can have no other
measures, than such as Piety and Christian Prudence shall assign. Only I say
that God knows our hearts and abilities, and we must approve our selves to him.
And I hear our Blessed Savior commanding to all without distinction, Luke
11.41. Give Alms of such things as you have. And the great Preacher of
Repentance enjoined the multitudes that asked him what they should do, Luke
3.11. He that has two Coats let him impart to him that has none: and he that
has meat let him do likewise. I hear the Psalmist declaring that Blessed is he
that considers the Poor, for the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble.
Psalm. 41.1. And the Prophet instructing all Penitents on this wise, Deal thy
Bread to the Hungry, and bring the Poor that are cast out, to thy House; when
thou see the naked cover him, and hide not thy self from thine own flesh.
Isa. 58.7. I hear Religious Tobit giving this Lesson to his Son, Give Alms of
thy substance, and when thou give Alms, let not thy hand be Envious, neither
turn thy face from any Poor, and the Face of God shall not be turned away from
thee. If thou have abundance give Alms accordingly: If thou have but little, be
not afraid to give according to that little; for thou layest up a good Treasure
for thy self against the day of Necessity; because that Alms do deliver from
Death, and suffer not to come into darkness. Tob. 4.7. etc.

3. What can be said more than all this to prove Almsgiving to be much a Duty,
and most advantageous? But yet let us hear also what the Beloved Apostle says
in this matter, 1 John 3.17. Whosoever has this Worlds good, and sees his Brother
has need, and shuts up his Bowels of Compassion from him, how dwells the
Love of God in Him? If not the love of God, then self-love, that is, lust and
sin, dwell and reign in him: and his Portion in the next world shall be with
the rich man in the Gospel, Luke 16. who was clothed in purple and fine
linen, and fared sumptuously every day, and yet would not give Lazarus so much
as the crumbs that fell from his Table. The Conscience of the Covetous cries,
or ere long will cry against him, why do thou put by that poor hungry man?
thou art his murderer, in that thou art able and do not feed him; that Bread
which thou can spare is his: those garments which fill up thy Trunks, belong
to the Naked: and the money hoarded in thy Coffers, is the just right of the
Necessitous. Christ in the great Judgment, will condemn to Hell such merciless
wretches as thou art: Go ye (says he) into Everlasting Fire, for I was hungry,
and you fed me not: I was thirsty and you gave me no drink: naked and ye
clothed me not. Mat. 25.42. He does not mention such pressing extreme
necessities, as must be now supplied, and could be relieved by none else; such
occur but seldom, not once perhaps in a man's life. Therefore we must not stay
for such Extremities to be Charitable: but we must spare as much as we can, and
what we can, we must give in Good Works, for Charity is the band of
perfectness, and shall cover a multitude of sins. Neither yet must we as some
do, delay our Charity till we can keep no longer what we have. That which Death
makes us give, if we could have given it before, will be nothing so acceptable,
as what we our selves freely distribute, when we have power to keep it.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Patience in Bearing and Forbearing.
1. OF all the Virtues wherein Christians must exercise themselves, that they
may come to Life Eternal, none is more excellent and none more useful than
Patience. By it we imitate the forbearance and long-suffering of God, who
provoked by so much wickedness and disobedience, yet does good to all men, and
makes his Sun to rise upon the Just and the Unjust. Patience governs the mind
and preserves it in Peace and an even Temper; it breaks Anger, and bridles the
Tongue, and mortifies Pride and a high Spirit; it ends Quarrels, and entertains
Friendship, and it conquers the World; it tames the Flesh, overcomes
Temptations, bears nobly and meekly reproaches and persecutions, and it
perfects and crowns the life of a Christian. If all men were Patient, the evils
of mankind would be nothing so great nor so numerous as they are: and we should
be happy with abundance of love and quietness. By Patience a wise and good man
may be distinguished from a vicious fool. It is so diffusive a virtue, that it
is necessary to all other virtues, and contrary to all vices: and God instructs
and proves the best of his Children by exercising their Patience. Nothing can
hinder but that injurious Words and Actions shall affect and stir up our minds:
and nothing but Patience can make us masters of our selves, can pacify our
tumultuous Spirits, and restrain us from mischief and revenge.

2. Philosophers themselves have extold very high the Praises of this excellent
virtue: and they made it the chiefest mark and ostentation of their own
wisdom. But as they know not the true God, from whom proceeds, and to whom
tends all true virtue: so their Patience was false as well as their wisdom. But
we that live in the School of Christ, are taught by him, that through many
Tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of God: and this is the only true
wisdom, to know Jesus Christ and him crucified, and to love, and cheerfully
bear his Cross. For a Christian must be made conformable to his Crucified
Savior, our life must be the Image of his Death: So that he is no Christian
that hates and refuses the Cross, and will not suffer. Let none of us sinful
men that own God for Father expect to be without Chastisement in this World,
for his own natural Beloved Son was not, though he was without sin: even the
Christ was to suffer that he might enter into his Glory. Every one in this life
is visited with pains and sorrows, either for his conversion or for his greater
perfection: but the most afflicted endures nothing that can be compared to the
shame and the Cross of Christ.

CHAP. XIX. Adversities are occasions of Virtue and must be Patiently endured,
1. THis our present Life is the way through which we must go to Heaven: and in
it we find all the properties that belong to a way: sometimes it is even,
sometimes rough; sometimes it is pleasant, sometimes full of briers, rocks and
precipices; in some places it is crowded with company, in some it is desert and
solitary: and here and there you meet with wild beasts and robbers; rain and
fair weather daily succeed each to other, obstacles and difficulties frequently
occur, and even in Grace and Religion the Philosophers saying does take place,
Omnia fieri secundum litem, that there is contention and opposition in all
things. We see it in Virtue which is acquired by fighting, by resisting
Temptations: and man's strength and fortitude would be unknown and of no use,
should he not meet with afflictions, and uneasy trials. I know this is not the
sense of the world, the fools party is very numerous, and they are all for ease
and for pleasure. If you take a prosperous one out of the herd, one that is
every where flattered and loudly applauded, one whose Table abounds with costly
dainties, whose Estate is great and daily increasing, whose Houses are stately
and richly furnished, whose worldly prosperity is complete, and is equally
admired and envied: If you come to such a one, and endeavor to persuade him
with the strongest reasons and sweetest eloquence, that his is but a painted
happiness, a more empty vanity, grounded upon vulgar opinions and errors, and
that crosses and afflictions are much more eligible and beneficial, and lead to
Bliss and Eternal Glory: you shall certainly speak that which is truth, but as
certainly spend your breath in vain.

2. But so it is; God visits his Children with sorrows and calamities that by
experience they may learn, how inconsiderable, how weak and perishing and how
false are all those Enjoyments wherein the World place their felicity: and
contrariwise, how advantageous are those afflictive dispensations which men
count the worst of evils, and how sweet and lasting those comforts they
despise. It is therefore the part of a wise man, in all events, in all crosses,
meekly and cheerfully to comply with Divine Providence: and to look beyond the
cloud and there fix his heart, where true joys are to be found. Let the wicked
rage and persecute the righteous as far as they can, let what calamities will
happen: yet still it will remain true what Solomon says, that No Evil shall
happen to the Just. Prove. 12.21. Prosperity shall not deprave, and Adversity
shall not cast him down: but he will say with the Prophet, Jerem. 10.19. Truly
this is my grief and I must bear it; It Is best it should be as it is, and I
would have it so, for it is God's will. All Creatures whether they will or no,
must be subject to God: but some like children cheerfully obey and do what is
just, and some like slaves bear punishment and suffer what is just, but all men
are bound by the Divine Laws, either to pair or obedience.

CHAP. XX. That we must bear patiently the little Vexations that happen daily.
1. MAny bear patiently imaginary crosses which never happen, they fancy to
themselves great evils to come, and they go through them with great courage,
and upon this account reckon themselves patient, and mean while the little
vexations that occur daily dissolve them into peevishness and fretful anger,
and they cannot bear the least cross or contradiction when it is present. But
we must beware of this illusion, and consider that great occasions of patience
happen but seldom, whereas the lesser are very frequent; almost every hour we
may have opportunities of exercising this virtue, either by bearing with
others, or by checking and correcting our selves. And we should always bear
more cheerfully that cross which is of God's sending, than that which is our
own choice: for that which God appoints is always best, whereas we are ignorant
and often deceived. As a sick man therefore would rejoice to have met with a
skilful Physician, able and willing to cure his otherwise mortal distemper, and
would drink and suffer any thing from him: So should we gladly and thankfully
take the bitter Cup from Gods hand, whatever it be filled withal, and though
malice and envy reach it out to us; for thereby God restores our dying Souls to
health, and fits us for an endless life.

2. This holy confidence and resignation will take the sting out of all
afflictions; when we are thus disposed and thus willing to receive them, they
shall not be half so grievous, and they shall be much more advantageous.
Neither shall the oppositions of the flesh, nor the reluctancies of nature be
an hindrance to this, as long as we pray and fight against them, and those acts
of our minds, which being free are capable of rewards or punishments, side with
God against sensual affections. But indeed if the man murmurs, and transported
with passion, bites the Rod he should kiss, and goes on in disobedience, then
his will is rebellious against God, and his sufferance shall find no acceptance
and shall have no remuneration. Those virtues are much easier which consist in
action, than such as are passive and bind us to suffer; for the scene of the
first is without us, and the exercise of the second within, upon the tenderest
part of us, our natural desires and affections. But can we want courage to bear
patiently, for Gods sake, those petty evils and afflicting occurrencies we
daily meet withal: when Soldiers bear much more, upon a poor and uncertain
account? they expect rest when they are old, or a fading laurel, and upon the
groundless hope of this, how much of cold and heat, hunger and weariness, pains
and dangers, necessities and inconveniences of all sorts do they not endure?
And we that expect and are sure of Eternal Rest within a short time, shall we
shrink for a short labor or a short affliction? shall we complain and be
dejected, when they cheerfully go through a much greater misery? What ever we
suffer in this world would be light and easy, if we considered what reward God
has assigned to our patience.

CHAP. XXI. That we should Rejoice in Tribulations.
1. AS in building, one stone requires more cutting and carving than another,
according to the nobler place the Master Builder has assigned to it: so must
we go to the divine pleasure for to know the reason why one man suffers more
than another; for God has appointed to every man his Cross, answerable to his
strength, and to that Crown which is laid up for him. Therefore as the marble
designed for Ornament would patiently suffer the Carvers strokes, and even be
thankful, had it the use of sense and reason: so should we joyfully and
thankfully receive the various afflictions wherewith God, as with a cutting
instrument does polish and beautify us, to exalt us to a higher place of Glory
in his Heavenly Palace. He prevents the deviation and ruin of his beloved, by
chastizing them: and for this the wicked are instrumental, by their malice and
persecutions, they forward the virtue and the happiness of the just. Therefore
should we be meek and loving to our enemies, who certainly procure us great
advantages: or at least we should look upon them as being commissioned by God,
as David did upon Shimei, 2 Samuel 16.10. The Lord (says he) has said unto him,
go and curse David, and who shall say, wherefore have thou done so? For were it
not Gods permission, they could do us no injury: and God would never permit
them, but in order to his Glory and our own Salvation. So that in all the
wrongs and vexations which we suffer, we must not seek for comfort from created
things, for they are vain and vexatious themselves: but we must go directly to
God, who has appointed us all our pains and sufferings, and will make them
beneficial to us, and at last will turn them into joy.

2. Let us therefore look upon afflictions as very necessary and useful to us:
and let us receive them as pledges of Gods love, and assurances of his care for
us: according as St. James exhorts, Jam. 1.2. My Brethren count it all joy when
you fall into diverse Temptations; knowing this, that the trial of your Faith
works Patience: but let Patience have her perfect work, that ye may be
perfect and entire wanting nothing. Reproaches, slanders, persecutions, and all
other evils we suffer in this world, are to be loved by pious men and to be
counted good: for though they be afflictive to flesh and blood, yet they
proceed from the divine pleasure, they come to us from God: and as our Blessed
Savior told his unjust Judge, John 19.11. They could have no power at all
against us, if it were not given them from above: So that in all events we may
meekly submit and rest satisfied, considering this power from above. And if we
do not thus consider and receive our sorrows; if we view them by themselves,
and not in their first cause, that wise God who is the contriver of them, and
the fountain of all goodness: then our minds will be afflicted with a thousand
grievous fancies of things past, present, or to come, which yet never were or
shall be: and we shall be sleepless and restless, full of anguish and fears and
distractions. Whereas if we used our selves to refer all things to God, and did
look up to him in our Tribulations, we should find rest and tranquillity, his
gracious will and appointment would answer and silence all our objections: and
whatever happened we could quietly say with patient Job, Shall we receive good at
the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? the Lord gave, and the Lord
has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord. That God who will have me to
be afflicted is gracious and compassionate, and has a tender care of me: He
has laid this cross upon me, which I resolve to bear, till he himself is
pleased to take it off.

CHAP. XXII. That Detractions and Derisions must be endured and derided.
1. IF we grieve more for the Evil men speak against us, than for the Evil we
our selves commit against God: then it is a plain demonstration, self-love
prevails in us above the love of God. He, infinitely perfect and holy, bears
patiently with innumerable blasphemies and provocations, and all the while
bestows many blessings upon the offenders: And we wretched sinful creatures,
who can hardly hear worse than we deserve; a disobliging word, or the least
mention of our faults puts us into a fit of anger and fury; though we
infinitely deserve it, we will not bear with reproof or contempt. Whereas
indeed we should rather fear the undeserved praise of men, lest the prosperity
and honor of the world cut off our communion and fellowship with the Cross of
Christ. Should the pains which our sins deserve, and the Torments Christ
suffered for them, be laid in one scale, and in the other, the evils and
injuries we suffer: these would have no weight, and be nothing compared to the
other. And farther, if it be considered that the injuries we receive, are made
grievous according to our own apprehensions, and not according to the intention
of our enemies: the disproportion betwixt our sufferings and deserts will
appear yet greater. For he cannot be injured that slights injuries: and he is
not wounded that will not by his impatience tear open his wounds. The soft
flesh, not the angry hand that flings the dart, is the cause of the hurt.
Should a man's body be hard as a rock, arrows thrown against it could never
enter: and it is from the softness and frailty of our minds, that reviling words
and affronts have power to make impression.

2. Blessed is he that so orders his life, that malice it self cannot fasten a
calumniation upon him: and next to him, blessed is he that endeavors to be
innocent, and to have a good conscience in all things: otherwise he is a
peevish fool that will not hear what he delights to do. But if it so happen
that notwithstanding our Christian prudence and our perseverance in well doing,
men will speak ill of us: then this is our comfort, that we suffer with Christ
undeservedly, and we must remember his saying, Mat. 5.11. Blessed are ye when
men shall revile you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely. Let
men think and say what they will, we are happy if our conscience does not
accuse us before God. Men's opinions and their judgments are false and
inconstant, and vain, and can make us neither better nor worse; and therefore
St. Paul says that if we seek to please men we cannot be the servants of
Christ, Gal. 1.10. For it is impossible for one to please all; men's thoughts
differ as their inclinations: and what some admire, others will censure. When a
Philosopher was told that others laughed at him, he answered, At ego non
derideor, that others might laugh, but he was not laughed at, for it neither
did hurt nor afflict him. Meaning, that those injuries are nothing, for which
we our selves will not be concerned.

CHAP. XXIII. Remedies against Discontent and Anger for what abuses we receive.
1. IT would be much to the purpose of comfort and patience in all our
adversities, to fix our minds steadfastly upon God, and take it off of our
trouble, which we increase by reflecting on it: for whilst we affect our selves
with pity, at the consideration of what we suffer, we soften our spirits, and
the sense of our misery makes the deeper impression upon them. Now all our
afflictions proceeding from a present or a feared loss, the best and most
universal remedy against them, would be to set our affections upon that supreme
increated Good, which is subject to no change and can never be taken away from
them that love it. And that we may also observe an outward Decorum, and not
disgrace our selves by giving way to impotent passions, we must refrain and
quite hold in our tongue, as soon as we find our selves provoked by any word or
deed: for as it is a symptom of a weak stomach, not to be able to digest harder
meat, so it is a certain sign of a poor and weakly spirit, not to have strength
enough to bear with a cross word or a cross accident: and it was the saying of
a Wise and Religious man, that he never found any thing so grievous, but by
silence he did overcome it. For whatever others do to vex us, comes to nothing
if we slight it: and if we show our selves much concerned, we betray our
weakness or our guilt, and we make it appear that we well deserve the abuse.

2. But 'twill not be enough thus to repress our grief and our talkativeness:
we must farther reprove and humble our selves with the consideration of our
sinfulness and unworthiness, acknowledging we deserve more contempt than can be
here poured upon us; for a wise and good man, will not only regard what he
suffers, but what he deserves to suffer for his offenses against God. Also let
no man judge and condemn another, remembering the saying of St. Paul, To. 2.1.
Thou art inexcusable, O man, for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest
thy self, for thou that judge, do the same things. For it is very unfitting,
he that owes ten thousand talents, should be a severe exacter of his Brother's
mite: and he is a fool that thinks to cure others by his distemper, that is, by
his pride and his impatience. Who art thou (says the Apostle, Romans 14.4.) that
judge another man's servant. To his own master, he stands or falls: And
how can thou say to thy Brother, let me pull out the mote that is in thine
eye, when thou thy self beholdest not the beam that is in thine own eye, Luke
6.42. God alone that can amend and forgive, or else punish the sins of men,
has right to judge of them: our part is to prevent them if we can, or else
bring men to repentance: however to hide and bear with them: endeavoring first
to amend our own faults, before we take upon us to correct others. As God is
merciful and patient to us all, so must we be to our Brothers.

CHAP. XXIV. Remedies against Impatience.
1. MAny and various are the affairs a man must go through in his life, and
very different are the humors and companies he must converse withal: so that it
is next to impossible all men should be of his opinion, and all things should
fall out according to his mind: therefore he must resolve before hand and be
very careful that he lose not his Peace and his Patience, whatever happen. To
that end let him consider in all his concerns and undertakings, what things may
come cross to his desires and above his power to help: and having took a view
of them, let him prepare himself to bear them if they come. For this will avoid
the surprise, and lessen the grief, and compose the mind. This must be
therefore our first and chiefest task, to understand the nature of things, and
to use them accordingly: as that they may be taken from us; and they are and
must be subject to thousands of changes and chances, which we cannot hinder;
and they are to serve, not to command us; and withal they are out of our power;
so that we must not be troubled if we cannot dispose of them, as we would.

2. These considerations well weighed will make a wise man's mind steadfast and
even; able to entertain all events with a generous indifferency. Is he deprived
of his good name, of his estate or liberty? is he threatened with persecutions,
or with death itself? he is not moved nor dejected; he had considered long
before, that such things might happen whether he would or no, and now he can
bear and overcome them. It Is not outward things that wound us, but the wrong
notion that we have of them; our own mistaken conceits do us the most hurt. No
man grows pale with fear or perplexed with anguish, but he that passionately
would avoid or obtain that which is not in his power; mind your duty, and let
not your passions go out of your own sphere, and you shall avoid all those
troubles which come from abroad, where man's Jurisdiction cannot reach. The
Christian Martyrs were constant in the midst of their wearied tormentors, their
patience could not be conquered: even women and children were undaunted in the
midst of the flames, they could not be overcome though they might be killed:
because they valued not those things which Tyrants might give or else take
away. Things without were nothing to them: but things within, things that were
their own, as their virtue, their divine faith and love: these they kept and
preserved and in so doing were happy. For these are the true goods which depend
only from our selves: and which the world can neither give nor take away from
us.

CHAP. XXV. Of Humility the proper Virtue of Christians.
1. LEarn of me, says our Divine master, the eternal wisdom, the inexhaustible
fountain of Grace and Virtue. Learn of me; what? sure some great matter; for he
that bids us learn, has himself created Heaven and Earth, and commanded the
light to shine out of darkness. Will he therefore teach us to make a new world,
and so bring things out of nothing also? No, that belongs only to God. He bids
us learn, not what he made, but what he, himself was made for us, Who being in
the form of God, yet made himself of no reputation, taking on him the form of a
Servant, and being made in the likeness of men, Phil. 2. Learn of me therefore,
says he, not to raise the dead or cast out Devils; not to cleanse lepers or
give light to the blind; not to walk on the Sea, or to work such wonders as he
enabled some to do: but Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, Mat.
11.29. He would not teach what himself would not do, but he himself becomes our
lesson, and this he makes the sum of his wisdom and his saving doctrine, that
we learn to be meek and humble after his example. So great, so difficult a
thing was lowliness, that we could not learn it, but from the humiliation of
the most highest.

2. Indeed human pride can be cured by none, but him who being God, yet humbled
himself and became obedient to death, even the death of the Cross. And humility
is the chiefest virtue of Christians; proper to them alone; unknown to the
Philosophers and wise men of the world; recommended by Christ, by his Example
and by his Precepts, above all other duties: That we following him in his
abasement, might at last come to his glory. Now that we may think meanly of our
selves, we must seriously consider who it is that calls us; the wretched State
whence he calls us; the Bliss he calls us to; our perverse dullness to follow,
and the assistances he gives to forward us. For we shall never come to the
prize of our high calling, except humility goes along, and follows our best
works, which are the steps we make toward it: Because our virtues shall avail
nothing if we be proud of them, and if we seek for praise and glory here, we
shall not have any hereafter.

3. If at any time our thoughts be lift up, and we fancy our selves to be
something, the Earth which is always present will tell us whereof we are made
and whence we had our origin. For dust we are, and to dust we must needs
return; and upon this humble and low foundation we must build the highest
virtues. For if a man had the gift of miracles and could remove mountains; if
he could speak all languages and foretell things to come; if he had converted
all the infidels, and given all his substance to the Poor: yet he would be in
great and perpetual danger of falling, and losing his reward by pride; except
he were always mindful of his peril and his infirmity: and except diffident of
himself, he still made it his business, to work out his Salvation with fear and
trembling. The true wisdom and safety of Christians, is to learn to be humble.

CHAP. XXVI. From God, we turned away by Pride, to him we must return by
humility.
1. PRide the first and the worst of sins took beginning when the Rebellious
Angels, proud of their excellency, list up themselves against God; saying in
their cursed ambitious thoughts (as the Prophet Isaiah is thought to mean, Isa.
14.13.) I will ascend into Heaven, I will exalt my Throne above the Stars of
God, I will ascend above the heights of the clouds, I will be like the Most
High. With the same wickedness mankind came to be infected, when by the
Serpents fraud, Adam was persuaded to aspire to the being like his Maker, happy
in himself, without dependence: for, The beginning of Pride is, when one
departs from God, and his heart is turned away from his maker, Ecclus. 10.12.
And so Pride is the beginning of Sin; and that with its appendant miseries, is
the inheritance we all derive from our first Parents; to seek and regard our
selves in every thing; to forsake God and aim at our own glory and excellency.

2. That we may therefore return to God, from whom we are fallen by Pride, we
must go back in the way of humility; the basis or foundation whereof, is the
sense of our frailty and misery; the sincere acknowledgment that we owe nothing
to our selves, and that we are nothing and can do nothing. For God created man's
body out of the Earth, and breathed into him a Soul made out of nothing, and
man was adorned with many graces, and was holy and happy: but by sin he defaced
Gods workmanship, forfeited all his gifts, and so foully defiled himself, that
nothing in nature can make him clean again. Nay, though by the mercies of our
Redemption man has been restored to the possibility of bliss and holiness, yet
by his choice and his free will, he would remain in his former state of
sinfulness and misery, should not the Divine Grace actually bring him out of
that unhappy condition: sanctifying his heart, and bringing him into the
liberty of the Sons of God.

3. For who but Christ by his Free Grace, can choose and bring a man out of that
mass or heap of perdition, wherein we are all involved by nature? If any one
puffed up with Pride, answer that his Faith, his Prayers is Righteousness, have
made the difference betwixt him and them that remain in their corruption, the
Apostle replies upon him, but What have thou that thou did not receive? Now
if thou did receive it, why do thou glory as if thou had not received it?
1 Cor. 4.7. Again says he in another place, 2 Cor. 3.5. We are not sufficient
of our selves to think any thing, as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of
God. And, Without me ye can do nothing, says our Blessed Savior: that no
flesh should glory before him, but as it written, He that glories should glory
in the Lord. Sinners can have no just cause to glory in themselves: neither can
the Just glory but in him, to whom they sing with the Psalmist, Thou O Lord art
my glory, and the lifter up of my head, Psalm. 3.3.

4. But may not a man glory that he has not rejected Gods gracious offers?
This if he did, would be the same folly as if a man should boast, that whereas
he could have made himself miserable, and drowned himself if he would, yet he
had not done it. But yet even our receiving Gods free benefits, proceeds from a
new mercy: which were it denied us, and should Grace withdraw from us her light
and assistance, we should neither value the gifts of God, nor know how to use
them aright. We must therefore mortify the desire of our own glory, as we
desire God would make and account us righteous; let the sincere love of God
make us despise the praise of men; let truth take place, we have no cause to
glory in any thing, for nothing good is our own. This is the ground and the
perfection of all true virtue, to know and be truly persuaded that we are, and
have, and can do nothing of our selves: for it is God that works in us to will
and to do. Therefore let us fear and beware, for God who gives grace to the
humble, does take it away from the Proud.

CHAP. XXVII. The Character of a proud man.
1. PRide is a swelling or lifting up of the mind, whereby the man would reach
and stretch himself beyond his narrow bounds, and attribute that to himself
which is not his own. This is joined with an high conceit of himself and of his
great worth, which he endeavors to propagate to others, boasting upon all
occasions his birth, dignities and riches, and those accomplishments of body
and mind, which he thinks make him great and mighty, and much superior to
others. This opinion gets strength, and the man's Spirit grows more high and
arrogant, if he has withal great Riches and a great Retinue, stately Houses
and Garments, Gold, Jewels, and all such Ornaments, as are the effects and the
signs of men's vanities. Then he must have great Titlet, loud Applauses, and
much Reverence from others, to testify that they acknowledge him for their
Superior. And these he counts the sovereign happiness of this life: and as for
life Eternal, he minds it not, and he cares not for it.

2. Hence proceeds a great aversion and hatred against all things that betray
his weakness and defects, and this being in any thing inferior to others. Hence
Anger and sullen discontent, when any thing happens or is discovered, which
reflects some disgrace and lessens his excellency. Hence a perpetual fear, lest
what he undertakes should not succeed to his credit. For indeed all men
generally seek to be seen and to be commended: even ordinary people in the
meanest employments seek to excel others of the same calling, and to make an
ostentation of their skill. Nay the Philosophers themselves affected praise,
whilst they spoke against it: and they aimed at glory, writing brave things for
the contempt of it. The infection of Pride runs secretly, and is hardly to be
discerned: and when the best of men think to have plucked up by the root that
cursed plant out of their hearts: yet there remain small slips and strings,
which will bud forth, though they cannot be found out. We must therefore love
and follow the truth, and utterly despise vain shows and false praises: and
with a strict observation, and the fear of the just and all-seeing God, we must
kill and stifle all proud and vainglorious thoughts. As smoke rising out of a
furnace, becomes a great cloud and darkens the Sun, but being but smoke is soon
blown away: so he mounts up aloft, that is high-minded and proud, and diffuseth
himself to obscure others, and thereby grows thin and puffed up with wind, and
wanting the solidness of virtue, he soon passes away and comes to nothing. I
have seen the wicked in great power and spreading himself like a green
bay tree: yet he passed away, and lo, he was not: yea, I sought him, but he
could not be found. Psalm. 37.35.

CHAP. XXVIII. Motives and Reasons for Humility.
1. OUR station is very slippery, and the heavy burden of our corrupt nature
does perpetually weigh us down: so that, without Gods right hand uphold us, we
can neither stand, nor yet walk firmly, we are always in danger of falling. If
we have not fallen into grievous crimes, it is Gods gracious providence has
removed the occasions from us: else we too well know by experience, how weak we
are in the neighborhood or under the assaults of a temptation. If any good
thing be in us, it is very small and imperfect: and if the least detect can
mar the best work, who who then can say he has ever done any thing altogether
good and without any mixture of evil? Who is there endeavors after perfection
and is as careful of his Salvation, as are the children of this world for
pleasure and riches? And are we not all conscious of many great sins, of the
pardon whereof we can hardly be certain, because that depends upon our
Repentance, which still remains many ways imperfect? Nay, if we were sure of
the pardon of what is past, yet have we not reason to fear for the future, lest
we fall and perish.

2. Whoever shall duly consider all this, how little is our virtue and our
assurance, how great our danger and frailty, will hardly pride or trust himself
in any thing: but will find much cause to tremble, and trembling to acknowledge
that he is nothing, and of himself can do nothing. As when the Sun goes away,
the Air immediately becomes dark: so does the Soul grow blind and impotent, as
soon as God withdraws his light and gracious assistance. He that rightly
understands this truth, cannot but desire, it may be known to others also: and
he that acknowledges from his heart, that he deserves nothing but shame and
confusion, cannot refuse to bear contempt, without opposing the known truth.
Truth and humility are inseparable: and he therefore is always most humble,
that is best acquainted with the truth.

3. It were an easy thing for a man to rise again after he is fallen, if he
would soon repair to the spiritual Physician, and from him receive help and
directions: but whilst men are possessed with a spirit of pride, that they will
not see their distemper, or they fancy they can cure it themselves, they remain
for the most part where they fall, and wallow in the mire till they die: and
that because they would not flee to God for succor, and use those means which
he has appointed; but they count the prescriptions of the Physician worse than
the disease, flattering themselves they should do well enough, and by their own
applications making the evil desperate. For no man is more unhappy and sure to
perish than he who being blind yet fancies he can clearly see: because the
conceiting he wants no man's assistance to guide him, is like to fall into every
ditch, and into the great Precipice it self. But let a man learn to know
himself, according to the old saying, which was said to have come from Heaven,
Nosce teipsum, know thy self: for then he shall know that of himself he can do
nothing but fall and perish; but that in God is his strength and sufficiency.
Many lie down in their bondage, and faint under the burden of their sins;
because they will not be helped, and they will not by humble prayer, seek to God
for help; and in him trust, of whom the Apostle says, I can do all things
through Christ which strengthens me. Phil. 4.13.

4. To yield and lose heart is despondency: but true humility will raise us up,
and make us cheerfully undertake and perform the most difficult duties:
confiding in his gracious help, who for us became man that he might make us
partakers of the Divine Nature. As an Iron red hot, burns by the fire that
penetrates its substance, and not of it self: so a man becomes fervent and
inflamed, not of his dull nature, but by the fire of Divine Charity which God
kindles in him: as also when he is said to shine before men, it is by virtue of
that divine light of Truth and Wisdom, which God sends in his heart. Man of
himself can do nothing; he is but an instrument in Gods hand, from whom he
receives power to will and to do; it is God that works all our works in us, as
the Scripture says. For if the Divine Love, and Light, and Wisdom, depart from
a man: he presently becomes Dark, Cold, and Unactive, useless as an Instrument
without an Artist. Man of himself being nothing, and fit for nothing, must
dwell in the sense of his nothingness, as in his Center: for then he is most
strong in God, when he is most sensible of his own weakness.

CHAP. XXIX. That the Humble man judges himself and not others, with a
Character of him.
1. HUmility is a virtue which makes man vile his own eyes, by the knowledge of
himself, attained by self-examination: for when the book of Conscience is
opened, and our past sinful life searched into, the Soul must stand as criminal
before her own Tribunal, and there be by her self accused and condemned: and
happy they that thus judge themselves, for they shall not be judged of the
Lord. But woe to that Soul which soars high in lofty conceits, and dwells much
abroad in vain inquiries: for then she remains unknown to her self,
unacquainted with her own misery, and those her errors and failings, she should
watch over and amend. Yet this is the case of many, and a sad case it is, to
see wretched, ignorant and vicious persons, take no notice of their own
follies: but pry into others infirmities, and observe their least
miscarriages: and this commonly is the employment of the most loose and
negligent; they are the more busy to censure others, that they do not reprove
nor correct themselves. But it is not so with upright men that endeavor to know
themselves, for the greater proficients they are in that knowledge, the more
humble they are and concerned for themselves, perceiving their great distance
from perfection and true holiness: and finding so much work at home, the less
they mind others, except where it is their duty.

2. This is the true discipline of the Saints, to exercise there zeal against
themselves, and to bear patiently with the faults of others: for he that cannot
bear with the imperfections of others, is himself the most imperfect. As God in
Nature produced all things out of nothing: so in Grace he produces all virtues
out of a man's hearty persuasion of being nothing, out of the sense of his own
sinfulness. That is true virtue that will bear with scorns, contempt, and
injuries: being grounded upon humility: but if this fails, virtue is but
Hypocrisy, a vain oftentation, and an empty name. He gathers dust before the
wind, that is not humble, and yet would be virtuous.

3. But he is to be counted truly humble, who is more lowly than the lowest
condition, and higher than the highest: who is not lift up with honors, nor
swelled with the wind of men's applauses: and who is never so much afflicted and
disgraced, but he is persuaded he deserves much worse. He is truly humble who
is willing to be vile in the eyes of others, as he ever is in his own: who if
he has advanced an untruth is not ashamed to retract it: and to ask pardon of
others, if by surprise or any other way, he has offended them in word or deed;
this is known to good men to be a great self-denial. He is truly humble that is
careful to do nothing for which he may justly be despised, and yet he is
content to be so: and meekly bears with reproaches, grieving for the offense to
God, but rejoicing in his own abasement. He whose most innocent actions are
misunderstood and misreported, who is disappointed of his due reward, and
requited evil for good, and yet is patient and contented, makes it appear that
he neither values himself nor his best actions. The humble man is silent of
himself and dead to the world: and when he is forsaken and persecuted, yet in
God he finds refuge and comfort. He is decently courteous and obliging to all
persons, even to them that are his inferiors. He compares what is natural to
him, to the gifts of God in others, his imperfections to their virtues: and so
entertains always mean thoughts of himself, and is content to have others
preferred before him, and to sit low and be concealed in his humility. I might
add that humility will make a man obedient to his superiors, meek and peaceable
under Government, and always ready to believe better of the goodness and
wisdom of his Rulers than of his own: but these must suffice.

4. This is a rude draught and but an imperfect Image of that lovely creature
called an Humble Christian: whereby yet a man may discern how unlike he must be
to the original, that comes not near to the copy. That is, how far he is from
being master of that blessed virtue, which Christ our Blessed Lord, did so much
recommend to his followers, by his lowest and wonderful humiliation. In the
exercise of humility there is no danger of excess; we can never be too humble:
but we may easily not be humble enough, here the danger is great, as the crime
also. As he that would come in at a door which is low of entrance, if he bows
himself more than needs, there is no harm done; but if he comes too upright and
never so little too high, he must bruise his head, if not break his skull: so
the lowest humility will never hurt the Soul, but the least Pride may destroy
it. Let a Christian therefore to avoid this danger, not only not exalt
himself, but even not equal himself to others. For in so doing he shall best
imitate the Blessed Jesus, who being Son of God, yet took on him the form of a
servant, that be might show to us the true form of humility.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Conformity of our Will to Gods.
1. WE can offer to God nothing more pleasing, no victim better and more
acceptable, than our own will; entirely to resign that to God, and desire that
in all things it may be subject and conformable to his blessed will, is that
living and holy sacrifice wherein God delights, which none but a Pious man can
offer, and which is the highest act of Religion we can perform on Earth. For in
this submitting and conforming our will to the Divine pleasure, we offer not to
God any one particular thing alone: but our whole selves, Body and Soul, and
all that we have without any reservation. Therefore we should make that our
daily study; thus to deny and forsake our selves, to empty our hearts of all
self-desires and self-affections, that even here, God may be all in all in us,
and we may be wholly devoted to him; prepared and willing to be in all things
disposed of by him, according as he shall think good. For God will not work in
us his good and acceptable will, if we have a will of our own, distinct from,
and contrary to his; he requires the whole heart, and he that gives less, gives
nothing. It may be allowed indeed to human frailty, that we should wish and
will after the manner of men: but then we must soon recollect our selves, and
lifting up our heart to God, lay our will in the dust, that we may acquiesce in
him, and cleave to him, who being the Sovereign has absolute dominion over
all. He is the Creator, we are his Creatures; he is the Lord, we are all his
Servants; he is Omnipotent, we are weak and infirm: we must therefore restrain
our own, and give up our selves wholly to his Blessed will, saying in all
contingencies, Not as I will, O Lord, but as thou will.

2. Thus Prayed our Blessed Redeemer, when he acted for us, and suffered in our
stead: not that he whose Godhead is one with the Father, could will any thing
contrary to him: but to teach us how to behave our selves, in resigning all our
desires to God. Therefore he also taught us to make it our daily Prayer, Thy
will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven; that as the Angels are always ready
to fulfill God's will, we may be so likewise; in all things desirous to be
obedient to his laws and dispensations; That that unhappy fight and contention
may be taken away, of which the Apostle speaks, Gal. 5.17. The flesh lusts
against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. That so God's will may be
obeyed by the whole Man, Body, Soul, and Spirit, without any opposition or
reluctance: and Nature may be governed by Grace, and Human affections be
changed into Holy Charity: for this is the will of God, even our
Sanctification. There is one only God, and he that cleaves to him, is one with
him in Spirit and in Will, and cannot but be Holy and Happy.

3. There is not a more excellent duty than to receive whatever happens as
coming from Gods hand, with a quiet and a contented mind: casting all our care
upon him, for he cares for us, 1 Pet. 5.6. There is no true evil, but the evil
of sin; all other things so counted, do proceed from God; Prosperity and
Adversity, Life and Death, Poverty and Riches come of the Lord, says the Son
of Sirach, Ecclus. 11.14. Therefore God says by his Prophet, Isa. 45.7. I form
the Light and create Darkness; I make Peace and create Evil; I the Lord do all
these things. Whereas therefore all things, even those that seem to be most
accidental, depend upon Gods most wise determinations and secret counsels, we
must submit our selves to his most gracious Providence, and interpret the most
afflictive events as signs of his care and good will for us: casting our selves
into the arms of his infinite mercies, and suffering him to fit us for himself,
by what means he pleases.

4. Slanders, Treacheries, Oppressions, Losses, Rapes, Thefts, Sicknesses,
Plagues, Famines, and all other calamities public or private, they are all
sent and appointed by God, for to punish or reclaim wicked men, or else to
exercise and perfect the Righteous: therefore under the sense or apprehension
of any of these, let a Christian humble himself and worship, and say with
patient Job, Blessed be the name of the Lord. Masters commit their work and
their affairs to trusty servants, and yet acquaint them not with their secret
intents and all the train of their designs: so should we like faithful and
humble servants, yield to God cheerfully an active or passive obedience, in all
things: unconcerned for the final event, how in any particulars God will
dispose of us or of others; taking that to our selves which our Blessed Lord
told St. Peter once, What is that to thee? follow thou me; follow me, whatever
happens, and mind nothing else. If thou art entered upon a good design, some
profitable undertaking, and can not go on with it by reason of sickness or
some other hindrance which thou can not help, grieve not and be not dejected,
for God knows what is best for thee; follow him wheresoever he calls. Thus if
we would meekly entertain Gods will and be guided by it, Peace and Tranquillity
would dwell in our hearts, and perturbations could have no access to the place
wherein God dwells and reigns.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Resignation of our selves to God in all things.
1. IT IS good to wish that God would afflict us, and that we may suffer for him
and from him: but it is yet better to be wholly devoted to him, so as to follow
without anxiousness or reluctance, whithersoever he is pleased to lead. Natural
life shows it self by the acts of sense and motion; Spiritual life, by the
cessation of those acts: when we no longer live our selves, but Christ lives in
us. For he that truly forsakes himself, and transfers the motions of his mind,
and the liberty of his will to God, lives here as a new born Infant, without
choice or desires of his own; having wholly permitted himself to the Divine
guidance, he is free from himself, and lives the life of Grace. In all cross
accidents, he looks and rests upon Providence, and of all the World calls
nothing his own: because he himself is not his own, but Gods, in whose hand he
is as an instrument, to be done with and put to such use as the Master shall
please. He is not curious and inquistive after Divine secret Counsels, but he
adores them, and believes them to be always just and equitable: and therefore
in what matter, and for what cause soever God is pleased to determine any
thing, he assents, and yields, and thinks it best.

2. He depends upon God for all the concerns of Nature, of Grace and Glory: and
divesting himself of his own liberty, he chooses Gods will and makes it his
own. And whereas by natural corruption man has too much complacency in
himself, and delights in the best acts of his will, rather as his own, than as
good, whence proceed many troubles: he that has parted with his own will, to
make it one with Gods, suffers no grief in himself nor any creature, but always
rejoices in his acquiescence to the Divine pleasure. At best, if natural
affections cannot be quite subdued, yet this prevails; and the man easily
overcomes his sorrows, and finds in God peace and satisfaction. None can resist
the Almighty, he does whatsoever pleases him, and his will must absolutely
take place in all things: therefore better it is willingly to follow than be
dragged: better it is to comply with, than to be forced by it.

3. Our content and tranquillity consists in our meek subjection to the will of
God. And even if we have fallen into great and mischievous sins, though we are
seriously to repent, to chastise and afflict our selves: yet we must not give
way to distracting perturbations, and a tedious and confused spirit: but rather
we must humbly implore the Divine mercy which permitted us to fall, that we
might not be high-minded but fear, and be sensible of our own frailty in our
fall, and of the Divine Grace, when we rise up again and stand: we must
patiently wait upon God, and beg for Pardon and the return of his favor, with
a contrite heart: and without impatience or amazement, make it our diligent
study and endeavor to mortify our sins and amend our lives. A faithful and
wise servant under God, seeks and desires nothing but that his Lords commands
may be fulfilled: he will always be disposed to say from his heart, Thy will be
done, I am ready to do and suffer thy pleasure: Even so Father, for so it
seemed good in thy sight. Mat. 11.26. Will thou grant me health and plenty, and
inward peace and joy: or will thou have me be poor and sickly, and to live in
mournful sadness and spiritual dryness: thy will be done, do with me what thou
please, for I am wholly thine.

4. This preparedness of mind and indifferency to all things that God shall
please to send, will free a man from all anxious troubles and fears, and from
being cast down; nay, will make him undaunted, always peaceable or always
victorious in all adversities. We are forbidden by our Savior Christ to be
solicitous about food and raiment, how much more about superfluous things,
which minister only to vanity. We must do our duty and leave all to God, and
rest our selves upon his gracious and Almighty will: for even the peace of the
Soul is lost if it be sought too anxiously. Too much care and inquisitiveness
after things to come, betray a timorous and unsettled mind, not yet resigned to
God, and are the effects of self-love afraid to suffer any thing. God who sees
all things from above, knows what is best for every man; and he sweetly and
powerfully disposing all things, takes a special care of that man, that depends
and relies upon him.

CHAP. XXXII. That the Hope of our Salvation must rest upon God.
1. A Man guided by the Christian wisdom, will not only, as the Gospel
commands, leave all temporal things to Gods disposal, taking no thought for the
morrow: but also commit his Soul and Salvation to him, who never fails them
that trust in him. In this hope, and in conforming his will to Gods will, he
will work out his Salvation; admiring and reconciling together the Divine
Justice and Mercy: and yet not seeking to enter into the deep abyss of Gods
secret judgments and decrees; a bold presumption which belongs to none but to
wicked impenitents, whose desperate Lives make their Souls desperate, because
they will not leave their sins and return to God. It Is true indeed that no man
without a special Revelation, can have a special assurance of his Salvation:
but we have that which is as good to secure us against despair, and to ground
an holy and comfortable hope upon. That we are redeemed by the Blood of Christ,
and devoted to him in Holy Baptism, and that God is our confidence and refuge:
always ready to help them that call upon him, and to forgive them that beg for
pardon, with tears and contrition, and a serious purpose of amendment. And many
more great and precious assurances we have that God has given us eternal life,
and that this life is in his Son; so that all his Providence are to fit us for
it, if we do not wilfully frustrate all his saving methods and purposes: Only
he would have our Election to be hid and secret, that security may not breed in
us pride and negligence, and that he that thinks he stands should take heed
lest he fall.

2. Now therefore, because the chosen are few, let every true Christian live a
Holy Life with the few, that he may make his Calling and Election sure, and be
counted worthy at last to receive the Crown of Life with the few. Straight is
the way and narrow is the gate that leads unto life, and few there be that
find it, says our Blessed Savior, Mat. 7.13. Therefore we must walk in that
narrow way, and that always with care and fear, even when we seem to run with
most speed, because no man in respect of himself is absolutely sure of
perseverance. Yet our fear must not proceed so far as to make us faint, but
only to make us wary, and make us put our trust and confidence in God, and with
a cheerful submission cast our selves upon him, both for time and eternity. If
any one objects that he knows not how Gods will is affected toward him; I
answer that Gods promises are sincere, and must be received as they are
generally set forth in Holy Scripture, to all that will obey Gods revealed
will: and moreover that his own will is much more uncertain, so that it is much
more safe to trust Gods, for God we are certain is infinitely good. He is
extremely proud and unhappy withal that relies on himself more than upon God:
but happy is he that confides in that gracious Lord whose mercies and promises
are sure for ever, and in whom whosoever trusted was never confounded.

CHAP. XXXIII. That Love is the Spirit of Christian Religion.
1. THough it be by virtue of our Baptism and profession of the Christian
Faith, that we are, and are called Christians, yet the Life or Soul of our
Religion is Charity or the Love of God, whereby we are enabled to live godly,
as becomes Christians. For as God, by his great love wherewith he loved us,
sent his dear Son into the world, to die for us, that we might live through
him: so are we to love God most affectionately, with all our heart and
strength, and our Neighbor as our selves, for his sake. In this is love, not
that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the
propitiation for our sins. Love therefore is the first and great Commandment on
which depends the Law and the Prophets. Love is the foundation and excellency
of our Faith, to know the love of God which passes knowledge, that when we
were enemies we were reconciled to him by the death of his Son. Love is that
fire which our Blessed Redeemer came to send in the Earth, Luke 12.49. which
cost him much to kindle, and which burns up men's dross and impurities, and
cannot be put out but where iniquity does abound. And Love is the spirit of
Primitive Christians, who had one heart and one mind: and is even the Soul of
the whole Church, whereby it is united and lives.

2. Christ left and appointed Love as the mark whereby his followers should be
known, Joh. 13.35. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye
love one another. And so in the love of God consists our union with him, and it
is the highest perfection of the Christian life. Now perfection is the work of
Grace; therefore we must not rely upon our own strength, but we must beg of
God daily and devoutly that by his good Spirit, he would kindle in our hearts
the fire of an holy Charity, that by it we may be guided, quickened, and at last
perfected. Neither yet must we lose heart, if we sometimes fall, as if all our
hope were in our own strength: but we must acknowledge our own infirmity, and
rise quickly, and pray more fervently, and afterward fight more courageously.
Still pursuing after perfection, not only in words or ineffective wishes, but
in hearty desires and serious endeavors: manifesting our love by daily
mortifying our sins, and attaining to new and higher degrees of virtue. And
then shall a Christian be most, perfect and happy, when his heart shall be
empty of himself, and free from the love of the world, but purified and burning
with the love of God.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the right Placing and Ordering of Love.
1. HE is a just and holy man who rightly values things according to their
worth, and also loves them proportionably; for sin is duly by wise men defined
to be a disorderly Love, and virtue to be a regular and well placed Love. And
though there be other natural affections, yet they all proceed from and depend
upon love, and if this be well placed and governed as it should, the rest
cannot be unruly. It is virtue to love what deserves to be loved: and wisdom
to make choice of it, and constancy to pursue it through all dangers and
sufferings: and to be drawn from it by no inticements, is temperance: and to
prefer nothing to it is justice: and the order of Love must follow the order of
things: and so God is to be loved infinitely more than any creature, because he
is infinitely better, more perfect and lovely. We become good and pure, by
loving him who is the fountain of all goodness and purity: for our manners
follow our affections; we become either virtuous or vicious according to the
nature of what we most love.

2. The true object of Love is God, our Neighbor and our selves. God in the
first place to whom all love is due, and from whom it must pass to other
creatures, according as they are more or less like him. By this, we must love
our Neighbor because he is, or that he may be just: and we must love our
selves, in that we are, or else that we may be holy: taking from God the
measure of our Love to all other things, that our Love may be regular and we
may be happy. Let no man therefore love sin, for thereby he hates and destroys
his Soul: and let no man love himself for his own sake, but upon Gods account,
who is the chiefest Good, in whom alone we can be entirely happy. For God who
alone is the Author of our being and well-being, has set these bounds to our
affections, that we should love him with all our heart and with all our Soul;
that we should consecrate to the service of that Love, our understanding, our
life, and all our powers; and that if we love any thing else, it be in
reference and in subordination to him that deserves all our Love, and should be
the master and disposer of it. The love of God must therefore lead the way to
what else we should love; it must always prevail and be the rule of all our
affections, and then we cannot love nor do amiss.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Necessity and Measures of Loving our Neighbor.
1. WE cannot love God as we should, without we love our Neighbor, neither can
we love our Neighbor except we love God. If any man says, I love God and
hates his Brother, he is a liar: for he that loves not his Brother whom he
has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? and this commandment have
we from him, that he who loves God, loves his Brother also, 1 John 4.20. The
Commandment makes no exception; though the man be poor, though he be a
stranger, nay, though he be vicious and thine enemy, yet he is thy Neighbor
and thy Brother, and he must be loved. The expressions of thy love may vary
according to his needs and thine opportunities. Yet they must be hearty, real,
and effective: for, The End of the Commandment is Charity, out of a pure heart,
and of a good Conscience and of Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5. And we must not
love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth, 1 John 3.18.

2. As Christ loved us and gave himself for us, not that we deserved any love,
but because he loved God, and us in God, to whom he purchased us; so must we
love all men, not for ours or their sakes, but for God's sake, having no
further regard to what is good in them, than only as it relates to God. True
Christians are so strictly united together by love, that what one has not in
himself, he with joy finds it in others, and what one has more than the rest,
he willingly imparts it to all. As by our love to God, we are united and in
some manner become one spirit with him: so by the mutual love of men, of
Christians especially, they become one among themselves, so that what one has
to himself, is for the good of all, and what one has not in himself, he has
and enjoys in others. Thus love is the fulfilling of the Law, and the
fulfilling of all Righteousness. According as is the man's Charity, in the
beginning, progress, or perfection, so is his goodness and his righteousness:
and then most perfect in this life, when even life it self is parted with for
love.

3. The modus or measure of love to our Neighbor is twofold, positive and
negative. First, To do to him as we would he should do to us. Secondly, And not
to deal with him any otherwise, than as we would he should deal with us. Every
one therefore, in the sight of God to whom all things are known, must consider
seriously what he would others should do, or not do to him: and if he desires
others should he patient toward him, and bear with his faults and infirmities,
and speak well of him, etc. Then let him be careful to do so to others. It Is a
sure indication of a perverse heart for a man in a private capacity, to do that
to another, which he should be sorry to suffer himself. A good Christian does
not inquire into the manners and faults of others, but leaves them to his view
and correction to whom all judgment is given. He examines, judges, and
punishes himself, and makes self-reformation his serious and constant
business. Whatever he sees or hears his mind is undisturbed and abides in
peace: for if it be good, he praises God, if evil, he turns it to good, by
turning his mind from it toward God in Prayers and Resignation.

4. If his Office and Charity obliges him to reprove and to correct others, he
does it with a zeal sweet and benign, and compassionate to his Brothers
infirmity: for roughness and ungoverned passion cannot consist with Charity. If
the ill actions of others are capable of an excuse, he excuses them; however
he censures not: knowing that nothing human is so perfect and holy, but may be
ill interpreted, and at the best may be some way defectuous enough, to be
liable to reprehension, if carping men let loose their censorious humors.
Whilst men are men, they will have some imperfections, and to be zealous
against them, is under pretense of preciseness, to give way to peevish
impatience or proud censoriousness. He that is too busy to tax and judge
others, will never grow better himself.

CHAP. XXXVI. True Friendship and the true Offices of it.
1. FRiendship is the communion of good things, and therefore it follows the
nature of those things which friends have common. Now there being nothing truly
good, but things supernatural and eternal, true friendship must consist in the
communication of these mutually. Hence it is that carnal friendship is soon
dissolved, because things of sense cannot last, nor always confine the spirit:
whereas spiritual friendship is never broken; for though it may seem to be
interrupted by little angers and contentions, yet true piety and the love of
God sweetens the harshness of them, and keeps the knot indissoluble. As for
that friendship which too much sets our hearts upon any person, and may be
called Doting, it should be stifled and avoided, as being mischievous, and it
is to be known by these tokens; when the party beloved is always in our
thoughts and we can never be well without him; when we fear his displeasure
above all things, when in him we rest as in our center, and we sacrifice to him
all our actions and most important concerns. And let none flatter themselves
that this is pure innocent friendship, without any self-interest: for it is
altogether sensual, it depraves the heart and affections, it is an enemy to all
wisdom and true Religion, and it begins and ends in the flesh; and it is to be
observed, that this kind of friendship is never betwixt persons truly good and
virtuous.

2. Men of real worth are always well composed, grave, and of a sweet
deportment; they are courteous to all, but they are familiar to few, and they
flatter none: in their conversation, modesty, discretion, an exact justice, and
an unaffected severity is to be observed. They seek not to make a show
outwardly, their life is inward and secret, they live to God and to their own
conscience. They fairly converse with men outwardly, when it is fitting: but
their heart cleaves to God, and they will not disturb themselves with the silly
impertinencies or petty concerns of the world: Their designs and affections
differ much from the vulgar multitude, and therefore their words and actions
are guided with greater and more divine wisdom, they proceed from a higher
principle, and they tend to an end much more excellent. Their soul and
conversation, their treasure and joys are all in Heaven, and if thither they
draw not others after them, it is because health propagates not it self as
distempers do. Man's nature is corrupt, and now infections are catching, but
cures are difficult.

3. Men are sociable by nature, and by a certain instinct they generally seek
to please others, and to be loved by them: but that friendship which they so
much endeavor after, will never be sincere nor lasting, except their souls
meet and are joined in the love of God. That friendship which consists only in
the reciprocation of civil offices, is but a kind of a traffic, and it abides
no longer than whilst men can be useful one to another. That courteousness and
obligingness which friends so strictly exact one of another, is but a vain
deceit or pastime, or at the best a game at words: and many that play best at
it and with most readiness, are they that cheat you most; they talk and promise
gracefully and at a high rate, but these are but wind and come to nothing, when
realities are wanting, and effects be required. Whereas if God were possessed of
men's hearts by Holy Charity, he would make their love to their Neighbors
hearty and sincere; there would be no contentions, no envies, no discords
betwixt them; they would dwell in peace and a happy union together, every one
not following his own will and desires: but all conspiring together in the will
of God and his good pleasure.

4. Self-love and self-interest are the spring of all divisions, for men
therefore esteem not their Neighbors nor seek their advantage, except it be
for some ends of their own. Let a man be a great Philosopher or a great
Mathematician, very Learned or very Religious, few care for that, and few love
him therefore: but if he be Rich and Prodigal withal, multitudes worship him
and run after him. Virtue and Learning are valued by few, but many love and
admire the money, and thence many wars and enmities, and many Lawsuits do
proceed. Man commonly loves not himself, because he is partaker with others of
humanity, but for some things which he fancies peculiar to himself: therefore
he lives not as he should to the community, loving others, especially
Christians, for what they have common with him: but by his imaginary particular
excellencies he separates himself from the rest of mankind, and upon that
account cherishes himself, and cares for none else but for his own sake, This
well considered will make a wise man despise much the friendship of the men of
this world. He will not purposely do any thing to get their hatred, but yet he
will not much value their good words, and their fine pretenses. Privacy and
silence will be pleasant to him, and his delight will be in conversing with
God, in whom alone all joys and all comforts are to be found.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the several Acts of Charity to our Neighbors.
1. WE are never without an occasion to show our love to our Brothers: for so
great and various are the miseries of human nature, either corporal or
spiritual, that we can hardly look or step, without finding objects of Charity.
Even the best of men want our hearty Prayers that they may persevere: for such
is our weakness, and such the strength of our enemies, that no man can be
secure in this world: and many strong ones have been known fall suddenly and
irrecoverably at the assault of an ordinary and often baffled temptation. And
how much want they our assistance and our prayers, that are fast tied with the
bonds of their sins, that they may not perish in their dungeon and unhappy
slavery. This is the case of all Infidels and Heretics, besides many vicious
Christians, who all together crowd in the broad way to destruction, and
heedlesly go down to Hell.

2. Bodily miseries also are frequently to be met with, and are altogether past
number. Many are afflicted with hunger, thirst and nakedness, with debts and
lawsuits, and natural infirmities: Many are persecuted and oppressed, reviled and
slandered, imprisoned and beggered, and perpetually vexed and distracted. And
many struggle with the terrors of a guilty conscience, and the fear and
approaches of death, and the amazements of that last moment, on which depends
Eternity. To all these our pity and charity is to be extended, as God shall
enable us; by alms, by counsel or comfort, by prayers, and by any means that
are in our power. Christ accepts as done to himself, what good we do for his
sake to the afflicted: and in the great day of recompenses, he will bountifully
reward Charity.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Charity is also due to our Enemies.
1. TO love our Enemies is the highest and most divine virtue, and the sum of
Christian perfection, which our Blessed Savior most earnestly recommends, and
absolutely enjoins to all his Disciples, saying, Mat. 6.44. But I say unto you,
love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
and pray for them which despitefully use you and persecute you: that you may be
the children of your Father which is in Heaven, for he makes his Sun to rise
on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust.
This Law is hard to flesh and blood, therefore the Lawgiver raises his
subjects minds above all things earthly and natural, even to the highest glory
and privileges of Heaven. That ye may be (says he) the children of your
Father which is in Heaven: that despising our first carnal birth, we may live
according to this second, whereof the honors and advantages in Christ, are so
much above all we could hope from Adam. Enough certainly to make us cheerfully
comply with our duty, in this particular; not only to love but also to do good
to our enemies, to speak well of them, and to pray for them. And yet we are
bound to this also by our greatest interest, for except we thus forgive, and
requite good for evil, our heavenly father will not forgive us our sins, nor
receive us into favor again, as our Blessed Savior plainly asserts, Mat.
6.15. and 18.35.

2. Saint Paul likewise exhorts us, Romans 12.20. If thine enemy hunger feed him,
if he thirst give him drink. And, Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil
with good. Men may be too strong for us, that we cannot help: but we cannot be
overcome of evil, except we please our selves. For to be overcome, is to hate
them that do evil to us, and to seek to revenge it upon them, and it is in our
power to do otherwise if we will; we may overcome evil with good, in pitying
and forgiving those that hate and injure us, and doing good to them, when we
have occasion. But this is better understood and persuaded by Holy Charity,
than by all argumentations and learned discourses: We need not fear therefore
the evils men can do to us, but those we do against our selves by an angry,
impatient, and revengeful Spirit. Let us but pray and labor for Christian
Charity, and it will make us invincible, it will make us conquer and overcome
all wrongs and afflictions. Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the
floods drown it. Cant. 8.7. The waters of Calamities and Persecutions, cannot
put out that bright and ever-burning flame, kindled by God in pious hearts.

CHAP. XXXIX. That the love of the Supreme Good, comprehends all goodness.
1. GOD is our true and sovereign good, him we must love with all our soul and
strength, and to him we must direct all our ways. For the love of God
comprehends all virtue and godliness; it is temperance, whereby we despise the
pride and delights of the World, that God may have our whole hearts to himself;
it is constancy, whereby we patiently bear any cross for and from God; It is
justice, whereby we serve and obey God alone, and with due moderation command
his creatures; it is prudence and the highest wisdom, whereby we diligently
avoid the obstacles, and use the means to come to God; it is all that can make
us good, and make us happy. Now God must be loved for himself, for nothing can
be better than God; he is infinitely good, and the beginning and end of all
goodness. Therefore other things must be loved only for his sake, and in such
proportion as they are more or less related to him: but he must be loved on his
own account, as much as is possible, without bounds or measures, for his
perfections are vast enough to swallow up all our affections, nay, they
infinitely exceed them: so that nothing must share our love with him, it is all
infinitely more than due to him.

2. It much concerns us therefore to be very careful, that those lower sensible
goods wherewith we converse in this Earth, do not steal our hearts from God the
giver of them. For though we set the greater value upon things Spiritual and
Eternal, yet because now they are out of our sight and we cannot reach them,
our affections to them are dull and heavy, and must be forced and listed up:
whereas they are brisk and swift to such things as are the object of sense, and
we naturally fall down to our sensual nature, and without great care we cannot
avoid to be by it cheated into self-love. If we would therefore be replenished
with the Holy and Beatifying Love of God, we must first cast the World out of
our hearts: for as a full vessel cannot receive better liquor, except it be
emptied, no more can our hearts love the Creator, if they are possessed by
creatures. Therefore says Saint John, the beloved Apostle of Jesus, Love not
the world, neither the things that are in the world, for if any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him. 1 John 2.15. Worldly things are
made for our use, and there is in them some beauty: but how much more beautiful
is he that made them, and made us for the enjoyment of himself. He that seeks
for happiness out of God, shall never find it: but if we love him above all
things, then we are certainly happy, for he also loves us, and his favor is
all.

CHAP. XL. Wherein consists the Love of God.
1. IT consists chiefly in joyfully suffering for God: for Love is a passion,
and he therefore loves most that is most patient: as the Blessed Apostles
returned from the Council rejoicing that they had been worthy to suffer shame
and stripes for the name of Jesus. There may be much of nature in that
tenderness of devout affection, and those tears that proceed from it, which are
observed in some: but true virtues and solid joys do proceed from a Love
practical and obediential. For he that truly loves, obeys in all things
cheerfully, for savor not for fear: and if any burden unpleasant to the flesh
be laid upon him, Love makes it light and acceptable too: Therefore the
Scripture says that Gods Commandments are not grievous, to let us know we are
not yet perfect in Love, when we find them grievous and difficult, and that we
should pray and labor for an increase of Charity. The keeping of Gods
Commandments is doubtless very hard to them that are acted by fear, but Perfect
Love casts out Fear: and as it fulfills the Law, so it makes it easy and
delightful to us. For there is no trouble nor difficulty, in that service which
Love obliges to, what duties it binds on a good servant, are ever thought
pleasant, and readily discharged: whereas the same imposed by fear, will make
subjection grievous, and obedience to be cavill'd at, and by some means eluded.

2. By this they are convinced to want the Love of God, who complain of the
strictness of Gospel-precept, and count morality a needless burden, and by
pretenses and objections, seek to loosen the yoke, that they may shake it off.
Such are they that have itching ears, and heap to themselves teachers after
their own heart, such as may more comply with their humor, and enlarge their
wanton liberty, by restraining Gods Laws and the injunctions of his Church. For
men now adays will not be held in by duty, but will range according to their
will; they have disputed themselves out of meekness and Charity: and now that
their actions are not governed by plain precepts, but by opinions and parties,
they may be warranted to do, in a manner whatever they lust. But alas, before
Christ's dreadful Tribunal, we shall not he judged by vulgar opinions, nor by
the exceptions of contentious men, but by truth and by divine Laws. There men's
fancies and relaxations, and the doctrine of probability, as some do teach it,
will be found to hare been only pernicious cheats, whereby men sought to
warrant their looseness and disobedience.

3. But these things are not weighed nor understood, but by them that sincerely
love God, and are therefore ready always to obey him, in all things he
requires. For it is by Love that the Soul gives up her self to God, and by
cleaving to him, becomes one will and one spirit with him: for God is Love,
says the Scripture, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in
him, 1 John 4.16. And from this union flows an holy peace, and a delicious joy:
when by love we are subject to our Beloved, and are possessed of him, in whom and
by whom are all things, and who is the fountain of all happiness, and the
satisfaction of all our desires. Now by this shall a man know whether he truly
loves God, and adheres to him, if God be the last end of all his purposes and
actions, if his thoughts and desires always run after him, and if above all
things he seeks to please and to obtain him.

CHAP. XLI. That there is more of Love in Practical Knowledge than in
Speculation.
1. TO desire knowledge is natural to man, and still the more he knows, the
more that desire increases, and then he rejoices in himself, and is much
delighted with his great learning, when he thinks he knows much, and has a
great insight into the profoundest of divine mysteries, and so he comes to love
his knowledge more than God the object of it. Thus the Philosophers, as St.
Paul reproves them, when they knew God, yet they glorified him not as God, but
became vain in their imaginations: much admiring themselves and their
discoveries. And thus also many Christians value more what they know, and what
they can discourse of God and Religion, that they value both him and it. They
speak great things of the love of Christ, and they love themselves for so
speaking. In that knowledge they have of God, as in a mirror, they view
themselves especially, and take little notice of the glass; they admire the
vision, their own act, more than the object which is seen. But God must be
loved and worshipped in spirit and in truth, in singleness and simplicity,
without any respect to our selves.

2. As a Countryman plain and unlearned, who daily sees the Sun, is more in
love with the light of it, than a blind Philosopher who can talk many things
concerning the nature, and the causes and effects of light: so an honest pious
man without Scholarship, by an active practical Faith, shows more love to God,
than the profound Divine, by his subtleties and high speculations. And as a
learned man in Northern Countries, where no Vines can grow, may learnedly
discourse of their fruit and the properties of it, and yet not have such an
intimate acquaintance with the nature and strength of the wine, as the plain
vine-dresser that drinks it daily: so may a Religious illiterate man have a
greater insight into divine mysteries, and a more relishing apprehension of
them, than many a man of great fame and learning. For experience goes beyond
all theory, and love passes knowledge, and we much sooner come to God by
affection, than by studious inquiries.

3. We must not only therefore inform our understanding: but if we desire to
love God fervently, we must engage our affections and give our selves to
Prayer. Proficiency in goodness will make us know more of God, and to better
purpose, than proficiency in knowledge. Goodness will make us love, and love
will bring us into Gods secret place, where we shall see more, and with more
delight, than all notional learning can show us. What we can know of God in
this our exile, is but little: but we may love him as much as we will, he
grants us that power; and as our love increases, our labor will grow less,
and our obedience more perfect. But many had rather seek God, whom they never
find: than love, and thereby enjoy him.

CHAP. XLII. That by Love Holiness is to be perfected.
1. IT is a commandment of God, both in the Law and the Gospel, be ye Holy, for
I am Holy. That is, that we should be pure, and without the unclean mixture of
the creatures. For as Lead in Silver, and dirt upon white robes, will debase
and stain: so if we engage our Souls to the world, to things beneath them, we
make them vile and unclean, whereas if we list them up to God by a hearty love,
we make them pure and beautiful. A heart whence all sensual and earthly things
are excluded, and whose affections cleave to God, by the unions of love, may
with joy and confidence say with the Apostle: Who shall separate us from the
love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? Nay, in all these things we are more than
conquerors, through him that loved us. For I am persuaded that neither Death,
nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to
separate us from the love of God; which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.35.

2. Fasting and Alms, and Corporal Austerities, the use of Sacraments, and all
such means, are great helps toward Sanctity; but they all profit nothing
without Charity; No, not Martyrdom it self, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 13.3. The
exercise of some other virtues may be sometimes dispensed withal: as the poor
from Almsgiving, and weak and sickly people from fasting, and rigorous
discipline: but to love God and our neighbor, which is the end of all other
precepts and the fulfilling of the Law, every one is always obliged; no man at
no time, can be any ways hindered or excused; obstacles and difficulties may
stop the progress of other virtues, but they increase Love. Love is within, in
the heart and will, there God has placed it, there God looks for it, and there
nothing can obstruct or stifle it, except we will our selves. Love alone is
necessary, and alone sufficient to make us holy. It is the first and great
Commandment, pleasant and easy beyond all others: for what more pleasant than
to love? and who dares say, I cannot love?

3. He that heartily loves God who is one, loves all things in one, and one in
all things: for he loves not God truly, that loves any thing, which he loves
not in God and for God. There is nothing above, there is nothing equal to God:
and if at any time we turn our affections from him, they fall upon inferior
objects, upon earthly things, whose weight does sink and press them down: and
our hearts are never at rest and liberty, till they return to God, from whom
they ungratefully departed. That we may therefore be truly sanctified, we must
forsake our selves and all created things, and return as high as to that first
principle of sanctity, that God from whom we had our origin: and then cleaving
steadfastly to him by a devout love, we shall become one with him, in life and
holiness, and felicity.

CHAP. XLIII. That the Consideration of the fewness of the Chosen, ought to
make us very wary and diligent.
1. NOthing can sooner startle a man out of his slumber and security, and ^edge
him on to amend and order his life by the Gospel Rules, than the due pondering
of the dreadful saying of Christ, Mat. 20.16. That many are called but few are
chosen. For no man knows whether he be called by that secret election, which
intitles him to glory and justification; No man knows either love or hatred, by
all that is before him; all promises for the life to come are conditional,
nothing but our sincerity in fulfilling the conditions, can give us any ground
of assurance. And yet how defective are we in this? how uncertain is it that we
shall persevere? and who can search and see into the deep secret of his
Election? here the Apostle who had been once in Paradise, cries out and
wonders, O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! Romans 11.33. In
this great danger and uncertainty every Christian ought exceedingly to fear:
and with trembling and an assiduous care, endeavor to make his election sure:
living in that Faith which works by Love, and declaring by his good works,
that he is one of that little but blessed number, to whom God will give his
Kingdom.

2. Now that that number is but little, compared with the greater multitude of
the wicked unhappy world; nay, that the number of the chosen is but small, even
of them that profess the Gospel, and are capable of choosing life or death, we
have too many reasons to believe. And our Blessed Savior intimates so much,
when he warns his disciples of the difficulties of coming into that blessed
Kingdom of which the entrance is narrow. Mat. 7.13. Enter ye in at the strait
gate, for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and
many there be that go in thereat. Then he adds, as wondering at this narrowness;
because strait is the gate and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and
few there be that find it. Being also asked another time, Lord, are there but
few that shall be saved? he gives no other answer but this, Strive to enter in
at the strait gate, for many I say unto you, will seek to enter in and shall
not be able. Luke 13.23. King David also inquiring, Lord, who shall abide in
thy Tabernacle, who shall dwell in thy holy hill? the holy Spirit suggests this
answer, he that walks uprightly, and works righteousness, Psalm. 15. And in
the twenty fourth Psalm, he questioning again, Who shall ascend into the hill
of the Lord? he is likewise answered, He that has clean hands, and a pure
heart, and has not lift up his Soul unto vanity. Now, who can say, I have made
my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? Prove. 20.9. Who can say to David, I
shall, for I work righteousness, and I am innocent?

3. Our Blessed Savior says, Mat. 10.38. He that takes not his Cross and
follows after me, is not worthy of me. Now where are they that thus willingly
take their Cross and suffer with Christ? or rather how sadly does St. Paul's
saying fit our Age: All seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's?
Phil. 2.21. Our Blessed Redeemer, who alone has the keys of Heaven, and knows
how we must be qualified, before we come thither, affirms, Mat. 18.3. Verily I
say unto you, except ye be converted, and become as little Children, ye shall
not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Which saying if compared with the pride
of men, it will be found that but a few by meekness and humility, seek to
become children, to be heirs of the Heavenly Kingdom. It is declared by St.
Paul, Romans 8.29. That those whom God foreknew, he also did predestinate to be
conformed to the Image of his Son. But who is the man can boast that his life
is conform to the Life of Christ? and who is he that suffers with Christ, that
he may be with him glorified? It is a saying that belongs to all, If thou will
enter into life, keep the Commandments, Mat. 19.17. But they are all gone out
of the way, they are altogether become abominable, there is none that does
good, no, not one, Psalm. 14.3. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence (says
the King of Heaven, Mat. 11.12.) and the violent take it by force: Now this
violence being against Nature, there are but few that will offer it to
themselves, by forgoing any present sensual satisfaction, on the account of
that Kingdom which is out of the reach of sense, not now to be enjoyed, but
expected only by Faith. If all our Righteousnesses are as filthy rags, as the
Prophet says, Isa. 64.6. What are then our sins and iniquities? If the
Righteous scarcely shall be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner
appear? 1 Pet. 4.18.

4. None but eight persons of the old world, were saved with Noah in the Ark;
all the rest of mankind perished in the flood. Lot alone with his wife and two
daughters escaped the conflagration of the infamous Cities, all the other
Inhabitants were consumed by the revenging flames. And of six hundred thousand
Jews that came out of Egypt, two only, Caleb and Joshua, came into the Land of
Promise. Now those things were examples, representations of things to come:
denoring that the number of those that come to life, is but small, in respect
of the greater number of such as go to perdition. Which is yet further but too
evident, by confidering how most men live and die; how few give any certain
marks of true contrition. Fear and sorrow extort groans and good words, and
death forces men to recant, and it is much to be feared there is seldom any
sincerity in a late deathbed repentance. For how can he begin to live well,
that is now dying? how can he heartily detest those pleasures of sin, which he
loved and enjoyed, as long as he lived? how hardly will he now he a true
penitent, who before abhorred all the mortifications of true penitence? how
will his resolutions be proved effectual, if he should es^ape, for the
forsaking those sins, which custom has made habitual, and almost a second
nature? how shall now his sensual mind lift up it self to those spiritual
heavenly things, which he before seldom or never regarded? and how shall he
straightened by time and sad circumstances, exercise those virtues contrary to the
sins he repents of, to make it appear by his life that there is a change in his
heart?

5. It Is known by experience that very few, when the pains and the danger is
over, stand to those resolves and promises which they made in the day of
sorrow. Generally men forget and are ashamed afterward of what they promised
and resolved: and they soon return to their customary vices and beloved
vanities: Especially because there is still a secret reserve in those
resolutions of amendment made in their distress, there being still some hope of
an escape, till they are at the worst, and then they are altogether passive,
and can act no longer; or at the best their strength and rational faculties are
so weakened, there are such anxious fears and trepidations when the Soul is nigh
to depart, that men are almost distracted, and know not what they do. We may
hope well of them, who though they lived ill, yet gave signs of repentance when
they were dying: But this is a desperate venture, there is much of uncertainty,
and nothing of safety in their condition. We have a sad example of this in King
Antiochus; read Maccab. 9. what vows he made, while he was under his grievous
sickness. He thought himself in earnest, no doubt, but God knew the unsincerity
of his heart, that his repentance proceeded from the fear of death, and would
therefore no more have mercy upon him, as the text affirms.

And who can consider all this, and not tremble? who will dare to presume he
has nothing to do, and that his Salvation is sure? who in the midst of so many
and so great dangers, will dwell as in safety, and not watch, and call upon
God? therefore because the chosen are few, fewer perhaps than we think, let us
not go with the many, nor follow the crowd: but let us live with the small
select number of truly good and religious Christians, that we may have comfort
and confidence, when our life is ended; that we may with an humble and
well-grounded hope, look up to God, and expect that gracious reward he has
promised to his faithful servants, to all that sincerely love and obey him.

THE END.
A CATALOGUE of some Books Printed for, and Sold by Henry Brom.
MR. Comber on the Common Prayer, in Three Volumes. Dr. Spark's Primitive
Devotions on the Feasts and Fasts of the Church of England. Bishop Wilkins
Natural Religion. The Fathers Legacy, or Counsels to his Children, being the
whole Duty of Man, in three parts, very useful for Families. Christian
Education of Children. Cardinal Bona's Guide to Eternity, Extracted out of the
Writings of the Holy Fathers and Ancient Philosophers. The Reformed Monastery;
or the Love of Jesus. A sure and short but a pleasant and easy way to Heaven.
In two Parts. Written Originally in Latin by the same Author. A Guide to Heaven
from the World, or good Counsel how to close savingly with Christ. Holy Anthems
of the Church. The Brief Rule of Life. The Crumbs of Comfort. Mr. Farindon-'s
Sermons. Several Sermons at Court and at other Places. A Discourse concerning
the Operations of the Holy Spirit. Together with a Confutation of some part of
Dr. Owen's Book upon that Subject. A Discourse concerning God's Judgments,
Resolving many weighty Questions and Cases relating to them. Preached (for the
substance of it) at Old Swinford in Worcestershire: And now published to
accompany the annexed Narrative concerning the Man whose Hands and Legs lately
rotted off: in the neighboring Parish of Kings-Swinford, in Staffordshire;
Penned by another Author. By Simon Ford, D. D. and Rector of the said Parish.
Christianity no Enthusiasm: or the Several Kinds of Inspirations and
Revelations pretended to by the Quakers, Tried, and found Destructive to Holy
Scripture and True Religion: In Answer to Thomas Ellwood's Defense thereof; in
his Tract, Miscalled Truth Prevailing, etc. A Narrative of the Principal
Actions occurring in the Wars betwixt Sueden and Denmark, before and after the
Roschild Treaty.

