THE Arraignment and Conviction OF ATHEISM: OR, An Exact and Clear
Demonstration by Natural Arguments, that there is a GOD.

Presented to the View of All, but especially the LEARNED.

By JOSHVA BONHOME, Rector of Calstock in the County of Cornwall: And Chaplain
in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. J^^nes for Dorman Newman at the Kings Arms in the
Poultrey. 1679.

IMPRIMATUR.

GVIL. JANE.
14 Aug. 1677.
TO THE Right Reverend Father in God, HENRY, By the Providence of God, Lord
Bishop of LONDON.
My Lord,
THese Arguments and Reasons were the Shield wherewith Derodon Public
Professor in Philosophy, in the Academy of Aurange withstood the Assaults of
Atheists, which swarmed in several places of Europe, about the time that this
Land was full of them; which they themselves made plain and evident to all the
World, when by an Example, without example, they made a mock at Laws, Justice,
Religion, and God himself, by Embruing their profane hands in the never enough
lamented blood of the true Protector of Laws, Justice and Subjects, the Pattern
of Religion and Piety, and Gods true and lawful Vicegerent in these Three great
Kingdoms. He delivered first in his School Disputations, the Objections of
Atheists, and furnished his Auditory with Mediums wherewith they might in a
Syllogistical way Encounter these Monsters; and afterward Imparted them to his
Country in his own Tongue: In the which, being fallen into my hands, I looked
upon them as a Jewel, which I have since kept close by me, both beyond Sea, and
here at home. And now seeing we live in an Age wherein we may very well take up
the Prophets complaint, The wicked walk on every side, Ps. 12. v. 8. and say of
most men in this our B^itish Israel, what the Apostle of the Gentiles said
concerning the Cretians, That they are unruly, vain Talkers, and Deceivers, who
subvert whole houses, ( and if they could whole Kingdoms) teaching things which
they ought not; and that they profess to know God, but in works deny him; being
abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate, Titus 1. v. 10,
11, 16. I have thought it my Duty to frame these Arguments in a known Tongue,
to the People of this Land, that first both they and my self, may use them
against this wicked brood, as Phinehas did his Javelin against the wicked and
profane Zimri, and impudent and brazen faced Cozbi, Numbers 25. v. 7, 14. And
secondly, that both all debauched and ignorant persons, if they will take the
pains to read over this small Tract, being convinced by the truth and solidity
of these Reasons; the one, that there is a glorious God, before whose
Judgment Seat they must (one day) all appear, and in whose hands it is a
fearful thing to fall, they may receive Instruction rather than Silver, and
Knowledge rather than choice Gold, Prove. 8. v. 10. and so grow in grace and in
the knowledge of God and our Lord Jesus Christ. And the other, that they may no
more look upon the Heavens and the Elements, as bodies of eternal duration and
continuance; nor live in this present world as if there were no death to cut
off the thr^^ of their sensual Lives; no Graves wherein the^^ pampered
Carcasses must be turned into dust a^^ ashes, and become the meat of worms; nor
(...) Judgment-day, wherein they must all stand before the Throne of that God,
who is a consuming fire Hebr. 12. v. 20. but have grace, whereby they man serve
God acceptably with reverence and godly fear: and like the Thessalonians, from
their I dols they may be turned to God, and from their Errors and wilful
blindness, to serve and adore the true and living God, 1 Thessalonians. 1. v. 9, 10.

If these two sorts of men, who dote and rely too much upon Nature, may be
convinced of their Errors, ignorance and lewd life, by casting their eyes
upon, and seriously considering the weight of these Natural Reasons: like
Galen, who was wrought upon by an Anatomical Observation, I have attained half
the end I intended in this Work: But if these Arguments, with the blessing of
him whose Being they demonstrate, may dis-thronize out of the hearts of others
(I mean the refined and professed Atheists) that grand Impiety of theirs; so
that (whether publicly or privately) they may fall down before the Throne of
God, and trembling and astonished, cry out with Saul, Lord, what will thou have
me to do, Acts 9.4, 6. Then shall I have reaped the fruit I expect of this
Labor.

My Lord, I hope this small Tract will be useful to all sorts of persons, but
especially to the young Plants, in the two famous Nurseries of this Kingdom,
OXFORD and CAMBRIDGE, woe are every day fitting themselves for the Work of the
Sanctuary. For if they will seriously consider the necessary Conclusions of
these Arguments, they shall clearly see the invisible things of God, even h^s
eternal Power and Godhead, and understand t^em from the Creation of the world,
Romans 1.20. and so be brought to remember their Creator in the days of their
youth, Eccl. 12.1. and withal shall be furnished with such weapons as will
conquer both Scepticisme, sometimes too too much entertained in the Schools;
and the foulest of all Impieties Atheism: which though not taught and defended
openly, yet by a subtle pretended way of arguing, Cognitionis causa, and
sometimes by a cunning railing at the holiest things, is unhappily instilled in
the hearts of young people.

My Lord, I will not excuse my self for the undertaking of this small Work, for
I have learned this true Position, among other Axioms in the Universities,
both here and beyond Sea, Non nobis solum nati sumus, We are not born for our
selves alone, but our Country challenges an Interest in us, our Friends and
our Posterity, do lay claim to us: Yet such wicked days are come upon us,
though a man for glory to God, love to his Posterity, good will to his
Country, or other honest motives, makes private things public, for the common
good of the Church and State, he is seldom praised of any, but reproved of
many, and condemned or censured of all malicious persons. Bonum quo communius,
eo melius, has been and will be a true Moral Principle, though some scorn to
put it in execution: We know the best Master that ever man served did reprove
and condemn him for an evil and ungracious Servant, that hid his Talent in a
Napkin, refusing to put it forth to his Masters use and advantage.

My Lord, I humbly beg your Lordships pardon for assuming perhaps more liberty
than is fit, in presenting this short Treatise to your view, and to your
Lordships patronage, yet trusting upon your Lordships goodness for a liberal
acceptance. Nature and your Noble Birth, has tought you. that to be generous
is to be virtuous: but sure it is, that Wisdom, Learning and Piety have
perfected Natural Disposition in you; so that I may say, the slenderer the
Present, and the meaner the Giver is, the more will it commend the favorable
Acceptance, and the noble Receiver. To such Eminent persons as your Lordship
is, both by Birth, Dignity, and Virtue, men do not so much give the Thing it
self which they present, as in it make tender of their hearts, love, duty and
dearest regards. All which I here humbly present to your ships goodness,
Commending you to the goodness of Him that so highly has honored you, and
besceeching Him to heap up more and more all his Blessings upon your Person,
Place and Relations, to the glory of his Name, the good of our Church, and the
encouragement of Learning and Piety; the Joy and Comfort of your heart in this
life: which I earnestly pray may be long and happy, and to the Eternal peace
and joy of your Soul, in the day of the great Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls.

Thus prays Your Lordships Most humble. Most obedient, and Most obliged
Servant, Joshua Bonhome.

TO THE Christian READER.
BEfore I proceed to the main Matter of this Treatise, I hold it necessary to
disabuse some Pious and Religious Persons, who having never met nor meddled with
the profane and ungodly Men (confuted and convinced in this Book) do verily
think and imagine that there is never a Man so desperately Wicked, at to deny
and dis-affirm a Godhead. Inorder to that, let these godly Persons know, that
there are in the World three sorts of Athiests; viz. 1. The subtle and wilely,
2. The lewd and debauched; and 3. The ignorant.

The first of these, are they who having gotten a way of discoursing cunningly,
with the help of their empty knowledge of natural Philosophy, do undertake to
frame Arguments against the Godhead, endeavor to answer the Reasons which
prove its Existency and Being; and conversing with good and honest men, convey
subtly into their minds, the Vennom themselves were insected and corrupted
withal. I have spoken with one that had written a Dialogue against all
Religions, who objected to me the first and sixth Reason or Answer, confuted in
this Book, but soon after he grew Frantic, and dyed in a sad and lamentable
condition.

I met once with another, who urged very fiercely the second Reason they use to
justify their Impiety (which reason is propounded and fully answered in this
Treatise) and disdainfully scoffed at my reply; this also a while after fought
a Duel, and died upon the place.

I have disputed against another, who made use of the first and fifth Arguments
of theirs (in this Tract propounded and overthrown:) This on a day of fearful
Thunder and Lightnings, made it his Bravado to speak Execrable Blasphemies
against the Divinity; but in a short time he died (fearfully mad) with the
Plague.

I have seen several others that would Allege all the pretended Reasons, which
in this Book will appear to be full of Absurdities, and they for the most part
have died very strangely, and the rest have suffered violent Death.

It will not be amiss to Associate with these Monsters, a certain other
dangerous sort of Men; who protest themselves to be Scepticks, and hold it
lawful to doubt of all things, that they may also speak dubiously of the
Divinity; against such Men, it were well if an Inquisition of Spain were set up
all the World over.

The Lewd and Debauched Atheists, are for the most part young Men of great and
Rich Families, who having had a bad Education, are easily drawn away, both by
the frequenting and keeping company with the subtle and cunning Atheists; and
by giving place to all the Charms of Sport, and Play, Drunkenness and Women: do
insensibly abandon themselves to the most abominable Vices that Hell and the
Devil can Devise. These are in greater number than theresined Athiests (as some
call them) seeing they swarm in great number in the Courts of most Princes, and
the greatest Cities in Europe.

The ignorant Athiests, which exceed in number the two former sorts, are they
who professing indeed that there is a God; have notwithstanding but a light
Opinion of the same: grounded only either upon the Hearsay of their Parents,
or the General Consent of them that are daily conversant withal: Neither are
they persuaded of this truth by the Creation of the World, nor by the admirable
and wonderful Disposition and Symmetry of the parts of it; nor by any of the
Reasons and Arguments which are to be seen in this Book. These are of the
vulgar and common sort of People, who being loath to give themselves the
trouble to be instructed in the ways of Salvation, never believe that there is
a God, but because they are born and bred among those that believe it. Such are
they also, who being drawn away of their own Lusts, and Entised, fall into
grievous and horrible sins, without the least sorrow, or reluctance. For I
cannot be persuaded, that a man who believes that there is a God Almighty,
Creator of Heaven and Earth, and who is within him, without him, and about him,
and every where; and who can cast him for ever into the bottomless Pit of Hell
for his sins: I cannot be persuaded, I say, that such a man will sin willingly
and wittingly, against a God so great, and so puissant, without horror and
resistance.

For if the presence of a King, a Lord, or a Judge, will keep back the most
wicked from Committing their Villainies; much more, if one were persuaded there
is a God Almighty, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, and Judge of all the Earth;
his presence would keep Man back from Committing Adulterses, Robberies,
Murders, Buggeries, and all other abominable Crimes, which are so frequent in
the World.

Therefore let the Devout and Religious Persons, who think well of all Men,
never find fault with me; if my zeal to the glory of God has caused me to
present the World with the Arguments here contained against this profane and
ungodly Brood the Athiests. And I heartily wish that all young People may so
Arm and Fortify themselves with these my Reasons, that they may keep
themselves from being seduced by such Devils.

A TABLE of the Principal Matters contained in this BOOK.
CHAP. I. 1. THat the World not being from all Eternity, one must necessarily
conclude there is a God that Created it. 2. That the Sun has not been from all
Eternity. 3. That the Earth has not been from all Eternity. 4. That the Day
has not been from all Eternity. 5. That neither Day nor Night have been from
all Eternity. 6. That the Moon has not been from all Eternity. 7. That the Sea
has not been from all Eternity. 8. That Men have not been from all Eternity.
9. The First Confirmation. 10. The Second Confirmation. 11. The Third
Confirmation. 12. That Alteration, Generation, and Corruption, are not from all
Eternity. 13. That neither Movable Things, nor Time, have been from all
Eternity. 14. A General Proof that the Bodies have nor been from all Eternity,
nor (consequently) the World. CHAP. II. 1 THE first Answer of Athiests, that
Successive Things may have been from all Eternity, collectively and not
distributively. 2. How many ways a Thing may be related to, or agree with,
another Distributively, or Collectively. 3. That Successive Things cannot be
from all Eternity Collectively. 4. That Old Men, Young Men, and Children,
Collectively, or taken together, cannot have been from all Eternity. 5. That
the Dead have not been from all Eternity. 6. That all men Collectively, having
been begotten, cannot have been from all Eternity. That the right understanding
and apprehension of the destinction of Athiests, is a sufficient refutation of
the same. CHAP. III. 1. THE second Answer of Atheists, viz. That as in the
After-Eternity, that is to say, in the Future, there will be no last or
furthermost; so in the Fore-Eternity, that is is to say, in time past, there
has been no first or foremost. 2. That Atheists compare unlike things, and the
disparity explained. 3. That re-ascending toward the time past, one may run
through it; and so it is not Infinite. 4. That the Succession of things cannot
be Eternal, and why. CHAP. IV. 1. THE third Answer of Atheists, concerning the
Infinite Number. 2. Three Arguments of Athiests, whereby they strive and
endeavor to prove that one Infinite is greater than another. 3. That those men
which have been in time past, make up some number. 4. That in whatsoever number
of Men, there is as much, or more, or less. 5. The Refutation of the Athiests
Argument, That one Infinite, is greater than another, Materially, and not
Formally. 6. That it is a Contradiction to grant or make one Infinite to be
greater than the other. 7. That the Answer of Atheists does not at at all hurt
or touch our choice and indissoluble Reason, drawn from the distance of Men. 8.
What the space is not, and what it is proved. 9. The Answer to the Atheists
First Argument^, drawn from the infiniteness of the Oriental and Occidental
space. 10. Another Answer to their Second Argument, drawn from the infiniteness
of the thoughts both of Men and Angels. 11. Another to their third Argument,
drawn from the pretended infiniteness of Men and Lions possible, that is to
say, that God may produce and create. CHAP. V. 1. THE Fourth Answer of
Athiests, saying, That from all Eternity there was a Chaos. 2. That the Heavens
and the Elements did not by degrees dis-intangle, and resolve themselves from
all Eternity. 3. That they did not remain a finite time to resolve or clear
themselves. 4. That they did not remain an infinite time to clear and resolve
themselves. 5. A Digression, wherein the two first Verses of the first Chapter
of Genesis are explained; and showed that there is no mention made of a Chaos,
and that they do not contain a Proposition of all those things God Created in
Six days; and that light was not the first Creature. CHAP. VI. 1. THE Fifth
Answer of Athiests, saying, That there has been, from all Eternity, Matter
without Form. 2. The Proof, That there has not been from all Eternity a Matter
without Form; and that the Matter could not produce the Forms. 3. That the
Eternal Atoms, by a casual concourse, have not made and disposed the World. 4.
That the Forms cannot have been produced, but by God. CHAP. VII. 1. THE Sixth
Answer of Athiests, saying, That men have their Original and beginning from the
Tritons and Sirens, commonly called Mairmaids. 2. The Refutation of this
Answer. CAHP. VIII. 1. THE Seventh Answer of Atheists, saying That men have
been produced by, or proceeded from, the Eternal Earth, or from all the
Elements together. 2. Reasons alleged, or Evidence produced against the
falsehood of this Answer. 3. That the Earth, nor the other Elements, cannot have
been naturally disposed to produce Men. 4. Other Reasons, proving, That Men
have not been produced by the Earth, nor the other Elements. CHAP. IX. Other
Reasons proving that there is a God. 1. THE First Reason drawn from the Order
of the Universe. 2. The Second from the General Consent of all People and
Nations, whoever acknowledged a Godhead. 3. The Third from the fear of the
Judgments of God, because of Sin. 4. The Fourth from the Existency of Devils.
5. The Fifth is drawn from the First Mover and the First Cause. 6. The Sixth
from the Novelty of Histories. 7. And the Seventh from the Consideration that
the Sea has not submerged the Earth.
CHAP. I. 1. That the World not being from all Eternity, one must necessarily
conclude there is a God that Created it. 2. That the Sun has not been from all
Eternity. 3. That the Earth has not been from all Eternity. 4. That the day
has not been from all Eternity. 5. That neither Day nor Night have been from
all Eternity. 6. That the Moon has not been from all Eternity. 7. That the Sea
has not been from all Eternity. 8. That Men have not been from all Eternity.
9. The first Confirmation. 10. The second Confirmation. 11. The third
Confirmation. 12. That Alteration, Generation, and Corruption, are not from all
Eternity. 13. That neither moveable Things, nor Time, have been from all
Eternity. 14. A general proof that the Bodies have not been from all Eternity,
nor (consequently) the World.
THe Knowledge of Causes by their Effects, is the best and most certain part of
Philosophy. Fire is known by Burning, Water by its Moistening and Cooling
quality; Men are known by Reasoning and Discoursing, Lions by their Roaring;
and all other Things by their Operations. Now if second Causes, which for the
most part may be apprehended by humane sense, cannot be better known than by
their Effects; much more the first Cause dwelling in an inaccessible Light, is
to be known by his Works. The Holy Apostle of Christ, St. Paul, teaches this
very clearly in his Epistle to the Roman, Chap. 1. v. 20. when he says, That
the invisible Things of God, even his Eternal Power and Godhead, are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made. Showing thereby, that
Naturally, by the Contemplation of the Creatures, a man may attain to the
Knowledge of the Creator; and by the consideration of the glory of this
beautiful Universe, may be led and induced to the admiration of its Creator.
Following the steps of this Holy Doctor, I will demonstrate by the Creation of
the World the Existence of the Godhead, against those whom Debauchery, ill
Company, and want of Learning, has so horribly corrupted, that they dare
publicly deny him, in whom even they move and live, and have their being. I
reason thus:

1. If the World has not been from all Eternity, it follows it has had a
beginning; and having not had that beginning of it self, seeing nothing can
produce it self, it must needs be granted necessarily that another has given
it that beginning, and consequently has created it. But the Creator of the
Universe and God, are one and the same thing. That the World has not been from
all Eternity, will appear, in running through the chiefest parts of the same. I
will begin with the Sun, the most glorious of all Soul-less Creatures, and
which Astronomers hold to be one hundred and sixty times bigger than the whole
Earth.

2. The Sun was never without Lighting the Earth, as the Atheists themselves
grant, who say that the World has been from all Eternity in the same being and
case it is now; but the Sun has not Lightened the Earth from all Eternity;
therefore the Sun has not been from all Eternity. The Assumption or second
Proposition is demonstrated thus: If the Sun has Enlightened the Earth from
all Eternity, either it has Enlightened from all Eternity our Hemisphere
only; or that of our Antipodes only, or both, Now the Sun has not Enlightened
from all Eternity our Hemisphere only, nor that of our Antipodes only, nor
both, which is proved thus: If the Sun from all Eternity has Lightened our
Hemisphere only, it follows that the Hemisphere of our Antipodes has not been
Lightened by the Sun from all Eternity, though there have been wanting but very
few hours; seeing the Sun having Lightened our Hemisphere, goes and Enlightens
that of our Antipodes some few hours after: just so, If the Sun has
Enlightened from all Eternity the Hemisphere of our Antipodes only, it follows
that our Hemisphere has not been Lightened by the Sun from all Eternity,
though notwithstanding there have been wanting but a very few hours; seeing the
Sun having Lightened the Hemisphere of our Antipodes, comes and Enlightens ours
some few hours after.

Now was there ever a man so void of reason and understanding, to believe, that
betwixt that which is from all Eternity, and that which is not from all
Eternity, the difference is only of few hours; and that there is but half a
days distance betwixt that which is finite, and that which is infinite, Time
and Eternity? Finally, If both the Hemispheres have been Enlightened by the Sun
from all Eternity, either it was all at once, or one after another; not all at
once, else it would have been Day every where at once, and the Sun would have
been in two places at the same time, which is impossible: nor one after
another, because that which has been Lightened from all Eternity, cannot have
been Lightened after another, nothing having been before that which is from all
Eternity. But Atheists do hold that our Hemisphere has been Enlightened from
all Eternity; then our Hemisphere has not been Lightened after another: and so
consequently not after that of our Antipodes. They hold also that the
Hemisphere of our Antipodes has been Lightened from all Eternity, then it has
not been Enlightened after another, and consequently not after our Hemisphere;
from whence one may infallibly conclude that both the Hemispheres have not been
Lightened from all Eternity one after another. Finally, Two Eternal Things
cannot be but together, and consequently one cannot be after another; there
being nothing before that which is Eternal. Therefore if the two Illuminations,
to wit, that of ours and that of our Antipodes Hemisphere, have been Eternal,
they necessarily must have been together, and not one after another; which is
impossible, as above I have proved I conclude then that the Sun, not having
Enlightened our Hemisphere from all Eternity only, nor that of our Antipodes
only, nor both, either at once, or one after another; that the Sun (I say)
has by no means Enlightened the Earth from all Eternity; And seeing that the
Sun (as Atheists themselves say) never was without Lightening the Earth, it
follows that Illumination not being from all Eternity, the Sun also is not from
all Eternity, but has had a beginning; and having not that beginning of it
self, seeing nothing is the cause of it self, it follows, that another has
given it a beginning, and consequently has created it: Now the Creator of the
Sun, and God are the same. As to that as is objected by Atheists, concerning
the Eternal Collection of all Illuminations, or their Eternal Succession, shall
be fully confuted hereafter in our Replies to their Answers.

3. The same reason that proves that the Sun has not been from all Eternity,
proves also that the Earth has not been from all Eternity, thus: The Earth (as
Atheists say) never was without being Enlightened by the Sun; now I have showed
already that the Earth has not been Enlightened by the Sun from all Eternity,
therefore it has not been from all Eternity. If you observe the last
Parenthesis, you will see that this Argument is formed from the Atheists own
Doctrine; for should I reason according to Holy Scripture, which is infallible,
the very first verse of Genesis would prove to them that the Earth was Created
before the Sun, and consequently was not always Enlightened by the Sun.

4. The same reason may also be confirmed thus, Either there has been some Day
from all Eternity or not; if not, it follows that all Days have had a
beginning, and therefore that the Day has not been from all Eternity. If the
Day has not been from all Eternity, neither the Sun has been from all
Eternity, seeing the Sun never was without Light and Day. If there has been
some Day from all Eternity, either there has been one only or many; if one
only, it will follow that all other Days have had a beginning, and that there
wants but one Day to the Eternity of the second Day, which is most absurd:
Seeing betwixt that which is finite and that which is infinite; betwixt Time
and Eternity; betwixt that which has had a Beginning, and that which never had
a Beginning, there is more than a Days distance. If there have been many Days
from all Eternity, either it were all at once, which is repugnant to the common
sense; seeing Days succeed one the other, or one after another, which is
repugnant to Eternity; for that which is from all Eternity and without
Beginning, is not after another; as I have proved already.

5. This Reason may be confirmed again, thus: When two Men have been at some
place, suppose a Town or City, they must needs have been there, either at the
same time, or one after another; so, seeing that Day and Night have been in our
Hemisphere, they must needs have been in it, either at the same time, and at
once, or one after another, not at the same time and at once; else it would
have been Day and Night in the same place at once, which is impossible; not
also one after another, for it would have been the Day after the Night, or the
Night after the Day: If the Day has been after the Night, it follows that it
has not been from all Eternity, seeing that which is Eternal is not after
another; and moreover, there will have been very little wanting to the Eternity
of the Day; seeing the Day is few hours after Night, which is said to be
Eternal by Atheists: If the Night has been after the Day, it follows that it
has not been from all Eternity (that is in our Hemisphere) seeing that which
is Eternal, is not after another; and moreover there will have been very little
wanting to the Eternity of the Night, seeing the Night is few hours after the
Day, which is said to be Eternal by Atheists: Therefore I conclude that the Day
has not been from all Eternity, nor consequently the Sun, which never was
without the Day. Finally, Two Eternal Things cannot be but together, and
consequently one cannot be after another; there being nothing before that which
is Eternal: But the Day and the Night cannot be together, therefore the Day and
the Night are not Eternal Things.

6. By the like reason one may prove that the Moon has not been from all
Eternity, thus: If the Moon has been from all Eternity, either it has been
from all Eternity, only Full, or only New, or both. If it has been from all
Eternity only Full, it follows it has not been New from all Eternity, though
notwithstanding there have been but few days wanting; seeing the New Moon is
few days after the Full Moon. And so if the Moon has been from all Eternity
only New, it follows it has not been Full from all Eternity, though
notwithstanding there have been but few days wanting; seeing that the Full Moon
is few days after the New Moon. And if it has been both New and Full from all
Eternity, it were either at once, which is repugnant to common sense and
experience, or one after another, which is opposite to Eternity; for that which
is Eternal, cannot be after another; as above I said: Therefore the Moon having
never been without being either Full or New, or wanting but very little, and
having been neither Full nor New from all Eternity, it is evident it has not
been from all Eternity; for two Eternal Things cannot be but together, as above
I have proved. Now the Full Moon and the New Moon cannot be together; therefore
the Full Moon nor the New Moon can be Eternal.

7. The same way of arguing may be used against the Eternity of the Sea, If the
Sea has been from all Eternity, either it has been from all Eternity with the
Flowing only, or with the Ebbing only, or with both: If it has been from all
Eternity with the Flowing only, it follows that it has not been from all
Eternity with the Ebbing, though there have been but very few hours wanting;
seeing the Ebbing of the Sea is six hours or well near, after it has began
Flowing: So if it has been from all Eternity with the Ebbing only, it follows
it has not been from all Eternity with the Flowing, though there have been but
very few hours wanting; seeing the Sea has its Flowing six hours or
thereabouts, after the beginning of its Ebbing. And if it has been from all
Eternity with its Flowing and Ebbing, it must be all at once, which is
impossible; seeing it cannot go backwards and forwards, Flow and Ebb at the
same time, or one after another, which is opposite to Eternity: for as I have
said above, two things Eternal cannot be but together, and consequently cannot
be one after another; there being nothing before that which is Eternal. But the
Flowing and Ebbing cannot be together, therefore not Eternal. And so seeing the
Sea never was without Flowing or Ebbing, and that neither the Flowing nor
Ebbing have been from all Eternity, it is evident that the Sea is not from all
Eternity. As for the Eternal Collection of all Flowings and Ebbings, or the
Eternal Succession of the same, it will be confuted hereafter.

8. Now let us come to the Consideration of other Creatures, and let us show
that Men have not been from all Eternity, and that they never succeeded one
another by an Eternal Generation; my reason is this: If Men had been from all
Eternity, and had been one after another by an Eternal Succession of
Generations, it would follow that the number of those Men which have been in
time past till now, should be infinite; for it is evident that if the number of
them were finite and determined in it self, there would have have been some
first and some second, etc. and at this day some last; and where some may be
said to be first, there is a beginning, and consequently no Eternity; but the
number of Men which have been in time past till now, is not infinite; therefore
Men have not been from all Eternity. The second Proposition is proved thus, An
infinite number admits no greater number, but a greater number then that of Men
which have been in times past till now can be given; seeing there have been
more Hands, more Fingers, more Hairs, and more Beasts than Men; therefore the
number of Men which have been in times past till now, is not infinite. The
first Proposition of this last Syllogism, to wit, that an infinite number
admits no greater number, is made good thus: If the infinite number could admit
a greater number, or a greater number than the infinite could be given, it
would follow that an infinite number should be exceeded by a greater number;
seeing that of two numbers the greater exceeds the other: But the infinite
number cannot be exceeded, seeing that which is exceeded is finite or termined,
where it is exceeded; and the infinite cannot be finite; therefore the infinite
number cannot admit a greater number.

9. Moreover, Either there has been some Man from all Eternity or not; if not,
it is evident that Men have not been from all Eternity; if any was from all
Eternity, it follows that he shall not have been made or begotten by another;
seeing that which is made or begotten of another, is after another: But that
which is Eternal is not after another, there being nothing before that which is
Eternal.

10. Again, Men which are said (falsely) to have Lived from all Eternity, did
not yet Live an Eternity, else they had Lived longer than a thousand times one
hundred millions of thousands of years, which is against the common sense; and
therefore they have Lived but a finite time, that is on hundred or a thousand
years only; from whence I reason thus: Betwixt that which is from all
Eternity, and that which is not from all Eternity, there is a greater distance
than of some few years; but betwixt the Life of Men, which are falsely said to
have Lived from all Eternity, and their Death, which is not from all Eternity,
there is but a few years distance; therefore their Death, not being from all
Eternity, it is impossible their Life should have been from all Eternity.

11. Besides, The Men which have Lived in time past till now, are distant one
from another, with an infinite distance of time only, or with a finite
distance only; or some are distant with a finite distance, and others with an
infinite distance: If they are all distant with an infinite distance of time,
it will follow, that betwixt Jesus Christ as Man, and we that Live at present,
there will be an infinite distance, and consequently an infinite space of time,
which is false; seeing there is but one thousand six hundred seventy seven
years, according to the common supputation: It will follow also, that betwixt
K. Charles the First and K. Charles the Second, there will be an infinite
distance of time; which is absurd. If they are all distant with a finite
distance of time only, it follows that their duration contains a finite time
only, and consequently are not Eternal, which is most true: If some are
distant with a finite distance, and others with an infinite distance; and that
of all them which are only distant, with a finite distance, one takes the two
remotest: For example, Peter who Lives at this day, and then remounts toward
them, that have preceded Peter, and from whom he is descended; if one takes (I
say) him who in a finite distance is the farthest, tow it, John; I say that if
one remounts a little higher, that is unto William the Father of John, it will
follow that Peter and William, will be distant one from another, with an
infinite distance of time; seeing they are more distant and farther removed in
a finite distance: so that it will follow, that betwixt the finite distance,
which is between Peter and John, and the infinite distance between Peter and
William, there will be but very few years difference, that is so many years
(and no more) as are betwixt William the Father and John his Son; which is
altogether absurd.

12. Add hereto, That every Generation presupposes some Alteration, that is
some convenient Disposition of the Matter, for the introduction of the Form,
and Generation of the Composed: From whence I dispute thus, That which is
Eternal is not preceded, but Generation is preceded by Alteration, since it
presupposes it necessarily: thefore Generation is not Eternal; and consequently
Men have not succeeded one another by an Eternal Generation.

By the same reason one proves that Corruption is not Eternal, thus: That which
is Eternal is not after another, seeing nothing is before, or precedes that
which is Eternal; but Corruption is after Generation: Seeing one and the same
thing cannot be at the same time begotten and corrupted, produced and
destroyed; therefore Corruption is not Eternal. In one word, Eternal Things
cannot be but together, and cannot be one after another; seeing nothing
precedes, or is before that which is Eternal: But Alteration, Generation, and
Corruption, cannot be together, but are necessarily one after another; that is,
Corruption after Generation, and Generation after Alteration: Therefere
Alteration, Generation and Corruption are not Eternal; and consequently Men
have not been begotten from all Eternity, nor have succeeded the one the
others, by an Eternal Generation. Moreover, The Generation of the Thing, and
the Thing begotten, cannot be but together: But the Thing begotten is not
Eternal, seeing it is after another; to wit, the begetting, at least in the
Generations of Men, of whom we speak: Therefore Generation is not Eternal.

13. Another general reason may be added to what has been said hitherto,
proving that all Moveable Things have had a Beginning, and that there is none
which may have been from all Eternity: Thus, If Time is not Eternal, it follows
that Motion is not Eternal, seeing that Time is nothing else but the duration
of Motion; but Time is not Eternal, therefore Motion is not Eternal; nor
consequently the Sun, Moon, and Stars, which never were without Motion, that is
without moving from East to West; nor the Sea, which never was without Motion,
that is, without Flowing or Ebbing; nor Men which never were without motion,
that is without pulse or respiration, nor without some Motion of the Vital or
Animal Spirits. That Time has not been Eternal, appears, because Time Eternal
is a Time infinite; Seeing the Time finite has a beginning and an end, and the
Eternal has neither beginning nor end. Now Time has not been infinite;
Therefore it has not been Eternal. That Time has not been infinite, is clear,
because time infinite comprises a number infinite of years; Seeing a finite
number of years, cannot make an infinite time: but there is not an infinite
number of years, therefore Time has not been infinite. That there have not
been an infinite number of years, is clear also; because there cannot be a
greater number, than an infinite number: else the infinite number should be
exceeded by this greater number: Seeing that of two numbers, the greatest
exceeds the other. And if an infinite number were exceeded, it would be finite
and terminate, where it is exceeded, which is impossible; Seeing that to be
infinite and finite are contradictories: But a greater number may be given than
that of the Years which have been, seeing there have been more Months and Days
than Years. Moreover the Year is always after the Month, the Month after the
Day, the Day after the Hour, and the Hour after the Minute, and consequently
the Year, the Month, the Day, the Hour, in the whole, are not from all
Eternity; seeing that which is Eternal is not after another. Moreover, We may
say of Years, what we have said of Men; viz. That the Years that have been in
time past, either are all distant, with an infinite distance of time, or are
all distant with a finite distance: If they are all distant with an infinite
distance, it will follow that betwixt the Year One thousand six hundred and
seventy, and the Year One thousand six hundred seventy seven, there is an
infinite distance, and consequently an infinite time, which is absurd: If they
are distant with a finite distance, it follows that they comprize but a finite
time, and consequently are not Eternal. Again, If some Years be distant with a
finite distance, and others with an infinite distance, and that of all the
Years which are only distant with a finite distance, one takes the two
remotest: for example, This Year One thousand six hundred seventy seven, marked
A, and reascending with a finite distance to the remotest Year from the same,
and that Year be marked B; I say that if one remounts a Year higher marked C;
it will follow that the Years C and A, will be distant with an infinite
distance, seeing they are more distant and remote than B and A; which are the
remotest in a finite distance: so that it will follow that betwixt the finite
distance B and A, and the infinite distance C and A, there will be but a years
difference; and that the year C which is a finite time, added to the distance
of B and A, which is also a finite time, will be an infinite time; such as is
the distance of C and A, and that the time infinite, viz. the distance of C and
A, by the detraction of a finite time, viz. the year C, will become finite;
which is absurd and contradictory.

Lastly, All things pretended to be Eternal, as well permanent as successive,
either have been from all Eternity without action, or with action: If they have
been from all Eternity without action, it will follow that the Sun has been
from all Eternity, without lighting, the Fire without burning, and Men without
breathing, etc. which most part of Atheists themselves deny, seeing they say,
that the World has been from all Eternity in the same case it is now. Besides,
all things pretended to be Eternal, either have been from all Eternity without
action, during a finite time or during an infinite time. If they have been
without action during a finite time only, it will follow that betwixt that
thing which has been from all Eternity, without action, and its action which
is not from all Eternity; the difference will be only of a time limited and
finite; and consequently that betwixt that which is Eternal, viz. the thing
without action, and that which is not Eternal, to wit, its action, there will
be but a finite time: and that to make its action Eternal, which is not
Eternal, there will be wanting but a finite and determined time; and also that
there will be but very little lacking, lest that which is finite, viz. the time
since the action of the thing, added to the finite, viz. the time the thing
has been without action, will make up an infinite time, such as is the
Eternity of a thing; which is absurd and contradictory. If all things have
remained without action during an infinite time, it will follow that the Sun,
the Moon, and other Stars, have been longer than a hundred thousand millions of
thousands of years, without moving and giving any light; Men and Beasts have
lived longer than a hundred thousand millions of thousands of years, without
seeing, breathing, etc. which Atheists themselves deny, when they affirm that
the World has been from all Eternity in the same case it is at present.
Moroever, it is a Maxim received of all men, That Idem qua Idem, semper facit
Idem. For example, Fire that burns wood, coals, straw, etc. will always burn,
if it be constantly supplied with fuel. Therefore if the Heavens, the Stars,
and the Elements, have been without action during an infinite time, from whence
did it come to pass, that they have acted afterward? Certainly it cannot be of
themselves, no new thing being come to pass, and having always remained in the
same state: and if it be of some other, it cannot be but of God If all things
have been from all Eternity with action; for example, the Sun with motion and
illumination, Men with ratiocination, Oxen with bellowing, Lions with roaring,
etc. they must needs necessarily have acted without ceasing, during a finite,
or an infinite time: If they have acted during a finite time only, it will
follow that betwixt their action which is from all Eternity, and the cessation
of their action, which is not from all Eternity, the difference will be of a
finite and limited time only. And consequently that betwixt that which is
Eternal, and that which is not Eternal, betwixt that which is infinite, and
that which is finite, the difference or distance will be of a finite and
limited time, only; and that there will be wanting, but a certain finite time,
lest the cessation of their action, which is not Eternal, be Eternal; and that
the finite time, to wit, the time since the cessation of their action, added to
the finite time of the duration of the action, will make up an infinite time,
such as is the Eternity of a thing; which is absurd and contradictory. If they
have acted without ceasing during an infinite time, it will follow that a man
has spoken, an Ox bellowed, a Lion roared, longer than a hundred thousand
millions of thousands of years, which is ridiculous, and Atheists themselves
deny, when they affirm that the world has been from all Eternity in the same
case it is now. Besides all this, The motion of the Sun, the word of Man, the
roaring of a Lion, etc. have certain parts which cannot be Eternal; because
those things that are Eternal cannot be but together, as has been proved
already: But the parts of the motion of the Sun cannot be together, because
they succeed one another; therefore they cannot be Eternal. Neither can the
parts of the speech of a Man be together; for when he pronounces one word, he
does not pronounce another; and when he utters a Syllable, he does not utter
another. For Example, If one supposes that a man from all Eternity has
pronounced this word (glory) it is evident that the Syllable (ry) was uttered
after the Syllable (glo) and consequently that the prolation of the Syllable
(ry) is not Eternal, seeing that which is Eternal is not after another, though
there have been wanting but very little, to wit, as much time only, as one
needs to utter the Syllable (glo) which is absurd and contradictory.

CHAP. II. 1. Wherein one may see the first Answer of Atheists, saying, That
Successive things may have been from all Eternity collectively, and not
distributively. 2. How many ways one thing may be related to, or agree with
another, distributively or collectively. 3. That Successive things cannot be
from all Eternity collectively. 4. That old men, young men, and children
collectively or taken together, cannot have been from all Eternity. 5. That the
dead have not been from all Eternity. 6. That all men collectively having been
begotten, cannot have been from all Eternity. 7. That the right ^^derstanding
and apprehension of the distinction of Atheists, is a sufficient refutation of
the same.
1. THe first Answer of Atheists to all our former Arguments, is to be seen in
Oviedo his Natural Philosophy, in the Nineteenth Controversy, in the second
and third Propositions; where having said, That Time, Motion, and all
Successive Things may have been from all Eternity; and having cited for his
warranters, Thomas Vasquez, and Pererius, and several others, at last he
Answers our Arguments and Reasons thus: All Generations and Corruptions (says
he) all Days and all Nights, all the Flowings and Ebbings of the Sea, all the
Full Moons and the New Moons, all Men and all Beasts, etc. if they be taken and
considered particularly, have had a beginning, and none of these things in
particular is from all Eternity.

But all Generations taken together, or the Collection of all the Generations
that have been in time past, all Days taken together, or the Collection of all
the Days that have been in time past, all Men taken together, or the Collection
of all the Men that have been in time past, etc. all these Collections (says
he) may have been from all Eternity.

The Reply.
2. Against this Answer, I say, That one thing may be related to, and affirmed
of another, four ways chiefly: First, When it agrees with, or belongs to all
together, and to every one in particular: in this manner one may say that all
men are rational; because all Men taken together are so, and every man taken in
particular is rational. Secondly, One thing may be related to and affirmed of
another, when it agrees with, or belongs to every one in particular; and not to
all together: and in this manner one may say that all men do occupy a certain
place, and are not in several places at once, because every man in particular
is in a certain determined place, and cannot be in diverse places at once; but
all men taken together are in diverse places at once, viz. In England, France,
Spain, Italy, etc. Thirdly, One thing is related to, or affirmed of another,
when it agrees with it because of some one, but yet not with every one in
particular. In this manner one may say that the Kings of France are from the
year Four hundred and twenty, or thereabouts; because Pharamond, who is thought
to have been the first King of France, began to reign about that time; but
every King of France is not from the year Four hundred and twenty: Likewise,
One may say that the Romans did sometime Conquer the Gauls, because Julius
Caesar a Roman, with the help of some Roman Legions did subdue the same; but
every Roman Soldier did not do that Exploit or Achievement. Fourthly, One
thing agrees with, or is related to another, when it belongs to all taken
together; but neither to some one, nor to every one in particular. Thus one may
say that the Kings of France have reigned above Twelve hundred years; which is
only to be affirmed of all the Kings of France taken together in their
succession, but not of some one King, nor of every King of France in
particular. So it may be said that the Apostles have preached the Gospel
throughout the whole World, which must be said of all the Apostles taken
together, yet dispersed, seeing every Apostle did not Preach the Gospel in
every part of the World.

3. This being granted (as it must needs be) let us see which of these four
ways, Atheists may understand the Proposition in question, viz. That
Generations and Corruptions, Days and Nights, Men and Beasts have been from all
Eternity. And first, I say, that it cannot be understood, according to the two
first ways, which require that one thing be related to, and agree with another
in respect to every one in particular, as has been said: for every Generation,
every Day, every Man in particular, has not been from all Eternity; else we
that live at this Day should have been from all Eternity; which is absurd.
Secondly, I say, It cannot be understood in the fourth manner; for when one
thing is related to, or agrees with all taken together, only, and not with
every one in particular, nor because of some one; then all are so necessary to
establish the truth of the Proposition, that if you except or take one away,
the Proposition will be false: For Example in this Proposition, The Kings of
France have reigned twelve hundred fifty six years; the Reign of twelve hundred
fifty six years are so to be applied to, and affirmed of all the Kings of
France taken together, that if one or two were not numbered with the rest, they
would not have reigned so long, and consequently the Proposition should be
false. Thus in this Proposition, The Apostles are in number twelve, the number
twelve belongs to all the Apostles taken together so necessarily, that if one
should be taken away, or deducted out of that number, the Apostles should not
be in number twelve, and consequently the Proposition should be false.
Therefore in this Proposition, Men have been from all Eternity; If to have been
from all Eternity, is proper to, and to be affirmed of all men taken together,
only, and not of every man in particular, nor because of some one that has
been from all Eternity; it follows that all men are so necessary to establish
the truth of the said Proposition, that if one or two are taken away, men shall
not have been from all Eternity, and consequently the Proposition will be
false: but according to the confession of Atheists, Though one should take away
all the men that have been four thousand years since, yet nevertheless they
might have been from all Eternity and without beginning. Therefore in this
Proposition, Men have been from all Eternity; to have been from all Eternity,
does not belong to, nor is to be affirmed of all men taken together, only.
Finally, since all men taken together, or the collection of all men, is not
only two days since, much less from all Enity and without beginning: It must
then be concluded, that the Proposition in hand, viz. That Generations and
Corruptions, Days and Nights, Men and Beasts have been from all Eternity; must
be understood by Atheists, in the third way or manner; that is to say, because
of some Generation, some Day, some Man, etc. that may have been from all
Eternity: But I have proved already, that there has been no Generation, no
Day, no Man, etc. from all Eternity; and Atheists themselves confess it in
their first Answer Therefore it must be concluded, that Generations and
Corruptions, Days and Nights, Men and Beasts, etc. have by no means been from
all Eternity.

4. Moreover, All the Old men which have been in time past, taken together,
either have been from all Eternity, or not: if they have been from all
Eternity, it follows that their Old age is Eternal, which is impossible: Seeing
that which is Eternal, is not after another, there being nothing before that
which is Eternal: But their Old age is after another; to wit, after their
Youth: Therefore their Old age is not Eternal. A man's Young age may well be
with the Young age, or after the Old age of another man; but the Youth of a
Man, cannot be with, or after the Old age of the same Man, and Old age must
necessarily be after: Now we speak here of the same Men, that is, the same Old
men; and consequently the Old age of all Old men, ought necessarily to be after
the Young age of the self-same Old men that have been Young: If they have not
been from all Eternity, it will follow that men will have been from all
Eternity without Old age, or Old men; which is denied by Atheists themselves,
who affirm the World to have been from all Eternity in the same state it is
now, and consequently with Old men. And moreover, Either men have been from all
Eternity without Old men, during a finite time, or during an infinite time: If
during a finite time, it will follow that betwixt that which is not from all
Eternity, viz. Old men, and that which is not from all Eternity, viz. other men
taken together, there is but a finite and limited time; and that the finite
time, such as is the time, since the which there are Old men, added to the
finite time, such as is the duration of Men, without Old men, will make up an
infinite time, such as is the pretended Eternity of Men; which is absurd: If
they have been from all Eternity without Old men, during an infinite time, it
will follow, that Men will have been without Old men above a thousand thousands
millions of thousands of years; which is ridiculous, and denied by these
profane Atheists themselves.

By the same Reason one may prove, that all young men taken together, which
have been in time past, have not been from all Eternity; seeing their Young age
is after their Infancy: and one may prove also that all Children taken
together, which have been in time past, have not been from all Eternity: Seeing
their Infancy, is after their Birth and Conception. But if the Collection of
all Children that have been, the Collection of all Young men that have been,
and the Collection of all Old men that have been; If (I say) all these
Collections have not been from all Eternity, it is evident that the Collection
of all men which have been in time past, is not from all Eternity; since it
comprises only the Collection of Children, of Young and Old Men that have been.

5. Again, either all men which have been dead in time past, being taken
together, have been dead from all Eternity, or not: If they have been dead from
all Eternity, it follows that their death is Eternal, which is impossible;
seeing that which is Eternal is not after another, there being nothing before
that which is Eternal, and without beginning: but their death is after another,
viz. their life; seeing the death and life of the same men cannot be together;
but their death ought to be necessarily after their life; therefore their death
is not Eternal: If all men which have been dead taken together, have not been
dead from all Eternity, it will follow, that men have been from all Eternity,
without having any dead men; which is denied by Atheists, who affirm, That the
World has been from all Eternity, in the same state it is now; and
consequently with dead men. And moreover, either men have been from all
Eternity, without dead men, during a finite time, or during an infinite time:
If during a finite time, it will follow that betwixt that which is not from all
Eternity, to wit, dead men, and that which is from all Eternity, viz. the
living Men taken together, there is but a finite and limited time; and that the
finite time, that is to say, the time since the which there have been dead men,
added to the finite time, such as is the duration of living men only, will make
up an infinite time, such as is the pretended Eternity of men; which is
contradictory. If during an infinite time, it will follow, that men will have
been above an hundred thousand millions of thousands of years without dying,
which is ridiculous, and denied by Atheists themselves.

6. To this may be added this Argumen, That which is begotten, is begotten of
another, seeing nothing begets or produces it self: But all men which have been
in time past taken together, have been begotten; seeing that according to the
opinion of Atheists, in the Collection of all men which have been in time past,
there is never a man not begotten: Therefore all men which have been in time
past taken together, have been begotten of another. From this Argument I form
another, thus, Whatsoever is begotten of another, is after that other; seeing
that a man who begets another man, did exist before he begat him: But all men
taken together have been begotten of another, as I have proved: Therefore all
men taken together have been after another. From this last Syllogism, I will
also form this, That which has been from all Eternity, has not been after
another, seeing there is nothing before that which is Eternal: But all men
taken together have been after another, as I have proved; Therefore all men
taken together have not been from all Eternity.

7. Lastly, The serious consideration of the very terms of this distinction of
Oviedo, will cause any rational men to reject it as ridiculous: Men (says he)
have been from all Eternity; but no man has been from all Eternity; the
collection of men which have been in time past, is from all Eternity; but there
is never a a man in all this Collection, from all Eternity: The Collection of
Days is without beginning; but there is never a Day in all this Collection
without beginning: as if one should say the Kings Successors of William the
Conqueror have been ever since the year One thousand fourscore and seven, but
there was never a King in that year.

CHAP. III. 1. The second Answer of Atheists, viz. that as in the
After-Eternity, that is to say, in the future, there will be no last or
farthermost; so in the Fore-Eternity, that is to say, in time past, there has
been no first or foremost. 2. That Atheists compare unlike things, and the
disparity explained. 3. That reascending toward the time past, one may run
through it, and so it is not infinite. 4. That the Succession of Things cannot
be Eternal; and why?
1. BEfore I proceed any farther, one must take notice, that for the right
understanding of these unusal words, the Fore-Eternity and the After-Eternity;
one must conceive that this day is the tie that knits and joins them both
together; so that the Fore-Eternity is a duration, from this day reascending
upwards or through the time past, even to the infinite; and the After-Eternity
is a duration from this day toward the future, even to the infinite.

This kind of Riddle being now clear, let us come to their Answer. As in the
After-Eternity (say they) the Day shall Eternally be after the Night, and the
Night after the Day, so that there shall never be a later Day, nor a later
Night; our Hemisphere will be Eternally lightened, after that of our Antipodes,
and the Hemisphere of our Antipodes after ours; so that there shall never be a
later illumination: The Flowing of t^^ Sea will be Eternally after the Ebbing;
and the Ebbing after the Flowing; so that there will never be a later Flowing
or Ebbing: The New Moon will be Eternally after the Full Moon, and the Full
Moon after the New Moon, without ever being a later New Moon, or a later Full
Moon; one part of Time or Motion will be Eternally after the other, without
ever being a later part of Time and Motion, etc. So in the Fore-Eternity, the
Day has been Eternally before the Night, and the Night before the Day; so that
there was never a first Day or a first Night: and consequently the Day and the
Night have been from all Eternity, one before another, as they will be
Eternally one after another: Likewise our Hemisphere has been Enlightened
Eternally before the Hemisphere of our Antipodes, and that of our Antipodes
before ours, without ever having been a first illumination; and consequently
illumination is Eternal successively, and the two Hemispheres have been
Enlightened from all Eternity, one before the other, as they shall be
Enlightened Eternally one after another: So the New Moon has been Eternally
before the Full Moon, and the Full Moon be^^re the New Moon, without ever
having been a first New, or Full Moon; and consequently the Full and the New
Moon have been from all Eternity, one before the other, as they shall be
Eternally one after another. Item, The Flowing of the Sea, has been Eternally
before the Ebbing, and the Ebbing before the Flowing, without ever having been
a first Flowing or Ebbing; and consequently the Flowing and the Ebbing have
been from all Eternity, one before the other, as they shall be Eternally one
after after the other, Finally, Every Day, every Illumination, every Flowing,
every Man, have indeed had a Beginning, so that there is none of these in
particular, that ever has been without Beginning, and from all Eternity: But
the Succession of Days, Illuminations, Flowings, and Men, etc. is without
Beginning and from all Eternity.

The Reply.
2. Against this Answer I say, That the comparison is to no purpose, because
things altogether unlike are compared in it, viz. that which has been and that
which never shall be totally; that which is totally past, and that which never
shall pass away: For the Full and the New Moon, the Day and the Night, the
Flowing and Ebbing of the Sea, the Illumination of both Hemispheres, Men, and
suchlike Successive things, that are pretended to have been from all Eternity,
have been indeed, but are no more, and consequently are past; and therefore the
pretended Fore-Eternity, being of this nature, is certainly past. To make then
a true and even comparison of Equal things, one should suppose of the
After-Eternity, that which is most certain of the Fore-Eternity, to wit, that
it is altogether past. Now if the After-Eternity should come to pass away, and
have an end, it would be finite, and consequently there would be a later Day,
and a later Night, a later Flowing and Ebbing, etc. and which is more than
that, the After-Eternity should be limited on every side, that is to say, by
this Day, and by the later Day, because it should be past as the Fore-Eternity:
Since then, that the pretended Fore-Eternity is past, it must be also finite,
and consequently there has been a first Day, a first Flowing, a First Man,
etc. and which is more, it is limited on every side, to wit, by this Day, and
by the first Day as well as the After-Eternity would be, if it were past.

3. From this Reply it is evident, That though one descending toward the
future, might go or reach to the infinite; yet re-ascending toward that which
is past, one could notreach to the infinite: because in every progression to
the infinite, there is always something to be taken in, so that one cannot run
through such an infinite: Now re-ascending from this Day to the time past,
there is not always something to be taken in, but one must stop at a first
thing, and so by ascending to the time past, all the time past must be taken
in: Therefore in ascending to the time past, there is no infinite to be reached
unto.

That there is not always something to be taken in, in ascending to the time
past; and that from this Day, ascending to the time past, all that time past
may be taken in, it is evident; because to descend by the time past to this
Day, and ascend from this Day toward the time past, are one and the same
thing, or at least are things alike; as the way from Thebes to Athens, and from
Athens to Thebes, is one and the same way, and all the time past either in
ascending, or descending, is always the same. Therefore since that descending
by the time past to this Day, all the time past is taken in; it is evident that
ascending from this Day toward the time past, all the time past may be taken
in, and consequently there is no progression to the infinite that way.

4. Finally, One cannot conceive, that there was never a Man, a Day, a Flowing
of the Sea, etc. from all Eternity, and that notwithstanding, the succession of
Men, Days, and Flowings, be from all Eternity, and without Beginning; for if
there be no Men, no Days, from all Eternity and without Beginning, it is
impossible the succession of the same should be from all Eternity, and without
Beginning. Seeing the Succession of things cannot be without the things,
whereof it is Succession: And moreover it is certain and undoubtable (and in
this case is very considerable) that every Succession comprises Essentially
many things, whereof one is after another; so that Succession, not only, cannot
have a Being, but which is more cannot be conceived, without such things as are
one after another: Now that which is after another cannot be Eternal: there
being nothing before that which is Eternal, and without Beginning: Seeing then
that Succession comprehends Essentially such a thing as is after another, it
follows necessarily that Succession in it self cannot be Eternal; for if it be
said to be Eternal, it must be in relation to some one thing which is not after
another, but without Beginning and from all Eternity, which is denied by
Atheists themselves; for they profess to believe, That there was never a Man,
never a Day, etc. but they have been after another (and by consequence cannot
have been without Beginning) lest they be forced to confess that there has
been a first Man, a first Day, a first Flowing, etc. and consequently a
Beginning, and so no Eternity of Men, Days, and Flowings, etc.

CHAP. IV. 1. The third Answer of Atheists concerning the infinite number. 2.
Three Arguments of Atheists, whereby they strive and endeavor to prove, that
one infinite is greater than another. 3. That those Men which have been in time
past, make up some number. 4. That in whatsoever number of Men, there is as
much, or more, or less. 5. The refutation of the Atheists Argument, that one
infinite is greater than another, materially, and not formally. 6. That it is a
contradiction to grant, or make, one infinite to be greater than the other. 7.
That the Answer of Atheists, does not at all hit or touch our chief and
indissoluble Reason, drawn from the distance of Men. 8. What the Space is not,
and what it is proved. 9. The Answer to the Atheists first Argument, drawn from
the infiniteness of the Oriental and Occidental Space. 10. Another Answer to
their second Argument, drawn from the infiniteness of the Thoughts, both of Men
and Angels. 11. Another to their third Argument, drawn from the pretended
infiniteness of Men and Lions possible, that is to say, that God may produce
and create.
1. THe third Answer of Atheists is, that there having been in time past an
infiniteness of Men, Days, and Generations, etc. one cannot say that there
has been a number of them, either finite or infinite, seeing every number is
called number, because it may be numbered: Now the infiniteness of Men, Days,
etc. cannot be numbered, and therefore these terms, number infinte, are
contradictory; that is, one must confess, that Men, Days, etc. are in some
number; they say that number is an infinite number; but that in the infinite
number there is neither as much, nor more, nor less; seeing these particles, as
much, more, and less. belong only, and are solely related to finite numbers.
And that if they be compelled by force of Reason to acknowledge that these
particles belong to all numbers, either finite or infinite: they Answer that in
the infinite number of Men (for Example) that have been in time past, there
have been so many Men as Hands and Fingers; and that all infinite Numbers are
equal. And if they be forced to confess that one infinite number is greater
than the other, they understand it materially, that is in reference to the
parts of it, and not formally, that is to say, in reference to the infiniteness
of the same. And finally, if they be constrained to grant, that one infinite is
greater than the other, both materially and formally; they say there is no
absurdity to grant one infinite to be greater than the other; and they
endeavor to prove it by these three Reasons. The first is drawn from the
infinitenss of the space in this manner: If from the City of London, drawing
perpetually Eastward, or to the Orient, there is no end to be attained unto,
and consequently the Oriental space is infinite, and so are the parts of the
same in infinite number; for as to have an end and to be finite, is one and the
same thing; so not to have an end and to be infinite is one and the same thing.
Item from the City of London, drawing perpetually Westward, or to the Occident,
there is no end, and consequently the Occidental space is infinite, and so are
the parts of the same in infinite number, by the same reason: Now the Oriental
and Occidental space together are greater than the Oriental space alone; seeing
the Oriental and Occidental space together, is as an All, whereof the Oriental
space is but one part, and totum est Majus sua part. Therefore one infinite,
such as is the Oriental and Occidental space together, is greater than another
infinite, such as is the Oriental space alone; and an infinite number, such as
is that of the parts of the Oriental and Occidental space together, is greater
than another infinite, such as is that of the parts of the Occidental space
alone.

2. Their second Reason is drawn from the infiniteness of the Thoughts of Men
and Angels, thus: The Thoughts Men shall have hereafter, in the after-Eternity,
whether in Earth or in Heaven, are in number infinite; for if they were in
number finite, it would follow that Men being come unto that finite and
limited number of Thoughts, would think no more, and so would no more know
God, nor any other Thing; seeing one cannot think on something without knowing
the same in some manner: Item, The Thoughts Angels shall have hereafter in the
After-Eternity, are in number infinite, else at least there would be a time
wherein the Angels should think no more: Now the Thoughts of Men and Angels
together are in greater number than the Thoughts of Men alone: Therefore a
number infinite, such as is that of the Thoughts of Men and Angels together, in
the After-Eternity, is greater than another infinite, such as is that of the
Thoughts of Men alone, in the same Eternity.

Their third reason is drawn from Men and Lions possible; and thus they argue.
Men possible, that is to say, that God may produce, are in number infinite; for
if they were in number finite, for Example, One hundred thousand millions, it
would follow that God could not produce one more, seeing that one Man would be
over and above all Men possible: Item Lions possible, or that God may produce
and create, are in number infinite for the same reason: Now the number of Men
and Lions possible is greater than the sole number of Men possible: Therefore a
number infinite, such as is that of Men and Lions possible together, is greater
than another infinite, such as is that of Men possible only.

The Reply.
3. Against this Answer, I say first, That all Men which have been in time past
are many, that is to say, are more than one, and consequently make up a
multitude, which in it self is either numerable and finite, or innumerable and
infinite: If it be numerable and finite, it follows that there has been a
certain number finite and determined in it self; and so that there have been
some first, some second, etc. And therefore that they have not been from all
Eternity: If it be innumerable and infinite, my argument is entire and sirm:
which is thus: One cannot give a greater multitude than an innumerable or
infinite multitude, else it should be exceeded, by this greater multitude:
Seeing that of two multitudes the greater exceeds the lesser, and consequently
should be finite and limited; seeing that which is exceeded is finite and
determined, where it is exceeded: But one can give a greater multitude than
that of Men, which have been in time past; to wit, the multitude of Eyes,
Fingers, Hairs, and Beasts: Therefore the multitude of Men, which have been in
time past, is not infinite, but finite and termined, and consequently has not
been from all Eternity, And here observe that in this place I use the words of
multitude and number for one and the same thing.

4. Secondly, It is false, That in an infinite multitude, or an infinite
number, there is neither as much, nor more, nor less; for in whatsoever
multitude of Men, either finite or infinite, it is certain that there are as
many Noses as Mouths, as many Hearts as Heads, as many Hands as Feet; and it is
undoubtable that in the multitude of Men, which have been in time past, there
have been more Hands and Fingers than Men; seeing there is no Man in the
Collection of all Men, which have been in time past (Monsters excepted) but he
has had two Hands and ten Fingers; and no Man can deny that the Collection of
all Animals which have been in time past, is greater than the sole Collection
of all Men which have been in time past; seeing the Collections of all Animals
contains the Collection of all Men, and of all Beasts. But the Collection of
all Men and of all Beasts, is greater than the Collection of all Men only; else
the whole, to wit, the Collection of all Men and of all Beasts, should not be
greater than the Parts; to wit, the Collection of all Men only. By the same
reason one may prove that the Collection of all Days, and of all Nights, is
greater than the Collection of all Days only: and that the Collection of all
Generations and Corruptions is greater than the Collection of all Generations
only; and consequently, that the Collections of Days and Generations which
have been in time past, are exceeded, and so finite and determined, where they
are exceeded; and therefore are not from all Eternity, but have had a
Beginning: Finally, In whatsoever greater multitude, or whatsoever great
number, either finite or infinite, there are more binaries than quarternaries,
seeing every quarternary contains two binaries.

5. Thirdly, It is in vain to say that one infinite is not greater than another
formally, that is to say, in respect to the infiniteness; but that it is so
materially, that is to say, in respect to the Parts; because it is evident that
the parts properly make the infinite; and therefore if one infinite has more
parts than another infinite, it will be greater than that, even as an infinite;
and moreover, though one infinite should be greater than another materially,
that is to say, in respect to the parts, it will follow that the lesser shall
not be truly infinite; seeing it will finish and be determined, where the other
will begin to exceed it.

6. Fourthly, it is false, there is no absurdity of two infinites to make one
greater than the other: for from thence will follow an apparent contradiction,
to wit, that one and the same thing, will be finite and will not be finite;
seeing the lesser infinite will be exceeded by the greater infinite, and
consequently will be finite; seeing that which is exceeded, is finite and
determined where it is exceeded: And it will not be finite, seeing it is
supposed infinite, and that which is infinite is not finite: Therefore the same
thing, to wit, the lesser infinite, will be finite and not finite, which things
are contradictory.

Fifthly, The Answer of Atheists does not at all hit or touch our chief and
indissoluble Reason, drawn from the distance of men, thus: The men which have
lived in time past till now, are all distant one from another with an infinite
distance of time only, or with a finite distance only; or some are distant with
a finite distance, and others with an infinite distance; if they are all
distant with an infinite distance of time, it will follow, that betwixt King
Charles the First, and King Charles the Second, there will be an infinite
distance of time; which is altogether absurd: if they are all distant with a
finite distance of time only, it follows that their duration contains a finite
time only, and consequently are not Eternal, which is most true: If some are
distant with a finite distance, and others with an infinite distance, and that
of all them which are only distant with a finite distance, one takes the two
remotest; for Example, Peter who lives at this day, and then remounts toward
them that have preceded Peter, and from whom he is descended, if one takes him
(I say) who in a finite distance is the remotest, to wit, John, I say, that if
one remounts a little higher, that is to say, unto William, the father of John;
it will follow that Peter and William will be distant one from another, with an
infinite distance of time; seeing they are more distant and farther removed
than Peter and John, which are the farther removed in a finite distance: So
that it will follow, that betwixt the finite distance, which is between Peter
and John, and the infinite distance which is between Peter and William, there
will be but a very few years difference, that is to say, so many years (and no
more) as are between William the father, and John the son; which is altogether
absurd.

This Reason may be confirmed thus: Every multitude actually existing, or
having actually existed, if it be actually finite, it may be told; seeing that
which cannot be told is necessarily infinite: therefore if from this day,
remounting toward the time past, one begins to tell those men which have been
successively one before another; the whole finite multitude of those men, will
at last be told and numbered; so that beyond that multitude there will remain
never a man to be numbered, that may with the said multitude, make a finite
number: Therefore if to the finite multitude of all men, which have been in
time past, one adds only a man, the result of it will be an infinite multitude;
seeing the precedent multitude, without that man added, was the greatest of all
finite multitudes past; nay, even the whole finite multitude of men which have
been in time past; and so that man added to the whole finite multitude of those
man, making the same greater, it must necessarily be infinite: Moreover, it
cannot be infinite, seeing a finite thing, to wit, a man added to another
finite thing, as the whole finite multitude of men, cannot make an infinite:
and though never one man should be added to the said multitude, there would
follow an evident contradiction; for there being as many more feet as men, it
will follow that the feet will be finite, and not finite in number; they will
be finite, because one finite, to wit, the whole finite multitude of men, and
the double of this finite, to wit, the feet of these men, do not make one
infinite; Also they will not be finite, because the number of feet is greater
than the whole finite multitude of men, which is supposed to be the greatest
number of all finite things.

And it is no strong Argument, to say, as Oviedo in his Natural Philosophy,
Controv. the 14th. Propos. 3. Paragraff 9th. There is never so great a finite
number, but a greater may be always given, in infinitum; so that one cannot
cannot properly say, the greater of finite numbers: for though it be true in
things possible, that is to say, that God may produce and create, seeing God
having created, for Example, a great number of men, may create and produce
still a greater number, and always, a greater; but also always finite in
infinitum; nevertheless in things actually existing, or having actually
existed, as the Question is now, it is certain that there is a finite number,
which is the greatest of all finite numbers; and it is false that in a
multitude actually present or past, there is no number finite, but will always
admit of a greater number, and always greater, in infinitum; seeing if there
were always a greater, and always a greater finite number, it would follow that
the actual finite number could never be told, and consequently should be
infinite; for that which is finite only cannot be told.

Further, All men which have been in time past are not distant one from
another, with an infinite distance of time, else my Father and I should be
infinitely distant one from another; therefore all men must be distant one from
another, with a finite distance, and consequently must have lasted but a finite
time, and must have made up but a finite multitude, or some must be distant
with a finite distance, and others with an infinite distance; in which case
those that are distant with a finite distance only, taken together, will have
lasted but a finite time, and will make up but a finite multitude, and will
make up the whole multitude finite, so that there will be no greater multitude,
as I have showed already. And it signifies but little, to say with Oviedo in
the above cited place, that all these things are true of a finite number, when
it is determined and specified; as for Example, of the number of an hundred
thousand, or an hundred thousand millions, or a thousand times an hundred
thousand millions, etc. but are not true of a finite number uncertain,
undetermined, and not specified; for in those things which actually exist, or
have actually existed, as the Question is at present, the number is always
certain and determined; and if it be uncertain and undetermined, it is not in
it self, but in respect of our selves who cannot determine it, because it is
too great.

To this you may add this consideration, That that which is Eternal and without
Beginning, is not after another; there being nothing before that which is
Eternal: Now the Sons have been after the Fathers, Death after Life, Old Age
after Young Age, Young Age after Infancy, Infancy after Birth, and Birth after
Conception: Therefore Sons, Dead Men, Old Men, Young Men, Children; all Men
Born are not from all Eternity and without Beginning.

8. Now I must answer at large the three Objection; mentioned in the third
Answer of Atheists, by which they pretend to prove, not only that there is an
infinite, but that an infinite is greater than another; for at first sight they
appear so strong, that they must needs be examined narrowly, to take away the
offense they might otherwise give to the weak.

The first Objection drawn from the infiniteness of the Oriental and Occidental
space cannot be well resolved, until we have first taken a view, and attained
to some knowledge of the essence of place or space: Therefore I shall show
first of all, what the space is not, and what it is, then I shall answer the
objection.

For the first, I say, That the place or space must of all necessity be
something or nothing at all: Now one cannot truly say that the space is nothing
at all, or a mere nothing; therefore it must be something. That the space is
not a mere nothing, appears, because a mere nothing is capable of nothing, and
can do nothing; because a mere nothing and an impossibility do not differ: Now
the space is capable of something and can do something; seeing it is capable to
receive the Bodies, and truly it is the receptacle of all Bodies; since that
all Bodies occupy some space: therefore the space is not a mere nothing.
Moreover, Betwixt two nothings there is no difference; but the space and that
which is between two Bodies, touching one another, do differ greatly: therefore
the space and that which is between two Bodies touching one another, are not
two nothings; and since that which is between two Bodies touching one another,
is a mere nothing; the space ought necessarily not to be a mere nothing: Now
that the space and that which is between two Bodies touching one another, do
greatly differ, appears, because a Body cannot be put between two Bodies
touching one another, but a Body may be put in the space.

Having showed that the space is not a mere nothing, but that it is something;
it must necessarily be something real, or something fained and imaginary; but
the space is not something fained and forged by humane wit, seeing that the
space has existed, and has been occupied by the Heavens, the Earth, the Sea,
before ever Man was; so far it is from being fained and forged by Humane Wit;
and all Bodies occupy a space, though we do not observe it, or think of it:
Therefore the space is something real.

Again, Every real being is either a substance or an accident; because every
real being is either inherent to some subject, and depending of the same, that
is to say, so tied and fastened to the subject, that it cannot be without it,
and so is an accident, or is not inherent, and tied to some subject, and
depending on the same, but may exist alone, and so is a substance: But the
space is not inherent and tied to some subject, and consequently is not an
accident: Therefore the space is a substance. That the space is not inherent to
some subject, for Example, to some Body, appears, because that which is
inherent and tied to the Body, moves with the Body, or according to the motion
of the Body: So the Color of a Horse moves according to the motion of the
Horse; the Blackness of a Crow moves according to the motion of the Crow; and
the Figure of a Man, moves according to the motion of a Man, etc. But the space
occupied by the Body, does not move with the Body; or according to the motion
of the Body: Therefore the space occupied by the Body, is not inherent and tied
to the Body.

That the space does not move according to the motion of the Body, appears,
because a Body by its motion, leaves one place and takes another, and having
occupied one place, occupies another presently; besides if place or the space
should move according to the motion of the Body, it would follow that a Body
going from London to Oxford, should not stir nor budge from its place, and
would always be in the same place; seeing the place or space would always
accompany him. Nay, Aristotle and all other Philosophers before and after him,
did all confess that place or the space was altogether immovable. And it is in
vain to say, that in the same time that a Body leaves the place or space, it
did occupy; another Body succeeds, to which the space is inherent and tied:
for besides that the general Maxim received of all, should be destroyed: That
an accident never passes from one subject to another, and that it cannot be
separated from its subject, but by perishing; it is evident that the place or
space is no more inherent to the Body, than a Chamber to those Men that are in
it; than the Ocean to Fishes, the Air to Birds, and the Firmament to the Stars;
all which notwithstanding are substances: It is evident that the Bodies leave
places, and tend to places, and that place or space is indifferent to all sorts
of Bodies, and never ties it self to any.

Add hereto, that the place or space was before the Body, and that if there had
not been a space before the World, it would have been impossible to make the
World; and if there were no spaces beyond the World, it should be impossible to
put a Body there: and therefore seeing the space was before the Body, one
cannot say it is an accident of the Body; for an accident is never before its
subject. If any one say that God created the space with the World; and if he
would create some other Worlds, he would also create other Spaces with them;
and that beyond the World there is no space: Against that I say that where
there is nothing at all, one cannot create neither Body nor Space: For Example,
Between two Bodies touching one another, there is nothing at all; so that
neither Body nor space can be created there: therefore, if beyond the World
there is nothing at all, God cannot create there, neither Body nor Space; and
if before the Creation of the World, there was nothing at all where the World
is, God could not have created there neither Body nor Space; because that
betwixt two mere nothings there is no difference; and we are to judge alike of
things that do not differ: Therefore if the mere nothing that is between two
Bodies touching one another, is capable of nothing, and neither Body nor Space
can be created there; neither the mere nothing, that these Men say is beyond
the World, and the mere nothing, that they say was where the World is before
the Creation of the same, will be capable of nothing, and one cannotcreate
there neither Body nor Space.

Moreover, God is not in a mere nothing, and one cannot say, that God is where
there is nothing at all; for Example, God is not between two Bodies touching
one the other totally, because between such Bodies there is nothing at all: But
God is beyond the World, and before the World, he was where the World is:
Therefore one cannot say, that beyond the World there is nothing at all; and
that where the World is before the Creation of the same, there was nothing at
all; so that there was something, which can be no other than the space. That
God is beyond the World, and that before the Creation, he was where the World
is; appears, because nothing can act, where it is not, neither by it self, nor
by its virtue and power: But God did act where the world is, in creating the
same there, and God can act beyond the World, creating there other Bodies, and
other Worlds: Therefore God is beyond the World, and before the World was where
the World is, both by himself and by his power; Seeing the Power of God is
nothing else but God himself. For God being most simple, all that is in God, or
can be conceived to be in God, ought necessarily to be God himself. And
certainly, if God were only in the World, he should be finite, as well as the
World, and so should not be God; for by the word, GOD, Men have always
understood an infinite Being.

Finally, To speak absolutely, and without any respect to God's will to create
but one world; I think God may create another World, distant from this; in
which case there would be an interval or space between the two Worlds, in which
space God should be, else he would be divided from himself, seeing that he
should exist in the two Worlds, without existing between both.

Having proved that place or space is not an Accident, it is easy to show,
that it is not the Superficies, or Surface of such a Body as compasses another.
First, Because according to the common opinion of Philosophers, the Superficies
is an Accident: But we have sufficiently proved, that place or space is not an
Accident; therefore it is not a Superficies. Secondly, The higher Heaven
occupies a place and a space, and the World is necessarily in one place, and
occupies and fills necessarily some space, and yet the World and the higher
Heavens are compassed with no Superficies nor any other Body.

Thirdly, The Superficies or Surface of that Body that compasses another, is
immovable, as it may be seen in a Tower, agitated with great Winds, in a Tree
in the midst of a River, etc. But place or space is wholly immovable, as I
have proved already; which may be confirmed thus: If place were an external
Superficies, it would follow, that a Body that stirs not, yet should move, and
that a Body that moves, should not stir from its place: That it would follow,
that a Body that stirs not, yet should move locally, appears; because a Tower,
a Castle that stirs not, changes its external Superficies when it is agitated
with great winds; and a Tree, that is in the midst of a River, without budging,
changes its external Superficies; and therefore if place is an external
Superficies, to wit, the Surface of a Body that compasses another; It is
evident, that a Body that budges not, receiving any change or alteration of
Surface or Superficies, will also change its place, and move it self locally,
which is altogether absurd: That it would follow also, that a Body which should
move it self locally, should not budge out of its place, appears, because a
Body which moves it self locally, may retain the Superficies of the Body that
compasses it, and consequently may retain its very place; but that which is in
one and the same place, does not budge at all out of it.

Fourthly, It is certain that by local motion, one leaves one place, and passes
unto another, since, a local motion, is nothing else, but a motion toward
another place: now by the local motion, a Body does not necessarily leave a
Superficies, and necessarily acquire another; for Example, If God should move a
Body beyond the World, in the inanity, or in an empty place, that he should
have made, that Body should not be compassed with any Superficies: Therefore,
the Superficies of a Body that compasses another, is not a true place to speak

Finally, The Superficies of a Body is a kind of quantity, and quantity is a
property of the Body, or the Body it self; and therefore since a Body is in a
place, the quantity and consequently the Superficies also, must be in a place,
and not place it self; else place should be in another place, and this other
place in another place, in infinitum; which is absurd. They being not able to
obtund the edge and force of these Arguments, their refuge is to say, that
place is not simply the Superficies of a Body that compasses another; but that
it is such a Superficies, as is joined with order and relation to certain fixed
Points of the World, as are the Center of the World, and the Four Cardinal
Points of it, to wit, the East, and the West, the North, and the South: for the
Superficies retaining the said order and relation to these fixed Points, is
said to be immovable: and by this means they pretend to explain the manner in
the which a Body changes place, to wit, whether it draws near to, or leaves,
that is to say, departs from these fixed Points of the World: For Example, If a
Body ascends, they say it moves, because it departs from the Center of the
World; if it descends, it moves, because it draws near to the Center of the
World, which is the Center of the Earth; if it goes toward the Pole Artick, it
moves, because it draws near to the North, and departs from the South.

Against this Answer, I say, first, That a thing which should not move nor stir
from its place, would nevertheless change place; for if God should move the
Heavens with a direct Motion, the Earth remaining immovable, it would follow
that the Earth which should not move, would change the Order and Relation
(according to these Men's Doctrine) it has to those fixed Points of the World,
and should be either nearer or farther from them; Seeing these fixed Points
being in the Heavens, should move with the Heavens: and therefore if place
should consist and reside in such a relation to the fixed Points of the World,
the Earth having no more the said relation, should have the said place no more;
and consequently would change place, without budging and stirring from the same
place, and without moving locally; all which is absurd.

Secondly, It would follow that a Body should move locally, without ever
changing place; for if God should move locally the whole World, with a direct
motion, and that all the parts of the World should remain in their proper
situation, it would follow that the Earth should move locally, with the whole
World, and yet retain the same order and relation it has, to the fixed Points
of the World; and therefore if place should reside and consist in such a
relation, the Earth retaining the same relation, should also retain the same
place, and consequently would not change place in moving locally; all which is
impossible.

Thirdly, If God should reduce or bring back all things to nothing, one stone
excepted, it is certain this stone should exist in a place, and occupy a space;
and yet it would have neither order nor relation, to these fixed Points of the
World, seeing there would be none, and consequently place and space, do not
consist in a certain order or relation, to the fixed Points of the World,
seeing that place and space may be without them.

Finally, This superficies and relation to the fixed Points of the World,
according to the opinion of Atheists, is an accident: but I have fully proved
above, that place or space is not an accident: from all which it do appear,
that place or space being not an accident, it must necessarily be a substance:
Now all Substance, according to the common Opinion of Philosophers, is either
Corporal or Uncorporal, that is, either a Body or a Spirit: Seeing then that
place or space is not a Body, it must necessarily be a Spirit: That place or
space is not a Body, appears; because a Body is impenetrable with another Body;
but the place or space is penetrable, with all sorts of Bodies: Moreover, Every
Body may move, for moveableness is the property of the Body; but the place or
space is immovable, as I have proved already. In one word, Every Body is in a
place, and occupies a space: but place is not in a place, else there would be
progressus in infinitum, and a space does not occupy another place by the same
reason; therefore place or space is not a Body. Since that place or space, is
not an accident, but a substance, and that it is not a Body as I have proved
just now, it must necessarily be a Spirit: Now every Spirit is either Humane,
or Angelical, or Divine; that is to say, it is either a reasonable Soul, or an
Angel, or a God. Therefore place or space being a Spirit, must be one of the
three: But it is easy to show, that place or space, is neither a reasonable
Soul nor an Angel; because reasonable Souls and Angels are in some sort
moveable, for they are sometimes in a place, and sometimes in another; but the
space is wholly immovable. Moreover, Souls and Angels are finite, and are
only in the World, but Space is infinite, and is beyond the World; as I have
proved above.

Besides, There being never a drop of the Ocean, never so small parcel of the
Air, Fire, or Earth, but it does occupy a place: And there being never a part
of the World, let it be never so small, but it does occupy a space, it would
follow, that there would be never a bit of Sand, never a Drop of the Ocean,
never a Leaf of a Tree, never so small a parcel of the Air, and Earth, but
therein would be a reasonable Soul, or an Angel, and all the World would be
filled, with Angels or reasonable Souls, which is altogether absurd. Upon this
ground, some conclude that place or space is nothing else but the Immensity and
Infiniteness of GOD, and consequently GOD Himself; and so proceed to answer the
Arguments of Atheists drawn from the infiniteness of the Oriental and
Occidental Space: thus:

One must argue and discourse of the Immensity of God in respect to Bodies, as
of his Eternity, in respect to Times and Ages. Therefore as Eternity, which is
the Divinity it self, being indivisible, and without parts, is always the same,
before Ages, with Ages, and after Ages, if they come to pass away: So that the
Eternity, which was before time, and that which is with time, the Eternity
which was in the time of Adam, of Noah, and of Jesus Christ, and that which is
in this present time, are not many Eternities, nor many parts of Eternity, but
one and the same Eternity of God, which is as the receptacle of all Ages and
Times; So that the Age of Adam, the Age of Noah, the Age of Jesus Christ, and
all other Ages and Times whatsoever, are in the same Eternity, and do not
differ in duration, in respect to Eternity, which remaining always immutable,
corresponds to all things and to all Ages; but they do differ in themselves, in
that Times and Ages being necessarily and essentially Successive, cannot be
together, So Immensity, which is the Divinity it self being also indivisible
and without parts, remains always the same, before the Bodies, with the Bodies,
and after the Bodies, if they should happen to be destroyed; So that the
Immensity which is beyond the World, and that which is where the World is; the
Immensity wherein the Sun is, and the Immensity wherein the Earth is, are not
many Immensities, nor many parts of the Immensity, but one and the same
Immensity, which is the receptacle of all Bodies: So that Heaven and Earth, the
Sea and all other Bodies whatsoever, are in the same Immensity, and do not
differ in internal place, in respect to Immensity, which is the true and proper
place of all Bodies; but differ in external place in themselves, in that being
necessarily extended and impenetrable, they cannot be together, and cannot be
compassed of the same Superficies.

And though Philosophers (for the most part) do attribute to the Eternity and
Immensity of God, Virtual Parts, and a Virtual Extension, as well to
distinguish the Eternity from the moment of time, and the Immensity from the
indivisible Point, as because they hold the frailty of humane Spirit to be so
great, that it cannot conceive so long a duration as Eternity is, nor so long a
space as Immensity is, without parts and extension: Nevertheless it is most
certain, that God knows all things as they are, and he that knows perfectly his
Eternity and Immensity, conceives them without parts and extension; and yet he
knows Eternity distant from the moment of time, and Immensity distinct from the
invisible Point.

And it is to no purpose to say, That by these Virtual Parts, Philosophers
meant not true parts; but only somewhat equivalent to these parts: So that
Eternity has somewhat equivalent to the actual parts of time, which have or
may have run during Eternity; and Immensity has somewhat equivalent to the
Bodies or parts of the Bodies, which are in the Immensity: For as it cannot be
truly said, that a Rock standing in the midst of a River, has so many virtual
parts, as there are actual parts of waters, that run and beat it, whilst the
Rock stands and remains always the same, in its firmness and unmoveableness: So
it cannot be truly said, that the Eternity of God, has so many virtual parts,
as there are actual parts, which run and as it were slide away, whilst
Eternity remains always the same in its Immutability: neither can it be said
that the Immensity of God has so many Virtual parts, as there are actual parts
of the Bodies, that are in this Immensity.

It is safer then to call things by their own name, and not give them that,
which they have not; and therefore parts must not be attributed to the Eternity
and Immensity of God, seeing they can have none: but one must say only, that
the Eternity of God, being indivisible and without parts, was necessarily
before time, and is now with time, and shall ever be the same, with or without
time. So that the whole single Eternity corresponds to all times; and that the
Immensity of God, being also indivisible and without parts, was necessarily
before the Bodies, and is now with the Bodies, and shall ever be the same with
or without Bodies; so that the whole single Immensity, corresponds to all the
parts of all the Bodies, that are in this Immensity.

They do not absolutely deny, That humane Spirit, because of its great
weakness, in so high mysteries, cannot conceive the Eternity and Immensity of
God, without attributing to them somewhat equivalent to the actual parts of
Times and Bodies: That it cannot conceive the duration of God, since six
thousand years and very near that the World lasts, without attributing to
the same somewhat equivalent, to the six thousand years; and that it cannot
conceive the Divinity co-existent with all the Bodies of the World, without
attributing to the same somewhat equivalent to the actual extension of all
Bodies.

If God should abolish and reduce this World to nothing, and should also create
another, but not immediately after, they assure that the Spirit of Man cannot
conceive the duration betwixt the two Worlds, without conceiving some space of
time, or somewhat eqvivalent to the space of time: And if God should create
another World, which would not touch this, they think that the Spirit of Man,
cannot conceive the interval, that would be between the two Worlds, without
conceiving some corporal extension, or somewhat equivalent to this extension.
But they think also, that God conceiving the duration or interval, that should
be between the two Worlds, would conceive them otherwise, without space of time
or corporal extension. And that if any will attribute to the Eternity and
Immensity of God, some virtual parts, that is to say, equivalent and
correspondent to the actual parts of Times and Bodies; They say, that the same
is so far from blunting the edge and force of their Arguments, that it favors
them greatly, as will appear anon.

And so answering the Objection precisely, they say, That the Oriental space,
and the Occidental space, are nothing else, than Oriental Immensity, and the
Occidental Immensity: and therefore as the Oriental Immensity, and the
Occicidental Immensity, really and in themselves, are not two Immensities, nor
two parts of Immensity, but are really one and the same Immensity, which is
called Oriental and Occidental, only in respect to the Oriental and Occidental
Bodies, that are or may be in this Immensity. So the Oriental space, and the
Occidental space, are not really and in themselves two different things, but
one and the same thing, which is called Oriental space, and Occidental space,
in respect to the Oriental and Occidental Bodies, that are or may be in the
same.

Moreover, as Immensity, though Infinite, is Indivisible, and without Parts, as
the Divinity from which it it is not distinct. So Space being nothing than the
Immensity of God, though it be infinite, is also Indivisible and without Parts.

Finally, Even as a man, and a rational Animal, are not greater, and have no
more parts than man alone; because a man and a rational Animal are one and the
same thing: So the Oriental and Occidental Immensity, or the Oriental and
Occidental Space, are not greater, and have no more parts, than the Oriental
Immensity alone, or the Oriental Space alone, because the Oriental and
Occidental Immensity, or the Oriental and Occidental Space, are one and the
same thing.

And if one will allow, or suppose some virtual parts in the Eternity and
Immensity of God, and says that the Eternity and Immensity of God have some
virtual Replications, according to the multitudes of Times and Bodies, to the
which the Eternity and Immensity of God correspond. They say, that as the Age
of Adam was in a part or virtual Replication of Eternity, and the Age of Noah
in another: So Heaven is in one part, or virtual Replication of Immensity, and
the Earth in another; and that we are thus to argue of other Times and Bodies.

And if any say, That all things propounded hitherto, are incomprehensible, and
altogether incredible: They answer, That God dwelling in an Inaccessible Light,
one must not wonder, if Incomprehensibility is one of his Properties and
Attributes; And seeing the Eternity and Immensity of God are nothing else than
God himself, one must not think it strange, that they are incomprehensible, and
cannot be perfectly conceived by humane Spirit. Therefore (say they) all things
propounded hitherto, concerning the Eternity, the Space, or Immensity of God,
are indeed incomprehensible; but they have this advantage, that they are not
contradictory: whereas all other ways of Arguing, concerning Eternity, Space,
or Immensity, seem to involve many absurdities and contradictions, alleged in
this Tract. For my part, I think this Answer ought to satisfy any one that is
not contentious; but because it is not common, and may be accused of Novelty;
and indeed is not without difficulty, I submit to the Judgment of my Betters
and Superiors.

But if this Answer does not satisfy, one must say, That space or the place of
Bodies is the Eternal, without action, and infinite Inanity of Ancient
Philosophers, which is neither Body or Spirit, nor Accident, nor active
Substance; but only such a thing as is capable to receive all Bodies, and which
having them, is always infinitely beyond them. And yet this Inanity must
necessarily be supposed without parts really different; Else the Objection of
our Adversaries will remain in its full force: for the Oriental and Occidental
Inanity being infinite and greater than the sole Oriental Inanity, it would
follow, that an infinite should be greater than another; which is absurd. And
because such an Inanity, without parts, will hardly please, and receive
admittance amongst sober, judicious, learned Men; I return to the first Answer,
and ground my Arguing upon it, yet submiting it to the judgment and censure of
those that have attained to a deeper knowledge of these matters.

10. Their second Objection, drawn from the pretended infiniteness of the
thoughts, both of Men and Angels, for the time to come may be resolved two ways:

First, In saying that God will give to every Man, and to every Angel in
particular, one only light and brightness of Glory, by which he shall possess
and enjoy God Eternally; and consequently that every Man and every Angel, shall
have but one only thought, by which he shall be fastened as it were, upon God
Eternally: Therefore seeing that all Men and all Angels will be in number
finite; so the thoughts of Men and Angels will be in number finite.

Secondly, Since I think that the thoughts, or the repetition of the same
thoughts, shall always be diverse in number; I answer that the thoughts of Men
and Angels for the time to come, shall be finite to the infinite, that is to
say, shall increase always, and perpetually be in greater number, and always
in greater number, but always also in finite number: And though to every Day,
to every Month, to every Year: to every Age, and to every Time whatsoever in
particular, this finite number of Thoughts be definite and determined, so that
God may assign and determine the number of the Thoughts of Men and Angels,
which have been in time past to that Day, that Month, that Year, that Age, and
that time inclusively: nevertheless if one speaks indefinitely, without
specifying, neither Day, nor Month, nor Year, nor Age, nor any other Time in
particular, but asks simply, in what number will the Thoughts of Men and Angels
be for the time to come? No other answer can be given, but that the number of
their Thoughts, shall be finite to the infinite, or that their number, is
finite indefinitely, and undeterminedly; for, because of the perpetuity of
Thoughts one cannot assign or determine a certain number, beyond which one
shall have no more Thoughts.

And if one demands further, The Collection of all the Thoughts which shall be
for the time to come, supposed they have never an end, what number is it of? I
answer, That Collection is impossible, and consequently a mere nothing, because
all future Thoughts, taken distributively, are future, but not taken
collectively, seeing they shall never be collected and gathered, and that there
will be still some to come to pass; and consequently to be collected and
gathered: One may also demand whether the number of the future Thoughts of Men
and Angels, which God knows is finite or infinite? To which I answer, That God
knows Things as they are in themselves, and that he knows future Things no
otherwise then they shall be in themselves; for the knowledge of God is always
true, and consequently always conformable to the things known. Therefore
seeing that the Thoughts of Men and Angels, shall always be finite to the
infinite, and that their number shall always be finite indefinitely; it is
evident that God knows them no otherwise, then as finite to the infinite, and
that he knows certainly, that their number is finite and indefinitely, which
will appear more plainly in our Answer to the third Objection.

11. Their third Objection drawn from the pretended infiniteness of Men and
Lions possible, that is to say, that God may produce and create, may be
resolved the same way as the first; to wit, saying that Men and Lions possible
are finite to the infinite, and that the number of them is finite, not
definitely and determinedly, so that one may assign a certain number, beyond
which none will be possible; but is infinite indefinitely, because there is
never so great a nmmber of Men and Lions, but God may produce and create a
greater, and always a greater, and still a greater, but notwithstanding always
finite. If it be objected that the Collection of all Men possible, comprehends
an infinite number: I answer, That such a Collection is impossible, and
consequently a mere nothing; because all Men taken distributively, are indeed
possible, but taken collectively are a mere impossible, and consequently a mere
nothing; because God can never produce so great a number of Men, but he may
always produce a greater, and agreater again; so that it is impossible that God
may not always produce some Men; and consequently the Collection of all Men
possible is impossible, and a mere nothing.

If it be farther objected, That there are as many Men possible, as God knows
are possible; and that God knows a number infinite of possible; seeing that if
he should know only a finite number of Men, he should see the last Man
possible, and should know he could not create any more, and should see the end
of his Power, and consequently his Power should be finite: I Answer, That the
number of Men possible, that God knows, is not infinite, nor also finite
definitely and determinedly: So that one may assign and determine a certain
number, beyond which God knows no more; for there is never so great a number
but God may see and know a greater, and always a greater, and still a greater,
but notwithstanding always finite; because God knows things no otherwise than
they are in themselves: And therefore seeing that Men possible are in number
finite indefinitely; God also knows certainly, that the number of Men possible
is finite indefinitely, and from thence it does not follow, that the power of
God is finite and limited in it self, or that he sees the end of his power,
since he may always produce and create other Men, though always in a finite
number; but at the most it may be said to be finite, in respect to its objects,
or its effects, which cannot be but finite; as the knowledge God has of this
World, though infinite in it self; because it is not distinct from the
Divinity, may be said to be finite, in respect to its objects, to wit, the
World that is finite.

And now I will conclude this Chapter, desiring the Reader to take notice that
when I have spoken of the Eternity of God, of his Immensity, of his Power, and
of his Knowledge, he must not imagine, nor conceive, that I put or suppose,
diverse things, or diverse qualities in God; but he must believe with me, that
there is one and the same thing, to wit, one and the same Divinity, to which
diverse names are given and attributed, according to the diverse respects, to
which it is considered. For the same Divinity, in as much as it contains all
Ages, and corresponds to every one of them, and is infinitely before them, is
called Eternity: Seeing that it is the receptacle of all Bodies, corresponds to
every one of them, and is insinitely beyond all the Creatures of the World, is
called Immensity; as it gives being to every thing, and protects and preserves
them; is called Omnipotency; as it places and disposes them together, according
to the dignity of each of them, is called Wisdom: as it bestows all sorts of
good things upon the Creatures, is called Goodness. And for as much it decrees,
foresees, and rules all the Events in the World, is called Providence. And thus
must we speak of all his other Attributes.

The Answer of Julius Scaliger, in his Exercitations against Cardanus, to
Algazel his Argument, and which the Affrican maintained to be most sound and
solid, has been sufficiently refuted, when I have proved that an infinite is
not greater than another; neither materially nor formally.

CHAP. V. 1. The fourth Answer of Atheists, saying, that from all Eternity
there was a Chaos. 2. That the Heavens and the Elements did not by degrees
disintangle and resolve themselves from all Eternity. 3. That they did not
remain a finite time, to resolve or clear themselves. 4. That they did not
remain an infinite time, to clear and resolve themselves.
A Digression wherein the two first Verses of the first Chapter of Genesis are
explained, and is showed that there is no mention made of a Chaos, and that
they do not contain a proposition of all those things, God created in six days,
and that Light was not the first Creature.

1. The fourth Answer of Atheists is, That the World has not been from all
Eternity in the state it is now; but that from all Eternity there was a Chaos;
that is to say, that the Heavens, the Stars, the Elements, and all other
things, have been from all Eternity, pell-melled and confused together; and
that having resolved themselves, they have framed and disposed the World in the
state it is now; that it was the opinion of Euripides, and diverse Ancient
Philosophers; as of Drodorus in the First Book of his History.

The Reply.
2. Against this Objection or Answer, I say that if the Chaos, that is to say,
the Heavens, the Stars, and the Elements, pell-melled and confused together,
had been from all Eternity, it would follow, that either by degrees they had
resolved themselves from all Eternity, or that a time finite or infinite would
have passed before they had resolved themselves: But they did not resolve
themselves by degrees from all Eternity, and a time finite or infinite did not
pass, before they did resolve themselves: Therefore they have not been confused
from all Eternity, and consequently the Chaos was not from all Eternity. The
Minor or second Proposition, which is the only one that may be questioned, is
verified thus:

First, That the Heavens, the Stars, and the Elements, pell-melled togethar,
did not by degrees resolve and separate themselves from all Eternity, appears;
because the separation of corporal things, mixed together, is not made without
the local motion of some of them: But nothing did move locally from all
Eternity, as I have showed in the first Chapter; where I have proved that time
and motion have not been from all Eternity.

Secondly, Those things which did by degrees separate themselves from others,
from all Eternity by local motion, they have remained, either a finite time, to
separate themselves, or an infinite time; if a finite time, it will follow,
that betwixt the mixture, and the perfect separation, the difference and
interval will be but a finite and limited time; and consequently that betwixt
that which is from all Eternity; to wit, the mixture and that which is not from
all Eternity, to wit, the perfect separation, the difference will be but a
finite and limited time, which is impossible. And moreover, It would follow
that a finite time, such as the duration of those things, since their perfect
separation, added to a finite, such as is the time that passed in their
separation, would make up an infinite time, such as is the pretended Eternity
of the mixture; all which is against this true Maxim, that one finite added to
another finite, does not make up an infinite.

If they have remained an infinite time to separate themselves, it will follow
that they will have run, through an infinite space in their separation; seeing
that a finite space may be run through in a finite time: and truly, since time
is the measure or duration of motion, it will follow, that if time be infinite,
the motion will be also infinite; and if the motion is infinite, the place or
space wherein things did move, will be infinite, either really or equivalently.
But they have not run through an infinite space, either really or equivalently;
else they would have run through a space, an hundred thousand millions of
thousands of times, and a space a thousand millions of times greater than this
World, really or equivalently; which is absurd. And besides, It would follow
that an infinite, would be greater than another; seeing the space that they
would have run through; until their perfect separation, and that which they
would have run through since their perfect separation, should be greater than
the sole space, they should have run through until their separation: For a
farther confirmation, look back upon the first Chapter, wherein I have proved
that time and motion cannot be infinite.

3. Secondly, That the Heavens, the Stars, and the Elements, have not remained
a finite time, before they have resolved and separated themselves; appears,
because it would follow, that betwixt the mixture, and the beginning of their
separation, the difference would be but of a finite time; and consequently that
betwixt that which is from all Eternity, as their pretended mixture; and that
which is not from all Eternity, as their separation, or the beginning thereof,
the difference would be but of some limited time; and there would be wanting
but a finite and limited time, lest that their separation, which had a
Beginning, should be Eternal; and that one finite added to the other finite,
should make up an infinite, which is impossible.

4. Thirdly, That the Heavens, the Stars, and the Elements, have not remained
an infinite time before they have resolved and separated themselves, appears,
because it is a Maxim received of all, that Idem qua Idem, semper facit Idem,
at least when it is not a free and intellectual Agent. Therefore, If the
Heavens, the Stars, and the Elements, have been confused and pell-melled
together, during an infinite time, or during Eternity; how came it to pass that
they have resolved and disintricated themselves at last? certainly it cannot be
of themselves, having remained in the same case and condition, above an hundred
thousand millions of thousands of years: and if another has thus separated them
(as it is most true) it cannot be ought else but God.

5. It will not be out of purpose to add to this Reply, The true sense of the
two first verses of the first Chapter of Genesis, which are conceived in these
words: In the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth; and the Earth was
without form and void, and darkness was upon the face of the Deep; and the
Spirit of God moved upon the face of the Waters.

Because, out of these words some Christians have imagined a Chaos, saying,
That God created first a Chaos, that is to say, the Heavens and the Elements
mixed confusedly together; and afterward in six days did draw all Creatures
out of the same; and others in greater number, say, that in the two alleged
verses, Moses makes a general Proposition of all things created, in these two
words, Heaven and Earth; and that in the following verses, he specifies the
Creatures as God created them every day.

Against that I say, That the true sense of the words of Moses, is, that in the
beginning of the first Day, which was the beginning of the first Evening, and
the beginning of Time, God created the Imperial Heaven, which should be the
Mansion and Dwelling Place of God and the Blessed; the Earth which should be
the residence of Men during this momentary life, and the Waters which did then
cover the whole face of the Earth. The chief reasons of my Assertions are these:

First, It is certain that the first day of the Creation, as well as the five
others, is divided in Evening and Morning, and that the Evening is put before
the Morning: For Moses says, And the Evening and the Morning were the first
Day; and from thence it is that the Jews ever began their Natural Day, with the
Evening. From which Consideration I frame these two Arguments:

That which is part of the part, is also part of the whole: For Example, The
Finger which it part of the Hand, is also part of the Arm, and of the whole
Body; but the Evening is part of the Day, which is also part of Time: Therefore
the Evening is also part of Time; and so when the Evening was, Time was also,
or began to be. From this Argument I frame another thus: Time never was without
some Corporal Creatures; seeing that Time is the duration of Corporal Things,
or of their Motion; but in the Evening of the first Day, Time was or began to
be; for the Evening, being part of the Natural Day, is also part of Time:
Therefore in the Evening of the first Day, there were some Corporal Creatures:
Now what other Corporal Creatures were in the Evening of the first Day, but the
Heaven, the Earth, and the Waters, whereof mention is made in these two first
verses of the first Chapter of Genesis. Wherefore it appears evidently that in
these words, In the Beginning God Created the Heaven and the Earth; these two
words (in the Beginning) are to be explained thus: In the beginning of Time, in
the beginning of the first Day, in the beginning of the Evening of the first
Day, God Created the Heaven and the Earth.

Secondly, After that Moses has said, In the beginning God Created Heaven and
Earth; he adds immediately, and the Earth was without form and void, that is to
say, the Earth that God created with the Heavens, was then without an external
form or appearance of Earth, because then it was all covered with Water, and
was void of the Ornaments, which now enrich and adorn it; for then the Earth
had neither Flowers nor Fruits, nor Herbs, nor Corn, nor Trees, nor Living
Creatures, etc. Now when was it that the Earth was covered with Water, without
appearance of Earth, without Beauty, and without Ornaments, but only during
the two first Days, unto the third exclusively; in which God separated the
Waters from the Earth, and beautified it with all sorts of Plants.

Thirdly, I say that in all the History of the Creation, described by Moses, no
mention at all is made of the Creation of the Imperial Heaven, of the Earth,
and of the Waters, but in the two first verses alleged. For though the
Firmament, which was Created the second Day, be called Heaven, v. 8. yet it
must not be understood of the Imperial Heaven, which is the Throne of God, and
the Dwelling place of the Blessed; because it is said of this Firmament, v. 7.
That God divided the Waters which were under the Firmament, from the Waters
which were above the Firmament; that is to say, this Firmament divides the
Earthly and the Heavenly Waters; and at verse the 14. that in this Firmament
God placed the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars; and at v. 20. that Fowls were
appointed to fly toward it; all which cannot be understood of the Imperial
Heaven, which is above all other Corporal Creatures, but only of the Element
of the Air.

Moreover, Though in the work of the third day, mention is made of the
Separation of the Earth, and of the Sea; yet there is no mention made of their
Creation; an evident proof that they had been Created before. And indeed Moses
describing the work of the second Day, speaks in this manner: And God said, Let
there be a Firmament in the midst of the Waters, and let divide the Waters from
the Waters: and God made the Firmament, and divided the Waters which were under
the Firmament, from the Waters which were above the Firmament. Now how would
God have divided the Waters, if they had not been before? and how would he have
created a Firmament between the Waters, if there had been no Water bebefore?
Therefore let us conclude that in these two first verses, and no where else,
mention is made of the Creation of the Imperial Heaven, of the Earth, and of
the Water, that God made before the Light, whereof it is spoken in the third
verse.

Fourthly, Immediately after these words, In the beginning God created the
Heavens and the Earth, and the Earth was without form and void; it is added,
And Darkness was upon the face of the Deep; as if he should have said, when God
created the Heaven and the Earth, and the Earth was covered with Water, without
Beauty or Ornaments; then the vast and spacious Waters, or the spaces between
Heaven and Earth, were covered with Darkness, because there was yet no Light,
as appears by the Text; and God had not yet created that great body of Light,
which he created afterward; to wit, in the Morning of the same first Day; and
whereof probably, in the fourth Day he made the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars,
which may be very well thought to be the Element of Fire, seeing it has all
the effects and properties of it; and that in the whole History of the
Creation, mention is made no where else of the Element of Fire; but when God
said, Let there be Light. Moreover, It is certain that Darkness is nothing else
but the privation of Light: now privation differs from a mere negation; in that
privation supposes a subject capable to receive that whereof it is privation;
and a mere negation supposes none: For Example, Blindness is the privation of
Sight, which supposes a Creature capable to receive Sight, Death is a privation
of Life, that supposes a Body susceptible of Life, etc. Now seeing that
Darkness which was before Light, as appears by the Text, is nothing else but a
privation of Light, it is evident that Darkness supposes some Bodies
susceptible of Light, which as well as Darkness have been before the Light; but
these Bodies can be no others, but those mentioned in the two first verses, to
wit, the Heaven, the Earth, and the Waters, which were created the Evening of
the first Day.

But I suppose it will be objected, that the form ought always to be before the
privation: For Example, The Sight before Blindness, Life before Death; and that
consequently the Light was before Darkness: But I answer, first, That all
Philosophers agree, that all Physical Privations, are before the Forms, whereof
they are privations; because they are privations of future forms, as logical
privations, are privations of forms past. And thus the seminal matter has the
privation of the Soul, before it has the Soul it self; and every physical
matter has the privation of the essential form, before it has such a form;
and in the Example alleged above, it may happen that Blindness is before the
Sight, Deafness before Hearing, and the privation of Life before Life. So the
Born Blind and Deaf Man that Jesus Christ healed, were Blind and Deaf, before
they received either Sight or Hearing. And the Embryo, that is to say, the
Infant in the Mothers Womb, before it has got perfect shape, has the
privation of rational Life, before ever he receives the said rational Life.

Secondly, It is must true, that when a Subject is equally susceptible of the
Form and the privation of it, if the Agent may produce the Subject and the
Form, it is then in the power of the Agent, if it be a free Agent, to produce
the Subject with the Form, or with the Privation thereof: But the Earth, and
the Waters are Bodies equally susceptible of Light and Darkness: Therefore God
who is a most free Agent, and who has created the Earth, the Waters, and the
Light, may have produced the Earth, and the Waters, with, or without Light. So
then seeing that by the Text it appears, that Darkness was before Light, we
must conclude, that the Earth and the Waters were produced tenebrous. Finally,
It is most true, that the Light God created, is a most bright and shining Body,
and not an accident, as I might make it appear, were not the Digression too
long already. Now who sees not, that God may have created the Earth, and the
Waters before this bright and shining Body, seeing he can create one Body
before another.

By the consideration of these things, it is clear, that in the two alleged
verses, Moses does not set down a general Proposition, of all those things God
was to create afterward; but that he describes particularly, the creation of
Heaven, of the Earth, and of the Waters, which were produced the Evening of the
first Day. Moreover, It is evident, that in the said verses, Moses speaks not
one word of a Chaos, containing all Creatures, pell-melled and confused
together; seeing there is no mention made of the Firmament, nor of the Element
of Fire, nor of the Stars, nor Plants, nor Living Creatures, but only of the
Imperial Heaven, of the Earth, and of the Waters; and yet there is never a word
of the Heaven and the Earth being mixed together; and in the whole History of
the Creation, there is no mention made of the separation of Heaven from the
Earth, as there is of the separation of the Earth, from the Waters that covered
it. But enough of this matter, it is time to come to the Consutation of other
Objections and Answers of Atheists.

CHAP. VI. 1. The Fifth Answer of Atheists, saying, That there has been from
all Eternity a Matter without Form. 2. The proof that there has not been from
all Eternity a Matter without Form, and that the Matter could not produce the
Forms. 3. That the Eternal Atoms, by a casual concourse, have not made and
disposed the World. 4. That the Forms cannot have been produced but by God.
1. THe Fifth Answer of Atheists is, That indeed the World has not been from
all Eternity in the case and state it is now; and that from all Eternity there
has been no Chaos, but that there has been from all Eternity a Matter without
Form, and that afterward out of this Matter, all Forms have been produced,
which being joined with the Matter, have framed all Corporal Creatures, and
made the World in the case and state it is now. The Epicures following the
Opinion of their Masters Democritus and Epicurus, have specified and determined
what that Matter was, to wit, the Atoms, which in time by a casual and
accidental concourse have made up the World in the state it is now.

The Reply.
2. Against this Answer, I say, That if there had been from all Eternity a
Matter without Form, it would follow, that the pretended Forms of Heaven, the
Stars, and the Elements, as well as the Forms of Plants and Living Creatures,
should have been after the Matter, and consequently would have had a beginning;
and having not had beginning of themselves, seeing that nothing produces it
self, they would have been necessarily produced in time by another, and that
other would be necessarily, either the the Matter or some other thing,
differing from the Matter. Now these Forms cannot have been produced in time,
neither by the Matter nor by any other thing differing from the Matter, unless
it be by God himself; which I prove thus:

If any Eternal Matter had produced these Forms in time, it would follow
necessarily, that before the product^^ of the same, a time either finite or
in^^nite, should have passed: not a (...) time, because betwixt that which is
from all Eternity, as the Matter (is supposed by them to be) and that which is
not from all Eternity, as these Forms or the Productions of the same, the
difference is greater than of a finite time And Moreover, It would follow, that
a finite time, such as that which should have passed since the productions of
these Forms, added to a finite time, such as that which should have passed
before the production of these Forms, would make up an infinite time, or an
infinite duration, such as the Eternity of the Matter would be; which is
impossible. Neither did an infinite time pass before the production of these
Forms; for how should it come to pass, that the Matter having been an infinite
time all alone without acting, would produce them afterward? Is it not a
constant and true Maxim, that, Idem qua Idem semper facit Idem; when it is not
a free and intellectual Agent, when there is no impedement, and the subjects
which it works about are not different. Now Matter being not a free and
intellectual Agent, and finding no impediment nor different subjects, seeing it
is supposed to be all alone, before the productions of these Forms; it follows
necessarily it has always done the same thing; and consequently that it has
not remained a time, either finite or infinite to produce these Forms, if it
may have produced them. Moreover, All Men know that Causa naturaliis agit a
dextremum suae potentiae; that is to say, Natural Causes act and work as much
as they can: For Example, The Sun shines as much as it can, the Fire heats with
all its strength; and it is most true, that, Causa necessaria, positis omnibus
requisitis ad agendum, and sublatis impedimentis, necessario agit. That is to
say, Necessary Causes, all things required, granted, and having no impediments,
act and work necessarily, and cannot keep back, nor suspend their action. Now
then, seeing that Matter is a Natural and not a Voluntary Cause, a necessary
and not a free Cause, and that there is no impediment, being supposed all
alone; it follows that if it may have produced these Forms, it must necessarily
have produced them before (or without remaining) an infinite time.

3. Against the Epicures, teaching that the Eternal Atoms by a casual
concourse, have made and disposed the World, in the same case and state it is
at present; I say that this concourse of Atoms, to frame and fashion the
World, cannot have happened without the local motion of some of them: From
whence I argue thus, If the Atoms or the parts of the Matter had concurred,
and consequently had moved themselves locally to frame and fashion the World in
the case and state it is at present, it would follow that they would have moved
themselves locally from all Eternity, or that they would have remained, either
a finite or an infinite time without moving, and then afterward would have
framed and fashioned the World in the case and state it is at present: but they
have not moved themselves locally from all Eternity, neither have they remained
a finite or an infinite time without moving; as I have sufficiently proved in
the precedent Chapter, Number. 2, 3, 4. for the same things I have said there of
the Heaven and the Elements, may be said likewise of the Atoms.

4. Finally, That these Forms have not been produced by any thing differing
from the Matters, but by God himself, appears; because the Agent who should
have produced them, would have been Eternal or not: if not Eternal he would
have had a Beginning, and consequently, would have been produced of another; of
whom I would ask, Whether he be Eternal or not, and so always inquire, until
one should come to such an Agent, as would not have been produced by another,
and consequently would be Eternal. If Eternal, he should be either a necessary
and natural Agent, or a free and voluntary Agent: If a natural and necessary
Agent, he would have forthwith produced these Forms; for a natural and
necessary Agent, acts, and works, as much as it can, and cannot suspend his
action; and consequently these Forms would have been from all Eternity, and
consequently the World in the case and state it is at present; which I have
demonstrated already to be altogether impossible: And if a free and
intellectual Agent, it can be no other but God; sceing that by the word GOD, we
mean and conceive nothing else, but a free and intellectual Agent, who has
produced the world, in the state and case it is at present.

CHAP. VII. 1 The Sixth Answer of Atheists, saying, That men have their
Original and Beginning from the Tritons and Sirens, commonly called Mairmaids.
2. The Confutation of this Answer.
1. THe Sixth Answer of Atheists is, That though men had not been from all
Eternity, it would not follow, that they had been produced by some Divine and
Superior Cause; for one might say, That their Original is from some Tritons
and Sirens, who after the Universal Floods, lived both in the Waters, and on
the Land, and so in time became terrestrial. And they say, that some
Historiographers relate several things, which seem to justify their
allegation. Herodotus in the Fourth Book of his History relates that Jason
being carried away by a storm into Libia, in the Country of the Lotophages, in
the dangerous places of the Tritonide Fenns and Marshes, there appeared to him
a Triton, who demanded of him a Trevet, promising to reward him, with the
discovery of the means, whereby he might come out of that place; which being
performed by Jason, the Triton showed him the way, and saved him. Lewis
Guicharden writes, that in the year 1403 they brought to Harbem in Holland, a
Siren, commonly called a Mair maid, which by degrees learned to eat bread, milk
and other meat, to spin, and to make the Sign of the Cross. Acosta in the Third
Book, Chapter the 18th of his Relations, describes the Vros as a kind of men
living in the waters, and observes that they themselves said they were no men.
Nicolo Conti in Ramnusio, relates, That in the River of Cochin, there are
Fishes to be found with a humane Form and Resemblance, that being taken, the
difference of Sex is to be seen both in Male and Female, altogether like ours;
and further he says, that they are so industrious, as to come out of the water
at night, to strike fire with flints they find there, to make a fire with wood,
at the light whereof they catch all other fishes that come near them.

The Reply.
2. Against this Answer, I say, First, That there is no Author, let him be
never so fabulous, that ever dreamed or writ, that men have their Original from
the Tritons and Sirens. And Besides, my reason respecting all terrestrial
Creatures, it would follow that Elephants, Lions, Bears, Oxen, and other
terrestrial Creatures, would have had their Original from the like Marine
Creatures.

Secondly, It is a Moral Maxim, That every thing seeks and endeavors to
better its Condition: Now either it is better for waterish Creatures, to become
terrestrial, or not: If it be better for them? how came it to pass that they do
not seek after it? And if it be not better for them, why have they done it in
time past.

Finally, If they are become terrestrial in times past, why do they not do the
same now? And if such a thing has happened heretofore, some where, why does it
not come to pass again, either there or in seem other place of the World?

Thirdly, Histories make mention but of three Floods only, to wit, that of
Noah, that of Ogyges, and that of Deucalion; now these two last have not been
universal, for they happened only in one part of Greece; so that it was an
easy thing to furnish it again, with neighboring People. And as for the
first, it cannot be believed, except one believes a Divinity, whether we
respect the Miracles that went along with it, or the Holy Man that writ the
History of it; who says positively that God sent it, and commanded Noah to
build the Ark, to save in it all kinds of Terrestrial Creatures; so that it is
needless to have recourse to Waterish Creatures

Fourthly, The Examples of Herodotus, Guicharden, and others, prove indeed that
there are Tritons and Sirens, but they speak never a word, concerning Men
having had their original from them. And as for the strange things they write
of them, it is certain they had them by hearsay from others, who might have
been deceived in the Narration, and by the Declarer, as well as themselves. And
this will soon appear to be true, if we judge impartially of the Writings of
Herodotus; for most part of what he writes from others, is so far from being a
true History, that it savours the Romance altogether: As when he says in his
Second Book, That Rampsinitus King of Egypt, went down into Hell, and there
played at Dice with Ceres; That the Sun did rise twice in the West, and did sit
twice in the East: That Sennacherib King of Assiria and Araba, being in his
March toward Egypt to War against Setho King of that Country, his Bows and
Quivers were gnawed by Cats, so that he was fain to go back again into his own
Country with shame. That the Daughter of Cheopes King of Egypt, did prostitute
her self to every Man that would give her but a Stone, whereof was made one of
the Pyramides, which made one of the seven Wonders of the World. That Phero
became blind for having shot an Arrow in the River Nilus; and ten years after
recovered his sight by Washing his Eyes with the Urine of a Woman, that never
lay with any Man but her Husband: And truly Diodorus in the Fourth Book of his
History, observes, That Triton who showed Jason and the other Argonauts, the
way to avoid the Quicksands of the Sea, was a King of Lybia and not a Fish.
Acosta speaking of the Vros, does not affirm that they are Waterish Creatures,
but only a rude and unpolished People. These are are his very words, These,
Uros (says he) are so rude and blockish a People, that they do not repute
themselves to be Men. And as for the Fishes of the River of Cochin whereof
Nicolo Conti speaks, I say that in matter of Narrations and Histories, we ought
not to believe whatsoever every one relates, who for to humor himself, writes
the Imaginations of his own Brain, or the Stories of others that deceived him;
but we must believe only, that which is related to us by such Men as have
traveled in those Countries. Now many Hollanders, and Portugals, that have
been at Cochin; and have seen the River and the Fishes in it, make no mention
of such Fishes, and hold it as a Lie and a Fable, whatsoever Nicolo Conti
writes of this matter.

Finally, If whatsoever is written concerning the Tritons, should be true, and
that Men should be originary of the pretended Eternal Tritons; yet my Reason
would remain whole and entire; and my Arguments against the Eternity of Men,
may be applied to the Tritons: And I may argue thus again, If the Tritons have
been from all Eternity, the number of these Tritons which have been in time
past is infinite: That the Tritons which are pretended to have Lived from all
Eternity, yet have not Lived an Eternity, but only a certain limited time: And
that the Tritons which have been in time past unto this very day, are all
distant with a finite distant of time, or all with an infinite distance, or
some with a finite, and others with an infinite distance: And so applying to
the Tritons what I have said of Men in the First Chapter, it will clearly
appear that the same absurdities do follow.

CHAP. VIII. 1. The Seventh Answer of Atheists, saying, That Men have been
produced by, or proceeded from the Eternal Earth, or from all the Elements
together. 2. Reasons alleged, or Evidence produced against the Falsehood of
this Answer. 3. That the Earth, nor the other Elements cannot have been
naturally disposed to produce Men. 4. Other Reasons proving that Men have not
been produced by the Earth, nor by the other Elements.
1. THe Seventh Reason of Atheists is, That Men have been produced by, or
proceeded from the Eternal Earth, or from all the Elements together, which have
been Eternal, and in time have produced the first Men, by which all others have
had their original by way of Generation; in a manner as Rats, Frogs, Flies, and
other Creatures of this kind are formed at this time, out of a Terrestrial
Matter.

The Reply.
2. Against this Answer, I say, That if the Eternal Earth had produced in time,
the first Men, or if the Sun, or any other Eternal Agent, had produced them out
of the Eternal Earth; it would follow that the Eternal Earth would have
remained, either a finite or an infinite time, before their production; but
neither can be said without absurdity: not a finite time, else it would follow
that betwixt the Earth and the Production of the first Men, the difference
would be only of a finite and limited time; and consequently that betwixt that
which is from all Eternity, as the Earth, and that which is not from all
Eternity, as the Production of the first Men, the difference would be only of a
finite and limited time, which is impossible. And besides, it would follow,
That a finite time, such as should be that which should have passed, since the
the Production of the first Men unto this day, added to a finite time, such as
should be that which should have passed since the existence of the Earth, unto
the Production of the first Men, would make up an infinite time, such as is the
pretended Eternity of the Earth; all which is against this true Maxim: That a
finite added to another finite, does not make up an infinite. And further, That
there would be wanting but a finite and limited time, lest that the production
of the first Men, which has had a Beginning should be Eternal, to wit, that
finite and limited time that would have passed, since the existing of the
Earth, unto their production. Not an infinite time also, else it would follow,
that the Earth would have remained above an hundred thousand times, a hundred
millions of years, without having produced Men; and that after an infiniteness
of years, it would have produced them; which is absurd: because natural and
necessary causes, such as the Earth is, all things remaining in the same state,
do act always the same thing. Now what I say concerning the Earth, may be said
of all Elements together.

3. And it is to no purpose, to say, That after an infiniteness of time, the
Eternal Earth is (as it were) become apt, and disposed to produce Men; and so
consequently has produced them; but before was not disposed, and consequently
could not produce them. For against that I say, That such an aptness or
disposition of the Earth, must needs have come to pass, either by degrees, from
all Eternity; so that after an infiniteness of time, it has been perfected and
accomplished; or that after an infiniteness of time, it is come to pass, either
all at once, or successively: now neither of these can be said without
absurdity. Not that it is come to pass by degrees, from all Eternity, else that
disposition or alteration of the Earth, would have had parts succeeding one
another, from all Eternity; and so succession, motion, and time, would have
been from all Eternity: which I have showed above to be altogether impossible.
Not also that after an infiniteness of time, it is come to pass, either all at
once, or successively; for if it were so, it would have been the act and work,
either of the Earth it self, or of another natural and necessary cause, such as
are the other Elements; or of a free and intellectual Agent. Not of the Earth,
or of any other natural and necessary cause; because natural and necessary
causes, all things remaining in the same state, act and work always the same
things, and act as much as they can, without having power to suspend their
action; and consequently would not have remained more than an hundred thousand
times an hundred thousand millions of years, to produce this aptness and
disposition, much less an infiniteness of time. If this Disposition has been
produced by a free and intellectual Agent, it cannot be but by the Creator of
the Universe, who is the great and glorious God whom we adore.

4. Now add to what has been said, this true Maxim of Philosophers, Natura
progreditur ab imperfectionibus ad perfectiora. Nature proceeds from things
more imperfect, to the more perfect: That is to say, Natural causes in their
operations, produce first imperfect things, which afterward become more
perfect in time: So the Earth breeds first Shrubs, which in time become great
Trees; and produces Frogs, and Worms, and Flies, and other small and weak
insects, which in time become great and strong. Therefore, If the first Men
have been produced by the Earth, or the other Elements, they cannot have been
produced but very little and most weak, as they that are newly born, and do but
come out of the Mothers Womb; in which case Men would have been almost Dead as
soon as Born, there being no succor nor help for them, and so there would be
never a Man left at this time. For it were to overthrow the order of Nature, to
imagine that the Earth, or the other Elements, should have produced the first
Men, as perfect as they are at this time, at Five and twenty, or thirty years
of Age. And besides, Our Reason extends it self to all sorts of Animals, as
well Terrestrial, as them that live in the Waters; so that it would necessarily
follow, that the Earth, the Air, the Water, and the Fire, or all the Elements
together, should have produced, not only the first Men, but also the first
Lions, the first Elephants, the first Whales, the first Dolphins, and the like,
in their perfection, Male and Female, for the propagation of the same; which is
altogether against the Order of Nature.

Moreover, If the Earth, or the other Elements, have heretofore produced some
Men, why do not they produce no more at this time? and if they have produced
Lions, Whales, and other Animals, how comes it to pass that they produce none
at this time, in some parts of the World? Surely, Men's Wits must be strangely
perverted and overturned, to suppose such Extravagances and Dreams. Therefore
since for the propagation of the humane kind, the first Men must necessarily
have been in a perfect Age and State, and that Nature could not make them such;
one must believe that as it is related by Moses in the Book of Genesis, to wit,
that there is a God, who out of the Earth, mixed with the other Elements, has
framed end fashioned a perfect humane Body, and having breathed in his Nostrils
the breath of Life, he became a living Soul. Finally, It is an undoubted Truth,
That none can give that which he has not: Therefore, Seeing that the Earth,
and the other Elements, distitute of understanding, and much more imperfect
than Men, neither contain, nor enjoy, either formally, or in eminency and
virtue the excellent perfections of the reasonable Soul; it is evident they
cannot produce it, nor consequently Man, whose chiefest and noblest part is the
reasonable Soul.

CHAP. IX. 1. The Eighth Answer of Atheists, saying, That there have been many
Worlds, which have been produced the one by the other, and not by a Superior
Spirit. 2. The Confutation of this Answer.
1. THe Eighth Answer of Atheists is, That this World has not been from all
Eternity, and yet has not been created by any Superior and Almighty Spirit;
but that it has been produced out of the Matter of another World, which was
before, and that that other has been produced out of the Matter of another,
which was also before it, and so there have been many Worlds which have
succeeded one another; the World that perished being the Matter of the
Generations of the new produced World; and that this World which we see now,
shall perish one day, and out of the Matter of it another shall be produced,
and out of the Matter of that another shall be produced again, and so
consequently.

2. Against this Answer, I say, That the Worlds which are pretended to have
been in time past, are either finite or infinite in number; if finite in
number, it follows that there has been a first World, which was never produced
out of the Matter of another World, else it would not have been first; nor out
of any Chaos or Eternal Matter, as I have sufficiently proved, in the Fifth and
Sixth Chapters; and consequently the first World must needs have been created
by a Superior and Almighty Spirit, who is the great God whom we adore. If
infinite in number, the same absurdities which follow the infiniteness of Men,
which we have showed heretofore, will also follow of the infiniteness of
Worlds; for there is no greater number than an infinite number; else the less
infinite number would be exceeded by the greater, and consequently should be
finite and termined, seeing that which is exceeded is termined where it is
exceeded. Now there is a greater number than that of the Worlds, which are
pretended to have been in time past; to wit, the number of Stars, the number of
Plants, the number of Animals, or the number of all Things in particular, which
have been in all those pretended Worlds. Therefore the number of those Worlds
(pretended to have been in time past) is not infinite. Moreover, All those
pretended Worlds were distant one from another, with a finite distance of time
only, or with an infinite distance only, or some were distant with a finite
distance, and others with an infinite distance: If they all have been distant
with a finite distance of time only; and since a finite distance of time
cannot comprehend Eternity, or infiniteness; it follows necessarily, that they
have not been from all Eternity, that they have been in a finite number, and
that there has been one first, which having not produced it self, nor having
been produced by a Chaos, or an Eternal Matter, as I have showed above, it must
have been created of God, necessarily. If they have been all distant, with an
infinite distance of time only, it follows that there has been an infinite
time, betwixt the two nearest Worlds, as well as betwixt the two remotest,
which is contradictory: And if some have been distant with a finite distance of
time, and others with an infinite, and one takes the two remotest Worlds in the
finite distance, it will follow that one only World, to wit, the nearest,
beyond one of them two, being removed from them, but with a finite distance of
time, will make up an infinite distance of time, and that one finite added to
another finite, will make up an infinite; which is absurd.

I might use several other Arguments to refute this Answer of Atheists, were it
not that it is sufficiently confuted in the first and second Chapters; where I
have showed that Men have not been from all Eternity. I will add only, That
every thing follows its natural inclination, and that which is best for it: Now
if the natural inclination of Bodies, is to make a World, and that it is best
for them; the World having been made, cannot have been destroyed naturally; and
the Bodies did never reduce, nor resolve themselves into a Chaos: but if their
inclination, and the best for them, is, not to make a World, and to remain in a
Chaos; it is evident that the World cannot have been produced naturally, and
that the Bodies would have remained always separate or in confusion. And
besides, I have sufficiently demonstrated already, that no succession is
Eternal, and consequently that of the pretended Worlds and Chaos cannot be
Eternal.

CHAP. X. 1. The Ninth Answer of Atheists, saying, That Christians confess that
the World may have been from all Eternity. 2. Their Reasons to prove that the
World may have been from all Eternity. 3. The Confutation of their Answer. 4.
An Answer to the Reasons alleged for the possibility of the Eternity of the
World.
1. THe Ninth and last Reason of Atheists, is, That Christians confess that God
may have created the World from all Eternity, though they believe he has
created it but in time. Now (say they) it is a true Axiom, that Posito
possibili, nihil sequitur absurdi. That is, If one lays or supposes actually a
thing possible, there follows no absurdity. And therefore seeing that the World
may have been from all Eternity, there is no inconvenience nor contradiction,
to suppose it actually from all Eternity.

2. Their Reasons to prove that the World may have been from all Eternity are
these. 1. All things are possible to God, Matthew. 10. Therefore the Eternity of
the World is possible to him. 2. God has never been without power to create
the World, but God has been from all Eternity; therefore he may have created
the World from all Eternity. 3. One ought not to deprive God of any of the
perfections, which belong to the Creature, when this perfection is not
accompanied of any imperfection, as is the power of Acting. Now if the
Creature, for Example, the Sun, were from all Eternity, it would act and work
from all Eternity, in Lightening and sending forth its Beams: Therefore God
having been from all Eternity, has acted, or may have acted from all Eternity,
and consequently has created, or may have created the World from all Eternity.
4. That which is once impossible, cannot be made possible, but always remains
impossible: For Example, It is impossible that a Man should be a Beast; so it
has been and ever will be impossible for a Man to be a Beast.

Therefore, If the World has been sometimes impossible, to wit, from all
Eternity, it follows that it never has, nor never will be possible, and
consequently has not been created. 5. If the World has been impossible from
all Eternity, either it nath been impossible during a finite time or during an
infinite time; if impossible during a finite time only, it will follow that
betwixt that which has been from all Eternity, as the impossibility of the
World, and that which is not from all Eternity, as the possibility of it; the
difference will be but of a finite and limited time: and besides it will follow
that a finite time, such as that as is past, since the possibility of the
World, added to another finite time, such as is the duration of its
impossibility; will make up an infinite time, such as is the Eternity of the
same impossibility; which is contradictory. And if the World has been
impossible, during an infinite time, seeing that an infinite Time, and Eternity
are one and the same thing, and have neither beginning nor end, it is evident
that the World shall have been Eternally impossible, and never could be
produced.

6. One must reason of the Fore-Eternity, as of the After-Eternity, seeing that
of things alike the same judgment is to be made. But the World may be Eternal
of the After-Eternity, seeing that God may preserve, and cause it to be and
exist Eternally: therefore it may have been Eternal of the Fore-Eternity, and
consequently may have been from all Eternity. 7. God might create the World
before the time he created it, and before again, and always before to the
infinite: therefore he may have created it from all Eternity, for to go forward
to the infinite, or to Eternity, is the same thing.

The Reply.
3. Against this Answer, I say, That very few Christians say that the World may
have been created from all Eternity, in the state it is now, because of the
contradictions that would follow, the which (I hope) I have sufficiently noted
already: for the same contradictions and absurdities, which follow from the
existence of the World, do also follow from its creation from all Eternity.
Therefore when some Christians by reason of a pious zeal, being willing to
exalt the Omnipotency of God, have written, that God may have created the World
from all Eternity; that is understood by the Learned of the World in another
state, to wit, in a state of immobility. For Example, If God had created the
Sun from all Eternity, it would have remained infinitely without motion; if God
had created the Sea from all Eternity, it would have remained infinitely,
without Flowing and Ebbing. If God had created Men from all Eternity, they
would have remained from all Eternity, without Pulse, without Breath, and
without Motion of the Animal and Vital Spirit; and without Dying; and if God
had produced all other Creatures from all Eternity, they would have remained
infinitely without Motion, and without being capable to be Destroyed; and
during this infiniteness of time, God would not have had an obsolute Dominion
and Sovereignty over them, seeing that during this infinite time he could not
have destroyed them. But seeing such an Answer is repugnant to right Reason,
and neither favors nor countenances Atheists; seeing it grants a Godhead, and
supposes the World in another state than Atheists do; I will insist upon it no
longer, but will come to the Answer of their Reasons alleged in their Answer.

4. To their first Reason, Drawn from that excellent Truth, That all Things are
possible to God: I Answer, That God may do all Things possible; but he cannot
do those Things that are impossible and contridictory. For Example, God cannot
Die, nor Lie; because to be God, and to be a Lier, or Mortal, are things
contradictory. But the Eternity of the World is a thing impossible, and that
involves and implies many absurdities and contradictories; as I have showed
heretofore. I Answer again, That all Things are possible to God, but that the
Eternity of the World is not a Thing, because it is impossible, and that which
is impossible is nothing, and consequently may not be called a Thing.

To the Second Reason, to wit, That God has never been without Power to create
the World, and that having been from all Eternity, he may have created the
World from all Eternity: I Answer, That God has never been without Power to
create the World, when it may have been created; but the World cannot have been
created from all Eternity, but only in time: Therefore God has never been
without Power to create the World in time, but he has been from all Eternity,
without having power to create the World from all Eternity. It is most true
that God has never been without his Omnipotency, and consequently has never
been without the Power to create the World; but he could not exercise and
execute from all Eternity, the Act of his Omnipotency, to wit, the Creation;
but only in time: Not that this proceeds from any Defect or any Impotency in
God; but because the Creature cannot concur and agree with Eternity, because
of the contradictions that would follow, and which I have set down already in
this Tract. And as the Soul of an Infant, which is still in the Mothers Womb,
has the power to reason, in that he has the principle of ratiocination, that
is the understanding, but cannot exercise the act of that power; to wit,
ratiocination; but only after his Birth and Childhood: not that such a thing
proceeds from any defect in the Soul; but because the Organ, whereby
ratiocination is exercised, is not yet disposed as it ought: So God has had
indeed from all Eternity the Power whereby he has created the World, but he
could not exercise from all Eternity the act of this Power; that is the
Creation of the World: Not that it proceeds from any Defect in God, but because
the World cannot be Eternal; as I have already sufficiently demonstrated.

To the Third Reason drawn from this Example, That if the Sun had been from all
Eternity, it would have acted, that is Enlightened from all Eternity; and
likewise that God being from all Eternity, has acted, or may have acted from
all Eternity, and consequently has created or may have created the World from
all Eternity. I Answer, That to suppose the Sun-Eternal is to suppose a thing
impossible. Now one must not wonder, if supposing a thing impossible, to wit,
the Sun Eternal; one supposes another impossible also, viz. the Eternal
illumination: For if one Creature be Eternal, the other must also be the same.
But in supposing God Eternal, one supposes a thing, not only possible, but
which is so actually; and from thence they infer and conclude, without ground
or reason, that he may create the World from all Eternity, seeing that Eternity
of this World is impossible, as (I hope) I have sufficiently proved. Therefore
as God, though he be infinite, cannot produce an infinite effect; and though he
be immutable, cannot produce an immutable effect; so though God be Eternal, he
cannot produce an Eternal effect: because Eternity as well as infinity and
immutability, are attributes incommunicable to the Creature.

To the Fourth Reason, That if the World has been sometimes impossible, to
wit, from all Eternity, it will have been alw^^^ ^^possible; and consequently
will not have been created. I Answer, That in the same manner, it has been
impossible, it will always be impossible; now it has been impossible from all
Eternity: therefore it will be impossible to all Eternity. And as it is not
absolutely impossible, that Man should be; but it is impossible that Man should
be a Beast: So it is not absolutely impossible that the World should be; but it
is impossible that the World should be Eternal: and as Man never was, nor never
will be a Beast; so the World never was, nor never will be Eternal.

To the Fifth Reason, That if the World has been impossible from all Eternity,
it has been impossible, during a finite time, or during an infinite time;
which is absurd, etc. I answer, That Time and the World are always necessarily
together; seeing that Time is nothing else but the continuance of Corporal
Things, whereof the World is made, or the continuance of their Motion. And
therefore, Since that Eternity is before Time, it is evident that, that which
is from all Eternity, is before whatsoever Time, be it finite or infinite. Now
it is ridiculous to ask, whether that which has been before Time, whilst it
has been before time, has continued and lasted, a finite or infinite Time.
Moreover, I Answer as before, viz. That the World has not been absolutely
impossible, seeing it has been possible in time, but that it has been
impossible from all Eternity; and that this impossibility of the World from
all Eternity, has been; is, and shall be to all Eternity.

To the Sixth Reason, That the World may be Eternal of the After-Eternity, and
consequently that it may have been Eternal of the Fore-Eternity, and so from
all Eternity. I Answer, That Eternity being an attribute of the Godhead,
incommunicable to the Creature, is not different from the Godhead: and
therefore as the Godhead is always the same, indivisible and without parts,
though its immensity, which is not different from it, be without Limits, and
cannot be measured, by any greatness; all Bodies being but a point of this
Immensity; So Eternity has been, is, and always shall be the same, indivisible
and without parts; though it cannot be measured by Ages, which always will be
no more than a point of this Eternity. From whence it follows, That those Men,
which divide it, in the Fore and After-Eternity, do not at all understand the
nature of Eternity; seeing that these words, Before and After, belong only to
such things, as are subject to Time, Motion, and Succession, and whereof the
Parts perish one after another; and not to Eternity, which is before Time, and
without Parts, and whereof nothing can perish. Besides, There is a vast
difference betwixt these two pretended Eternities, as I have amply
demonstrated, in my Reply to their second Answer; chiefly in that the
Fore-Eternity is all past; and that the After-Eternity shall never pass, nor
end. And if one should suppose of the After-Eternity, that which is most true
of the Fore-Eternity, to wit, that it is all past; it is evident it should be
finite and limited on all sides, viz. By this Day, and by the last time of this
Eternity, which should pass, and end. And if it be finite, it cannot be a true
Eternity; for a true Eternity is an infinite continuance.

To the Seventh Reason, That God might create the World before the time he
created it, and before again, and always before, to the infinite, and
consequently from all Eternity. I Answer, That though the World in its total,
may have been created in less time; seeing that God who created it in six days,
might have created it in one day, yea, in a moment. Nevertheless it is most
true, That the World, if we have a regard to the first Creatures, which are the
chiefest parts of the same, to wit, the Heavens and the Earth, could not be
made sooner than it has been made, and could not be created, before the time
it has been created; because before the time, that the World has been
created, there was no other continuance than Eternity: but the World cannot
have been from all Eternity, as I have demonstrated: Therefore the World cannot
have been before the time it has been created. And indeed these words of
Before and After, Sooner and Later, cannot belong but to time, that has Parts,
whereof some are Sooner, some Later, some Before, and some After. But Eternity
being indivisible, and without Parts (as I have proved) can have neither Before
nor After; and consequently, though Eternity, may have been before the World
and before Time, nevertheless there was in it neither Before nor After.
Therefore one cannot say, That the World may have been Before, and Before
again, and always Before to the infinite: because where there is a Before, and
again another Before, and always a Before, to infinite, there are many Befores
(if I may so speak) whereof one is Before, and the other After; but in the
Eternity before the World, and before Time, there have been neither Before nor
After.

And if any one objects. That the Heaven and the Earth which have been the
first Creatures, may have been created later; and consequently may have been
created sooner: I Answer, That Heaven and Earth may be considered, either as
Creatures, or as the first Creatures. If they be considered as Creatures, I say
that they might have been created later, seeing that God, who created them the
first day, might have created them the second day, and some others the first
day: But if they be considered as the first Creatures, I say they could not be
created later; because they could not be created later, but in creating them
after some others. Now if they had been created after others, they should not
have been the first Creatures. Moreover, Though the Heaven and the Earth, which
have been the first Creatures, might have been created later, in the manner
aforesaid; yet it does not follow that they may have been sooner than they have
been: because that before the Time, or before the first Creatures, there have
not been, nor could have been any continuance, but Eternity. Now the first
Creatures, and so consequently the World, cannot have been from all Eternity,
as I have sufficiently proved. Therefore the World, or the Creatures, cannot
have been before the time they have been; and consequently cannot have been
sooner than they have been.

Finally, According to the common Opinion, one might say, That though the World
might have been created before, and before again; and always before to the
infinite; yet it would not follow that the World might have been from all
Eternity. For though a Body may be supposed greater than another, to the
infinite, yet it does not follow, that there is a Body actually infinite;
seeing that this progression to the infinite, does not reach farther, than to
an infinite in power (i.e. Potentia; as they speak in the School) which is
always actually finite: So though the World might have been before, and always
before, to the infinite; it does not follow that the World may have been from
all Eternity; seeing that this progression to the infinite, does not reach
further than to all infinite in power, which is also actually finite, and
comprehended, and included in the temporal continuance.

And now Courteous Reader, I shall end this Chapter, together with this long,
but (I hope) solid Disputation, against the most profane and ungrateful Men
that ever were, I mean the Atheists, with this advice, That if ever thou
chancest to dispute with them, to make use of the Reasons set down in this
Chapter, especially the first in the Reply, as being the chief that proves
demonstratively that there is a GOD; and so forcibly convinces Atheists, that
they are not only without Answer, but even without Evasion.

CHAP. XI. Other Reasons proving that there is a God.
1. The First Reason is drawn from the Order of the Universe. 2. The Second,
From the general Consent of all People and Nations, who ever acknowledged a
Godhead. 3. The Third, From the fear of the Judgments of God, because of Sin.
4. The Fourth, From the existence of Devils. 5. The Fifth, Is drawn from the
first Mover, and the first Cause. 6. The Sixth, From the Novelty of Histories.
7. And the Seventh, From the Consideration that the Sea has not submerged the
Earth.
First Reason.
THe First Reason that proves a Godhead, Is drawn from the Disposition and
admirable Order of the Universal World: thus, Order admits and presupposes
Intelligence and Wisdom; for Order being a convenient Disposition of Things,
according to the dignity of each; that they may be conveniently disposed, they
ought to be first compared among themselves, and one must know their Dignity,
which is proper to Intelligence. And Secondly, They must be placed and
disposed, according to their Rank and Dignity, which is proper to Wisdom.
Therefore seeing that Order presupposes Intelligence and Wisdom; a most
excellent and most perfect Order, presupposes a Sovereign and most perfect
Intelligence and Wisdom; but the Order and Disposition of all the parts of the
World, is most perfect and most excellent: Therefore there must needs be a most
Sovereign Intelligence, and a most perfect Wisdom; that may have given this
admirable Order and Disposition: Now this sovereign Intelligence, and this
perfect Wisdom, we call Divinity.

Now that the Order and Disposition of the Universe is most perfect and most
excellent, appears, if one takes a view of all the Parts thereof: In the
Heavens you see the Stars of the Firmament twinkling and sparkling as so many
petty Suns, and always keeping the same distance among themselves: The Sun that
never goes beyond the Tropikes, and other Stars, having their Motion so
excellently regulated, that they were never seen out of their ordinary course,
but by a Miracle. Now from whence may come this uniformity of Motion, but from
the first Mover; who always remaining firm and immovable, moves all things
according to his will? From whence comes it to pass, That the Motions of the
Sun is so moderate, that it rules and directs all other Motions here below? Why
does it rather move from East to West, rather than from the North to the South?
And why, being come to a certain Point, it never goes any farther? but because
there is a Sovereign Moderator of this Universe, who has assigned to all
Things Bounds and Limits, beyond which they cannot go? Descend from the Heavens
to the Elements, and you shall see that though they be totally contrary one to
the other, yet they all enter in the composition of all Bodies: and as
sometimes a sweet Harmony is caused by different Sounds, so from the
contrariety of the Elements, is made up that Temper and Proportion which is to
be seen in all mixed Bodies. Now from whence may proceed this mutual Agreement
of Countraries, whose property it is (if we believe Philosophers) to destroy
one another, or expel one another; but from a superior Spirit, who has made
them subject to his Will? Consider the Earth in particular, you shall find it
almost every where differing and unlike: Here it is Slimy and Muddy, in another
sort Dry and Sandy; in some places it will breed Fruits only, in another Vines
and Corn: Hic segetes illic veniunt felicius uvae, Arborei faetus alibi, etc.
In Peru there are Mines of Silver and Gold; in Swedeland Mines of Iron and
Copper; in Cornwall are the Mines of Tynn; and in other Countries of other
Minerals. Egypt and Sicily are fruitful in Corns; Numidia in Dates, Tunis in
Olive Trees; the Island Madera in Sugar; and most part of the Countries in
Europe in Wines. In Arabia are Flying Serpents; in Egypt Crocodiles, in England
Coursing Horses, fierce Mastiffes, etc. In Scotland Tracing Dogs, in Africa
are Lions, in Asia Elephants; and in other Countries are sundry sorts of diverse
Animals. Now from whence comes this diversity and variety of Lands and Soils,
but from him who created and produced them? Who gave to so many differing and
unlike Creatures, those Verrues and Properties which they have, but him, who
communicated them unto them when he created and gave them their Beings?

Cast your Eyes upon the Waters, and consider the sweet Fountains springing out
of the Salt Sea, the Springs and Sources of several Rivers bubbling out of the
Tops of the highest Mountains, and yet proceed from the Sea, a great deal lower
than they. The Rivers, Nilus, Miger, and Paraguez, which at their appointed
time, never fail to overflow the Lands to fatten them: Some Waters will
presently congeal and kill them that drink of them, and some others are
Healthful, and will cure the most inveterate Maladies. There are some Springs
Hot and Scalding Water; others whose Waters are turned into Flints: But above
all other Things, admire that so well ordered Flowing and Ebbing of the Sea,
whereof the certain cause is unknown to this very day; the great Whales and
others Marine Monsters that are in it; and so many other Wonderful Things, that
point out (as it were with the Finger) the infinite Power, and the Eternal
Wisdom of a Divinity.

Finally, Let us consider our selves, and observe the Frame of our Bodies, so
admirably ordered, that the best understanding Men do greatly wonder at it: Nay
look upon the wonder of our Eyes and Ears, the Ability and Nimbleness of our
Hands, the Dispensation of Spirits, for the Motions of our Members, and the
Functions of our Senses, the Light of our Understanding, its Prompt and Nimble
Actions, its Conduct and Guiding so excellent, its great Capacity to Reason of
all Things: And after all that we will be worse than the Beasts of the Fields,
and all Creeping Things upon the Earth, if we do not confess and acknowledge
that there is a GOD, in whom we Live, and Move, and have our Being; and all
these things, that the more clear sighted Fathers, must acknowledge, they can
in no ways communicate to their Children.

The Second Reason.
The Second Reason, Which proves a Divinity, is drawn from the general Consent
of all People and Nations of the Earth, who ever acknowledged a Divinity. For a
Tully says in the First Book of his Laws, There is never a People so Rude and
Barbarous but confesses that a God must be said (that is acknowledged.) Seneca
in 117. Epistle says, That there is no People so perverted but believes there
are Gods: And Aristotle in the Third Chapter of the First Book of Heaven,
writes, That all Men one way or other acknowledge a Divinity. Now seeing that
as Tully says, in the First Book of his Question. Tusc.) The Consent of all
People is to be esteemed a Law of Nature: One must believe that Naturally some
Knowledge and Apprehension of a Divinity is (as it were) printed and stamped in
the Heart of every Man; and certainly the belief Men have of a Divinity, is
most considerable in this, That no Man can bring any solid Reasons against it;
that it is spread all the World over; that it has been received in all Ages;
that it has constantly maintained it self amidst all the Revolutions of Humane
Sensuality; that it has been found in the remotest Islands, and in those Lands
which are separated from us by such a most unconceiveable vastness of Seas;
that they have been discovered but in later Ages. And it is a wonderful thing,
that those Men, which have almost, if not altogether, lost the knowledge of
their Original, and of the streights through which the Colonies they are
de^^^^ded from; and have almost lost all Hum^^ity (...) and Devouring one
another, (...) this belief, That there is some, Superior Spirit over them. Not
that there is not always some Fools, which say, There is (...) as it is said in
the Psalms: But they commonly are Men abandoned to their Pleasures, and devoted
to all Wickedness, who endeavor to persuade themselves against their own Light
and Conscience, that there is no Judge to punish their Impiety and Ungodliness;
or they are Men of a mean Learning, who yet will go under the Notions of Wits,
in receding as much as they can from the universal Belief of the World,
assaulting (if one may so speak) him who so glorioufly appears by his Works,
and Shows himself to all Eyes in the World; or lastly, they are poor simple and
ignorant Fellows, who are seduced to Atheism by their frequenting with these
Impious and Profane Men. And if any Rude and Savage Nation is guilty of some
strange and monstrous Mis-apprehensions of the Divinity, that I say is no more
to be inferred against the general Consent of all Nations, than Monsters and
Prodigies, which are Born against the Natural course of Nature, and the
ordinary way it follows in the production of its works.

The Third Reason.
The Third Reason, Is drawn from the terrors of Conscience, because of Sin, for
those Fears and Terrors which Men feel after the Commission of some Wickedness,
show evidently that there is a God that terrifies them by the inward threats of
his Vengeance: and it is to no purpose to say that the fears of the Penalties
of the Laws breeds these Terrors within them; seeing that Supreme Magistrates,
to wit, Princes and Kings, who are not subject to these Laws, are troubled with
these Terrors as well as others: witness, Emperor Caligula, the most furious
and raging of all Men, against God; who yet when it thundered, as if the Living
God had spoken from Heaven, would hide himself under his Bed, as if he would
have made with it a shield against the Thunderbolts. And though in some Men,
the Pleasures and Sensualities wherein they drown themselves, do for a time
blunt the sense of these Terrors; yet it is to be believed certainly, that in
that case it is with them as with those Prisoners. Which will be Drunk and
Merry for all their Shackles and Fetters; but when once the fumes are puffed
out, and they begin to reflect upon their Crimes and their Judge; the very Idea
and Representation of a Gibbet, will make them shake and tremble: so I say it
is with these Impious Men; for being forced to leave their Pleasures and
Sensualities, and particularly when Death draws near unto them, they reflect
upon the Justice of God, and tremble at the Idea and Horrors of Hell, which is
prepared for them.

The Fourth Reason.
The Fourth Reason, Is drawn from the existence of Devils, who being Men's
Mortal Enemies and mightier than they, would have already destroyed them were
there not a God, who holds their Bridle so fast, that they can do nothing
without his permission. Now that there are Devils, appears by the woeful
confession and condition of so many Witches and Magicians Condemned to Death;
for having given themselves to the Devil, and committed a world of Wickedness
by his Instigation; as also by so many Men, who by the just Permission of God,
and that for their Sins, have been possessed with the Devil. And by so many true
Histories, received by the most excellent Wits; which tell us that very
prodigious things have been acted by Devils, which exceeded the strength of all
other Creatures: See d' Assigni in the Preface Porphir. etc.

The Fifth Reason.
The Fifth Reason, Is drawn from the first Mover, and grounded upon this
Principle, That whatsoever Moves, is moved by another, and that other is moved
again by another, and so consequently till one stays at last to a first
immovable Mover of all Things, which is God; else one would proceed to the
infinite, and consequently there would be an infiniteness of Movers, which is
impossible.

The same may be said of the First Cause, and may be grounded upon this
Principle, That whatsoever is produced, is produced by a Cause, and this Cause
is again produced by another, and so consequently till one comes to a first
Cause of all Things, which is God; else one would proceed to the infinite, and
there would be an infiniteness of Causes, which is impossible.

Another Reason may be drawn from the independency of the first Being, thus:
Either all Things that have a Being, have their Being of another, or there is
some one which has not, its Being of another, but of it self: Now all Things
have not their Being of another; else it would follow, that that other Thing
should have its Being of it self; seeing it is comprised under this Word, All
Things: Therefore there is something which has not its Being of another but of
it self; and that Thing cannot be no other but God.

Thus again, I may reason from the necessity of the first Being, Either all
Things are contingent, or there is one necessary: Now all Things are not
contingent; else they might not have been; and suppose they had not been, it
would have been impossible that they should have been afterward; seeing that
nothing produces it self, and that there would never have been any Agent, that
might have produced them, every Agent being comprised and included, under this
word, All Things: therefore there has been a necessary Thing which has
produced all contingent Things; and that Thing cannot be no other but God.

Lastly, I may make use here of another Reason, drawn from the excellency of
the first Being; in this manner: The Things which are more or less, such, or
like, are related to one that is chiefly and principally such: For Example,
Things more or less hot, are related to that which is most hot, viz. to the
Fire; Things more or less white, are related to that which is most white, viz.
to Snow, or any other whiter Thing, if there is any; and Things more or less
Bright are related to that which is most Bright and Shining, viz. to the Sun:
There are Things more or less perfect and excellent, therefore they are related
to a thing most perfect and most excellent, viz. to GOD; seeing that by the
word GOD, we conceive, mean, and understand the most excellent, and the most
perfect of all Things.

The Sixth Reason.
The Sixth Reason may be deduced from the Novelty of Histories, for it is most
true that the most Ancient profane Histories, reach very little beyond the War
of Troy, that is about Three thousand years; seeing that since the Destruction
of Troy, unto the Foundation of Rome, Men reckon but Four hundred thirty two
years; and since the Foundation of Rome to the Nativity of Christ, (...) be is
but Seven hundred and fifty years: and from Jesus Christ unto this day, we
commonly reckon but One thousand six hundred seventy eight years; and the Holy
History written by Moses, the most Ancient of all Histories, dos not go beyond
Five or six thousand years. Now it is not likely that if Men had been from all
Eternity, we should have the Histories but of Five or sixthousand years. For as
if the World should still continue, Two or three hundred thousand years, Men
would surely have all that time the Histories of above Six thousand years: So
if Men had been from all Eternity, and that there were above an Hundred
thousand times, an Hundred millions of years since they had had a Being,
certainly we should reckon above Six thousand years; and the Memory of all Men
would not only extend it self to so few years as it does.

If any object, That some Nations have reckoned Twenty thousand years, and
others Fifty thousand, or more; I say that those Books which relate these
Things are fabulous, and their Authors had no ground for what they writ; or one
may say, That those Nations which have reckoned Twenty thousand years, did
reckon their years by the seasons of each year; and those that have reckoned
Fifty, did reckon the years according to the course of the Moon, and did reckon
months for years. Therefore one must say, That Men have had a Beginning, and
that not having had it of themselves, seeing that nothing produces it self;
they have had it of another, to wit, of God, the most wise Creator of the
Universe, as I have proved sufficiently. Add to this reason that the invention
or finding out of Arts and Sciences, is since five or six thousand years, which
does evidently show a Beginning, being not likely that Men would have remained
an infiniteness of time, before the finding out of the same.

The Seventh Reason.
The Seventh Reason is drawn from the Consideration, That the Sea has not
submerged the Earth: I reason thus, If the Earth and the Sea had been from all
Eternity, it would follow that the Channels of the Sea should have been filled
long ago; and consequently that the Sea would have covered the face of the
whole Earth. which yet is not come to pass. To verify and make that good, one
must suppose a thing, which I hold to be most true, and which cannot be denied,
to wit, that Rain and Floods troubling and thickening in Rivers, by the Earth
they carry away with them; and these Rivers carrying again these troubled
Waters into the Sea, do bring in it more Earth than comes out of it. From
whence I frame this Argument: If by reason of Rain or Floods, a little quantity
of Earth enters into the Sea, without coming out of it again, it follows that
within an infinite time, such as Eternity is, the Channels of the Sea should be
filled: for if but one Corn of Sand or Earth should enter into the Sea every
year, Eternity comprehending an infiniteness of years, it is evident that an
infiniteness of Earth should have entered into the Sea, and would have filled
not only the Channels of the Sea, but an hundred millions of others, if there
were so many; and so the Sea would have covered the face of the Earth. But by
reason of Rain and Floods, a little quantity of Earth enters into the Rivers,
and from thence into the Sea, without ever coming out of it again. Therefore
within an infinite time, such as Eternity is, the Channels of the Sea would be
filled; and consequently if the Earth and the Sea had been from all Eternity,
the Channels of the Sea being filled, the Sea would have covered the whole
Earth. By this Reason, Polybius in the Fourth Book of his History, proves that
the Euxine Sea, and other places, shall be filled at last: And Herodotus in the
Second Book, uses the same Reason, to prove, that sometimes Egypt was a Sea.
Seeing then that the Sea has not covered the Earth, Let us conclude that
neither Sea nor Earth have been from all Eternity, but have had a Beginning;
and having not had it of themselves, seeing that nothing is the cause of it
self, they must necessarily have had it of another, and that is the great and
glorious God, whom we adore; to him be Praise, Honor, and Glory, from
Everlasting to Everlasting. Amen.

FINIS.

