THEOPHRASTus. PARACELSUS


The lively Portraiture of the most famous and profound Philosopher and
Physician Aureolus. Philippus Theophrastus Paracelsus Bom^ ast of Hohenheim.
who was Poysned ye 47th. year of his age.

Paracelsus HIS ARCHIDOXIS: Comprised in TEN BOOKS, Disclosing the Genuine way
of making Quintessences, Arcanums, Magisteries, Elixirs, etc.

Together with his BOOKS Of RENOVATION and RESTORATION. Of the TINCTURE of the
Philosophers. Of the MANUAL of the Philosophical Medicinal STONE. Of the
VIRTUES of the MEMBERS. Of the THREE PRINCIPLES. And Finally his Seven BOOKS,
Of the DEGREES and COMPOSITIONS of RECEIPTS, and NATURAL Things.

Faithfully and plainly Englished, and Published by, J. H. Oxon.

London, Printed for W. S. and are to be sold by Thomas Brewster at the Three
Biibles in Paul's Churchyard. 1660

THE EPISTLE. TO THE READER.
Man's Supposition is no positive determination, it being incapable of
preventing future Obstructions, else both this, and the several Books of other
Authors, promised thee in my Epistle prefixed to the Aurora, etc. of
Paracelsus, and the Water-Stone of the wise men, had ere this time been abroad;
Accept of this at present: the rest, yea more then what I there promised may
shortly follow: The ensuing Books may serve as a Whet-stone to sharpen the edg
of thy honest Desires after a serviceable understanding. Imaginary Suppositions
will fail the Confident man in a day of Trial. Ye therefore that in reality aim
at the good of mankind, be as Active as you can in the things which the
Integrity of your minds persuades you unto. And those of you that without the
base Ends of Honor and Wealth, have a desire to Practice in Medicine, let me
tell you, That though our Author has in many places written obscurely, yet
time may Evince to the constant mind, that much of stable beauty lies veiled
under those necessary Masks. I would not impose ought upon thee, but lovingly
advice thee, not rashly to conclude, that all such things as thou understand'st
not, are falsities: Let not the Calumnies that our Author is aspersed withal
affrighten thee; for what man ever detected the Fallacies and destructive
Cheats of imperious disdainful men, but was thus reproached; and yet the
bitterest of his Enemies must acknowledge the Cures he performed were very
great, yea, on such as themselves durst not visit. But we will leave them as
they are, Hurtful to themselves, and Unprofitable to the Generation they live
in: The Archidoxis discovers the making of Arcanums, Magisteries, Elixirs,
Quintessences, Tinctures, etc. the Tenth Book whereof has been Enviously
suppressed till now of late, It being a Recapitulation and Explanation of the
Precedent Nine; both it and all the rest following are choice Treatises, and
can speak more for themselves then I am disposed to do. Thou must not think
that a bare Study will render thee a Master of such notable things as are
therein contained; If thou disdained to do as the Author has done, thou have
no great reason to expect any Benefit from his Labors; For Diligence and
Patience in Manual Operations must necessarily be undergone by thee if thou
would be his Disciple; but forget not with all thy heart to mind him in the
first place, from whom (...) good and perfect Gift descends. I am not forward
to persuade thee to these kinds of Studies, unless thou have a natural
well-rooted Affection thereunto; for it is to be feared thou may soon faint in
thy mind, and be very propense rashly to Condemn the Author thou proposest to
thy self to follow, when ^s the sole defect may be on thy part; Thou must not
therefore indiscreetly determine with thy self to be aut Caesar, aut nihil; For
much time must pass, and many Adventurous Combats must you undergo, ere Nature
will admit thee to be of her Council: I deny not but the blessed God of Nature
may reveal what, and to whom pleases him, nor shall I say, That it is
impossible, no nor unlikely but that such as rightly wait on (...) Sacred
Majesty, may receive far beyond what I mak^ mention of; For where a sincere
prepared heart is, there (if faithfulness be preserved) will a Measure suitable
to the Vessel be (in time) bestowed. One thing more I must advise thee of, and
it is this; Most of those many unusual words which here and there (but
especially in the Books of Degrees thou will meet with, are Explained in that
Chemical Dictionary, at the End of The New Light of Alchimy, etc. Sometimes
thou will meet with Expressions that are dubious, and therein I will not
promise thee the right understanding of his Iutention, till by use, and in
time, thou be better acquainted with him. Whatsoever thou obtainest by the
great Mercy of God, improve it honestly; for man's peace does not so much
consist in knowing and having, as in doing all the good that lies within his
Sphere. And so farewell.

Thy Friend, J. H.

A POSTSCRIPT TO THE READER.
THe Triumphant Chariot of Antimony, together with the Stone of Fire, Written
by Basil Valentine, is lately Printed at Oxford, and is to be sold by Thomas
Brewster at the sign of the Three Bibles in Pauls-yard.

Besides those other Books formerly promised thee, and which are ready for the
Press, thou may shortly expect Paracelsus his Paramirum, entire. Nor will it
be amiss to desire such as shall be pleased to render any of his Works in
English to give them us as whole as himself has left them, without a Culling
out, and Collecting some in this place, some in that; for fear of omitting what
may be directory to a right apprehending of those Secrets of Nature, which are
so warily dispersed throughout the whole of his Writings.

The most material Errata's are to be Corrected as follows; Other literal
ones, and some mispointings, may by a very little Care be amended.
PAge 2. line 6. for ban, read can. page 3. l5. dele And. p. 5. l. 6. f. How,
r. Now. p. 10. l. 8 r. natural: for etc. l. 10. f. to wit, self, r. to it self.
l. 11. f. sustain it, r. be sustained. p. 14 l 27. r. perfection. Briefly, etc.
ibid. dele (;) p. 16. l. 19. d. not. l. 21. r. complexions, that etc. p 17. l.
6. r. multitude. p. 18. l. 36 f. etc. r. or. p. 22 l 14. r in a B. p. 25. l. 3.
r.. p. 26. l. 21. r. colors. p. 27. l 19. r. last, a part etc. p. 34. l. 5. r.
Elements. p. 39. l. 32. r. from, after this manner, etc. p. 63. l 13. f. let, r
set. l. 25 r from one seed, etc. p. 66. l. 2. r. so. p. 67. l. 31. dele a flat.
p. 37. l 18 r. from which, etc. p. 74. l. 22. r. unto. Setting about the
practice therefore, etc. p. 81. l. 27. r. ritual, to it etc. p. 83. l 11. r. is
a etc. l. 19. f. does, r. is. ibid. f. complexionate, r. complexionated by p.
84. l. 7. r. One way etc. p 87 l. 13. f Mineral, r. Minera. l. 27. dele in. p.
91. l. 11. r. less, alias more, then etc. p 99 l. 6. r. to, and in etc. p. 105.
l. 10. r. Matter only, whether etc. p. 111. l. 26. dele pounds. p. 112. l. 33.
dele all the. p. 115 l. 22. r. Citrine Aloe, p. 116. l. 18. dele and. p. 117.
l. 24. f. not, r. now p. 119. l. 26 f. collected, r. cocted p 124. l. 1. r.
Oleum. p. 131. l. 20. dele but. l. 22. put a (,) at besides. p. 141. l. 2. r.
is in. p. 143. l. 19. r. dissolved therein, to etc. p. 144. l. 11. r water
oftentimes, etc. l. 21. put a (;) at Wine.

THE ARCHIDOXIS OF Theophrastus Paracelsus.
The First BOOK.
Of the mystery of the Microcosme.
IF we consider our misery, most dear Sons! and that our abode is in a grievous
habitation, and obscure Cottage, subject to hunger and to a very very many
various accidents, with which we are on every side Overwhelmed, as it were, and
environed; We find that we cannot at all flourish, no, nor scarce live, as long
as we have imitated or followed the Medicine and Physic prescribed unto us by
the Ancients; for we were often times assailed with many bitter Calamities and
Conditions, and detained or imprisoned with terrible, cruel Chains, and all
things daily become worse and worse unto us, and to exceeding many others that
are in an equal balance with us, and are our contemporaries, whom the Ancients
could not hitherto assist or help by their Books, no not in the least. We
forbear to reckon up in this place the various causes of this evil; Only, we
say thus much, that most of our Doctors have gotten abundance of Riches by that
way of the Ancient Writers, but have neither purchaced, nor indeed deserved the
smallest portion of praise and honor thereby, but have gotten so much wealth
by mere lies; The which when I considered, I was wiling to compose and set
down this work as my memorial, that so we might attain to a more prosperous and
nobler practice, wherein we shall meet with such mysteries of nature as are
admirable, and more then ban be ever found out. It will therefore be worthy our
consideration, how and in what manner the Art it self agrees with the
mysteries of nature; against such as could not in the least arrive unto the Art
hitherto.

The virtues of the mystery of Nature are impeaded or captivated as it were in
their bodies, just as a man that is kept in prison, in bonds and setters, whose
mind notwithstanding is free. For this mystery in its works, is like to a
certain fire in green wood, that would sain burn, but cannot by reason of the
moisture.

Since therefore the hindrance that impeads it, proceeds from those things, it
seems expedient, to have it freed therefrom; which being free and at liberty,
this Art of Separations may then be compared to the Art of the Apothecary, just
as the light may be compared to darkness. And this we do not speak of
arrogantly, but on this account, because those exceeding great wickednesses and
compositions that are made in the Apothecaries shops, and instituted by
Physicians, do very much displease us. And therefore it is not causelessly that
we call them by the name of darkness, and dens of thieves and Impostours; for
such only, for the most part, as have money are undertook to be cured by the
ignorant men, whereas if they have it not, then presently even at the first
dash shall they be pronounced sound; For they, viz. these Doctors, etc. do full
well'know that all their consultations produce not any helpful remedy.

Whereas therefore, that it both is and may deservedly be called an Art, which
reaches the mysteries of nature, as for example, to cure a contracture by a
Quintessence, and to heal that (in the space of four days) which would
otherwise abide even until death; Likewise to bring a wound to the end of its
cure in xxiv. hours, which could not be accomplished by bodies in so many
days. And now we will at length cheerfully set about the separation of the
mysteries of Nature, from the Impediments and Fetters of their bodies, and this
by experience.

Therefore first of all it is to be considered, what is the most profitable
thing of all, and the most excellent for a man to learn. It is to know the
mysteries of Nature by the which he may exactly consider what God is, and also
what man is, and how prevalent and useful the knowledge of them is, both as to
the heavenly Eternity and Terrestrial infirmity. Out of which two, the
knowledge of Theology, Justice and Truth does very excellently spring forth.
Moreover, the mysteries of Nature only are the life of men; and such mysteries
are to be imitated and followed as may be known by, and obtained from God who
is the eternal Good. For albeit, that there are to be found certain admirable
things in Medicine, and also in the mysteries of Nature, far greater things;
yet nevertheless, as to that Eternal Mystery, after this life, concerning
both of what, how and whence it is, we have no other foundation or ground
thereof then what is manifested unto us by Christ himself: Hence therefore does
arise that ignorant stupidity and sottishness of those Theologists and Divines
that attempt to draw out as it were and demonstrate the interpretations of the
mysteries of God, whenas they understand not the least tittle thereof; for we
men cannot at all find out what the will and pleasure of him is that gave it,
or declared it. But verily they wrest his Word for pride and covetousness
sake, from whence do proceed so many seductions, and do daily prevail more and
more, as we have demonstrated in our Monarchia. On this account therefore we do
disesteem, yea not at all value that reason or fantasy that has not the
least foundation in the mysteries visibly. In like manner the Jurists, or
Lawyers do patch up Laws according to their own conceits, yet so, that though
the benefit of the Commonwealth be wholly tossed as it were in danger, they will
be sure that themselves will lose nothing.

Seeing therefore that in these faculties and employments, there are so many
vain transactions practiced, without the Rule of equity, we shall leave them
till their proper time. Nor will we at all heed the foolish pratings of such as
talk more things concerning God, then he has made known unto them, and would
sain understand him, just as if they had been of his Counsel; and (in the mean
time) do vilify us, and detract from the mysteries of Nature and of
Philosophy, when as they are wholly ignorant of them all. The chiefest
knowledge that these men have, is a wicked impudent noise and roaring, whereby
they presume that themselves are the men upon whom faith entirely depends, and
that were it not for them, the Heaven and the earth would perish. O! the sury
and madness of men, and their most great cheating and deceiving! whom it would
much better become to account themselves as unprofitable servants, and as none
at all. Now albeit that even we our selves may by use, in our imitating of
these men, easily learn together with them to wrest the word of our Teacher and
only Creator unto our own pride, yet notwithstanding, seeing that we have not
an exact knowledge of the Word, but it is to be laid hold on by faith only,
and is not established by any earthly reason how specious soever it be; Let us
cast off this burden or rather yoke of their reasoning, and search after the
mysteries of Nature, in which mysteries the end or issue proves and confirms
the foundation or way of truth, let us seek after not only those mystries, but
such also as teach us to accomplish the highest Charity. And this is that
treasure of the chiefest good, viz. the material part, which we do understand
and mean in the writing of our Archidoxis, and as for the spiritual part, we
will refer that to our Monarchia.

How out of the aforesaid bassis and foundation have we experimentally drawn
our Medicine, whereby we are made certain, and do occularly behold that the
thing is truly so. To come therefore to the Practick part, we will divide this
our Book of Archidoxis into ten parts; that it may be a kind of assistance for
our memory, that we may not forget it; and withal we will speak so openly,
that we may be understood by our Sons, but not by the vulgar; for we will not
at all thrust the manifestation of these things upon such, so easily. We will
not disclose our mind, thoughts and heart to those deaf ears, nor to wicked
men, but will studiously endeavor to shut up our Arcanums from those with a
strong wall and key. And for fear least this our labor should not be secure
enough from those Idiots that are enemies to all true Arts, we shall wholly
refrain from writing the tenth Book concerning the use and practice of the
things preceding it. that so we may not cast the childrens bread to dogs. Yet
nevertheless such as are our Sons will abundantly enough understand the other
nine.

And that we may speak more openly of these Arts, you are to know in this
Treatise of the Microcosme, that therein is an approved demonstration of each
things, both of such as it contains, and such as receive or admit Medicine, and
also of such things as be permixed herewith. Likewise it viz. the Microcosm is
conquered and governed by Medicine and so follows it, just as an horse bridled
follows him that leads him; Or like a mad dog tied with chains. Thus on this
wise do I understand Medicine to attract and draw on nature and every living
thing. Now in this we do meet with three things, which demonstrate unto us the
virtues and powers whereby such things are to be completely done. As

First of all, by what means the five Senses shall be helped by the mysteries
of Nature, when as they proceed not from Nature, nor have a natural rise or
birth, as any herb has out of its own seed: but there is no matter which may
produce them.

Secondly, The mobility of the body must be considered also, as from whence it
proceeds, and by what it is moved and stirred, and by what means it is to be
helped. Thirdly, There must be a knowledge of the division of all the powers in
the body, and what things they are that have an agreement with each member, and
are to be transmuted according to the nature of those members, whereas
notwithstanding they are at the beginning one only nature.

First of all therefore we will speak of these; of Seeing, Hearing, Touching,
Tasting and Smelling: You may take this teaching example. The Eyes have a
matter of which they consist, as is mentioned in the composition of the body,
so also have the other Senses. But now the sight it self is not out of that
seed of which the eye proceeds, nor the hearing or tone out of that of which
the Ears are made, nor proceeds the Touch from the flesh, nor the Taste out of
the Tongue, nor the Smell from the nostrills, no more then Reason proceeds from
the brain, but these are bodily Organs or rather coffers in which the senses
are generated. Neither are we to understand that these Senses have their
dependence upon the grace and pleasure of the Creator, in such wise as not to
be of the nature of man, but only infused by the grace of God supernaturally,
to this end that the great wonders of God may (if at any time a man be born
blind) be made known unto us. We are not to conceive of it thus in this place;
for the aforesaid senses have their proper insensible and impalpable body, even
as on the contrary the other part of the body is tangible, for every man is
composed of two, viz. of a material, and of a spiritual body. The materiality
gives body, blood and flesh; But the spirituality gives hearing, seeing
smelling, touching and tasting. So then, if one be born deaf, it proceeds from
the defect of that mansion place in which the hearing is to abide. For the
spiritual body does not perfect its operation in an ill disposed place; the
cause of which we set down in the book of the generations of men. In this
therefore are the great wonders of God to be known, that there are two bodies,
viz. an Eternal and a Corporal, couched and concluded in one, as is also
manifested in the book of the Generation of man. Now Medicine works upon the
house and cleanses it, whereby the spiritual body is able to perfect its
proper actions therein, no otherwise then as Civet in a clean and an undefiled
case.

Secondly, Now let us proceed to the motive faculty of the body, and enquire
whence it is, and how it has its Original, viz. what or how the body unites
its self to the medicine, whereby the motive virtue is increased. You are to
understand it thus; Every thing that lives has its motion from nature. This is
sufficiently enough proved per^se, as concerning natural motion. But now that
motion which we imagine and make thereby is to be declared, as viz, how it
comes to pass accordding to our will and intention, as for example, if I would
lift up my Arm, it may be demanded, by what virtue or power I do it, for I see
no Organ whereby to move it so, but that thus it is done according as was my
desire to do. And so of walking, leaping, running, and such like actions, which
are made contrary unto and besides the motion of nature, for nothing of such
actions is a peculiar product of Nature, but is made accidentally. These kind
of motions have their original thus, viz. the powerful Mistress Intention is
above my motion natural, viz. on this wise. The Intention or Imagination
kindles the vegetative virtue, as fire kindles wood, etc. as we have written
in our Treatise peculiarly of Imagination. Now it is not able to accomplish its
operations more potently in any kind of body then in its own proper body, in
which it both is and lives. Likewise in every body there is nothing more easy
to be kindled then the vegetative Soul, because that She runs and walks by her
self, and is disposed hereunto; for even as a fire that is covered over and
buried, does, as soon as it is made bare and has an access of air, burn up;
even so likewise does my fantasy apply and bend it self to the seeing of any
thing. I cannot direct my eyes with my hands whether I please and would, but my
Imagination converts them to whatsoever it likes me to behold. So also is it as
to my journeying; for, if I have a desire of going any where, and do thus
propose to my self according as seems me good, then is my body directed to
this or that place thus intended by me. And by how much the more it shall have
been imprinted in my Imagination and thoughts, so much the speedier do I run.
So then its evident that Imagination is the mover of my course. Even after the
same manner is it, that medicine does mundifie bodies, in whom is a
spirituality, from whence it comes to pass that that motion is performed the
more easily.

Thirdly, Is to be understood, the distribution that is made in the body unto
all the members, out of all such things as are presented unto it either without
or within. In that distribution is made a mutation, whereby the things are so
changed, that one part serves for the complexion of the heart, another part is
accommodated to the nature of the brain: and so likewise is it with the rest.
Now, the body attracts unto its self two manner of ways, viz. internally and
externally; Internally, it attracts whatsoever is taken in by the mouth.
Externally, it attracteth the air, earth, water and fire; Thus therefore is the
business to be constituted and defined, viz. Those things that are received
inwardly, are not so necessary to be written; for that they are to be known by
the foundation of nature, (viz. these) which are distributed thus, as we shall
speak anon concerning the division. But outwardly you are to understand it
thus, that the body does attract through the whole skin from the four external
elements, what is necessary for it; which if it should not do, the internal
nutriment would not suffice for a man's support; and because that moisture is so
very existent in the body by custom, the same body extracts it out of the
Element water, and so it comes to pass, that as long as one shall sit or stand
therein, he needs not any other quenching of his thirst. Now this proceeds not
from the waters extinguishing the heat as it quenches fire, but the internal
heat attracts the external moisture to it self, and drinks it just as if it
were taken inwardly; hence it is that the Cows are able to abide in the Alps
without drink an whole Summer, for the air is as a drink to them and supplies
the place and office thereof; The same may be concluded of as to a man.

Moreover the nature of a man may be sustained also without food, if he be set
or planted with his feet in the earth. So have we seen a man that lived six
months without food, and was sustained only by wearing a piece, or clod of
earth upon his' stomach; the which being dry, he now and then took a new fresh
clod; he affirmed that during all that time he was never hungry: the cause of
which thing we show in the book of the Appetite of Nature.

So likewise have we seen a man that sustained himself for many years by a
medicine, viz. by the quintesence of gold, and scarce took half a scruple
thereof each day, Hence likewise or after this manner, have there been many
others that have eaten nothing for many years, viz. xx years, such I remember I
have seen in my time. Some do attribute this kind of living to the goodness and
piety of the persons, and some also impute it to God, the which we do not in
the least desire to gainsay or judge of; yet however this thing is even natural
for sadness, melancholy and fainting, or grief of the mind do take away both
hunger and thurst; so that by the attraction of the body, to wit, self, it is
able to sustain it for many years; for as much as food and drink are not so
ordained or appointed, as that we must of necessity eat flesh or bread, and
drink wine or water, but also we may sustain our life with the air and with
clods of earth; and we are to believe that whatsoever is ordained for food was
made that we might try and taste it, the which we shall declare more at large
in our book of the Monarchy of God; Albeit we grant thus much, that because of
our labors and such like, we cannot want temporal and corporal food, and that
for very many causes, and therefore food was ordained for this body, as
medicine was against diseases; Now therefore as to the distinction of things
which enter into the body, observe it thus, that they are distributed
throughout all the parts of the body, no otherwise then as if vinum ardens or
burning spirit were poured into water, thereby making it all of the same odor,
because it is defused throughout the whole body thereof; In like manner if ink
be put into wine, all of it will be rendered black thereby. Even thus is it in
the body of man, the humidity and moisture of life does presently defuse such
things as are received in, and that sooner and speedier then what we have
proposed unto you by these examples; but as to the form that the substance thus
took in, is transmuted into, the nature of this consists only in the members
which receive it and digest it into their own likeness, no otherwise then as
when bread, if conveyed into a man, is made mans-flesh, and if into a fish it is
made fish, etc. Thus in like manner is it to be understood of the things that
are taken in, they are transmuted by the virtues of the nature of the members,
and become appropriated to the nature of the parts receiving them. The same is
likewise to be understood of medicines, viz. that they are transmuted into the
members according to the proprieties of them members, for they receive their
strength and virtues from the proper substances of the medicines according to
either the good or evil, the subtle or gross dispersing thereof, according as
the quality of the medicine shall be, as for example; if it be of a
quintessence, the transmutation of it will be more strong and potent; but if it
be a gross medicine, such also it remains, even as an Image or picture that
has its ornament from the colors as to fairness and deformity, the which
colors if noble, such also will the picture be; So therefore that we may
collect our experiences in those like things which we have met withal, and may
as it were, heap them up together for our pozy and better remembrance, that so
we may have them in a readiness when we need them; we will write down these
nine Books, but as for the tenth, I will reserve that close in my brain,
because of the ungrateful Idiots; but yet notwithstanding in these 9 is enough
declared to our Sons; and let no body admire and so much wonder at the teaching
of my Doctrine, for though it be contrary to the courses and methods of the
Ancients; yet notwithstanding, it is most firmly founded upon experience which
is the mistress of all things, and by which also ought all arts to be proved.

THE Second and Third Book OF THE ARCHIDOXIS
Of the Separation of the Elements.
BEfore we set about the Declaration of the Separation of Elements, there are
some things which we shall explain (seeing that the things written of the
Generation of things are not so very consonant with the Separations of the
Elements) for the better and clearer understanding of that same Separation; for
every thing is brought to its end and issue, the more conveniently, where a
mature intelligent consideration, as to what the event will be, precedes; For
verily, thereby the practick becomes the clearer. We therefore say that the
four Elements exist together in all things, out of which does arise to every
one its Predestined state.

But now by what means those four Elements, so mutually contrary among
themselves, are able to agree and abide together, without the destruction of
themselves: you are to understand it thus, Whereas the mixion of the Elements
is in and by predestination, so united and corroborated, the case stands thus;
there is no weight to be accounted in them, but the ruling power of one of them
is greater in things then another power is, by which is to be understood that
in the digesting or disposition and ferment of the predestination, the
strongest element will bear rule, and overcome and subject the others. By which
means the other three elements cannot in the least attain their perfection, but
are in relation to that perfect element, as the light or sappy matter in wood
is to the firm timber; therefore also they are not to be called Elements, for
as much as they are not all of them perfect, but one only is so; when we speak
therefore of the four elements which finally are in all things, we are not to
understand it so precisely, that in them the four Elements are perfect; but
there is but one only finished or accomplished element in things; the other
Elements remaining imperfect, by reason of the virtues and puissance of the
chief excelling element; hence it comes to pass, that they can thus accord and
consist together, because that there is no perfection in three of them, upon
which account also neither can there be any corruption by the contrarieties to
bear rule. Moreover, that an element is predominant in one kind, it is because
it is hereunto predestined, and therefore no corruption nor permixion can
adhere to them, as we mention it in the book of Generations; whereas therefore
there is only one element in every thing particularly, it is needless to seek
for four elements in things, there being three of them not posited in
perfection briefly and finally; therefore we must understand that the four
elements are in all things, but not four complexions actually, the case stands
thus; a substance or matter contains the element water, and then it is nenusar
or water lilly; there is not in it besides this element, neither earth, nor
air, nor fire; likewise, there is not in it any likeness of heat, or dryness,
for it has no peculiar operation, but the predestination thereof is water, and
is the only element of water, under which is neither dryness nor heat,
according to its affianced nature. But yet although all these things are thus,
yet notwithstanding the other three elements are in it, but the creatures have
not their rise out of those three elements which are not brought forth as it
were perfect, nor have they their beginning or help and assistance from them,
but out of the predestined element which is united to, and impressed in that
stock and kind.

And albeit, that this squares not with the Common Philosophy, viz. that the
one predestined element has of its own nature the other three elements
adhereing unto it self, yet notwithstanding it is to be believed, that the
element, and substance, or matter, are different from each other. The which is
to be thus understood. The substance or matter is not from that element which
tingeth and elementateth the substance; neither also are these elements from
the substance, but they have an equal like agreement as the body and soul have.
But now each body, as for example, The body of some growing thing has its
Complexion, and likewise its element. Although the element it self is not
visible in the growing body, nor is it tangible or demonstrable, and that for
this reason, because this element is by reason of its subtilty more strong, and
subjects the other elements of the growing body. And yet all of them are in the
body, but imperceptibly, like as when water is permixed with vinegar, it
becomes like unto it; and although the vinegar shall have changed all in the
essence thereof, yet nevertheless the Complexion of the water remains
incorrupt; nor is it vinegar, for that cause, but is as much water as before:
And although it puts not forth the virtues of water as before; yet it does not
therefore follow, but that it has them still.

Now therefore, by these propositions we are willing to declare by what way the
Separations of the Elements are to be made; and here shall we meet with two
Practicks that require our understanding. One is that which the Separation of
the Predestined Element agrees unto, and this we will declare in the book of
the Quintessence. The other is that which the four Substantial Elements that
exist in growing things, appertain unto. By this we are to understand, that the
Predestined Element is the Quintessence, nor is it possible to make a
separation of the one from the other, only it may be made from the other three
Elements, as follows hereunder, concerning the Quintessence. But where we
speak of the Separations of the four Elements, we mean those four which are
essentially in a body, from hence has risen so many various errors, because
that men have sought after the four Elements, and also the Quintessence in the
Predestined Element, the which cannot possibly be.

Moreover, you must also know, that when the Elements of bodies are not to be
separated, so that one may be Fire, another Water, and another like to Air,
and the fourth to Earth, according to their Complexions. That sometimes the
Elements appear with their forms, sometimes with their Complexions, as the
water like water, the air like air, the earth like earth, and the fire like
fire. These are to be subtly understood, and may then at length well be done
by a similitude, if they are taken for the union of the Elements, not visibly
or actually, neither according to the nature of the Element of fire, but as an
hot and dry Complexion, like fire. On this manner has every Element its
nature, essence and condition attributed to it; the propriety remaining
incorrupt; for it is not to be supposed, that because some herb is most hot,
as a nettle, it does therefore contain in it self the more fire; no, but it is
rather to be accounted thus, viz. that the Quintessence of it is more hot, then
the Quintessence of Chamomill, the which latter has a lesser heat. But the
Elements of the body do receive either less or more, from their own substance
or matter; even as wood contains in it self more fire then herbs do. Likewise
stones have in them more of dryness and earth than Rozins have.

In like manner also note, that the mulittude and quantity of the degree in the
Quintessence, does arise from the Predestined Element, and the intension or
exaltation of the degree of the Corporal Elements, arises from the Species, or
shape of the substance, which is unlike.

But as to the Practick of the Separation of the Corporal Elements from all the
other things, Observe that it is twofold; One way teaches to extract the Three
Elements from the Pure Elements, as from the burning Fire, from the invisible
Air, from the true Earth, and likewise from the natural Water; the which
Elements have not such a like Original as the precedent Elements have: The
other way is of them, of (alias in) which those Four do exist, as we said
before, but yet with this difference, viz. That this exhibits more of the
Element of Fire, Water, Earth, or Air, with the similitude of the Form of the
essential Elements. When they shall be separated after this manner, they can
never be any more dissolved, viz. So as for the Complexions to be corrupted or
altered any further; (alias, So as to be eradicated out of their Complexions.)

It Is also to be considered, That the Elements by Separation, are found to be,
formally, of the likeness of essential Elements: for the Air appears like Air,
that cannot at all be shut in, (which some falsely think) and that for this
cause, because it presently exalts it self in the moment of Separation, and the
Wind does sometime break forth, and ascends upward with the Water, sometimes
with the Earth, and other while with the Fire: For verily the exaltation, or
elevation in the Air, is very much wonderful, like as if the Air were to be
separated from the essential Element of the Water, it is to be done by boiling;
the which beginning to boil, the Air is forthwith separated from the Water, and
carries with it the most light substance of the Water, and by how much the
Water is lessened, so much also is the Air diminished according to its
proportion and quantity.

There ore it is to be be noted here, That no Element can be conceived or had
without Air, although any of them may be had without another; wherefore we
undertake not the burden of Separating the Air apart, seeing it is in the other
three, as the life is in the body; for when it is separated from the body, they
all perish: as we clearly teach in the following Practick of Separations. In
this place, there are Four ways must be considered; One way, is in Watery
bodies, that is, in Herbs, which have more of Water, than of any of the other
Elements. The Second is in fiery bodies; such are Woods, Rozins, Oils, Roots,
etc. which contain in themselves more of the fiery substance, than of the
others. The Third is to be understood of Earthy bodies, such as are Stones,
Clayes, and Earths; but the Fourth is of Aierial: and this is in all the other
three, as we mentioned above. In like manner also are there so many Ways to be
considered of, as to the pure Elements, after the same manner as is said before,
of the Four foregoing.

Hence then is it easy to be known what the Elements are, and how to be
separated; amongst which, the separations of the Elements from Metals come
first, to be considered of; in which Elements there are peculiar Predestined
virtues, which are lacking in the other Elements, (alias, which are forced out
of the other Elements;) for although all the Elements are alike in the form,
viz. in Heat, Coldness, Moisture, and Dryness; yet notwithstanding the Dryness
or Moisture, etc. the Heat and Coldness are not the same in one thing as in
another; for in some it is Appropriative; but in other-some it is Specific; by
various ways after this manner, according as in every kind they are each of
them naturated peculiarly and essentially, for there is no kind of the Elements
like to another in virtues

Thus also are we to conceive concerning the Separations of Marcasites, the
which do likewise differ from the others in the Practick, and Elemental Nature;
for every kind, or Lineage, is posited in a peculiar Separation, and must be
practiced with, in a particular way; afterward we will speak of Gems, and
Stones, and demonstrate their Elements, for they appear not at all like the
others.

Furthermore, Salts are of a peculiar and most excellent nature, and of more
properties then are perceived to be in the others: There is also a diverse
essence in Herbs, which have no manner of agreement with the Minerals
themselves; nor indeed can they be alike, as to what belongs unto their nature
Likewise, the property of Woods, Fruits, Barks, and suchlike is singular; also
the property of Flesh, Drink, and all edible Food, and of things not good and
clean, but evil and impure, which are to be separated into Elements.

There are Two ways found to be, of that Separation which we mean; One whereof
is, the Separation of each Element shut-in by it self, into a peculiar Vessel
without the corrupting, or losing of its virtues, the Air excepted. The other
way is of the Separation of the pure from the impure, in the Four Elements,
viz. after this manner: After that the Elements are separated viz. the one from
the other, they have as yet a gross substance; for which cause there follows
another separation of those same Separated Elements; we will therefore declare
the Practick of them all, for it is to be known in the first place, that the
Quintessence of things is to be separated and extracted this way, because truly
the Elements drawn out of bodies, in the nature of Quintessence, are not
subjected, but are left with it. Therefore it is able to tinge the Elements,
either stronger or weaker; which is to be understood thus, That the
vigorousness do not (because of this) perish from the Elements when the
Predestined Element, that is, the Quintessence, is extracted; for it is it
self likewise Elemental and Separable, as to the Elemental form, but not as to
the differing natures, as is evident in the Discourse of the Quintessence.

By these like Separations, all Elemental Infirmities may be cured, by one
simple Quintessence, viz, after this manner; If those Predestinations fight
against these infirmities, as we set down more largely in the Discourse of
Predestinations. By these things therefore thus spoken, we have sufficiently
enough disclosed the beginning of the Separations, and therefore let us now
hasten on to the Practick part of them; the variety whereof is Tenfold: One is
of Metals, a Second of Marcasites, a Third of Stones, a Fourth of Oleaginous
things, a Fifth of Rozins, a Sixth of Herbs, a Seventh of Flesh, an Eighth of
Juyces, a Ninth of Vitrified things, and the Tenth of Fix things: And now, as
to those Separations of the Elements there are three ways thereof, One by
Distillations, a Second by Calcinations, and the Third by Sublimations; To this
do belong all the exercises, as the applying of the hands to the Fire, and
Laboring, and other necessaries, which shall be set down in the following
Separations.

Of the Separations of the Elements out of the Metals.
AS touching the Separation of the Elements from the Metals, there need the
best Instruments, Labor, Diligence, and an artificial Experience, and an
aptitude of the Hands for this Work.

First of all, make an Aqua Fortis, thus:
Take Salinitre, Vitriol, and Alum, equal parts, the which you must Distill
into an Aqua Fortis; pour this Water again upon its feces, and again Distill it
in a Glass. In this Aqua Fortis clarify Silver, and afterward dissolve
therein Salarnioniack: Having so done, Take a Metal, reduced into Leaves, and
resolve it there into water, that is, in the same water, then separate it by B.
M. pour it on again, repeat this so often until there be found an Oil at the
bottom, viz. of or Gold, a spadiceous or light red Color; of, a lazure; of
Mars, a red, and very obscure; of a white; of, a livid, wan, and leady; of
Venus, an absolute green; and of rum, a yellow color.

But yet note, that, not all the Metals are thus reduced into an Oil, but such
as have been before prepared: as for example, Mercury is to be sublimed; Saturn
to be calcined; Venus to be florified, or reduced into ^ores, Iron to be
Crocified, and reduced to a Crocus; Jupiter to be Reverberated; as for Sol,
and, they will easily submit themselves.

So then, when the Metals shall be on this wise reduced into a liquid
substance, and thereby disposed themselves to a disjoyning of their Elements,
(the which thing cannot possibly be done in a Metallic nature) for every thing
is to be before prepared for the use its agreeable unto and convenient for.
Afterward ad to one part of this Oil two parts of new Aquafortis, and being
well shut in together in the best glass, set it in horse dung for a month,
then destil it wholly off with a gentle fire, that the matter may be coagulated
in the bottom. And the Aquafortis which ascends, if it be destilled on this
manner in a B. thou shall fine two Elements together; But note that all the
metals will nor leave the very same Elements behind; for in Gold, the Earth
and the Water remains in A. B. but the Air is in all the other three; and the
Element of Fire abides in the bottom; because the Substance and tangible matter
of Gold is coagulated by the fire, therefore it will come together in a
substantial matter and substance.

In Lune there will remain in the bottom, the Element of Water, and in a Bal^y,
the Elements of the Earth and Fire, for the Substance and Corporallity of
(which indeed is of a six nature, and which cannot be elevated, is born and
springs from coldness and moisture. In Mercury, the Fire remains in the
bottom, and the Earth and Water are elevated up. In Venus, the Fire also
remains, and both, viz the Earth and the Water abides in a B. In Saturn, the
Element of Earth remains in the bottom, the Fire and Water are to be had in a B
In Jupiter, the Air remains in the bottom and the Fire, Water, and Earth are
elevated there from.

It Is therefore to be observed, that the Air affords ^ body in rum and in no
other metal whatsoever, of the which although some part does also ascend
together and remains, inseparably permixt with the other three Elements, yet
notwithstanding that Air is not Corporeal, but is adherent and concurrent with
the others, and is inseparable from them.

Furthermore, it is to be noted, that, that remainder, that is, the corporeal
Element, which remained in the bottom, must be reduced by a B into an Oil, with
fresh Aquafortis; and so this Element will be perfected, the which thou shall
keep for one Part The rest thou shall Separate by a B. on this wise; Put them
in Sand, and Urge them gently; then first of all, the Water will be elevated,
and will come forth; then after that the Fire, for you will know by the Color
where those two remain. But if the Elements, Earth and Water, should have
remained, then the Water will ascend first, and after that the Earth. But if it
be the Earth and Fire, then the Earth is elevated first, and the Fire
afterward. But if the Water, Fire, and Earth should be together, then the Water
will ascend first, the Fire next, and last of all the Earth. These Elements may
be so kept in peculiar Glasses, each of them according to its nature: as for
example, in Sol, the Hot and Dry, without any other property. Likewise the Cold
and Moist, and the Cold and Dry. The like is to be understood of the others.
But you must know thus much, That the Corrosive nature of the Aquafortis, is so
to be extracted, as we have described it in the Book of the Quintessence.

Of the Separations of the Elements out of Marcasites.
HAving before set down the Separations of the Elements out of Metals, it
remains that we now proceed to those Separations that may be made from
Marcasites, and they are these:

Take of any kind of Marcasite (as you please) whether Bismute, or Talk, or
Granate, or Cobolt, or any other kind, one pound; of Salt Nitre as much; beat
them together very small, and draw them out, or distill them by an Alembick,
without a Cucurbite, by burning them together, and keep whatsoever Liquor shall
ascend. But as for that which remains in the bottom, grind it, and resolve it
into a Water with Aqua fortis, and hereto pour the Water you gathered before,
and Distill it into an Oil, as was aforesaid of the Metals. And after the same
process, shall you Separate the Elements likewise; for thus it is to be
understood, viz the Golden Marcasite, to be separated like to Gold, the
Silverish like to Silver, the Bismutick like Lead, the zinck like Copper, the
Talk like rum, the Cobolt like Iron, etc. Thus much may suffice for the
Separation of all kinds of Marcasues.

Of the Separation of the Elements from Stones.
THe Separation of the Elements of Stenes and Gems, is to be thus understood;
Take a Stone, grind it exceeding well to powder, whereto add twice as much
Sulphurvive, and being all well mixed together, put them into a luted Pot in an
Athanor for four hours, that the Sulphur may be wholly absumed; afterward, let
that which remains be washed from the feces and Sulphur, and be dried. This
Stony Calx must also be put into Aqua fortis: and he proceeded withal as, is
aforesaid of the Metals. Therefore Stones are compared to Metals; as the clear
Gems, that are not white, nor brownish, are compared to Gold; the white
Ceruseous and bluish colored, to silver or; then the more common sort of
stones, to the other Metals; as Althaster to; Marble to Mars; flint to rum;
but Dulech to.

Of the Separation of the Elements from Oleaginous things.
ALL Oils, Woods, Roots, Seeds, Fruits and such like as have a flaming
nature, and fit for burning, are to be reputed Oleaginous; and the Separation
of them is two sold, viz. of the Oleaginous Bodies, and of the Pure Oils:

The Separation of the Oleaginous bodies, is thus.
TAke this Body, break, grind or make it small by any other way you can, then
wrap it up in a linen cloth, and tie it, set it in Hors-dung tell it be wholly
putrified, the which sooner happens in one body then in another. After that it
shall be putrefied, let it be put in a Cucurbite, and let be poured thereon so
much common Aqua Ardens, or burning water, as may overtop it the breadth of
four fingers, and let be destilled all that can ascend, in Sand; for all the
Elements ascend, except the Earth it self, the which you shall know by the
colors; but yet, the Aqua Ardens does first ascend, after that the Air, then
the Water, and lastly the Fire, and the Earth will remain in the bottom.

But now as to pure Oils, you are to understand that they do not need
putrefactions, but are to be destilled alone without addition; then afterward,
their Elements are to be separated, as was said before of the others, the which
are likewise destinguishable by their Colors.

After the same manner must you proceed with Rozins of a liquid substance, as
Pitch, Rozin, Turpentine, Gums and such like. But such Rozins as are Corporal,
as Sulphur is; they must first be prepared on this wise.

Of the Separation of the Elements in Corporal Rosins.
TAke Sulphur most finely ground, boil it with twice as much Linded Oil, into a
Liver; the which being beaten to powder, and shut up in a bladder, must be put
into Hors-dung to putrefie for four weeks; Then let it be destilled by an
Alembick, gently upon a naked fire, the Air and the Water do ascend first, in
different and pallid Colors; then afterward by the increasing of the Fire a
little, the Fire does ascend upwards, but the Earth abides in the bottom. The
Colurs appears pure, as the Air yellow, the Water like to thick milk, that it
can scarce be distinguished from milk, the Fire like a burning Rubie, with
transparency, and all the signs of fire, but the Earth is altogether black and
adust; and the four Elements being thus Separated, each Element is perfect, in
its own Elemental Complexion, and without permixion, as is above said.

Of the Separation of the Elements from Herbs.
SO also in Herbs, the Element of water, is of most account, when they are
cold Herbs; but if they be Aerial, then that Element predominates. So likewise
is it to be understood of the fire; The Separation of their Elements is thus.
Take Sage, and beat or bruise the leaves thereof, and afterward set it in
putrefaction, as is said before, then destill it by an horse-belly, and the
Element of fire will ascend first, So long until the Colors, and the
thickness of the water be changed; afterward the earth will succeed, and some
part of it likewise will remain in the Bottom, the which part is indeed fix.
Destil this Water in the Sun, six days, and afterward set it in a B. then the
Element of the Water will first ascend, which is very little, and is
perceptible by the taste; after that, the color is varied the Element of the
fire ascends so long, until that taste be likewise altered; then at last, at a
part of the Earth is elevated up, but yet it is but very little, the which
being permixt with the Air, is found in the bottom The like is to be understood
of Aerial and watery Herbs; of which Herbs the Air ascends first, after that
the Water, and last of all follows the Fire, according to the process set down
of Sage.

Of the Separation of the Elements from Fleshly Bodies.
THE Separation of the Elements from Fleshly Bodies, and such as live with
blood, is to be thus understood, that the Predominant Element in them, is to be
perceived more abundantly, and chiefly at the last of all; as the Principal
Element in Fishes is Water, in Worms fire; likewise in Fleshly Bodies that are
commestible, and such as we usually eat, is Air, according to our discourse in
the Treatise of the Generation of Animals.

The Separation of the Elements from Fishes is thus.
PUtrefie the Fishes most exceedingly well, then destil them by an hors-belly,
and there will very much Water ascend, repeat this Putrefaction and
Destillation, and so increase it, until there will no more water ascend, that
which remains, destil afterward by Sand, then at length the Fire ascends in
the form of Oil, but the earth abides in the bottom. Thus the whole substance
of the Fishes is Separated into the Elements; Here need not any consideration
of their fatness and marrow, but it is to be supposed, that every thing is
Separated by putrefaction, and divided into their Elements. In like manner is
it to be understood of Worms, except that from them there comes not only
Water, but more of fire, unless they be aquaous or watery Worms; as Serpents,
in the destillation of which there are many things obvious, and things more
wonderful then can be spoken, after the same manner is it to be understood of
commestible Animals, which do also peculiarly disclose their Elements by
Separation.

Of the Separation of Elements from Waterish Things.
AS to the Separatron of Juycy and Watery bodies, into their Elements, and of
such bodies as have the form of waterinesse, as Urine, Dung, Water, etc.
observe this Process.

Take Urine and destil it very well, then will ascend the Water, Air, and Earth
together, but the fire abides in the bottom; afterward mix all together and
destil them again, and do thus the fourth time, and in the fourth destillation,
the Water will ascend first, then the Air and Fire, but the Earth abides in the
bottom.

Take then the Air and Fire in a peculiar Vessel, the which set in a cold
place, and there will be Stria's or Crystals congealed, the which are the
Element of Fire, though indeed they will be likewise congealed in the
destilling, but yet in the cold the Congelation will be more.

Of the Separation of the Elements from Water.
MAke the water boil, by an horse-belly, or dunghill, and the Earth it self will
settle in the bottom, putrefie that which ascends, for its time, and let it be
destilled, afterward by a B. and the Water will ascend first, and the Fire
afterward. Dung or Excrements, Vitriol, Tartar, and such like juyces, as
Alum, Salts, and others of that kind are to be destilled by ashes in that
heat, and so long, until they will no more ascend, and that the Water and Air
have ascended, and the Earth abode in the bottom, afterward by the fire, does
the fiery Element ascend. It Is to be observed in this place, that albeit the
four Elements are separated, yet notwithstanding there do yet remain in the
Earth, four Occult Elements, as being six, as in the Caput mortuum of Vitriol,
the which you must subline with Sal Armoniack, and so will an Oil proceed
forth, in which the Water and the Fire are, and the Earth it self remains
Substantially, Separate them which have ascended up, and the Water will ascend
again, and the Fire will abide in the bottom, thus also is it to be understood
of Tartar, and Salts. Now although there are many more Separations of liquors,
yet we shall make a larger declaration of them, where we speak of
Transmutations; for it is to be observed that there are more Elements in a
Corrosive Earth, then in Ashes; Therefore the Separation is to be made by
Sublimation, as we shall demonstrate elsewhere.

Of the Separation of the Elements from Glasses, and such things as are Glassy.
THat which we have set down before concerning the resolutions of Marcasites,
the same is to be understood in this place about Glases, and is principally to
be considered, viz. that they be calcined with Sulphur, as the stones were;
then afterward washed, and be dissolved with Saltpeter and Aquafortis, etc.
as we have mentioned before, etc. Their Elements are likewise to be known by the
colures, in the destillations of them, not as they show themselves to the
sight; and thus much for them.

Of the Separation of the Elements in six Bodies.
THe Separation of the Elements of six things, is made by sublimation, as we
teach of Salts and Liquors, but yet with this difference, that they are to be
calcined with Salt-nitre, and to be sublimed afterward; And although there are
many other things not set down in this place, yet nevertheless it is to be
understood, that the Separations of all Bodies are to be made, by these thus
mentioned ten ways. Moreover as to the Separations of the four Elements, it is to
be observed that each of them may be Separated again, viz the Fire as fire, the
Air as air, the Water as water, the Earth as earth, as it follows concerning
their Peculiar Separations.

Of the Separation of the Fire.
YOU are also to know, that from the Element of Fire may be Separated four
Elements after this manner, when the Fire is most violently enkindled or
ascends, receive it in a Recipient, or Glass-vessel, which shut exceeding well,
and set it in horse-dung for a month, and thou shall find in that one Elements
our Elements; the which do thus with, open the vessel, put a Receiver thereto, so
the vapor, or Air will (...), into the receiver, then afterward, destil that
which remains by a B. so the water will ascend, then by an heat of ashes, the
fire will ascend, and the Earth will abide in the bottom; as to the virtues of
these Element, what they are, and why they are in this place thus described, we
shall explain more at large in other Books.

Of the Separation of the Air.
HAving received the Element of the Air into a firm glass, and shut it with
Hermes his Seal, it is to be exposed and directed or, turned at the Sun, for an
whole summer; the Air is by the circulation changed into moisture, or Water,
daily increasing more and more. Thou shall separate this quantity on this wise,
viz. let it be putrified in horse-dung for four weeks, afterward destil it by
B. as you did the Fire; Its virtue shall be spoken of, more largly in another
place.

Of the Separation of Water.
THe being put in a glass top-ful and not he least space empty, let be shut
with Hermes Seal, and ^^t at the warm Sun for a month, that it may daily have
such a heat as if it would boil, but by reason of the fullness of the glass it
cannot; which time being past, putrify it for four weeks then open it and
deful it by an Alembick of three qu^ls or beaks, by this way are the three
Aleme^, Separated and the Earth of that Water abides in the bottom. The nature
of ^Spa n^ said to be of very much vir^^^^ in many case^.

Of the Separation of the Earth.
THe same process is to be observed with the Earth. (...) was with the Water,
except only the c^vilation, for this destiliation is like to that which is
made or done in the fire, and is perfected by the same way. There is many a
reason of our setting down thi^ Separation of the Elements, in this place; not
only because us very profitable in Philosophy, but it is so in Medicine likewise.
We have now abundantly enough w^i^^^n of the Separations of the Elements, and
although more might be mentioned thereof, yo^ i^ is not so very necessary.

Now we will declare the Separation of the Pure, from the In pure, according to
out determination and purpose. The which indeed is done after the self same
(...) as we teach of Arcana's and Aurum Potabile, and therefore not to be (...)
in (...) that process is not from its very beginning, altogether the same with
that which is set down about Arcana's and Magisteries, yet nevertheless I do
at the end assume, and follow the same way of Preparation by Separation of the
Element, for as much as that here in this place, those Elements are to be
Separated, after that each of them is purged from the desilements that are
therein; so that no deformed thing or impediment may proceed from them, which
otherwise might easily be.

The end of the Second and Third Book of the Archidoxis, of the Separation of
the Elements.
THE Fourth BOOK OF THE ARCHIDOXIS.
Of the Quintessence.
WE have formerly mentioned the Quintessence that is in all things; now we are
(here in the beginning of this Treatise) to consider what it is; The
Quintessence therefore, is a certain matter Corporally extracted out of all the
things, which Nature has produced; and also out of every thing that has a
life in its self, and is separarated from all impurities and Mortality, is most
subtly mundified, and likewise Separated from all the Elements; from hence it
is evident, that the Quintessence is as if it were the Nature, Power, Virtue
and Medicine, shut up and imprisoned heretofore in things, but is now free from
its dwelling place and extraneous incorporation; the same Q E. is the Color,
Life, and propriety of things; it is a Spirit like the Spirit of life, with this
difference, that the spirit of the Life of a thing is permanent, but of man
mortal; from whence may be understood, that a Quintessence cannot be extracted
from the flesh or blood of a man; and that for this reason, because the Spirit
of Life, which also is the Spirit of Virtues, dies, and the life exists in the
Soul, which then afterward is not in the substance. By the same reason also,
even the Animals, because they lose their Spirit of Life, are therefore wholly
mortal, and afford no Quintessence; for the Quintessence is the Spirit of the
thing, which verily cannot be so well extracted out of things sensible, as our
of in-sensible things; Now, Baume has in it self a Spirit of Life, the which
is its Virtue, Power, and Medicine; and although it be separated from its Root,
yet notwithstanding the Life and Virtues are therein; for this reason, because
that is a fix Predestination: Therefore the Quintessence may be extracted
therefrom, and be also Conserved with the life thereof, without Corruption, as
a thing eternal, according to its Predestination: But now, could we but extract
after this manner, the life of the Heart, without corrupting it, even as is
possible for us to do, out of things insensible, without doubt we might be
capable of Living perpetually! without the knowledge or feeling of Death, and
Diseases; the which thing is impossible for us to do. And therefore we must
expect to die.

Whereas therefore, the Quintessence is the Virtue of the things; we must in
the first place tell you, in what form the Virtue and Medicine is in things,
and that on this wise; Wine contains in it self a great Quintessence, whereby
it has very wonderful Operations; yet notwithstanding there is not so much of
the Operation, as of the Wine, as is evidently apparent: If Gall be cast into
Water, it makes it all bitter, although the Gall be not the hundredth part of
the quantity of the Water; So the smallest portion of Saffron, will tinge a
great deal of Water; all which does not therefore become Saffron. Thus in like
sort is it to be understood of the Quintessence, its quantity is very little,
and lodges as a Guest in Wood, Herbs, Stones, and such like; The residue is a
mere absolute body; the which we write of, in the Book of The Separation of
the Elements. Nor are we to dream that the Quintessence is a certain fifth
Essence, above the Elements, when as even it it self is an Element. Likewise
some or other may suppose, that the Q. E. is a Temperate Essence, viz. neither
Cold, nor Hot, nor Moist, nor Dry, for verily it is not such. For there is
nothing that consists of such a temperature; for by it, it would be wholly
alienated from the Elements; But all Quintessences, have a nature according to
the Elements; as for example, the Quintessence of Gold has a nature according
to the Fire, the Q. E. of Lune, according to the Water, of Saturn according to
the Earth, and of Mercury according to the Air.

But the reason why a Quintessence cures all deseases, is not because of its
temperature, but because of its implanted property, its great cleanness and
purity, whereby it does in a wonderful manner, alter and change the body into
cleanness. For even as a spot or film is took off from the Eye, wherewith it
was darkened before, even so does the Quintessence mundifie the Life in man.
Neither does it follow, that all essences must necessarily be of one and the
same nature, mutually; No, nor are all the fiery natured essences of the self
same Operation, by reason of their complexion; as for example, should any
suppose that the Quintessence of Anacardes has the very like self-same
operation, as the Quintessence of Gold has, because both of them are of a
fiery nature, he would be extremely mistaken, because the Predestination and
disposition, causes the diversity of virtues; for even as every Animal
conteins in himself the spirit of life, and yet for all that, they have not all
of them the very same like virtues, because they all consist of flesh and
blood, but one differs from another, as in taste, so in virtue; even so is it
with the Quintessence; the which does not receive its virtue from the Elements
simply understood, but from the propriety existing in the Elements, according
to our discourse, in the Book of the Generation of Things.

Thence it comes to pass that some Quintessences are Stiptick, some are
Narcotick or stupifying, other some Attractive, others cause sleep, others are
bitter, sweet, sower, benumming, and some are renewers of the body into
youthfulness, others concerve it in health, purge it, bind it, etc. the virtues
of which Quintessences are innumerable, nor can they be reckoned up here, but
yet a Physician should know them very well.

When therefore the Quintessence is Separated from the not Quintessence, as the
Soul from its body, and that it be taken inwardly into the body; What infirmity
is able to resist so noble, pure and potent a Nature? or to take away the life
from our body, death excepted, viz. the Predestined time which Separates our
Body and Soul, as we teach in our Book of Life and Death. We are also to
consider in this place, that every Disease requires its Peculiar Quintessence;
although we teach some that are sit for all diseases. But by what reason that
comes so to pass, shall be taught in its proper place.

Furthermore we testify, that the Quintessence of Gold is as to its Quantity,
exceeding small; and the residue of it is a leprous body, in which there is
remaining neither sweetness, nor sowernesse, nor any power or virtue besides
the mixion of the four Elements. And this secret we ought not to be ignorant
of, in the least* viz. that the Elements themselves; cannot without the
Quintessence resist any disease, but are able to do only thus much, and no
more then thus, viz. to heat or to cool, without any kind of virtues; as put
case the disease be hot, it is driven out by Cold, but not by that frigiditie
as is destitute or void of Cold virtues, as water and snow, the which two
though sufficiently cold, yet there is no Quintessence in them, by whose power
and virtue the disease may be expelled. On this account the body of Gold is, of
it self, invalid; But its Quintessence only, existing in that body, and in its
Elements, yields those virtues therein hidden; so likewise is it in all other
things, it is their Quintessence only that cures, heals, and tingeth the whole
body, as Salt does excellently season any food; The Quintessence therefore, is
that which gives color, such as it is; also virtue; and if Gold be spoiled of
its color, it does likewise loose its Quintessence. The same is to be
understood of the other Metals, that when their Colors are removed from them,
they are then robed of their natural virtue.

The like is it in Stones and Gems, as the Quintessence of Corrals is a certain
fatness with a redness, and the body of them is white; Likewise the
Quintessence of the Smaragdine is a green juice, and the Body of it is also
white. The same is to be supposed of all the rest of the stones, viz. that they
loose their nature, essence, and proprieties together with their colors, as we
teach peculiarly in their Extractions. The same is to be likewise understood of
Herbs, Plants, and other growing Products. In like manner of flesh and of
blood, from which there can be no Quintessence extracted for the reasons before
rehearsed; but yet notwithstanding there may be a certain similitude of a
Quintessence extracted by us therefrom; after this manner, a piece of flesh
has life in it self even yet, because the flesh is as yet furnished with its
whole nature and virtues; and therefore there is a life in it, which although
it be not the true life, is nevertheless a preserved life, and that so long
until it putrifies. And therefore this difference is to be noted, whereby dried
Herbs, and such like, are to be accounted of, as was spoken of Flesh. For, that
green Spirit, that is their life, is perished from them. So then dead Things
may be taken for a dead Quintessence, even as Flesh can emit from it self all
its virtues, peculiarly separated (into one part) from its body: So also is it
with Blood, and dried Herbs. Which indeed, though they be not live
Quintessences, yet do they demonstrate, how even a dead Quintessence discovers
some Virtues. But, Metals and Stones have in them a perpetual Life and Essence,
nor do they Die; but as long as they are Metals, or Stones, so long also does
their Life endure; therefore also do they exhibit perfect Quintessence, which
may in like manner be extracted from them

Moreover, we are to see by what way the Quintessence is to be extracted:
verily, there be many ways, some are made by Additions, as by the Spirit of
Wine; others by Balsamites; some by the Separations of the Elements; and by
many more several ways which we shall not here reckon up particularly.

But, whatsoever way it is done by, the Quintessence must not be extracted by
the mixtion or addition of things inconvenient, and unsuitable; but the Element
of the Quintessence is to be extracted alone from the Separated body: and
likewise by such a Separated body as is extracted. There are many ways to be
found by which the Quintessence may be extracted, viz. by Sublimation,
Calcination, by Strong Waters, by Corrosives, by Sweet, by Sower things, etc.
and it may be done any kind of way: But this also is to be noted, That every
thing that has been admixed to the Quintessence, by reason of the necessity of
the extraction, that same thing is to be extracted again therefrom, that so the
Quintessence may remain alone, without being polluted, or permixed with any
other things: for it cannot possibly be, that the Quintessence can be extracted
from Metals, and especially from Gold, (for that cannot be overcome by it self)
without the using of some fit Corrosive, that may be again Separated therefrom
afterward. So Salt, which was Water, is again extracted from the Water, so
that this Water is void of Salt. But now this is to be considered, that it is
not every Corrosive that is fit for this work, because they cannot all of them
be separated; for if Vitriol or Alum be permixt with Water, neither of them
can be Separated therefrom afterward, without detriment or corruption, but
they leave behind them a sharp residence; and that for this reason, because
they are both Watery, and there is made a concurrency, or meeting of two likes;
the which ought not so to be in this place: Therefore diligent heed is to be
used, that you take not a Watery body to a Watery, or any Oily body to an Oily,
or Resinous to a Resinous body; but verily, the Contrary ought to separate the
Quintessence, and to extract it, as Waters extract the Quintessence of
Oleaginous bodies, (as is mentioned of the Metals) and Oleaginous things, the
Quintessence of Watery bodies, as we may learn of the Quintessences of Herbs,
etc. So therefore, after the Separation, and extraction of the Quintessence,
the Corrosives are to be again Separated, which will easily be done; for Oil
and Water are easily separated, but Oil from Oil not so; nor can Water be
separated from Water without permixing each with the other; the which thing
being left, may bring to the Quintessence a most great losle, for the
Quintessence must be clear and undefiled, and must be gathered without the
permixion of any thing whatsoever, that it may have a Uniform substance,
whereby it may be able to penetrate the whole body; for, the subtilty and
virtues thereof; cannot be found out fundamentally; no more then its Original,
viz. from whence it first proceeded, can be fully known. For it (viz. the
Quintessence) has many degrees; One against Fevers; as the Quintessence of
Opiates; One against the Hyposarcha, or an Hydropical distemper, as the essence
of Tartar; One against the Apoplexy, as that of Gold; One against the Epilepsy,
as that of Vitriol; the number of which is even infinite and unsearchable by
experience. It Is therefore worthy the highest Consideration and diligence, that
to every Disease, its true enemy may be assigned; for so Nature will give an
incredible assistance; the which we will make a better Declaration of in what
follows. We cannot speak of the Degrees thereof, in such a manner as is the
assignment of Degrees to simple things in Medicine; the reason is this, because
there can be no Comparison of the degrees of a Quintessence, to the degrees of
Simples, nor indeed may be; but when they are exalted, the excellency and
virtue of one, is found to be greater, then that of another, and not the
Complexion; Nor is it to be conceived, That the Quintessence of Ambos, is
hotter then the Quintessence of Lavender; or the Quintessence of Venus, dryer
then the Quintessence of; but the degree of any thing is to be discerned, by
the great and more excellent virtues that it has, viz. after this manner; The
Quintessence of Antimony cures the Leapry, the Quintessence of Corrals drives
away the Spasm and Torsions, or Gripings. But now to know which of these is the
better and higher granduated, there can be no other judgment of it then thus,
viz. That the Quintessence of the Antimony is higher and more excellent, and
that for this reason, because the Leapry is a more grievous infirmity then the
Cholick is, with all its appurtenances; and therefore answerable to the
propriety that each has against diverse Diseases, are the degrees thereof to be
considered: yea, also in one and the very same Disease; for so in the Leprosy,
one essence is more powerful to cure it then another; for the Quintessence of
Juniper expels it, and the Quintessence of Ambergreece, and the Quintessence of
Antimony, and the Quintessence of Gold: Now although that all these Four
Essences will cure the Leprosy, yet notwithstanding they do it differently,
nor do they consist (as to the Cure thereof) in one and the same degree; for
the essence of Juniper expels this Disease by a most high Repurgation and
cleansing, which it brings into the blood, and consumes the Venom so, that it
is not so perceptible; and therefore to be accounted in the first degree of
that Cure. The Quintessence of the Amber-grecce takes away the venom also; and
does more, for it mundifies the Lungs, Heart, and Members, subject to the
Leprosy; and therefore the Second degree is attributed thereunto. The
Quintessence of Antimony does go yet further then the Two aforesaid virtues,
mundifies the skin, and acuates and renews the whole body, after a wonderful
manner; and therefore obtains the Third degree. But the Quintessence of Sol,
does even alone accomplish all these Operations, and radically takes away all
the signs of the Leprosy, and so renews the body, even as Honey and Wax are
mundified and purged from their Comb; on this account it possesses the Fourth
degree.

By this kind of way, are the degrees of Quintessences to be known, and
distinguished from one another; that is, which of them is more high, or more
excellent. Besides Simples are to be known by their Properties; for as is their
Propriety in the Simple form, such also is their Quintessence; not sluggisher,
but much more powerful and excellent.

Moreover, we must likewise know the differences of the Quintessences; for some
of them do very much serve for the Liver, to resist all its Diseases. Some for
the Head, others for the Reins, some for the Lungs, othersome the Spleen, and
such like; Likewise, some do operate only in the blood, others in the Phlegm
only; some upon Melancholy only, others upon Choler; othersome have their
Operations in the Humors only, some in the Spirit of Life, some in the
Nutritive Spirit; some Operate in the Bones, othersome in the Flesh, some in
the Marrow, others in the Gristles, some in the Arteries; some also there are,
that Operate against some Diseases Only, and against none else; as, against the
Palsy, Falling-evil, Contracture, against Fluxes, the Dropsy, etc. Some also
are found to be Narcoticks, others Anodine; some Somniferous; some Attractive,
Purgative, Mandificative, Incarnative, Confortative, Regenerative; and some
Stupefactive, etc.

Othersome there are to be found, that Renovate, and Restore; that is, such as
transmute the Body, Blood, and Flesh; Othersome for the Conservation of the
Diuturnity, or Prolongation of the Life; some for the Retaining and
Preservation of Youthfulness; some of them work by Transmutation; and some by
enkindling, or stirring up. Moreover, this is likewise to be understood that
some Quintessences have a Specifical form, others an Appropriated form, others
an Influential, and others a Natural form. Briefly, there are many more virtues
that they are endued with, which we are able to describe, and their Operations
in Medicine, are exceeding admirable and unsearchable, and that variously; for
some Quintessences will make a man of 100. years old, like to one of but 20.
years of age, and that by their own Virtues and Power. And now, What man is
able to search out the Original of so great a Mystery? Or to find out, from
whence the first matters do naturally spring? It is at the pleasure of our most
Supreme Creator, either to make them so, or to forbear. For, who shall instruct
us to know, what the virtues of the Quintessence of Antimony are, by which the
old Hair is cast off, and new springs up in its room? Likewise, why the
Quintessence of Bawm roots out the Teeth, and eradicates the Nails of the Hands
and Feet, and causes new ones; and the Quintessence of Rebis, rubs or scours
off the skin, and renews it? But the Quintessence of Celondine changes the
body, renewing it into good, and better; just so as fresh Colors renew a
Picture. There are far more Properties then these, which we omit in this place,
and reserve them to be declared in their proper Chapters.

And now at last, How can it be possible that we can relinquish and neglect
that noble Philosophy and Medicine, seeing that Nature affords unto us such
wonderful experiments, both in, and from them; yea such, as the other Faculties
are destitute wholly of, for that they are placed in a mere Cavilation. And why
should not this strange Operation be very pleasing unto us, viz. That the
Quintessence of the Carline Thistle takes away the Powers of one man, and
bestows them upon another that uses it. Likewise, that the Quintessence of
Gold inverts, or turns as 'twere, the whole Leprous body inside outward, and
so washes it as an Intestine, or Entrals are washed in the Shambles; and does
likewise remove the Scabby Skin and make a new one, and loosneth the Organs of
the Voice, and takes away the whole Leprous Complexion, and produces such a
one, as if he newly came forth out of his Mother. Now therefore, we will apply
our mind to the making of those Quintessences, and direct you the Way of their
Extractions or Compositions; to this purpose, we will endeavor to declare them
in a just due order, together with their Appurtenances, viz. One way for
Metals, another for Marcasites, another for Salts, another for Stones and Gems,
another for Burning things, another for Growing things, another for Spices,
another for Comestible and Poteable things. But yet, you are to take notice in
the Practick part of Quintessences, That the Theory, and a good knowledge of
Natural things, is requisite; but yet notwithstanding Theorically, viz. of the
Proprieties of things to natural Diseases; Neither are we to be Ignorant of the
difference between a Quintessence, an Aurum Potabile, Arcanaes, Magisteries,
and others of that kind, viz. thus; A Quintessence cannot be again reduced into
its body; but Aurum Potabile may be again transmuted very well into its
Metalick body; and therefore the virtues that are in a Quintessence, are far
more noble then in other things.

But now, in our thus Discoursing of the Quintessence, the difference in
respect of the one and the other, is to be known; and also what that difference
is: And although we have sufficiently explained it before, yet the Practick
allures and calls us some other way, by which said way, the condition and
nature of the Quintessence may be found out. For although they do not appear in
the form of a Quintessence, nor are made after the same manner, nor consist in
one Element alone, as a Quintessence ought to be; yet nevertheless it is to be
understood, that as to the Quintessence of those things, it is more then so, as
to be called a Quintessence; and is rather to be styled a certain Arcanum, and
Mystery; concerning which, more should be written then we have written of a
Quintessence. But whereas we have declared it in the Books of Paramyrum, we
shall pass it over in this place. The number of the Arcanaes and Mysteries of
this same Art is infinite and unsearchable, and many are the ways thereof,
that we meet withal, and which require the attentive heed of a man's quickest
ingenuity. But yet, amongst all this number of Arcanaes, we will here rehearse
Four. The First therefore of those Secrets is, Mercurius Vitae; the Second is,
the Prima Materia, or first matter; the Third is, the Philosophers Stone; the
Fourth is the Tincture. And although these Arcanaes are, as to their
revealment, rather Angelical then Humane; yet nevertheless we will not greatly
fear, or doubt of them, but will rather endeavor to search out the ways of
Nature; and even all that which has proceeded from Nature, may in my Opinion,
be also natureally understood. We do therefore profess concerning Mercurius
vitae, that it is not a Quintessence, but an Arcanum; because there are in it,
many virtues and powers, which preserve, restore, and regenerate; as we write
in our Book of Arcanaes. So likewise Prima Materiae does not only operate upon
living bodies, but also on dead bodies after the same manner, more then can be
imagined to be done naturally. In like manner does the Philosophers Stone show
its efficacy, the which tinging the body, does release it of all diseases, even
as each of the Metals are mundifyed from their Impurities. So also is it with
the Tincture, the which does as well transmute the disease into health, as it
does into. These things, yea and others to, do Magisteries and Elixirs
accomplish, and Aurum potabile, each whereof are treated of in their proper
books.

Of the Extraction of the Quintessence out of Metals.
NOw then we will in a few words, finish the Extraction of Quintessences from
Metals; for many men have (in our time) attempted and experienced very many
things in them, and have met with many things that have as it were, even
constrained them to enter upon other (and those various too) ways.

Concerning Metals. Therefore this is to be understood, viz. that they are to
be divided into two parts, viz. into their Quintessence, and into their Body;
both which are liquid and potable, and will not be permixed together: but the
impure body, turns forth the Quintessence to its superficies, even as the
Colostrum, or cream is Separated from the milk. By this way are made two
fatnesses, or viscous liquors out of Metals, the which liquors are to be
Separated. As for the fatness of the Body, it is always white, even of all the
Metals; but their Quintessence is colored, even as we have explained it before;
concerning the seven Metals, they likewise have all of them the same process,
and is this.

The Metal must be dissolved into a Water, then afterward, must this solution
be destilled by a B. and be abstracted or drawn off, and putrefied so long
until it be reduced into an oil, the which oil must be destilled out of small
Glasse-Cucurbites by an Alembick, and one part of the Metal will remain in the
bottom, let the which be again reduced into an oil as before, and be destilled
so long, until all the Metal shall ascend, then let it be again putrefied for a
Month, and at length be again destilled with a gentle Fire, and the vapors
will ascend first, and fall into the Receiver, the which vapors remove; Then
there will ascend two obscure colors, one white, and the other answerable to
the nature and condition of the Metal, and when they shall be wholly comeover,
they become Separated in the Receiver. So that the Quintessence remains in the
bottom, and the white color of the Body swims at top. Separate these two by a
Separating-Glass and put your Quintessence in another Glass, and pour thereto
some Purified Burning Wine, which let remain so long therewith, until it, viz.
the Wine be plainly acuared, then let it be strained or Separated from the
Quintessence, and more fresh be again poured on; this do so often till you
perceive no more Acuity or sharpness. Then at last, power on Water twice
destilled; where with let it be washed and brought unto its sweetness, then
keep it; by this way is prepared the Quintessence of Metals. But as for the
white Color of the body if you reduce it, you shall have thencefrom a white
Malleable and Metallic body; the which cannot be known, viz. under what
species or kind it is contained. Many other ways are to be found for the
Extraction of a Quintessence, which we shall be silent in, because we account
them not for true extractions of Quintessences, but only as transmutations, in
which there is no Extraction made or used.

Of the Extraction of the Quintessence from Marcasites.
THere are also to be sound, various ways as to the Extraction of the
Quintessence out of Marcasites, but yet we cannot in the least account them for
true Quintessences. And although they be of a greater virtue then their
Quintessence is, as we teach, and discover of Arcanaes, Magisteries and
Elixers; Yet notwithstanding the way and manner that we here use, in extracting
the Quintessence from all Metal^ne Marcasites, is like to the true extractions
of the Metals. And whereas we said before, that the Quintessence is the most
supreme virtue of things, and do yet for all that aver the contrary in
Arcanaes, viz. that they are greater then the Quintessences themselves are; the
reason is this, because all Arcanaes contain in them the Quintessences, and are
reduced further, to such an acuity and subtilty, that they do receive thereby a
far greater virtue then the Quincessence.

The same comes also to be, by reason of their Appropriate and Specisick
faculty. The process therefore of the Extraction of the Quintessence out of
Marcasites is thus.

Take of a Marcasite ground most exceeding small, one pound; of the eating
Water, two pound; being permixt together in a Pelican, let them remain in
digestion two or three months, and they will be reduced into a liquor; distill
this liquor by the Fire, wholly, and it will come over in an oil, the which
thou shall putresie together in a Belly or Dung, sor a month, then distill it
as you did the Metals, and there will likewise two colors ascend, as did from
the Metals, one color white, the other the true color of the Quintessence;
leave the white, except it be of Bismute, or a white Marcasite, and then you
shall know them from each other by the thickness. Take the undermost and
reduce it to its sweetness, as was before spoken of the Metals. On this wise
then have thou Extracted the Quintessence out of Marcasites, without any
corrupting of their powers and virtues.

Of the Extraction of the Quintessence out of Salts.
THe manner of Extracting the tho Quintessence out of Salts is done by a
peculiar way, that so their virtues may not be diminished, viz. on this wise.

Take Salts, The which you must Calcine excellently well; but if they be
volatile Salts, burn them; afterward let them he resolved into a Tenuity or
thinness, and be destilled into a Water, put this Water in putresaction for a
month, and destil it by a B. and there will ascend a sweet water, the which
throw away. That which will not ascend, set again in Digestion for another
month, and distill it as before; and do thus so often, till there be no more
sweetness perceived; for by this way, have thou now the Quintessence of Salt in
the bottom; from one pound of Burnt or Calcined Salt, thou will scarce have two
ounces. Half an ounce of this Salt Extracted on this wise (suppose common Salt)
does season meats more then half a pound of the other, for here is only the
Quintessence present, and the Body is abstracted thence-from, by the liquid
Solution.

By this way is the Quintessence of all Salts Separated. But it is to be
extracted from Alum and Vitriol, by another way; thus, They do not admit of a
Calcination, even to fusion, as Salts do; and therefore it is Expedient, that
after their Calcination, you burn them, and resolve them according to the Rule
of Practice; and after that they be resolved, power on again the Waters that
proceeded from them, and proceed on, according to the Process given of Salts;
for much of the Essence ascends with the moisture, the which does again thus
reside at the bottom in the Composition and Putrefaction, and so come together
into one.

Of the Extraction of the Quintessence out of Stones, Gems and Pearls.
THE manner of extracting the Quintessence out of Stones, Gems and Pearls, (the
Process of all which is one and the same) is the most excellent of all, and is
as to the Operation thereof, very Subtle and Industrious; very, very little is
the quantity of that Quintessence, which is to be had out of Gems, and by now
much the subtiler and purer the Gem is, so much the lesser is the Quintessence
thereof; it is scarce worth while to Extract the Quintessence from gross, great
and vile or base Stones, for they have but little virtue in them, and therefore
also have but very little Quint. to come forth or proceed from them. The
Process thereof is this.

Take Gems or Margarites, or Pearls, beat them into pretty big pieces, not into
a Powder, and put them in a Glass, and pour thereto the Acetum of the Root,
or Radicated Vinegar, so as to overtop it the breath of four or five fingers,
and let them be digested in a horsbelly for a whole month, which being done,
the whole matter will appear liquid; the which thou shall extract with other
Radicated Vinegar, and shake and mix them well together; so the Vinegar
receives into it self the Color of the Stone. The Colored Vinegar must be
poured out into another Glass, and power on more Vinegar as before, so osten as
there comes any Color; now in that Color is the Quintessence contained, the
residue is the Corporality. Take therefore the Colors, or tinged Vinegar, and
boil them very gently even to dryness, then afterward wash it often with
distilled Water, until it be made sweet, as above said: Then let this powder be
dissolved upon a marble; thus shall thou have the Quintessence of Gems and
Pearls; but this is to be noted in the Colors of Pearls, that they are
resolved into the Color of thick Milk, and the Body of them is Sandy and
viscous; and thereby may the one be known from the other. The like is it also
with Crystal, its Quintessence appears at top, a certain Viscous Body
remaining, by which the sufficiency or compleatnesse of those kind of
Extractions may be known.

Of the Extraction of the Quiutessence out of burning things.
ALL such things we call burning, as are not used for food or drink, and do
naturally burn, and feed the fire in their Bodily Substance. The Process of the
Extraction of their Quintessence is this. Take the Body, cut it exceeding
small, and put it into a Glazed Pot, and fill it up, and close it firmly with
the Seal of Wisdom, that so it breath not out, burn it in a Circulatory Fire
for twenty four hours, so as to abide in an equal Heat, and the Pot to be
glowing like the Coals: Then take it out of the Fire, and putrefie it in Dung
for four Weeks, then distill as much as will ascend; Let this be put in a
Horse-belly to distill off all the moisture therefrom, and be set again to
putrefie, until there come out no more moisture, then at length the
Quintessence of that which thou have received, and at first tookest in thy
Reciver, remains in the bottom; after this manner is the Quintessence to be
Extracted out of all things that contain in them Oil, or Rosin, or Pitch, or
such like, as out of Turpentine, Fir Tree, Juniper, Cypress, etc. Likewise out
of all Seeds, Fruits, and such like.

Moreover you are to note, that there are also far more ways and kinds of
Extracting the Quintessence from them, by which it comes forth very
Odoriferous, Subtle and clear; but those ways are not Extractions of the
Quintessence, but certain Magisteries of those same things, by which some part
of the Quintessence does in the Permixion together, ascend upwards: But yet it
is not a perfect Quintessence, for the Essence of Woods is a certain satness or
Rosin, and thick substance, and is not therefore extracted in the form of
Magisteries; but the cause hereof is this, viz. the Quintessence of the
Turpentine Tree heals Wounds; but if it shall be extracted after the
aforesaid manner, of other Magisteries, it does not Cure them, because it has
not in it the basis and foundation of the Quintessence; For verily Magisteries
are on this account distinguished from Quintessences, because they only concern
and respect the Complexions and Four Elements, the which is not the nature of
Quintessences; Likewise they receive, or have it Spiritually, and not
Materially in its proper Essence; as appears in the Chapters.

Of the Extraction of the Quintessence out of Growing Things.
SUch we call (in this place) Growing Things, that fall off and grow again, as
Herbs, Leaves, and such like And for the Extraction of the Quintessences of
them, there are various ways found out, by the addition of other things; but
they ought to be extracted without the mixture of any thing; and so, as to
retain their Taste, Color, and Odor, and that they may be increased in them,
and not diminished. So if the Quintessence be extracted out of Musk,
Ambergreece, and Civet, their bodies do stink afterward, so that they are
worth nothing, either in Taste, Odor, or Nature The like is to be understood
of all the rest of that kind, as to the Extraction of the Quintessences. But we
will not discourse of Mask, Ambergreece, or Civit, in this Chapter, because we
write peculiarly of them elsewhere; and we treat at present of Growing Things
only: a the Lilly, Spike, Leaves; for the Extract on of the Quintessence of
which, this Process is to be observed.

Take of Growing Things, bruise them exceeding well, and put them into some fit
Vessel, the which set in a Horse-belly for four weeks; then Distill it by B put
them again into Horse-dung for eight days, and let them be again Distilled by
B. M. So, the Quintessence will ascend by the Alembick, but the body will abide
in the bottom. If there should ought of the Quintessence have remained in the
bottom, it must be further putrified, and he proceeded with as before. Then
take this Distilled Water, and put it again to this Growing Body, and so let
them be digested together in a Pelican for six days; then the Color will be
thick, the which abstract by B. M. and the body will go away, and be severed,
the Quintessence remaining in the bottom; Separate this (by a Retortive process
or pressing) from the feces, and then digest this Quintessence four days; by
this means thou shall have it perfect in Odor, Juyciness, Taste, and Virtue,
and of the Consistency of a thick substance.

Of the Extraction of the Quintessence out of Spices.
WE will now teach the manner of Extracting the Quintessence out of Spices; as
Musk, Civet, Camphire, and such like; First of all, the Quintessence must be
reduced into another form, and then at length be separated therefrom; and in
that same separation is the Quintessence found, as follows,

Take the Oil of Almonds. with which mix an Aromatical body, and let them be
digested together in a Glass at the Sun, their proper time, until they are
reduced into a Paste; afterward, let them be pressed our from their feces;
after this manner is the body Separated from the Quintessence, which
Quintessence is thus permixed with the Oil; and is to be Separated therefrom on
this wise.

Take rectified burning Wine, wherewith mingle the aforesaid Oil, and leave
them in digestion for six days; afterward let them be distilled by Ashes, and
there will ascend the burning Wine, and with it the Quintessence; and the Oil
will remain in the bottom, without any remaining of the Quintessence. Last of
all, let this Wine be Distilled by B. M. and the Quintessence will abide in the
bottom in the form of Oil, and Separated from all the like Additions.

Of the Extraction of the Quintessence from Comestible and Potable Things.
THe Quintessence of things Comestible, is to be no otherwise, then in a like
form with that wherewith we are fed; as with Flesh: for the Quintessence of
Comestible Things is the best nourishment. And although no Quintessence can be
drawn from Flesh, (as we said before) yet nevertheless we are well able to
Extract therefrom, as to its own being or essentiality, that which may be
equivalent to a Quintessence; as follows.

Take a Comestible Thing, cut it in pieces, and put it into a Vessel, or great
Jugg, very well luted, and let it boil for three days; then afterward strain
out that which shall be in the Pot, and distill it by a B. So there will first
of all ascend a certain wateriness, the which when it shall be all come over,
the Quintessence will be left in the bottom. This is the highest Nutriment,
beyond all the others that we can set down, or declare: And in respect of
nourishing, it is like to a Quintessence. Likewise, the Quintessence may be
Extracted out of Potable things sundry ways; but this is the true Process
which we account as the chiefest, fittest, and most profitable for this Work.

Tale any Potable thing, shut it up in a Pelican, as it is, with its whole
substance, and digest it for a Month in Horse-dung, but 'twill be the better to
leave it so for a year or more, and you shall find in the Pelican a certain
digested somewhat; Separate this same by a B; afterward by Ashes; and lastly,
by Fire. By this means shall thou have Three Quintessences, which are in like
manner in all Poteable things, and that for many causes, as we set down more at
large in the Treatise of their Generations.

These Three Quintessences thus extracted, and each of them put into its
peculiar Vessel, the two latter are to be further digested, and then put into a
B. M. and there will ascend more of the former Quintessence; this do so often
until no more of the former does ascend, and by this means are they very
excellently well separated.

And whereas I have so briefly taught the Quintessence of all things, and the
so short way of their Extraction, there is no cause for any to wonder at the
hasty running of my Hand, or Quill. Because they are each of them well and
sufficiently delivered so; nor are the Quintessences so succinctly, or briefly
written of by us, but that the Work and Labor necessary thereunto is most
evidently demonstrated: What need is there of many Writings to stir up a
nauseate, both to our selves and Readers. For it is to be confidered that
exercise and use teaches all things. But now, as to the wonderful virtues and
faculties of the Quintessence, thus extracted after the aforesaid way, we have
partly taught already, and shall more clearly manifest (in the last Books) that
which belongs to this Part of the Archidoxis: and so shall have abundantly
enough discovered the Quintessence of all things. And although that many men
before us, have in various instructions and documents written some great matters
of Quintessences, yet nevertheless we do not account of what they have written,
as for a Quintessence; the cause whereof we have sufficiently disclosed before.
We perceive also by their Writings, that Verdigreece, or greenness of Brass,
was accounted by them the Quintessence of Venus, which is not so; but the
Crocus of Venus, is the quintessence of Venus, which is to be thus understood;
Flos Aeris, or the flower of Brass, is a transmutation with, and partaking of
the substance, is gross and subtle together, and is extracted out of all the
Venerean Complexion, or our of the whole Complexion of Venus, and therefore it
cannot be a Quintessence; but the Crocus of Venus is (as we have taught) the
true Quintessence, for it is a Poetable thing, divided from the body without
Corrosion and permixtion, it is very subtle; yea, more then I am willing to
write down here, because I would shun prolixity. So likewise the Crocus of
Mars, and the Rust thereof, has been hither to accounted for a Quintessence,
but it is not so; But the Crocus of Mars, is the Oil of Mars. Concerning these
things, we set down more of them about Transmutations, in our Philosophy.

A Quintessence therefore is to be thus understood, viz. That it is no other
thing but a certain Separation of the virtues from the body, wherein the whole
Medicinal Virtue and Essence is; But as for the Flos Aeris, and Flos of Mars,
and many more such like, viz. What they are, shall be delivered in the place of
Magisteries.

The like judgment must be had of the Vegitables, and Herbs, and such like, as
of the Metals. And although we have set down very noble, and many virtues of
the Quintessence; yet nevertheless we have recited but the smallest part of
their Virtues and Qualities; but we have chiefly declared thus much, that these
things may be somewhat understood: but as to the quality and quantity of all
their Virtues and excellency, that is not done by us in the least. Hereby may
be hinted unto us, the greatness of that power which is in our hands, did we
but know how to use it well. Hence also is manifest the cause why man was
Created, and all things in Earth made subject to him; Likewise why nothing, be
it good or be it had, proceeds forth without a cause; the which we declare
more clearly in the Book of the Nature of Things; for that fundamental, and
basts, brings with it a faith strongly bent upon the Creator, and an hope of
his Love toward us, as of a Loving Father to his Children; and therefore we
must not snatch at every shadowy and vain Faith, but ought to behold God only,
and Nature, and the Art of Nature. Wherefore good reason have we to in voak him
only in this life, and for ever; and believe that only which we see so to be;
and neither Receive, or Approve of any thing that does not agree with Nature,
but is besides the way thereof.

The End of the Fourth Book, etc.
THE Fifth BOOK OF THE ARCHIDOXIS
Of Arcanaes.
HAving spoken of Quintessences, We not come in order to write of Arcanaes,
(...) Secrets. For as to these, we understand more to be herein, then is in
Quittessential Virtues; wherein we are by experience taught, that there is a
vast difference as to the great powerful Operations, by which are demonstrated
unto us, as by most evident signs, which are better and more virtually
prositable, and which are le^ virtuous. Therefore may we assume the one instead
of the other for Medicine, according to the suitability of the thing. Indeed
the Ancients have often judge^ Arcanaes to be Quintessences, because they saw
them to be far more Subtle then the more-gross Substances; and knew that they
Operated by the Subtilty of their Nature, after a wonderful manner. But this
Error o^ theirs proceeded not from their Reason and Consideration, but arose
rather from the barrenness of the Practick part. For they had no knowledge of
the determinate difference, and limited distinction of the degrees of high
things, but accounted every higher, and highest degree, in the place of
Quintessences. The which distinction notwithstanding must be not only known and
defined by the Practick, but rather also from the Operations of Medicine.

Therefore, before we shall treat of Arcanaes, it is to be seen and known why
they are so called, and what ^n Arcanum is, seeing it has a Name so excellent
and indeed full well deserves it. An Arcanum is so called, because it is
incoporeal, immortal, of a perpetual life above all, or every nature,
intelligible, and is as it were of a more then humane knowledge. Therefore
Arcanaes being compared to our Corporeal bodies, are to be accounted of as
incorporeal, and of a far more excellent Essence then ours, and of as much
difference as is betwixt black and white; for they have a power of Transmuting,
Altering, and Restoring us, as the Arcanaes of God, according to their proper
induction, and Order.

And although there is not in our Arcanaes, an Eternity, or that Celestial
harmony, yet ne vertheless they are (in comparison of us) to be adjudged as
Celestial; for as much as they conserve our bodies more then ^s possible to
Nature, or can be searched out, and do Operate thereupon by their virtues,
after a wonderful manner. And therefore these Natural Arcanaes are (as to what
appertains to Medicine) to be so compared to our bodies, as the Arcanaes of God
are to them. Neither will we be afraid to write that these Arcanaes are higher
and greater then we ourselves, and have a most great power of furnishing us
with life, as shall be witnessed by those Four which we shall set down. Nor
will we in the least Care for those vain empty Tales of those unprofitable
slavish Deunculi, [or Dwarf-like Divines] looking upon them, to understand no
more then the blind do see; So therefore, one is an Arcanum in o^^ Essence;
another is an Arcanum of Nature her self: for an Arcanum is the whole virtue of
a thing, but exce^^ it a thousand fold. Therefore we are able to discourse
without ^ear thus, viz. The Arcanum of a Man is the whole Gift and Virtue of
that which he retains to Eternity; as we teach in another Book of this
Archidoxis Therefore an Arcanum is to be understood two ways the one is
Perpetual, the other is, as-it-were-Perpetual This, viz. as-it-were-Perpetual
Arcanum, we judge t^ be like that which is Perpetual, according to the esteem
and Predestination of it; But there are Four Arcana^ only that we have known
even from our Childish years with the which we will Complete this Book, (and
lea^^ behind us a sufficient praiseworthy Memory) that i^ we may never forget
them, praying to the most High God, that it would please him of his Mercy to
gra^^ that this cur humane Flesh may arrive to many years that so we may lay
apart and erect a long and mild Re^ for our Age, may faithfully hope in him,
and by r^means doubt, but that he (seeing he vouchsafed to assume the Humanity)
will give unto us to enjoy it that so we may not be at all frustrated in our
Hope, the which Grant we firmly expect. Being therefore the fraught with hope,
we will in the first place declare what the difference between those Four
Arcanaes is both as to the Labor, the Art, and finally, their Vrtues. Besides,
the Final and Conclusive Knowledge o^ the Virtues of every one of these is
requisite, on the wise: In general, they do chiefly Conserve the body in
Health, and drive away the Diseases therefrom, the exhilarate a Sad mind, and
free it of all Pensiveness they preserve from all Sicknesses, and do happily
conduct and guide the body on, even unto its Predestined death, the which
has no limit, except by a diminishing Consumption, as we declare in our
Treatise of Life and Death.

And although that we have already declared their virtues in General, and
their Nature; nevertheless they are very greatly and particularly different
amongst themselves, in so much that they neither of them have an Operation
alike, or do accomplish their Virtues equally, but are different both in manner
and form, each of them having their proper and peculiar ways; therefore the
first Arcanum is the Prima Materia; the second is the Stone of the
Philosophers; the third is a Mercurius vitae; and the fourth is the Tincture;
for even thus in this Order we let down the Practice of them, after that we
have expounded the manner of their Operation as follows.

First of all therefore it is to be noted, concerning the First Matter, that it
shows and gives forth its Predestination, (to which it is ordained) whole and
entire, and such as is described, assigned or exemplified, from the first
Original, even to the end. As for example, a seed gives out of it self, the
whole Herb with a Renovation of all its Virtues, and a consuming of the Old
Essence. So that the Old Substance, Nature and Essence has no more Operation;
So therefore do we even speak of the First Matter, that we are born from. One
Seed as the growing Herb in the Field, according to its growing Nature.
According to the aforesaid example, does the First Matter introduce a new
youthfulness into a man, and absumes the Old no otherwise, then as a new Herb
arises from a new Seed, in a new Summer and Year.

The Stone of the Philosophers, which is the second Arcanum, perfecteth its
Operations in another form, viz. after this manner, Even as the extrinsical
Fire does, by burning of the spotted and defiled Skin of the Salamander, make
it so clean as if it were newly born; So likewise this Stone of the
Philosophers does purge the whole Humane Body, and cleanse it from all its
defilements, by the introducing of new and younger Youth-like virtues, the
which it adjoyneth to the Nature of a Man.

Mercurius vitae, which is the third Arcanum, does exhibit and show its
Oparations to be such like as the Halcion or King-Fisher does manifest, the
which Bird is in its Anual season renewed, and clad with new Feathers. Even so
does this Arcanum cast off from a man, the Nails of his Hands and Feet, also
his Hairs, Skin, and every thing that is there to subject, and causes them to
grow up again, and renovates the whole body, as we spoke before of the
King-Fisher.

But the Tincture, which we set down as the fourth Arcanum, does manifest its
Oparations after the manner of Rebis, because it makes Gold out of Lune, and
the other Metals; for after the same manner does the Tincture tinge the Body of
Man, and takes away from him his Corruption, and Impediments, and transmutes
all his parts into the highest Purity, Nobility, and permanencie, etc.

How therefore can it be possible for us to depart from the Noble Medicinal Art,
or from Philosophy it self, when as we may evidently see their powerful
Virtues, the which alone are the things that so confirm us, as to give unto
them the greatest belief, and that deservedly; for we never inclined our miude
to believe, Learn and imitate such Things as cannot be proved and confirmed by
most true and most certain reasons, conjoined with both Experience and
Practice. If at that time wherein Christ did hang upon the Cross, the Sun and
Moon had not been affected with a kind of compassion, in so much that they were
deprived of their light and obscured; and had not the Earth it self been also
shook with a terrible trembling; and had not those other signs been manifested
as to his birth, verily no body would now have believed in him; They now
naturally teach us to See and Know him, that Jesus Christ is God, and that he
assumed the Humanity. The like may be said of these Arcanaes, that they Make,
and even Compel us to believe them, so as not to recede from them even till
death; but rather strictly and daily to give thanks unto God with many liftings
up of our Hearts. So, neither the Eclips, nor the, will withdraw ought from us.

Now therefore lets come to the Practice and Work of those Four Arcanaes, by
which we may be able to drive away the Accidents and Corruptions of our Youth,
and rejoice in them, even as our Eternal Arcanum rejoices in the Life Eternal,
etc.

Of the Arcanum of the Prima Materia; Or, First Matter.
HAving sufficiently spoken of the First Matter, whence in comes, and what it
is; you are to understand that it is founded not only upon Men, but also all
bodily Creatures; that is, upon every thing that is born of any Seed; From
whence it may be Concluded, That (if it has its Operation in any Created body,
and perfects it) it is able to preserve the Trees from perishing by corruption,
the Herbs from drying up, and also the Metals from Rust; the which is to be
here in this place understood of Men and Beasts after the same manner.
Therefore a Tree being now almost Consumed by Age, and daily tending more and
more to its Corruption, not by the Roots defect, nor by defect of Nourishment,
but by the lack of its proper Virtue, may be renewed by its own Prima Materia,
(even as we have spoken of the Skin of the Salamander) and may o attain even to
another Age according to its Predestisnation; yea, even to a Third, to a
Fourth, and more; For this reason are the virtues to be bestowed thereon, viz.
That the Corruption and Destruction thereof happening in long success of time,
may be now and then renewed. The same is to be understood of Herbs, which
endure and last but one year only, because their Predestination is no longer;
for even they, yea when they begin to be dried up, are renewed by their Prima
Materia, so as to remain green and fresh for another Annual Age, and a third,
and a fourth, and further. The like do I also mean concerning bruit Animals, as
old Sheep. etc. the which may be Renovated, even to a second age, and so
receive Strength, Milk, and Wool, like young Sheep. In like manner may a Man
be brought out of one Age into another, as we said before; Now, it is to be noted
from these things, what the first Matter is, as concerning its first Essence.
In Created Insensible bodies, it is the Seed of every thing. In Created
Sensible bodies, it is their Sperm; You must also know that the first Matter is
not to be taken from that thing which this Created body is produced out of, but
from the producted and Generated matter: For the first matter has such
Virtues, as not-to-permit the body that is born of it, to go into a
Consumption; but does abundantly administer what is sufficient for the
supplying of every necessity. For verily death only rises from the destruction
or infection of the living Spirit. Now, that Spirit grow: out of the Sperm or
Seed, and is verily a Spermatick matter, and therefore may it be helped with
its like. For where a like-help is administered there is introduced a new age,
for many causes, which we shall not at all set down in this place, but declare
them in our Philosophy. Moreover, although we did not purpose to write any
thing of the Sustentation and Renovation of Trees in this Book; Seeing our
intent was to discourse of the Medicines and Physic of Man's body only; yet are
those Inductions of the Trees, and other such like Transmutations set down,
that thereby we may Parabolically, and by those examples, render our intention
the more easy to be understood: As the Quintestence of Nettle, (alias
Lavender) if it shall be poured on to the Root of its own Herb, that so it may
receive its Tincture and be tinged therewith, it will abide another year like
as in the former year, and not putrify till the other year be ended.

Likewise the Quintessence of the Seed of Quinces, if poured to the Root of the
Quince-tree, the Tree abides green and flourishing even to the end of another
year, and also produces Flowers and Fruit. In like manner the Quintessence of
Cheries causes the Trees of them to bring forth their Fruits twice in the
year, like two Summers; for one is the half-Summer of the Summer-Cherry-trees,
the other half is made a second Summer, like the former.

We also suppose it expedient, not only to speak of the Quintessence of the
Sperm, but also of the Arcanum of the Sperm; out of the which do proceed far
more Wonderful Things, as we have already told you.

First of all therefore we will declare the Process of this Practice; First,
It Is alike both in Men and Beasts: Secondly, It Is made out of the first Matter
only, after this manner, as now follows.

Take the First Matter, let it be digested in a Flacco, a flat or flattish
Vessel in a Resolutive digestion for a Month; then let the Addition of a
Monarchy be adjoined there unto in an equal weight, and let them be again
digested for a Month or two, then distill this Matter over by a Retort, and that
which shall ascend, shall be the Arcanum of the first Matter, of which we here
write: Nor has any one a reason to admire at this so short a way and Process,
for multitude of words brings much Error.

Of the Arcanum of the Philosophers Stone.
I Am not an Author or Teacher of that Philosophers stone that is so diversely
described by others; nor am a Practitioner thereof, much less a Searcher
therein, and so should as it were speak thereof from Hearsay, or Writing;
Whereas therefore I have no certainty thereof, I will leave that Process, and
prosecute my own, as being such as my self has found out both by Use and
Practice: And I call it the Stone of the Philosophers, because it so tingeth
the bodies of men in such a manner, as they write of theirs. But mine is not
prepared according to their Process; for we mean not that same here in this
place, nor indeed do we know it; We do not at all set down in this our
Practick, the Process of the Operation, for we mentioned that before in the
beginning of the Book, where we wrote of its Virtues and Operations which it
has by the Separation.

But verily you shall further observe the Ingress of the Penetration, whereby
it penetrates the whole body, and whatsoever is therein; for by its penetration
it restores and renews it, not that it wholly removes it, and introduces a new
body in its stead; or, that it does (like the Prima Materia) infuse its
Spermatical Arcanum: but thus, It does so purge the old, as the Salamanders
Skin is cleansed, without any hurt or defect; and yet nevertheless the old Skin
abides both in its Essence and Form; even so in like sort does this
Philosophers stone purge the Heart, and all the capital Members, and the
Intestines, the Marrow, and whatever else is contained in the body it self. It
permits not the budding forth of any Disease in the body; but the Gout, the
Dropsy, the yellow Jaundice, the Collick-Passion, and all the Sicknesses
proceeding from the Four Humors, it turns them all out, it also purges the
bodies, and renders them in such wise, as if they were but newly born; it
bannisheth every thing that endeavors to destroy Nature, no otherwise then as
Fire does to Worms and Vermin, even so do all infirmities whatsoever shun this
Renovation.

These are the Virtues that this Philosophers stone has, whereby it expels
such, and so many wonderful Diseases, not by reason of its Complexion, or
Specific form, or its Propriety, or by any accidental Quality; but from the
powers of the subtility of the Practice, with which it is endued by the
Preparations, Reverberations, Sublimations, Digestions, Distillations, and
afterward by its various Reductions and Resolutions, all which kind of
Operations do bring the stone to such a virtuous subtility and acuity, that
it is even wonderful: Not that it had those Virtues at the beginning, but that
they are at length attributed thereunto. The like may be apprehended as to
Honey, the which is by its Elevation rendered far more acute then any Aqua
fortis, and any Corrosive, and more penetrative then any kind of Sublimate. Now
it has not naturally such a property of Sharpness; but it merely proceeds from
the Elevation, which changes all this Honey into a Corrosive: This also is to
be observed in those efficacious Arcanaes that such as use them, (and likewise
the Children that are born from them) will live so healthfully afterward, that
there can be no Sickness or contrariety, or any such like Corruption happen in
their bodies; But they will be wholly adorned with such a subtle and clean
Complexion of Nature and such a Condition, as it is impossible to induce a more
noble Complexionated state; for that most choice and most excellent Medicine
does very much amend and cleanse, and does introduce a Life incorruptible, such
as cannot be contaminated or defiled with any life; for it suffers not any
thing to wither, but causes men to live in the highest nobility of Nature, and
promotes or gives vigor unto their Offspring, even unto the tenth Generation.

This Philosophers stone does not only transmute one weight, but that weight
does again transmute Another, and this likewise another, etc. insomuch that
those mutations may be almost extended even to Infinity; even as one light
enkindles another, and that other a third, etc. The like may be understood of
this Philosophers stone, in relation to health, even as out of a Good Tree
proceeds a good Seed and good Succors, and Cions, out of which good Trees may
again be produced. The virtue and power of the Philosophic stone is exalted in
a wonderful manner, that it is even impossible to be found out how that can be
naturally so brought to pass. And were it not for those most evident signs
that are visible to our Eyes, it woule be even incredible, that men could
perfect and accomplish such wonderful things; for the virtue of that Operation
passes from one Generation to another without Corruption* Likewise it
consists, by the mercy of God, in one body, and is denied to others, or of mere
grace vouchsafed unto them, according as their deserving is.

Now we will set down the Process of this Philosophic stone after this manner;

In the Name of God; Take Mercury, or else the Element of Mercury, and separate
the pure from the impure; afterward let it be Reverberated even to a
Whiteness, the which sublime by Sal Armeniack so long until it be Resolved; Let
it be Calcined and again dissolved, and be digested in a Pelican a Month, then
at length let it be Coagulated into a body; this body is no more Combustible,
nor Consumible by any manner of means, but abides in the same state. Those
bodies which it penetrates are permanent in the Cineritium, or Cupel, and
cannot in the least be reduced unto nothing, or be altered; but the stone takes
away every superfluous Quality from Sensible and Insensible things, as we have
before declared. And albeit we have set down a very short way, yet
notwithstanding it requires a proliae labor, difficult and hard by reason of
the many Circumstances that attend it, and it needs such an Operatour as is not
affected with any nauseate or wearisomeness, but is highly diligent and expert.

Of Mercurius Vitae.
NOw we will write of Mercurius Vitae, the virtue of which does far excel the
virtues of the two precedents Arcanaes; for its virtue Consists not in the Art,
nor in the Operation, but in the Mercurius Vitae it self; nor have we ever
known any Simple thing that is like unto it; for as much as that Nature and
property is as it were innate therein; nor is it from the virtues of the
Quintessence, nor of the Elements, but from the Specific Quality of its
Predestination; Neither has it only the virtues of Transmuting persons, and
other Essentials, but also of renewing every Growing Thing, and such like, out
of the old Quality into a new, viz. on this wise; The Mercurius Vitae reduces
Mars into its First Matter, and does again so Transmute it into its perfect
Matter, that Iron is again made thereof; After the same manner it renews Gold
likewise, the which it reduces into its proper Mercury and Tincture, and again
digesteth it into Gold, so as to become a Metal like the former.

Nor does it Operate thus in Metals only, but also in other things, as Herbs,
etc. When their Roots are perfused or moistened therewithal, they will bring
forth Flowers and Fruits a second time; If when the first seed shall fall off,
they be at that time moistened with the same as above, they will produce second
Flowers and Fruits without any respect of Time.

The same is to be understood of Men, and Beasts, etc. to whom if this Mercury
be Applied or administered, it Renovates all their Old and Consumed Members, and
restores the deficient and lost Virtues, into the Youthful-like Body or
Habitation; insomuch, that the Months and Blood do as Naturally slow in old
Women, as in the Younger. It does likewise reduce the Aged Wise into the like
perfection of Nature, as the Younger sort are in.

Furthermore this also is to be observed concerning the Arcanum vitae, or this
secret of life, that its so potent Virtues exist in its Specific Form, by
which it Separates the Old from the New, or Age from Youth, the Latter of which
two, viz. youth is increased thereby, and so the Age renewed. From hence it may
be gathered, that that Youthfulness and the Vigor thereof, is not at all
defective and lacking to Old Age, but is as well and equally in the Old as in
the Young; But the Corruption that grows up with, and increases in youth,
becomes so fortified and strong, that it takes away the Vigor therefrom, from
whence Antientnesse is known.

And therefore when that same Corruption is Separated from the Youthfulness,
this Juvenility does again manifest it self, without Controversy and
Impediment. The which is to be thus understood, viz. When any Body (or Carcass)
putrefies, the Quintessence therefore does not become Rotten, but is always
fresh and unconsumed, and is Separated from the Carcass into the Air, or
sometimes is scattered and dispersed into the Earth, or into the Water, and
goes unto its place. For there can be no destruction made of the Quintessence,
the which is most worthy noting, and highly to be admired, as we teach
concerning Corruption and Generation; So also a Rose putrefied in Dung, retains
its Quintessence in it self, yea even in the Dung. And although all of it stink
and are putrid, yet nevertheless in the Separation of the Pure from the Impure,
the Quintessence lives without defect or blemish, and the Bodies are stinking
Carcases. Thus therefore say we of Mercurius vitae that it Separates
Corruption, even as Rotten Wood is Separated from the Sound Timber. It Is also so
powerful in man, that after the corruption shall be Separated from him, the
Quintessence is again stirred and lives, as in its Youth. But you are to
understand me thus; not that the Mercurius vitae, excites a New Essence, as
some may maliciously interpret our meaning and experience, but that the
Essence, and youthful Spirit, which the juvenile Virtues proceed and go forth,
do remain unconsumed although by being oppressed it may be accounted for dead;
therefore M. V. Separates the Impuritie, whereby it comes to pass, that the Old
Life does most efficaciously recover its virtues, as before; even as in our
formentioned Example of the King-Fisher, we have declared, that that Bird is
renewed after death; the Reason is this, because its Quintessence does not
withdraw from its house and abiding place; but if that lodging be dissolved by
Putrefaction, then is the Quintessence received into that thing which it lies
or is cast upon; Therefore there are oft-times found wonderful Conditions of
Nature in growing Things, the which are not of their Nature, but of a like
Accident, as we set down in our Book of Generations.

This therefore is to be this way understood. In Dung there is a Concurrency
and an Accumulation of Various Corruptions, viz. of Herbs, Roots, Fruits,
Waters, and other such like Things; from whence it so comes to pass, that the
Ground is not made Fat and Fertile because of the Corruption; but because of
the Quintessence that is in the said Dung, the which be taking it Self into the
Roots, Exhibits Virtues to Growing Things, but the Body it self vanishes, viz.
the Dung, and is reduced into nothing, and is consumed in its substance. And
therefore Mans-dung or Excrements has very great Virtues, because it contains
in it the Noble Essences, viz. of the Food and Drink, concerning which
Wonderful Things might be Written; for the Body receives not any thing
therefrom, save nourishment, but it receives not the Essence, even as we write
of Nourishments.

But to come nearer to the Praxis of Mercurius vitae, which does (as we said
before) perfect its Operations after a wonderful manner, viz. in casting off the
Nails of the Hands and Feet, and by Rooting out gray Hairs, it strengthens
Youth, in so much that Corruption cannot come to that height as to discover
old age, by those signs attending it, except a following or second Age be
again arived unto, or setting about the Practice; therefore we will tell it the
Alchymists in a very few words, for it is needless to write much, and to Preach
Prolixly of these things; but as for such as are Foolish pretenders, we will
Exclude them wholly. This then is the way of its Practick,

Take Mercury Essentificated, the which Separate from all its Supersluities,
as the Pure from the Impure; afterward Sublime it with Antimony, so that they
may both of them ascend and be made one; then let them be resolved upon a
Marble and be Coagulated, and do thus even four times. Which being finished,
thou shall have the Mercurius vitae which we have so much mentioned before, and
with which we shall comfort and refresh our old Age, as with an Arcanum.

Of the Arcanum of the Tincture.
AFter the same manner is the Arcanum of the Tincture to be understood, viz.
that it takes away all the unwildinesse of Old Age, and every disease, and
whatsoever corrupts the health, and that has an inclination contrary
thereunto. This Arcanum is a certain Tincture of such like properties and
Conditions as to Operate and introduce Health; not after that same way as the
three former do, but according to its Name, for the Tincture tingeth the Good
and the Evil, the Gross and the Subtle. Nor does it otherwise then so, perfect
its Oparations in the Body likewise, so as to transmute the Corrupt and
Disorderly complexions into sound and healthy, like that Tincture that makes
Luna of Mercury; it Separates not the evil there from, but tingeth both the
Good and the evil that they finally become together most excellent. So likewise
does this Tincture tinge the Hydropical and scteritial Body into a sound State;
not that the Dropsy is took away, the Original driven out or Separated from
the Good, but is transmuted into Good, even as is behooveful and is constituted
in its high, yea best degree, even as the Corrupted Dung or Mud, may by the
Subtle Corruption of Art, be brought into an Elixir, able to drive forth every
Corruption; and that Corruption is not Separated, but the whole Substance is
transmuted into another Quality and Nature.

The self-same is to be supposed of this Tincture, that it tingeth the Body
without any Separation of the evil from the good or expulsion of Man's first
Essence, but by the renovation thereof.

But yet this is to be known, that that tinged body lives no more in the Old
Form, but is after the manner of Metal, transmuted into into another; as Copper
or any other may. Likewise Saturn has not in it self its Old Quality, but the
Quality of the Tincture it self; The very same is to be understood of tinged
Bodies, such as have received the tinging of the Tincture, that they exist no
more in the former life from which they were transmuted by the Tincture, but
the condition of the Body, and Form, or Beauty, is far Nobler, better, and more
Healthful then its Native Original was, and is like to Gold in Nature, made by
the Tincture out of Iron, as we have likewise written concerning Transmutations.

If therefore this Tincture is a Transmutress of Bodies to a better State, as
that of Metals (which so few have the Knowledge and Experience of) is; there
shall be so many such like Various Corporeal Tinctures, as there are Metaline
Tinctures; of which as one is always better then another, so are the Corporal.
It Is to be observed, that some are naturally Tinctures, as Saffron, a Flower and
Sulphur, some are so made by Art, as the Stone, Realgar, etc. These Things are
most heedfully to be observed, because the beginning and entrance that they
exhibit to those Tinctures is not small.

Furthermore it is to be considered, that those Tinctures ought to be made for
the Seven Principal members, and their property to be attributed and given to
each of them, as those that serve the Heart to the heart; to the brain such
things as are suitable unto it; and those Tinctures must be prepared from
Metals, Herbs, and such like things as are proper. Hence will it come to pass,
that by them the whole Body may be Tinged. Nor will it be sufficient that it be
tinged by one Tincture only, but even as one Tincture does only Tinge one
Metal, the like is to be supposed of these. The Practice therefore of the
Tincture is this;

Take the Essence of the Members, from which Essence you must Separate the
Elements; afterward put their Fire in Digestion, and leave it so long until
there resides nothing more in the bottom, and that there appears not at all any
thing of the Matter, Substantially. Then take the Matter and the Glass well
Luted after this manner with the Lute of Hermes, and set it in a Moist and Cold
place, in which place they will be again resolved into a Visible Matter; that
Visible Matter is that Tincture whereof we wrote; and thus with these few we
will conclude; For should we write more of this, the Stoics would deride it,
and therefore we will free our selves from their scoffing, and speak only to
the Alchimists.

The End of the Fifth Book, etc.
THE Sixth BOOK OF THE ARCHIDOXIS.
Of Magisteries.
HAving thus finished the Precedent Books of the most excellent Medicaments; we
have intended to adjoyn this Book of Magisteries; And first of all to declare
what a Magistery is; This therefore is a Magistery, viz. that which can be
Extracted out of things, without any Separation or Preparation of the Elements;
and yet notwithstanding, the Powers and Virtues of the things, are by the
addition of some thing, Attracted into that matter, and conserved there.

Those Virtues do not at all proceed from the nature of the things, as in
reference to the operation, nor do they proceed from a Specific Virtue, but
from the Permixion, by which those same virtues are extracted; If Vinegar be
poured into Wine, it makes it all Vinegar, this now is a Magistery. But if Wine
be poured upon Honey, that is not wholly transmuted hereinto, wherefore it is
not a Magistery.

Those things therefore are to be considered that appertain to a Migistery,
even as, What Wines do to Acetum; for such as are perfect, and are, as is fit
they should be, they are not in the least apt hereunto, neither can they make a
Magistery. Therefore the Natures of things are to be considered; likewise the
difference of the Extractions of Magisteries is to be heeded, as out of Metals,
Marcasites, Stones, Herbs, and such like Matters, by those things which are
not Metalick, and are yet nevertheless made like to Metals, no otherwise then
as Wine is made like to Vinegar, both in Powers, Virtues, and Sapour. And that
the Wine appears nor different from the Acetum, the cause thereof is, because
there is also a Nature like Acetum, in it, whence it comes to pass that their
Natures have one and the same appearance. So likewise i^ the Nature o^ the
Metals be pure, it does even in like manner and equally appear so in their
Magisteries, but yet it is not of that same property.

Moreover as concerning the Additions, this is to be noted, viz. those Things
that are assumed to this intent and purpose, although they are not of one and
the same Complexion, Power, or Act, yet nevertheless they agree and accord in
the preparation; For that which results from the Virtues thereof, is an
appropriated, and not complexionated product. By those Mediums do the Metals
themselves afford their Magisteries, the which indeed may be accounted no less
then Quintessences, as to their Virtues. Gold does deposit and lay down in its
Magistery all its Quality and Complexion in one essence; And it is not to be
therefore supposed, that because the Body is of no moment or Value, that
therefore the rest will be infected therewith; No, for the Leprosy thereof
does not at all hurt in this place, but the whole is good Sugar is entirely
sweet, whilst it is yet in its Body and not Separated, and it also may be so
prepared (with an abiding in its sweetness) that it may become far more sweet
and efficacious then it was before; but the abstracted Quintessence is not
sweeter then in or with i^ own Body. Wherefore this Body does not at all bring
any damage thereunto. But yet notwithstanding the Virtue thereof Separated
from the Body, is more Noble, then being prepared in or with it. But the
Magisterie does amend it more then Nature could.

The very same also is to be understood of those Stones that enter into the
number of Magisteries, and likewise of their Bodies, viz. that that which is
assumed about the use of them, is not defective in its Virtue, but is a
Magistery sufficiently strong. This you are to understand on this wise, even as
when Sulphur is kindled and wholly burnt up, that which burns it is the very
least portion thereof; so likewise the stones; as for Example, Crystal, when
it is reduced into a Magisterie, it brings all Stones into their First Matter,
and grinds them after a wonderful manner no otherwise then the Essence thereof;
and that s^^ this Reason, because the Body may be, or is tinged by the
Quintessence, and may be accounted for an Essence no otherwise then as Vinegar
and Wine is; One whereof does make the other like it self without any defect In
like manner, it is not only so in Stones, that the Tincture is thus made, but
also in such like Metals a the Quintessence of Gold Tingeth all its Body into a
pure Quintessence, the which light we account of a great, yea too too great,
viz. the light of all the secrets of our Archidoxis; and therefore we kindle
Coals with a cheerful mind, that so we may find the final conclusion of those
Noble Mysteries of Nature; We draw our Instructions from Examples, proved
experimentaly by us, as in Magisteries, and chiefly in that ^ Gold, the which
contains both the Body, and the Quintessence equally as well as the
Quintessence it self is, that is drawn therefrom. And therefore Magisteries are
known to us to be gifted with peculiar Virtues, and we write them down, to our
praise, even to death.

We speak in like manner of the Magisteries of Herbs, the which are so
effectual, that half an ounce of them operates more then an hundred ounces of
their Body, and the reason is, because that scarce the hundredth part is the
Quintessence. Wherefore the quantity of it being so very little, the greater
heap thereof is to be used and administered, which is not required in
Magisteries; for in those the whole quantity of the Herbs is reduced into a
Magisterie, the which is not then to be esteemed inferior (by reason of its
Artifice) to the true extracted Natural Quintessence it self; one part of this
being administered, is more profitable then an hundred parts of the like Body,
and that for this reason; because the Magisteries are prepared, and are rendered
accute to the highest degree, and are brought to a quality, equal to a
Quintessence, in the which Magisteries all the Virtues and Powers of the whole
Body are present, and from them Virtues, does its help and succor arise unto
it. For in them does the Penetrabilitie and Power of the whole Body exist, from
the permixion that is made therewith; for the Body does not receive any of
these with desire or affection, but such things only as are spiritual to it
self; whereby it comes to pass, that it attracts that Magisterie, and permixeth
itself therewithal, no otherwise then as even Gold draws to it self the
Mercury of Life, and is commixed therewith (the which thing Iron does not do,
and the reason is this, because they are not so agreeable betwixt themselves in
the Composition) and so, both the Body of it, and this Magistery are
Amalgamated together and made one; concerning which product many Examples are
to be found, which we shall not mention in this Place. Some of the Marcasites
do after the same manner perfect the Operation of their Medicinal properties;
but yet with this difference, viz. they leave their Body and the best part of
them only (as the juice) is extracted, and is nevertheless a Magistery,
albeit the Body be Separated therefrom; But yet this is to be understood, that
that is not the Body of the Marcasite, but rather of the Earth or Mineral, in
which the Marcasite does lie; for it has not such an efficacious Virtue of it
self, whereby to be Separated from the Earth, or Minera, but abides therein, as
a Marcasite, and is so accounted of. And therefore to declare a Magisterie what
it is, of what it is made, and what Virtues it is endued withal, we will in
what follows, set down the Practice thereof, and likewise describe the Artifice
of its Preparation; but yet this Process cannot be couched in one General
Explication, but there must be a particular treating of each, as of the Metals
by themselves, also of the Marcasites by themselves, and so of the Stones and
Herbs.

Likewise there is to be had a Singular Magistery of Blood, and this is also
taught by a Peculiar way and manner. In it is to be considered, what the
Virtues and Powers of a man are, and that the Nature of it contains in it self,
in what things there is a defect, etc. but yet without the diminution of the
Natural Creation it self, but is to be considered as a work perfect and
complete with its parts, even as a bird with all its Feathers.

Of the Extraction of the Magisterie out of Metals.
First of all, we will set down the Magistery out of Metals, and declare that
which shows it self to be of wonderful Virtues, and are to be known according
to the Tenor of its Essence. The Process of them must be done without any
Corrosives, and all such complexionated things as are coutrary to the metals.
For the Essences are corrupted by the Conjunction or Commixion of contrary
things, insomuch that by this error, they show forth no virtues, the one
overcoming and bearing sway over its contrary.

And whereas a great regard is to be had of their agreement and affinity,
therefore the Temperate alone will be suitable thereunto; but now you are to
know what that Temperate Thing is; a Temperate Thing, a Complexionated somewhat
or Body, for this does receive the other into it self, and is incorporated with
that whereto it shall be adjoined, so that it does not any more discover the
old, and its own complexion, but the Virtues of that Body only which shall be
added unto it; Thus indeed Vinum ardens, or burning Wine has in it self a full
and perfect complexion, but yet it does (as I may so speak) Complexionate that
which is put into it, much more abundantly, and does so perfect its oparation,
according to the Virtues of that Body which was put therein.

And therefore seeing it does thus Attract the Virtues of another and tame its
own, it is for this reason said to be Temperate, and is deservedly called so.
But here are some destinctions to be noted, for we mean the Elements only, and
we may speak so of oil, the which draws to itself the Natures of others, and
hides its own Element. Out of any thing that is like to these may be made a
Magisterie; so that the Virtues of the metals may pass into that same temperate
thing, and may be mundified and purified therewith, and be destilled even to
their limit or end, such a like Magistery after it shall be perfected, shall be
called Potable, and that because it may be taken in drink, whence it comes to
pass, that the Magistery of Gold, is called Aurum Potabile, and that of
Silver, Argentum Potabile, so of Iron, Lead, A^gent vive, etc. they may be made
Potable and so called, and be described according to their own Complexions, and
according to those processes, they have far greater Operations then is
Expedient for us to write of; After this manner, with one Temperate medium, and
one process, and also by way of practice, may all the Magisteries of the seven
Metals be made.

The practice thereof is thus;

Take Circulatum purged excellently well, yea to the highest essence, whereto
put the thinnest Metaline Leaves or filings of any Metal you please, excellenly
and most subtilely wrought and mundified.

These two being put together in a sufficient weight must be circulated for
four weeks, and the Leaves will be reduced by this temperate medium into an
oil, and into a form of fatness swimming at top, and colored according to the
condition of the Metal, the which you shall Separate by a Silver drawer from
the Circulatum; this therefore is Potable Gold or Silver, etc. The like may be
also extracted with the other Metals, and may be taken in drink, or with your
food, without any detriment.

The Extraction of Magisteries, out of Pearls, Corrals and Gems.
THE Magistery out of precious Stones, is to be understood after the same
manner, as that out of Metals, as to the Virtues, which each Stone has
according to its Nature; But this is to be noted, that for Stones there needs
no Temperatum, nor any kind of Addition, because their solution is not the same
with the resolution of the Metals, but the Magistery of them is extracted by
another way; in the practice of which there are three Processes to be
understood, one for Gems, a second for Marcasites, and a third for Corrals; by
which three all stony growing Things may be brought into their proper
Magisterie. As for the process of Stones, their Colors are not to be observed,
neither their brightness and claritie to be heeded, for that all the
Magisteries of them have a white Color. So likewise Pearls, Corral excepted,
for they hold their Color singularly above the others in the Magistery; and
therefore the Color in them is to be chiefly noted; for the Magisterie of
them, together with the Body and Element and whole Essence is Extracted (by
additions) without corrupting them, and may nevertheless be again restored
into their perfection; and therefore as to their Generation and Nature, they
cannot be compared to Stones, and yet have they a Stony condition. This also
may be done, viz. the whole Color may be Extracted out of the Body of the
Corrals, into another medium, and there may afterward be made an image or
frame of their Bodies, as of Clay; and after this frameing, may the Colors be
again infused, and be made as good Corral as before. But now this cannot
possibly be done so with Pearls, not with Gems, for they cannot by the same
Rule be any more reduced into their perfection, but they remain in a Magistery,
their essence not being corrupted. We have likewise perceived it to have
pierced the Glasses, and the Instruments, and to have informed and stamped them
according to its own Nature. As thus, The Magisterie of the Magnet, it has
drawn unto it self, in the form and manner of the material Magnet, and has
afterward fixed it into the Glass, and has tinged it, so that even this also
has attracted Needles and Straws, etc. The same is to be understood of the
rest, and therefore are they to be kept in Gold only; we have met with more
such things as these then is credible, of the which sort we make here a
memorial only, that so by this guiding, more thin as may be searched out in
Arts and Magisteries; Whereas therefore they require a peculiar demonstration
beside, or different from the other Extractions. We will now Teach their
Practice on this wise; And first of Gems

Take Gems, (and first of all grind or beat them, and Calcine them according to
a Reverberatory condition) and Common Saltnitre, in equal weight, viz. a pound;
the which burn together excellently well into a Calx, and after let them be
washed with burning Wine, so long, until there be found no more superflous
Matter; After the Washing, Calcine this matter again, and proceed in all
respects as before, and so the whole will pass into the burning Wine. Evaporate
this by Ebullition, so shall thou have an Alkali, the which being Resolved into
a Water, keep. There Is no reason that thou should abhor the use of the
administration hereof, how acute or Calcineous soever it be; for it is by that
acuity alone that it Operates upon that which resists it; and it is so Subtle,
that one only drop tingeth the Whole body into a singular Virtue.

Likewise Pearls are to be reduced into a Water on this wise, viz Take
Corrected Vinegar, whereto put the Pearls being bruised, and let them digest
therein for a Month, and so will they be Resolved into a Water; then Distill it
and Separate the Acetum therefrom by a B; this done, thou shall find the Pearls
in the bottom Resolved into a Water: this is the Magistery of Pearls or Unions.
And although the process of this Practick be an easy and short way, yet
nevertheless (believe him that has Experienced it, for) Wonderful is the
Operation of them; but yet this activity of their virtues is not made by Art,
but is placed even in the Nature of them, and is hidden in their gross
substance, by reason of which they cannot Operate no more then a dead body, but
a Resolution being made, their body will be vivified; but of this enough.

But now Corrals are to be ground and Calcined (at the beginning) with Salt
nitre, then afterward to be prepared as the Gems are, and to be also Resolved;
So have thou the Magistery of Corrals, the virtues of which I do most highly
and peculiarly admire, which God has bestowed on this Growing Thing, and which
are of such a powerful and wonderful Operation, according to the admirableness
of their Growth,

Of the Extraction of the Magistery out of Marcasites.
AS concerning the Magisteries of Marcasites, this is necessary to be known,
That they only are Minerals; and therefore the Mineral is not adduced into its
Magistry, but the true Marchasite only, as is also apparent in Metals, the
which do not pass into their Magistery unless they be first Separted from
their Mineral: And although that Marcasites cannot well be Separated therefrom,
yet nevertheless it may be done in the Magisteries. There are indeed various
kinds of Marcasites, as the Golden, Silverish, the Golden Talk, the White, and
the Purple, the Tinny or Bismutey; Antimony, Granate, and other such like; to
all which, notwithstanding, there is one only Extraction is agreeable. Likewise
the Virtues and Powers of them do in in Medicine show and discover themselves
according to the Conditions of the Metalick Operations. And though they be not
in Metals, yet notwithstanding have they the Properties of them, Therefore
we will now set down a few things thereabouts, because we mention them more at
large in our Book of Extrinsecals. There is a difference, or distinction to be
observed, according as is their particular Affinity and Agreement; as Gold and
the Marcasite, Antimony and Lead, the which in their framing and Constelation,
may be compared to each other mutually, but are nevertheless Separated in
Virtue; For in some Marcasites there is more virtues then in the Cons^milar, or
like Metals. This we see happens in Lead and Antimony; of which two, this
latter Cures the Leaprous, the Morphew, the Alopecia, and the like, and all
Scabs, and Scars, or Chops, the Leonine, Elephantiack, and Tyrian, etc. which
the Magistery of Lead or Saturn does not do; Therefore the Properties of this
kind are to be noted, the which do sometimes lie hid, not only in great but
even in lesser thing, and that more abundantly. Therefore lets proceed to the
searching out this Reason, Why Antimony possesses more virtues then its Metal
does? You must note, that the body thereof is not fix, nor sufficiently
digested into its own Perfection as Saturn is; thereupon it assumes a volatile
Property. But the Matter it self out of which it is born, is Beereavative (or
capable of divesting) and Mundificative of its own natural Property, which so
remained incorrupt, as we set down in the Book of Generations. Hence it is, That
it purges Gold and Silver more then the fire or any other Element does;
thereupon also it Mundifies and purges the body, even as Gold and Silver are
freed by it of all their Impurities; The Magistery of Antimony expels the
Leaprosie more then is Credible. The like is to be understood of the rest.

Now lets proceed to the Practice, whereby we teach the preparations of the
Magistery from them all, on this wise;

Take a Marcasite, grind it most subtly, and put to it so much dissolving
Water as may overtop it the breadth of six fingers; Let it be dissolved, and
afterward be putrified for a Month, then let it be Distilled, and be
Separated, as we teach of Metals. This done, thou shall have the Magistery of
that Marcasite thou tookest.

The Extraction of the Magistery from Fatty Substances.
NOr is it to be otherwise conceived of about the Extraction of the Magistery
of Fatty Substances; as the at of Amber, of Rozins, Oils, and others, as they
appear in the like Material Substances; concerning which, there are Three waves
of Extracting of their Magisteries; one peculiar way is of Amber, another of
Rozins, and the other of Fatty Things; as Oils, Fats, Butter, and such like.
For Amber cannot at all endure the Process of the Extraction of Fatty Things,
because, thereby its virtues would be lost. Likewise Resinous Things cannot
undergo the practice upon Amber, for it would be destructive to them; Therefore
we will teach the preparations of those Magisteries in Three ways; Seeing that
there appears such excellent virtues in Fats, and that variously; There, where
Essences can Operate nothing at all, do the Fatty Things help; for they have
that property by reason of their Specific and Appropriate Virtue, which is not
found to be so perfect in other things, nor indeed is it; and as the difference
is betwixt Corrals and Gems, so also is it to be understood of these; The
Practice of them is this, and first of the Amber.

Take Amber, exceedingly well ground, as much as you please; and of Circulatum
as much as is sufficient, digest them in Flacco, or a flatted Vessel, in Ashes
for six days; then let the Circulatum be Distilled thencefrom, and be again
poured on, the which let be done so often until there be found an Oil in the
bottom, the which Oil is the Magistery of Amber. This has disclosed to us its
wonderful Virtues. May it so remain.

The Resinous bodies are reduced unto their Magistery, on this wise;

Take Turpentine, Gum, or Rozin, as much as you please, put it into a Glass
luted, and let it be digested for a Month per se in a hot digestion; then being
mixed with the dissolving Water, let it be boiled in burning Wine, for half an
hour only. Then distill it by a blind Head, or Alembick, then let them stand for
one day; So shall thou find certain Oils, distinct from each other, the which
Separate, for each of them is a Magistery i^ its Nature.

But the Magisteries of Oils are made without the addition of dissolving
Waters, the which likewise have virtues corresponding with the virtues of their
Matter.

The Extraction of Magisteries out of Growing Things.
COming to Treat of Growing Things, we mean by Growing Things, such as grow
green, and afterward^ wither, and do again wax green in their Season, as before:
and likewise those things that Flower; as Trees, Herbs, and such like. The
Magisteries of these are diversely made and Extracted from them; as from Trees
one way, from Herbs another; the difference whereof consists in this, viz. That
the one is Wood or Timber, and the other is Putrifiable The Leaves therefore
and Flowers must be prepared as the Herbs are; Therefore we will set down these
Magisteries Separately: The preparation of the Magistery of Wood's is thus;

Take the Wood, cut it small enough, the which put into a glazed pot, able to
abide the fire, and shut or cover it exceeding well; let it be burnt with a
fire of Coals for four Hours, then take it out, and putrify it in a Glass for
a Month, then Distill it in Ashes even to the last Spirits; which being
perceived, presently cease, that so the Magistery may not get any stinch from
the fire; By this way shall thou have the Magistery of that Wood which thou
have undertook to prepare. Thus also may Seeds, Roots, and Barks, and such like
as contain an Oil in their Material Substance, be extracted; There ^es a
greater Artifice in those Extractions then is said or understood, although the
Process be here entirely described.

But as for Herbs, and other such like, they are to be permixt with burning
Wine, and to be putrified therewith for a month; then are they to be Distilled
by B. M. and that which is Distilled must be again poured on; and it must be
thus proceeded withal so long until the whole Quantity of the burning Wine be
fourtimes less then the Juyces of the Herbs: Distill this same by a Pelican,
with new Additaments, for one month, then Separate it; Having so done, thou
shall have the Magistery of that Matter or Herb which thou tookest.

The Extraction of the Magisterie in Wine.
NOw we will declare the Magistery of Wine, the which appears to be endowed with
innumerable Virtues; whereas it receives such a Nature from most of the Virtues
that lie hid in the Earth, as we set down in the Generation of Wine; Now you
must know, That the Magisteries hereof are to be done Two ways, albeit we
pass over One of them in silence, because the process thereof is common, such
as we use in the many Extractions of Wines. Some Practick ways of this
Magistery of Wine are here set down; Some do endeavor to Extract it whilst
the Wine is yet new, and boyls in the purging; Some bury it, and so leave it an
hundred days, (or years;) Very many Separate it without fire. But however it
be done, I shall not Write any thing here thereof; I will only deliver that Way
which I have tried by Experience. First of all, you are to know, That in Wine
is a very Subtle Spirit, and but little; and is contained in (and accompanied
with) much Phlegm. And although this be a Quintessence, yet notwithstanding is
a Magistery to be made thereof, (...) by using a greater Practice, and Process.

You are also to know, That there are more and greter virtues in that Wine
which has not as yet put do^^ its Tartar, for there is sometimes more virtues
in Tan^ then in the Wine it self; Also the Oldnesse of Wine more laudable then
that which is Young, for the Spir^ thereof is more digested in Success of
longer tin^ then a shorter. Moreover, it is to be considered, The the Wine that
is to be for this use, must be buried in the cold Earth, and its Vessel must be
exceedingly we^ shut both above and beneath, that so it may have n^ breathing
vent at all: for it may be kept thus many hundreds of years without Tartar. But
we will not speak here of the length of time, for it will be too tedious; but
yet it is good to remember it. Nor is that a Magisterie of Wine that is drawn out
of Must, or n^^ Wine, but a Magistery of Must: Nor is it a thing of A^^ to
Distill it with its feces, or its own phlegm; as Vinum ardens is, because by
this way those Virtues of the Spirit are lost which are in its Essence.
Therefore it is no ways convenient to do this same thing. So by how much the
oftener the best Vinegar is Distilled, so much the remoter does it recede from
the Spirit of Wine: Upon which account it is to be considered with the highest
diligence, that the Quintessence be not by any means Corrupted in the
Magisteries, but rather that it be augmented and fortified in its Virtues:
Likewise, when it is Separated without Fire, it cannot by any means be a
Magistery, because there is the Substantiality wanting. You are therefore to
know that the Spirit of the Wine is to be conserved together with its
Substance, and not with its Phlegm: For there are Two Substances to be found in
Wine; the one is Winey, in which the Spirit of the Wine is, and from which it
cannot be Separated; the other is Phlegmatic, which is permixed with the
feces, and the sweet, or insipid Water, both which are to be Separated from the
true Substance, as a Metal from its Mineral, or Earth.

Furthermore it is to be known concerning Wine, That ^he Feces and Phlegm thereof
is the Mineral as 'twere, and that the Substance of the Wine is the Body, in
which the Essence is Conserved; even as the Essence of Gold lies in Gold.
Therefore we will set down the Practice for a remembrance, that so we may not
forget it: and it is thus;

Take the oldest Wine; and the best that you can get, both as to Color and
Taste, what you please; put it into a Glass Vessel, so that a Third part
thereof may be full; and shut it with the Seal of Hermes, and keep it in Horse
dung, and in a continued Heat for four months; let it not be defective, viz.
your Heat. This being done, then in the Wintertime, when the Cold and Frost
are extremely sharp, set it abroad in the cold for a month that it may be
Congealed; After this manner, the Cold does thrust the Spirit of the Wine
together with its Substance into the Center of the Wine and Separate it from
the Phlegm: That which is Congealed or Frozen, cast away; but that which is not
Congealed, you may account to be the Spirit with the Substance; Put this in a
Pelican in a digestion of Sand, but not too hot, and there let it abide for
some time; Afterward take forth the Magistery of the Wine, of which we have
now spoken. As for those more Processes that are existant and are applied to
use, we will speak more largly of when we shall Treat of Elixirs; and here
we will make an end, and be mindlesse of some other those Processes of Wine which
we have no great liking unto.

The Extraction of the Magisterie out of Blood.
WE will now explain our Opinion concerning Blood, in which there are most
wonderful Virtues and admirable, more then can be believed, and are
sufficiently evidenced, yea most exceeding apparent, so that the Blood Exists
out of the best Root, and most Noble Fountain of the Heart, (as we declare in
the Treatise of the Composition of man) wherein is no defect, so it has its
Conditions according to the Nature of the Heart, and is a precious Treasure of
the whole Nature and of all that which lives therein.

Here some may say, That the Blood when it is let (...) of the veins, is
deprived of those virtues necessarily that renew and sustain the Blood, but
this is not so for it may be Conserved in the Essence as we shall show below.
Let us therefore but consider the paucity of such men as live with a sound Body
and Blood; Therefore it must be looked to, that such men be brought into
renewed Quality and Essence, by Arcanaes and a Quintessence as we mentioned
before; that the Blood may thereby flow from them sound and incorrupt. Nor d^ we
speak of man's Blood only, but also of the Blood o^ the Sperm, which we make a
Description of in our Secrets, in which there is no Disease nor Alteration,
b^^^he-most-highly-to-be-admired Blood out of the Spe^^ of man, which we
pretend, and alleadg to be taken i^ this place; and this for many reasons not
here mentioned. We also speak of the Blood of Bread, which i^ to be in like
manner taken for the same use; for there are therein such Virtues as are scarce
to be searched ou^ by us, nor will we undertake the burden of doing i^ to its
highest worth. In like manner may it be understood of other nourishments and
Commestible Things in all which is Blood to be had, although we see it n^^ in
them, no more then in bread, the which is notwithstanding made Blood, by
putrefaction; as in the Stomach and the Liver. So likewise every thing that is
therewith taken, for food is changed after the same manner, as in the Body. We
will forbear to Write of this Blood more largly and prolixly, especially
because we see that it will not prove an acceptable thing to any body but our
selves only; and there^^ G^^^ will sleep in rest, and being afterward
awake^^^ out of our sweet sleep, we will proceed on to speak further of this
Blood. Each thing may be prevalent as far forth as it can in its Virtues, and
answerable to as much as it has in it; for out of a good thing does much of
good proceed, and this we must always duly consider of. Neither will we only
speak of the Blood of Commestible things, but also of Potable Things, which
does simply exhibit Blood unto our Body. Likewise there may be extracted out of
Blood, Quintessences as well as Arcanaes, concerning which we do not here speak
in the least, but have determined to speak of Magisteries only, and to
conclude each, in this one process.

Take the Blood, which being shut up in a Pelican, let it so long transcend,
or rise up upon the Horse-belly, (or Dunghill) until the Third part of the
Pelican be filled; for, all Blood in its Rectification is dilated according to
the Quantity, and not according to the Weight; This time being finished, thou
shall Rectify it by a B. By this way the Phlegms Separate, and the Magistery
remains in the bottom; the which being shut in a Retort with the Seal of
Hermes, Distill it nine times, as we have Taught in the Book of Preparations: By
this way shall thou have the Magistery of Blood.

The End of the Sixth Book, etc.
THE Seventh BOOK OF THE ARCHIDOXIS.
Of Specificks.
IT now remains that we speak of Specificks, in the which there are exceeding,
admirable, and great Virtues, which do not derive or take their Original from
Nature, as in reference to Heat, and Cold; but they have besides those
Qualities, one only Nature and Essence, as we have hinted in many places. That
same Specificality takes its Original and Rise from External Things; as, when
you throw some Wood into the fire, and it burns, that now is not an Action of
its proper Nature, but is Wood, or a Wood. Essence; Therefore also Specificks
are generated from a Conjunction; as, when Mastich and Colophony are framed
together, an Attractive is produced, the which neither of them is per se, or
simple; Or when Turpentine is Coagulated, there is made a Stone thence-from,
which attracteth Iron to itself like the Magnet. Many more such like Things
there are which have such Virtues, but yet it is from their Compositions, and
from without. Ellebor also is Composed of the Liquor of Stone and Earth; by the
Composition of those Two does arise the Specificality, So the Oil of Cherries
with Vinegar, do (after their digestion) become a Laxative, and yet neither of
them does of its own Nature loosen; Wherefore those kind of Specificks are born
of their own proper nature, by the Composition of their Elements and a proper
matter, no otherwise then as Tincture or Color, the which does not arise from
Cold and Heat, but from the Composition; as Galls with Vitriol produce Ink,
whereas neither of them is black; So likewise Sal armoniack and Urine do make a
black Color, and yet are both of them white: The same is to be understood of
Specificks, viz. That they do in-likemanner receive their Original; but some
things which assume those same Virtue from without may be in any Herb, but yet
not in One kind or property, the which is to be thus understood, viz.
Wheresoever the Magnet grows, there is a certain Attractive; as Colocynthis is
a Purgative, and Poppy an Anodine: This now proceeds from the Composition
existing in them; from whence it comes to pass that every Magnet is
attractive, and every Colocynthis purgative; But the Case stands not thus with
the Specificks from without, the Condition of them is thus, viz. If one Flint
should have the Virtues of the Magnet, and another like it should have none,
now this Specificality shall be external, or from without; but yet it is rare to
find a peculiar Condition or Quality to be in One Herb, and yet not as well in
Another that is like it. Furthermore, although many such like Specificks do
arise from Influences, yet nevertheless we will not much dispute (in this
place) concerning their proceeding, or not-proceeding therefrom but will
reserve that for its proper place in Physic, and rather forbear here.

Besides, There are to be found many Specificks, as Odoriferous Specificks,
which have their Original from Composition and Digestion, as the Water of
Vitriol Distilled with Sal armoniack resembles the Odor of Musk; and yet
neither of them have such a smell, per se. Many more such things there are that
become Odoriferous, and were not so before, and do got a noble Odor; as a Rose,
or Lilly, in whom there is no Odor at the beginning, but it is at last stirred up
by Labor, Digestion, and Separation.

In like manner Cow Dung is a stinking Excrement; but if it be but Elevated or
Distilled it gets an Odor of Ambergreece; but the residue of the matter that
abides in the bottom, stinks more loathsome then man's Ordure.

Some Specificks are Diaphoretick, and provoke Sweat, which receive such a
Virtue from a Composition; as a burning Coal put at top of a fat Earth, emits a
Vapor; So likewise Ginger thrust into, or conveyed into the body, burns; and
is to be extinguished as Calx or Lime, with the pouring on of Water. This Heat
happens to the Ginger by reason of that acuity or sharpness which it contains
in it self, and is Coagulated with an hot Element, as a Limestone, which is
brought to such an heat by the fire. For every Diaphoretick is the Calx of the
Liquour of the Earth, even as we mention it in the Book of Generations. In like
manner do even Purgatives proceed from a Composition; as Rhubarb, the which
also is the Calx of a Liquour, but yet with a certain difference and
distinction interveening; For as Tartar being burnt is Resolved into a Water,
and together with it all its Liquidity, if it shall be laid up in a moist
place. So is it also with Rhubarb, and so may you judge of other Purges, which
have their Original many waves, as the Calx of the Earth is; for some of them
do Purge or Dissolve Choler, as Rhubarb, the which is like to Calcined Tartar;
Some loosen Phlegm, as Turbith, (This seems to have been inserted
Suppositiously because that a WORD was wanting in the Authors own Handwriting)
with them Purges, Realgar is loosened, and nothing else. Others Purge
Melancholy, as Sena; the which you are to understand thus, viz. It Is after the
manner of Nitre, which Resolves Stones with its power, and not any other
thing. Some purge the Blood, as Manna; like to in the manner of Arsenick which
Resolves Sublimates. On this wise are you to determine of the difference of
those things, even as they are divided in themselves, and as we have now minded
you of. Likewise some Comfortatives do arise from a Composition, as a Sperm
destitute of virtues, yet notwithstanding out of it a Glandule or Kernel is
Generated by Nature, by reason of its Predestination: So therefore a
Comfortative it self, is a certain Predestined Thing arising from the
Predestination of the Composition. But the Carline, which is not born after
this manner, draws the virtues of other Herbs unto it self, and takes their
powers from them, (and does then alone possess those virtues) even as the Sun
draws the moisture out of Wood; This we declare more at large in our Book of
Generations.

In like manner also, some Mundificatives do acquire by their Composition such
a like virtue as to Mundifie; even as when a Calx of Earth is Transmuted into
another Form by a Liquid Thing, as Rozin, Honey, Gum, Pitch, etc. Those
Alterations are like to the Flores of Venus, the which are at first a
Purgative, as it becomes a Calx to be; then afterward, they are reduced by the
fire into a Stiptick Property, so that they lose their purging faculty, and do
then mundifie.

In like manner are Corrosives to be accounted of, which are Salts, and are
sometimes Calcined in Earth; and again sometimes Substantionated (as I may so
speak) into one matter, as is mentioned by us in the Book of the Generation of
Salts. There are various and many such like Properties in Things, of which we
Treat in our Book of the Properties of Things; and have sufficiently enough
spoken thereof in this place. Nor will we here discover why some of them are
hard, and contrariwise othersome soft; Nor does our Archidoxis Treat of the
whole beginning, but only of the Composing of Specificks, and bringing them to
the highest degree of Nature, Concerning which we will now at length speak and
propose the Experiences we have had thereof, and leave behind our backs those
that are the Preachers in the corners of the Streets; such as speak of God, but
understand not any thing besides their Hypocritical Ceremonies, and such like
Fables; They are Enemies to those that are addicted to these Arcanaes, and
Arts; and are sunk Head and Ears in the glory of the World: They are Bablers
and Cavillers, and are endued with much Prating, which they sustain and bear
(as the Proverb goes) with both Shoulders; They are Flatterers, and imagine
themselves to be wise men, whereas they are stupid and follish, and are
deceivers of men for worldly Riches. But lets now come to the Specificks,
according to our using of them, and give leave to those University Physicians,
(who be the Success or Issue good or bad do only Read and Imagine) to grind
and gnash with their Teeth against us as they please.

Of an Odoriferous Specific.
THerefore lets now speak of Odoriferous Specificks by what way and form they
are made, and first of all as to what belongs to their Virtues; An Odoriferous
Specific therefore, is a Matter that takes away Diseases from the Sick, no
otherwise then as Civet drives away the stinck of Ordure by its Odor; for you
are to observe, That the Specific does permix it self with this evil Odor of
the Dung; and the stink of the Dung cannot hurt, not abide there, but the stink
thereof is here tinged with the good Odor, insomuch that by how much the more
stinking it was before, so much the more is it now endued with a good Odor;
for there is Nothing can take away the good Odor of Civet or Musk, but yet it is
Transmuted, as we prove in many places; whence it comes to pass, that sometimes
some man's ordour is to be admixed to the Musk; for thi^ penetrates more readily
then any Lilly, with all its Operations; for it is well known that there is to be
found more of evil Odor then of good: Even as also the Tyrian Viper is put
into Triacle for a speedy m^st high penetration of all the Members, together
with the Virtues of the other Things; So in like manner may we judge of an
Odoriferous Specific. Now, this you are to Consider here, That by Odoriferous
Things Diseases are driven away from those who cannot at all b^a^ Medicaments,
as in the Apoplexy, or Epilepsy; for verily there are many Odours that ease the
Epi^eptick, and many that succor the Apep^ectical, not that they do Cure them
perfectly, but yet they prepare the way. For the Virtue thereof that is
afforded to the body, does by its Odor presently excite the Blood, and by the
carrying of this to the Heart, does Refresh it more then can be written:
Wherefore we will ser down an Odorisick, out of which we may take a Foundation
(...) the (...) of Odorisicks for all other Diseases; The P^ceess whereof is
this;

Take white (...), Anthos, basii, Cardamoms, and Roses, of each one Handful;
Spile, two Handfuls; heat them grossly into a Paste. Whereto add the Juice of
Orange Apples, two Quarts; put all these together in a Pelican, and let them
be digested for one month; afterward let them be Separated from their seces,
with your Hands, or with a Press which is better; put this again into a
Pelican, and presently let be added Mice, Cloves, Cinamome, of each one Ounce:
Ambergreece half an Ounce; Musk two drams; Civet one ounce; grind them most
exceeding small, and put them into the said Pelican with the other things, and
digest them in Dung; Then add Gum Arabic dissolved, half an ounce; of
Tragacanth also dissolved, one ounce; and so let them harden with the Clear of
the White of Eggs in a shut Glass; then presently as soon as you see it to be
made of the likeness of Glass, break your Glass and take out this Stone, and
thou shall have the Odoriferous Specific, of which we have now written enough,
But yet 'twill be good to add Aurum Potabile.

Of an Anodine Specific.
THere are also many Causes that induce us to write of this Specifical Anodme,
for we have met with some Diseases in which all sorts of Arcanaes have failed
us, except a Specifical Anodine only, and that has performed things
miraculous. Neither let us wonder thereat, for as we see that Water quenches
Fire, even so does the Specifical Anodine extinguish Diseases, and that for
many Causes which we will forbear mentioning of now.

For, That which rests or sleeps, does not naturally offend; If the Paroxism
sleep, it is not felt: but if it does not sleep, the Operation thereof is
accomplished. This now Comforts and encourages us, in that we see many Cares
and Melancholy taken away by sleeping.

But yet this is to be noted in this place, That it is not necessary that the man
sleep, but the Disease it self; And therefore we compose a Specific to sight
only against the Disease, and not the whole man, as is to be understood of
Feavors, and is to be made use of in them. Now we propose and set down such
things as are Mortal in the full or perfect man, but healthful and Salutiferous
in a full or perfect Disease; And therefore we set upon the Disease it self,
and herein we labor that it may have no operation upon the Body, nor be able
to have, on this wise;

Take of Thebaick Opium, one ounce; Of the Juice of Orange Apples and Quinces,
of each six ounces, of Cinnamome and Cloves, of each, half anounce; Beat them
altogether exceeding well, and being mixed, put them into a Glass with its blind
Cover, and digest them at the Sun, or in Dung for a month, afterward let them
be pressed out, and be put in again with these following things, viz

Take Musk, one Scruple and half; Ambergreece, four Scruples, Saffron, half an
ounce; The juice of Corrals, and the Magistery of Pearls, of each, one Scruple
and half, commix them, then after their digestion for a month; Add of the
Quintessence of Gold, one Scruple and half, which being permixt with the rest,
there will be a Specifical Anodine for the taking away of all griefs, both
Internal and External, so that no member may be tormented or seized on any
longer.

Of a Specifickal Diaphoretick.
NOW we come to speak of a Specifical Diaphoretick, whereby every such disease
is cured, that can or ought (because of its Nature and Property) to be healed
by sweat; such a disease is to be driven out with this Medicament beyond all
other Medicines. For by a Diaphoretick, a Cold Disease becomes Hot, and is by
that Heat took away; for it has often befallen us, that the Cassatum (or the
dead Blood in the Veins obstructing the motion of the good) of twenty years
standing, has been healed by a Diaphoretick, and very many other Diseases
which they call Intercutaneous, or between the Skin, and also such as stick in
the Marrows, in which Diseases a Quintessence effects nothing, much less a
Comfortative Arcanum; the cause is chiefly this, viz. there is not so powerful
a Vigor in the heart, as to drive out the Cassatum, except it be done by a
Diaphoretick alone; for even as the O does heat the Frozen Stone, and melts the
hard l^e, even so does a Diaphoretick display its Virtues upon a Disease, which
cannot be cured with any other Virtues how noble and good soever. And although
Flammula or Crowfoot be a most hot Herb, yet nevertheless the heat thereof is
not at all comparable to the smalest point of the Nature of the Sun; Even so
exceeding much is the difference betwixt each hot things and Diaphotericks
themselves. Therefore we set down in this place a Specifical Diaphoretick,
which comprehends Diaphoretical Virtues.

Take of Ginger, one pound; Long-Pepper and Biack, of each, half an ounce;
Cardamomes, three drams; Granes of Paradise, one ounce; beat them into Powder
and put them in a Glass with one ounce and half of the best Camphire, ground or
beaten and with two ounces of Aqua Solvens or the dissolving Water, Seal up the
Glass, and let i^ remain in Sand the time of finishing its Digestion. Then
Separate from them the dissolving Water, and let it putrefie for a month, and
be circulated one week. Afterward press it out and keep it; this is the best
and most potent Diaphoretick, acting more vehemently then is credible, as well
in the Cassatum, as in other most grevious Diseases; of which enough.

Of a purging Specific:
IT IS expedient also, that we write of a Specific Purgative; and although the
Complexions and such like things come under consideration; yet nevertheless we
are confirmed, and build on a solider Foundation, taking such things as take
away the Diseases, and that do not drive away one or another Disease
particularly, but every evil; from whence may be gathered, that whatsoever of
choler is superfluous and of no moment, does thereby depart* The like is to be
understood of Offending Phlegm, Melancholy, and Blood; as also of Apostemes and
other Corruptions, which cannot be purged according to the Complexions, nor be
resolved with Purgations, of which sort of Diseases, there are many to be found.

We do therefore endeavor to draw out the offending Matter, only whether it
be corrupt or not, whether with an Aposteme or Complexion, or any other
permixion.

But as for the tedious and unprofitable discourses of the Universitie
Physicians, we shall not care for them, but diligently consider of the health
it self; and for this cause we will frame our Medicaments. Such a Medicament is
Tartar, which (of its own Nature and Property) takes away all Putrefactions;
nor is it inclined to Choler, nor Melancholy, nor Phegm, nor Blood, but takes
away every unprofitable thing in the Body, and such as may endammage it. So
likewise Vitriol purges away all such occasions as give birth to many
infirmities. For verily we are to consider, that Colocynthis does not purge us
of all our Choler, or of all that arises therefrom; neither also does Rhubarb
do it; nor does Tur^ith carry off every thing that proceeds from Phlegm; nor
Lapis Lazuli, all the Impediment caused by Melancholy; nor does Manna expel all
the coutrarietie of the Blood; but these our two Specifical Purgatives, and
many others not here mentioned, do accomplish it, and that principally in all
these putrefactions and superfluous feces of the Body, from whencesoever they
proceed, all which it purges no otherwise then as Water washes Linen
Clothes, and as Soap clears them from their filth and defilements of any kind.
For thus do they Operate singularly upon each disease; We will therefore now
set down that Specifical Medicament according to our aformentioned purpose,
after this manner*

Take the Magisterie of Tartar, and the Magistery o^ Vitriol, both which commix
together into one Body then add equal parts of the Quintessence of Saffron. the
being shut up in a Pelican, let them be digested is Sand for a month, and let
the Medicine (which ^ spoke of above) be kept most carefully; as or the res^
hereto necessary, there is requisite a greater understanding, as well with the
learned as the ignorant; neither are Men only, but also Trees and Herbs
capable of being purgedfrom their Diseases and superfluities; for there are
infirmities as well in the things that grow as in Persons, and they also have
their remedies, as we have elsewhere mentioned; the defect of Anthos, viz. when
it cannot perfectly grow strong, the Magistery of Vitriol heals, and causes it
to grow egregiously afterward, as we set down in our Discourse of Plants; Thus
therefore will we now conclude this Chapter

Of a Specifical Attractive.
AND now that we may begin to speak of an Attractive Specific; we are to know
that a Specificks Attractive draws unto it self whatsoever is superfluous in
the Body, and whatsoever evil adheres thereto as it often happens, it brings
out, as we set down in many places, and is manifested by probable
demonstrations Likewise some Specifical Attractives have been so appropriated
and suited to Flesh, that they have drawn ^^ themselves an hundred pounds of
Flesh, no otherwise then as the Lodestone draws Iron. It has also happened
that in my time, that such a like attractive has drawn the Lungs out of the
Body into the mouth, and so have choked the Man; it has likewise happened,
that another has had the Pupil or Ball of the eye drawn from its own place,
even to the nose, and could ^ever be thence moved. For there are not only
Attractours of Iron, but such also as respect Wood, Herbs, flesh and Waters;
for we have seen an Emplaster that ^ath Attracted so much Water as to be able
to fill a tub, and the Water to have flown down from the Plaster, as if it
dropped down from a house Eaves; so likewise, Lead, Tin, Copper, Silver, and Gold
may be Attracted by the composition of Attractives.

Moreover it may be so contrived, that by these kind of Attractives, Boughs may
be torn off from the trees, and Cow may be lifted up on high, and many more
such things may be done, which we have declared in our Secrets as a Treasure,
that so we may in these things admire and worship him only who has created
all things with so wonderful an Artifice, insomuch that so various things are
to be found, as demonstrate incredible operations, far transcending Nature,
according as it is constituted and ordained in it self.

We will therefore set down some Attractive Virtues for the Body, by which that
which is evil and corrupt ^ay be extracted, and be separated from the good on
this wise, viz. the Attractive must be placed upon some Emunctory, and in that
place where the defect appeared, or upon an Ulcer, the which may likewise be
accounted of as an Emunctory; and if any Glandule or Kernel arises, it is to
be first opened like an Emunctory. But now we know by experience that such a
kind of Attractive, has extracted the pestilence more then is ^it to write of
in this place. No sick person ever died that had this Medicine, although
possessed with a grievous Disease. The Receipt of a Specifical Attractive is this;

Take the Quintessence of all the Gums in every kind, of each, one quarter of a
pound; The Magistery of the Magnet, a quarter and half (alias half a quarter)
Of Element of the Fire of Amber, one pound; Of the Fire Element of Mastick, of
Myrrh, of each, one quarter ^^ half; Of the Element of Scamony, ten ounces; Mi^
thereof a Cerote with Wax, Gum Tragacanth, and Turpentine; Use it as is
aforesaid.

Of a Specifical Stiptick.
NOW we come to speak of a Stiptical Specific, ^^ Virtues of which are very
many, and are more then is to be understood or learned by the other Specificks.
For when such wonderful works of Nature ^^ the Qualities of those kind of
things are obvious to o^ Eyes, they do encourage us with a supreme Joy, not ^
desist from them, but to renew, as it were, and quick^ the remembrance of all
those things which are presented unto us by those same Arts; and if happily
the^ should be found any thing written of the Nature ^ things by the Ancient
Physicians and Philosophers which does not all agree with us; yet
notwithstanding that shall not in the least disturb us, for all that the have
written is uncertain, but we are delighted wi^ those great Mysteries as are in
Nature herself, and which present themselves to our hands; and as for those
labors of the Ancients, which are to be accounted of ^^ Lame and imperfect, we
do deservedly neglect there as we have hinted in many places; Nor may we so
much admire at the vehemence of Stipticks, which have ^^ great virtues, even in
their Quintessences, Arcanaes ar^ Mysteries, in so much, that they will so
firmly aggl^tinate two pieces of Iron, that they cannot be Separated afterward
but by Fire. Nay more then so, one pieces of Copper is by such like Stipticks,
so glewed on ^^ another piece of Copper, that they can no more b^ Separated,
neither by Fire nor by Water; Likewise th^e may be by such a like Stiptick
Attractive, an heap Stones glewed together into a huge Mass like a Rock. like
sort may Sand and Calx be (by such like Stipticks) concreated or knit together
into an ever-during compactness, and harder then Marble it self; thus much
concerning hard things; we will now also speak of others. We have seen (after
the same manner) Leaves have been so conjoined together, that they have been
accounted for a Natural concrete, as the leaves of Lilly, with the leaves of
Roses in one compaction; likewise Smiths have (by my advise) so firmly and
compactly consolidated their Irons together as if they had been conglutinated
with a true compaction, or ^elling.

We have also seen the lips of the Mouth, to be so ^rawn together with a bare
washing only with a Specifical Stiptick, that they could not be opened but by
^^rce, with the help of Instruments and much effusion ^f Blood; The Fundament
also has been by the sport^^g or waggery of some, so comprest with such a
Specific, that for evacuations sake, they have been contained to open it with
an instrument; The like compaction or closing together, we have seen in wounds,
and in the rupture of the bladder, so that no opening ^r rupture did any more
afterward break out either in their time or mine. Whatsoever member this
Material Stiptick shall touch, it does so contract, whether it be ^he bone it
self, or the bare flesh, that it cannot be ^raped off, without a file, or
Separated without a knife, ^or no water mollifies these Stiptick Virtues of
which ^ort there are far more then what we have here set down, but as to what
belongs to Medicine, we will ^et down a Specifical Stiptick as follows.

Take the Quintessence of Bole, and of Iron, the Quintessence of Amber, (alias
Cathebes) of each one pound; ^et them be digested in Ashes for a month,
afterward put in a pound and half of dried Tartar; with this cu^ the Body
where need requires. This and such li^^ Stipticks are not searchable, whilst
(in their Bodies but in their Separated Substances do Attract more th^^ is
credible, because of the Nature and quality of the^ most great dryness, and
therefore are they called Stiptick Specificks, as being Stipticks beyond and
abo^^ all others.

Of a Corrosive Specific.
NOW we will add and describe a Specifical Corrosive^ in which are wondrous
Virtues implanted b^ Nature. For verily (being compared to the Antie^^
Corrosives) it is even wonderful, for it Absumes ar^ wholly Consumes Metals even
to a nothingness, so th^^ in them can there be no body any more sound, (...)
more then is of Wood that is burnt up by the Fire Now although that even by
Strong Waters there is made a consuming of the Metals, yet notwithstanding the^
are not diminished in their weight, nor changed i^ their essence, but may be
again reduced by the Fire into their first Body and Matter, the which is
impossible to be done, after that consumption that is made by the Specifical
Corrosive; and the Reason is this, because there is no matter can be found any
more in thi^ place, that can be (by any way or means) reduced us to a Metalick
Nature, no more then Wood-ashes c^^ be reduced into Wood; further you are to
know, tha^ this Corrosive does operate so strongly in the flesh, th^^ nothing
can be compared therewithal, for it pers^rates the hand in a moment like an
Awl.

We mention these things for Medicine to this end that so all the putrid and
up-grown (or proud flesh in the body, that does very much arise in Ulcers, (i^
in Fistulaes, Cancers, Scrophulaes) may be removed; (...) which may be Cured by
such Corrosives, for there is in ^ a Stiptick Virtue of exceeding powers, by
which it requires peculiar properties of Curing. Though indeed (...) may be
rather called a Fire then a Medicament, for it consumes Iron Chains, and Bolts
more readily then is credible, or can be written; and therefore we will assign
this Receipt hereto, and that most briefly thus;

Take Aqua Fortis rectified from the Caput Mortuum, one Pound; Of Mercury
Sublimate, one Quarter of a Pound and half. (alias half a Quarter;) Of Sal
armoniack, two Ounces; Mix all these together, and let them be Consumed or
devoured; then admix an equal weight of Mercurial Water and keep it. There is
no Diamond can resist this Corrosive. Though indeed the same may be understood
of a Quintessence and Arcanum. viz. That the Skin may be taken away from any
one by that kind of Cautery, and instead thereof may a new Skin be brought
thereon; as in the Leapry, Morphew, Serpig, Lentigo, Pannus, etc. Against which
Diseases this Specifical Corrosive is useful; but (because of its vehemence) we
omit it, and do take this mixture, wherewith the Skin must be washed, for so
tw^ll fall off and be bare; then afterward may it be consolidated, as the
Custom is: The Mixture may be thus;

Take the Juice of Flammula, (or Crowfoot) one pound; Of Cantharides, four
pounds and an half; Of the aforesaid infernal Fire, two drams; permix them
together, and do as above.

Of a Specific for the Matrix.
NOW at last we come to speak of a Specific for the Matrix, and that for
various Causes, and because of the various Affects or Diseases thereof: but now
we will not at all speak here of the Elements that either heat or cool it, for
that is to be done by Magisteries and Arcanaes. But we here mention Two
Specificks; One is in the Suffocation of the Matrix, the Other is in either
Provoking, or Restraining the Months: You must therefore understand, that the
Suffocation cannot be removed by any other thing then a Specific; though i^ be
such as is unelementated and unprepared, yet it is to be administered in the
Common Form or Essence as it grow^ in: Such is the fig of the Skin; as soon as
the Fume of this enters in through the Privities, the Disease is expelled: The
which thing verily is highly worthy o^ Admiration, because this is so vile a
Simple thing, which albeit it should be prepared, yet notwithstanding the
Essence of its Fume does not perish, for in that alone is the Virtue. But as
for the provoking of the Months the Specific Remedy is in the Spleen of a
gelded Bull or Ox, brought into a Magistery or a Quintessence; the provocation
property of which is most excellent as well in young solks, as in old.

So also for to Restrain them, you must know, That the Quintessence of Corrals,
or the Oil of Iron, or Potable Iron, which does wonderfully Restrain beyond the
rest, is a most exellent Remedy. It Is no ways necessary to write down any more
such like Properties, for it would prove too Prolix in our Archidoxis; yet it is
to be noted, That under the aforesaid Compositions. Specifical Compositions are
comprehended; as the Incarnative, Conglutinative, ^axitives, and
Mundificitives, and such like, and under the Purgatives themselves (so is it
concerning the rest) are the Deoppilatives, viz. under Purgatives and
Attractives. And ^^ we will Conclude this little Book of Specificks, for to
succor our Memory that we may not forget them; Likewise Comfortatives are
rehearsed in all the singular Chapters.

The End of the Seventh Book, etc.
THE Eighth BOOK OF THE ARCHIDOXIS.
Of Elixirs.
HAving written of many most secret Mysteries of Nature, we are now also
willing briefly to treat of Elixirs, and that not in Vain, for we perceive that
there lies in them the greatest conservation, and this does even constrain us
to bend our mind thereto, without resting, for every Elixir is an Internal
preservative of that Body, in its essence that takes it; even as the
Extrinsecal Balsome, is the External preservative of all Bodies from
putrefaction and corruption; the which thing is sufficiently evident in
Balsome, viz. that it preserves Bodies so, that they abide many hundreds, yea
thousands of years without corruption or mutation.

And therefore seeing such a like gift or faculty is in Balsome, as to preserve
dead Bodies and to conserve them incorruptible; you may well conceive that in
and by this same gift and Mystery, a sound and living Body may be far better
and more commodiously preserved; But now we have not this according to Nature,
viz. that these Mysteries of Nature, yea, and constituted above Nature (by
which we may conserve the Body inwardly and outwardly from all contrariety)
become manifested and known unto us; but in them we meet with many Mysteries as
are most occult and hid from others.

Verily as concerning Elixirs this is to be known, that they have not their
operations from their Nature, not from their complexion, but are Mysteries
rather then Specificks leading us to a most high admiration of the Creator, by
many demonstrations. Yet they are planted in Nature her self, so that they are
in her, even as may be seen in Balsome; if therefore it be possible to preserve
dead bodies, it is much more possible to preserve living Bodies. Nor makes it
much to heed the Words or Arguments of our Adversaries, but we will disclose
our own Arguments, and hereby shall endeavor to direct and guide, to the true
foundation of the Intrinsecal Balsome, not regarding the trifling unprofitable
sayings of those that talk of a Term or limit of death, and its Predestination,
and conclude or stint it in its determinate points; for God our Father gave
life unto us, and together therewith Medicaments, by which we may be able to
defend and sustain it; if therefore the term of death were precisely set and
limited, it would necessarily follow that the other be false, which is not so.
But as long as we have ability and knowledge, we have power of sustaining our
Life, for Adam attained to such an Age, not from the proper Nature or condition
of his own propriety, but merely on this account, because he was so learned and
wise a Physician, and knew all things that were in Nature her self, with the
which he also sustained himself so long a time. So likewise many other were
there, that used such like remedies.

Many there were that dyed in the days of Adam, that attained not to his Age,
and some attained not to our Age, (as we are now constituted and ordained since
the flood) but dyed even as we, and that because they were ignorant of these
Arts, which Adam and the rest understood, and hereby it came to past that they
dyed before their time, nor did their Food or Drink help them.

Whereas therefore we are able from such like examples Naturally to find out,
that an old or long life proceeds from Nature, we will enquire what Nature and
the gift of God is; some things do conserve a dead body from putrefaction only
one year, as Oleum Laterinum, or Oil of Bricks. Others ten, as the Corrected
Oil of the Philosophers; some twenty, as the Water of Honey; othersome fifty, as
a Destilled Preservative; but others preserve it perpetually without end, as
Balsome; Some only eight days, as Salt; others for a night, as Destilled
Water; some longer, as Vinum Ardens; othersome also there are that preserve the
Body from Corruption, in a new and strong essence and Nature, when a man is
confirmed and strengthened by them, according to his complexion, as Cittine,
Aloes, and Myrrh; some Bodies are defended from Putrefaction, by reason of
their most great Tincture only, which is so potent, that it admits of no evil,
nor suffers any to grow or to enter therein, as Gold, the Saphir, Pearls,
Arcanaes, Magisteries, and such like as we have before written hereof.

We will therefore write down a Preservative against all the Corruptions of the
Live Body and the Dead; But it is to be considered that the preservative of the
Live Body is to be taken by the mouth, and ought to penetrate the whole body,
so that here may be no member in the Body, but may perceive and admit of that
preservation, and may (by the Attraction of the benefit thereof) be informed
and impressed thereby; Moreover it is to be noted that the Spirits of the
excrements in the bowels are sufficiently vehement and strong to fight against
the Preservative, and that for this reason, because no putrefied thing can be
Embalmed or preserved; for it has not in it self any essence, as newly dead
flesh, which is embalmed has. And that does as much suit with a Preservative,
as Vermin with the best herbs, and as a putrefied thing does with an
incorruptible; for a thing that is putrid, cannot be corrupted more, nor be
altered, for it is of no value; contrariwise, a preservative cannot in the
least be putrefied, for it i^ like to Gold that never becomes rusty. They
mutually are Separated from each other, so that each of them fulfills and
performs what is proper to it; But thus much we have thought fit to mention,
because the Dung or Excrements are able in time to overcome the preservatives,
which thing cannot so come to pass in dead bodies, and because they are
unbowelled, or if they are not as yet unbowelled, they are indeed coagulated by
death, even as the blood Separated from the Vains congeals.

We call this Preservative Elixir, as if it were Ferment, with which bread is
fermented and is digested by the Body. Its Virtue is a Preservative of the Body
in that same state wherein it finds it, and in that same Vigor and Essence;
for this is the Nature of Preservatives, viz. that they defend from corruption,
yet not by mending or bettering, but by preserving only. But whereas they also
take away Diseases, this is done by the subtilty that they possess; Likewise
they do not only preserve, but also conserve; for they have a two fold Labor
and Office, viz. to prevent Diseases, and to conserve the Essence it self in
its own State.

Nor do they thus only in humane Bodies, but likewise in all sensible Bodies.
Thus also dead Wood may equally as well be preserved from corruption, as a Body
that is seasoned with Balsome; nor is the conservation of Herbs in their
Essence any otherwise then a certain live Body is; for those conservations that
are done to Herbs, do conserve them in the same Essence that they find them
in, so that they are still green, and remain equally as fresh as in the Fields
or Gardens, etc. even to the fifth or sixth Age. If they be taken together with
their Flowers, they also conserve them, and so if with their fruits, they
conserve them. Neither is there so great reason of wondering thereat, for it is a
thing possible for dead Wood to live again, and for Iron to be fixed so, as
never more to contract Rust; so likewise for Sulphur to be made incombustible,
all which are very contrary to the understanding of a simple man. The cause of
all these we set down more at large and more sundamentally in the Book of
Conservations. Nor are they to be judged of as impossible, for many more things
that are esteemed impossible, may be most assuredly accomplished. We will
therefore speak of the conservation with Balsome, by the destinctions of Ages
as follows.

Of Preservation and Conservation by Elixirs.
WE will not write of the first Elixir, which conserveth the Body in that
Essence as it finds it in; suffers it not to putrefie, no^ to be infirm; but
conserves it in the spirit of life, so that no accident can befall it. Likewise
it brings it unto the third Age or more. As concerning its use, the operation
upon dead bodies is different from that upon living, for those must lie in the
Balsome night and day, whereas the living and sound bodies neither may nor can
at all do so.

And therefore this Elixir is to be looked on as being useful only for life; as
for the Heart and those place chiefly in which the life is most vigourous and
depending, for it is ordained for the Spirit of Life that dispersed through out
the whole body, and it preserve the Spirit of Life by that Virtue by which the
dea^ Body or Carkase is kept from putrefaction; for, as ^ Wound or Ulcer may be
outwardly preserved from putrefying, and from evil, so likewise the Intrinsecal
body is disposed, and capable of being preserved from all adversity. We do
therefore so frame the Elixir, that it may Operate upon the Spirit of Life,
like as Ferment Operates in Paste or Dough; and upon the body, even as when a
Tree is tinged in the Root, in such wise as its Color may never depart
therefrom. After this manner is the whole body preserved; for the Tincture is
either more or less dispersed, and penetrates into all the Members, even as
the whole Metal is tinged into Gold, and is so made Gold, or is preserved from
Rusting. Thus is it in the Conserved Body, there is no Member but it full of the
Elixir.

Now then, when the Virtue is thus dispersed and received throughout the whole
body, and does thereby exercise its Operative power, there cannot happen any
Corruption by putting any thing thereto, for the Life of every member is full
of Elixir, even as the tinged body is full of the Balsam. But you are to
understand that it is not necessary that the whole body be balsamed by taking he
Elixir; for where the Spirit of Life is only environed there with in its root,
it is sufficient as to the Conservation of the body.

Now come we to the Practick part; and first of all to Treat of the Elixir that
does Conserve the whole body from putrefaction by the Conditions and properties
of the Virtues of Balsam. Then we will speak of that Elixir which preserves the
body by the potential Virtues of Salt. And Thirdly, of the Elixir of Sweetness
that supports and sustains the body in its Conservation. Fourthly, We Will Teach
that Elixir which enters man's body with the virtues of a Quintessence. Fifthly,
There shall be another Elixir added that is truly noble by reason of the
Virtues of its most great Subtilty; for it resists all the enemies of Nature,
by which resistency it permits not the body by any means to slide into
Diseases. And then for a Conclusion, we will adjoyn that Elixir which (by the
Virtues of its own proper nature) is endowed with such like Conservative
Qualities.

Of the first Elixir, viz. Of Balsame.
TAke of true and the very best Balsame, (well known to us) one pound; Let it
be put into a Glass, which cover with a blind Head, and pour in together
therewith two ounces of the Quintessence of Gold, and one ounce and an half of
the Essence of the greater Circulatum; all which, let be digested together at a
gentle fire, so as the Vapors may ascend day and night. Then afterward
increase the fire, that some drops may adhere and stick, and may fall down
drop-by-drop for two months; then let them remain in Horse-dung for four
months, that so they may have their digestion without intermission. This done,
the Elixir is completed. You are to understand that this Balsame or Elixir, is
become a ferment, which is to be collected and immixed in the root of Life, and
has the power of Reducing the Life in to a good Essence, so as no Nature can
be able to resist it. Even as Arsenick overcomes Nature for evil, so contrarily
this Elixir overcomes it for good, by defending the body. The dead body is
preserved safe by that Odor, so as it cannot in the least putresie when it is
put into its Sepulcher, and covered, that it cannot Evaporate; How much more
then do the Virtues of a Living body remain hereby: Thus much may suffice to
have spoken in this place.

Of the Elixir of Salt; by the Virtues of which, the Body is Conserved.
THere is no less power and virtue in Salt, then in Balsame, whereof we have
spoken; and that for this reason, because Flesh is preserved by Salt from
putrefaction for many days, years, and a long time. And that, sundry ways,
and by one way more then by another. By the same Basis and Rule will it be
possible to Conserve and Preserve the body; Not that we advise the Use of Salt
in such a manner as it is used in dead flesh but it is necessary to make
thence-from the Elixir of Salt, which does materially penetrate the Spirit of
Life, so, that it lives by the Salt, even as salted Flesh; for this Elixir is
so subtle, that it may be compared to the Spirit of Life. They two do so
straightly and closely agree in One Conjunction, insomuch that the One is
tempered or seasoned with the Other unto perfection; (even as Salt makes some
Food favoury) without which it could not possibly be brought to perfection in
Unity. This therefore is to be noted, That the Elixir of Salt is a ferment, in
which there is a certain Tincture whereby the whole body is penetrated. It Is
also an inconsumeable thing, and is not in the least absumed (with natural
Things) in the body by the digestion; but is fix, like to Glass in the fire,
which does not at all perish by boiling or fusing. This fix Elixir does so fix
the body, that it becomes permanent in Life, no otherwise then as when a metal
is fixed, which, no moisture, no Corrosivity, or such like can hurt afterward,
or bring to be rusty: So therefore, it may be gathered from hence, That the
Elixir hereof is as fix a body as Gold, whereinto no unclean thing can
penetrate, so as to hurt it; We will therefore describe the Practick of the
Elixir of Salt, after this manner;

Take Salt excellently well prepared, the whitest and cleanest, put it in a
Pelican with so much quantity of Aqua Solvens, or the dissolving Water, as may
be six times its weight; let them be digested together in Horse-dung for a
month; then afterward let the dissolving Water be Separated by distillation,
and be again poured on, and be Separated as before, this let be done so often
until the Salt be converted into an Oil, whereto let be added an eighth part of
the Quintessence of Gold, and let them be digested together in a Pelican and
in Horse-dung for four months, and let them be Circulated for a month after;
then add another part of Circulated Wine, and let them so remain in Ascension
yet a month longer. This time being over, thou shall have the Elixir of Salt,
of the which we have made for ourselves a memorial as a pattern, for the
succouring and lightning of our Ancient days.

Of the Third Elixir. viz. Of Sweetness.
WE are certain, That bodies may be preserved from Corruption by Sweetness;
but as to the Virtues that it is to be done by, we deliver them in the
Treatises of the Generations of Honey, Sugar, Manna, Tronus, (the sweetest kind
of dew) and such like, which we will not Repeat in this place because of the
Writings of the Ancients. We are able to Transmute Sweets into an Elixir, the
preparation of which does rather conserve the lively body in its Conserved
Essence, then the Languid or decayed body. For it is the property of all
Specific Sweetnesses neither to be Corrupted, nor do they suffer this body to
be Corrupted, unless by things Contrary, thereby they are made ob^oxious to
Corruption; as for Example, Out of Honey and Bread, Vermin and Emmets are
generated; and in like manner out ^^ Sugar and Coagulated Milk. Out of Manna
and Wal^ is made a Corruption like to Mud or Dung. Many more such like
Compositions may be made by which the Sweetnesses pass into Corruption. To
prevent which this is our Intention and Experience, viz. That (i^ that
Composition) such a thing be taken as may not hinder the Sweetness to remain
in its proper Essence and such as may be without the Corruption of any other
things. By this way and means it has the Virtue of a Balsame, to Conserve the
dead fleshy bodies of Carcasses, and other things. For such a like Sweetness is
the Balsame of the Earth, and othersome there are of Dew, for in them has it
its Original. We will therefore set down the Elixir of Thronus, because there is
no Sweetness comparable hereunto; It does also contain more Mysteries then is
credible, as we set down in the Book of Generations. By the preparation of
which may be Collected the ways of preparing other Sweetnesses.

The Preparation of Thronus is thus;
Take as much Thronus as you will, which let be put in a Pelican, in digestion
at the Sun for two months, (but twill be better for a whole Summer) Afterward
let be added a fourth part of the Quintessence of Gold, and so let them be
Circulated together for two months, then keep it. Albeit this way be very
short, yet nevertheless the Elixir hereby made, is very wonderful in very old
folk.

Of the Fourth Elixir; which is, Of Quintessences.
IN like manner may Quintessences be brought into an Elixir which Conserves
both living and dead bodies, like as Balsame does; We make but a very brief
Rehearsal thereof in this place, because it is before demonstrated in the Process
of Quintessences; So therefore we will proceed here a little further and set down
such things as we have noted to make for Preservation and Conservation. Then
out of the Elixirs of those processes, we will teach the Composition of one
Elixir, fully as profitable to the body as the Three precedent are; Verily you
are to underdand that this Elixir of Quintessences has in it a secret Virtue,
which daily tends to a Restoring, and which endeavors to Renovate and Restore
the whole body; Therefore it Operates more then a bare Conservation, for it
also Renovates, yet not so perfectly as we have mentioned above of
Quintessences and Arcanaes, but is of meaner Virtues, and that because the
Conservative and Renewing property of them cannot be together, but yet by this
way is Renovation disposed for Conservation, thus;

Take the Quintessence of Celondine, of Bawme, of each two ounces; the
Quintessence of Gold, the Quintessence of Mercury, of each half an ounce; the
Quintessence of Saffron, and of all the Mirobolanes, of each one ounce; Let
them be all well mixed together, and be shut in with a blind Head, and remain in
the digestion of Sun for two months; Then add of the Quintessence of Wine, and
the Magistery thereof, of each one ounce and an half, and let them be digested
again for a Month, as above; then keep it as a Treasure, not only for
Preservation, but also for Restoration.

The Fifth is called the Elixir of Subtilty.
NOw we account it expedient to set down the Elixir of Purity or Subtilty; for
it Conserves by the power of its great Purity and Cleanness, such as is the
Corrected Oil of the Philosophers; this suffers nothing that shall be anointed
therewith, to putrify: The like does the Corrected Oil of Bricks (or Oleanum
Laterinum) effect, and many others; and yet it is not their property to preserve
from putrefaction, but they acquire this thing, and get such a property from
the Preparation and Labor: So likewise Distilled or Corrected Wine permits not
to putrefie, nor does Digested Wine; nor is it at all changed by the fire. The
Water of Honey does (by its preparation) resist putrefaction, as to what
appertains to sensible bodies; but the Crude Substance thereof does not do so,
but is subject to all putrefaction; We therefore set down an Elixir of
Subtility, forasmuch as man's body is (just like as Mercury it self which is
volatile, is fixed with its own Water, and made permanent) also fixed into a
Constancy and permanency; Now although that this same thing may be done by many
other things then what we here describe, Yet nevertheless we will mention such
only as are known unto us by Experience; Nor will we for this Cause detract any
thing from the others, but only we say thus much, That as yet all of them have
not been known unto us, nor been Experienced by us. The process of this Elixir
is thus;

Take Oil Olive, Honey, and Vinum Ardens, or burning Wine, of each one pound:
Destil them altogether according to the Chemical manner, and that thrice.
Afterward Separate all the Phlegm from the Oils, which are distinguishable by
the many Colors; put all these Oils into a Pelican, and add to them of the
Quintessence of Bawme, and of Celondine, a Third part; digest them for a Month,
Then keep it for your use: There is no Sensible body is able to resist it, no
nor Insensible, and that for many Causes and properties which we will not at
all set down in this place.

The Sixth is the Elixir of Propriety.
IN like sort may a perfect Elixir be extracted out of Natural Things, as out
of Myrrh, Saffron, and Aloepatick; but as for those Vittues that it proceeds
from, we describe in their Generations; We only mention the process here,
omitting their Original, which we elsewhere do often Treat of.

Take of Myrrh, Aloepatick, and Saffron, of each one quarter of a pound; the
which being put together in a Pelican and placed in Sand, let them ascend most
gently for two Months, then at length Separate the Oil from the feces by an
Alembick without Adustion or burning. This Oil must be digested for a Month
together with Circulatum in equal weight, then (after) keep it: In this Elixir
are all the Virtues of the Natural Balsame, yea, and such a Conservative Virtue
for old Folk, more then is fit to ascribe unto it, because there does not only
proceed one Age therefrom, but Four, Seven, or Ten, etc. It Is scarce possible to
express its force and natures; but it is in my Judgment sufficiently enough
Dilucidated, nor do we think it need any more ample Interpretation.

The End of the Eighth Book, etc.
THE Ninth BOOK OF THE ARCHIDOXIS.
Of Extrinsecalls.
HAving in the Precedent Books, treated of Intrinsecal Diseases; it is expedient
now for us to write of those Diseases as proceed from without, and to set down
some remedies for them. And although we insert nothing (in these Books) of the
Origenal of those Internal and also External Diseases, yet notwithstanding we
will set down the Originals of those Medicaments, and then afterward the
composition of such like remedies for external Diseases. Some remedies are
only for Wounds, with which a Wound may be cured in twenty four hours; which
you are to understand thus;

When there is a Wound made, it needs nothing else but that it be again knit
together, or conjoined on such wise, as two pieces of board are knit together
with Glue. Do not at any rate let Wounds lie open, but endeavor to replenish
them with flesh, for it is rather a thing Rustical then Medical. Consider that
when the lips of a wound are joined together as two pieces of Boards stick
together with glue, they are even more then half whole already; the which is to
be necessarily done by a certain Medicament, so contracting both sides of the
Wound together, that it cannot be better and more fitly done; Thence it follows
that where the lips touch each other by the compression of the Medicament
helping Nature, there is the healing completed; insomuch that there is no
Wound wherein the Bone is not broken) is so evil, but will easily be healed in
twenty four hours. But the Bones do not permit themselves to be knit so
together as the flesh does; therefore we speak not at all of them! in this
place. For example understand us thus, viz. when any Member is plainly cut off,
then (before that the Vains be dead, but whilst they are yet warm and fresh)
let them be presently moistened with that Medicament, and let the wound be
conjoined, and so the sides thereof will be so knit together (as two Sticks are
conglutinated with Glue) and be healed and united. Thus is the operation of
this Medicament, and herewith dot^ Nature cure so soon because of the great
resiccation, or drying up of such like Medicines, and it is by that Virtue (which
we have before spoken of) that it heals. Moreover you are to know, that an
Incarnative Medicament is not at all to be used for Wound, nor any
mumdificative, or Attractive, because that those extract, and are to draw out
all Putrid Fluxes into much Sa^ies.

Furthermore the gaping or caveity of a Wound is to be filled with flesh; now
that is a long time doing, and consequently very dangerously and without any
Mastership. The same is also to be conceived of in old Ulcers, which are a long
time laden (as it were) and burdened with fluxes, whereby it comes to pass,
that they cannot be cured without many accidents, and exceeding great
difficulty, and sometimes never. So then it is most necessarily expedient that
the Medicament of them, be made of those things which we have spoken of, and
which do likewise by a certain force compress and cling together the Skin and
widenesses Likewise in the curing of Ulcers, you are to consider, that the
Generation of Flesh is necessary, but that cannot possibly be done by
compression, or closing together (as we mentioned in Wounds) in Ulcers, as it
Eistulaes and such like; all which are to be cured by the Virtue of such like
Medicaments, as anon. Therefore we describe and set down two Fundamentals, for
such an opening or gaping of the Skin, the one is an Incarnative, the other is
an Exiccative or dryer up.

Now let us speak also of the other deformities of the Skin, as Scars,
Morphews, Serpigees, the Pannus or Birth-mark, the Stains and Leapry, and such
like Discases proceeding from the Skin, the which we advise the cure of after
this manner. First of all we ordai^ and appoint the Skin to be pulled off, even
as the Skin of a Beast is stripped off, then (afterward) to be clad with new by
a convenient Medicament. For it is to be understood, that the Skin must be took
away by a certain Medicament, and a new Skin pure and unspotted be generated of
another Color; as with that Medicament that follows hereafter, whereby much of
Flesh and moisture is not to be attracted; thus are all Spots to be removed, by
the way thus described. As to the taking away of their Original, we make no
mention in this place, nor as to their entrance or beginning, for it is
elsewhere Treated of, nor does it bring either benefit or damage to our
present intention or Doctrine. There are many other Distempers, as the Cancer,
Buboes and such like, which require their Peculiar Medicament for the drawing
out of the^ Originalitie, and the total purging out and cleaning away their
defilements, the which is exceedingly well performed by the Specifical
Attractive; then afterward there is need of Consolidation, the which we have
set down in our Discourse of Fistula's and such like.

But now the Ruptures, etc. breaking of Bones and the like are to be
consolidated with a Stiptical Attractive only, the which Medicament we shall
not here repeat as having spoken there of elsewhere* In like manner there are
found to be many superfluous Crescences, as Strumaes or the King's Evil,
Kernels, etc. the which must first be evacuated or emptyed, and then be cured
afterward.

We will therefore divide Surgery into three Parts or Cures, and refer one
part to Wounds, the second to Ulcers, and the third to Spots or Blemishes; as
for the Cancer, we shall Cure it with a Specifical Attractive only, and
afterward with these Medicaments which we shall Teach here following.

A Remedy for Wounds.
IF we would attain to such a Medicament as may (by its own proper Nature) so
knit the Lips and sides of Wounds together, as two pieces of Boards are with
Glue, then it is necessary that it be done by the greatest Siccity and
Stipticknesse, as may serve for the Flesh only, as follows;

Take Samech excellently well burnt and calcined into a Whiteness, whereto add
Circulatum minus; then afterward destil it, that a most dry Caput mortuum may
remain in the bottom, and that the Glass be wholly red hot, then pour on fresh
Circulatum again, as before; and thus do so long until the Circulatum come off
altogether sweet therefrom, as it is in it self, then suffer it to be resolved
by it self. That which shall be resolved, is this Remedy here spoken of for
Wounds, and may be Entitled, a Balsam for a Wound; for Balsam (in our Common
Germain Speech) is as much as to say Baldtrusammen, that is presently
conjoined, and not according to the Latin Idioine. We shall not make any
singular description of the Virtues of that same Medicament, but do make this
General Assertion, that it is fit for all Wounds, as being what we have cured
many hundreds of Wounds withal, by a bare washing, and that above what is
credible to be done by Nature.

A Remedy for an Ulcer.
WE are also to understand, that Ulcers may in like manner be compressed or
closed together by the Virtue of such a Medicament, together with a Generative
Virtue. Nor do we imitate the writings of the Anticuts for their writings are
malicious and wicked. This therefore is to be considered of, viz. a
constraining or causing that to enter into the composition, and that on this
wise;

Take the aforesaid Balsome for Wounds, and also the Balsome in like manner
made of rust, as that of Samech, of each one pound, mix these together, and add
thereto one pound and half of the Oil of Iron, all being thoroughly permixt, let
be put upon Ulcers, and let them be washed daily, as shall seem expedient, and
let a Consolidative Plaster, such as we teach for Ulcers, be applied; proceed
therefore on with your Ligatures, even to the end of the cure; for this is to
be heeded, that the Members are to be (as it were) drawn together or comprest
with Ligatures, which thing we largely enough teach in other places. And
therefore let thus much suffice for Ulcers.

A Remedy against Marks or Blemishes.
WE have sufficiently described the taking off the Skin, by a Specifical
Corrosive, and together with that, the Cautery how it is to be done and used.
And after the taking away of the Skin and the Blemish with it, then the cure
thereof is as follows;

Take the aforesaid Balsam for an Ulcer, to this, add of Washed Turpentine, of
the Oil of Worms, and of the Oil of Eggs, equal parts; with this mixture must
all the Flesh that is bared of its Skin, be washed. After this Cure there is no
more requisite, for this is the property of that Medicament, viz. to induce
together with the new Skin, a new Color, and a Natural hardness, in so much
that it can no more be defiled with the aforegoing Blemishes.

Now although such like Stains and Blemishes may be removed by many Waters, as
the Water of Bean Flowers, of Sigillum Mariae and such like, and also with
Mansdung, but yet these are not for our purpose, for they do not at all times
answer our expectation, and besides all blemishes are much more perfectly taken
away with those things which we have already set down.

Nor has any one reason to admire that we set down so few, and so brief
Remedies for the whole Chyrurgery; for we do not imitate the ways of the
Surgeons, such as the Ancients have written of, and which the Modern Surgeons
do also make use of, as well as they. For when we followed that Medicinal way
or Method, we could never (by that kind of Physicallity) find or ever perceive
any thing well founded or certain. But we have made use of our own Remedies
according to experience, and have by this way sound out the best Medicines of
all Surgery; even as we have comprehended them in this place, under three
process only.

And albeit that there are to be found more disease then are here mentioned,
as, the Bulla, Allopecia, etc yet are they comprehended under Blemishes, and
Cicatrizes, and are to be cured as those others are; for which there are many
causes not here mentioned, but are les^ for our use or practice, but we are
mindeful even o^ them; for when we had seen that Wounds (of which we have had
many hundreds and thousands under our hands) were so speedily and exceeding
wonderfull^ cured with these Remedies; what reason is there for us to imitate
the long and vain processes of the Ancients, and so be forgetful of our
Neighbors. And what cause have we to make use of the Mundificatives, Washings,
Sutures, Ligatures, Corrosives and such like, when as they are all
Iunimicitious to Wounds, and do most miserably deprave and spoil them; the
causes whereof we do largly enough explain in the Book of Wounds. What need is
there of the diverse Emplastors, Cerots, Unguents and the like, that we should
take them even for the cure of Ulcers, as also the Ligatious, Unctions? etc.
all which to reckon up is tedious, for they teach nothing else but a Prolix,
intricate and foolish way to walk by, the end of which is to enquire and to
find out many Accidents by their foolishness; for it is by reason of our
superstition, that we so much credit the Ancients; For verily it is not the
silly boasting nor useless writeings (for they can never Recompense or make
amends for the lost paper employed about them) can inform, in Surgery, what a
Fistula, Cancer, Ulcer and such like are, and so likewise to assign to each of
them their peculiar Medicament; for they may all of them be sufficiently and
exactly cured and healed by one only Remedy, as the External Leapry, the
Alopecia, Serpigo, Blemishes or Marks and such like, as Pustules, ^^chings, and
Cicatrizes, all which may be abundantly removed by one only Medicament, and
one only Practick; as likewise the Artetick Wounds of dartings, of Missive
Weapons and Bullets and such like Wounds. And so we will conclude our Surgery
with these few Medicaments, and put a period thereunto.

THE KEY OR Tenth BOOK OF THE ARCHIDOXIS Taken out of a most Ancient Germane
Manuscript.
The Preface of the Author.
ALthough we were minded to Write our Archidoxis, and other our Books aptaining
to Medicine, somewhat more plain and more clear then is done; yet because the
highest Medicinal Universal Arcanaes cannot be prepared without true Chemical
Manual Operations, and be brought unto the desired Exaltation of Degrees; for
it is well known to most, how the whole World is in a manner addicted to Riches
and worldly Wealth, and does only with all their might drive at Tinctures, and
the Transmutations of Metals, to scrape together abundance of Gold and Silver;
Now, for the attainment hereof, they do very much need true Chemical
Preparations, the which they would willingly find in our Archidoxis, briefly
and without labor.) Therefore, for this reason, viz. That we may meet with so
great an evil as might arise from thence, and may crush their Malice; We even
concealed our meaning in those Books, according to the Ancient Philosophic
Custom, and Cabalistical Form, and have yet nevertheless made demonstration
clearly to the good and well accomplished, but obscurely enough to the
Contemners and Impious men; And yet it is not only the Lacrymists, that gape on
Gold, are the cause of our Cabalistical Philosophic Writing, but also that
most great Troop of the Sect of Galen and Avicen, for they would very willingly
make use of our Medicaments and Arcanaes, for the driving away of Chronical
Diseases, (which are uncurable by their Galenical way) Provided, that they
could find a brief, sure, and easy Method for the Preparation and
Administration of them, without renouncing the old Error of the Ethnicks and
false Christians, and could attribute the Honors, Fame, and Riches which they
get thereby to the Galenical Writings, and to themselves only, and thereupon
(out of an envious mind) suppress my Name and famous Deeds, and vindicate
themselves by their Writings, and (because I say that that Art proceeds from
me) affirm that they secretly possess the very same thing.

For, whereas they are Ancient Doctors, they will not by any means seem
(themselves being so Aged) to be, and publicly profess themselves Disciples
of a more gross Wit, and younger Scholar, (whom they all Envy because he
subverteth their Foundations) Therefore, because of their Sloathfulness,
Ambition, Envy, and Hatred, together with their Ingratitude, I have thus Taught
and Reasoned in the Archidoxis, and my other Books; After the aforesaid manner,
so well liking me, (the which I shall at the last day approve and justify
before God and my Conscience) that so those as would attain to the Foundation
of my Archidoxis, may publicly call themselves Theophrastists, and acknowledge
me to be their Monarch, may follow me as to Laboring, may frequent my School,
and may contrariwise cast away their old Fathers under the stall: And although
they may privily get some Experiment from some miserable simple Country Clown,
or elsewhere, yet they shall not understand the great Arcanaes of Administering
my Medicaments, and so consequently will purchase more Disgrace then Honor
therefrom. And therefore although some Old Wi^e has told them, That the
Chicken, or the young of the Swallows that Cranium, and viscus Quercinus, etc.
are a certain Cure for the Falling Sickness (as in very deed it is) yet shall
thou not herewith Cure it. But whence is it, or what is the Cause? It Is this,
because thou understandest not the way of the Administration, nor the great
Ilech, nor will thou be able to Learn it of thy Galen, unless thou frequentest
my School, and learnest Philosophy according to Christ, and not according to
Fiscus, or a Promoter. Now then seeing that Viscus Quercinus does not afford
thee Help, thou supposest it to be too weak by it self, and therefore thou
Correctest it with other Herbs, and Composest a great Mixture of Sixty parts,
or more; these thou do Digest, and Purgest the Excrements by them; but thou
can not Expel the Disease therewith, because thou understandest not neither
the Simple, nor the Compound, nor the Administration.

But, Would they have thankfully accepted of my Dostrine, and cast their Red
Cap, or Fools Coat (that they have received of Galen) behind the Door, and
would withal have submitted themselves under my Discipline, I would have put on
them a better Cap, yea, the Cap of even Fortunatus himself, in the which does
lie more Art then in all the other Writings besides, insomuch, that they should
not need to put it off in the Presence of any body, but be able to Cure
Chronical Diseases equally as well as Fortunatus Restored the Kings Daughter.

But indeed, they are unworthy of any better, and are to be Accused (as
culpable) of their own harm because they have known nothing of the Magnalia,
and Mysteries of Natures Sanctuary, nor of that Celestial Treasury which is
liberally Revealed to me from above in these last Times and Seasons of Grace;
the which things do make a true Adam, and wonderful Physician according to the
Enochian days, in the understanding and preception of new Generation; But
those Ignorant braggers have Refused it, and therefore I will no farther pity
them, but leave them in their Ignorance: But, because there is no doubt but that
amongst such a great multitude of men (concerning whom there is mention made in
the 4th. of Esdras) the Lord God will reserve some very small number of some of
his Elect; who will be desirous of faithfully following my Theophrastical
Doctrine, and of loving the Truth, and of helping their Neighbors in their
Necessities and Diseases, out of a true unfeigned Christian Love, and not for
Gain and Ambition, but for the pure Love of God: And are also desirous, That
the Wonderful Works of God may be made apparent by the Light of Nature, (albeit
all men are not born under such a Constellation, as to apprehend the meaning of
our Books (without the help of God) though they diligently study them) Because
therefore of the sincere Intention and Love of such, and that they may
comprehend the true Foundation of our chiefest Writings, and Arcanaes
concerning Medicine, and may arrive to an happy end; And that the most precious
Treasure of Nature that God has Revealed unto me may not be wholly buried with
me; We will therefore Write this little Book for them, and will therein clearly
show the Foundation, or Basis of our Archidoxis, and Universalities, and will
Teach the Preparation of the several Arcanaes, the Quintessences; the First
Entities, and Magisteries.

But, that this Clear Light may not come to the Ungrateful and the Unworthy, I
do exhort all such as have the Possession or Understanding of this Book, and do
bind thee by the most great Sacrament, and the Oath thou have made to God in
thy Baptism, that thou even Concealest all these things privily, and as the
most noble Treasure of Nature; and that thou do not admit any Unworthy
Person thereunto, but that thou Honor it as a most blessed Talent, and
servest the Necessities of thy Neighbor therewithal.

The Lord God bestow his Blessing and Grace, that whosoever Partakes hereof,
may rightly use it.

THE Tenth BOOK OF THE ARCHIDOXIS OF THEOPHRASTUS, Comprehended in Ten several
Chapters.
CHAP. I. Of the Separation of the Elements.
THE four Elements are commixt with each other in all things, but yet (in every
thing) one only of those four is perfect and fix, and that Element is the
Predestined Element, wherein the Quintessence, Virtue and Quality does lodge;
but the rest are imperfect Elements, and as a bare Simple Element, wherein
there is no more virtue then is another simple Element; and they all are as an
habitation of the true, fix, and perfect Element; on which account also they
are called, Things Qualified: And whereas some do imagine the body to be the
true Element and Quality, and that it discovers in some sort the virtue of the
true Element, the reason thereof is this, because the body (and likewise the
three imperfect Elements) is tinged and Qualified (each according to its
nature) by the fix, perfect, and Predestined Element, or Quintessence, as
with its Inhabitant.

For Example: In some things the Element of Water bears rule, in other bodies
the Fire is chief, in others the Earth, and in othersome the Air, So then, if
you would have the fix Predestined Element Separated, it is expedient that the
House thereof be broken open; But now this breaking up the House, or
dissolution, is performed by several ways, as is clearly spoken of in my
Metamorphosis, in the Book of the Death of Things: If the House be dissolved by
Aqua Fortis, or Strong Water, Calcinations, and such like; this always it to
be observed, that the dissolved be separated from the fix by vulgar
distillations, for then the body of the Quintessence comes over in the manner
of Phlegm, but the fix Element abides in the bottom; But whereas we take no
great Care about the House or Habitation, but diligendy Enquire for the
Inhabitant only, it is needful that we find him in the fix Predestinate Element,
and from thence extract him according to the manner of a Quintessence; and so
consequently that fix Element is to be dissolved by other more powerful
Artifices then by Calcinations, Sublimations, etc. and the Pure be Separated
from the Impure.

The Pure is the Quintessence, but the Impure is the Tartareous Superfluity
which is permixt in every Generation; Concerning which, see the Book of
Tartarous Diseases.

But whereas my Theory is more largely Opened in my other Books of the
Archidoxis, my Metamorphosis, and of the Generations mentioned in our Book
Paramirum; therefore I will not be (in the least) tedious, but briefly disclose
the Practick: Reduce a Metal (prepared according to the Process in the Book of
the Death of Things) into a Liquid Substance with Aqua Fortis, according to the
manner which we have Taught in the Book of the Separation of the Elements; and
Separate the Three imperfect Elements by very many Cohobations and
Putrefactions; then the fix Element (of what kind soever it be) remains in the
bottom; and so those Four Elements are rightly Separated.

CHAP. II. Of the Quintessence.
ABstract the Volatile (which comes over in the Separation of the Elements)
from the fix, oftentimes, that so the Quintessence which partly ascended with
the Phlegm, may be again Co-united. Take then the fix Element that remained
after the Separation of the Three Imperfect Elements (what kind soever it be
of) and dissolve it in its appropriated Water; each according to its Nature, as
we have spoken of in the Archidoxis concerning a Quintessence; keep it in the
greatest puterefaction, distill it by Cohobation, the rest per Descensum;
Putrify it yet a little more, distill and conjoyn all, and distill it in B. M.
even to an Oylinesse;

Then corrupt or break it with the Subtle Spirit of Wine by boiling, then the
Impure will settle to the bottom, and the Pure will Swim at top, Separate it by
a Tritory, or Separating Glass, and that it may therewithal loose the Nature of
the Aqua Fortis, pour on a greater Quantity of the Spirit of Wine, the which
abstract often until the Quintessence becomes Sweet; Lastly wash it off with
Common Cold Water; After the like manner are you to conceive, of Marchasites,
Stones, Rosins, Herbs, Flesh, Excrements and Fix Things, viz. that (first of
all) the three imperfect Elements be Separated, and that the fix Element be
farther proceeded with according to the Doctrine of the Book of the
Quintessence.

When we speak of an Eating or Coroding Water, understand Acetum mixed with the
Spirit of Wine, and such a Spirit as being often abstracted from the Spirit of
Salt Nitre, becomes an Acetum. The fix Elements of Marcasites are to be
dissolved, therein to be putrefied and Elevated by an Alembick, and then at
length be corrupted or broken with Spirit of Wine, that the Impure may fall to
the bottom, and Separate it self from the Pure.

As concerning the Essence of Gems, where we speak of Radicated Vinegar,
understand us thus, viz. that you have a sharp Acetum Corrected with Tiles or
Bricks, and oftentimes Abstracted from the Tartarised Matrix of Acetum. Your
Gems are to be first Calcined by Sulphur, then dissolve them therein, and
Putrefy them, and then Separate the Pure from the Impure by breaking them with
Spirit of Wine.

An Essence is easily perfected out of Fruits, Herbs and Roots; so that you
dissolve the Imperfect Elements, by the highest Secret Putrefaction of the
highest heat. Then shall thou putrefie them in Dung, and drive out per
descensum, all that is able to go out, and from thence Abstract by a
Destillation in a B. all the huttfull imperfect Body of the moisture, then will
the Predestined Element remain in the bottom; this must be not Separated from
the Superfluous Impurity, by corrupting or breaking it with its own Spirit, or
with the Spirit of Wine, the which Spirit draw off, and thou shall have the
Quintessence pure.

The Extraction of the Quintessence out of Salts, as Vitriol, Common Salt, Salt
Nitre, Venus or Antimony, etc. is done thus, viz. Cohobate them with their own
proper Liquor or Water, oftentimes Putrefie them with the Phlegm, and abstract
the Body thencefrom in the manner of Phlegm, even to the fix Spirit. This then
dislove in Water, or in their own proper Water, and (in the heat) Saparate the
Pure from the Impure with Spirit of Wine.

CHAP. III. Of Magisteries.
MAgisteries do well deserve to be called Mysteries because of the great
Tinctures they show in an appropriated Menstruum, viz. in Acetum, in Wine, and
as we there mentioned, so likewise do we here enjoin, that respect is to be had
only to such concordances or uniformities as are commodious for the extraction
of the Magisteries, for if you take Destilled Vinegar, you shall not tinge
Water, but wine into Acetum, because the Tincture or Vinegar was made of Wine.
Did thou but well and rightly know the Magistery of Acetum, thou would
likewise well enough understand the Book of Magisteries.

In the Magistery of Vinegar this is to be considered, That first of all you
make the Tincture, that is, the Vinegar out of Corrupted Wine by that serment
that is allied or a kin thereto naturally; as for Example, by Tartar; then with
a small Quantity of that same Acetum may you tinge a most great Quantity of
Wine, (first corrupted and putrefied) into the best Vinegar in a short time. If
therefore you intend to convert Merals into a Magistery, and plainly to tinge
the whole body into an Essence, it is expedient that you take a chief and Open
Metal, to which all the other Metals are by Nature allied; the which you must
corrupt or break in its own Matrix which is placed in Water, and is termed the
Mother of all Metals, and you must purge it from the superfluous Elements, and
reduce it into its first liquid Ens, that is, into a most sharp Metaline
Acetum; as often as all the Metals are digested therein, they are necessarily
Transmuted thereby into Acetum, that is, into a Quintessence. But now, even as
Wine must be in some sort before corrupted, if you would have good Vinegar
quickly prepared thence-from; even so in like manner must the Metaline bodies
be before corrupted, or putrefied and mortified, as is spoken of in the
Metamorphosis in the Book of the Death of Things; and then are they truly
called Potable.

After this same manner also are the Magisteries of Marcasites to be prepared
even as the other Magisteries are in which said Marcasites is (in a manner)
more Virtue to be found then is in Metals; and by our dissolving Water is to be
understood the Water of Salt.

But the Magistery of Gems is this, viz. You must first Calcine them with
Sulphur for four Hours, then Reverberate them, and afterward burn them with
Nitre, then boil them with Simple Water eight Hours, Filtre, and Coagulate it,
and Extract it with Spirit of Wine.

The Magisterie out of Gums and Rozins (as for Example, out of Turpentine and
Amber) is made after this manner; First, boil them in Spirit of Wine, then
Corrupt them in new Spirit of Wine commixt with a dissolving Water, viz. of
Salt; and Distill it thencefrom.

The Magistery of Herbs likewise, as also of all Spices and Fruits is thus
done; First of all, let them be fermented like Must, or new Wine, then draw off
from them a Spirit, as from the feces of Wine; in that Spirit digest the
putrefied Herb, oftentimes renewed with new Herbs until the Spirit become four
times the Quantity it was. But because there is frequent mention made in our
Archidoxis of First Entities, and whereas the chiefest Foundation is hidden in
them, we will together therewith briefly adjoyn the preparation of our Water of
Circulated Salt, which is thereto requisite, but was omitted.

The Preparation of the Sal circulatum, OR, Circulated Salt.
WE have sufficiently showed and declared in our other Books, That the Water or
Sea, is the true Element, as being the true Mother of all the Metals, and has
received out of its own first Ens the Sperm of the Three Principles, of which
no body has made any mention before me, but built their principles from Sulphur
and Mercury only, they neglected the mentioning of the Third Principle, viz. Of
Salt which lies in the Sea: But Experience being my Tutor, I have also in my
other Books briefly hinted, That the first Ens or the Quintessence of the
Element of Water, is the Center of Metals and Minerals; and I have elsewhere
added, That every Fruit must die in that in which its life is, that so it may
receive a new better life afterward, and so (by the deposition or laying off
the old body) may be reduced into the first Ens, We will therefore here add
the. Extraction of the Center of the Water, in which the Metals ought to lose
their body.

Take, in the first place, the true Element of Water, or instead thereof
another Salt as is not yet wholly boiled to a dryness; Or, even Sal Gem
depurated; pour there to two parts of Water mixed with a little Juice of Radish,
putrefie it in an accorate Digestion, by how much the longer, so much the
better; then afterward let it congeal, and putrefie it again for a month, then
distill it by a Retort; Urge the Residue by a strong fire, that so it may flow
or melt, Reverberate it in the Retort with a continued fire, Dissolve it on a
Marble, then take that water that flows from hence and pour it on again, and
putrefie it; distill it again even to an Oylinesse, Conjoyn it with Spirit of
Wine, and the Impure will fall to the bottom, the which Separate, but the Pure
will be Cristallized in the Cold; pour on again that which is distilled, and
Cohobate it so often till a fix Oil remain in the bottom, and that nothing
comes over sweet afterward. Then farther, digest it for a month, and then
distill it so long until the Arcanum of the Salt passes over by an Alembick:
Let not the length of laboring here-abouts grieve thee, for this is the Third
part of all the Arcanaes that are hid in Metals and Minerals, and without it,
can nothing fruitful, and nothing perfect be accomplishr.

But although there are more ways for Extracting the first Ens of Salts, yet
this is the most profitable, and the most ready way; and next to this is that
other way which we have mentioned under the Title of the Elixir of Salt, viz.
That new Salt being permixt with the dissolving Water, (which Water is the
Distilled Spirit of Salt) be putrefied and distilled so long, until the whole
substance of the Salt be dissolved and reduced into a perpetual and during
Oylinesse, the body being removed therefrom in the likeness of Phlegm. After
this manner likewise is Taught the making of the Arcanum, or Magistery of
Vitriol and Tartar, and out of all other Salts.

CHAP. IV. Of the First Entities: And first of the Extraction of the
Quintessence, or first Ens, of the Common Mercury.
IF you would Reduce the Mercury of the Vulgar into its first liquid Ens, then
is it to be first Morrified and brought out of its own form; and that is done
by various Sublimations with Vitriol and Common Salt, that so it may at last be
like six Crystal; Then dissolve it in its own Matrix, viz. in the first Ens of
Salt, putrefie it for a month, corrupt it with new Arcanum of Salt that the
Impure thereof may be precipitated to the bottom, and that the Pure may be
turned into Crystals; Sublime the Stones or Crystals in a close Reverberatory
when it is Sublimed, always turn it up side down, until it comes to a redness.
Extract this Sublimate with Spirit of Wine rectified even to the height;
Separate the Spirit of Wine, dissolve the rest upon a Marble and digest it for
a month; pour on new Spirit of Wine, digest it for a time, and distill it. Then
the Arcanum of the first Ens of Mercury will come over in a liquid substance,
the which is called by the Philosophers, A most sharp Metalline Acetum; and in
our Archidexis, Circulatum Majus. The same is to be understood of Antimony,
Gems, and Herbs.

CHAP. V. Of Arcanums.
YOu are thus to understand our speaking of Arcanums, That they are nothing
else but a graduated Quintessence, a Magistery, or first Ens. And first, by the
Arcanum of the first Matter, we mean the first Matter, or first Ens of the
Limbus of man; likewise the first Matter of the Mercury of Salt, for that is
nearest conformable. Therefore thou must (according to the process of the first
Ens) reduce all things into a liquid substance, and then again Conjoyn it with
a Monarchy, as 'twere with the living unreduced body of that thing, and promote
or set it to distillation.

As for our Opinion concerning the Arcanum of the Stone, it shall be declared
in the following Practick: But by the Arcanum of Mercurius Vitae we mean a
Living Fire, so that the Mercury of the Vulgar be Essentificated with the
Quintessence of Salt, and be vivified with the first Ens of Antimony, as 'twere
with a Celestial Life; but the Arcanum of the Tincture displayes and unfolds
it self, and therefore we here omit it.

CHAP. VI. Of the Arcanum of the Stone, or of the Heaven of the Metals.
THat which we have here and there set down Theorically, concerning the Arcanum
of the Stone, we omit in this place, and I only say, That this Arcanum is not
to be sought for in the Rust, which many have falsely termed Flores but in the
Mercury of Antimony; And that Mercury of Antimony when it is brought to its
perfection, is no other thing but the Heaven of the Metals, because its Virtue
is always Vital or lively, and is no other thing then a perfect pure
Quintessence; and therefore even in the deludge, nothing of its Virtue or
Efficacy was taken from it; for the Heaven being as 'twere Life it self, cannot
be destroyed by any lesser or inferior thing; The preparation thereof I do
here briefly describe.

Take Antimony, purge it from its Scoria or dross, and Realgar in an Iron
Vessel, until the Coagulated Mercury of the Antimony appear white and fair; and
although it be the Element of Mercury, and has in it self a true hidden life,
yet notwithstanding all these things are in power, and not in act. But if you
would bring it unto act, then it is expedient that you stir up that life with it
own like living Fire, or with a Metaline Acetum, in or with which fire many
Philosophers have proceeded many ways. But because they have all agreed in the
Foundation or Root, they all arrived to the appointed end: For, one of them
has extracted a Quintessence out of the Coagulated Mercury, by much labor,
and has therewith brought the Mercury of the Antimony into act; but, others of
them have beheld a Uniform Essence to be in other Mineral things: As for
Example, in the six Sulphur of Vitriol, in the Magnetic stone, and have thence
extracted a like Quintessence, and have therewith ripened its Mercury or
Heaven, or brought it into act. And because they extracted their Quintessence
out of a stony matter, they therefore called that Magistery a Stone; and indeed
their Opinion is right: Yet notwithstanding, that Fire or Corporal Life is
found much more perfectly and sublimely in the Mercury of the Vulgar; and this
is evidently witnessed by its Flux and Running, viz. That there is hidden in it
a most chief Fire, and a Celestial Life. And therefore whosoever desires to
Graduate his metalline Heaven even to the height, and to reduce it into act, he
must first of all extract out of the Corporal Life, (viz. The Mercury of the
Vulgar) the first liquid Ens, (as being a Celestial fire) the Quintessence of
Sol, and a most sharp metalline Acetum by a Solution with its own Mother, that
is, he must permix it with the Arcanum of Salt, and with the stomach of
Anthion, that is, with the Spirit of Vitriol, and must therein dissolve the
Coagulated Mercury of Antimony, digest it, and afterward reduce it into
Crystals, that it may be like to a yellowish Crystal; of the which we have made
mention in our Manual.

CHAP. VII. Of the Arcanum of Mercurius Vitae.
EVen as a Temperate Essence is educed or drawn out of Herbs, as for example
out of a Vine, by the which Essence may be Attracted the Essence of Herbs and
Roots of every kind; insomuch that the Mercury of the Wine does not show its
own proper Nature, but the Nature of that which it is Essentificated with; even
so in like manner is it with Metals and Minerals, for such a like Mercury or
spirit is extracted out of the open and middle Metal (Mercury) if an Essence be
extracted out of the perfect Metals with that same spirit; then that
Essentificated Mercury, is afterward conjoined with the Celestial Balsam of
the Quintessence, in a close Reverberatory, by which it obtains a life, and is
therefore called Mercurius Vitae. The Virtues of which seem to us very
admirable, and therefore must be concealed and hidden by us, that so they may
not be contemned.

CHAP. VIII. Of the great Composition, being the greatest (in Medicine) of our
Secrets.
IN our Paramirical Writings it is clearly enough declared, viz to a
Philosopher, or a Physician, as much as is needful for the preservation of the
whole humane Body, not only in his Corporal and Earthly Mass, but even in the
Celestial Balsamic Part, and for the curing it of all Celestial and
Terrestrial Diseases. For it is expedient that such a composition be in that
Medicament, as does not consist in the number of Ingredients. For example sake,
should any one think that by the mixing of Water and Wine together, were made a
true mixion, it would be a false conception; for one part may be Separated from
the other without the hurting of either, which is far otherwise in our great
Composition; for here is made a uniform, and an Harmonius mixture, insomuch
that two things different or distinct in Nature and properties are united, and
neither of them can be Separated from the other without hurt, because of their
notable Concordance; as it also comes to pass in the Masculine and Feminine
Seed; if therefore such a composition be to be prepared as is in its state and
form suitable and agreeable to man, in the proportion of Celestial and
Terrestial Things, it is convenient to consider of the Name of the Microcosm,
and that man is a little World; And consequently if you would cure him
Universally of all his diseases, it is necessary that it be done by his like.
Concerning which Hermes Trismegistus says, it is expedient that he who intends
to make this composition, do Create a new World; And even as God created the
Heaven and the Earth, ^ likewise must the Physician frame a Medicinal World
Separate and prepare it. And that he (the said Hermes) may faithfully show unto
his Disciples, what thing o^ matter this composition must be made out of, and
how also a Concordancy of Celestial Virtues may be found with us in the valley
of darkness, he does very wisely and truly add a little after, viz. That which
is beneath is like that which is above, and the things beneath are so related
to the things above as Man and wife, and for the better understanding thereof,
he teaches that the Heaven (does of it self) agree with the Element of Water;
for it had its First Spermatick matter in the Water, and that the Element of
the Earth thereof, being coagulated or changed out of a Spirituality, into a
Corporality and Earthlinesse, is like to the Plannets and the other Stars; for
they also did at the beginning obtain their Spermatick Matter in the Heavens,
and did from thence pass, or were changed (by a Separation) out of the
Celestial transparent Nature, into a thick Coagulated Body.

In the first Creation, the things above, and the things below, the upper and
lower Heaven or Water, the Superior Coagulated Nature or Stars, and the
inferior Terrestrial Nature were all commixt in one, and were but one thing.
But God Separated the Subtle from the gross, that so of one Water might be
made two, the Superior Water was Subtle, and to be accounted of as a
Masculine Sex to the inferior, more gross, Feminine Water. But even as God did
farther devide and Separate the superior Water, that the subtle Aerial part
might be ordained for Stars, so that the Celestial Bodies or Stars are so
related to the Heaven, as Sons are to a Father; even so likewise by the same
way, has God appointed (in the more gross Feminine Bodies, viz. the Waters in
the Valley of darkness) a Separation agreeing with the Superior Separation, and
has also divided it into two Parts. The seventh more clear part, he called
Water, the other six dried parts, or Coagulum, he called Earth, the which
comprehends in it self all the Specificated or particular Fruits and Planets,
that had their first Original in the Water, as in their Heaven. Even as Metals,
Minerals and Gems, which are to be accounted of in respect of the Water, as
Daughters in respect of their Mother. So the Superior. Heaven has a Nature
and properties like it self in its Feminine Nature, viz. in the Inferior
Heaven or Water; and the Superior Terrestrial Bodies or Stars, as being the
Sons of a Father (that is of the Heaven) have a like concordancy and affinity
with their Sisters, the Terrestrial Bodies. And by how much the Superior
Celestial Bodies or Stars are conjoined with their Father the Heaven; Even so
by an equal kin or affinity, the Inferior Terrestrial Minerals and Metals are
allied to the Water (their Heaven) as being their Mother, from thence therefore
is the truth of the saying of Hermes evidenced, the which we do even commend to
our Sons of learning, in these expressions, viz. that the whole Microcosm (as
far forth as appertains to the comprehensible Mass, and to the living, Moving,
Corporeal, Generating Spirit) ought to be gathered as it were and composed of
those Inferior Elements, dark Waters, their most Noble Essences; But as to the
Mental Arcanaes (by which a sound mind consists in a sound Body) they are to
be Attracted from the superior Celestial Waters, and their Astral Influences
(spiritually) in a Mental manner, through the mind of the Image and its Gamahea
or (if they are not so pleasing to us) may be eschewed; even as we have largely
and clearly enough demonstrated these things in our books of long life. And
because we have comprised the Theory of this great Composition in other places,
but especially in th^^ Books of Paramirum; therefore we shall content o^^
selves with them, and rather adjoyn the Practick (...) self, viz. how the
Inferior World or Heaven ought (...) be united and compounded with its Earth,
or the (...) with its Heaven. But because we have before premis^ the preparation
of the Heaven, and have taught it under the Arcanum of the Stone, we omit it in
this place But now whereas of it self alone, it is like the male se^^ and can
bring no benefit in the Body of man, but one^ restore the Celestial Parts, viz.
the Radical Moisture (...) Balsam of Life, therefore it is expedient that it be
co^^ joined with its Terrestrial Corporal Mass, and b^ brought into a Concord
and Harmony, that so even the Fleshy Mass in man, may be also refreshed and
restored, and not only one Member be restored to health but the whole Body
Therefore such a Corporal Man must be taken as is equal in its Nature to the
Superio^ Sun, and comprehends in it self the proprieties of a^^ the Stars; for
as much as it is impossible for all the Subterrane Stars, and Coagulated Bodies
to be comprehended together in the number of Ingredients. This Coagulated
Essence of the Heaven, that is the Sun in its own Essence and Temperate
Element, is so elevated and graduated, that it does also even six its own
habitation (that is the superfluous Elements) with it self, so that it cannot
be destroyed by any Element, and the Inhabitant or Corporal Balsam therein
hidden, is able to continue eternal. If therefore (as is aforesaid) the whole
Microcosm is to be truly cured, then the Corporal Coagulated Balsam is to be
Co-united with the Celestial Spiritual Balsam, and the discord betwixt the
Elements of the Sun, to be reconciled, so that the superfluous Elements, may be
Separated from the fix Predestined Element, and may plainly die, and may
leave the Eternal fix Element (as being their Inhabitant) alone. If this dead
Body of the Sun, be afterward cleaned from superfluities, and be brought into
^otatile Spiritual Nature, then is perfected the true ^limed and resolved
Mercury of Sol (not that Hore^ntal, which many endeavor to prepare with the
^ercury of the Vulgar, and Sal Armoniack.

CHAP. IX. Of the Corporal Balsam or Mercury of Sol.
THat you may stir up a discord between the Elements of the Sun, or of the
habitation of Gold, it expedient that you draw out or bring Sol in a strong
^olution by a Phlegmatic Fire or Quintessence of Tar^^ into its proper heat
and fervency; By which the ^lement of the Air is most greatly augmented in the
Sol, and (by the assailing or accompanying Air) the fix Element of the Sun (as
being its proper Fire) is so much ^raduated, that it is able to overcome and
destroy the dwelling of the other three. Putresie this destruction ^ith the
Quintessence of Tartar, and with the Ostrich, ^onvert it by a proper
Sublimation, into the Matter of ^ercury, and then the fix Mercurial Element of
Sol, will remain alone without a habitation; but because that it (as yet)
permixt with its superfluous Tartar, therefore this is to be removed therefrom;
dissolve it therefore in the Circulated Water of Salt, corrupt or break (...),
and the Tartar will be precipitated. Sublime the ^ure in a close reverberation
of an Athanor; dissolve ^ upon a Marble and putrefie it, so is the Mercury
sublim^d, Graduated and resolved into the First Matter of Sol, and is prepared
in the highest degree.

CHAP. X. Of the Composition of the Spiritual Balsam, and the Balsam of the
Coagulated Body.
THis composition as is rehearsed in the Manual, made in the Philosophic Egg.
And so we put a end to this Great Work, in the Name of God, to b^ Praise and
Glory.

The Contents of the Ten Books of the ARCHIDOXIS.
OF the Mystery of the Microcosm Page

Of the Separation of the Elements. P. 1^

Of the Separation of the Elements out of Metals. p. 2^

out of Marcasites. p. 2^

from Stones. p. ^^

from Oleaginous bodies. p. 2^

in Corporal Rosins. p. 2^

from Herbs. p. 2^

from Fleshy bodies. p. 2^

from Fishes. p. 2^

from Waterish things. p. 2^

from Water. p. 3^

from Glasses. p. 3^

in fix Bodies. p. 3^

Of the Separation of the fire. p. 3^

of the Air p. 32

of the Water. p. 33

of the Earth. p. 33

Of a Quintessence. p. 35

Of the Extraction of the Q. E. out of Metals. p. 47

from Marcasites. p. 49

out of Salts. p. 50

out of Stones, Gems and Pearls. p. 51

out of burning things. p. 53

out of growing things. p. 54

out of Spices. p. 55

from Edible and Potable things. p. 56

Of Arcanum's p. 60

Of the Arcanum of the first matter. p. 65

of the Philosophers Stone. p. 68

of Mercurius Vitae. p. 71

of the Tincture. p. 75

Of Magisteries. p. 78

Of the Extraction of Magisteries out of Metals. p. 82

out of Pearls, Corals and Gems. p. 84

out of Marcasites. p. 87

from Fatty Substances. p. 89

out of growing things. p. 90

in Wine. p. 91

out of blood. p. 94

Of Specificks. p. 96

Of an Oderiferous Specific. p. 100

Of an Anodine Specific. p. 102

Of a Diaphoretick Specific. p. 103

Of a Purging Specific. p. 104

Of an Attractive Specific. p. 106

Of a Stiptical Specific. p. 108

Of a Corrosive Specific. p. 110

Of a Specific for the Matrix. p. 111

Of Elixirs. p. 113

Of Preservation and Conservation by Elixirs. p. 117

Of the Elixir of Balsam. p. 119

Of Salt. p. 120

Of Sweetness. p. 121

Of Thronus. p. 122

Of Quintessences. ibid

Of Subtilty. p. 123

Of Propriety. p. 125

Of Extrinsecalls. p. 126

A Remedy for Wounds. p. 129

For Ulcers. p. 130

against Marks or Blemishes. p. 13^

Of the Separation of the Elements. p. 140

Of a Quintessence. p. 142

Of Magisteries. p. 144

Of the preparation of Circulated Salt. p. 146

Of the first Ens of Common Mercury. p. 148

Of Arcanums. p. 149

Of the Arcanum of the Stone. p. 150

Of the Arcanum of Mercurius Vitae. p. 152

Of the greatest Composition etc. p. 153

Of the Corporal Balsame or Mercury of Sol. p. 157

Of the Composition of the Spiritual Balsams. p. 158

FINIS,
A BOOK OF RENOVATION AND RESTORATION, By THEOPHRASTUS a Philosopher and
Phisician of GERMANY, called PARACELSUS the Great.
WE are (in the first place) to understand, in the Creation of things, what
Restoration and Renovation are; what those things be which restore and
renovates and also what this is that can be renewed, and restored: Indeed all
Minerals are thus brought unto a youthfulness, are renewed, and repaired,
insomuch that rusty Iron may be again reduced into new Iron; and the
Verdigreece, or flos Aeris, into its Copper: Likewise, Midium into Lead, and
Saturn into Mercury (alias, the ^alx of Jupiter into Tin.) So then Renovation,
and Restaurtation (in this place) is that which reduces a destroyed, or rusty,
or consumed [Mineral] to its juvenility and perfect essence. But yet
notwithstanding this Renovation which we have here induced, cannot be compared
(in the least) to that Restoration, and Renovation which we pretend to
expound: for although that Rust and Verdigreece be not a Metal, yet
nevertheless, it is not ^^ yet perished or consumed in its Mettalick essence,
and therefore it cannot (in this place) be made use of ^y way of comparison,
for the explaining of our intent and meaning concerning Restoration and
Renovation, because such Rusts, nor Ablutions, does not at all happen in
Mankind; thence comes it to pass, that men not at all need such a kind of
Reduction.

But now if after this manner, a decreasing or consuming hap to befall an old,
or decreped man, (as if (...) were a kind of rustinesse in his substance) then
may (...) body be on such wise reduced from his decrepit degr^^ unto
juvenility, and it is a reduction from any whatsoever disease unto health; but
yet this is not the thi^ which we (at present) will write of. Moreover this a^
so may be accounted of as a kind of Restoration when a metal is naturally
made out of Salt, Sulphur and Mercury: This perfection being accomplished, ar^
brought into a perfect metal, this metal may again easily return into its three
first Principles, so that i^ Salt, sulphur and Mercury may again be made
apparent, as they were at the first Generation thereof, insomuch that the
metalline Essence may wholly pass away, and it be no more a metal. Thus may it
also happen, viz. that the matter of the three Principles m^^ return into a
metal, as before, as for example, if (...) the three Principles of Copper there
be again mad^ Copper, etc. This (now) in metalls, is likewise a Restoration or
Renovation, when there is a certain generation made of a metal formerly
perfect, into a perfect an^ complete metal again. But yet' that is not to be
esteemed of as a Renovation and restoration, if it be compare^ to a man;
because we cannot (in the least) be reduced into our three Principles, or be
brought into our Sperm out of which we may be again renewed and restored (as we
spoke above concerning metals.) For so it would come to pass, that we could
then have power of bettering our selves by a second generation, better then the
first was, or as iron, which being reduced into its three first Principles, and
afterward into silver, or gold is by this same made incorruptible, or as which
is again reduced unto its own Mercury, and at length changed into an
incorruptible metal; Even so then should we be able to effect or create an
incorruptible Creature out of our selves, the which (notwithstanding) we have
no power to do; for we want that first matter, nor can we go back into the
irreducibility of our appointed and ordained state, but must proceed on, as we
have begun; for there is no way by which we may be able to recover, for to have
this thing out of which we proceeded.

There is therefore a twofold Restoration or Renovation. One is what we have
brought and declared about metals; The other is when an old Image is renewed
with fresh colors, that so it appears fresh and new as it was at first; but
yet we are not for this Cause to understand in this place, that there is made a
new matter out of the old; but that the old image is palliated, and cloaked as
it were, so as to appear new; and therefore, neither may this be called a
Restoration, in reference to the Renovation and Restoration of a man: But
Renovation and Restoration are to be understood after this manner, viz. That
his Radical moisture acting or governing, and exercising the Spirit of life,
be not diminished or driven backward, but be rather augmented and promoted in
its virtues, as a tree that has help administered unto it for the Production of
its flowers and fruits, the which falling off, and being gone, there are others
produced again as before: But although that this example here made use of does
not on every side serve for the Declaration of our alleged opinion; yet
nevertheless it affords us the understanding of making an advance or promotion
of the Radical moisture of life, as we have demonstrated in the tree. And
verily we would have you to apprehend of Renovation and Restoration after this
manner, viz. that it is not to be done in the radical humidity, but in that
which is born of the said humidity, and draws, or deriveth, its Originality,
materially and corporally. For, even as a Bell made by fusion, does not at all
receive its sound from the To^^ or note, that it is framed unto, but from the
body; so the Restoration or Renovation does not receive its operation in the
spirit of life, but in that which makes, and effects it; that is, the one is
Material, and the other ^^ Substantial, or spiritual. But, when all this, in
which the radical moisture is, shall be mundified, its Tone will be also
mundified: and by how much the better its Tone is, so much the better will the
body be. And when we say that the radical humidity proceeds from bodies and
members, we intend and mean after this manner, That the radical moisture it
self, and that which proceeds thence from, are; even as the root and the tree
is; one whereof cannot at all live and subsist without the other: In like
manner is it to be (here) understood, that these two are so united and
conjoined, that they cannot be separated: therefore the radical humidity, and
spirit of life, with the moisture of life, is in the bodies and members, even
as the Tone or Note in a Metal, which is not seen, but only heard: for the
spirit of life, and the radical humidity, are truly in bodies; therefore it
will be a foolish thing for us to endeavor to amend it, or to renew the body
by it, but it is expedient and ^it, that the body and the matter, (which are
born and risen, or sprung off, and with it) be renewed and restored. From
thence, then, may it be collected, that Restoration and Renovation is a
Transmutation of those members, nor parts, as exist in the body, superfluously;
so that every such thing as proceeds from the body and from the radical
humidity, may fall off, and new may be born in the place thereof; even as we
spoke of trees, all the leaves of which, its flowers, fruits, and excrescences
do fall off, and again spring up, and yet the Wood it self is not changed, so
as to fall off, and other to be born again, but remains: even so likewise the
radical humidity remains; that is, the life in the body, and (with it) the body
do cast off the hairs, nails, and teeth, and then afterward the like of them
are re-born, and grow again. This therefore is restoration, and renovation, by
which this same thing as is to be renewed and restored, is so restored and
renovated: for every Restoration and Renovation is made in the superfluities,
and in those things that rise and grow out of the substance: So then, it may be
sufficiently understood what way it is that the body may be restored and
renewed by: and (from the demonstrations we have made) viz. from those
superfluities that are not of so material a growth, as the hair, teeth, skin,
and nails; for these are in the body as certain superfluous things, and do not
pass into the corporal matters, or substance, but remain in their own Essence,
like as are the Four Complexions, alias humors, ^ne whereof proceeds from
coldness and moisture, which is born and retained in the whole body, and has
no peculiar place, nor beginning from whence it may proceed, as is proved [in
our Discourse] of the Four Complexions. A Second proceeds from things contrary
to the former, viz. from heat and dryness, and even this also is so in the
body, and has no peculiar abiding or original, and it likewise causes, or
makes moisture. The Third is cold and dry, and its way of birth is the same
with the Others. The Fourth is hot and moist, and does proceed even as does the
rest.

Here you are to observe that it happens that all those Four Humors are not
always in all bodies, but sometimes one of them only, sometimes two, sometimes
three, and otherwhile four; This also is to be heeded, as concerning them, that
they are consumed and expelled in the Renovation and Restoration, for this
reason, because the nature and life of man can very well persist and abide
without them, and does not at all need them, for they are only superfluities;
like as the feces are in Wine, or as the s^um and sroth flowing there from in
the Vintage-time.

This likewise is to be believed concerning the Four Complexions appearing in a
man, that they are not to be renovated and restored because they spring not
from any either greater or lesser member: nor are they in the blood, nor in the
flesh, or such like: Neither is it true, that the sanguinc Complexion proceeds
from the Liver, by reason of the very much-abounding quantity of blood; or that
Melancholy proceeds from the Spl^^n, or Choler from the Gall, and Phlegm from
the Brain, and such like; for verily the aforesaid Members do not give any man
his Complexion, but the Complexions happen to a man even in his Nativity, and
abide even till his death. But we undertake not to dispute hereof in this
place, for as much as it would be too too wide from our text of Renovation and
Restoration.

Whereas therefore none of the Four Complexions has any place or original in
the said bodies, but they exist in the spirit of life, and in the radical
humidity: therefore the Complexions cannot be renovated, not restored; but
where the body shall be clarified, the nature of them is also clarified.

Moreover we also signify this, by our text, viz. That the division, and
distinction of Complexions according to Age, Country, and Regiment, is not at
all to be cured, because there are no Complexions imprinted in the body, from
these three: It may happen indeed that old Age may enforce a sadness in bodies,
but yet that it no Complexion: So likewise the Country or Region may induce
Phlegm, but yet that Complexion is not therefore Phlegmatic. So Choler may
cause one to have a yellow color, but these things have no place of discussing
here, for they are declared in our treating of the Construction, or framing, of
the body. There Is a peculiar understanding requisite for Divisions (or
Distinctions) of this sort, wherein is to be noted that they are not only
Humors, but also sometimes Minerals, sometimes Corruptions; all which are
superfluities against nature and strength: The like may be said concerning the
principal Members, for these resist Renovation and Restoration, thus, viz
these perceive not those (qualities of renewing, etc.) nor receive they them
unto themselves; but every thing that passes through them, and is prepared
with, or by them; they receive and admit of it as Nutriment only, and not as a
Medicament: but yet, if happily any humors or superfluities should be in them,
they would be expelled. Even so then is it to be equally understood of the
other Members, viz. the bones, marrow, brain, heart, liver, lungs, reins, milt,
stomach, intestines, gristles, muscles; and also as concerning the Blood, you
are to know, that corruption, or superfluity, may be even in it; yet this is
only accidental: And even so may it be equally-alike understood as concerning
the Flesh; and verily this accident is purged away in the Renovation and
Restoration; not that there is to be made other blood, but that the evil be
removed therefrom, and the good be preserved, and predominates. The same
consideration is to be had concerning the flesh. But that we may briefly
explain what those things are that may be restored and renewed, know, That the
Leprosy, Falling Sickness, Madness, Pustules, or Pox, the Gouts of the Fact,
of the Hands, and of the Joints, and many other such like, may be taken away by
the Renovation and Restoration, unless there hap to be a Disease that had its
Original even from the Nativity, for that will not be removed.

But as concerning the Leprosy, or if there be in the body any more grievous
Disease then that is, you are to know that there is to be made a Transmutation
thereof in the body. not that there be made a separation of the Pure from the
Impure, but that the Leprosy be converted into Health, even as Copper and Iron
are into Gold: Nor ought any one to admire at this same Transmutation, for
Renovation and Restoration do consume even a^ the fire consumes all the
Falsities and Impurities that are in Gold or Silver, and leaves them pure and
clean: By the same way are the Falling sickness and Gout removed; for so all
things that are in the whole body are renewed by the flesh and blood, together
with all the others therein concluded; for even as Alcali mundifies the Leprous
Mercury into the best Silver, even so the Renovation and Restoration do
transmute the body into a good essence, as is said before.

So then Renovation and Restoration drives forth whatsoever is superfluous in
the body, and contrary to Nature, and changes all that which Nature does not
stand in need of, or which shall be of no moment or virtue, into good: Likewise
it restores all things, and causes them to grow again, as we said above: It
reduces the whole body into youthfulness, etc. and that for this reason,
Because Nothing of those things as are in Nature it self, is able to resist
them.

But now we come to consider the way by which the body may be restored and
renewed, viz. It Is done by that kindling (of a renewing. and restoring
Medicament) which it has in the spirit of Life, and in the Radical humidity;
by the which kindling the aforementioned Operations are made like to the
burning virtues of a Nettle: Who is so quick-sighted as to be able rightly to
search out such kind of virtues, when as they do not appear (in that action) so
materially as they art sensibly known to be? After this manner also even
Renovation and Restoration of nature are as 'twere assisting-approaches made
by such virtues as we are not able to express. Now we evidently know that every
visible thing is cleansed and purged by fire; for so Nature requires that this
very thing be done by fire, that is not possible to be done by any other thing.
And therefore we understand a twofold fire, viz. A Material and an Essential
Fire; the Material operates by a Flame, the Essential by the Essence and
Virtues like Cantharides that burn the skin, and raise blisters, like to the
most violent fire; And yet notwithstanding they are not fire, (in the ^east)
nor are they so perceptible to the sight, like as fire is: The same likewise
does Crowfoot and Nettles do, as we have often times said.

It Is in like manner evident unto us that the Renovation and Restoration (when
they come into the body, or are conjoined with it by union) do perfect their
Operations after this way, viz. There is such an operation as is made in the
Mercury of Saturn or Mars, the which are put into the fire with their Realgars;
and although neither of them be hot or fiery, yet are they burnt like wood, and
the perfect Metal is found in the bottom, though it appeared altogether
leporous before.

Likewise who is there that can search and find out what means it comes to pass
by, that when Migdalio shall have been most vehemently melted with Vitriul, it
becomes Copper, and in all respects like to true Copper, and yet it had not any
similitude of Copper before: even so are we to understand concerning Renovation
and Restoration, viz. That they perfect their Operations like to Lime or Calx,
which is extinguished or quenched with water, and purifies it self, and the
force and ac^imony thereof is taken away by the essential fire, and
extinguished. The Renovation and Restoration of our Nature is much resembling
that of the Halcyon, or King-fisher, the which Bird is renovated by his own
proper nature. Hence then, there are many more such like things to be found as
have a power of doing that, and of them we have made mention sundry ways in
our Archidoxis, or much rather, in our Secrets, from whence a very many might
be brought, but that their digression from our present Text of Renovation and
Restoration, would be too much; such things as we there demonstrate, the same
are to be understood in like manner here in this place concerning Renovation in
our reiterated assertion, viz. That we cannot sufficiently or certainly know
how the fire operates, although we see that it consumes the wood; for it
overcomes and absumes all other things by the vehemence of its heat: But
omitting this, we will betake our selves to another thing.

So then having abundantly enough spoken hitherto concerning the beginning of
Renovation and Restoration, let us now go on to discover those things which
d^renovate and restore; We have indeed taught the prepreparation of them in our
Archidoxis, and have given them their proper Names by which they may be known
and heeded. Now we will set down the Compositions of them, but in the first place
their process: Now when we speak of, and teach you concerning simple Medicines
and Arcana'es, it is to be understood that the operations thereof are done
diversely; for there are some things to be found which do even violently cleanse
the Leprosy, and do drive away no other Disease so well as they do that; and
yet nevertheless are (as to Renovation and Restoration) perfect; besides
which, in the distinctions of Diseases of this kind, are the Quintessence, the
Magistery, and Element of Antimony, the which does so cleanse the body from the
Leprosy, even as it does purge Gold and Silver melted therein, in whom it
leaves no footsteps of Impurity. So likewise the Element of Sol, and its
Quintessence, as also its Oil, and Aurum Potabite, do take away the Leprosy,
together with all Diseases, and do renovate and restore; so likewise the
Quintessence of Hellebor, of Colandine, of Bawm, Valerian, Saffron, Manna, and
Betony, do renew the body, those Diseases abovementioned being excepted, for
they do not drive them away.

Likewise the quintessence of Pearls, or Vni^'s, of the Smaragdine, the Saphir,
Ruby, Granate, Jacynth, do renovate and restore the body into all perfection,
they take away tartarous Diseases, as the Stone, Sand, Feet-Gout, Hand and
Joint-Gout, and the things that are congealed and coagulated, and all such like
Diseases as arise from Tartar, so likewise the Qnintessence and Magisteries of
Minerals and of Liquors, do renovate and restore the whole body without any
defect, and free it from the ^alling-sickness, Swounding, Suffocations, and all
such Diseases as happen with a deprivation of the senses, as ^adness, the
Vitista, or Laughing Diseases, and such like.

The Magisteries and Essence of Tartar, and of Alcali, do also renovate the
body with the perfection of, Restoration; they take away all Aposthumes, and
amend the putrefactions and grossness of the Humors.

In like sort the Essences, Extractions, and Magisteries of the greater
remedies, do renovate and restore the whole body; as for example, They remove
Fevers, as Quotidian, Quartan, the Syncchus, [or continual] the Ephe^^ra
Fever, etc. Likewise the first Ens of Margarites are able to renew and restore
the whole body, and to take away all Women's Diseases, together with their
Accidents, and to render both the Man and Woman fruitful; so likewise those
same Arcana's do take away all long and incurable Diseases by the renewing and
restoring of the body into its supreme Virtues.

Thus also does the Quintessence drawn out of Balsom, renovate and restore the
body, and take away Pleurifies and the Pestilence by the admirable operations
and virtues of its prefecting property: There are many more such like things
which shall be elsewhere repeated, and such as are of a far greater virtue then
is able to be attributed unto them, and then can be mentioned. But yet as to
these things, this is diligently to be heeded and considered of, as to
Compositions, that although there are very many of them, yet none of them is
sufficiently able generally to expel and cure all the Diseases (by it self) as
are to be expelled by those Medicaments of Renovation. We Will therefore
demonstrate the manner and Practick of our intention and meaning, even to the
end; yet we will not set down all the Processes, for that is not necessary; for
he that understands us, will apprehend and mark our writings, but he that does
not, will not be instructed by them; and yet we will set down all the Processes
(as are necessary) abundantly enough: But 'twould be burdensome for us to write
down such things as many have written of, or are known before; yet this whole
Doctrine cannot be better delivered, or treated of, then by the first Ens,
wherein there is a singular Nature of operating upon the body, and of
transmuting the essence thereof; for the first Ens it self is an imperfect
Composition, predestined to a certain and assured end, and corporal Matter.
And because it is not perfect, it is able to alter every thing that it shall be
incorporated withal; even as Mercury, which is like to the first imperfect
Ens, as to imperfection: For although that it be determinated and bounded, yet
notwithstanding it is not changed from Imperfection, but is limited therewith.

Mercury has even a power of renovating the whole body, for that there is a
most wonderful Laxative, and Alterative Virtue therein, which can never be
sufficiently enough searched out: And yet nevertheless it is wholly imperfect and
unprofitable in its Own operation, and that (forsooth) because it is Mercury,
and the first Ens thereof must not be predestined into another body; for
such as it, viz. is, so is its perfection: But we speak of a first Ens that is
perfect, for the renovating and restoring of the whole Body, as is the first
Ens of Gold, and that for this reason, because it truly possesses the spirit
of the Gold, and the most subtle spirit, and is far more subtle then the true
body it self is, viz. Gold.

Hence likewise the first Ens of Sol, or Gold is penetrable, even as a Mercury
in Metals; nor contains it in it self the spirit of Salt, whereby it may be
coagulated; for the spirit of Salt coagulating the first Ens, does take away so
much virtue that the Gold is not a hundredth part so potent in its virtue, as
its first Ens is; like to Generous Wine, which being coagulated with Frost,
does not again return to its former power and excellency.

But that we may perfectly speak and write concerning Renovation and
Restoration, you must know that the first Ens, that is, that the first
composition of Gold, which is as yet a liquor, and not as yet coagulated, does
renovate and restore whatsoever it lays hold on; and not man only, but also
all cattle, fruits, herbs, and trees: And what we thus mention, is to be
understood on this wise, viz. Like to the Mineral, or Oar, of a Metal, which is
endued with far greater virtues than its Metal is: for in the Oar there is a
spirit of Arsenick, and Salt, of Sulphur and Mercury, all which do go away in
the purging of the metal, the said metal remaining in one essence only.

The like is to be understood of the first Entities of Marcasites, as of
Antimony; the which you must note to be no less then the first Ens of Gold is;
for there is such a virtue in the first Ens of Antimony, that it does, of it
self, of its own proper nature, transmute every thing that it seizes on, even
like as Antimony it self does by the fire: for the virtue of it separates every
thing from the body that is born out of the radical humidity, and does
thoroughly renovate the said body from a true foundation; because its first Ens
is seated is that predestination, insomuch that such an essence proceeds and
goes out therefrom, as the heat does out of the fire.

The like is to be understood of the first Ens of Rosins: The first Ens of
Sulphur is an entire transmutation of the body into some Renovations and
Restaurations, for it is so vehement that it tingeth all the first Entities of
metals into its own essence, it takes away their operations, and reduces them
again to their first matter, and does afterward reduce them into a new perfect
body: For, the first Ens that is produced out of Sulphur, has such virtues upon
the body of a man, that it renewes all the radical humidities in him, in all
his parts and members.

In like sort may we speak of the first entities of Gems, the which do, by
their first essence, most potently restore the whole body to its former powers
and vigorousness, and do amend it of all its impurities, and renovate it, even
as fire transmuteth Lead into a most pure Glass: for the primum Ens of the
Smaragdine does regenerate and renovate it self, for it is a perfect body from
the beginning: Even as the green Marble, the which has such a nature from its
proper predestination, that it renovates it self from all uncleanness and
impurities, and does again coagulate it self until it become pure; and it does
sometimes thus renovate it self, and return into juvenility a third, and a
fourth time; and by how much the oftener it does thus regenerate itself, so much
the more pure and constant does it become: therefore as far forth as the
virtues of the first Entities are known to me, they do assuredly far excel all
the rest.

So likewise are you to note concerning the first Entities of Salts, that they
are according to their spiritual virtues, far greater then in their perfection:
So the first Ens of Vitriol transmutes all white Metals whatsoever into red,
and those that are red into white, and over comes and subdues all the
perfections that are comprehended in them; it renovates and restores all the
imperfect bodies of the Metals, as, Yin into its own fi^^^ Ens, and into Tin
again, in which is more virtues then is in the Old Tin.

After the same manner it reduces whatsoever proceeds out of the radical
humidities into the radical moisture, and causes the Renovation and
Restoration it fell more perfect, more plentiful, and more abundant; for
there is no other thing that operates so vehemently upon the radical moisture.

Nor are the first Entities of herbs and trees different from what was
aforesaid, the which Entities are a thousand times more potent as to
theirvirtues, then when they have received their body, stalk, or trunk, and are
incorporated: Even as the first Ens of Bawm does renovate and restore the whole
body far more powerfully then seems possible to be done in natural things; for
'its to be known that the Hal^yon, or King-fither, is not thus renovated nor
restored from his own nature; but because its nature is such as to be nourished
and live on first Entities, on this wise, when it seeds on the bodies of herbs,
or seeds, and such like, his stomach does, by digestion, reduce them to their
first Ens, and does afterward our of that first Ens perfect the operations of
its Renovation and Restoration: for, that Birds digestion has its
predestination naturally to first Entities only, whence it comes to pass that
he does first transmute all his food and drink into a first Ens; and therefore
likewise does he seed only on such bodies as do regenerate and restore, with
which bodies he is even from the very beginning always provided for, and
nourished with by his Parents, or Dam: this also is his nature, viz. to be
renovated and restored after death; and that for this reason, because the first
Entities cannot at all have their progress, or full course, in the Bird whilst
he lives, for the life of this Bird takes away all the virtues thereof by
converting them into blood and flesh; but being dead, he flourishes according
to the yearly seasons: And even as the first Entities disclose and produce
themselves in the earth, even so, in like manner do they then, even in the Bird
it self, put forth themselves and so renovate and restore the dead flesh; and
this is [in nature her self] a very wonderful Argument of its most great
virtues and power: And now, were not these things apparent to sight, they would
seem incredible, although thus described by many a one; for this cause also
does it happen that the Hal^yon's do renovate themselves at different times,
viz. some of them sooner, some later or flower, according as they have either
more early or more late, eaten the first Entities; for some of them are born
and do come forth either sooner or later then other-some do. In like sort there
are very many Vermin or Worms renovated and restored, and that for this
reason, Because they are fed and nourished by first Entities, while and they
are as yet in the Earth, imperfect. Many more wonderful things are there that
are hidden, yea far more then are known, or openly manifest, concerning which I
could write more largely, but that it would be too much wide from the Text of
the Book of Renovation and Restoration.

And although we cannot so very well take, or get the first Entities, as we
have written of them, or have them in the same Essence as we have demonstrated
before, yet nevertheless' it is a thing possible unto us; for if we know where
the Mineral of Goldlyes hid, we shall even the^e find its first Ens, if we but
come before its perfection; for there are certain signs whereby it may be known,
in what manner the form of the Metal is posited, viz. thus Whilst it is in its
first Ens it makes trees fruitful, and the bottom, viz. the Earth, fertile; it
renovates old trees, that have produced no fruits for these twenty years; for
when the first Ens of Gold shall lay hold on them, or on their Roots, they
again begin to live and flourish as before; but albeit, that there are many
more admirable things done by the first Ens of Gold, then we write of, yet
notwitstanding these things are sufficient for the demonstration of the (...)
Ens, that, viz it is there.

But when you (...) or some (...), and to be noted that treme^tal is (...), and
that it ^^^h betaken (...); these are ^^ be accounted a (...), of the other
(...), as (...) those of Gold.

When therefore such a (...) ^ee^, o^ found ^ut, it is to be understood, (...)
(...) very fi^^t E^s is not in the (...) up (as (...) in the hear, as it is
when it lies in its pe^^^ction, but is d^^ated (in that place) (...).

And therefore this earth is in the virtues of the first En^^ies, for o^t of it
^^e they (...) as (...) in Cel^ndin^, when it is not as yet compounded, or
^^^moned* (...) Ens is in the earth, in which it oath its situation: for this
reason a like earth must be taken, be then it much be at length extracted
therefrom, as we have demonstrated concerning the (...) of (...) you are
likewise (...), that there is this (...) between the (...) Ens, and perfection
(...) ^an Reno^^e, and (...): but being perfect, it (...) ^nely the natur^^
(...) i^ as to incline thither ^^^d, as (...), but yet ^^perfectly. So then you
are to understand from hence, that if you would have from them the virtues of
those first Entities, then it is (...) that you remove th^^ from their
co^^ulation, and (...), as is demonstrated in A^^^n^^'s and Quintessences but
yet every thing in its first (...) has (...) (...). Nor let a Philosopher
wonder here (...) that out of a certain earth in which an herb is essentially
born, before it be incorporated, all the virtues of that herb may be extracted:
(...) that the virtues may be (...) kept, or preserved, and the earth may be
again put into its place, and in such wise, as that it is thenceforth but a mere
earth, not has in it any fruitfulness at all, because its first Ens ^^ now
sequested from it, that lay in the earth: from thence its wont to come to pass,
that the virtue of such a first Ens, may be shut up in a glass, and be brought
to that state, as that the form of that same herb may grow in itself without
any earth: and after it is wholly grown, may have no body, but be
notwithstanding, a formed thing like a body: the reason whereof is this,
because it has no liquor of the earth; from whence it follows, that the stalk
thereof is nothing else but a certain apparition to the sight, which may be
again th^^st down with your ^^n^er into a juice, in the likeness of asume,
(...) which demonstrates the Substantial form, but not perceptible by the
touch. In such like growing things is the Quintessence altogether incorrupt,
and in its highest perfection, as in the earth.

Therefore there is born, after this manner, out of the first Ens of Gold, a
concluded, or enclosed Gold, which in touch is like to a ^ed water, and is
stirred up, and is exalted after the manner of Gold.

But enough of this Let Us therefore now betake ourselves to the practick of
those things as do Renovate and Restore; provided they be prepared according to
the possibility and rule of Art: the which, though briefly described by us, yet
are evident enough, for those intelligent men that have a good knowledge of
Medicine and Philosophy.

So then, such things are to be known in the first place, as Renovate and
Restore, as we have demonstrated, and the first Ens of them is to be extracted,
and by it is a Renovation and Restoration to be made: but for a close of this
matter thus treated of, we will set down four Mysteries: viz. of Minerals, Gems,
Herbs and Liquors, as follows.

The first Ens of Minerals.
Take the mineral of Gold, or of Antimony, ground exceeding small one pound; of
circulated Salt, four pound; mix them together, and digest them for a month an
Horse-dung, then 'twill become a water, the pure whereof must ^^ separated from
the (...): coagulate this into a ^^^ne, the which you must (...) with
cen^sia^ed wine, and again separate it, and dissolve it upon a marble: putrefie
this water for a month, then will there be made a liquor, in (...) do happen all
^^ signs, as in the first Ens of Gold: Antimony, and therefore we justly call
it the first Ens of th^se things: the same is to be understood concerning
Mercury, and the others.

The first Ens of C^^^.
Take of Smarag^^^^, or Emerald^ excellently well ground, one d^am, (...) them
in (...) dissolved until they be converted into a (...); then let them be
dissolved and ne put into a Pi^ial glass, (...) with the Lute of Hermes; let
them be set over a (...) ^ine, and let the matter be hanged up somewhat ^^gh,
in a (...) un^oated glass, so as (...) so long, until it fall down from its
(...) and condition unto the bottom, into a body like the liquor of Honey. This
body exhibits the (...) of the Emerald, and therefore may deservedly be called,
the first Ens of the Emerald.

The first Ens of Herbs.
Take Celondine or Burnt, heat them into a Pult^ (...), and put them in a glass
(...) with the Lute of Hermes, set them a digesting in Horse-dung for a month,
then afterward (...) the pure from the impure; power out the pure into a glass
with the dissolved Salt; the which being shut, let it be set in the Sun for a
month, which time being over, thou shall find a thick liquor in the bottom, and
the salt swimming at top: separate it, and thou shall have the virtues of the
Bawm, or Celondine, as they are in their first Ens: the which both are, and are
called the first Entities of Bawm or Celondine.

The first Ens of Liquors.
Take the Mineral of Sulphur, and Salt dissolved, and let them be totally
reduced into a Water by themselves, the which distill four times there will
ascend up a certain whiteness, in the first place, which demonstrates all the
virtues of the first Ens of Sulphur, and therefore may we deservedly account of
it as the first Ens of Sulphur, and so term it. Having thus written of the for
first Entities in general, it is to be further noted, viz. in what manner, they
are to be made use of, that then virtues may be perceived, the which is thus:
Each of those first Entities is to be put into good Wine, in such a quantity
that it may be tinged therewith; which done, it is prepared for this regiment,
or work. Or this wine must you drink every day in the morning about daybreak;
so long, till your nails of your fingers first fall off, and then the nails on
your feet, then your hair and teeth; and then lastly, till your skin be dried
up, and new be again generated.

All this being done, you must cease from that Medicament, or Potion, so will
there new nails be born aagain, new hairs, new teeth, and withal, a new skin;
and the diseases both of the body and mind will depart away, as is
aforementioned. Herewith we will conclude this our small book of Renovation and
Restoration.

Ph. Theophrastus, Bombast of Hohenheim, a Philosopher, a Monarch, a Spagyrical
Prince, a most great Astronomer, a wonderful Phisician, and Trismegest of
Mechanic Arcana's. His Book of the Tincture of the Philosophers, against the
Sophisters that are born since the Flood, in the year of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Son of God, (...)
THE PREFACE.
WHereas thou O Sophistic (...) me which such (...) words, viz. That I am a rude
Helvetian, or illeterate fellow, and neither understand or know any thing, and
that being more by one Letter then a Phisician ^f viz. (...), or a Beggar: I
wander and rove like a Vagabond, from one Country to another: I have therefore
pr^po^ed to make known to the world in this shore Treatise, Those ignorant and
unexperienced men, and also, What good Arts were in being, in the first Age;
and What My Art is able to do in comparison of Thine, and what Thine is in
comparison of Mine, and how Each are to be accounted of; and withal, How I
shall be imitated by such as come after in the Age of Grace: Look upon Hermes,
Archelaus, and other (...) in the first Age what ^ ^a^y^ists, and how great
Philosophers they were Their (...) Adversaries and which, O^^ Sophisters, are
your Patr^^^) do testify thus much, That themselves are even to this very day
rather Images, then otherwise. But, although (...) and (...) Authentic and
(...) accounted of ^ Fathers, yet that Ancient Smaragdine ^able does (...) and
un(...) A^^^d Experience both in Philosophy and A^^himy, in Mag^^, (or Natural
Wisdom) and such (...) Arts, (...) ^e taught by Thee, or all the whole Tr^^p of
(...) yet understand from what is af^re sp^^e^, viz. What, and how great th^se
Treasures be, then (...) whence it come to pass that no King or Pri^^^ (...)
(...)? And why Di^^^esian the (...) such Spagy^ical Bo^kes as ^ver came with
his ^^wer, to be burnt? For had not their Books contain^ something, they had
long since been ^on^rained to (...) undergone that intol^erable yoke of
Seraitu^^ such as w^ll, in time to come, light upon the^e^ Sophister, and thy
Colleagues.

In this middle Age the Monarchy of all A^^^ is (...). Theoph^astus Pa^^el^^
(...). Ga^en, Avi^^n, Me^^e, or any there of then followers (...) Theory
proceeding out of the Light of Nature, (...) (...), or decay, nor be ^h^nged,
because ^f its Con^iancy, or Basis; but will at length begin to flourish in
1^58. Then the succeeding Practick will be proved by Signs both ^onderful and
incredible, so as to become apparent even to (...) and common people, and even
they shall through (...) the Para^el^i^n. (...) (...), against the (...) yet of
the Sophisters ^ (...) that other Sophistick ^hea^ing Art has ^eed of Papal
and Imperial Privileges to support and bear up their sill, ^^pperies.

But whereas I am accounted of by ^^ee, O (...) Sophister as a Beggar and
Vagrant, I will be (...), and (...) Danuby and ^^lieiue to answer for me. ^^y
(...) studied Slander ^^ast upon me, have often a^sp^^as^d (...), Princes and
Nobles, likewise. Imperial ^iti^^, and (...) a Knightly Dignity and Nob^^^
(...) in a certain Ci^^ of (...), called (...), in the Hospital, the which
neither thou (...) the Roman, nor th^^^ Charles the German, are able to pay for
with (...) Estates. Although there be a signed Star entered upon, an^ s^^d into
the A^^^num of your Names, it (...) any but the S^n of the Di^ine S^a^rri^al
Art. And therefore whereas thou Verminous and Low^^^ (...) i^aginest the
Monarch of Ar^an^'s (...) and prodigal decocter and b^yle^, I will therefore in
this (...). Age ^^ke open in this Book an honorable prose^uti^^ of th^se
^^ings, together with the v^rtues and preparation of that Tincture of the
Natura^^ is, for the ben^fit and hon^ur (...) (...) Lovers of truth, and
whereby the (...) Arts may be redu^^d (...). The La^^ Age shall be (...) (...),
as ^^^g a Gift of (...) tru^ spirit so that the (...) and ^isdom, was never
(...) beginning (...) However, in the mean time (...) shall not be (...) press
the good and honest men; (...) shall the Pow^^ and (...) of those many
Opposers, be any damage to the upright.

OF THE TINCTURE OF THE PHILOSOPHERS. BY PHH^^^S (...) PARACE^SUS
CHAP. I.
I (...) Therphrasius B^mbast does say, that (...), and according to the
man^^ed (...) n^^ D^^n^ Grace there are va^^ous ways found ^ut ^^ the
att^inin^ to the T^nclure of the Philos^pheis, all wh^^nd finally belong and
lead to the same (...) and end, for Homes Tris^^gi^i, the E^^p^an, (...) ab^ut
this Work according to his own pe^uh^ way ^^u^ the (...) obte^^ed the same
Pro^es^. (...) the Arab^^^ continued in his pe^^^ar Method* But (...), followed
a very ^^dict^ ^^^ess I very ^ne of them proceeded according to the^^ proper
(...) and manner; but yet never the less they all ar^ived to One and the same
^^nd, viz. to a L^ng Li^e, so much desired by the Philosophers, and to an
n^ne^^ Su^^ntati^n and Conservation thereof in this Valley of M^eri^s.
Therefore I Th^^ph Paracelsus Bomba^t, he Mon^^ch of Arcanum's, am (in this
season) gifted by God wi^h pe^ulia^ Endowments and that for this end, ^iz That
every Sea^cher after this high natural work, may have occasion and
en^^uragement of imitating and following me, be he wha^ he will, either
Italian, Pal^ni^^. Frenchman, German, (...) Come nither after me all ye
Phi^^^phers. A^^ron^ners, and Spa^^ri^, what high N^me soever ye ^e of, I will
(...) and open unto (...), ye (...) Doct^r^, ex^ted by me with (...) ^^^ine
(...) that C^orr^^al Regeneration, I (...) (...) you the T^^ciure, the Ar^anum,
o^ Quintess^^^, in (...) (...) very Fundamentals of all ^ysteries and (...)
p^^a^^ons de lie hid; for verily a m^n may, and Ought (...) belie^e another,
Only in such things as h^ has (...) (...) o^ by the fire (...) any one shall
introduce an^ tr^ng besides this kind of Experience into the (...) (...) (...)
Art, the^e's no cause of giving any (...) there unto; (...) Experien^^ (...),
that by the (...) made a se^ (...) of the true from the false, (...), the ^i^ht
of Nature is (...) this ^ise created, th^^ by it may be m^de evident the (...),
or trial of ev^^y t^ing; but yet to such Only as wa^k in that ^ight N^^. from
that ^ight we w^ll t^a^h by most excellent (...) (...), and (...). (...) all
^^^h ^s h^ve eve^, bef^^^ (...) time. entered upon this (...) their pe^uli^^
F^ncies, and a^^ute Spe^ular^ (...), (...), (...) this found ^tion of mine,
therefore, many (...) (...) have been made N^b^es, and (...), ^^ny (...) have
been by their ^utatitio^s and (...) (...), turned (...), R^^ti^k, such as h^ve
^^^ied Gold (...) untains in t^eir Heads, before they h^ve set the^^ ^ands to
the C^^les In the first place therefore, is (...) be learned, Di^^stions,
Di^tillations, Subhmati^^s, Re^^berations, ^xtractions, Soluti^ns,
^^agul^tions, ^ermentations, ^ixations; and every ^^strument requi^^^ to this
work, is to be known by use; such as are Glasses, ^u^^^bites, Ci^culato^ies,
Vessels ^f ^^^mes, ^^uthen Vessels, Balneas, Wind-Fornaces, Reverbera^^^es, and
other such like: Also a Marble, Coals and ^ongs. Thus at length may thou
profit in Alchimy and Medicine: But as long as thy Fancy and Opinion adhers to
thy Fiction Books, thou art not fit, or predestined to any of these things.

CHAP. II. Of the Definition of the Subject and Matter of the Tincture of the
Philosophers.
BEfore I come to the Process of the Tincture, it is expedient that I lay open
unto thee the Subject thereof; for this has always been peculiarly hidden
hitherto by the lovers of Truth. The Matter therefore, of the Tincture, [see
that you understand me according to a Spagyrical sense] is a certain thing
which does by the Art of Vulcan, pass out of three, into One Essence, or may
remain. But, that I may mention it by its proper Name, according to the use of
the Ancients, it is by many called, the Red Lion, but is known but by a few;
this Lion may by the help of Nature, and the Art of an Artist, be transmuted
into a White Eagle; so that of One are made Two, and so Lustrous, that the
splendour of Gold shines not so bright to a Spagyriss, as this does; those two
have a brighter shine if kept in One. If n^^ (...) do^ not understand and the
use of the Cabalists, and of the Ancient Astronomers, or their (...), thou art
not ^Spaan^ ordained by God for the Spagyrick Art, not (...) chosen by Nature
for the work of (...), nor created to open thy mouth concerning the Chemical
Art: The matter therefore of the Tincture, is a most excellent Pearl, and a
most precious Treasure, and the most noble thing [next the Manifestation of the
Most High, and the Consideration of Mankind] that can be in the Earth; this is
the (...) of Alchimy and of Medicine, which the Philosophers have so accurately
sought after; but because or the defect of the m^ne knowledge thereof, and i^
perfect Preparation, they arrived not to its perfect end; there is given us an
(...) only of the Tincture, by their Searchings and Experiences; but as for
the true foundation, which my (...) to imitate, is les^ t^ me, so that no body
may commi^ then (...) without Intentions. Deservedly therefore do (...) my long
Experience ^ co^^ect and regulate the Spagyris^s, and separate the false and
^Wprd^ from the true; son I have by my long Inquiries and ^^^gent Search, found
out such ways, by which I may justly reprove and change many things: But yet
notwithstanding, had I found the Experiments of the Ancient, to have been more
excellent then mine, I would not at all have taken such great Labors as I have
willingly undergone for the (...), benefit and honor of all Honest Archimists,
etc. Having therefore sufficiently declared the subject of the Tincture in such
wise as can (...) be done more faithfully between two Brethren, o^ indeed is
lawful to be done more, I will proceed to its preparation; and having first set
down the Experiences of the First Age, I will also add my Inventions, to which
the Age of Grace and Mercy ^^ at last adhere, whatsoever (...) thou, O
Sophister, make and producest in the me (...), as (...) of thy Philosophy.

CHAP. III. Of the (...) of the Ancients in order to the Philosophic (...),
and of a briefer (...) PARA C^LSVS.
THE Ancient 'Spaygrists putrefied L^y for a Philosphical Mo^th, and did
afterward (...) thence from the mo^st spirits, (...) at length the day spirits
were ele^ated; the Caput Mortum they again imbued, and moistened with the moist
spirits, and ^^structed them often thence from by distillation, and that so
long until the dry spirits were wholly elevated; then afterward they united
the abstracted Humidities, and the dry spirits together by a Pellicane, three
or four times, until all the Lily remained dry in the bottom.

Although that the first Experience gave this proceeding before fixation, yet
nevertheless our Ancestors have thereby of entimes perfectly obtained their
desire; but yet they would have lighted on a shorter way of attaining to the
treasure of the Red Lion, had they but learned the Harmony of Astronomy, with
Alchimy, as I have demonstrated it in the Apocalyp^ of Hermes. But where as
every day, as Christ speaks for the comfort of the faithful, has a ca^e proper
to it self; the Labor of the Spagyrisis before my time, was grievous and very
great, but now in this last Age, by the help of the inflowing of the Holy
Spirit, 'twill be cased by my Theory and Practick, and will be declared to all
those that shall constantly persevere in their workings with patience: E^^, I
have tried the properties of Nature, its Essences and Conditions, and have
known its conjunction, as well as its Resolution; and this is the highest and
great (...) in a Philosopher, never as yet made known to Sophisters.

When therefore the first Age gave forth the first Experience of the (...), the
Spagyrisis out of one simple Thing made two; but when that Invention did pe^^^
afterward in the middle Age, their Successors did afterward by a diligent and
thorough search light upon the two Names of that simple Thing, and styled it by
One word, viz. Lily, as being the subject of the tincture.

Then the Imitators of Nature putrefied this Matter for its time, even as the
seed in the Earth is: For nothing can be born thereof, nor can any Arcanum
break forth, or be revealed before this corruption or putrefaction. Then
afterward they abstracted the moist spirits from the Matters until at length
by the violence of the fire, the dry were likewise sublimed, that so by this
way they might attain unto maturity, (like as the Country man expects in the
season of the year where one thing is wont to ascend after another, and so to
sail away.) La^ of all, Even as after the Spring, the Summer comes, so they
(...) those fruits and d^y spirits, and brought the Magistery of the Tincture
to that pass that it became ^pe for the Harvest, and disposed it self to
Maturation.

CHAP. IV. Of the process concerning the Tincture of the Philosophers,
abreviated by Paracelsus.
THe ancient Sp. gyrisis would not have needed such a prolix labor and tedious
(...), had they learned then Work out of my School, and so attempted it; they
would fully as well have obtained them desired End, with far less costs and
labors: But now in this Season in which (...) Paracel^^^^ is becomthe Monarch
of Areanum's, the time is now at hand of the invenuon of that which was hidden
to all the Spagyrisis that were before me. And therefore I say, take Only the
blood of a Ros^e color of the Lion, and the Glue of the Eagle, the which after
then have conjoined them together coagulate them according to the old process,
and thou shall have the I incture of the Philosophers, which an infinite number
have sought after, and but a very, very few have found.

Thou Sophister, Will thou, or ^^ll thou, this is a Magistery in Nature it
self, and a Magna^^ on wonderful thing of God above Nature, and a most pre^ious
treasure in this valley of miseries. If thou beholded a ext^i^secally, it seems
to be somewhat a ^^le thing ^^ transmute another thing into a much more noble
Body then i^ was before, But thou must even brook it, and confess that this is
a Miracle produced by a Spagyrist, who by the Art of his Preparation corrupts a
visible externally (...) body, out of which be excites another m^^ noble and
most precious Essence. If now thou have likewise learned any thing from the
Aristotelian Light, or of us, or any thing of Scrapi^'s Rules, come hither, and
bring it forth by experience) unto light, and preserve the Right of the
Schools, as becomes a Lover of Honor, and a Doctor: b^t if thou know
nothing, and can do nothing, why do thou despise me as if I were an
irrational Helvetian-Calfe, and called me; Wandering-Vagaband? Art is a second
Nature, and; peculiar World, as Experience witnesses, and demonstrates against
thee and thy Idols: And therefore sometimes the Alchimist compoundeth some
simples, the which he afterward corrupts according as his necessity requires,
and thence prepares another thing; For so oftentimes, of many things is made
One thing, the which is more efficacious, and does more then Nature by herself
is able to do, as is evidently apparent in Gasia^n^^m, where is made of; also
in (...), where is made of, and in Hu^gary (...) is made of: I^ shall forbear
to speak of other transmutati^ns of Natural things, they are well known to the
Magi, and brought to light, and are more wonderful then those things that Ovid
declares in his Metamorphosis. But that you may rightly understand me, you must
seek your Dyon in the East, and your Eagle in the South, for this our assumed
or chosen Work: Thou will not find better Instruments then what Hungaria and
Hi^^ria do produce: But if thou desire to bring it from Unity, by Duality,
into Trinity; with an equal permutation and change of each, then you must
direct your journey to the South, for so in Cyprus shall you obtain your whole
desire; concerning which we must forbear the making of any larger Discourse
then what we have here at present declared. There are many more of those
Arcanum's exhibit transmutations, although but a few know them, the which
though m^nif^sted by the Lord God to any one, yet the reporting of this Art
does not therefore presently break out, but the Omnipotent God does together
with it also give understanding of concealing these and other such Arts until
the coming of Helias the A^^^^t, in which time there shall be nothing so occul^
but it shall be revealed. Ye also visibly perceive th^ugh indeed I have no
reason to speak a word of these things, because some may decide it) that in the
fire of Sulphur i^ a great ^incture for Gems, the which does ex^lt them to a
more noble degree then Nature of her self could do. But as for that Gradation
of Metals and Gems: I shall omit the Discourse of them in this place, for I
have abundantly enough written thereof in the Secret^ of (...) and in the Book
of the Vexations of the Alchimish and in other places. And now, as I have begun
the process of our Ancestors concerning the Tincture of the Natu^^llists, ^^e'l
perfectly conclude and (...) hit.

CHAP. V Of the Conclusion of the p^^^^ of the Ancients, made by Paracel^^s.
LAstly, the ancient Spag^rists did by a cert^^n ^derly augmentation of the
(...), so lon^ ^ix the Pell^^anated and dried Lily, until it come (...)
bl^^kness, with a permutation of passing through all the (...) (...)) to be
a^^ed as blood, and did therewith assume the property of the Salamander. Indeed
they rightly proceeded in such a labor; and it is very sitting and exped^ent
that Every one as aims at the getting of this Pearl, should proceed after the
same manner. 'Twill be too hard a task for me to declare this more clearly
unto thee, unless thou have learned in the School of the Al^him^^ls, to observe
the degrees of the fire, and also to change, or alter thy vessels: for then at
length ^^alt thou see, (...) presently upon the he ^^ng of thy Lily in the
Physical ^gg. it will with vonderful apparitions be made blad^^^ then the Crow:
then afterwa^ds in su^cess of time, (...) be w^iter then the (...) and th^n
la^ly 'tw^l pass through a yellow color, and become more ^ed then any blood
Seek, seek, says the chiefe^t Spag^ust, and you ^^all find; knock and it shall
be opened unto you: It will be i^pious and unseemly to (...) m^at into the
m^uth of a per^idious ^^^d, let her rather fly hereto; even as my self,
together with such as were before me, h^ve been constrained to do: Follow the
tru^ Art therefore, for this will guide thee unto the perfect kn^wledg thereof
It Is not sit to m^ke a la^ger or ^lea^er addition of any thing, then what I
have before spoken. Let thy Pna^sai^^l Schools teach thee what they will from
their unstable and slippery foundation, it ^eacheth not its end or scope.

Now (...) length when thou have been as a^^urately taught as possibly can b^^d
me by the Al^^anical industry, then at length, will the^e be nothing in the
nature of things so diffi^ult, wh^^ may not be made manifest unto thee by the
help of (...) A^^: But verily nature, barely of her sel^, never brings unto
light any thing that is e^alted to the height of its perfection, as we may here
see in this place, from and concerning the unity, or union (...) duility. But a
man must by Spagy^ical preparations) bring it to that pass, to which it was
destinated by nature* Thus much therefore let suffice concerning the process of
the Ancients, and my correcting of the ^ncture of the Philosophers, as to what
pertains unto its operation.

Furthermore, when we have that Egyptian, or Herme^^^l treasure in our hands,
it is expedient that we convert it to our bene^it: and this may be done after a
twosold manner, by the Spa^yrical magistery. The ^ull way is the application of
it to the ^enewing of the body; the latter is the using it for the
^ansinutation of metals. And whereas I Theophrastus Paraecelsies have diver^^y
experienced them both, I am willing to deseribe and (...) the same down
according to the signs of the wo^k, and according as they have be^t^r and more
perfectly appeared in, and by the testimo^^y of Experience.

CHAP. VI. the Transmutation of Metris by the projection of the Medicine.
IF you would make use of the Tincture of the Philosophers for transmutation,
then first of all, there must be one pound thereof projected upon a thousand
^ound of mo^ten Sol. then at ^ength will thy medicine be prepared for the
transmutation of the leprous humic^y. or juice of the metals. This is a
wonderful work in the Light of Nature viz. that by the Magistery, or Operation
of the Spagy^ist, a metal should perish from what it was before, and become
another. And this has even rendered that same Aristotle, together with his
ill-founded Philosophy, a foolish man: for ve^ily the Ru^tical fellows in
Hungaria, when they have thrown some ^^on into a certain Fountain, called,
^^pserb^o^nen and there les^ it, its time, it is consumed into a Rust, which
being melted with a blast at the fire, (...) presently becomes pure Venus, and
never more re^urns into ^^on. Likewise in the mountain (...) commonly so
called, they st^ein a Lixi^i^m, or a ^y, ^ut of Marchasites, in the which I^on
is presently turned into most excellent, highly graduated Venus, and more
malleable then the other natural Venut is.

These and many more such like things are better known to plain simple men,
then to the Sophisters, viz. the transmutation of one Species, and kind of
metal into another. But yet these Arts, partly by reason of the very much
contempt of the Ignorant, and partly because of the just envy and displeasure
of Artificers, are almost quite hidden. Verily I have in Istria, oftentimes
brought Venus beyond 24 degrees (alias 38) so that the color of Sol could not
ascend higher, 'twas constant in the trial by Antimony and the Quartation, the
which Venus I have made use of, in all respects as the other.

But now although the Artists of old were very desirous of this Arcanum, and
sought after it with the highest diligence, yet nevertheless 'twas but a very
few that could bring it by a perfect preparation to its end. For the
transmutation of a meaner metal into a better, bring^ with it many difficulties
and hindrances, as that of Jupiter into Luna, or of Venus into Sol. Happily it is
the pleasure of God, that the Magnalia of Nature be hidden from many men,
because of their sins; for when th^s Tincture has been sometimes prepared by
Artists, and that they could not bring their projection to take effect^ it
happened that by reason of their negligence and ill^ keeping it, it was
devoured by Hens, whose feathe^ thereupon fell off, and grew up again, this, I
my se^^ saw. By this way, through the abuse perpetrated by th^^ negligence of
the Artists, came Transmutation into Medicine and Alchimy; for, when they could
not in the least make use of that Tincture according to their desire^ they
coverted it to the Renovation of men, as you sha^ hear more at large in the
following Chapter.

CHAP. VII. Of the Renovation of Men.
SOme of the chief and ancient Philosophers in Egypt lived by this Tincture an
hundred and fifty years: likewise the lives of many men have been producted and
prolonged for some Ages, as is most evidently mentioned in many histories; this
will hardly seem credible to any body, for the virtue thereof is so admirable,
that it continues, and lengthens out the body more then is possible for its
^^-born nature to do; and it conserves it in that degree so firmly, that it
live^ safe and free from all infirmities. And though it may have old age; yet
nevertheless does it appear as if constituted in its former juvenility.

The Tincture, therefore, of the Philosophers, is an universal medicine, and
consumes all diseases, whatsoever nam^ they are called by, like an invisible
fire: its Dose it very little* but its operation is most powerful; I have
thereby cured the Leapry, Lue^ Venerea, D^opsie, Falling Sickness, Colic,
Gu^ta, and such like diseases: also the Wo^f, Cancer, Noli-me-^anger^, Fisiula,
and such kind of internal diseases, and that more certainly then is credible:
concerning which, Germany, France, Italy, Poland, Bohemia, etc. will yield
sufficient testimony. And now Sophister look back upon Theophrastus
Paracelsus; How can thy Apollo, Machaon, and Hypocra^^ be able to stand against
me? This is the Catholicon of the Philosophers, by which all the Philosophers
pursued long life, and resisted diseases; and did by this universal Tincture
most excellently, and most effectually obt^in it, and styled it (according as
seemed them good) The Tincture of the Philosophers: for what can there be
greater in all medicine, then the mundifying of such a body, by which
mundification al supe^fluity is even radically and totally taken away
therefrom, and transmuted; for heal but the seed, and all things are become
perfect. What profit is there in the most untowardly-sounded purgations of the
Sophisters, when as they take away nothing of that which they ought to remove.
And therefore this is the most excellent foundation of a true Physician; viz. A
Regenerating of nature, and a Restoring of youth; then afterward the new
essence it self, expels all that which is contrary to it self. In order to this
Regeneration, the powers and virtues of the Tincture of the Philosophers, are
sound to be wonderfully excellent, and are used with much secresi^, and
absconded by the true Spagyrists even to this time.

FINIS,
THE MANUAL OR, A TREATISE OF THE PHILOSOPHICAL, MEDECINAL STONE.
The PREFACE to the READER.
REader, Forasmuch as it has pleased God to permit the Spirit of Medicine
truly to Operate by Machaon, Podalirias, Apollo, and Hypocrates, etc. that so
true Medicine ^hining through the Clouds, (for it cannot possibly be known
fully and plainly by them) might proceed forth unto the light, and be
manifestod unto ^^n: He was also pleased by that same means to prohibit the
spirit of Darkness from wholly suppressing and quenching the Light of Nature,
whereby the Magnalia of God which lie hidden in Arcana's, Quintessences,
Magisteries, and Elixirs, would have been unknown. God therefore has ordained
certain Mediums, that so the diligent search of such Arcana's and Mysteries
might furthermore be implanted in ^^n by the good Spirits, even as some men
(there have been, ^h^) have received Angelical Natures from the Heaven in which
the Angels are: Such men could afterward (as being endowed with a perfect
understanding of Nature) search thereinto, and into its daily Course, more
profoundly then other men, and compare the pure with the impure, and separate
these two, and so alter and change the Pure, that it seemed to some a thing
impossible: For they (as being natural and true Physicians) do know how by
convenient Medium's to help Nature, and to bring ^^r by their Arts, to
perfection: And therefore all imperfect and diabolical Operations, must give
place to them, even as a lie does to the truth and perfection. It Is beh^veful I
say, that we speak the truth, if no would arrive to a happy End: And if it be
absolutely lawful to lay hold upon the truth, let it be no shame to any one to
seck it, whatsoever place is be in.

So then, let no body take it in evil part, that even I my self have loved it,
and sought after it; for 'twas expedien: for me to follow Her, and not that She
should have sought after me: Whosoever will see a strange City, he must not lie
at home in his C^uch, nor must he be a rosting of Pears in his Chimney; it is
not sitting that he should be made a Doctor there. There can be no famous
Cosmographer made at his table only: Nor no Chyromancer in a Parlour: nor no
Geomancer in a Cellar. So* neither can we obtain true Medicine without
abundance of diligent search. It Is God that makes a true Phisician, but not
without trouble and labor, as himself says, viz. Thou shall eat of the
Labors of thy hands, and it shall be well with thee. Whereas therefore, to
SEE, precedes the truth, and such things as the sight perceive^, so the heart
is accordingly either exhilerated, or affright^ned: I^ will not be lost labor
to me, nor any infamy, to visit (or go traveling into) other places, and to
adhere to such men as fools do contemn, that so I may try what lies hid in the
Limbus of the Earth, and may fulfill the Office and Duty of a true Phisician,
that so Medicine may be administered to our Neighbors benefit, according to
Gods appointment, and that least it should bring loss and damage rather then
benefit: But this it not to be done by an idle, lazy man. Let him that will
(therefore) set in his Couch: My journying to and fro delights me, together
with such things as God and time permits me to search into, and see.

But, because of the Candid Readers, who desire to learn, and who love the
Light of Nature, I have thought good to write this Book, that so they might
know the foundation of my true Medicine, and may reject the tris^es of the evil
Physicians, and may be in some measure able to defend my Cause against them:
But I suppose that even these things will be accounted fabulous; For those
^gregious Fellows have very well known all these things long ago: And the
Ass-like-Doctor has long since had these things in his Budget, but yet he
shall not so easily obtain them: For verily he that would understand this Book,
must be a good Alchimist, such an one a^ the Coals do not hurt, and such an
one as is not tired with the daily smoke: So then, let these things be
pleasing to whom they list, I will compel none; but this I say, That this will
no^ fall without some fruit, howsoever the lying Phisicians (my Adversaries)
may blame and accuse me.

THE MANUEL OF THE STONE OF THE PHILOSOPHERS.
IF you would (by Vulcan's Art) frame the Philosophers Stone, which for very
weighty causes we call a perpetual or perfect Bals^m; you are first of all to
know and consider how that Stone is to be placed materially before thy Eyes,
and be made visible and sensible; and likewise how the virtue or fire thereof
may come forth and be known. But for the clearer setting forth of this my
intention, let us borrow an Example of Common Fire, viz. By what means the
virtue or power thereof shows it self, and becomes visible: And that is done on
this wise. First of all by the Vulcanick Art is Fire smitten out of the Flint:
Now indeed this Fire can do nothing unless it has such a matter as is friendly
to it, upon which it is capable to operate, such as is Wood, Rosin, Oil, or
such like things, as it is naturally easily combustible; When therefore the
said Fire lights upon some such a like thing, it proceeds on to an uncessant
operation, unless it be destroyed or impeaded by its contrary, or unless the
fuel sail by which it multiplies it self; for if Wood or such like be put
thereto, then does its force become stronger and stronger, and so it always
operates until there be no more fuel put thereunto. Now then, as the Fire
exercises and shows its operation in the Wood, even so is the same thing done
with the Stone of the Philosophers, or the perpetual Balsom in Man's Body.

If that Stone be made by a prudent Phisician, out of a convenient matter, and
by a philosophic manner, and (after a due consideration of all the
circumstances of man) it be administered unto him, it does then renovate and
restore the Organs of Life, in such wise as if Wood were put to a Fire, by
which the well-nigh dead Fire is cherished, and a shining and clear Flame
procured: From hence therefore it is evident, that there is much placed in the
matter of this Balsom, forasmuch as it is behoveful that it have a singular
Harmony with the body of man, and may so exercise its virtue, as that the Human
Body may be safe from all the accidents as might be able to happen thereunto
from such a matter.

And therefore there is not only much placed in the preparation of the Stone
or Balsom, but it is much more behooveful to know the true matter it self, that
is thereto sit; and furthermore, to prepare and use it as is sitting, viz.
soberly and prudently, that so such a Medicine may be able to purge away all
the desilements of the Blood, and other superfluities, and may induce Health in
the room of the Disease. It Is therefore expedient for a true and honest
Phisician, to have a good knowledge, and not to regard ambition and pomp, nor
to appoint things doubtful or contrary, nor to trust an Apothecary too much,
but well to know the Disease and Diseased, or otherwise ye will always heal
sinisterly, and will get nothing thence-from, but only this, viz. The sick is
deluded, and only deceived by the pride and ignorance of the foolish and unmeet
Physician But this is a great sin, and such as will not go unpunished: For what
is it else but a voluntary wickedness, viz. For any one to demand money, and a
reward for that which he knows Nothing of, and yet he will be a Master, but with
infamy enough; For many men do dis-esteem money, and not regard it, could they
but be rightly advised and informed: But if this be not done, they lose both
their Bodies, and Fortunes: And yet nevertheless it is counted a praise to
demand money and fees; but believe it he that lists, for my part I Will reckon of
such a Doctor after another-gess-manner: For it is manifest, that of such
Doctors (who in their own conceits are most highly learned) there is not a tenth
part that has a right knowledge of Simples, and much less that are certain of
what they command to be done, and how the Medicine is boiled by the Apothecary;
so it often comes to pass, that such a Doctor orders such or such a simple to
be taken in his composition, which himself never knew, and happily the Apothecary
much less; and verily it frequently is so, that the Apothecary has it not at
all; and yet this Medicine must be called Perfect, and the sick must drink it
off as a good Medicine, and pay deer enough for it, but as to the Event, that
the Patient feels; for although it be no ways profitable to him as to his
health, yet it is profitable to the Doctor and Apothecary, as to the filling of
their Purses. But if the Doctor and Apothecary themselves should be possessed
with the like Disease, they would not take such a like Medicine: Therefore it
may well be guest, how miserably and wickedly they act, and that it is most
highly necessary for them to order their Affairs otherwise, to amend their
errors, and to follow better things: But I fear 'twill be a hard matter to tame
and master old Dogs.

But to return to my purpose, (from whence a just zeal to the miserable and
forlorn sick persons withdrew me) and to give satisfaction concerning it, I
say, That it is not so much expedient only to prate or boast of the
Philosophers Stone, but it is necessary that that Stone be framed and prepared
out of a convenient Matter, and be discreetly used: But know, that many of the
Ancients have in their parabolical writings sufficiently discovered that
Matter, and have, moreover, disclosed the Operation under figurate expressions,
but yet have not wholly, and perfectly, manifested it; that so the foolish ones
might not abuse it, and yet their sons might not have it hidden from them.

But whereas they are but a few that have followed them, and that have aptly
set upon the thing, these secrets have, in process of time, been, as 'twere,
blotted out of remembrance, and Galenical fables have crept into the room
thereof: But as the foundation thereof was at first laid, so does it even yet
stand in the same state, or rather grow daily worse and worse: This you may see
in their Herbaries, how do they torment themselves therein? How do the Germans
mix Italy with Germany; when as, notwithstanding, Germany does not need those
ultramarine herbs, but has even sufficiency of perfect medicine in her self.
And therefore lest the truth should be constreined to give place to a Lie, and
least the darknesses of Galen, and his Accomplices, should quench or suppress the
Light of nature in medicine, it is expedient for me Theophrastus to speak in
this little book, not as an imaginary Physician, but as a knowing one, and as
such an one as is not ashamed of his actions in Medicine, and who (by the grace
of God assisting) have had good proof and experience in many sick persons, such
as thou Galenist du^st not to have visited: Tell me now, thou Galenical Doctor,
from whence came thy foundation? Do thou not place the bridle upon the
horses tail? Did thou ever cure the Gout? Did thou ever dare to go to the
Leprous? Have thou cured the Dropsy? I believe, and that upon good reason,
that thou will be mute, and suffer Theophrastus to be thy Master. But if thou will learn, learn and see what I shall here write and say; viz. That the body
of man has no need of thy Herby-chariot, especially in Chronick and long
continued diseases, the which (by reason of Ignorance) thou call wholly
incurable; for thy Herbs are too too weak for these diseases, and cannot, of
their own nature, find out the Center of the disease.

Neither will thou be able to do any thing with thy Pills, unless to purge the
Excrements only; and withal, because of their inconveniency, thou often
expellest the good with the bad; the which cannot possibly be done, without
the great damage of the sick; and therefore well might those Pills have been
omitted: Furthermore, neither do thy Syrups profit any thing, yea rather are as
a thing of no value; and bring such a nauseate to him that takes them, because
of their horrible and loath some favor, that they burden the sick, and do
afterward induce gripings and danger, and do operate against nature.

But now I Will leave the rest of thy absurd and improper medicaments, for that
they fight directly against nature, nor should be made use of by any means.
Whereas, therefore, those things that I have spoken are true, and that there is
no true medicine to be found in Galen, Rhasis, or Mesue, that can set upon the
said diseases in their root, and purge them out, (even as the fire mundisies
the skin of the Salamander;) it necessarily follows, that the Cure of
Theophrastus is far different from the Galelenical Fantasies, and that his
Curing flows forth from the fountain of Nature; otherwise Theophrastus should
be as reproach-worthy as they.

If therefore we would follow Nature, and use natural medicine, let us see what
things they are, amongst all the others, that are most convenient in medicine
for the body of man; viz. for the Conserving it (by reason of their virtue and
efficacy) in soundness and health, even to the term of the predestined death.

This then, if considered of, I doubt not but that 'twill be on all hands
Consest, that Metalline things have the greatest agreement with the body of
man; and that the perfect Metalls, by reason of their perfection, but
principally their radical humidity, are able to do much upon the body of man:
for that a man is also a partaker of that Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, which
does in some measure, though hidden, ^est in metals, and metalline things. Now
then like is to be applied to like, the which is wonderfully profitable to
nature, so it be rightly done, the which is a great secret in Medicine, yea,
may be called an Arcanum.

What wonder therefore, is it, if excellent, unheard of, and inseparable Cures
do follow, and such as ignorant men accounted impossible to be done?

But that I may not digress any further, I must for brevities sake, here hint
what I have determined to write in this Book; for I have a mind of treating
more clearly here in this place concerning true medicine, then elsewhere. But
we have before toldhow man has his original of Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt, even
as Metals have; this therefore being sufficiently declared in the book, P
ARAMIRV M, it is needless to repeat it here* wherefore I shall only show you,
how the aforesaid Stone of the Philosophers may be known, and in some measure
prepared: Know therefore of a Certainty, that there is nothing so small, out of
which any thing is to be made, that can stand without Form; for all things are
Formed, generated, multiplied, and destroyed in their Concordancy, and propet
agreeableness, and do show their Originality, whereby it may be perceived, what
it was in the beginning; and that, that same also must be in the Vltimate
matter, and that, that which runs, or steps in between, is like to that
imperfection which nature admixeth in the Generation.

But whereas such Accidents may be separated by Vulcan, least they might do
somewhat that may be an hindrance, Nature may in this case be amended: and this
is likewise done in this Stone; for if thou would make it of the right proper
matter (the which may be well enough known by the aforementioned
circumstances) it is necessary that thou take from it its superfluities, and
frame, multiply, and augment it in its Concordancy, or uniformity, like
another, or third thing: for without its Concordancy it cannot be thus done,
for Nature has left it imperfect here, forasmuch as it has not framed the
Stone, but the proper Matter, and is hindered by accidents, whereby it is
incapable of doing those things that the Stone, when prepared, is able to
effect: and therefore such a Matter, without preparation, is, in respect of the
Stone, but an half and imperfect thing, and stands not in any Concordancy, and
Harmony, whereby it may be called perfect, or may be helpful for the health of
man's body. The Microcosm affords thee an example of this thing: for behold, man
as formed by the working Framer, into a man only, is not an whole and perfect
work, whilst standing out of his concordancy, but is but an half-work, until
the framing of the woman suitable to him, and then he is a complete entire work.

But both of them are Earth; and so now these two Earths do constitute, or make
up an entire man, capable of Augmentation and Growth; and this is done by the
thus framed concordancy. In such wise must be done with the Philosophers Stone,
if you would have it Renovate as well Men as Metals: If it be unburthened of
its superfluous Accidents, and placed in its Concordancy, it causes wonderful
effects in all Diseases: Except this be done, all your Attempts thereabouts are
but vain.

But now if you would thus place it into its Concordancy, it is expedient that
you reduce it into its First Matter, that so the Male may act upon the Female,
and that its outside may be turned inwards, and its inside outward, and that
both the seeds, viz. the Male and Female, may be enclosed in their own
concordancy, and be by Vulcan's help brought to a more then perfect condition,
and be exalted in their degree, and withal, may from it self pour in all
virtue, (as being a clarified, temperate, and qualified Essence) into man's
Body, and likewise into Metals, and may render them sound and whole, driving
out all the desilements by way of expulsion, and that the good in the blood of
man may thereby be drawn to the due places, by the means of attraction, that so
the Microcosms which is posited in the Limbus of the Earth, and framed of the
Earth, may by this Medicine as being like himself, be Radically, and not
imaginarily, but most assuredly restored to health, or preserved therein. This
therefore, is a Mystery of Nature, and such a secret as every Physician ought
necessarily to know; And indeed every one that is born of the Astral Medicine is
capable of comprehending it: But that I may more clearly describe the Matter*
and the preparation of a Medicine so excellent, that so an entrance may be
given to the Sons of Learning, who love the truth.

You must know, that Nature has given us a certain thing in which (as in a
chest) are mysteriously concluded, or comprehended 1. 2. 3. the virtue and
power whereof is more then enough sufficient for the conservation of the health
of the Microcosm, insomuch that after preparation, it expels all imperfections,
and is a true Defensive against old Age, and by us is called a Balsom.

But now you must first know what thing it is that Nature has placed such a
number in; for I cannot describe it thee more clearly, for many reasons

But as to the preparation thereof, neither Galen, Rhasis, or Mesue, understood
it, nor shall those that follow them attain it: For this Medicine has such a
preparation, as your Pill-sellers attain not unto, and much less for an
Helvetian-Calf to apprehend. Moreover it has as it were celestial and singular
operations; for it does purify and renovate by (as 'twere) a regenerating way
as you may read more at large in my Archidoxis; and withal, well and advisedly
take notice of the Original and the Essence, together with the virtue of Metals
and Metalick things. He therefore that has ears to hear, let him hear and see
whether or no Theophrastus writes lies or truth, and whether or no he speaks
groundlesly and from the Devil, as thou Sophister triflest and supposest, who
art thy self environed with the Devil, ^yes and Darkness, and call nothing
Good but what thy foolish head is able to comprehend, and what serves for thy
fancy without any previous labor: For thou see but with one Eye, and
erroneously wandrest, nor go thou to the right Window of the Kitchen: But
yet thou may without offending me, wind about thy intricate thread, and search
for the Center of the Labyrinth amongst the dark stars. But notwithstanding, if
thou shall at any time hap to make use of thy Wisdom, and consider what thing
the Paracelsian-Art is founded upon, and how lame thy hotch-potch-fragments
are, there would not be that contrariety betwixt thee and Paracelsus: For, as
concerning the things whereof I now do, and shall briefly write, whereby my
Astral Disciples may apprehend and enjoy them, and glory of them; these things
I say, may by the diligence of such an one as is not ashamed to learn, be well
understood, there being nothing so difficult but may be known, and learned by
labor and study.

The practice therefore of this Work, is as follows.

The preparation of the Matter of the STONE.
Take the Mineral Electrum, filed; put it into its own Sperm, [Others read it
thus: Take the Immature Mineral Electrum, put it into its own Sphere:] that
the desilements and supersluities thereof may be washed away, and purge it to
the utmost, as much as you can with Stibium, after a Chemical manner, lest that
otherwise thou should suffer loss, by reason of its impurity. Then resolve it
in the stomach of the Ostrich which is born in the earth, and is comforted and
strengthened in its virtue, by the sharpness of the Eagle. But when the
Electrum is consumed, and has, after its solution, gotten a Marigold-colour,
be not unmindful of reducing it into a spiritual transparent essence,
resembling the color of true Amber: then add half so much only of the
extended Eagle as the corporal Electrum (before its preparation) weig^ed, and
oft-times abstract thence-from the stomach of the Ostrich, for so thy Electrum
will be still more and more spiritual. But when the stomach of the Ostrich is
wearied, or spent with labor, it is needful that thou refreshest, or renewest
it, and from time to time abstractest it. Then lastly, when it has again lost
its sharpness, add the Tartarizated Quintessence, yet in such a proportion, as
to overtop it the height of four singers, that so it may be deprived of its
redness, and may pass, or distill over together therewithal: this do so long
and so often, until it becomes white of it self: Now then when it is enough for
thou will see with thine eyes, how it will by little and little ^it it self for
sublimation) and thou perceivest that sign, sublime it, and so the Electrum
will be converted into the whiteness of the exalted Eagle, and it is brought
thus to pass, and is transmuted by a little labor. This now is that we seek
for, for our use in Medicine; with the which thou may make a safe progress in
many Diseases, which will not yield to vulgar medicines. Thou may likewise
convert this same into a water, an oil, or a red powder, and make use thereof
in all such medicinal cases as need requires.

Give me leave to tell thee, and that truly, that there is not a better
foundation for the whole structure of Medicine, then what lies hid in the
Electrum. Albeit I do not deny but that (according to what I write in my other
Books) there lie hid even in other Mineral things great secrets, but then they
require a longer and greater labor, and besides it is more difficult to use
them aright, especially for the unskilful; sor if such make use of them, there
accrews more hurt then good thence from.

For these respects therefore, it is not laudable for every Alchymist to
exercise the Medicinal Art, if he be ignorant thereof. It would be expedient
that, as to this, some let and bar were here instituted, that so an inhibition
might be imposed on such putatitious, imaginary Physicians. For my part, I Will
not bear their blame, not acknowledge them for disciples, seeing they follow not
the truth; but account of them as notorious deceivers, and sloathful Loyterers,
such as snatch the bread out of the true disciples mouths, and of set-purpose
hurt men, esteeming neither Conscience, nor Art. But in our said Electrum
prepared, there lies so great a virtue of Curing men, that there cannot be
sound a more certain and more excellent medicine in the whole world.

Indeed the Galenical Triacle-selling Doctors do call it Poison, and oppose it,
not knowingly, but out of pride and mere foolishness. I my self do likewise
grant that in its preparation it is a poison, and as great, or greater then
that of the Tyrian Serpent, or Adder, that is put into Triacle; but that it
remains poisonous after in preparation, that is as yet indemonstrable: for
though to some blockish brains it be incomprehensible, yet does nature always
tend unto its perfection, and it may therefore be much rather brought to that
pass by convenient Arts, then alone. But I Will grant yet farther, that after its
preparation, it is a greater venom, and more vehement then before; but yet it is
only such a venom as is so directed, as to seek after its like, and to find
out fixed and other incurable diseases, and expel them; not in such wise, as
to suffer the Disease to be operative, and so hurtful, but it is, as it were, an
enemy to the disease, and attracts to it self the like matter, and radically
absumes it; and it does so wash, even as Soap scoureth off the spots in soul
clothes, and together with the said spots, does it self also go off, and leaves
the clothes purified, unhurt, clean, and fair.

So then, this venom (as thou call it) has a far other and better
efficacy then thy Axu^gia, which thou art wont to make use of, in the cure of
the French disease, and which thou oftener anointest withal, then the Currier
does his skins. For this Arcanum which lies hid in this medicanient, has in
its self a well proportioned, well-prepared, and excellent essence; such as
admits not of any Comparison with other poison, unless you apprehend me
according as my self said before, and it is as much different from thy ^Span,
which thou anointest with; and from thy Precipitate, as to virtue and efficacy,
as the heaven is from the earth it is therefore called, and indeed is a Medicine
blessed by God, and is not revealed unto all; for it is much better corrected
then those mucky, dirty medicaments that the slow-paced Doctor has in his
gown, or has sil^red through his double Strainers, or Fools-bag: Furthermore,
this blessed Medicine has thrice greater force and operative virtue in all
diseases, whatsoever name they are called by, then have all the Storehouses
and Shops thou ever saw. But now I attained not hereunto by idleness,
sitting still, and ^loth, nor did I find it in an Vrinal; but by Traveling,
and as thou termest it ^ Wandering: I perceived that if I would indeed know, and
not conjecture only, 'twas necessary for me to learn by much diligence and
labor. But as for thee, thou suckest thy Medicine and Artour of the old
Mattress, or Pallet, old Cushion, or Couch, wherein the Necromantick Old Wife
sits; it is she who has inspired thee, and has covered thy Celestial
Intellect with a Blew Cap for Medicine: It does not therefore ^^ all repent me
of my Journyings, for I shall continue to be thy Master, and trace the steps of
Machaon, which spring forth from the Light of Nature, even as a flower does by
the heat of the Sun. But that the Work I have intended may not be retarded, and
be left imperfect, we shall go on to observe how the procedure is to be made,
and what virtue and property Medicinal Nature has given to this Philosophical
Stone, and how it may be brought to the end.

The Residue of the Preparation follows.
Thy Electrum being destroyed, as aforesaid, if then would make a farther
progress, and arrive to thy wished end, Take the destroyed and flying-made, or
Volatilized Electrum, as much of it as thou have a desire to perfect, and put
it in a Philosophical Egg, and seal it excellently well, that nothing may
evaporate: Let it stand so long in an Athanor, until it does of itself, without
any addition, begin to be resolved from above; in such wise that there be an
appearance of, as 'twere, an Island in the midst of that sea, the which does
day by day grow less and less, till at last it be changed into the blackness of
Shoomakers-black, or Ink: This blackis the Bird which flies without wings by
night, the which even the first cloestial dew has by a perpetual Coction, and
ascension, and descension, transmuted into the blackness of the head of a Crow,
the which does afterward assume the Peacocks tail, and then gets the feathers
of the Swan, and last of all, receives the highest Redness of the whole world;
the which is a sign of its fiery nature, by the which fire it expells all the
Accidents of the body, and cherishes the cold and dead members.

Such a Preparation as this is done (according to the saying of all
Philosphers) in one only Vessel, one For^ac^, one Fire, the vaporous Fire
never ceasing.

So then, that Medicine is as 'twere Celestial and Perfect, or at least may be
made a more then perfect or Medicine, by its own proper Flesh and Blood, and by
its internal Fire, produced and turned outward, as was spoken of but now,
whereby both all the desilements of Metals are washed away, and by which also
the hidden parts of Metals are manifested: For that same More-then-perfect
Medicine, can do all things, it penetrates all things, and infuseth, or pours
in health in that very self-same time when it expels the Evil, and Disease.
Therefore there is no Medicine in the Earth that is likeit. Herein then exercise
thy self, and be strong, for this is it which will bring thee praise and glory;
neither will thou be an imaginary, but a knowing Physician, yea, thou will be
even constrained to love thy Neighbor; for such a Divine Arcanum cannot be
perceived or understood by any one without Divine Assistance, nor its virtue,
for it is unspeakable and infinite, in, and by which the Omnipotent God is to be
known

But know, that there is no Solution made in thy Electrum, unless it has
perfectly run through the Circle of the seven Spheres thrice; for this Number
becomes it, and this Number it must fulfill: Give heed therefore to the
Preparation, for it is the cause of Solution, and to the glorified, destroyed,
and spiritualized Electrum, use the Tartarizated Areanum to wash off the
superfluities which happened in the Preparation, least you labor in vain: But
yet notwithstanding, nothing of the Arcanum of Tartar will remain there, but
you are to proceed with it only circularly, according to the aforesaid Number;
for so it easily becomes of it self in the Philosophical Eg, and Vapor of the
Fire, a Philosophical Water, the which the Philosophers call a Viscous Water:
It will also coagulate it self, and represent it self in all colors, and at
last be adorned with the highest Redness.

I am prohibited to write more plain of this Mystery, it is at the Dispose of
the Divine power; For this Air is most assuredly the Gift of God, and therefore
all men cannot understand it, God bestows it on whom it pleases him, nor will
be suffer it to be sorcibly wrested out of his hand, but will alone have the
Honor herein: Whose Name be blessed for evermore:

Amen.
Now follows the use of the STONE.
It Is likewise expedient that I write of the use of this Medicine, and its
Weight: Know therefore, that the Dose of this Medicine is so little and small,
that it is scarcely credible, and that it must be taken only in Wine, or the
like; but however taken, it must be of the very smallest Quantity, because of
its heavenly force, virtue, and efficacy; for it is only for this end
manifested unto man, that so no imperfection may remain in Nature; and it is so
provided and predestined by God, that the Virtue and Arcanum thereof may be
produced by Art, to the intent that all creatures may be constrained to be
profitable unto man, as being Gods Image; but above all, that the Omnipotency
of God may be made known. He therefore that receives his understanding from
God, to him shall this Medicine be given: But the ignorant Galenical Drone will
never be able to comprehend it, but rather loath and abhor it; for all his
(...) are Darknesses, whereas this Work does opera^^ (...) in the Light of
Nature. Thus in few, but true words, have thou the Root of all true Medicine,
and its Original, such as no body shall pluck from me; no, though Rhasis with
all his soul offspring be staringmad; though Galen be as bitter as Gall, and
Avicen gnasheth his teeth, and Mesue lies largely, yet it will be too high for
them all, and Theophrastus will stand firm in the truth: Whereas on the other
side, the maimed works of the Apothecaryes, and the sinearings of the
Physicians, together with all their pomp and foundation, will tumble down.

One thing more it is convenient for me to speak, because my present Writing
will seem obscure to many: thou will happily say, My Theophrastus, then speak
too briefly and intricately unto me, I know not thy kind of speaking, and how
rightly thou declarest thy things and Arcanaes, this Writing of thine will not
profit me at all. Hereto I answer thus: Pearls belong not to Swine, nor a long
tale to a Goat, for Nature would not give it them; therefore I say, He to whom
God will vouchsafe it. he shall find sufficiently, and more then enough, yea
more then he has been desirous of.

I write these things for an entrance and beginning, follow thou on prudently,
neither shun thou study, labor, or the Coals: Let not the bragging praters
seduce or hinder thee, nor turn thee aside from that diligence which is
requisite, for by perpetual Meditations, are many fruitful and profitable
things found out: Wherefore accept of what I give thee in good part, and apply
thy self to make use of the Fountain, so shall thou have no need to drink out
of the pits of the Philosophers, nor shall thou have any thing to do with the
dead-buryers, but shall be able to serve thy Neighbor well, and bring praise
and honor to God: He that is a master of Hares dung, even so let him remain,
with him is neither help nor counsel. These things I was willing briefly to set
down in this my little Book of the Philosophers Stone, least men might imagine
that Theophrastus cures many Diseases by Diabolical means. If thou followest me
aright, thou shall do the same, and thy Medicine shall be like unto the Air,
which pierces through all open things, and is in all things driving forth all
six Dise^ses, and immixing it self Radically, whereby health ^^^y succeed in
the place of the Disease: For out of this Fountain does True Aurum potabile
abundantly flow, nor can better be any where found.

Accept of these Instructions as a faithful Admonition, and do not reject and
vilisie Theophrastus before thou know what he is: I am ^^willing to set down
any thing else in this Book, though it would have been necessary to say
somewhat of Aurum potabile, and to speak of the Liquor of (...),
philosophically. But I shall only hint at these things, the which if they are
but rightly prepared, are not to be contemned in their virtues. But because my
other books do ^eat much, and declare sufficiently enough as to these things,
viz. What a true Physician ought to know, I will even here forbear, hoping that
this little Book will not be altogether fruitless, but rather be a sufficient
Counselor to the sons of Learning. The Lord bestow his Grace for his Own glory
and honor:

Amen.
Paracelsus his way of Extracting Mercury out of all METALS.
TO extract a Mercury out of Metalline Bodies, is nothing else but to resolve
them, or reduce them into their first Matter, that is, into Running-Mercury,
viz. such a Mercury as it was in the Center of the Earth, before the Generation
of Metals, viz. a moist and viscous Vapor, containing in it the Mercury and
Sulphur of Nature invisibly, which are the principles of all the metals, such a
Mercury is of unspeakable Virtues, and possesses Divine Secrets.

This Reduction is made by a Mercurial Water, which neither John de Rupescissa,
nor others, what ever boasts they have made thereof, ever knew: It is therefore
by much diligence to be known, and to be handled or improved with unwearied
Labor. On this wise therefore is the said Mercurial Water to be prepared.

Take Mercury seven times sublimed, with Vitriol, Salt-nitre and Alum, three
pounds.

Of Sal Armoniack clear and white, thrice sublimed from Salt, one pound and an
half.

Both of them being ground together, and Alcaolizated, sublime them in a
Sublimatory in Sand for nine hours: Let all cool; then take off the Sublimate
with a Feather, and sublime it with the remainder, as before: Repeat this
operation four times, until it will sublime no more, and the Mass remain black
in the bottom, and flowing like to wax: cool it, and take it out, and grind it
again, and put it in a Glass-Dish, and imbibe it oftentimes with the Water of
Sal Armoniack, but let it be the prepared Water, and let it Coagulate of its
own accord, and then again imbibe it, and dry it, even till nine or ten times,
until it will be almost no more coagulated. Then grind it subtly upon a
Marble, dissolve it in a moist place, into a fair Oil, the which you must
rectify by distillation in Ashes, from all fece and residence. Diligently keep
this most chief and principal Water, of the which -- Take eight Ounces, and put
thereinto one Ounce and a half of most purely mundisied Leaves or Plates of the
best Sol or Luna, set it a digesting in hot Ashes, in a shut Glass, for eight
hours: Thou shall see thy body in the bottom of the Vessel, transmuted into a
subtle Vapor, or Mercury: The Solution being made of the whole Mercurial
water, separate it from the first Matter by Sublimation in an Alembick, with a
gentle fire, and keep it in a glass vessel diligently. By this means shall thou
have the most true Mercury of a body, the use whereof in desperate Cases
(provided it be wisely used) is miraculous, and caelestial; and therefore not
to be revealed to the unworthy.

The Sulphur of Metalls, by Theophrastus.
The Sulphur of Metalls is an Oilyness extracted out of them, the which is
endued with abundance of virtues for the health of Man. One Sulphur is
extracted out of Metalls before they have endured the fire: as for example, Out
of golden, or silver Marcasites, etc. according to the nobility of the Mineral,
so is the Sulphur noble and excellent. So likewise out of the Mineral of a
Marcasite, and Cobolt, each as its nature and propriety is.

The more common way of the extraction thereof is this: viz. You must take
Vinegar excellently well distilled, such as has stood for 24 hours upon a
caput mortuum of Vitriol, Salt Nitre, and Alum distilled, and been distilled
by an Alembick thence from. This, I say, must thou power upon the pulverized
metalline body, in a glass that it may overtop it seven singers, and set it to
digest in a Horse-belly for nine days: then take the colored Vinegar, and
distill it in ashes, even to the Sulphurous oil, the which you must rectify
in a B. or at the, so shall thou have a most true Sulphur of the metalline
body, the which thou must rightly make use of according to thy discretion. An
extraction may likewise be made by a sharp and well-depurated Lixivium. But
these other Sulphurs are not so profitable, as to the inward use of the body,
because of the Alkali of the Ashes, out of which we make a clavellated gnawing
Salt: and because of the Calx, or Limyness which such Lixiviums are made
withal. The Sulphur that is thus extracted, may be washed with sweet water, and
be Precipitated: but the digestion afterward requires twice the time.

The Lixivium also is to be rectified by the sublimation thereof from all
terrestrial residence, lest that such Sulphurs being incorporated with it
become corrosive, to the destruction of the sick: the which to prevent, the
said separtion is to be made. And so much concerning the Crude Sulphurs.

But now as for the melted and depurated Metalls, you may extract their Sulphur
too: There is not given a more certain, a more noble, and better way, then by
the water of Salt, or its Oil prepared on such wise as I have evidently
described in my books of Alchimy for such a Water does sundamentally and
radically extract out of all Metalline bodies, their natural liquor, or
Sulphur, and most excellent Crocus, as well for Medicinal, as for Chemical
operations: it resolves and breaks every metal, bringing it out of its
Metalline nature into another, according to the different intention and
industry of the workman.

The Crocus, or Tincture of Mettalls.
The Crocus of Metalls is fourfold; viz the Crocus of Sol, Venus, Mars and
Chalybs: that of Chalybs, or Steel, is the better, it is extracted by
Reverberation, or Calcination, reducing the said bodies into a powder. So Iron
filed is consumed by Rust: the Consumption of the Rust is made by the
inhibition of those things which cause Rust, and by a decoction extracting the
color of the Rust.

Take old Urine powered off from its residence. viz. some Cups of it, in which
dissolve three handfuls of Salt ground; strain it, boil it, and scum it well:
Herein again dissolve an handful of Vitriol beaten, and two Ounces or three of
Sal Armoniack beaten, and scum it again very well: With this Liquor imbibe the
silings, and boil them until they are pulverisable; the which powder you must
reverberate with a strong fire, continually stirring it with an Iron rod, until
it pass from one color to another, and at last into a most lucid Violet
color; out of which thou may easily extract the Tincture by spirit of Wine,
or distilled Vinegar, and by the separation of the Elements gather the
abstraction left in the bottom of the vessel, with which thou may effect
wonderful works, as well within the body, as without.

As for the making of Crocus Veneris, do thus: Take one pound or two of the
best Copper-rust, or Vordigrease alcoolizated; power thereto plenty of distilled
Vinegar, and stir it well thrice every day. Pour off the colored Vinegar
gently, and totally sublime, or distill it in ashes, even to a dryness: Let
this powder be afterward washed nine times with warm water from all the
sharpness, and be dried; so shall thou have the prepared Crocus of Venus, or
the Flos of Brass; out of which thou may, if thou will, easily extract an
Oil, according to the precepts delivered in the great Chirurgical work, where
also its use is explained.

The Crocus of is to be extracted by the water of Salt, by which the Metalline
nature thereof or Malleation, is broken, the residence is to be washed with hot
water, and the Crocus to be extracted with spirit of Wine, the which being
again separated, the Crocus will remain in the bottom; the which by elevation,
by the degrees of fire, in five times sublimation, is changed into a Liquor, or
the most true Quintessence of Sol. With this thou may perform miraculous
things: but hereto is required not a putatitious, but an industrious and
skilful Artist.

FINIS.
Theophrastus of Hohenheim, OF THE Virtues of the Members,
The First Book treats of the Virtues of the Spiritual Members.

The Second, of the Virtues of the Inward,

The Third, of the Virtues of the Outward Members.

The First BOOK. Of the Virtues of the Spiritual Members.
CHAP. I. Of the SPIRIT of LIFE.
THE Spirit of Life is a Spirit planted in all the members of the Body,
whatever Distinction they are denominated by: It dwells in them all, and in
each of them, and is the One, or sole Virtue of them all, promiscuously. It Is
it that is the supreme and most noble Grain, by which all the whole members
live: But according as it is extended or dis^used, so does it become various,
answerable to its various Seats: For in the Heart it is so acted, as to assume
the Virtues of the Heart, which property it is not fraught with in the other
members: So likewise in the Liver it gets the virtues of it, and performs that
Office there only, and not in the other parts. The like is to be judged of the
Marrow; but although that these Virtues are either perceptible, or not
perceptable; yet the virtues of all the members are uniform, nor are they any
otherwise to be understood then thus, viz. That the virtues of the Heart do in
some sort only differ from those of the Bones, whereas the virtues are but One
notwithstanding: For the Virtues that sustain and conserve the Bones, are not
weaker then those are which refresh and strengthen the Heart; for there is as
much of importance situated in the Bones, as is in the Heart: So in like
manner the virtues of the Spirit of Life in the Brain, are not of more
excellency then those in the Marrow: And although by reason of the use and
necessity of that in the Brain, the contrary seems true, yet the necessity of
the Marrow, is as much as that is of the Brain, and the virtues of them both
are alike.

The like consideration is to be had of all the members, of the which though
some seem worthier then other some, yet it is but one only Spirit of Life that
is the Governor, the Virtue, the Efficacy, and Operation of them all.

CHAP. II.
THE Spirit of Life arises from external Causes or Generations, and not from
Natural, according to the Flesh: For as the Generation of the other members i^
twofold, so the Generation of the Spirit is simple, and is united with the body
and the members, as we have said: this likewise is the cause why (as in
reference to its own Virtues) it cannot be strengthened, unless the members
themselves be healthy and strong; for by how much the stronger, healthier, and
chearfuller a Member is by nature, by so much stronger and more refreshingly
does the spirit shine forth: And therefore we must not by any means attempt to
conserve, strengthen, and advance it as it is a Spirit of Life, but only thus,
viz. by conserving and strengthening the members (which have their birth from
Nature, in their first Integrity, and Original Healthfulness; this being done,
the Spirit does in it self become more enlarged, and more strong: But yet
there is One thing that appertains to the Spirit only, and it is this, viz. That
it be occupied in the Open Passage, and kept unstopt: Concerning which
Oppilation or stopping if it chance to happen, we will here annex a peculiar
Treatise; then after we have so done, we will annex two little Books of the
Members that govern themselves, as shall anon follow: You must therefore know,
that the Spirit of Life may be so stopped, that unless the ways and pores of
its passages be opened, it may be strangled; for the second Generation is
nothing else but a Vapor and the Spirit of Life lives in us in the form of a
Vapor, as the Nature of the second Generation, which is made without Nature,
(or Externally:) therefore the Pores are to be immediately opened, even at the
very beginning, viz. In the Marrow, in the Flesh, in the Veins, in the more
principal Members, in the Bones, in the Ligaments, in the Nerves, in the
Joints, in the Bladder, in the Diaphragme, in the Matrix, in all the members,
none excepted; for this Spirit is likewise placed in the Brain as well as in
the Flesh, and passes through the Brain upwards, and downwards, and penetrates
the Pia Matter, and Dura Matter, and runs through the Heart and its Case, and the
Chest of the Gall, and the Regions of the Reins, and the Center of the Bladder,
and possesses as well the place that is empty, as that which is full.

CHAP. III.
WHeresoever therefore, the Spirit of life cannot penetrate, there a Disease is
stirred up; for if it be stopped, there arises a Putrefaction, degenerating
into an Exulceration, for there it dies in that place; But now, that which is
dead, does putrify, and make an Ulcer, according to the Nature of the Member,
which the Disposition (or effect) it in; for if the Ulcer be made in the
principal parts, it causes death. From the Oppilations of the spirit of life,
do proceed Fevers, Aposthumes, Pleurisies, the Iaundice, Ulcers, and
whatsoever seizes on the body with a Feverish Fit, as the Plague, and the
like; the cause hereof is this: The spirit foreknowing its suffocation and
death, does first shake the whole body with horror, whiles it is as 'twere
congealed; then afterward if it be resolved, heat and inflammation prevail: I
do here except those Fevers that produce more Pavoxisms or Fits then once, as
the Quotidian, the Tertian, and Quartain; and therefore (as I may so speak) if
it causes Fits in the Brain, it stirs up the Frenzy, Madness, and the like:
If in the heart, it induces the Chorea viti, or the Laughing-Disease, for it
touches the Veins of rejoicing; and it often happens, that it procures Fits,
according to a time, and hour, and year: But this the Regular Practice of
Fevers and the Plague does discover, viz. From what causes such things come to
pass, the Spirit of Life is subject to influence, even as the body it self to
the Earth; for even as the Body eats the Earth, and is it self that which it
eats, and sustaineth its Life from the Earth, even so likewise the Spirit of
Life eats of the superior Influence, and is nourished by the Element of the
Fire, in which the four Elements do shine bright; For even as the Earth does
according to its fruits shine in the four Elements, so here do the influences
also shine. There are therefore two Practicks to be set before us; the first
is, That the Influence may be so much conserved, a^ is grateful and suitable to
the spirit. The second is, That the Body may be kept profitable to, and fit for
the spirit; this done, there follows the health of the body one way, as to the
Spirit.

CHAP. IV. Of the Influence of the Spirit of Life.
THE virtue of the Spirit of Life is extended, or enlarged by the Stars, and
all the Influences of the whole Heaven, by which the Firmament is manifested,
and it is like a celestial, invisible Vapor, with which it is united, even as
Cold and Heat are, when a temperature is constituted and made of them: But if
happily the Stars of the Members do at any time run cross, corrupt, and cause
Fits, then also that member of the body is vanquished, and either stops the
Spirit of Life, or does vitiate and corrupt it in that same Place: But there
cannot be administered to this Evil, any other Remedy then a Receslion from that
l^f^^ence, and undergoing another: For the Opinion of the Astronomers
concerning Nativities and Ascendants is false and wicked: For example, Put case
I am born under Scorpio, if now I submit my self to Aries, I am become of his
stock, nor have I any commerce with Scorpio thenceforward: It is not therefore
any longer my Ascendant then whiles I submit my self thereto, even as I have
treated thereof concerning Nativities.

The Place therefore, as to the Nature of the Firmament, is to be changed, nor
is the Ascendant or any Conjunction afterward to succeed: So if I should be
born under such an Aspect as that I should be hanged, and such a like spirit of
the Firmament should be in (...), (at we know it delivered or written of Humane
Spirits) if then I would hinder and annihilate this efficacy, I reject that
Planet, and take to me another, and so the force thereof is broken. And
although that that property, or nature, and kind remain, yet the effect does
not follow. But contrary wise it often happens, that an honest and ingenuous
man becomes (under an evil influence) a thief; according as is written of
Spirits, in the Treatise Of the External Senses of men.

CHAP. V. Of Oppilations in general.
AS for the removing of the Stopping of the Spirit of Life in general, it is
necessary that the spirit be preserved in its heat, so as it may be more strong
and vigorous therein, the process whereof is this; viz. That it be made
Diaphoretical; and constantly glow in its own essence, and continue in a full
heat; the which is speedily done by this Receipt: Take Saffron, Ginger, and
Triacle, etc. Extract their essence, etc.

The Second BOOK. Of the Virtues of the Internal Members.
CHAP. I. Of the Virtues of the Heart.
THe Heart requires nothing else but corroboration of it self, when that which
is adverse and contrary unto it is removed, for it is too weak of it self alone
to resist and strive with all those evils which daily beset and assault it. And
therefore it must be succored by supplying remedies; for that member is the
chiefest, and given to man for this end, and is implanted in his body, that it
may continue him in his stability and vigor. But if any hurt, and dissolution
of substance possesses any member, it is not to be thought that the Heart is
appointed and ordained to turn it off: but that evil is to be corrected and
removed by the help of Medicine; where upon that Medicine seems to be esteemed
as another Heart. For the more diligent and acceptable care of a Physician,
depends more on registring and ordering the external heart, then the internal.
For this, viz. the Internal, is not subject to the Physician, but the External
only. If therefore at any time the Internal Heart has need of the External,
it is wholly necessary, that (as we have said already) it be appled unto, and
conserred thereon; for there must not be only a Cordial, and a simple Medicine
administered, but it must be manifold: for it is fitting, that One [Medicinal
property] do strengthen the elemental powers, that another property do hinder a
particular corruption, or putrefaction, that another property do divert and
turn away other external accidents: therefore it is necessary that various
virtues be congregated, or assembled into One Medicine.

The Recipe, thus.
Note here the Description of Aurum potabile; the Matter of Pearls, the Essence
of Saffron, the Essence of Bawm, the Essence of Celondine, the Essence of Mace,
etc.

CHAP. II.
THe highest Arcanum of comforting the Heart, so as not to be hurt by any
accident that may befall, and that its substance may not be suffocated, or
depraved, is Aurum potabile, or the Liquor of Gold, and the Matter of Pearls,
in the form of Oil, like Balsom: then next, the Essence of Saffron, Mace,
Corrals, etc. The description of the Gold is this: That the Gold be calcined
into its yellowness by the Regal Cement of Hill and Malch; then let it be
separated from its impurity, and afterward let it be permixed with the
Circulated water, and be digested for twenty four hours, in a moderate fire,
then the Oil will flow forth, which will swim on the top of the water; gather
it, and drink it with Aqua Vitae; nothing is more excellent then this: In like
manner must thou proceed with Pearls, doing only this; Add the Calx of Cheb,
and Cohobate them with distilled Vinegar, so long, until they pass into a
Liquor: take likewise your Corralls, and resolve them in burning Wine, permixt
with Hell: if then you abstract the burning Wine from the putrefaction, thou
shall have the Liquor of Corral. So likewise as forother diseases that assault
the heart by reason of the condition, or elemental humors, the Essences of
Saffron, Celondine, Mace, Cosius, and Bawm: the manner how to prepare them is
this; First, take the best Saffron, cohobate in the best Aqua vitae, hang is in
a fost cloth, that it may not touch the bottom, and sealing it with Hermes
seal: this must be done by thee twelve times, and the Saffron will become an
Oil of a most strong odor. Administer one drop of this in the Wine of Life.
This medicine is a most high refresher and rejoicer of the heart in old men, in
infirm, melancholy, and sad men.

After the same manner must you proceed with Mace, only you must go on in the
Cohobation of it twenty four times; this Essence does in some virtues exceed
the Saffron; thou must cohobate the Celondine, Hawm, and such like in
themselves, four days space: then afterward separate the pure from the impure,
by straining it; take away its Phlegm, and add thereto the Wine of life, and
Cohobate it even to a Liquor; on this wise thou shall operate with all Herbs
that are to preserve the Heart, and to comfort the Spirit of life.

CHAP. III. Of the Virtues of the BRAIN.
AS there are two Hearts, so likewise two Brains: One is External, the other is
Internal: The Nature of the Internal is unchangeable; that is to say, the Brain
it self cannot of it self purge away the faultiness that is in it; for as it is
framed, such does it remain, nor is it changed: But if it be invaded by some
external effects, or if that offending matter proceed from the Body, or from
the Spirit of Life, that Effect is to be wholly cast out by another Brain,
which God has implanted in the Herbs; nor do the members themselves acquire a
certain power whereby to fight against the Disease, and expel it, but
themselves remain quiet, and commit the wrestling and chasing it away, to the
external Brain: If then this gets the victory, the Internal Brain grows well;
but if it be mastered, then the other feels the loss: You must therefore know
that External Brain, that strives against all such things as may annoy the
Internal Brain: Of which kind are, the Oil of, the Liquor of the Saphir, of
Musk, and the Liquor of Vitriol.

CHAP. IV.
THE Brain is to be conserved in its strength, so at that nothing may endamage
it, and that it self may be wholly Brain: But it sometimes any infirmity be
tide it, then the Hurts and Distempers are to be removed by the External Brain,
that the whole Brain may remain: Of those sorts of Brains, one is the Liquor
of, and is thus made: First calcine it, then cohobate it with the Wine of Life
for seven days, so the Calx of will be resolved into a soft or clamming Liquor.

Digest this in a Balneo for a Months space, then 'twill be resolved, and be
in the form of a Green Liquor: This is the highest Arcanum, by which the
substance of the brain is cherished, and a new, or extaneous brain implanted.
Like unto this is the Arcanum extracted out of Gilla; on this wise, Distill the
Gilla in an equal Weight of the Wine of Life, circulate it so long till it
touch not the bottom; administer it with Falernum Wine, or Muskadine: It does
so powerfully strengthen the brain, that no Vertigo, Frenzy, or Madness can
offend it.

The Liquor of the Saphir, and of Musk, do the same, and is on this wise
prepared; If the Saphir be reduced into an Alcoadamantine Nature, and be
dissolved afterward by Chybur into its own powder, and the Wine of Life be
added by six days Cohobation to this Powder, then at length the Liquor becomes
potable, and heals the Choraea viti, or laughing Disease, and the Madness and
Fantasy of such as incline to hang, or otherwise destroy themselves: A like
Medicine is extracted out of Musk: It is to be decocted in a Cloth by the Wine
of Life, into the form of a Juice, like to Storax: Herewith is the Vertigo, the
Scotemia, or running round of the Head, and whatsoever induces as wounding or
Giddiness, cured; as also the beginning of the Falling-Evil, Madness, and
Phrenzie.

CHAP. V. Of the VIRTUES of the LIVER.
THE Liver it self of the Body, has likewise need of an external Liver to
succor it: Neither is i^ such a Warrier, and of such a Military ingenuity or
capacity as to be able to defend it self. On this account these are called
spiritual members, for no spirit goes a warring, but the body: But now the
Liver only, and of it self is a spirit, but the flesh thereof, which bears the
Name of the Liver, that is a Member of the Body, wherein there is not so very
much placed If therefore at any time the Liver is to wage war, then it is
behoveful that some other certain thing do fight for it, that is to say, A
certain Body that has its proper Hands and Feet, with the which he produces
and employeth his Weapons against the corporal Disease; for if the body
suffers, it suffers materially: It Is therefore sitting that such a like
Medicine be applied, that so by this means Matter may proceed against Matter,
and Like may act upon its like: Such a one now is this; Take the Essence of
Spodium. Likewise if the Liver he broken or marred with an Hyposarcha, then the
virtue or property of it is thus: If with the Iaundice, its Virtue is so. If
Fevers, then so. If with an Aposthume, then is its virtue so, etc.

CHAP. VI.
THere is nothing more excellent, or conducible then Cheiri for procuring
Healthfulness to the Liver, so that it receive no detriment, nor be hurt. The
Preparation is this: Take Cheiri, and let it be sublimed from its blackness
into whiteness; this Whiteness is to be drunk with the Wine of Life: With this
Drink the Apostematical Nature, and putrefaction of the Liver is removed, and
all its corruption is amended, insomuch that thenceforth it does well digest,
and rightly dispense the Blood; nor does it only produce much, but such as is
good and laudable, and not so capable of being subject to any Diseases. It does
likewise renew the old and exalete blood, and does so amend it, as to cause
even the Leprosy to vanish. The Yellow Anthos does the same, if it be resolved
by the spirit of Aqua vitae, so drunk, it heals all the faults and Diseases of
the Liver.

But the Liquor of Alchahest has also a great power and efficacy of conserving
and comforting the Liver, and consequently of preserving it from the Dropsy,
and all such kinds thereof as arise from the defects of the Liver: The Process
whereof is this; It must be resolved after its coagulation, and be again
coagulated into a transmuted Form, as the Process of Coagulation and Resolution
teaches; For then if when it has overcom its like, it becomes a Medicine for
the Liver, exceeding all other Medicines: And verily, should the Liver it self
be broken and dissolved, yet this stands in the place of all the whole Liver,
no otherwise then as if it had neverbeen broken and dissolved.

Whosoever ye be therefore that set about the work of MEDICINE, it is needful
that ye endeavor with your utmost diligence, the learning how to prepare the
Al^ahest, because of the turning away, or hindering of the many Diseases that
arise from the Liver.

CHAP. VII. Of the VIRTUES of the SPLEEN.
THE Spleen is like to the rest of the Members, for it, it self also does no
less then the rest, admit occasion of breaking of the body, and therefore has
need of having its like sought out: Herein confists its mischievousness, that
it generates Hardness, stirs up Fevers, Putrefactions, Oppilations, and many
more such like.

But the Virtue and Industry consists herein, viz. That the Spleen of the
Body be taken our, and an External spleen be immitted or implanted: For the
Life without the Spleen is longer then with the Spleen; the which though it
cannot be so spoken as in relation to the three aforesaid Members, for their
being in the body, is most highly necessary; yet notwithstanding it is true, as
to the spleen, for we can be conveniently without that. The whole Practick
therefore is to be thus, viz. That we may live by the benefit of the External,
and not the Internal spleen, and that we root out the Internal, and radically
consume it.

CHAP. VIII.
AS for the consuming and taking away of the Spleen, that is done by Sutratar,
from the which separate its Liquor without a Corrosive, by a Report in a strong
Fire, then afterward abstract it five times; Let every Cohobation be rectified
with the (alias, as in the Dutch) Cohobation it all with rectified Wine of
life, and so let it be drunk: This does thoroughly take away the Spleen, nor
does it leave any footsteps thereof behind it, and does likewise consume that
which was to be digested by the spleen; it preserves the whole body from
Hurtfulness. The same virtue and operation is to be likewise found in the Feces
which the Wine of life is separated from; the like Efficacy is also planted in
Cafa: It is to be macerated in Oil Olive, and to be afterward mixed with one
pound and a quarter of Opopanax, let it be distilled in an Alembick: this Oil
anointed upon the Region of the Milt, takes away all the spleen; being yearly
used, it removes all Diseases begotten by the spleen: But yet being used by a
more accurate order, it does thoroughly take away and consume the spleen, and
remove its Griefs, Diseases, and all its Hurts.

CHAP. IX. Of the VIRTUES of the REINS.
THE best comforting of the Reins is to be in those things which are Reins
outwardly, as thus: the interior Reins are to be abolished and taken away, and
be rendered like to the Spleen, and then at length the virtue of the Reins will
be entire, if the Operation of them shall be slain; For they do by their
Operation produce the Lithiasis, Stone, Sand, Diabetick, and many other such
things; but the Operations of them being dead, and that other Essence be
therein, none of those Diseases remain, but the virtue of the body is good and
strong, and both its Old Age and its Youth is sound, nor is it invaded by any
of those Diseases which would happen to them, viz. the Reins, were they alive,
and remaining.

CHAP. X.
But that the Reins, which make more for chastity then do the Testicles, may be
removed, you must know that they may be taken away without any hurt: And as for
the damage that may follow upon their being taken away, it does not at all
pertain to the rest of those passages which run through the Reins themselves;
for their Matter and Life remains, but their Nature and Operation is taken
away: And this is done by Aroph, the which by distillation in Bread, is reduced
into a Liquor, and is to be so drunk: this Drink takes away the Evil which the
Reins beget.

CHAP. XI. Of the Virtues of the GALI.
THE highest selicity and virtue of the Gall is, that it be materially taken
away and consumed; for so there will not be generated those chollerick
Diseases, the Chollick, Iliack, and such like, the Contractures, Tremblings,
and other ill effects of the Ventricle; for these parts do nothing else but
destroy that which the profitable Members have built up; But the Physicians are
ignorant that the Gall is nothing profitable; for they ascribe unto it great
Use and Honors, when as there is no cause; for this is a superfluous Member in
Nature, and is like a Monster; for indeed there is nothing so good and so pure,
but that Tares and Cockle are sown therein; so likewise the Gall and its like
Member, is the Tare or Darnel of Nature, and has insinuated it self next to
the good, not for the conservation, but for the destruction of the body.

CHAP. XII.
THE process of so consuming the Gall, as that whatsoever thereof is
unprofitable, may be abolished, is this, viz. that all the Diseases arising
from the Gall, be removed, and that neither any anger or sickness be induced
therefrom henceforth. And this is obtained by Rhubarb on this wise: Take
Rhubarb and the Flowers of Cheiri, ana, and extract the Liquor of Cheiri, as we
said before, and extract it out of the Rhubarb after the same manner, as you
did out of the Anthos; mix these two together, and then add as much Wine of
life, the which when thou do administer, so do as first, as to cause the
Anger to be appeased, then afterward the Disease, if any be from the Gall;
then after this a thirstiness inwadeth.

With this the Gall dis-appears, and goes away; then at last does Health follow
more profitable then the former.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Virtues of the LUNGS.
THis is the best virtue of the lungs, viz. that it remain in its own Matter,
and that nothing be put thereunto, but that it act, and be solely and alone
without any thing adjoined thereto; but now it is more movable then all the
other parts of the body, the which it has from the force and virtue of the
spirit of life; therefore Reason and Use informs, that this is to be
comforted chiefest of all, and it is accomplished by such things as make all the
Members found, for thus even the Lungs will be also whole: But to avert such
Fluxes there to as are more then fitting, we will deliver the following Medicine:
And here it is equally as well to be observed, that the other Members are to be
conserved sound, lest an occasion of death be given.

CHAP. XIV.
AMongst all the Medicines profitable for the Lungs, there is none that excels
Chibur: therefore let Chibur be taken, and be mixed with two sorts of Calxes
and Minerals, and be sublimed thrice, and give thereof to the sick.

This takes away all the evils of the Lungs, increases and doubles its
strength, and so is a Balsom of the Lungs and of the whole Breast, a more
potent then which is not to be found in all the virtues of things, not is there
any thing in which more of the external Lungs is to be found, then in Chibur,
as we have said.

The End of the second Book of the Virtues of the seven Internal Members in the
little World
These other Books are not come to light, Viz.
The third Book of the Virtue of the External Members.

The fourth, of the Virtues of the Members of the Chaos.

The fifth, of the Four Elements, how ihey are desended.

The sixth, of the Three Essences of which Nature is composed, and how they are
considered.

BITISKIUS his Epistle to the READER.
FRiendly Reader, I have here need again to forewarn thee that these Books,
according as the Author has disposed, and begun to write them, are not to be
found with the two former Books, because happily he had not ^niched them: An this
may be conjectured out of the Original; for 'twas written with an hasty Pen, so
as only to exhibit or discover the face of the first delineation, or rude
Pourtraicture, and Rhapsody. But these following Titles, together with the
beginning of the Fifth Book, because they were found in the same Papers with the
two first Books; they are here placed for this reason, That an occasion might
be administered thereby to the studious Inquirers of a nearer attaining the mind
of the Author: And whereas there is good reason to suppose, that this small Book
of the three first Essences, is the Sixth here inscribed; it is here annexed to
the rest, for that reason. It Is but just in thee, therefore, Reader, to enjoy
these present things with a contented mind; and not to complain, and be
displeased, because of the things that are wanting.

The Third BOOK. Of the Extraneous Members.
CHAP. I. Of the Stomach, and its Coherencies. The other Chapters are wanting.

The Fourth BOOK. Of the Virtues of the Members of the Chaos, is not to be had.

The Fifth BOOK. Of the four Elements how they are defended.

CHAP. I.
THe Elementary nature which is in us, besides the substance of the Members,
and the other things which we have spoken of, have also their interpretations
on this wise; viz. that we do also conserve the four Elements in us, after such
a manner, as that the Element of the Fire does not generate the Stone; or the
Element of the Earth, the kinds of Pustules; or the Element of the Water, the
Dropsy; or the Element of the Air, the Tinipany: for by the same means as they
generate externally, do they also internally.

CHAP. II.
WHereas therefore those four Elements are mixed in us, you must know that they
are placed in the whole body, in that form or species of the four Humors. Two
Elements lie in us externally, and two hidden, on this wise: The Air and the
Fire are the Flesh and the Skin: the interior Elements, that is, those that are
placed in the hollow of the body within the Ribs, Brain, and Bones, are subject
to the other Elements, viz. of the Earth and Water. The Intestines therefore,
the Matrix, ^^. are the Element of the Earth, the other members are the Element
of the Water.

CHAP. III. The rest are wanting.
Of the three first Essences, out of which a thing Generated is composed.

CHAP. I.
EVery Generated or begotten thing, and every thing produced from its Elements,
is assigned to three; viz to Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury: out of these three is
a Conjunction made, which Constituteth one body and united Essence. As to what
appertains here to the Body, that is not spoken of, but the Internality only
of the body.

The Operation thereof is threefold; One is of the Salt, and this acts by
Purgation, by Mundisication, and by a Balsamic property, and other ways, and
rules over that which tends to putrefaction. Another is of Sulphur, and this
rules over that which is the overmuchness or superfluity of the other two, or
is dissolved. The third is of Mercury, and this removes that which has its
tendency unto a Consumption.

As concerning these three, you must know what the form of each is; One is a
Liquor, and that is the form of Mercury. Another is an Oilyness, and that is
the form of Sulphur. The other is an Alkali, and this is the form of Salt.
Mercury is without Sulphur and Salt: Sulphur is without Mercury and Salt: Salt
is without Sulphur and Mercury; and by this means and way every thing abides
in its Potency. But as for those Operations which are found in permixt
diseases, you must know, that the Separation of things is not perfect, but two
are conjoined in one; as in the Dropsy, and such ^^ke. For those sicknesses
are permixed, which exceed their juice and temperate humidity. So sometimes
Mercury and Sulphur do take away the Palsy, because there is a concurrance also
of corporal Sulphur: Or because there is some hurt in the next and neighboring
Confine. You are to consider, therefore, that every Disease may be either
doubly or trebly Commixt; and that is a Commixture of the Disease. Herein the
Physician is to consider, when he makes use of a certain Simple; what the
degree thereof is in Liquor, in Oil, and in Salt, and how it squares with the
Disease of the adjoining, or neighboring hurt. According as is that degree, so
must the Liquor, Salt, and Sulphur be extracted and administered as need
requires. So therefore, this short rule ^^to be heeded, viz. that One Medicine
be given to the (...), or annoiance, and another to the disease.

CHAP. II.
SAlts do purge but yet various ways: Some purge by Stool, and of these there
are two sorts; One is the Salt of the thing, and this disposes to the Stool;
the ^^ner is the Salt of Nature, and that drives forth. With^^^ Salt therefore,
no excre^ion, or casting out of superfluities can be done. Hence then it
follows, that the Salt of the Vulgar is helpful to the Salts of Nature.

Some Salts do purge by Vomit; such a Salt is most ^ost, the which, whereas it
cannot p^^ss into digestion, ^^^seth a strangulation in the stomach, inwards:
some ^^rge by Sweat, such a Salt is a most subtle one, for it doseth with the
blood: the other purgative and vomitive Salts don't conjoin with the blood, and
therefore they provoke not to sweat; and it is Salt only that departs, or
separateth. Some Salts purge by Urine, for all the whole Urine is nothing else
but a superfluous Salt. The Excrement, or dung, is a superfluous Sulphur, (...)
nothing of the Liquor departs, as superfluous out of the body, but abides
within: On this wise are all the ^oidings of the excrementitiousness of the
body; the Phlegm is expulsed by the Nostrils, by the Ears, by the Eyes, and
other ways, and all by the Salt. But now you are to understand, that this is
done by the Archeus, from whom they derive their Operations, as shall be last
of all declared.

Now therefore, even as there proceeds from the Archeus a Laxative Salt; that
is to say, One purges the stomach, and comes from the stomach of the Archeus:
another purges the Spleen, because it comes from the Spleen of the Archeus:
Even so is it likewise with the Brain, Liver, Lungs, and other members; for the
member of the Archeus is the mover of the member of the Microcosm. You must
know, as concerning the Alca^^ and Salt, that it is various: One is sweet as
Cassia, an^ is a separated Salt; which in Mineral is called Antimony. Another
is an Egar Salt, as, Sal Gem: Anothus is sharp, as in Ginger: Another is a
bitter Salt, as i^ Rhubarb and Colloquintida. Moreover you must know that many
Alkalies are begotten, as that of Harms many are extracted, as that of
Scammony: many are coagulated, as that of Wormwood; all which is to be
understood according to that which is to be considered o^ and known in the
Salt. Likewise some things purge only by Sweat: some by consuming the diseases,
and the like: for as often as there is a peculiar savor, so often is there a
peculiar operation and expulsion: but yet there is no more then two kinds of
working, that i^ the Operation of the thing, and the extinct or quenched
Operation.

CHAP. III.
SVlphur Operates by drying up and consuming Superfluity, whether it be of it
self, or of other things it must be wholly consumed by Sulphur, provided, that
it be not subjected under Salts. Thus a Medicine of Salts produced out of the
Liver of the Archeus, is good for the Dropsy, to consume that which is
putrefied and corrupt. But yet there is need, besides them, of the virtue of
Sulphur, for the taking away of that same diseases to which those kind of
diseases are subjected, as to their Originality: although every Sulphur is not
able so to do. And it is so produced from the nature of an Element, that every
kind of sickness, which the nature of the body begets, has its contrary out of
the Elemental nature, and this is done universally and particularly: therefore
the several kinds of Diseases are to be known from the kinds of the Elements:
so the one is always the sign and manifester of the other.

The like judgment is to be had concerning, it assumes that which has not to
do with Salt and Sulphur. From hence are made the Diseases of the Ligaments,
Arteries. Joints, Articles, and such like: therefore in these Diseases this One
thing is to be heeded, that the Liquor of be taken away But the said sicknesses
are to be removed by those things which shall seem suitable and beneficial unto
each, which are demonstrated by the speciality of things in nature, and in
Philosophy, by the thing itself, and nature, which for brevities sake we here
omit.

CHAP. IV.
ON this account therefore, the Phisician is to understand the three kinds of
all Diseases: One is of Salt, one of Sulphur, and one of Mercury: Those of Salt
are on this wise, viz. Every lax or loose Disease is generated of Salt, as the
Flux of the Belly, the Dysen^^ry, the Diarrhea, the Lyentery, etc. But that is
Salt which lies in its own seat: For every voiding of Or^^re is caused by the
Salt, both in sound men, and sick; One is the Salt of Nature, (viz. the sound
man's:) The other is a corrupted and resolved Salt: From hence it is to be
gathered, that even by Salts the Cure of it is to be perfected, in such wise,
that the Salt may again rectify and separate the resolved Salt from the the
Sound: then afterward, the Sulphurous Cure follows, as being a kind of
confirmation of the Operation of the Salt: for that does bear rule over this,
and is a special Sulphur out of the virtue of the Archeus, etc.

Furthermore, out of Mercury do all those Diseases arise that possess the
Arteries, Ligaments, Articles, Bones, Nerves, etc. For the substance of
corporal Mercury does not bear sway or rule in other places of the body, but in
the external Members only: For the Sulphur does mollisie and cherish the
internal Members, viz. the Heart, Liver, Brain, Reins, etc. And Diseases of
those are to be called Sulphurous; for a sulphurous substance is placed in
them, an example whereof we may take from the Chollick, the cause thereof is
Salt in reference to the Intestines, in which salt predominates, and begets
many kinds of Chollick, viz. One kind if it be resolved; Another if it be too
much hardened: For so it exceeds its temperature, and becomes either too moist
or too dry; thence it comes to pass that in the cure of the chollick the humane
salt is to be rectified by the Elemental salts: But if any other salt be
thereto joined then of sulphur thou shall esteem it an overwhelming of the
salt, and not the cure of the Diseases of the Chollick So likewise in Mercurial
and sulphurous Diseases a proper thing must be applied unto each, and not
acontrary thing to a contrary; but a thing proper must be accommodated to that
of its like nature; for the Cold does not overcome the Hot, nor the Hot the
Cold, in Natural Diseases; but the cure proceeds from that which has generated
both the Disease, and the place thereof

CHAP. V.
THE several kinds of Diseases are divided into various Boughs, Branches, and
Leaves, but yet the cure is but one: For example, Consider a Mercurial Disease,
and you shall find that the Mercurial Liquor does likewise pass into many
Branches and Leaves; so it is in the small Pox, or Pustules, all the kinds
thereof are under Mercury, for the Disease it self is Mercurial: Some
French-Po^ are under Common Mercury: some Pustules are under a Metalline
Mercury, some are under an Ebonywood Mercury, some are under a Mercury of
Antimony: The cause is this, viz. the Mercury goes to its proper Branches, and
not out of order; it is needful therefore that the Liquors of Mercury be known,
for he it is that heals that which his salt dissolves. There Is also another
thing which is placed in it, viz. An Incarnative, and Consolidative Virtue,
according to the nature of the Mercury. But now this mercurial Liquor is
manifold: In ^^als, the Liquor of Mercury is like a metal: In Juniper and
Ebony, it is like Wood: In Markasites, Talx's, Cha^ymia's, it is like a mineral:
In Brassatella, (or Adders^^gue) Arsmart, and Serpentina, (or sea-Plantane)
it is like an Herb: And yet notwithstanding it is but one and the same Mercury
which does so manifoldly present it self: As it is with Pustules, so likewise is
it to be understood of Ulcers, some of which are to be cured by the Mercury of
Arsmart, some by the Mercury of Arsenick, some by the Mercury of the Guaieum
Wood; the Phisician therefore ought to know the tree of the Diseases, and of
the things suitable: some Trees there are of this sort; there is one tree of
salt, and it is twofold, viz. of Rebis, and of the Element; there is likewise a
tree of sulphur and of Mercury, therefore the Phisician must be careful that he
implant not two trees into one cure, but let him keep to the Rule, and know
that a Mercury is to be given to mercurial Diseases, salt to saline Diseases,
and sulphur to sulphurous Diseases; that it to say, to every Disease let an
appropriate Remedy be administered, as is convenient: For to speak truly, there
are but three Medicines, even as there are but three Diseases: And therefore
those long circumstances, and trislings or cavill^tions of Avicen, Mesue, and
others, are to be cut off and omitted.

CHAP. VI.
NOw therefore (after all this that we have hitherto spoken that a Phisician
may carry about him a brief and ^^sie ^om^en ^ium he must divide or place his
Diseases under the Name of his Medicine, as we have made a beginning thereof in
the aforesaid Diseases; and let him carefully shun to say, This is the
Iaundice: for such a speech is beside, or void of the Practice of Art, and
every Country Fellow knows such a kind of Art as that: But contrariwise, thou
shall speak thus, viz This is the Disease of Leseolus: For so thou shall
comprehend the Cure, Property, Name, Quality: Disposition, yea thy Art and
Science in one word alone: For Leseolus cures the Iaundice, nor does it cure
any thing else save this Disease: By this means thou have gotten thy self out
of all Errors, and the cure is thus proved, viz. In Leseolus there is a most
notable transparency of salt, which colors and figureth more excellently
then a molten Topaz: Even so the Iaundice is (as I may so term it) a
diaphanous, or transparent Iaundice salt, (of a yellow color) and has need of
being expulsed and thrust forth by its like. After the same manner the yellow
Orpmens, and the salt which makes the Iaundice, is the mother of the Orpment
and Leseolus, but yet notwithstanding it is begotten of two mothers, viz. Annual
and Elemental.

I do therefore persuade all men rightly and solidly to know those three trees,
for he that knows not the seed of these trees, i^ drowned in mere Errors.
Thus likewise you shall say, This is the Disease of Gold, and not say, This is
the Leprofie, nor must any species of it be named: And thus to speak is truly
Phisician-like, and that on this account, Because this one Name only, does
sufficiently declare what cure thou intendest to apply in the Leprofie: and
thus to say, is much more then if thou should call it the Leprofie: So
again, if I say, This is a Disease of the Tincture; A wise man will
sufficiently understand that I both know how, and what a Tincture is, and how
it regenerates, and causes old age to become young. So again, if I say, This
is a Disease of Vitriol: experience will declare this to be true, viz. that the
sorts of the Epilepsie may be cured by the Oil of Vitriol, or its spirit: The
which very thing, albeit it is every where almost confirmed by writing; yet
seeing it does appertain here to the Theory of my intention, what hurt is it to
repeat it here? by what means the Theory is to be perfected: But in that I have
comprehended these things Theorically, the cause thereof is this, viz. the
especial mean out of which the former is deduced, together with the Mysteries
of Nature, which have been hidden by the Chimical Authors, out of whom I do on
just grounds prove and demonstrate my Theory, of both the one and the other
Originality, viz. the Elementall in its production, and the Annual, alias,
Animal, in its Generation, and from thence do I build the foundation of my
Theory.

CHAP. VII.
MOreover we may enquire from the Theory, out of what virtue Incarnatives are?
They are out of. only, it is it that heals wounds; and viz. in a long time by
the Mercury of Rosin, yet sooner then, alias, by the Mercury in Mummy; and
again sooner then, alias by the Mercury in Tartar: So likewise does it in
Ulcers, some whereof are Cancers, Estiohmenae's and Erysiples: There are many
such Mercurial operations or virtues in things Elementary and Annual. all found
out by the experience of those who do understand what things one lies in, and
what things others, viz. Mercuries lie in: who likewise know how to prepare
that Mercury, and to form one into a Topaz, another into a yellow-sanders,
another into a Spirit but each into its exaltation, in which it is must pleased

And although indeed Mercury i^ but only one yet notwithstanding as the need
of it is; so will it be produced: We do therefore testify in this place, that
the virtue of Incarnating and Consolidating proceeds from Mercury alone, in
which there is neither Sulphur nor Salt, but it must be extracted and reduced
into it pure Liquor.)

After the very same manner is Sulphur and Salt to be proceeded witha^^; and
you must know the exaltation of them if you would obtain the name of a
Physician, and heal your sick Patients laudably. Full well do I know, that
Purphyrius will wonder to hear that the Saphir is a Mercury, and the Noble
Jasper, so too, because he does not see it, nor feel it with his hands; Who
albeit he is not hitherto any ways experieneed, nor has, ever set himself to
learn any thing, yet notwithstanding does dote and dream of I know not what.

CHAP. VIII.
SO likewise, whence is it that Ginger is a Diaphoretick: it is because of the
Salt, by the body whereof this is made so to be, (alias, out of which the body
is made) But, that same is the virtue and power of the fire, by which the
Generations do bo^le up, by which there is a Generation of Ebullition, (as is
treated of in our Philosophy) and by reason of the Ebullition, it does open and
unstop, and reduces or advances the humors of Sulphur, Salt, and Mercury,
into the second* third, and fourth degree of Ebullition: And according as it is
constituted in relation to the sieriness of the Salt, even so does it kindle
the degree; by which degree the humidities do distill forth, through the poars,
and by drops. Hence also it is, that Mundificatives do cleanse, merely by
virtue of the Salt, as Noney and other things; from whence it follows that in
Honey is placed the Balsame of Salt by reason whereof it does not putrify; for
Balsom is the most noble Salt that Nature ever produced.

The Attractive virtue, or property, is of a Sulphurous Nature or Essence, as
is to be seen in Gums; They attract by reason of a Sulphureity. Mastich is a
Sulphur thus produced, and so is Opoponax, Galbanum, and others. Neither are
you to believe this Axiom of the Physicians, viz. That it is the property of
heat to draw, but you are to say thus, 'Ti the property of Sulphurs to draw or
attract, and this is most true: For hot things do draw there only, where they
are; that is, where they burn; but that which burns, is a Sulphur, but not fix,
and therefore ^lies away; and this, Gums do perform. Laxatives do also draw
from those places in which themselves are not, in the manner of a Magnet: But
the cause why salts do also draw, is because of the Impression of sulphur, in
the salt; and because of that it is Coagulated by the Spirit of the sulphur:
and therefore it does attract from those places that are more distant from it
self; In like manner, Repercussives are also sulphurous, be they told, or
green, or red, or whatever other manner they are of; for this is the Nature of
a Repercussive sulphur, it goes to the Center, and drives before it whatever
moveable things it lays hold on. Nor is that true which they usually say, viz.
That it is the property of Cold to repercuss; Alas! those simple Dwarfs think
to hold the Fox by the Tail, when as yet, they have only caught him by the
Arse.

He must be a subtle Albertist that would or can desend that Rute of theirs:
But more at Large of this is spoken in our Philosophy.

CHAP. IX.
But as concerning what is requisite for us to know about Comfortatives, the
explanation of the Archeus teaches that, it being like to a man, and lies hid
in the four Elements; that is to say, there is but One Archeus, but it is
divided into four parts: It therefore is the great World, and man is the
lesser, and one is like the other; from that Greater proceeds the virtue of
comforting; so that that which proceeds from the Heart of the Archeus, is the
comfortative of the Heart, as Gold, the Emrald, Corrals, and such like. That
which proceeds from the Liver of the Archeus, comfort the Liver of the
lesser World, and so consequently, it is neither Mercury, sulphur, nor salt that
afford this so comfortative a virtue, but the Heart of the Elements gives it,
from this it is that it flows. In the Elements is a virtue and power that
brings a tree out of a seed: And from the Element it self comes that virtue by
which the tree stands, is fastened, and abides; thus likewise Hey and straw is
strengthened externally, as is visible to the eye: the like strength is in
Animals, by the benefit whereof they go, stand, and are moved, and so is it in
the other Products.

Besides, there is another strength not visible, but that is a strength it has
in it self, by which that Body abides sound and strong wherein it is: But this
is the spirit of Nature, which spirit except every thing has, it perishes:
that spirit abides fix in its body, and that-same does also comfort a man. So
therefore, the virtue of the several members of the Archeus, flows down into
the lesser World, and that by the means of the Vegetables.

FINIS.
PARACELSVS HIS BOOK OF DEGREES, andC.
Theophrastus Bombast of Hohenheim, an Hermit; Doctor and Professor of both
Medicine.
To the Studious of the Medicinal Art, Health.
WHereas of all Disciplines Medicine only, as being a certain divine gift, is
praised with the honorable title, and name of Necessity, by the testimony both
of Sacred Writ, and also of Prosane; and whereas the number of Doctors that do
at this day prosperously exercise it, is most exceeding small, it seemed good
to recall it to the former praise of its Authority, and Credit: the which we
will purge and cleanse from the Dregs of the Barbarous, and from their most
grievous Errors. We do not addict or lind our selves to the Precepts of the
Ancients, but to such only, as partly from the Indication of the nature of the
thing, and partly from our own labors, we have found out, and have by the long
use and experience of the things, made proof of. For who knows not, but that
most of the Doctors in this Age, have (to the exceeding great hazard of the
sick) most foully erred? because that they have anxiously adhered to the
sayings of Hipocrates, Gallen, Avicen, and others, just as if they had been so
many Oracles, proceeding forth out of Appollo 's Tripode; and such, as from
which it would be unlawful to depart even a fingers breadth. By these Authors we
may doubtlesly be made most gallant Doctors, (if fates so favor) but not
Physicians. It Is not Title, nor Eloquence, nor knowledge of the Tongues, nor
the reading of many Books, (though those things are a comely ornament) that are
to be required in a Physician; but an excellent and deep knowledge of Things,
and Mysteries; which one bare knowledge, does easily supply the room of all the
rest. The Rhetoricians part is to be able, Eloquently to speak, and persuade,
and to draw the Judge to be of his opinion: But the Physicians part is to know
the Kinds, Causes, and Symptoms of Affects, and withal (by his piercing
quick-sightedness and industry to apply Medicines, and to heal even all,
according as the nature and occasion of every one requires. But that I may in a
few words trace out to you the manner of teaching, but especially as concerning
my own particular; know, that I being invited by the large stipend of the Lords
of Basil, do (for two hours space, daily) publicly interpret, with most
accurate diligence, the Books of both the Active, and also Inspective Medicine,
both of Physic, and Surgery, (which said Books my self am the Author of) to
the great fruit and profit of the hearers: But yet I have not begged them from
either Hipocrates, Galen, or any else, as the custom of others is; but these of
mine are such as I have obtained by Labor and Experience, the chiefest
Instructress: Therefore when I would prove any thing, Experiments and Reason,
are (instead of Authors) my Spokes-men; Wherefore, honest Readers, if the
Mysteries of this Apollinean Art are delightful to any of you, and that a love
and desire after them possess you, and that you covet thoroughly to learn in a
short space of time, whatsoever pertains to this Discipline, come forthwith
unto us at Basil, and you shall find far other and greater things then I can
describe in these few Lines. But that my intention may appear the more clearly
to the studious; I am not ashamed to put you in mind (by way of Example) that
we do not in the least imitate the Ancients, as to the Account of Complexions
and Humors, for they have falsely attributed to them, all kinds of sicknesses;
Whence it happens, that none, or at leastwise a very, very few Doctors have
even at this day exactly known, the Diseases, Causes, and Judicial days.
Lastly, let these things thus demonstrated, through (as 'twere) a Lattice
suffice; but yet I do not allow ye rashly to judge of these things, till you
have first heard Theophrastus. Fare ye well; and take in good part this our
endeavoring the Reformation of Medicine. Dated at Basil, in the Nones of June,
MDXXVII.

Theophrastus of Hohenheim, an Hermit, Doctor of both Medicine, Physician and
Ordinary at BASIL.
To the most Excellent, Mr. Christopher Clauser, the most Leared Doctor of the
Tygurine Phisicians and Philosophers, HEALTH.
THe best and most excellent thing of every true Physician, is, Well to know his
own proper Medicinal Verity; and withal, Whether he be a possessor of his own
Arcanum, or not; Even as thou O Christopher, the best of the Tigurine
Physicians, do not make use of ought in the Medicinal Faculty, without
Judgment, and an exact Conscience, (which is not causelessly said to be a
thousand Witnesses:) But as concerning the Power or Authority whereby I
exercise my self in this my Monarchy, it is thus: My Medicinal drivings and
forcings are born in me out of my Country Soil: As Avicen was the Arabians
Physician, Galen the Pergamensians, and Marsilius the best of the Italian
Physicians, even so the most fruitful Germany her self has chosen me to be its
necessary Physician; for even thou thy self know, That Experience her self
is (as it were) the Mother of every Physician, and also verily is of all my
whole Monarchy. Besides, thou know that every Country has its own Laws and
Customs, and moreover, that no Stranger or Alien can be well united with the
Senators of another Country; nor can a Contrary (that is, a mere Stranger) be
ever well joined together with another Contrary: From this observe, that thou
compares Hypocrates to Me, Me to Averois, and compare Rhasis together with Us
three, viz. Each according to his own country

Forasmuch as the Arabians and Graecians, together with the Germans, do stand
in an equal Poise, no otherwise then as the Triple Horehound; and they do make
the Ambergreese of Germany and Graece, equal with Storax and Turpentine, Balsom
and Mummie; nor art thou ignorant that every Country contains in it self the
Matrixes of its own Element, and exhibits to its own self that which is
necessaly: For there is in Arabia the Ambergreese of its own Country: And
although a (haldean Rose be happily no ways comparable to a Rose of Arpinum, yet
what is this to the sicknesses themselves? For a Rose is always a Rose of its
own Country: Just so every Nation produces to it self its own proper and
peculiar Physician, and that out of its own Archeus: For every Necessity
affords Industry (alias, things necessary) to its Workman: But the self-same
Necessity, is as it were both a Master and Parent of every Physician; therefore
the Italians may excuse themselves from using the Graecians, and the Germans
may from them both: For each of these have their necessities to themselves, and
likewise a peculiar Helper of that Necessity, viz. of the nature of that proper
Nation: Nor is there any need for any one to follow the Dreams and Customs of
the Arabians or Graecians, but the so doing is the Error or Ignorance of the
Country, and a Peregrine Arrogance; verily this is negligently done of them,
and as it were, dreamingly, without any Reason, and uncompulsively, beside
either Opportunity or Necessity; from which things a Physician is
(notwithstanding) to be begotten.

But he that is (by reason of such like dotage and carelessness) stirred up
from the necessity of his Country, to be a Physician, he at length is a
perfect Physician of his own Nation, and plainly is the very Hypocrates, the
very Avicen; and finally, the Lully himself of that Country: Albeit, I do not
(in this place) therefore praise them to this end, as if they were born from
necessity; for (and this I shall pass by in ^ilence) their own Country could
not sustain the Errors of them: For I pray, What help did R^^si; afford Vie^^a?
What did Savanarola profit Friburgh? What did Arnoldus the Suevians? What does
entilis, of the Country of St. James, and the Trusane Commentaries, help the
M^sntan Physicians? What does Avicen help all these; for as much as even the
health alone of the sick is to be considered. This therefore is that Faculty I
write of, which even my Country her self has given Me, and that very thing is
by the Necessity which I spoke of, out of which I am begotten. Therefore I
dedicate unto Thee, even whatsoever is in this Book, that thou may have it
committed to thee in Print. But I am persuaded that after a while some
unskilful Fellow or other will Reply to these Books of mine, and my self answer
them again: For from thence will be plainly manifested, and evidently known on
both sides, the necessity of every Physician, and the healing of the Sick: But
as for those whom I most dearly love they perhaps will briefly give the
interpretations of some obscure places in these my Writings; but not those,
viz. the very oldest of my Foxes: For my Troop, forsooth, of the Physicians, is
cut and torn a pieces; for one part of them is of a deceitful Tongue, the other
part of Heart and Tongue. Questionless thou understandest what I drive at; I
will send thee very suddenly some Descriptions, together with my amending of
the Colcotharine Oil. Take this in good part, and always be careful to act the
part of a friend. Farewell.

From Basil, the 4th. of the Ides of ^ber. An. 1526.
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE DEGREES AND COMPOSITIONS OF RECEIPTS AND NATURAL
THINGS. By THEOPHRASTUS of HOHENHEIM. etc.
BEfore I begin to treat of the Degrees, there are two Complexions of Nature
that require our observation: the one is Hot, the other Cold: Moreover each of
these has a certain unbred disposition within it self; For every Hot thing is
dry, and every Cold thing is moist, nor can Heat nor Cold be alone: Therefore
these two Natures, as Hot and Dry, are one thing, and so are the Cold and Moist.

Hence therefore are the Degrees easily found out, that is to say, In what
manner every thing is in its own Degree, and how many Degrees each thing does
occupy. And happily in this place those that have a long time had Catarracts in
their Pannicles, (or Filmes over their sight) will gainsay, and such as have
been accustomed to the in nature Treatises of the four Complexions, viz. Hot,
Cold, Dry and Moist, from which they gather and understand that Cold is present
in moisture and dryness; and likewise that Heat is coupled with both. And
according to this Opinion have they directed every thing, viz. That Cold may be
dry, and Heat may be moist, which verily is a contradiction; whereas if they
had approached nearer and thoroughly searched into Nature, they would certainly
have found my Arguments here following to have been nearer the truth; for they
did not sufficiently understand that these four are but two only and therefore
have they falsely ascribed them to the four Elements, when as they are nothing
less then Elements, the which Philosophy does evidently demonstrate.

CHAP. II.
But that those things which I have spoken of, as to the two Complexions, may
be the better known, understand thus: Whatsoever the Elements have produced in
the Nature of things, is either Cold or Hot; If it be cold, it has in it self
a certain imbred, individual Humidity: Therefore where there is moisture, there
is cold; so where heat is there is dryness, for dryness is in heat alone: Nor
can it possibly be that cold can be dry, and heat, moist; For these are
Elemental Conjunctions which come of the Ares, which is evident in the Example
of a Man and a Woman; the man has in himself the hot and dry, and the woman
she has the cold and moist, but they contribute to the Complexions as far
forth as in their Degrees. First of all then, it is to be considered what
moisture is, what a coagulated is, and finally, what a resolved dryness is: For
from thence flows a common Error, which is very frequent amongst the chiefest
Phisicians: For Example, Take Crystal, which appears cold, and besides that,
dry, for it dryes, but falsely; for the most dry virtue of Crystal is a moist
Coagulum, and in its administration it transmutes whatsoever it overcomes, and
compels it into a coagulated Humidity, because it is again resolved like Ice.
Likewise in Petroleum, (or Oil of Peetr^) it is not a resolved Siccity, as it
appears to be (alias, it is a resolved Siccity, and not (as it appears to the
fight) moist: For the dryness is resolved in the substance of its own body;
Wherefore here (by way of in Epilogue or Conclusion) I define the Degrees to be
observed in a twofold manner, viz. Hot and Cold and therefore the dry is
twofold, and so is the moist, viz. the dry perse, and the dry resolved; the
moist perse. and the moist congealed: What else is in this place desirable, may
be found in our Philosophy it self.

CHAP. III.
ALthough more things might be spoken in this place about the Degrees, then
have been hitherto mentioned by me, yet notwithstanding, because these things
are known to such as are after any sort skilled in Medicinal affairs, I shall
pass them over in this place with silence, and only briefly speak of those
things which have been hitherto falsely and erroneously, yet commonly uttered;
the which take and observe in the following manner. In the first place the Sum
or Number which respects the Elementated Degrees, is not only to be noted,
forasmuch as it only servs to Elementated Sicknesses, but also those things
which respect Mundificatives, Incarnatives, Laxatives, Constrictives,
Repercussives, Diaphoreticks, Narcoticks, Cicatrizers, and others of that
kind. But as for these things, there is in the first place required a plenary
knowledge of sicknesses, and also of the peculiar Degrees of every infirmity:
For, as for wounds, their proper Degrees are requisite, viz. Of Incarnation: As
for the Dropsy, or Hiposar^ha, the Degrees of drying up. For the Gutta, the
Degrees of Comforting. For the Epilepsie, the degrees of Specification. For the
Chacexia, the degrees which are of Commis^ion. If thou have well examined and
considered all these things, then at length set upon, or attempt the
Composition of Receipts.

Neither do I think it sit to for bear to demonstrate in this place, that for
the perfect knowledge as well of sicknesses, as of degrees, there i^ (...)
only required the Medicinal Professi^n, but also the A^^^logical, and besides
them, the pegyrual Species, (o^ Qualities) for all these things deserve a
perfect and so consequently a long Experience; for even this alone (and not a
bare continual reading, nor a judgment, though it be exact) unlocks the scope
of this Book.

Lastly, If you desire any thing in this place concerning degrees, seek it from
a daily use, whereto we direct and refer you all, that ye may know the virtue
of Anthera, and also of Tereniabin, which is eminently enobled; xnd lastly of
the Flower of Cheiri.

CHAP. IV.
But before we come to the degrees themselves, there are certain rules of the
degrees to be observed, viz. By what means the degrees are augmented, or
diminished: Therefore in the first place you are to observe this method:
Whatsoever is of the Elements of the Earth, it possesses the first degree,
such as are Lettice, the Violet, Anthos, etc. Likewise whatsoever is made by
the Air, as the Plagne, the Peripnumonia, or Imposi^^me of the Lungs, the
Causon, or most sharp Fever; these are in the second degree: But that which is
begotten of the Element of Water, possesses the third degree, as Lead, the
Saphir, the Topaz, etc. But such things as come from ^he Element of Fire, as
Ice, Crisial, Snow, they are of the Fourth degree, and that either hot or dry:
Therefore you are to note, that whatsoever, sensitive thing proceeds off an
Element, it is the same with the Element; as for Example, a Frog, whose Spenn
i^ in the third Degree; Likewise Camphire. That which is of the Earth, as men,
is in the first Degree, as Rebis: Whatsoever comes forth out of Volatile or
flying things, is in the second Degree, as ava, alias nvis, a Bird. But
whatsoever breaks forth from the fire, as the Salamander; is in the fourth
Degree: But the means by which one excells another, shall be laid open in the
following Chapters.

CHAP. V.
MOreover, that the Degrees may be more clearly known in their Points, consider
the present Example: Even as the Degrees which respect the Herbs, have been
hitherto divided into four Degrees, so as many of them as ever there be, are to
be referred to the first Degree, but yet not all alike; for one is sometimes
more strained or exalted then another, viz. as to the beginnings, middle, and
end of both; but yet so, that whatsoever descends from the Element of the
Earth, remains in the first Degree, nor is to be placed without the same: For
amongst you, the Water-Lilly possesses the fourth Degree, and with you, Saturn
is placed in the third Degree, which in its frigidity or cold* exceeds the
Water-Lilly almost eight Degrees: Wherefore they can never be placed or
assigned to the same Degrees. So whatsoever is here in the second Degree; there
even the first point overcomes, or exceeds the fourth Degree of the Element,
which is off the Earth. And the fourth Point is more sublime by four Degrees
then the last Point of the first Degree.

The like is to be supposed in the third Degree, and so of the fourth: From
thence are collected sixteen points, which ascend, as it were, by stairs unto
true Degrees, yea even to the six hundredth sixty and third. Therefore we have
rightly affirmed, that those have erred, who have com^rized Camphire. the Sperm
of Frogs, the Water-Lilly, Adums into one Degree; from which a certain and true
Degree could never be found out in Receipts, the which shall be showed in the
following Forms or Measures of Compositions.

CHAP. VI.
BUT that you may peculiarly understand both the Degrees and the Point of those
which induce heat, Observe, Whatsoever beings a thing into Athes, Calx, or
Glass, is in the fourth Degrees fire: as Fire, Mercurial-water, and Aqua-(...),
etc. So whatsoever is of a biting quality, and bring a thing to an Eschar, so
as to putrify poslesseth the third Degree such are Calcothar, Arsenick,
Salt-armoniack, Borax, Auripigment, and others of that Kind, as also Alkali:
But as to what appertains to the virtues of these things, by which some things
excel others, that belongs to the Points; and not the Degrees. Besides,
whatsoever makes Cicatrizes, or Blisters, possess the second Degree, of which
sort are Rab^boia, Cantharides, Flammula, or Scarwort, Melsna, and others of
that Kind: For although Flammula be in the first Degree, yet other ways it
affects the second Degree; Because the spirit of Salt reduces Flammula so far
that it may be in a sort transferred to the first Point of the second Degree.

Lastly, whatsoever heats, and yet attains not to the aforesaid signs, as
Ginger, Cardamomes, Southernwood, and other of that kind, is in the first
Degree, together with their higher and lower Points. But you are to observe in
this Rule, that the Degrees are not here ordered according to the Nature and
Reason of the Elements, but are concluded into this present Rule, without them,
and that on this Account; because the present Rule is taken from the three
Principles, and serves for these things: which excel in Salt, in Mercury, and
finally in Sulphur.

Wherefore in this place, we are chiefly to beware, that we use not this
present Rule in Elementatedsicknesses; for they are certain things picked out of
these, and serve for such Diseases only, as are to be healed by the three
Principles.

CHAP. VII.
BUT that you may know the Degree of Cold, besides that which is Elemental;
understand it thus: Whatsoever Congeals humors, possesses the fourth Degree,
of which sort are those things that are begotten of the Element of Fire: But
whatsoever infrigidates (that I may use the Common expression and yet does not
impair the Spirit of Life, the Remedy being administered in its own proper Dose)
as Narcoticks, Anodynes, Somnisirous things, the sperm of Frogs, Hemlock, etc.
are subjected to the third Degree. Moreover, whatsoever Congeals humors, as
the Beryll, Carniola, possesses the second Degree: But whatsoever
extinguisheth praeternatural heats, and allays the Paroxismes or Fits, is in
the second Degree.

Lastly, whatsoever hinders a Disease from breaking forth into a Paroxisme or
Fit, is of the first Degree. This Rule does not much dister from that which is
of heat, for these things have the Enantiosis, or the just-contrary of the
things aforementioned: But whatsoever portion of Degrees those have which are
off the Elements, the same portion does also remain according to the decreed
form or precept, together with the present Degree; so that now there is made a
two-sold Degree of Nature, and it operates merely according to the Rule and
Nature of the Elements.

CHAP. VIII.
MOreover the Rule of Colors is worthy observation; for they also declare the
Nature of the things wherein they are, as Century which is Red, and therefore
of an hot Nature; and a Lilly which is white, and therefore of a cold Nature;
But as concerning the Colors, which are outward, there can be nothing of
certainty defined, unless on this wise; A Rose is red and of a Cold Nature,
because of the yellow Threads ^ying in the middle thereof which attracts the
^ea^ of the Rose. Besides, wheresoever there is a yellow in a Red flower, there
also is the heat, viz but the Redu^^s i^ adjudged to be of a cold Nature, the
like opinion is to be had of other Flowers.

Moreover there are Flowers which although they appear to he of a hot Nature
yet (...) they Cold, amongst which Minium is one. Others seem Cold o^ Nature,
when as they are Hot, such as Copper is: For the better knowledge of these
things, N^^e the following Rule; Whatsoever is green, brown or du^kie, as soon
as in commixtion, it is picked out, or taken from the body, is hot; likewise that
body under which the Colors lie hidden.

Silver is Cold in its Nature, and keeps the Color of Cold, for in the End it
goes into the Color of Lazure; But Mars is by Nature of a cold Color, and
suffers it self to be Transmuted into an hot Nature, yet nevertheless it keeps
the force and Consequently the Universal Virtue of its own Nature: The black
Colors are of no Nature, for they are nothing else but a Sulphur, which is
Adust, or burned, under which there lies nothing at all, which is Elemental:
But whatsoever is White, Wan, Black; and jaecynth is Cold, the other Colors
are Hot; But whatsoever is garnished with diverse Colors, consists in one
Nature, viz. in that which is of the more principal Color: So likewise in a
green Color, although there be Cold therein, yet it is comprehended in its Own
Head, or Principal thing.

CHAP. IX.
WHatsoever is fat, and moreover moistened, is cold, although this be in a green
thing, yet that greenness is turned into a Cold Nature; But whatsoever is dry,
is of an Hot Nature: Besides, whatsoever is of Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt, fall
within the compass of both Natures, viz. hot and cold, by reason of the three
Principles. Briefly, whatsoever burns, is sulphur, and of an hot Nature, unless
it be in the hot, alias cold, Colors; But whatsoever goes into Sublimation,
and Calcination, admits an hot Nature: So whatsoever resolves it self, or is
boiled, or brought into an Alkali, is hot: Also whatsoever it austere, is Cold.

Every sweet and bitter thing, is of an hot Nature, unless it be subjected to
the former Rules; But that which dries the skin is hot, and that which
Constringeth is cold. Now if you would judge by the Odours of these things, you
can define nothing certainly; Except, as far forth as they keep the same Nature
with the body. Lastly, there are other Rules which may be allowed of, if they
obstruct not the precedent Rules.

CHAP. X.
MOreover, it is observable that there are some things in which the Degrees
(besides those that are Natural) do lie hid two ways, and that, according to
the two Bodies; as in Metals, Gems, and Stones: And according to this Opinion,
Mercury is the chiefest amongst the Metals, and has a certain peculiar Nature
in it self, viz, Hot and Cold, nor can it be taken therefrom. Now then if a
Metal be generated from thence, In Iron or Lead, it does (besides this nature)
get to it self another Nature, and so two Natures will be in one Substance:
Wherefore henceforth Lead shall be instead of Mercury, if the Leaden Nature
which it therewithal conceived, shall be accommodated, or appropriate to thy
occasions. The like is to be judged of Tin, Silver, Iron, and Copper, forasmuch
as they return into their own Body: After this manner it is also in Gems, the
Liquor remains in its own nature, viz. In a Mercurial Nature: Now then if the
Liquor be congealed into a Gem, it does in like wise put on a twofold Nature,
because they are again reduced into the first Liquor. The like is to be
supposed concerning some common Stones or Pebles; also in some Herbs there is the
like Nature: Wherefore read, and read over again, and then bring to Experience
whatsoever is committed to thy Memory concerning the nature of things; but call
it so to Experience, that thou may not only Opinion ^t^ or Conjecture, but
may exactly know every thing for in these things lies hid the true and
certain Phisician or Naturalist.

The Second BOOK.
CHAP. I.
ALthough I have afore-written the Relolleum's according to the Reason and
Nature of Heat and Cold, together with the innate Essence; yet notwithstanding,
besides those things, there are others which the Ares of Nature has produced;
and this does by many parts excel that which I have treated of in the former
Books: And that I may begin from thence; first of all, If you would exactly
speak of Accidental Complexions, you shall find that in this place of degrees,
the Superior, or foregoing Relolleum's of Nature, are to be but little approved
of, and that on this Account, Because throughout the whole Universe, there are
two Natures in things which are both together in one substance, although the
one of them appears only) and these are an Innate Accident, and an Elemental
Accident: Besides, Every thing in the nature of it self, is hot: For the first
matter of things is hot perse; nor does the Innate Accident change, because
every one of the three principles in the Complexions, do consist or abide even
unto their ultimate Matter, that is, look what manner they are discerned, or
found in, before the Relolleum's. In the same manner do they remain so long as
until the Relolleum departs. Therefore like as Experience comprehends, or
perfects the End, in like manner the beginning i^ manifested in, and by it
self, yet notwithstanding before we come to those Simples which are in the
degrees, it is to be observed, that neither their heat or cold is their Innate
Accident, but rather an Elemental and External Accident.

CHAP. II.
MOreover, Nature does not wholly emit, or let go any thing out of it self, the
which a man skilful in Medicinal Affairs may easily apprehend, but it keeps the
Innate Accident so long at the Matter or Body wherein the Accident is, remains:
An example hereof you have in Fire for in this the Innate Accident is Heat, and
is the nature of the three first Principles, which is manifestly Hot. Moreover
it cannot otherwise be, but that together with the Heat, the substance passes
away, if you would translate, or bestow the Heat on another object. And
although that Heat makes Warm, yet it is but a dead Heat, nor does it heal a
sickness, nor give any help, but it is a certain superfluous Heat, added to the
Body from without. On this wise does every Innate Accident open its virtue, and
discover it, but without helping or succouring the sick. Therefore whatsoever
is accomodated or fitted to be a Medicine for Diseases, must be thus prepared:
In the first place, bring your Medicine to that which seperates the two
Essences, the one in the Substance, the other in the spirit of life; For
wheresoever you would administer a Medicine, even there it is expedient and
necessary that the Spirit of Life departs from the substance, and accords with,
or is suitable unto the offending-matter of the Disease, and then the Medicine
will appear alone in its own Body, and this according to the nature of the
three Principles: But the External, Elementated Accidents go to that place
where the sickness does lurk thereby I gather, that in the universal nature of
things there is a twofold accident, an Innate, and an External; the Innate
tends but little to Health, but the External only does, and in the fire there
is nothing of an External Accident: Wherefore I affirm it to be an imperfect
work of Nature.

CHAP. III.
WHen Nature does at first bring forth in its proper Element, then the Archeus
does prepare it according to the reason and nature of a private (or peculiar)
Iliastes, so that the Ares does plainly consist in the three Principles, and
generates the substance of the body in the same thing; this Generation perse,
is for the Bodies sake only, that it may at pear the same with the Relolleum:
But what is this to the sick? For the sire is even alike, a Relolleum Accident,
also Snow, yet they heal not sicknesses, nor have they any power in themselves
of curing Diseases, because they are a Relolleumper so. Besides, the External
Elements do make the Cherio of nature, the which is also needful that you bring
to the Relolleum, which although you take together with the Cherio, yet it is
the Cherio that heals all the sicknesses: And in this place you are to observe
concerning the Cherio, that the Cherio is no other thing then the Heat, or
Coldness of those things which leaves the Body, and goes into Nature: An
example whereof you have in Camphyr, for it has its frigidity from the Cherio,
and is therefore a most present help in Sufflatures, (or Windy sir^^lings) but
in the substance of its first Principles, it remains hot, even as Sulphur, and
the spirit of Salt, together with the Mercuriality; so likewise Gems and Herbs.
Moreover, whatsoever Nature produces, has its proper Cherio, that is, an
Elemental, External Accident: Wherefore in this place of degrees I affirm, that
one thing has more Cherionick Heat, or Cherionick cold, then another: Thus
has the Archeus disposed all things, and that for the sake of the Microcosm.

CHAP. V.
BUT that you may the more clearly understand our Intention and Opinion,
concerning the Compositions of Receipts, you are to observe, that like as I
have before mentioned the Relollenm and Cherio; so in this place, it is
expedient, that you again understand it, in reference to the Body, viz. thus,
That such sicknesses, which are only of a Cherionick nature, and lie hid in
the Body, do descend into the Body without the destruction of the three first
Principles of the Body it self; For as the ^iiastes in the four Elements does,
(mother-like) produce, [or bring forth] the Relolleum and Cherio, so does Man
stand in the four Elements, and does receive (as it were hereditarily) those
sicknesses that do now and then bud forth in the Body, so that they also in the
end break forth into External Elementated sicknesses: Wherefore for the
ordering of Cherionick Receipts, it is behavefull, that the External Elementated
things, do leave and for sake their own Bodies, together with their substances,
and decline, or turn into the Spirit of Life, for from thence is the sick
person freed, or relieved: Therefore it is to be noted, that death is not
Cherionicall, but Relolleaceous Nevertheless hence it is, that on what part
soever it is turned or inclined, it cannot dye: For who can separate or take
away that, which is an Individual, from that under which it lies hid? But in
this place we speak of cold and hot Cherioes, and not Relolleums. As for the
Rest of what may be here desired, You may read it in The Discourse of the
Original of Diseases.

CHAP. V.
LIke as I have in the former Book, delivered in many and sundry Rules, the
knowledge of the Nature of those things, which is either hot or cold: So in
this place, the present Rule now to be observed i^ concerning Herbs: the most
of which part are cold and dry, alias, moist: yea, and such as have in them a
certain obscure viridity: Now although th^^ these are esteemed hot, yet are
they truly cold is Vervain, shepherd, purse: Othersome are reputed cold,
whereas they are hot, as Bugloss, Dill, and that on this Account: Because the
Coagulated Humidity, brings by its Congealation, a most great dryness, and the
Resolved Siccity does not resolve without some little moisture, because of the
Cherionick Nature: For it is evident, that otherwise nothing can be begotten of
the Element of the Earth, but it must be hot, nor of the Element of the Water,
but it must be cold, for this is the Order of Nature: But that no such thing
does come to pass, the External Elementatedness is the reason thereof, for it
corrupts and breaks the former Nature* Wherefore, it is to be heeded, and dealt
with according as is its Cherionick-nature, that is, according to the Guidance
of Experience: Likewise because the same Nature, whether it be hot or cold,
does not form the body, under which it lies hid, there is no need that you
should pass so much for the Body, but bestow all your Experience, upon the
three aforesaid Natures, according to what we have before spoken in the first
Book.

CHAP. VI.
LAstly, the Physician is to observe the bodies of such things, as (...), for
all those Bodies in which these things lie hid, are nothing else but ^ Liquor,
under which is hidden that which is Cherioni^al^, but the liquor is Congealed
in like manner, in or with its own Element, even as the Iliastes has brought
it forth; wherefore the separations of Nature do again resolve that which
Nature has Congealed, and in this resolution the two aforesaid Natures are
separated.

Hence it is evident that the External Elementated things of Nature, are the
Relolleum-accident of Nature, and, being apart, do not partake of any Virtue:
So likewise it is clear, that the other Nature is fully and most perfectly
present, in such things as abide in their proper Innated, and in their proper
Accidental Quality; both of them in their separation: From these things it is
evident, that there is nothing, in-born, hot or cold; but that which is Innase
does neither profit, or disprofit any one

Yet besides, there is another certain Nature, which induces an heat or cold;
according to which we judge of the heat or the cold, viz. by the Cherionicall
Testimony or Touchstone; by the mediation of which, every sickness is to be
healed; for, that same Frigidity or heat, does, upon its ingress or entering in,
incline to, or betake it self unto the sickness or distemper; the which its
Innate property does never affect. All these things are to be found in the Book
Of the Conjunctions of things in the Proprieties of the two Natures, according
to the three Principles; and that according to the prescription of Philosophy.
Moreover, you shall see the Order of the Degrees in the following Chapters, and
that, according to the reason and Nature of their Elements.

CHAP VII.
These things following are of an hot nature, such things as come forth from
the Earth do possess the first Degree of Heat.
Dittander. Lions foot. Anthor, or Rosemary flowers. Lacca. Dadder of Time.
Fig. Broom. Costus. Pennyroyal. Humulus. Lencopiper. Hartwort. Cretamus.
Scammony. Teazels. Basil. Horehound. Sagapen. Agrimony. G^ntian. Eaecampane.
Cipress. Great spurge. Gallingall. Phili^endala. Blouawort. Laudanum Claves.
Moncks Rhubarb. Macropiper. Fonrel. Granes of Paradise. Civonia. Bawme.
Chamepitis. Badellium. Fumitory. Thistle. Cheiry. Mellilot. Clary. Fi^la.
Calamus. Hirundinaria P^o^y Ginger. Flammula. Herb of Paradise. Lavender.
Mustard. Calbanum. Gamandrea. Liquorish. Succory. Cubebs. Cardamoms. Marjoram.
Mother of Time. Opopanax. Ammoniacum.
Aireal things do claim the second Degree of Heat:
Tereniabin. Nube. Chaos. Ilech.
Such things as proceed forth from the Water, are in the third Degree of Heat.
Vitriol. Sulphur. The Golden Talck. Copper. The Topas. Carniola. Both sorts of
Arsenick, Red and White. The Kakimia of Salt. The Granat. The Red Marcasite.
Congealed Salt. Sal Gem. Gold. Smaragdine. Copprose. Molten Salt. Argent Vive.
Realgar. The Kakimia of Sulphur. The Chimeaolae Calcis The Iacynth. The
Crisolite. Ogorum. Feathered Alum. The Ruby.
Such things as come forth from the Fire, affect the fourth Degree of Heat.
The Hot Lightning. Every Aetna. The Hot Hail.
CHAP. VIII.
The following things are of a Cold Nature. Such things as are produced out of
the Earth are Cold in the first Degree.
DOdder. Strawberries. Comfrye. Brancursine. The Mandrake. The Rose. Acetum.
Cic^nidion. Chestnuts. Water-Lilly. Lentils. Eyebright. The bitter Ve^ch.
Mallows. Herb-Mercury. The Pomegranate. The four greater cold seeds. The
Flowers of Mulbery. Ribes. Dates. Beans. Galls. Crispula. Ath. The Gourd. The
kinds of Sanders. Tragacanth. Nightshade. High Taper. Lettice. Endive. Gladwin.
The flower of bread Corn. Henbane. Purslane. Citron. The kinds of myrabolanes.
Ripe Apples. The fourlesser cold seeds. Melon. Snapdraggon. Pisa. Darnell.
Lilley of the Valley. Cowcumbers. The greater Arrow head. Fleawort. The kinds
of Poppies.
Such things as are produced from the Air, possess the second Degree of Cold.
As Nebulgea.
Such things as proceed from the Water possess the third Degree of Cold.
LEad. Camphire. The white Kakimia. Electrum terrae. Thallena alterrea.
Thallena frigida. Antimony. Hoematites. The 3 sorts of Tin. Alumen de glacie.
The silver marcasite Iron. Silver. Alumen Entali. White talk. The three kinds
of Corrals. Lotho. Aqua glariona.
Such as are produced from the Fire, are of the fourth Degree of Cold.
Crystal. Arles. The Baeryll. Cold lightening. Citrinoeus. Cold Hail.
Citrinula. Snow. Ice.
CHAP. IX.
IT IS therefore to be observed, that by what reason or consideration every thing
proceeds from the Elements, by the same Reason also does it posses the same
degree, according to the aforesaid Rules: Moreover, whatsoever sensitive thing
exists from the Elements, the following figure will discover.

The subsequent Sensitives which proceed from the Earth, do occupy the first
degree of Heat, as,
Men. Children or Boys. Capricorn, or the Goat. Leopards. Lions. Horses. Oxen.
Bears. Rams. Wolves. Cocks, Foxes, And such like.
The following Animals born from the Air, do obtain the second Degree of Heat.
The Eagle. Ostritch. Phoenex, Swallow. Sparrow* Heron, etc.
And all flying* living creatures, except such as are in the Water.

Those which are generated from the Water, have the third Degree of Heat.
Castor.
These from the fire, are of the fourth Degree.
The Salamander.
The following things are of a Cold Nature.

Those things that are of the Earth, possess the first Degree of Cold, as
Women. Maids. Cows. Menstruums Every Sperm.
Those of the Air, the second degree of cold, as
Pigeons. Storks.
Those of the Water the third degree, as
Fishes. Worms. Tortoises. Frogs.
Those of the fire do possess the fourth Degree of Cold.
Gnavi, ( alias Gnani) Zommi.
CHAP. X.
BEsides, there are other Simples which by means of a composition, attain to
the second degree: these, albeit they do not altogether or wholly follow their
proper degrees, according to the Reason and Nature of the Elements; yet such as
are in the first degree, attain the second; those in the second, the third; and
those in the third, the fourth, as appears in the subsequent figure.

The SIMPLES.
The Rose. The Violet. Nightshade. Anthera. Water-lilly. Chamomel. Flowers of
Mullein. Flowers of Hypericon. Flowers of Centaury. Flowers of Selfheal.
The Addition of Composition.
Oil. Burning Wine. Crude Vinegre nAnd every fatness. Vinegre distilled.
Moreover, although the Nature of it self, be not so Cold, yet a Composition
reduces ^t to that pass, that by an addition, the second Degree of heat or
cold may break forth; and this is evident in Oil of Roses, and in Rosed
Vinegre, and others of that kind. Some things also there are, which otherwise,
are in the third Degree that attain the fourth Degree, as Vinegre Campherated,
the Oil of Lead, etc. There are besides, some Degrees, which by separation,
Aseend from the first into the fourth Degree; and like wise from the third into
the fourth: and this shall be evidenced in the third Book of Spagyricall
Degrees. Moreover, there are some things which are not at all augmented or
advanced forwards, as Snow and Ice, and that because of the Nature of the
Relolleum. Some things also there are, which unless they are prepared, do not
draw out their Nature, as the Sperm of Frogs, Chrysall, and Sulphur*: Likewise
some things may be reduced from an hot Degree into a cold, as Gems; othersome
from a cold into an hot Degree as Camphire, Corrals, etc. Lastly, there are
things which in their preparation, loose a Degree, as those things which are
Congealed or Resolved: Likewise such things as in their Corporeal Substance,
operate nothing at all, a^ the Oil of juniper, and others of that kind: What
else may be here desired in this place, will be taught by Experience.

FINIS.
The Third BOOK.
CHAP. I.
IT is to be observed, in the Frontespeece of this third Book, that, besides
those Essences which I have mentioned in the former Books; there is another
Nature, or Essence, distinct from the former; Which is called a fifth Essence,
or as the Philosophers term it, an Elemental Accident; or as the Ancient
Physics terms it, a Specific form. But it is called a fifth Essence, on this
Account, because four Essences lie hid in the three first Principles: Therefore
the Elemental accident, and that which in this place is called a Quintessence,
has a Nature neither hot nor cold, and is without all complexion in it self:
But that I may the more clearly discover it by an Example, it is the Quintessence
introduces firm Health alone, like that fortitude and vigor, or firm Health,
which is in a man without any complexion, and is prolonged and continued to the
end or termination of it self. Thus does the virtue lie hid in Nature: For
whatsoever drives out sicknesses, is no other thing then a certain
comfortative, even as the driving out of an Enemy by an acquisition of force
and power. As for the nature of things, it is to be supposed that there is
nothing amongst natural things that is (alias, but is) destitute of virtue,
unless it be of a laxative nature, and that is (alias, because it is) as much
as a Quintessence, for that it is an Accident without a complexion. Although
Frigidity does sometimes loosen, and sometimes heat, yet it is preternatural,
and is by reason of the virtue of the Relolleaceous Nature: But whatsoever
operates according to Nature, is the quintessence of that thing: For hereunto
is the virtue disposed, viz. that it may take the filth away from the body even
as Incarnatives do (in the healing of Ulcers) induce new flesh, by this means
(or, on this account) that by their interveening virtue the peccant matter may
be removed: these three things are of a threefold Essence, but 'ti but one
virtue; which by a proper just title, may be called a Quintessence.

CHAP. II.
FOR the knowledge of those degrees which are of a Q. intessentiality, and
especially of those things that comfort, there are in the first place requisite
four observable things: First, What ever is of the earth, obtains the first
degree of Health. Secondly, Whatsoever is of the Air, affects the second
degree. Thirdly, What ever is of the Water, possesses the third degree.
Fourthly, Whatsoever is begotten by the fire, claims the fourth degree.
Moreover, he labors in vain, whoever he be, that thinks to extract a
Quintessence out of Terrestrial things, equal to that which is extracted out of
the Air. In like sort that thing which is from the Air can never be compared
to that which has its rise from the Water: And thus are you also to judge
concerning the fourth Element; an example you have in the extraction of the
Quintessence out of Colondine. It Is in vain to endeavor by the Quintessence of
Celondine, to attain to, or match the Quintessence of the Phoenix: and likewise
by the Quintessence of the Phoenix to equallize the Quintessence of Gold;
likewise by the Quintessence of Gold to match the Quintessence of Fire.
Although that in Celendine, Bawm, Valerian, there is a greater Arcanum then it
in the rest, (Herbs:) yet is there such an excelling precedence in the degrees,
that that Arcanum is much transcended by many parts. So in every degree one
thing is of an higher state then another; therefore amongst the Earthly terrene
things it is to be observed, whether or no Celondine outstrips Bawm and Bawm,
Valerian; the like Judgment is to be had concerning the other three Elements.

CHAP. III.
WHatever I have treated of in the former chapters, has been only to this
end, that I might descend unto the following signs of Degrees, and that so it
might be made manifest by what means or order the Degrees in the Elements
consist: For I am not ignorant of the great dissension of Platearius,
Dioscorides, Serapio, from this point; and of the others also, which have been
followers of them, who have written many things of a Quintessence, but falsely.

But thou, whoever thou art, seek the knowledge of this Quintessence from
Experience, for so shall thou find out the Degrees in their division. But that
it may also be manifested by what means Diseases may be driven out by the
Quintessence, thou must first of all diligently observe the concordance or
coherence of things and diseases; for some virtues give an assault only in the
Synodoia, othersome in the Mania, or Madness; others in the Aschlyte, others in
the Lethargy, etc. And this is to be imputed to the concordant property. I
esteem it worth knowing in this place, that which lies hidden in Nature, as in
Gelutta, or the Herb Chameleon, and Bawm, which renovate and convey away the
Disease without any virtue of the Degrees, viz. in renovating and repairing the
former Juvenility, or Youthfulness and Lustiness: But by what reason or cause,
and by what virtue these things are done, is declared in the Book of Long Life,
as some certain peculiar Mysteries, which (besides Arcanum's) are in the Nature
of things. Wherefore I think it expedient to pass them over in this place, that
so I may prosecute what I have begun, concerning the degrees of the four
Elements. And although here are many and sundry virtues which do overcome and
conquer Diseases, some by their diaphoretick Nature, others by a Narcotick,
others by other properties; yet as for these things, I refer them to those that
give their mind to Theorems and Speculations.

CHAP. IV.
EVery Confortative it temperate: In this place the Substance will impead or
hinder nothing, be it cold, or be it hot; yet notwithstanding it will not at
all endamage the Quintessence in its work: Moreover, every Specific is a
Quintessence, without any corrupting, (or breaking) of its own body: Besides,
there is nothing temperate but the Quintessence; all kinds of bodies are
Elementated in nature, and in their proper accident.

The degrees of Health.

Such things as proceed forth from the Earth, do possess the first degree of
health, as

All kinds of
Herbs. Seeds. Roots. Sponges. Animals. Flowers. Barks. Fruits.
The things of the Air have the second degree, as all kinds of Birds.

Those of the Water have the third degree, as

All kinds of
Metals. Marcasites. Kakimeaes. Salts. Minerals. Rosinous Sulphurs. Fishes.
Gems. Stones.
The things of the Fire the fourth Degree.

The Tincture. The Stone of the Philosophers.
Albeit there are some other virtues also so be observed, which lie hid in
Herbs, and not in flying things, nor in Metals, even as the Vrsina, the
Carlina, or the Carline thistle, declare, the which admit in themselves other
different virtues besides the degree, amongst which also is the Smaragdine,
which (besides others) admits of another (...) in it self; yet they tend not at
all to be (...) only external virtues, and do not at all (...)

CHAP. V.
HItherto we have spoken of (...), now for Laxatives and their degrees:
therefore first of all us to be observed, that that division or distinction by
which Laxatives are divided into four Natures, is not to be observed in this
place, the which (forsooth) are described on this wife, according to the
ancient custom: Colequintida, and Scammony, purge Choler. Turbith and Ellebor,
Phlegm. Manna, and Capillus Veneris, the Blood* Lapis Lazuli, and black
Ellebor, Melancholy. Besides, some things there are which drive out a
yellowish, or yelky Choler: Others, an Eruginous: Others a yellowish cittrine
Hydropical Water: And others of that kind there be which are elsewhere
described, which with us are unworthy of credit, and that on this account,
Because the former things operate by (alias, upon) the peccant matter, even in
any kinds of Diseases whatsoever: And by this Sentiment or Rule, the innate
Disposition of Coloquintida is to provoke to stool, where there is Melancholy.
So Turbith stirs up stools not unlike to slyme, even in choler; and so is it
with the others. Wherefore that Judgment concerning the colors of the Stools
or Excrements, is not to be taken from the Nature of the Disease, but rather
from that which stirs up the stools. Moreover, although the Stools or
Excrements do sometimes make an Exit, or outpu^s, according to the disposition,
and by the reason of the sickness from which they are produced; yet it is to be
considered without difference, with, or in what Purgations these stools are to
be stopped, vlz. not according to the nature of the four Humors, but rather
according to the nature of the four Degrees which do more powerfully stop the
belly. O great Alaoscopy, by which men determine to call that in question which
could not by any means be apprehended, as shall be the more clearly evidenced
beneath, when we speak of Stools.

CHAP VI.
LIke as I have made mention of the Degrees of Laxatives in the former
chapters* so in this place do I rehearse the same things, whereby they may take
the deeper Impression in your minda* viz. that Laxatives do not wholly observe
the degrees of the four Elements, but have mixed degrees, without any respect to
the Elements: Wherefore the Nature of the Disease is to be the more diligently
looked into, least von do too rashly abuse Comfortatives in healing a Disease:
but rather order and accommodate it so, that it may on every side square with
the nature of the disease, and that thou may. in what place soever, apply a
degree to the disease. But lest we should (in this place) rush into this order
of purging, with unwasht hands, as the proverb goes; this is the Work, and this
is the Labor. It Is to be observed therefore, that sometimes there are unequal
parts in the same operation, in the fourth degree: as, sometimes Ellebor takes
away that which Tithimal, or Spurge cannot Likewise the Catapurias, or great
Spurges, expel that, which the other two could never bring to pass: sometimes
Praecipitate, sometimes Esula, or the smaller Spurge: likewise Cassia Fistula.
Besides, sometimes in Fevers a Laxative purges Febrile humors, as Centaury:
sometimes in the Cataleptick disease, as Hellebore: sometimes in the Ascarides,
or Worms, as Agarick, and so in others of that kind: the cause whereof is
Nature, and not the humors, the which is here unto destinated, that it may take
away whatsoever is Melancholy, or Choleric, or Phlegmatic, or whatever other
thing may relate hereto: For that which you call Eruginous, or rusty ^anker'd
Choler, may slow out from all these according to the account of humors: As for
all these things, what mysteries each have in themselves, apart, experience
will declare.

CHAP. VII.
AS for the Degrees of more Intense or Violent, and more Remiss, or slow
Purging; note these things which follow:

1.
Polypode The tops of Botim Maidonhair Turpentine Seen The tops of Elder
Gamandrea Stomachiolum Manna Succory The tops of Danewort Whey
2.
Siler montanus Sowbread Turbith Asarabacca Hermodactyl
3.
Rhubarb Esula Vitriol Diagridium Agarick Lazulus Scammony Centaury
4.
Both Hellebors Colloquinoida Tithymal Serapine Cataputia Praecipitate
CHAP. VIII.
AS for Incarnatives, and Consolodatives note and observe these things:
Incarnatives and Consolidatives have in themselves four degrees; but the
Consolidatives do exclude the Elements in the some manner as the Laxatives do.
It Is therefore observable in the first place, in what order or proportion the
sicknesses which we would heal, have their consistency in the degrees: For from
hence follows the like degrees of Natural things for some heal the Fractures of
Bones, others heal wounds, othersome heal common Ulcers, others cancrous
Aestiomena's: From thence proceed four Degrees on this wise.

1. Fractures of Bones are healed by
Lions foot. Perewinckle. Hypericon. Sanicle. Aristoloch-Rotunda. Consolida, or
Comsry-Serpentina.
2. Wounds are healed by
Natural Balsom, Artificial Balsom, the Powders of the Apostles, Wound-drinks,
the Emplasters of the Apostles, Apostolical Unguents, Oil of Hypericon, Oil of
Centaury, Oil of Self-heal, Oil of Dill, Oil of Turpentine, Oleam Benedicti,
Oil of Tiles.

3.
Aposthumes and common Ulcers are healed by G^mm'd Plasters, Mummigated
Emplaisters, Apostolic Emplaisters, Apostolic Unguents

Cancrous Aestiomenaes are healed by a Composition of Mercury, a Composition of
Brassatella, a Composition of Realgar. All ye Chyrurgions, come, come hither,
(I have not as yet beheld one of ye so much as worthy of the title.) Come, come
hither I say, hasten all ye Impostors together, that ye may once know each
Degree apart, according to what is prescribed and sorewritten, from which you
have so far strayed some certain Ages, being taken with the allurements of your
silly Receipts, which even from your childhood, (as 'twere) ye have one after
another begged, but are not worth a Nut* Repent I pray, repent, and now at last
cease from your Unguents, Sparadaps, and Cataplasmes, which are tossed up and
down in a confused manner, and approach unto the true Order of Curing.

CHAP IX.
MOreover, there are other things different from the former, which do equally
as well possess their proper degrees, of which sort are Poisons, in which the
Degrees are even most specially to be observed, that they be not admitted into
the composition of Receipts, according to their Elementated Nature; therefore
in the first place the quantity of the Poison is to be looked into, and then
the weight is to be prepared, and that by this Rule.

Poisons in their DEGREES.

1. The Simples by themselves.
Colcothar. Alum.
2. The Reverberated things,
Spirit of Jupiter. Spirit of Saturn.
3. The Calcinated things,
Tartarum. Scissum.
4. Sublimated things,
Arsenick. Mercury.
The other kinds of Poisons, as of Spiders, Toads, Seortions, Lyzards,
Serpents, the lesser Dragons, and others, forasmuch as they are not
Ingredients, I think good to pass them by, except Tyrum, or the Tyrian Adder,
which shall be spoken of in its place.

Besides, there are some things which provoke the Menstruaes: wherefore in
stopping the Months, the things most fitly appropriate shall be related, viz.
amongst the other Receipts, like as the Nature or Order of their Degrees,
according to the Prescription or Rule of the composition of Receipts. Moreover,
there are things which re^ress Humors, and provoke Urine: All these things,
and what else is like them, are to be sought for from Experience and
Concordancy. Thus much of the Degrees: As for what else may be desired in this
place, daily use will declare: Now of the Spagyrical Degrees.

CHAP. X.
BY the Spagyrical Industry, four Degrees do proceed forth in the same manner
with the four Elements, which overcome the other Degrees in their quantity
Moreover, wheresoever the last Degree terminates or cease, there the first
Point in Spagyrical things, begins on this wise.

1.
The Oil of all Herbs. Roots. Seeds. Oiles. Rozins. Gumms. Fruits. Mushroms.
Mosses.
By distillation.
2.
The Oil of the Vultur. Dove. Heron. Crow. Pie.

3.
The Water of Vitriol [the Liquor or juice of it.] Mercurial Water. Oil of
Argentvive. Viridity of Salt. Alluminous-Waters. Calcinated Oils. Oiles of
Metals. Liquors of Gems. Potable Gold. Essence of Antimony.
4.
Oil of Crystal. Oil of the Berill. The Tincture. The Philosophers Stone.
All these things are hot; for the Spagyrical Degrees do take away the
Elementated, and tend in their degrees above that which is Elemented*
Wherefore, for the knowledge of these Degrees, a plenary and perfect Experience
is requisite, that you may see the preparation of those things which descend,
or go out of an Elementated thing, (to that Degree) wherein they overcome and
transcend that which is Elementated.

The things which come from the Earth are of the first Spagyrieal Degree, a out
of the Seeds of Dill. Juniper. Cardamoms. Cloves.

Roots of Henbane. Re^pontick. Angelica. Ostritium.

Woods of Hehony* Juniper. Saunders.


2.
The things from the Air, are of the second Degree, as out of Fruits of Nuba.
Ilech. Terniabin.
Volatiles, or Birds the Phoenix. Eagle. Dove.


3.
Things of the Water are of the third Degree, as of Metalls. Gold, Mercury,
Silver. Copper, Lotkon, Iron. Lead. Tin, Electrum.

Gems, the Sephyr. Smaragdine. Granate. Topaz Ruby. Iacynth. Amethist.
Corralls.

Mineralls Marcosite Kakimia. ^a^k Realgar.

Salts, Vitriols. Allums. ^a^ts.


4
Such as are from the fire claim the fourth Degree, As of -- Beryll. Crystal.
Arde, alias, Arles.

And those things that descend from the aforesaid four Elements, as from the
Earth.
Aqua-vite, or Distilled Balsams. Circulated water. Distilledliquors.
From the Air.
Distilled Birds. Teremabin. Nuba. Ileeh.
From the Water.
Potable Gold. Liquor of Silver. Resolution of Mercury. Things Sublimated,
Calcinated, Reverberated, Resolved, Congealed.
From the Fire.
Liquor of Crystal. Liquor of the Beryll. Liquor of A^r de, or Ar^^.
The Fourth BOOK
CHAP. I.
EVen as I have earnestly commended in my former Books, those things which
concern Degrees, together with the differences of them; so likewise in this
place do I again commend unto thee the difference by this Rule. Those Herbs
which are of a cold Nature, and of the Earth, are not universally profitable
for all the Diseases of an hot Nature; nor on the other side, are such as be
hot, for the Diseases of a cold Nature: From these things are gathered seven
kinds of Diseases, and also seven kinds of Heats and Colds, of which sort
(amongst the other Members) are those of the Heart.

This difference is to be even chiefly observed in the beginning of this Book,
whereto is prefixed a title of the Composition of Receipes, that those things
which the Liver wants, whether it be hot or cold, may be sought for from the
same-like Herbs: So those things in which the Brain is defective, require their
proper Herbs. Moreover, although the Herbs are generally either hot or cold,
yet these Herbs that are for the Spleen, do nothing at all benefit the
sicknesses of the Reins: Wherefore next to the knowledge of the Degrees,
follows the difference of the Herbs after this wise.

CHAP. II.
YOu must know the difference of Herbs, thus: First of all the Herbs are
divided into seven species, together with the rest of the Elements* and that
according to the Order and Nature of the Astrum, or Stars, the which is as well
as these, put or digested into seven species or kinds: Besides, by the same
account or reason that these receive a sevenfold division* by the same reason
does the body receive a sevenfold partition, and every of them do affect their
like; as those things that are under the Sun are appropriated to the Heart, and
are twofold: But those things that are under the Moon, to the Brain, and that
in the degrees of both; those that are under Venus, heal the Reins; those
things that are under Saturn, comfort the Spleen, those under Mercury defend
the Liver; those under Iupuer do respect the Lungs. Lastly, the things that are
under Mars, are referred wholly to accommodate the Gall. Besides, although the
Herbs, together with the Simples, are not governed by the Planets, not the
Planets by them, yet is there existing a certain singular Dominion or Ruling in
every Element, without the commixtion of another.

CHAP. III.
NOw for the knowledge of those Elements which relate to the Heart, you are in
the first place to observe, that whatsoever regenerates, is most friendly to
the Heart, [] as Gold, Bawm, Nuba, etc. Moreover whatsover absumes or takes
away Phlegm, by the interveening native fragancy of the thing, is referred to
the Brain, [] such as are the Rose, Camphyr, Musk, Ambergreese. Also,
whatsoever quenches or appeaseth the blood, or makes it warm, serves for the
Liver* [] That which provokes urin and increases the sperm, serves for the
Reins [.] that which conserves long life, is for the spleen: [] Whatsoever
deoppilates on unstops, is for the Lungs: [] The knowledge of these things
consists in Experience, and rather in that which is of Philosophy, (that is of
Regeneration) then that which is Medicinal, (that is of Diseases:) but yet
that, which is born of, or proceeds from transmutation; for there, both the
Philosophical Experience, and also the Medicinal, do co^our, and so the proper
and Genuine Diathesis, or Disposition of every thing is found out.

CHAP. IV.
THerefore the transmutation being known, which discovers and shows the seven
Species both of Cold and Hot it is to be observed, that whatsoever regegenerates
and expels that which is waxen old, and brings cleanness, and renders a thing
whole, and so incorrupt, is concluded under the same species or king, whether
it arises from the cold or the heat of the Elements. Moreover, whatsoever in
transmutation consumes supersluous Humors, as Salt takes away the Leprosy of
the Moon) is a most present Remedy for the Brain. In this place you shall
observe, that Herbs are not to be administered on this account, because they are
Lunar: but because they reduce and constrain Lunar things into their own power:
For, the Brain is by no means healed by Silver or Luna, but rather by those
things which contend and sight with these: Also, whatever fortisies or
strengthens against Rust or Putref^ction, and conserves things in essentiality,
(as those six things which are found out in the transmutation of Metals) does
by the same reason conserve the spleen incorrupt; so whatsoever resolves a
Substance, or a body into a Liquor, comforts the Liver, and expels that which
is repugnant. But whatsoever does resolve so far, as to separate contrarities
one from another, is imputed to the Lungs, such as are the Alkali in Tin. Last
of all, Whatever prepares things, and renders them fit for increasing or
augmenting of transmutation, such as are the conjunctions of Arcana'es, is to
be made use of even in the chiefest or first place. As for these things, seek
the experience of them out of the transmutation of Nature; Nor do not (in the
interim) tire or weary out your whole life time, with your pitiful and
deplorable Degrees, nor in those cold, feeble descriptions of Herbs, which the
unsavory, and unprofitable Books are full of, for these things are not
assistants and helpers, but are rather tyrannical and full of cruelty against
the Lungs.

CHAP. V.
MOreover, this which follows will declare in what order or manner the seven
aforesaid species or kinds, are found to be in the four Elements, viz. what is
of the Earth, of the Air, of the Water, and finally, what is of the Fire; by
the description of which, thou shall judge of the manner of composing Receipts,
and that on this wise.

Such things as are from the Earth, and are of an Hot Nature.
The Brain. The Heart. Venus The Reins. Mercury The Liver. Saturn The Spleen.
Jupiter The Lungs. Mars The Gall. The Viridity of Salt. The Essence of Bawm.
The Correction of Sivet. The Liquor of Brassatella. The Mystery of black
Ellebor. An Extraction from the Lungs. The Quintessence of Celondine. the
Liquor of Vitriol. The Quintessence of Gold. The Essence of Satyrion. Of Manna.
Of Valerian. From Vsnea. the Liquor of Lunaria. Of Zilo-aloes. Of Vervain.

Such things of the Earth as are of a Cold Nature.
Brain. Heart. Reins. Liver. Spleen. Lungs. Gall. Essence of Geloen. The Matter
of Laudanu^ Materia Sintorum. The liquor of Seen. Compositio Cand. The Matter
of Dew. The Composition of Agresla, (or Verjuyce, viz. the juice of unripe
Grapes.) Essence of Anthos. The Matter of Pearls. alias, Stintorum Q. of Blood.
Confectio-Dubelteleph The Matter of Sulphur. The Composition of Balaust ium's,
or Pomegranate flowers. alias Anthera. The Matter of Saphyrs. The matter of
Letticeseed. Q. of Gamandrea. The Matter of Olog^n. Q. of Cichorea.

CHAP. VI.
Such things of the Air, as are of an hot Nature.
The Brain, Heart. Reins, Liver. Spleen, Lungs, Gaul. Nuba. Iloch. Cymona.
Hallereon Thereniabin.

Such things of the Air, as are of a cold Nature.
Halcyon, or the king-fishes. Ilech Crudum. Arles Crudum.

CHAP. VII.
Such things of the Water as are of an Hot Nature.
The Brain. The Heart. Reins. Liver. Spleen. Lungs. Gaul. The Oil of Mercury.
Aurum Potabile. The Essence of Vitriol. The Mystery of Mercury. The Magistery
of Asphaltum. The Flos of Jupiter. Crocus of Mars. Of the. Liquor of the Sun.
The Q. E. of sulphur. The Mystery of Antimonie. Rubedo de Nigro, or the Red of
the black. The Extraction of Tin. Talk Resolved. Topazius eserro (or the Topaz
out of Iron. The Essence of silver. The Oil of the seventh, that is, of Saturn.
Flos of Venus. The Essence of the sixth, that is, of Venus.

Such things of the Water as are of a cold Nature.
Brain. Heart. Reins. Liver. The Spleen. The Lungs. The Gaul. The juice of the
Amathist. Both Marcasites. The Tincture. The spirit of Saturn. The Mystery 'of
Mercury coagulated. The Flos of Crude Jupiter. Ferrugo de Quinto, or the rust
of the fifth, viz.. The Liquor of Granat's. White Talk. Lapis de Physico, or
the Philosophers stone. The Essence of Lead. The composition of Gems.

CHAP. VIII.
Such things of the Fire, as are of an Hot Nature.

The Brain, Heart, Reins, Liver, Spleen, Lungs, Gauls. Nosloch. Calidum, or hot
Nosloch.

Such things of the Fire, as are of a cold Nature.
Arcana's, of Christ all. Magistry's of Beryll. Liquores Citronei.
CHAP. IX.
THE Degrees, and the species or kinds of the Degrees being known, then at
length attempt the composition of Receipts, according to the prescription of the
following Rule. Like as there are four Elements, so four sorts of Receipts are
to be prepared; thus: Viz. Some kinds of Diseases there are which affect
terrene remedies; othersome desire Aereal; others require Aquaous, or Watery;
and others Ignious, or Fiery. First of all therefore, the sicknesses or
distempers are to be taken notice of in the aforesaid seven Members, viz.
Amongst, or to what Elements they have relation; for, thencefrom are the
Simples to be taken with which you would prepare a compound, according to the
reason and order both of the degrees, or species and kinds of them; therefore
in Elementary sicknesses, (suppose in earthly ones) the Compound is not to be
prepared higher then its Degree, but is to be left in that self-same Degree.
The like is to be understood in Aereals, that nothing of the other Elements is
to be thereto admixed. After the same manner are you to judge of the other
Elements, as of the Water and Fire But that you may accommodate and proportion
the several sicknesses, to the several Elements, this is the Work, and this is
the Labor: For from thence happens that common Error which oftetentimes buds
forth in the Gout, in Paralitical Diseases, and others of that kind, because of
the preposterous and rash order of Healing, which unskilful men set upon; An
example you have in the Epilepsie, the species or kinds of the Epilepsie are
subjected to the Element of the Water; Wherefore it is to be healed by those
things which are called Minerals; and thus are you to judge of the rest.

CHAP. X.
AS for the general Rules of the composition of Receipts, take them thus: All
such Receipts as are to be prepared for Elemental Diseases, do consist of six
things, whereof two are of the Planets, two of the Elements, and finally, two
of the Narcoticks. Although they may be composed of but three, so as that but
one of each may be taken; yet these are more infirm and weaker then those that
are to be admitted and used to the order and reason of Healing. But to return
to my former sayings, there are two (I say) which consist of the Planets on
this account, because they unite, commend, and correct the Medicine: two of the
Elements, that the Degree of the sickness may be overcome. And lastly, two of
Narcoticks, for this reason, Because the four aforesaid parts are too weak to
prevent the critical day, and to expel the Disease before the Crisis. Wherefore
in this place of Compositions, you are chiefly to observe that you prevent the
Critical day: such Receipts therefore as are thus prepared, are very fitly
availeable in accute, very accute, and the most accute Diseases, the which
Receipts thou must make use of on every hand.

CHAP. XI.
LAstly, as for the Weights, observe the following Rule. In the first place
note the Degree, least that the Degree be vanquished or exceeded by the
Medicine, and whether it agrees and squares with its proper degree on every
part; but so order it, that these threefold species or kinds do not corrupt or
hurt one another: Next to those things, dispose of, and frame your Weight by
this Rule: First of all, such things as are of the Planets, reduce to four
parts in the Receipt; such as are ^f the s^ lements, to three parts; such as are
of Narcoticks, to one part: And that my Advice may be the more clearly evinced,
I will address my self to those compounds which are composed according to this
manner of preparation, and that on this wise: Take the Essence of the Planets,
the Elementated Essonce, and finally, a pure Narcotick: Otherwise, if the
substances are admitted into the Weights, the Receipt becomes depraved: For this
composition is not to be made of the multitude of Grass or Hey (according to
the prescription of the Catarractists, or blind Doctors) but rather of the
Native Virtues. Thus much for the Composition of Receipts in general; but as for
the order and reason of composing and fitting the several Receipts, for the
several Diseases, that shall be declared in the fifth Book.

THE FIFTH BOOK.
CHAP. I.
FIrst of all, in the description of Receipts, divide the Disease into four
species or kinds, then refer or reduce these species into the four Elements,
and that degree which offers it self, do thou take, and proceed by the
following Rule. Moreover, if there should happen a transferring of the Disease
from one degree unto another, take the same degree; for thus are healed the
sicknesses of the first degree, which are of the Earth; of the second degree,
which are of the Air; of the third, which are of the Water. And as for that
which attaineth to the fourth degree, it must be healed by the Tincture only;
otherwise there is nothing that can be profitably used in this place. Besides,
although I have in the former Book prescribed, that a Receipt should be prepared
with six parts, yet can it be done with three parts, or the former ones may be
doubled, and so may be twelve in all: or it may be thus described: Take, of
those things which are of the Planets, four; those of the Elements, two; of
Narcoticks, one; but so, that you may withal (according to the order of this
Description) dispose of the Weight on this manner: Take of those things that
are of the Planets, four drachms; of Elementated things, three drachms; of
Narcoticks, one dram: For thus stands the business, viz. in the Weight, and
not the Number of Simples. Again, the force and virtue, and consequently, the
effect of those things that are admitted into the description of this Receipt,
has its relation to the Dose, (or Endowment) and not to the Weight, nor to the
Receipt: as for instance, In those things which are of the Planets, thou may
perceive that there is a greater energy or power, then in the Elementated
things; but this is from the Dose or giftedness, and not from the Weight or
Receipt: Wherefore the above-measure is to be observed. Last of all, In this
place is requisite agreater knowledge of the Medicinal Art, viz that you set
not upon the way of healing before the time, but rather handle your affairs so
discreetly, that where need is of purgation, there purge; where need is of
healing, there heal* where of consolidation, there consolidate, on this manner
as follows.

CHAP. II.
AS for the composition of Receipts which are prescribed for Laxatives, there
are two things needful which are to be ordered against the Laxation, the one to
comfort, the other to miitigate; and being thus ordered, this description of
Receit'is void of all danger: First of all therefore, we will speak of that which
belongs to comforting.

Take Spices, Cinnamon, Cloves, Nutmegs, and others of that kind: But for that
which appertains to Mittigation, take Anodynes, and let them be the least in
Weight; and by these two things are those other (how many soever they are that
are in the Receipt) corrected: Nor is it in this place needful to observe this
difference, viz. What purges Choler, or what purges Phlegm, but rather
Experience is to be looked into, as to what is beneficial, according as is
mentioned in the manner of healing: For the consideration of Purging is the
greatest thing of all, which a skilful Physician ought to observe.

CHAP. III.
NOw follows an Example In Laxatives: Those things which provoke to Vomit, are
thus described: Take of white Ellebor, one dram: Cinnamon and Nutmegs, of
each half a dram: the juyee of Thebaicum, one scruple: This description shows
both the Weight and the Nature of Vomitives, which do also purge by stool on
this manner: Take of Vomitives one part, of Comfortatives as much; of
Thebaicum-juyce, a third part of the Laxative simples; then order and digest
them according to the manner of confection, and administer them according to
the proportion of their giftedness: Or do on this wise: Take of Mithridate, and
Rob de Kibes, of each half a dram; the juice of Poppy, one scruple: Precipate
one dram, make them into a form: Or on this wise. Take of Cataputia,
Tythimal, Ellebor, of each one scruple: of Annise, ^en^el, Crocus Martis, and
Terra Sigiliata, of each 15. Granes: the juice of Thebaicum, of Poppy, and of
Henbave, of each seven Grains, dispose them into a form: But if the Vomitives
do not operate by stool, (alias but if they operate by stool, and not as
Vomitives) such as are Rubarb, Colloquintida, and others of that kind; t^ke
those which are the most efficacious Laxatives, and that consist in the third
Degree; join them to Confortatives, and to a sixteenth part of Narcoticks; on
this wise. Take of Scammony one Drachme, Species of Gems and Diamoscus, of each
half a Dram, of Opium half a scruple; Mix them to a form. The like is to be
judged of Rhubarb, and the rest. Furthermore, if they reach to the second
Degree, add a twelfth part of Narcoticks, as it is customary to do in Turbith,
and Hermodactil^, and the rest of that kind: But if they are of the first
Degree, then alter nothing, but so conjoin them with Confortatives, so as
advisedly to consider whether or no thouwouldst have them cold or hot; Prepare
them with the Confortatives, after this manner.

Take of Diagridium, Agarick, and Sowbred, of each one scruple; of Red Corrals
one Drachme; of Opium one Scruple: Or else thus. Take of Vomitives and
Laxatives together, yet so as that their own weight may be preserved on both
sides; and so double the Receipt, then mix it to a form.

CHAP. IV.
INCarnatives, (whether before or after Purgation) the Receipts are described
according to the Physical art and knowledge on this wise: First of all place
each of them in the first Degree; If therefore the Disease be transmuted from
the first degree into the second; from the third into the fourth, do
accordingly. In the jaundice, Take of Locusta's one Drachme, of Centaurie 2
Drachmes of Resibolae, alias, Rebisolae, three Drachmes: Mix them according to
the Prescription of Experience with the addition of Wine; then administer it by
way of a Potion Now, if by such a Receipt the Patient be not cured, then seek
into the second, third or fourth degree, and according to the manner of my
Prescription describe thou the Receipt.

Therefore, there are three things to be considered of, in the Composition of
Receipts, viz. the Specific of the Plannets, as Latus^i, that is, Mouseare:
Then the Elementated things of Nature, as Centaury, and finally, Narcoticks as
Resibolae, Opium. Moreover, although Centaury does more fully operate then the
Elementated things; yet notwithstanding experience requires this: But whereas
the weight does not agree with the Rule in the present Receipt; the cause of it
is the now spoken of Experience, which composeth the Receipt from its own
nature, and not from the Rules: So likewise in Fevers, Take of Nectar one
Drachme, of Crab^ half a Drachme: of the juice of Thebaicum one scruple: But
such as do follow the Rules, have the same Proportion with the former
description, which consists of six Parts or more: But I would rather have
Experience, then that bare painting of such men's writings as study Rules only.

CHAP. V.
IN the falling sickness, where the Receipt has need of a Composition in the
third degree; there a Compound has no place, but a Simple only is to be
administered; as by the spirit of Vitriol and others of that kind. In the first
degree, the Receipt is to be described according to the prescription of the
first degree, according to this advise. In the Palsy, Comfortatives are to be
administered by themselves, as Aquavitae, the Essence of Lavender Aurum
Potabile, the Liquor of Gems, and others of that kind: so in the fourth degree
is the Rule to be observed. Moreover, if there happens a twofold need or use of
Medicine, viz. within the skin, and without it, as in the Palsy, then
administer also duplicatly to the Paralitick, and contracted, Inwardly;
according to the aforesaid manner; but outwardly, a Balsom, according to
Experience, even as the manner of administration is. But those things which are
made for a Balsom, take on this manner: First of all, take only those things
which are of the Planets, and do not look after either Elementary or Narcotick
things: As in Contractures the highest Experiment is the specifieum of
Serpentina, then also the fatness which is extracted out of Ebony, men,
Turpentine, Oil of Nuts, Oils of Guaieum, and others of that kind. Now by this
account there are innumerable things which follow Experience, and not the
rules; For those kinds of Diseases are better to be healed by such things as
are sound out by long and daily use, then by Canonical Receipts.

CHAP. VI.
IN Incarnatives both Experience and Rules are to be observed on this manner:
Diligently and exactly inquire whatsoever is of the Planers, and withal in
what degree it accords with the Incarnatives; then the order of making the
Composition, as the following Receipt in the Fractures of Bones does demonstrate.

Take of Comfry, Aristolochia-Rotunda, Serpentina: of each one pound. Moreover,
although besides this, there are infinite ways mentioned for the healing the
fractures of the Bones, yet notwithstanding, whatsoever is here adhibited,
besides what has been said, does hinder and impead the present order of
Healing: Nor do I judge it sit silently to pass over in this place, the various
and many kinds of Consolidaes, as also the known things of the Serpentina's,
and those that are unknown; and therefore they shall not be rchearsed by me,
because they do nothing at all impead the Weight, but are referred unto the
same, according to the prescription and Rule, without respect of either Heat or
Cold, which do corrupt and mar the description of the Receipt: But in Wounds
observe the following way of composition. First of all, Collect into one
whatever are of the Planets and Wounds, each according to Experience, thus:
Whatsoever is of a Crude Balsom, bring to an Oil by extraction, and that too,
in an equal Weight, without any addition, either of Heat or Cold, so that thou
may abide, or depend on Specificks alone: thus Gums must be dealt withal in
Emplasters, or Apostolic Unguents, and let them be, (alias, unless as far
forth as they be) a sixth part with reference to the other species, and the
rest, five parts be of species, and the body of these things has four weights:
But as to a Vulnerary drink, it is referred unto Weights, according to
Experience, and that too, more intensly, or more remisly, on this wise: Take of
Pyrola two handfuls, Pervinca Diapensia ana. one handful; Agrimonia, one
handful and a half: Now if any thing shall be more excellent, forsake others,
and cleave to them. Lastly, although there are many things which are desired in
this place concerning the Receipts for Wounds, yet without Experience, which is
the Mother of Receipts, they cannot be comprehended in a Rule.

CHAP. VII.
IN the description of Receipts for Aposthumes, you must first of all observe,
that those things which we have mentioned in the former Chapter amongst the
Receipts for Wounds, are not to be here at all admitted: But besides those
things which are of the Planets, the Elementary are also to be considered, that
both of them may agree: Besides, the Receipts being so disposed, nothing of
those things which putrefie, or do purge and leanse in the place, or locally
are to be added thereto: ^f which sort are Maturatives, and Laxatives; But the
order and nature of this Receipt is thus, that Gums, Incarnatives, and finally
such things as are of the Plannets, are to be digested into the under written
weight, viz. there must be one part of Gums, of Intarnatives three, and of
those things that are Planetary, the other two, thus. Take of the Gums
Bdellium, Ammoniacum, Galbanum, Opoponax, of each two Drachms: of Franckinunse,
Myrrh, Mastich, Mummie, Aristolochia-rotunda, Aloes Epatica, ana. half an
Ounce: Flos Aeris, Cinnaber, Ceruse, Camphire, of each half an Ounce: All these
bring into one body in Litharge boild, or Minium, or only wax, with an
admixtion of Colophonie: And after this manner digest or order the Emplasters
of common Vleers, and Aposteme. Lastly, that the aforesaid things may have the
form of an Emplaster; take both wax and Turpentine, and that according to
experience.

CHAP. VIII.
IN Aestiomena'es, or Cancorous Ulcers, as the Serpige, N^limetangere, and
others of that kind, there are three ways of Composing Receipts, to be
observed: The first proceeds from the virtue of the Plannets, and heals all
Ulcers without the addition of any other thing. Such as is Brassatella.

The second is, of those things which are prepared by Medicines that make an
Eschar: The third is made out of the Medicaments of Precipitate. The Receipt
for the making of an Eschar, is thus described: Take of the Escharmaking
Medicines, one part: Of the Water of Brassatella four parts, use that same
water. Another is thus: Take a sixteenth part of Precipitates, and mix it with
the Unguent or Emplaster Apostolorum, and administer it. Although these things
stand thus, yet are they nothing else but a Mercurial Stame (or Representation)
of those things which Experience clearly shows, and it is that, viz. Experience,
which I would have you highly esteem of, that so you may perfectly know the
proper and native force of every thing, and desist from your own present
Experience, which is very barren and lean, yea none at all in comparison of
him, who like the Lacedimonian Apollo, has four Ears.

THE SIXTH BOOK.
CHAP. I.
But in the description of the Doses, or Guiftednesses; besides those things
which we have treated in in the five former Books, as far as concerns the
Complexions, and consequently the Ares it self, that universal thing, is to be
known, which is to be approved of by the nature, viz. of that thing, the charge
whereof the Physician takes upon him; for this alone, as is even occularly
proved, ought to be considered in the doser or Giftednesses. First of all
therefore, you are to observe, that every Guiftedness, does (according to its
property and true Ares) consist either in hot or cold; where also you are to
know in the preparing of Receipts, that, as with relation to the Dose, or
Endowment, neither moist nor dry is to be considered: For, as in the beginning
I have demonstrated that there are but two Camplexions only: So also there are
but two Guiftednesses only: For whosoever shall well know, the degree of heat
or cold, he also shall not at all be ignorant, that to it, not only the dry
and moist thereof are joined, but also the dry-resolved, and the
moist-coagulated.

Besides, thou must likewise know, that in hot and dry there is not at all
either an Arcanum or Aniadus; For as much also as there is no Disease rises up
that requires only one of these: The sum or chief thing is in hot and cold;
for that Diathesis, or disposition, bears rule either in hot or cold; and this
is the alone Inclination of, or thing requisite unto, every Disease* viz. that
only either of the two be observed by the Physician, be it either hot, or be
it cold, but every degree is the Dosis of its Disease. Therefore also from the
degree must the guifted-property be taken, the which may be understood by a
Comparison of the fire, which has but one only degree, and yet that degree is
abundantly sufficient of it self alone, to consume its contrary: and this now
is according to heat.

In like sort, all Ice has one degree, sufficient to make a member cold, and
that is according to cold. In like manner, every Disease has its degree,
neither more nor less; even thus also is there a guifted-property against every
Disease. After the same manner, Pepper and Castor have their endowments related
to Pepperine and Gastorean Diseases, as I may so speak: But there is another
Disease which requires its dose from the fire. Sperniola, and Camphire, have
one degree, and the Diseases which relate to the Persian fire, do possess the
same degree: Thence it comes to pass that Sperniola and Camphire, are the Doses
of the same. Again, you are to know, that the things of nature are not so ^like
graduated as Diseases are, as in relation to the Dose or Guiftedness, but each
thing has its degree equal to its Disease: and this is the degree of Doses.

CHAP. II.
MOreover, because there is but one degree only, not is any thing (as well in
heat as cold) of an higher Gradation then another* it is therefore assuredly, a
chief thing to find our the Dose Equality: But in the things of Nature, and in
Diseases, the degree of both of them is to be one and the same: Nor indeed is
any Disease so bad, but the degree of the Medicine thereof is higher: For no
Disease can be made (or chance to be) worser, unless it be in teference to the
Nobility of Nature.

But now for contriving or administering the Dose in these Diseases, the power
or abounding-quality is to be considered of on both sides: From hence therefore
take the dose. The power or copiousness of the Disease will also abundantly
show thee the copiousness or plentifulness of the Dose. It Is therefore
behoveful for a Physician to know what, and how much Weight the Disease is
laden withal; for so much Weight of Medicine does the dose likewise require;
and therefore you are to observe that the Weight is to be administered, and not
the degree, for herein is placed the chief foundation or rule of finding out
every Dose. This now must proceed from out of the number, and not out of the
body of those things, therefore the first or chiefest thing is this, viz. that
the Ares of the Microcosm cures it self, and not the administered Medicines: For
as soon as ever the Disease shall be brought to equallity, it does presently
follow that Nature her self cures what is contrary unto her: Therefore you are
to know, that every Dose is not to be used beyond that aforesaid number that is
taken from the Disease: For there are 24. Lots contained in Nature her self, in
which number the Medicine it self must likewise be taken, that so it may attain
and reach to each Number: The same is to be taken out of the Anatomy of Nature:
For (as I may so say) there are herein 24. Minutes of Diseases, so are there
twenty four Lots in Medicines; and therefore by those twenty four Minutes, and
so many Lots, must every Physician know how to administer his Medicines, that
so he may bring in an equal Number (on both sides) into the Microcosme; this
done, the virtue of Nature is such, as to cure the sick: Therefore it is worthy
observation, how that it very often happens, that very many (though their
Disease be dead or extinct) are neverthelese, as yet, much like to those that
are sickly, and that for this reason, because the virtue or power of Nature it
self, agrees not as 'twere, in a universal Harmony, and therefore cannot
exhibit or perform the Office of a Physician: from the defect whereof, and not
from the Disease it self, does death befall.

CHAP. III.
But (to speak on of the 24. Minutes) you are to note, that in these Minutes
the highest or chiefest Equality as well of Nature, as of the Disease, does
consist: and here observe, that a complexionated Disease does divide it self,
and does partly descend, and also partly ascend from one, even to twenty four:
and that not because it is only one Disease, but as many as be the Diseases, so
many different Minutes be there; the faculty also, or power of Complexions,
does contrariwise ascend from the supreamest, even to the twenty fourth:
[alias, does descend from the supreamest, to the lowest.] Hence therefore is
such, and so much ignorance risen in the Physician, that he cannot know the
Disease in its Minutes, save only by the Dose: Neither do we intend, or is it
our meaning that any Disease consisting in the third or fourth Minute, can
advance or increase it self; but rather, this alone must be understood, that
there are twenty four Lors out of which the Dosis does proceed: As for example,
In the Caducus, or Falling sickness, there are twenty four Minutes, the which
do require even so many Lots; and yet notwithstanding, it is but one only
Disease, or species and kinds of that-same Disease, and therefore to find out
the Dose, the Theorical part, cannot exhibit or afford it you, but yet
Experience can: For the Composed Dosis does proceed from Nature, as 'twere
Hereditarily, and must therefore be preserved and administered according to
nature, and that according to the Dose of Experience. But now, seeing that this
same thing must be referred to experience, you must in the first place
understand whether or no the Anatomy of that Dose does well or truly agree with
the Anatomy of the disease; whence it follows, that in this 24th. Number, each
disease affects or requires its own proper Dose, and to ascend even to an
Equality: but beware that thou do not transcend or exceed this Number; for
verily it is the office both of the nature of the Microcosin, and also of the
external Elements, (when they have an agreement, or are harmonious in the body)
to assord and* cause Health: And that Conjunction is in like manner as
Cinnaber, which is too too much graduated. Therefore in that kind of
Elementated exallation, they assord, or give their own exaltations to the
virtue of the Microcosin: And so the first Grane, [alias, that which at first
is but a Grane] passes into a scruple, a dram, and Lot, and some Granes
amount unto a pound, some also into a greater quantity, viz. Into a Kissed, and
other some also, into talents.

CHAP. IV.
HItherto we have spoken of the virtue of a thing, and of Nature; but now the
case is altered, if there shall be either a putrefaction, or superfluity, or
Syndenocha, the dose of which is to be thus administered* For such like
Syndenochaes must be prevented by Laxatives, and that on this wise, that every
Laxative be accounted for Resolutive, and therefore must you take your doso
from the Resolution, and not from the Laxation, or Laxative property: For if
you shall take, or derive it from this, there will presently be sueh a change
in a man, as can neverbe done by the other. Withal, it is expedient for ye who
are Physicians, well to know or distinguish a Resolution presently, and at
first sight, that so with your dose composed of this, ye may purge innocently,
without any hurt; the which knowledge must be on this wise manifested, viz.
What soever resolves it self into a solid Water, consists of ten Grains: But
whatsoever resolves it self into a perfect Resolution, consists of six Grains
only. But if it abide together with the Material Substance, it contains only
three Grains. Moreover, that which in it self, before its resolution, passes
into Putrefaction, and from hence declines into a solid Vegetable Substance,
challenges to it self the forti^th Grain: But if it shall abide in
Putrefaction, or else putrefie after the Animal Resolution, then it possesses
the Eighty third Grain: But that which abides in its Own Fssence, and conserves
inseparably in it self, the Crude Substance of both Sex is extended, and
reaches even to an Ounce: And if it descend of the Matrix of the Air, it
obtains the double of the number: But if from the Matrix of the Water, then it
gets it self the treble of that Number: If of the Fire, then the doso does now
come to half the Weight. Wherefore observe here, such things as are needful for
Laxation, viz. Some dissolved things that proceed from things coagulated, do
even purge in half the dose. So likewise is it with solid, to solid things: But
some things do loosen from the propriety of another Resolution, as Manna
purges by a virtue which it resolves every day thing by, and Siler does the
centuary. Now (...) loosens from a conjunction or assinity Therefore it is to be
noted from all these things, that a Purgation is nothing else then *as 'twere)
a certain Tincture, but yet void of any show of color, the which resolves even
Minerals, and dissolves even Tartars, like as Anatomy in its parts demonstrates
the same: Whereas therefore it is a certain Tincture, we are necessarily
constrained to consider of, and to heed Resolution, and what it is that must be
resolved, or what assumes the tincture of Resolution, and what things of the
Resolutive Matter do necessarily appear in the Microcosm.

CHAP. V.
NOw as to Relolline and Cheronian properties, they are to be understood thus:
That which does disorderly (by force) overcome the other part, according to the
nature of the Iliaster thereof, must be only a Relolline Iliaster, and
therefore such a thing proceeds not from Equallity, but does by force, get
above Equallity. Nor does this proceed from the nature or disposition of the
Microcosme, but rather from the property of the Ares, from whence also the
Iliaster is derived, which does forcibly drive away the Disease, and that by
the virtue of both Natures, the which you are to understand thus, viz. That
here the twelve Granes are to be divided according to the number of the Dose.
And now the sixth Grane is the beginning, or first; the other six Granes
exhibit or resemble equallity: But now in the Cheronians, you must number from
One, even to the Sixth; nor are you to proceed farther, forasmuch as the half
part of this, viz. that part which is from six, even to twelve; for the
Cheronian and Relolline property do assume or choose their middle in the sixth
number, but yet each of them with their own proper Iliaster: Although such
Doses may be brought above equallity, from the virtue of the individual
Iliaster, the which is able (its like manner as a certain Crocus, or Saffron)
to perfect its own operation.

CHAP. VI.
MOreover, as to what is requisite to be known concerning the Doses of
Arcanae's, of essated and Essentificated things, of Specificks, and other such
like, it is on this wise viz. The Dose must be taken out of the aforesaid
Granet; and then it is convenient that there be added thereunto, an Essated, and
an Essential, an Arcanum, together with a Specific, of an equal virtue and
Complexion, and that on this wise, viz. that the virtues of the Arcana'es, be
(as 'twere) heaped up above the Equality of Diseases: For although according to
the variety of the Species or Sorts, there be a peculiar and proper Dose or
Guiftedness; yet notwithstanding the Dose is nothing of hindrance in that
place. Therefore consider again what damage may ensue thereby; as for Example,
if an Areanum shall have been powerfully administered, and some detriment should
happen to arise hence-from, either in the Paroxism or fit, or in any other
manner: or if a former old Disease should be stirred up, or some other new
Disease bud out, thou must not therefore presently ascribe it to the virtue or
efficacy of the Arcanum, but rather consider well aforehand, the proprieties of
that body in which such a like Arcanum is posited: for it is possible that in
one Simple only, composed by nature, there may lie hidden together both some
excellent Arcanum: and also a most great poison, and introducer of soon new or
else of an old Disease: Wherein observe, in things composed by nature, that the
Dose be kept and observed after this manner, least that it should implant a new
poison, or some deadly seed into the body, as is manifestly evident in
Misselte, which cures the seventh Species of the Epilepsie: But on the other
hand it also induces another disease, viz. the Siphyta, or Fantastic
disease, etc. of the first Species, or kind. But if the Dose in the
Fallingsickness shall have been in the Arcanum. The Physician is furthermore to
consider, that that Arcanum does not exhibit any Dose, but the body it self
which brings the first kind of the Siphyta does it, but even that very body it
self is anticipated or prevented by the Dose: So likewise is it in the
Apoplectical and Lethargycal, when the liquor of Colcothar is taken according
to the Arcanum of the Dose: and yet if the Microcosmical body shall not have
been considered herein, then becomes it a most present poison of a new disease,
viz. of Tartar: therefore in this Chapter we would have every Physician to be
warned, that whatsoever kind of medicine he is about to administer, he often
set this rule before his eyes, and observe it very diligently, and not step a
nails breadth awry.

CHAP. VII.
But as concerning Spagyrical Doses, as in Alcohols, Balsoms, and other
Magnalia's of that kind, take this rule: That their true use, and consequently
their very foundation it self proceeds from a Tincture, and is only an
Ephalatheral, or particular conjunction, the which you must consider of after
this manner: That the Anatomy of the microcosme does also consist in the very
smallest drop of all. For every Spagyrical degree is a Tincture of its own
virtue; and it is to be understood by every Physician, that in every drop (how
many soever of them there be) so many entire Anatomies there be, both in the
Microcosme, and in Elementated things. But that ye may know those kind of
Doses, observe, that in the universal operation, there are only three
Divisions comprehended, viz the Elixir, the Essatum, and the Tincture: the
Elixir's Dose i^ in the sixth minute, but the Essatum's is in the fourth minute
and half: But the Tincture it self consists or abides in the Center. Hence
likewise observe, that such like Extractions are to be judged of according to
the body: For verily the body w^o its (...) is an Equal Ares, and that same is
the Aniadus in an Equal operation: Here also the Dose divides it self into
Karenaes: but a Karena is the twenty fourth part of the smallest Drop, the
which notwithstanding, cannot pass into a Quateraion, or Quarter part, unless
it get some bigger body: But the temperature passes out from that body, and
exhibits its Dose according to Diaphinicy, or transparency. But that you may
both find and judge of these things exactly, consider then colors, for as much
as the colors discovers the Dose: the (...) to in this (...) the Karenae to be
sought for, and not in the Qua^^ity of the visible substance, for the virtue is
situated in the color, and a i^^ out it there can issue forth no virtue.

CHAP. VIII.
MOreover, as touching Medicaments that are (...), either by Art or Nature,
what the Doses are which must be heeded in them, observe: Whatsoever undergoes
a Reverberation, not transmutes its self in it^ ^orm, is (as the ultimate
matter of things) (...) out even to the (...), (...) Grane. But it (...) its
form, it then ascends even unto the hundred and fourtieth, and so many Granes
make^ ^Spaan^ every Dose is O^e Degree, the which we do even abundantly (...)
very entrance of this Book* For as many Granes as are taken for a sufficient
(...) of a Disease, so many do likewise constitute and make one Degree (...) in
common calcined things, it is the hundred and thirty eighth drop, is a Dose: In
A^^e-calcined things, after their passing the Fulmen of an Athanar, the four
and twentieth: In resolved sixth things, a scruple and ha^^^ In coagulated
things, a Golden Crown of (...)* In Alkalie^, the ye^^ of an Egg is the weight:
In transmuted things, (...) our Country Beans: In (...) without the grain In
Waters, the Shell of a (...): In (...) reduced from their first matter, the
(...) of the (...) tree, or a drop of the Rosin thereof. In things transmuted
from the first matter, the Locusta, or tender b^d of the Poplar: In all
Corrosives, the equal, or just breadth of its place: In Precipitates, the
weight of (...) piece of money: In Liquors of the Earth the weight of the stalk
wherein (...) du^a h^ng^: In Liquors of the Water, half a Pomegranat. In the
^^ereniabin of the Air, as it were the spirit of a (...) breath: In Liquors of
the Fire, Like the Frost-gr^nes, or Hoare-frost: From the ^^ee of the Sea, One
Kissed From the Rosin of the Earth, a Kissed and an half* From swimming creatures,
an (...) and ^^ half: Of H^^^^uli, the bigness of a ^^^^ra Nut. These are the
Doses that proceed out of Fix things, and to be tho^^ are the Karenaes of
Drops, and contain their own body without damage: For this ^^use the Dose here
is to be understood of Fix things.

CHAP. IX.
THose things which we have hitherto delivered concerning Doses, (...) so very
certainly comprehend all those things (...) were necessary for universal
Medicine; yet notwithstanding, however the case stands, it is certain that the
Center, and consequently, the Root its self is contained therein. But
furthermore, let every Physician diligently consider, that (...) knowledge,
(which he ought studiously to employ, not for his own profit, but for the
benefit of the sick) must proceed only from the Spagyrical Art; but even in
all his businesses he must act Ephall^^her^ll. Albeit, all these things do
require a well Experienced man, who (as the Proverb goes) has not only filled
a sluggish and blind unprofitable He^d, but has filled even the eye, and mind,
and does not mind himself only, but even all (...) con^^^sant: For all these,
both thy (...) and they make a Physician of thee* Forasmuch as the Archeus and
its ^aphnaeu^, and their whole off spring, (...), and the rest, cannot be known
by a ^ude and (...) Physician; for whosoever will know such things, (...) of
necessity be well, and very perfectly (...) in the (...), and all the (...) For
it is be (...)full that a Physician do exercise his (...) well in the mind, as in
the external (...) the Feet, the Eyes, and the Tongue do (...) M^^^over, it is
needful that the whole (...) by the (...) For believe me, in (...) the ^^culty,
the power, and finally, (...) and (...) of Medicine.

The Seventh BOOK
CHAP. I.
But a^ for those things (...)foresaid Degrees into a composition, every Receipt
must be directed and brought to that pass, as to have virtues Equal with the
Disease; from hence therefore you may observe, that in composing of Receipts,
Simples alone by themselves are too too weak, and not sufficient enough; this
being truly so, it is expedient that the Physician be so instructed, as
exceedingly well to know, and that very readily, the reasons thereof, thus,
viz. One and the same Arcanum is many times distributed into three hundred
Herbs, more or less, all which if thou bring into One, then at length it
becomes a perfect, and consequently, an Entire Arcanum: Forasmuch as every
perfect Medicament is an Arcanum, the which sort I teach in the Book of the
Original of Diseases, and the Nature of things; and do moreover demonstrate it
to you by this Example: Even as there are almost above two hundred kinds of
Fevers, and yet it is but one and the same Fever throughout them all. From
which you are to consider, that the cure itself thereof, is to be in like
manner, distributed into so many kinds; for as often as there is a kind or
species of a Disease, so often is there, on the contrary, a simple for it: From
hence two kinds of Physicians do arise, one kind is of Natural, the other of
Experimental Physicians. In this Book therefore, there is nothing so worthy of
consideration as that alone, viz. That the virtue and efficacy of those things
pass into an Arcanum, and that as often as there is a Disease, so often may
there be an Arcanum, and that nothing at all be done in the several kinds and
species, unless happily the Naturalist has a most thorough understanding what
the acting, or prevalenty on both sides, viz. of the Disease, and of the
Simple, i^.

CHAP. II.
MOreover, this is to be observed, that this manner of composition consists
in the virtues only, viz. that they be made perfect and entire* for Centaury
drives away Fevers, and so in like manner does the Alhuginous N^ctar, so
likewise does Harmel the lesser, and so do many more besides them: But yet
verily in the well-composing a Receipt it is necessary that these virtues be
brought into one, viz. that as many Simples at there are framed by Nature
against Fevers, may all of them be converted and contracted into one Arcanum,
and this then at length is an Arcanum against Fevers. Even thus also is it in
other Diseases, even after the same manner are the degrees of diseases to be
considered thus: The Composition proceeds out of the Doses, that is, out of the
virtues. Besides, in the Palsy, Lavender is a most chief Magistery, and so
likewise Bawm is one, but yet is lesser then that other. Moreover, it comes to
pass in another case, and that even in the Palsy it self, that Bawm is better
then Lavender, and is much more powerfully virtuous. Hence it often falls out,
that one and the same simple may in one and the same disease, help (...) man,
and not another: Sometimes also it may take away something from the disease,
and yet not cure all the wh^le disease: For in the Palsy even Gold it self (if
you administer it rightly) is a Medicine; so is Viticella, or white Br^ony,
Betony, Masore^, and many others* For sometimes B^^^ being taken is profitable,
and sometimes not: sometimes if you use Castor, it helps; but use it at
another time, and it will not profit at all: Sometimes Pepper avails, when
all the r^st are defective. Oftentimes also, when Pepper ^ too weak, the Oil
of Sulphur being, administered, helps: Furthermore it happenet^ sometimes,
that Fa^n^sse^ being made use of, are profitable, all the others being used in
vain. You must therefore know, that the virtues of Arcanums are chiefest of all
to be sought after, as well in the Palsy, as in (...) diseases, and neither
the Heat, o^ the Cold, but only that natural, inbred property sprung from the
I^^a^^er.

CHAP. III.
EVen thus also is it in ^^e Falling Sickness, in which likewise the^^ are
(...) species o^ (...) of the (...), the (...) exhibit even so many species
(...) the (...) ^^ kness, one whereof is the (...) availeable (...) another
time. Likewise ^ome of these are profitable to some persons, (...) and are so
sat from (...), that being used, they bring ^am^g^: As for instance, those that
are cured by (...) are cured by Corrals, (...) of the Stag^ Hears) other by
Vi^^^^ and much like. Therefore we here deliver upto your understanding the
principal sound (...), upon, which, whosoever, of what is wholly-solid, you
(...), well not e^sily tumble downs that is to say, You (...) above all things
know that Archeus of Nature very well, both in the Microcesm, and also without,
that is the Anatomy of both, even as I do abundantly enough (...) in the
Anatomy of the world, and ^f Di^eases: (...) does grow up, and proceed (...)
and solid (...) action of every sound and persect Physician, and to which he
may ^^^ely must, as to a (...) And (...) ^^^ ^^ontimes there are many things
that are one (...) profitable to (...) Disease, and (...) there while altogether
unprofitable and (...) The (...) is to proceed thereoutof, and is to be made on
(...), (...) all those several^ (...) the Whole (...), together with all the
kinds of the same, be on every side gathered into one Arcanum* This done, all
the kinds of the disease are comprehended in that one Compound: For as we said
before how many kinds or species of diseases there be, so many simples are
there also* From whence it necess^^^^ (...) a (...) who would make a (...)
things, must (by A^atomy) (...) o^ ^^^ds of diseases and (...) and may
deservedly ^ee (...) or inventer of Experi^^^^, and (...) al^^e hewed, where we
sa^* that there (...) of Physici^^, viz. Natural^ and (...) kn^w^ now to turn
his (...) the stroke of the Part: Bu^ the (...) upon his own Composition (...)
by that Rule himself ^^th pres^^^^ed, and it almost in (...), like unto him who
knows how to (...) W^^^, (...) how to (...) or dress the Vineyard, and yet
notwithstanding does not everth^ (...) as well as he that (...) d^ess it very
neatly (...) (...) thing we will (...) thi^ third Chapter and (...) true (...)
^^ Foundation of (...) as well the experi^^ed, (...).

CHAP* IV.
(...) matte^ in hand th^^ (...) way which (...) and (...) in Plantane, and in
many (...) hundred: Bu^ (...) has (...) in the (...) this Herb, sometimes
that, does heal more speedily, or more slowly, according as its Endowment is by
nature: therefore it is here worthy noting, that look how many Diseases or
Accidents (for so they call them (...) are in Surgery it self, even so many
species or kind are there on the other hand* So in like manner is i^ as in
reference to times and leas^ ^s, viz. One season delays the ^ne for a time:
Another admits of help even presently, upon which account it is well worth your
observation, that the true, and consequently the perfect cure of every wound,
do the necessarily require either four and twenty hours, or e^^n three days,
or in m^st great wounds, nine days: But if that time, (viz as much of each as
we have mentioned) does not suffice to the cure. What then must I say? Verily
nothing else can be from hence concluded, but that even the Receipt it self was
not so well composed, as it ought to have been; for (...) things these (...)
that hasten a cure in the space of only one day and night: ^^me also there are
that require even a whole month* t^^e, but other some there are that pass over
a (...) time before they cure. All and every of which it is (...) that you bring
together into One, if you would (...) a wound according to each of the
afore-pr^^^^^hed I (...) (...) then it will (...) certainly so come to pass* In
like manner are the some times to be regarded in Ulcers and Apostthumes.

Even such also is the state of Laxative^ (...) which whatsoever is to be
compounded, (besides those which we have treated of very briefly in the former
books is be understood on this wise, viz. That all the Laxatives, how many
soever of them there be, are but even only one Laxatives and do purge by the
species, or kinds, and not in the least as related to the Complexions. the like
is to be judged of in Comfortatives, and the others. Moreever, I suppose it sit
to add hereunto (for it is worthy your highest observation) this also, viz that
there are some simples, which do, as (...) their virtues, most nearly touch and
attain unto universality: out of which simples, put case four or five, all and
every the virtue may be contracted and brought into one. But yet it does not
therefore follow^ that it is thus in all the Simples: for as much as there are
even amongst these not a few abject boughs, a^ I may so call them, which being
they are of themselves of no pre sit at all, would, if made use of in the
Receipts, make an ill-proportioned, and consequently a needless somewhat, as it
were an Abo^tive, in them Here therefore I do thus conclude with this opinion;
viz. that it becomes him who would both be called, and truly be a perfect
Physician) well to distinguish those more-principal and chief simples of nature
from the unprofitable boughs, as I call them, of the same, lest that neglecting
these things, or not well understanding them, ^e frames, as is wont to happen,
a certain confused Cha^^ of Receipts.

CHAP. V.
FOr the sake of all these things, the Illadus is placed in Anatomy; and even
as Codoquintida, Turbith, Hermodactils, Lazuli, Thereniabin, etc. do in their
operations separate themselves, even so the Iliadus does in like manner,
forasmuch as it ^ottein^th both Ana^^mies, separate it self: therefore neither
Choler, nor Phlegm, nor Blood, nor Melancholy are to be considered of for the
sake of Purgation; for in purging the Blood only, there are even above Forty
things that present themselves to our observation, thus also is it in other
things: it is therefore necessary, that the Number proceeds forth from Anatomy,
and not from the Humors: and here also is to be known, that it is not so
behoveful for a Physician to be learned herein, so as to know what he both
would and ought to purge, but he is only to consider and regard this, (...)
self with the Anatomy of the Disease, and (...) against it, (...) ^ence it
follow^, that that ^^^ly ^s to be Ev^^cuated, ^^ich i^ ^^^ary in An^^^ and
^^t^th as if it (...) ^n ene^y. For the thing is ^or (...) successful in
pu^ging according to ^^at seem^ g^^d to the Physician, but according to wha^ is
plea^^ (...) nature her self, as being o^e that will not fol^^^ (...) as the
(...) to the Rule, an^ not the ^ule to the (...) the Physi^ian must so (...)
tha^ thing, and not attempt (...) the aforesaid ^um^rs, as Chole^ and (...) let
upon that only w^^ch (...) although all virtues are d^v^ded amongst (...) and
there is not one that i^^^^^ctly wh^le and (...) it self, like as we have (...)
for ^ne heals Wounds, another heals he (...), a hard ^^es ^leers, a ^^^th the
(...) and some (...) S^^ns: all which does proceed out of a ^^^^sed, and in
some sort mangled property ^f nature, whi^^ is thus out in pieces, so that ^t
has not in it self any entire virtue; for a ^^ue and perfect Corso^^ation
ought not only to (...) and W^unds, but also (...) and Syrons, and (...)
whatsoever ^^ of that kind: But because the vir^^^ (...) ^^vided, (...) in this
case, another in that; th^^efore the Physician ought to be (...) the^in, that
to be may again contract th^^ dispersed v^^tue, (...) and th^^e divided, into
(...) things (...), but in all other virtues. (...) must perfectly adjoin to
every (...) Anatomy, after that manner in which it^ Matrix as (...) composed;
from whence it is here to be observed, that the Virtue cures the whole kind of
the Disease, in w^ic^ a perfect Anatomy does withal consist.

CHAP. VI.
EVen as therefore we have mentioned concerning Anatemies, viz. that they are
necessary in the rule of Composition; even so furthermore the doctrine of the
process is to be noted: For seeing that man is a Microcosme, he may fitly be
compared to the four Anatomies, of the which that Anatomy which is displeased,
and treacherously seeks the entrapping of the rest, bears Rule. This Anatomy
therefore is the (...), and that in this sense as follows: In Minerals, these
Anatomies do consist of the four Matrixes of the Elements; therefore in
Consortatives, that which amongst others is the smallest virtue of all, must be
taken in the first; the fourth kind of Thereniabin in the second, Cheiri in the
third and Saphirica Granata in the fourth; all which, if they are composed into
one, or if the whole virtue of every Matrix be joined together, then at length
it becomes a medicine, even as the Aniadus requires: For when those four do
come together, then it is a perfect Anatomy against that disease, and is then
an Aniadus, (...) unto the (...) of nature, and does thinks (...): for in the
(...) of all these things it is behoverful that the (...) entire A^^^, the which
cannot possibly be by any means accomplished, but by the (...) Composition for
as much as the Liquor (...) Nature, and its virtue that the u^huntest after,
consists herein.

CHAP. VII.
But because the efficacies of the virtues are already demonstrated, thou shall
likewise observe, that nature has also a kind of appetite and desire: for
alone that it be made the whole Ares (alias, before the whole Ar^s be made) the
Archeus bears in himself by his own Ilech some enmities against the Microcosme;
and is on such wise to be understood, as a man in whose esteem one woman is
ba^e; but another is not so in the least, and yet there is in both of them one
and the same thing: Now this is not within the Physicians consideration; for
wheresoever the Archeus ^eigns aloathing, and hates its own nature and proper
work, therein the Physician (as being its servant) cannot bridle that Arch^ical
^b^minating: therefore as touching the manner of Composition, it is necessary to
know, that it oft-times happens, that the Ar^^^^ willing to admit of the
composing its Anatomy by one thing, but by no means by another: and that manner
of Composition is to be known by the Spagyrical Degrees; for if the Archeus be
but therein overcome, that is, in its own Ilech, then it is just as a man that
is (...) pleased with a woman but when she is adorned with gay and sine colored
Apparel: For this is evidenced by Philosophy, that Arcanaes are ordained for no
other thing, but to use such an ornament and trimness to the Archeus; and
therefore it oft-times does not per^^^ any power of operation even in Arcanaes,
unless it has some defect in it self before. So then in these aforesaid
instructions, the force and efficacy only, both of the Archeus, and also of
the Arcanum, is to be under stood.

CHAP. VIII.
MOreover, that we may also speak something of the Consolidative Anatomy, by
what means it is to be composed, and how all the virtues are therein, It Is to
be noted, that here the whole greater Author is to be taken together, that is
to say, That which is not brought forth out of one matrix only, but out of
four: the like may be said also of Tartar; because they do separate themselves
thereout of, not so much the Incarnatives of ^^^acture, as the Consolidative of
wounds, and finally a perfect Consolidation of other (...) of what kind soever:
But every one of them refer to their proper part, according to the distribution
of the Anatomy. For every part cures that which lies under its Anatomy; But,
(...) that the parts are separated, it is a general Consolidati^^^ for all
Chiurgical diseases; for, in that one thing (...) minerals ((...)) together:
the which is to be observed with the highest diligence by all the studious of
medicine. Of such a (...) which does likewise (...) of the f^^ Matrixes, and
^^nteines in it self (...) Myseries of every (...), there (...), and are to be
made (...) so many kinds of diseases. And ve^^ly (...) ^ag^alia's of Nature
which I may (...) are likewise yet (...) it is not necessary, so often (...)
Anatomy (...) the before (...) they are all comprised by themselves.

CHAP IX.
But in a composition, all the Incarnatives ought to proceed out of Mercury. So
likewise all Laxatives, Mundificatives Conservatives and whatever belongs
hereto; that the Ares may be conserved entire, in the condition of a Balsam.
Moreover, whatsoever does either comfort or a^uate and quicken or prolong,
ought to be made out of Sulphur. Besides whatever is to perform the office of
either incarnating, or ^^rrecting, or consolidating that which is once open,
it is necessary that it be made out of a Mercurial-Salt. Under these three
therefore are comprehended the cures of all diseases; For every cure is
compounded of these three ^s (if in the Eyes, it is necessary that it be this
Mercurial-Salt; Likewise in the loosning or opening (...) needful (for the
conservation of the Balsam) that it be done by the mercury of a body. But
whatsoever is besides these, is all done by the operation of Sulphur. But
whosoever has brought the Anatomy of these three into their proper Ilech, he
has such in Arcanum, that he has not at all any need of any other medicine,
so much needless is it for him, after that he has once obtained this, to
search into the Theorical, or Physical part afterward.

And albeit that this demonstration, such as it is, be happily some what obscure
to those that do every where give out themselves by the name of Physicians, and
therefore unprofitable to them in their reading it; Yet we value not that at
all, nor will we vouchsafe them any other answer, but that they must hold us
excused, by reason of their own unskilfulnesse. Therefore whatsoever we shall
either write, or in any other manner deliver, hereafter, be it such or such as
it is, We dedicate it to those they call Artists; whose very shoes (as the
Proverb goes) the unlearned Medicinal Faculty is not worthy to wipe. But in the
mean time, I do entreat the younger Students in Medicine, that they be not
troubled at that obscure writing, not be affrighted, not despair because
thereof; but let them rather studiously apply themselves to the search of
Spagyrical Arts; Wherewith being instructed, they will abundantly perceive the
^eason, and withal the foundation of this our writing. Besides, let not any
one here judge us, as if we pretended to our own power and strength only,
(alias, by the report of the men of our own family, and as if they were)
without any help of accomplices, without any aid and assistance of others. For
truly I do think, and I verily dare to affirm, that those that wrote against
me the little book, entitled Laudanum San^lum, neither understood themselves,
nor those from whom they have received, in time, all they have. These men
having raised against me with their feeble ^^isles) which I am so far from
being ^^^ed at, as that, in plain truth, (...). Yet notwith^^^^ (...) A^gu^^^^
(...) the jud^ment (...). Verily I do (...) Auth^^i^y ^^ the A^^^ents, (...)
self (...) exactly d^^^^ied. And (...) we think (...) and (...) only they, but
also all their (...) moment, (...)*

(...)
The mo^^ (...).
P(...) p. 40. l. 10. for i^ (...) etc. p. 72. (...) 73. l. 26. 1. (...) etc.
p. ^6. l. 11. (...) to, ^. 10. (...) p. 89. l. ^0. (...) p. 112. l. 6. r. (...)*

THE CONTENTS.
THE first Ens of Minerals, Gems, Herbs. p. 19 Of Liquors. p. 20

The Tincture of the Philosophers. p. 24

The definition of the subject and matter thereof. p. 26

Of the process of the Ancients, etc. p. 27

Of a briefer way by the Author. p. 29

The conclusion of the Process of the Ancients. p. 30

Of the transmutation of Metals by projection, etc. p. 33

Of the Renovating of men. p. 35

The Man^at of the Stone, etc. p. 40

The Preparation of the matter of the Stone. p. 48

The residue of the Preparation. p. 52

The use of the Stone. p. 54

The Authors way of extracting from Metals. p. 56

His way of extracting Mercury from them. p. 58

The Crocus or Tincture of Metals. p. 5^

Of the spirit of life. p. 6^

Of the influence of the spirit of life. p. 6^

Of Oppilations in general. p. 6^

Of the virtue of the heart. ibide^

Of the Brain. p. 6^

Of the Liver. p. ^^

Of the Spleen. p. ^^

Of the Reins. p. 7^

Of the Gall. p. ^^

Of the Lungs. p. 7^

Of the three first Essences out of which things generated: composed. p. ^^

The seven Books of Degrees and Compositions of Receipt and natural things. p.
^^


