Joseph 's Entertainment of his Brethren: IN A SERMON Preached at the
Herefordshire Feast AT St MARY-LE-BOW, June the 25th. 1684.

BY WILLIAM BOLTON, One of the Schoolmasters of the Charter House.

LONDON, Printed by Miles Flesher, for Charles Harper, at the Flower-de-Luce in
Fleetstreet. 1684.

Genesis 43. Verse. 34. And he took, and sent Messes unto them, from before him
(but Benjamin's Mess was five times so much, as any of theirs,) and they drank,
and were merry with him.


WHEN I look into the Sacred Writings, I cannot sufficiently admire at the
Power, as well as Goodness of the Lord, in defeating Satan, by those very
means, whereby the old Serpent brought ruin to our first Parents: Man may now
eat and live; and the Devil may cease to boast of his conquest over Mankind in
Paradise, when he tempted to eat of the forbidden tree: For if Man do not
contribute to his own destruction, and misuse those Creatures which God has
afforded for his benefit, for the intercourse of Love and Friendship, as well
as stay and support of his life, he may go into a better Paradise, than that
from which our first Parents were driven. Here Is no Angel now with a flaming
Sword, to bar us from entering those more sacred Mansions, and eating and
drinking are become the Symbols, not only of Christ's love to us, as in the
holy Eucharist, but of our love and kindness one toward another. Take a survey
of God's Church in all ages, and you will find the men thereof, (whether after
any great mercy received, or a resolution of entering into a more familiar
acquaintance) still entertaining one another with these tokens of amity, eating
and drinking together. The Jews of old had a feast at the end of their
Sacrifices; and the Primitive Christians, if not in the very Apostles times, I
am sure immediately afterward, their (...), or Love Feasts, after the Lord's
Supper: That feasting, or public eating and drinking together, were the ties
of Union and Confederacy amongst men, Satan knew well enough, therefore he
encouraged this Custom also amongst his Proselytes and Followers. Would
Absalom slay his brother Amnon? A feast is made the snare to entrap him. But
that I may bring this somewhat home to our ownselves; have several degrees and
orders of men, whether in relation to their being born in the same Country, or
otherwise, met together, first to celebrate God's praises in his own House, and
afterward adjourning to some Common Hall, there engaged one another, in their
duty toward their Prince, their adherence to the Succession of the Crown in
the right line, their Reciprocal love one with another, and the relieving the
poor and necessitous? Have good and loyal men, as now, met together for this
end and purpose? And have not the Catilines of our age, had their Cabals, and
Associations too, for the ruin of their, I had almost said, too Gracious King,
and his Royal Brother, for the Subversion of the Laws, and their Country, and
afterward of themselves too, as their Forefathers in the last Rebellion found
it? What else meant their King's Head, or Green-Ribbon Clubs, where many
affronts to Sacred Majesty were first hammered, before they received their
Polishing by Votes in another place? But Absalom has a vow to be performed in
Hebron: Tickets are therefore sent abroad by the Underminers of our Israel,
which, forsooth, must be ushered in, with the Pageantry of a Sermon too; but
this their solemn Appearance was baffled and disappointed by Authority; an
happy presage, without doubt, of our deliverance from the effects of it, I
mean, the late Damnable and Fanatic Plot. I mention these and the like, to
acquaint you, that it was the custom of all Ages, for men, whether for good or
bad designs, to strengthen one another, by eating and drinking together; and
therefore long before the Law was given, you find Joseph entertaining his
brethren after the same manner; witness the words of my Text; And he took, and
sent Messes unto them, from before him, and they drank, and were merry with
him. The words do acquaint us, how Joseph, one of the twelve sons of Patriarch
Jacob, constituted by Pharaoh, Lord of Egypt, and inferior to the King
thereof, only in Name and Title, entertained his eleven brethren, which twelve
gave denomination afterward to the twelve Tribes or Counties of Israel: So
that you see, my Text, and this solemn Appearance of so many of the same
Country, do agree, and carry a Resemblance one with each other.

In handling of which words, I shall do these things.

First, I shall show you, what that place and dignity was, which Joseph
enjoyed, at this entertainment of his brethren: And he, that is, the Lord of
the Country; for Joseph had not as yet discovered himself to his brethren.

Secondly, The Reason why.

Thirdly, The manner how he entertained his brethren; And he took, and sent
Messes unto them, from before him, and they drank, and were merry with him.

Fourthly, I shall endeavor to vindicate such Meetings as this.

Fifthly and lastly, by way of Application, from the Consideration of the
person entertaining, and the parties entertained. I shall propose some
Practical Inferences, fitting for such Assemblies.

I. First therefore, as to the Place and Dignity, etc.
I might here give you an Historical account of Joseph before his promotion; as
what he suffered in Canaan from his unnatural brethren, and likewise what
befell him in Egypt, from the seventeenth year of his age, when he was sold, to
his thirtieth, when he was advanced by Pharaoh, the King thereof; but I
consider, it is but your turning at your leisure to the last part of Genesis,
and you have a plain, as full, relation of him.

As to the Place and Dignity, which he held at this entertainment; it was as
great as a Sovereign Prince was able to confer upon him, or a Subject capable
of receiving: Forasmuch, says Pharaoh, chap. 41. verse. 30. and so on, as God
has showed thee all this, there is none so discreet, and wise as thou art;
thou shall be over my house, and according unto thy word shall all my people be
ruled; only in the Throne will I be greater than thou. A Commission you see
very large, and therefore though the occasion and the circumstance of the time
of Joseph's advancement might seem to countenance, yet I cannot subscribe to
their conjectures, who would allow Joseph no other than a Praefectus Annonae,
who was to take care of the Corn, that the people of the land might not suffer
famine; Although I shall grant, that this place of Trust, was very honorable,
not only in Egypt, but other Nations; so honorable amongst the Romans, that
Pompey the Great, after he had subdued Mithridates, the most powerful Prince
of Asia; nay after he had triumphed, over a great part of the World, thought it
an honor to have this of Praefectus Annonae added to his other Titles: Though
this Dignity, I say, was very great, and Joseph particularly executed this
Office also; yet his authority was greater: He managed all affairs of State; he
had the power of Life and Death, of making War, and Peace; in a word, he had
the whole sway of Government devolved upon him: The authority of such Regents
(as Joseph was constituted in this Chapter) was of that figure and estimation
in the world, both then, and afterward, that they were many times mistaken for
the Kings themselves, by people of other Nations. Joseph's brethren, I am sure,
took him for such, witness those words of theirs to their Father, chap. 42.
verse. 30. The man who is the Lord of the Land; and again, the Lord of the
Country: Nay the Egyptian Historiographers inserted several of these Regents
amongst the Kings themselves, otherwise their Catalogue must be very imperfect,
and never to be reconciled; And such was the Soldans power afterward in Egypt,
under the Caliphs; such the Masters of the Palace, under the old Kings of
France; and such the Grand Viziers, perhaps at this time in the Turkish
Dominions: Such, so great in Authority, as well as Piety and Wisdom, as the
Scripture informs us, was the person, who took and sent Messes unto his
brethren. Which brings me to my second Particular.

II. The Reason why Joseph entertained them at a Feast or Banquet.
Ten of his brethren had been with him before, to buy Corn; to whom he then
seemed rough and severe, either to make them repent of their former usage
toward him, or fearing, that they might have been, as cruel to Benjamin, his
only Brother by the same Mother, as before to him; he charged them therefore
as Spies, secured one of them in bonds, till the rest brought Benjamin with
them into Egypt: Let but him once appear, the scene is altered; and all the
Clouds of Joseph's seeming indignation are gone and vanished, and they might
even then, before he discovered himself unto them, have read the kindness of a
brother; As soon as they come to Court, Joseph immediately commands, Kill and
slay, for these men shall dine with me. And now Joseph's brethren may lay aside
all fear; this following banquet, to which they are invited, gives them more
than hopes, both of their own safety, and the Prince's favor: Simeon is
released, and all of them from suspected spies find themselves graced with
dining with the Lord of the Country: A Banquet is thought by Joseph to be the
best way of receiving them, both as their Brother, and their Lord: They had
enough paid that adoration, and obedience to him, of which he had formerly
dreamed, and which had caused their malice against him; he had with joy often
understood their Repentance, as to what they had formerly done to him; he views
his brother Benjamin, grown to man's estate, whom he had left in Canaan a little
child; and can scarcely forbear embracing him, and discovering by his
tenderness, who he was; he is satisfied that his Father is well; he can
therefore now no longer treat them, as theirs and the Egyptians Lord, but
thinks it high time to consult his brotherly affections too: Which to effect,
he orders, that they should dine with him; and this was the most ready and
natural means, that Joseph could make use of, or indeed his brethren expect;
had they then known, how nearly he was related to them: And therefore, in the
book of Esther, Haman, in my opinion, urged very well; (though the Event,
through his demerits, proved otherwise,) that Ahasuerus his King did design him
favor, when he admitted him of all his Courtiers to dine with him. Eating and
drinking together, ever was a token of friendship amongst all people: Insomuch,
that I read of the Romans afterward, that they had their Annual Charistia,
like to our Country feasts at this time, when kinfolk and relations met
together, to confirm, says my Author, their friendship one with another, and
reconcile all different parties, who had lived in any variance before. Fancy
therefore, Beloved, the twelve brethren sat down at dinner; Joseph indeed, as
a Prince, served at a Table by himself; as it is before my Text; but as a
brother too, he admits them to dine in the same room near unto him: which leads
me to my other particular, viz.

III. The manner how he entertained them;
And he took and sent Messes unto them, from before him; and they drank, and
were merry with him.

I shall not, as some have done upon the words, lay down any Critical
questions; as whether it was always a custom for Princes to sit alone at Table
by themselves, by way of State and Grandeur; or whether sitting, as here in
Egypt, or lying along, as amongst the Romans, and the Jews from them in our
Savior's time, bore the most ancient date; or whether it has been a practice
for Princes to send dishes from their own Table to their Favorites, as is
reported of Cyrus amongst the Persians, Agesilaus amongst the Grecians, and
several of the Roman Emperors? or why the Egyptians, as in the Context, sat
at one Table by themselves, and the Hebrews at another by themselves; Neither
farther shall I enquire, what the Messes were, which Joseph sent to his
brethren, taking it for granted, that they were rich and sumptuous, such as
might set forth his magnificence, as well as kindness; neither, lastly, shall I
ask, why Benjamin had five times so much as the rest, as you read in my Text,
points indeed incident enough to my Theme, but wholly averse to my design,
which is not to nauseate you with intricate questions, a trouble both to the
Commentators themselves, and their Readers too.

But I must not omit the giving you the genuine signification of the last words
of the Text, viz. They drank, and were merry. At the first view thereof, the
Debauchees of our, as well as of Saint Austin's age, might hug themselves, with
having Joseph a Pious and Wise man, yet a Patron of their excess and
drunkenness: Let therefore the same Father's answer serve the men of our, as
well as his time. The word in the Hebrew, says he, signifies to drink
plentifully, or cheerfully, by way of refreshment only; and it is applied even
to inanimate Creatures: Thus Psalm. 65. v. 9. Inebriasti terram, thou have
refreshed, or watered the Earth; which being there acknowledged, as a gift of
God, cannot be taken in a bad sense. If this will not satisfy, let them read
the 2d Chapter of St. John, where they will find the same word with the
Septuagint in my Text; and upon the Occasion of a Feast too; which Feast the
blessed Jesus did not only grace with his own presence, but honored it also
with the first miracle he wrought; and as after his Resurrection he made
himself known to his Disciples by breaking of bread; so here at the Marriage of
Cana in Galilee, he manifested himself by turning water into wine; as if
thereby he designed, not only to supply their present necessity, but remove
such scruples, as men of more niceness than piety might afterward raise: which
brings me to my fourth and last Particular, viz.

IV. To endeavor to vindicate such Meetings as this of ours.
And of this too, I shall be short, as having hinted at it in the Preface to my
Sermon; neither do I think it fitting to trouble such Meetings as this with any
long discourses.

And this I shall do from the practice of the Patriarchs before the Law, of
the Jews under the Law; I might add of the Gentiles under the Law of nature,
and finally of the Primitive Christians (a body made up of Jews and Gentiles)
under the Gospel. Let three Angels visit Abraham, the Father of the faithful;
he orders a Calf to be dressed to entertain them; and so far were they from being
offended at his courteous invitation, though they had no need of it, that, Genesis
18.5. they commanded him to do as he had said; and my Text acquaints us, how
Joseph entertained his brethren.

Under the Law, I might give you many examples; I shall name but one; yet such
an one, as was annually kept for many succeeding years; from Judas Macchabaeus,
till our blessed Savior's time; and then it was so far from being
discountenanced by our Lord, that he himself justified the observation of it,
by his own presence. Josephus acquaints us very succinctly, with the reason of
that Feast: When Judas Macchabaeus had re-established the Service of the
Temple, which had been for a long time polluted by the Heathens, both he and
his Contrymen solemnized a Feast: And this, without doubt, gave occasion to
the Primitive Christians, of instituting their Encoenia, or annual Feasts at
the Consecration of their Churches, the same with our Country Wakes, so
generally observed, I am sure in those places where I lived in Herefordshire;
though perhaps the Reason thereof not so well known.

Our Savior's Parable of the Prodigal Son is much to the same purpose: Let the
Penitent Son return to his home, as well as his duty; the indulgent and
compassionate Father commands the best fatted Calf to be slain, to bid him
welcome; And the presence of the blessed Jesus, at the two Feasts before
mentioned, sufficiently declare his approbation of such Meetings. I shall not
insist upon the Practice of the Gentiles, as knowing that of old, the Heretics
called Cathari, and the Puritans now, agreeable both in name and nature, did
and do as falsely, as maliciously, decry such Feasts, as taking their rise from
the custom of the Heathens.

Proceed we therefore to the times of Christianity. If we read so seldom of
Feasts amongst the ancient Fathers, it is because of the Persecution of God's
Church in those Elder days; yet even then we shall not want sufficient
Testimonies: (...), was a Canon of St. Clement, whom St. Paul makes mention of
in his Epistles, and who was the first Roman Bishop of both the Gentile and
Jewish Churches; and who within one remove, succeeded the blessed Apostles, St.
Peter and St. Paul, not only in the then pure and untainted See of Rome, but
in their Martyrdom too.

Theodoret is copious, how he and other Christians kept such Feasts; And at the
Dypticks, or Commemoration of famous men, who sealed their faith in Christ with
their blood; the Primitive Christians did indulge themselves, and take a
greater repast than at other times. Nazianzen in several places gives us his
concurrence with us: We keep Festival-days, says he in one place; and in his
Oration in Sanctum Baptisma, at the beginning thereof, he seems to contest for
such Meetings against the Heretics of his time: It is fitting, says he, that
men should annually celebrate, and rejoice in such, and such days; and then
names the days; either wherein they were born, or baptized, or married, vel
locum aliquem primi incoluerunt, agreeable to our Country feast at this time;
and then, as if he despised the unreasonable Cavils of the Heretics, by an
allusion to the Pagan Rites and Ceremonies, he declares how Pious and Orthodox
Christians did solemnize their Feasts. After this manner, from that Father, the
stout and learned Prelate Mountague informs me, That Mountague, who asserted
the cause of our Established Church, not only against Baronius, that Bulwark
of the Papal Chair, but the Puritans likewise, and those also backed by an
House of Commons too; yet did not that daunt him from taking off the Fig Leaves
that Party had put on, to hide, if it were possible, their errors and enmity to
our Church. I must confess, that St. Ambrose often blamed the Christians for
their riot and excess at such Meetings; and particularly chid them for
immoderately drinking the Emperor's health; And though the drinking of the
Prince's health, was decreed by the Senate, to Augustus Caesar, and never, as I
have read, cancelled by any Edict of Christian Emperors; yet Peter Vrsinus, in
his Appendix, cites St. Ambrose, speaking of the Custom of his time: Bibamus,
inquiunt, pro salute Imperatoris, etc. Let us drink, say they, the Emperor's
health, etc. That good Father, to any unbiased Reader, does not so much find
fault with the thing it self, as with the ill manner of doing it: And the
general practice of the Loyal, and consequently the best part of our Nation,
does explain HIs present Majesty's Proclamation, as to the drinking of his
Health, viz. that it does not so much forbid the thing, as the excess therein;
and that we should not impair our own health, whilst we wish his. And this
shall serve for the Explication of my Text; I shall now beg your patience for
the Applicatory part, and I have done.

First therefore, from Joseph's thus courteously entertaining his ten brothers,
who before had been so cruel, barbarous and unnatural to him, as the Scriptures
will fully inform you: Let me recommend that grand duty of Christianity, of
pardoning your Enemies, and forgiving those, whom you may fancy, have done you
any injury. To encourage you to which duty, I shall entreat your leave to
propose a new and living example to you; but such an one, as is not impertinent
either to my Text, or this Loyal Assembly; the Motto of whose chief Town,
Invictae fidelitatis praemium, proclaims their constant fidelity to their
Prince, even in the worst of times; much more now, when Schism and Faction,
when Sedition and Rebellion are wisely, as justly, discountenanced and
punished, and all men are, or pretend to be so, Loyalists: You may easily judge
whom I mean, without my naming our present Sovereign, between whom and Joseph
there seems a great resemblance. Compare their Age, you will find them both
commencing at the same time in their Miseries, and in their Glory: Both of them
about the same years were forced from their Native Country; the one by
unnatural brethren, the other by more inhumane Subjects. But our King's
Persecutions were greater than Joseph's; He was but the eleventh Son, and so
could not expect any great inheritance, whilst our King was the eldest, and
heir to three flourishing Kingdoms. Joseph, when he was sold, had the comfort
not to fear any hurt to be offered to Jacob; whilst our disconsolate Sovereign
laments his Father, as murdered by the worst of Villains, and that under a
Mock-shew of Justice: Joseph had but one brother Benjamin to be concerned for,
our Prince had two, the one indeed a Companion of his Exile and miseries, but
young Gloucester exposed to the barbarity of Hypocritical Rakehells, whose very
Mercy did threaten more, than others Cruelty; for if they should for their own
ends, as the old King feared, have forced the Crown upon his Head, he knew
'twould be like the Royal slaves, amongst the Persians, to sacrifice him
afterward: Besides, our King had many Loyal Subjects, continually harassed
with Plunders, Sequestrations, and suchlike tendernesses of the pretended
Saints, nay even with Death it self, which could not but grieve his Princely
heart. Farther, there was this difference between the brethren of the one, and
the Rebels against the other: The one sold Joseph, that they might not be
branded as Murderers of their brother; The other proffered one thousand pound
for his Person, that they might, without doubt, doubly dye their accursed hands
with the blood of the Son, as well as the Father. And thus much as to their
Sufferings. Now let us view them in their glory and power, and see how the one
treated his offending, but penitent, brethren; the other, His then, I wish to
God, they may not still prove his Rebellious Subjects; And the last Plot does
more than justify such fears. But let us view them in their Glory. The
Scripture acquaints us, that Joseph, when he was thirty years old, stood before
Pharaoh, and received that Royal Commission of governing the land of Egypt; and
none of you are ignorant, at what age God blessed these Kingdoms, with the
happy return of our present Sovereign. Both of them came to their power; the
one to a deputed, the other to his own by inheritance, by the very same means:
It was God, and God alone, who raised Joseph; and the same God, who restored
Charles the Second; without making use of the boasted instruments, either of
Canaanitish Brethren, or English Presbyterians: Joseph therefore, as soon as he
had made himself known to his brethren, chap. 45. verse. 8. for fear that they
should plead, that their selling him, brought him into Egypt, and consequently
to his promotion therein, tells them plainly to their faces, It was not ye that
sent me hither, but God; and he has made me a Father to Pharaoh; and a Ruler
throughout all the land of Egypt. And in my opinion, Redeunte Carolo, was not
only an ingenious and witty, but a pious and solid argument, that one made use
of, to prove the existence of God; for nothing less than an Almighty Arm could
have so effected it.

Suppose them both in their full luster and dignity; though we know who they
were (those great Pretenders, and but Pretenders to the King's Restoration)
who would have limited our Soveregn's just Power; and like Philip, the second,
King of Spain, to the Duke of Alva, would have our King govern, as the other
complained, that he was sent to conquer Kingdoms with fetters and shackles on
him.

Behold them both, I say, with their Sceptres in their hands, the one governing
Egypt under Pharaoh, the other of his own right giving Laws to his English, and
other Subjects. The Scripture tells us, that Joseph after two years, and the
imprisonment of one of his Persecutours, for I cannot give them any other name,
till his Clemency restored them to that affectionate title, which by their
cruelty they had forfeited; I say, after he had imprisoned one of them for a
long space, after he had often known their sorrow, as to what they had formerly
done to him; instead of punishing those who had been so unnatural and barbarous
to him; he kindly invites them to dine with him, and as in my Text, courteously
entertains them, and which too, was only an earnest of his future favors, for
soon after with tears of joy he discovered himself unto them, and laying aside
the Robes of Majesty, embraced them with the tenderness of a brother; and gave
them the richest part of Egypt, even the land of Goshen to inhabit and dwell
therein: But still they were his brothers, nay his elder brothers too, whom
Joseph thus forgave and obliged. And did our King treat his Rebellious Subjects
with less pity and compassion? Some few excepted of those impious Regicides,
who had the Impudence to sit in pretended Justice upon, and sentence to death
the Sacred Person of his Royal Father: Those few excepted, I say, for example
sake, whom neither his own Piety, nor the cries of his Martyred Father's blood,
nor the just Resentments of his then Loyal Parliament would suffer to live any
longer: With what mercy did he receive all the rest? So far was he from
punishing, that he seemed more concerned for them, than they for themselves.
How impatient was he, till all his Rebellious Subjects might know themselves
safe and secure; witness his hastening and urging forwards his Gracious Act of
Indemnity? Wherein he excluded no cursing Shimei's, or other Traitors of a
larger size, but gave a general pardon to all; as if, like David, after the
quelling of Absalon 's Rebellion, 2 Samuel 19.22. he likewise were resolved to
say to any repining sons of Zeruiah, Shall there any man be put to death? Know
I not, that I am this day King over Great Britain and Ireland? And if his
Justice has, as of late, seized upon some incorrigible Traitors: Is it not,
because all kinder methods of his mercy were lost upon them, and they became
doubly guilty of ingratitude, as well as Treason? But some may say, that Joseph
never punished his offending brethren afterward, I shall easily grant it; but
then it is as true, that his brethren were so far from reiterating their
iniquities, that chap. 50. verse. 17. As if they had not given testimonies
enough before of their Repentance, after 17 years, you find them renewing it,
praying him to forgive them their trespasses against him. But more than 20
years are past, since our King's Act of Oblivion, without any penitent
Applications hitherto; instead thereof, we have heard of repeated Conspiracies,
and of late intended Insurrections and Massacres of the King's Loyal Subjects,
of Blunderbusses to take away his Life, with his Royal Brothers, by whose sole
Grace they hold their own. And now, Beloved, one would think, that these
Examples of Joseph and our present Sovereign, might prevail with any, to lay
aside Anger, and to pardon their Enemies; few ever receiving such wrongs; and I
wish to God I could not say, few ever so pardoning. But if this be not of force
enough, let me entreat those haughty spirits to meditate upon the Lord of
Glory, descending from Heaven, and becoming a servant for our sakes; and after
33, or 34 years converse upon Earth, submitting himself to the shameful and
painful death of the Cross, whereon he received all the affronts, and sharp
usage, wherewith malicious cruelty could torment him: His nailed hands, and
bored feet, distilled and dropped blood; nay his whole body in every particular
part endured a several Crucifixion: Yet then, even then, it was; he showed
himself the highest example of (what he taught his Disciples, and in them us)
loving our Enemies, crying with a loud and strong cry, not for himself, but for
those who so inhumanely butchered him; Father, forgive them, for they know not
what they do. I might now, from Examples, farther press this duty, as from
other things, so from your interest, from the eternal interest of your bodies
and souls; For as you forgive men their trespasses, so will your heavenly
Father forgive you yours. But I have been, I fear, too long upon this point, I
must hasten to another.

Therefore, secondly, from Joseph's entertaining his brethren, who came into
Egypt to buy Corn for themselves, and their little ones, by reason of the great
famine that then raged in Canaan, and other parts adjacent to Egypt. Let me
propose another duty incumbent upon us, especially at such solemn meetings,
viz. that of Charity toward the Poor. And this is so inseparable from a true
Christian feast, that I never read of the one, without the other. I might press
this duty, had I time, from several arguments, but I shall confine my self to
what may naturally be inferred from the Text, concluding this particular by way
of Direction, upon whom chiefly you are to dispose your Charity. Egypt, by an
easy Allegory, may be taken for the World; by the eleven brethren, you may
understand the poor and necessitous; and by Joseph, are represented those whom
God has blessed with riches, to the end they may supply out of their store to
them, who labor under need and poverty. Joseph so well managed his Province,
and so effectually provided against that raging famine that then was in the
land, that I read in several Histories; That the Egyptians supposed him to be
more than man; and therefore in afterages adored him as a God, under the name
of Serapis: I am sure all ye, who abound in Riches, have the same honorable
employment entrusted to you, though your Province is not so large; but then you
have your Commission from a greater King than Pharaoh, viz. the King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords. And if the poor should want relief, when you can assist
them, you will have this reproach upon you, that whereas Joseph supplied the
wants of a great Kingdom with the adjacent Countries, in an extreme want of
seven years; you suffer a few indigent people to starve in a great plenty of
all things. But I hope better things of you, especially having been an
eyewitness; how free and liberal you have been at our last Annual meetings.
And here, if I may guide your hands, in your more liberal distributions, I
would propose those Loyal persons as larger Objects of your kindness, who
either suffered in the service of the late Royal Martyr; or, of late, in their
faithful adherence to our present Sovereign; when the Tragedy of Forty-one
was, if possible, in more dismal circumstances, designed to be re-acted, by
some of the same men, but all of the same Principles with the former. And I am
sure my Text will justify my advice, wherein though Joseph entertained all his
brethren at a feast, yet Benjamin 's Mess was five times so much as any of
theirs.

Thirdly and lastly, Did Joseph, a pious, chaste, and religious Man, yet
entertain his brethren after that manner, as you have heard? and was his
Practice followed by the Jews under the Law, by our blessed Savior and the
Primitive Christians? Why then, let us not regard the unjust censures of
unreasonable men, as to our present Assembly. Those Writers did but dream, who
fansied the fruit of the forbidden tree, to be that of the Vine: No, no, God
never made the Vine only to tempt Mankind, and that he should not taste
thereof. The Impostor Mahomet indeed denied it to his Worshippers; but God
himself was pleased to accept of it in Sacrifices, and the blessed Jesus put
himself to the expense of a Miracle, that men might know his sense thereof. But
here let me beg of you, not to misconstrue what I have said; and do not think,
that whilst I plead for the innocent mirth of Christians, that you may behave
your selves, as if you were at the Roman Bacchanals, or, which is very like,
their Carnivals now.

I shall sum up all in a word or two, by way of Exhortation. Do not, O do not
abuse God's goodness; and that which he has indulged to us, to cheer and
refresh us; Let us not make use of it to the dishonouring his Image in us, to
the unmanning our selves, and putting on the shapes of beasts, as too too many
do. I shall give you but one direction herein; be sure none of you touch that
glass, whereby you may be rendered less fitting for God's service. As for
drunkenness and debauchery, let it not be so much as mentioned, as becomes
such Christian Meetings; When you are at Dinner, remember, that as the Jews
after their Sacrifices, so you just before were worshipping God at his holy
Temple; Let your carriage at the following entertainment baffle the idle
clamours of those who oppose such Meetings of Love; Show to them, that you can
be sober, as well as cheerful; and that you can be men, without laying aside
the Christian.

Let this meeting be like that of the Primitive Christians, of whom Pliny wrote
to the Emperor Trajan, an engagement to Virtue, and an abhorrence from sin and
iniquity. Be constant in your Allegiance to our English Joseph; Continue true
members of Our established Church, which, best of all others, teaches how to
render to God, the things which are God's; and to Caesar, the things which are
Caesar's. Let us follow St. Paul's advice, and do good to all men, especially
to those of the household of faith; Nay, let our charity be more extensive, and
let us embrace even the Dissenters themselves, though not by prostituting the
Churches Orders to their peevishness and wantonness, but by praying for them,
that they may return to their duty to our common Mother, the established Church
of England, that so at length we may all be loving brethren, and with one
unanimous consent, may with one heart, and one voice glorify God, the Father
of us all. If any of you have had that grand happiness of Mankind, a true
friend, do your utmost to preserve him so: Nay, if any of you has an enemy,
who has done you wrong or injury, imitate Joseph, and our present Sovereign;
but above all, our blessed Savior, single out that person, and forgive him: If
any Object of Charity comes into your thoughts, especially of poor loyal
persons, take hold of the occasion, accordingly as God has enabled you. These
and the like things, if you perform, you need not fear, but that this following
Banquet will be an Antepast of an eternal Feast in the Heavens; Which God
grant. Amen.

FINIS.

