PARACELSUS HIS Aurora, and Treasure OF THE PHILOSOPHERS.

As also The WATER-STONE OF The Wise Men; Describing the matter of, and manner
how to attain the universal Tincture.

Faithfully Englished.

And Published by J. H. Oxon.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the Black Spread
Eagle, at the West end of Paul's, 1659.



Reader,
THese three Pieces of Mysterious Learning, need not any Apology, nor ought of
those flattering titles that many worthless Books are ushered in withal; It Is
sufficient that two of them were written by the experienced Paracelsus; and
that the other viz. The Water-stone, has the testimony of that enlightened man
Jacob Behmen, in his 23. Epistle. It is (in truth) a discourse so sober, its
title so modest, and the plain-hartedness of the Author so evident, that it
will be but lost labor to commend that which is so really excellent. And
whereas the Genius of many an Englishman tends after these noble employments,
and is destitute of those helps that many Authors extant in the Latin tongue
might happily afford them; I do therefore intend to publish these ensuing, viz.
The Rosary of the Philosophers. The Mineral work of Isaac Holland. Bernard
Trevisan of Alchimy. The last Testament. The Experiments and several other
Tracts of Raymund Lully. Glaubers second and third part of the Mineral work.
Paracelsus his Archidoxis and Book of degrees. All which, except the two
last-mentioned, (and they may shortly be ready) are completely finished.

Some (happily) will be displeased with, othersome will deride whatsoever they
meet with of this subject; such may please themselves and wallow in their
frothy fancies; but the ingenuous man will consider, that to attain to the
useful understanding of things of this nature, there is required the labor of
the body, integrity of the mind, and a patient perseverance in both: these are
the usual keys that give admission to this despised Science,

Farewell, Thy Friend, I. H.

The most material Errata's are to be corrected as follows.
PAge 3. line 9. read with; p. 21. l. 16. r. Trutae or Trouts; p. 23. l. 18. r.
Haematites; p. 25. l. 17. r. revification. l. 18. r. urine; p. 34. l. 23. for
their r. the; p. 37. l. 26. set a full-point at time; p. 42. l. 15. r.
mystery; p. 47. l. 26. r. meets; ib. r. Cahoick; p. 55. l. 27. r. and it; p.
57. l. 17. blot out or thus; p. 60. l. 9. r. Balny; l. 11. r. vive; p. 62. l.
3. for below, r. all over; p. 69. l. 9. r. Cinnabre; l. 15. r. cohobation; p.
72. l. 17. r. all; p. 75. l. 14. r. ounces; p. 94. l. 14. r. 47. p. 107. l. 27.
r. Aes. p. 112. l. 18. r. cover; p. 116. l. 24. r. so; p. 174. l. 23. r.
caring; p. 184. l. 25. r. aa^a; p. 187. l. 9. blot out unto it self; p. 195. l.
10. r. ears; p. 210. l. 20. blot out be.

The Aurora of the Philosophers by Paracelsus.
CHAP. I.
Of the Original of the Philosophic Stone.
ADAM was the first Inventor of Arts, because he had the knowledge of all
things, as well after the fall as before the fall; from thence he presaged the
worlds destruction by water; Hence also it came to pass that his Successors
erected two tables of stone, in the which they ingraved all Natural Arts, and
that in Hieroglyphical Characters, that so their Successors might also know
this presage, that it might be heeded, and provision or care made in time of
danger. Afterward, Noah found one of the tables in Armenia under the Mount
Araroth, when the deluge was over: In which [Table] were described the courses
of the superior Firmament, and of the inferior Globe, and [also] of the
Planets; then at length this Universal Notion of Knowledge was drawn into
several particulars, and lessened in its Vigor and Power, in so much that by
means of that separation, One became an Astronomer, another a Magus, another a
Cabalist, and a fourth an Alchymist: Abraham that most great Astrologer and
Arithmetitian conveyed [it] out of the Country of Canaan into Egypt,
whereupon the Egyptians arose to so great a head and dignity, that the wisdom
[or science] of the same thing was derived from them to other Nations and
Countries. And for as much as the Patriarch Jacob painted [as twere] the sheep
with various colors, it was done by a part or member of Magic; for in the
Theology of the Chaldeans, Hebrews, Persians and Egyptians, they proposed these
arts (as the highest Philosophy) to be learned by their chiefest Nobles and
Priests: So it was in Moses his time, wherein both the Priests and even the
Physicians were chosen amongst the Magi* they indeed [viz. the Priests] for the
Examination or Judging, of what related to soundness or health, especially in
the knowledge of the Leprosy; Moses likewise was instructed in the Egyptian
Schools at the Costs and Care of Pharaohs daughter, so that he excelled in all
their Wisdom or Learning; So was it which Daniel; he in his young days sucked
in the Learning of the Chaldeans, so that he became a Cabalist. Witness his
Divine foretellings, and exponnding of those words, Mean Mean Tekel Phares:
These words are to be understood by the Prophetic and Cabalistick Art: The
Tradition of this Cabalistical Art, was very familiar with Moses and the
Prophets, and most of all in use; The Prophet Elias foretold many things by his
Cabalistical Numbers. Even so the Ancient wise men, by this Natural and
Mystical Art, learned to know God rightly, and abode and walked in his Laws and
statutes very firmly; It likewise is evident in the Book of Samuel, that the
Berelists did not follow the Devils part, but became (by Divine permission)
partakers of Visions and true Apparitions, the which we shall treat more
largely of in the book of Snpercelestials. The gift thereof is granted by the
Lord God to the Priests who walk in the divine precepts. It was a custom
amongst the Persians, never to admit any one as King, unless a Sophist [or Wise
man] exalted both in reality and name; and this is clear by the usual name of
their Kings, for they were called Sophists. Such were those Wise men and
Persian Magi that came from the East to seek out Christ Jesus, and are called
natural Priests. Likewise the Egyptians having obtained this Magic and
Philosophy from the Chaldeans and Persians, would that their Priests should
also learn the same wisdom, wherein they became so fruitful and succesfull,
that all the neighboring Countries admired them* This was the cause why
Hermes was truly styled Trismegistus because he was both a King, a Priest, and
a Prophet, a Magitian, and a Sophist of Natural things; such another also was
Zoroastes.

CHAP. II.
Wherein is declared that the Grecians drew a good part of this Learning from
the Egyptians, and how it came from them to us.
AFter that a Son of Noah possessed the third part of the world after the
Flood, this Art brake in violently [as it were] into Chalde and Persia, and
from thence into Egypt; The which [Art] being a little smelt out by the
superstitious and idolatrous Grecians, some of them that were more wise and
sage, betook themselves to the Chaldeans and Egyptians, that so they might draw
in, out of their Schools the same wisdom; But now whereas the Theological or
Bible-study of the Law of Moses did not so well please them, they confided in
their own proper Genius, and fell away from the right foundation of those
natural secrets and arts. This is evident by their fabulous Conceptions and
stumblings about the doctrine of Moses. It Was the Egyptians custom to propose
those Traditions of that so excellent wisdom merely in Enigmatical figures and
abstruse Histories and Terms. The which was afterward shadowed by Homer, by an
admirable poetical artifice: Herewith was Pythagoras also acquainted, who mixed
[with his writings] very many things out of the Law of Moses and the Old
Testament. In like manner Hippocrates, Thales Milesius, Anaxagoras, Democritus
and others, did not forbear to apply their conceptions hereunto. Although none
of them were skillful of the true Astrology, Geometry, Arithmetic or Medicine;
for their pride so hindered, that it would not admit of Disciples of other
Nations. And when they had got some sight as twere from the Chaldeans and
Egyptians, they became by this accident far more proud then they were before
naturally; and without any fear did acuate or set out the thing or substance it
self with subtiler figments and lies, and then attempted to describe a certain
kind of Philosophy, which came and descended from them to the Latins. They
being now seasoned and instructed herewithal, adorned it with their dictates
also: from all which this Philosophy was sowed abroad all Europe, and then many
Academies were made for the propagation of their Decrees and Rules, that so
youth might be instructed; and this does now flourish with the Germans and
other Nations even nuto this very day.

CHAP. III.
What was taught in the Schools of the Egyptians.
THE Chaldeans, Persians and Egyptians had [all of them] the same knowledge of
the secrets of nature and the same Religion, the names only being changed. The
Chaldeans and Persians called their doctrine Sophia and Magic; and the
Egyptians, because of the sacrifice, called their wisdom the Priesthood. The
Magic of the Persians, and Theology of the Egyptians were both of them
heretofore taught in the Schools. Albeit there were many Schools and Learned
men in Arabia, Africa and Greece, as Albumazar, Abenzagel, Geber, Rasis and
Avicen, amongst the Arabians Machaon, Podalirius, Pythagoras, Anaxagoras,
Democritus, Plato, Aristotle and Rodianus amongst the Grecians; but yet there
were various opinions amongst themselves as to the Egyptian wisdom, wherein
they differed, and disagreed from it. For this cause Pythagoras would not be
called Sophist, because the Egyptian Priesthood and Wisdom was not at all
perfectly taught as was fitting, although he received thence many Mysteries and
Arcanums; and Anaxagoras [had received] most or exceeding many. This appears by
the disputations which he made of Sol and the stone thereof, and which he left
after his death, yet he was in many things contrary to the Egyptians; Wherefore
even they would not be called Sophists nor Magi, but imitating Pythagoras in
that thing they assumed the name of Philosophy; but yet they reaped no more
then a few Glances like shadows, from the Magic of the Persians and Egyptians;
But Moses, Abraham, Solomon, Adam, Elias, and the Magi that came from the East
to Christ, were true Magi, and Divine Sophists, and Cabalists; which Art and
Wisdom the Grecians knew very little of, or none at all; and therefore we shall
leave that Philosophical Wisdom of the Greacians as a Speculation widely and
largely distant, and separated from other true arts and sciences.

CHAP. IV.
What Magi the Chaldeans, Persians and Egygtians were.
MAny have attempted both to search out and bring to use the most secret Magic
of those wise men; but yet it has not hitherto been done; Many even in this
our age do exalt Trithemius, others Bacon and Agrippa for Magic and the Cabal,
which [two things] seem not in the least to agree, not knowing why they do so;
Magic indeed is an art and faculty by which the Elementary bodies, and their
fruits, their proprieties, virtues, and obstruse operations are attained unto.
But the Cabal, by a subtle understanding of the Scriptures seems to trace out
the way for men to God, how to act with him, and prophecy from him; for the
Cabal is full of Divine Mysteries, even as the Magic is full of natural
secrets; for it teaches presages and foretellings of or from the nature of
things to come and things present; for its opparation consists in the knowing
of the intrinsecality of all Creatures as well Celestial as Terrestial bodies,
[viz.] what is hidden in them, what (...) ry and Ternary ascend to the denary
[then] is made their regress [or reduction] unto Unity. Therein is concluded
all the occult wisdom of things, the which [wisdom] God has made openly
manifest to men, both by his word, and the Creatures, of his hands, that so
they might have a true knowledge of them, the which shall be declared more at
large in another place.

CHAP. V.
Of the chiefest and most supreme essence of things.
THE Magi by their wisdom affirmed, that all creatures might be brought to an
united substance, which [substance] they affirmed, might by their mundations
and purgations, ascend unto so high a subtilty, divine nature and occult
propriety, so as to work and effect things admirable. For they considered that
by the returning into the earth, and by a supreme Magical Separation, a certain
perfect substance would come forth, the which at length, is by exceeding many
industrious and very prolix preparations exalted and lifted up out of Vegetable
substances into Mineral, and out of Mineral into Metalline, and out of
Mettalline perfect substances into a perpetual and divine Quint-essence
concluding in it self the essence of all Celestial and Terrestial Creatures;
The Arabians and Grecians by the occult Characters and Hieroglyphical
descriptions of the Persians and Egyptians, attained to secret and abstruse
Mysteries, the which being gotten, and in part understood, and partly not, they
ocularly saw (by trying and experiencing) many admirable and strange things.
But because the Supercelestial Operations lay more profoundly hid, then their
capacity could reach unto, they called not this a supercelestial Arcanum
according to the intention and mind of the Magi; but the Arcanum of the
Philosophers, and (according to the advice and judgment of Pythagoras) their
stone. Such now as ever obtained this [stone] did shadow it over with various
Enigmatical figures, and deceptory similitudes, comparisons, and fictitious
sayings, that so the matter thereof might be occult and hidden, very little or
no knowledge whereof can be had [from them.]

CHAP. VI.
Of various Errors as to the matter, its finding out and knowledge.
The Philosophers have prefixed sundry most occult names to this matter of the
stone, grounded on sundry similitudes; The which Arnoldus observing, says in
his Rosary, that the greatest difficulty is to find out the matter of this
stone; for they have called it Vegetable, Mineral, and animal, not according to
the litteral sense, as is well known to such wise men as have tried the divine
secrets and miracles of the same stone. For example sake Raymund Lullies
Lunaria may be produced, which gives flowers of admirable virtues familiar to
the Philosophers themselves. But yet this was not the intention of those
Philosophers, that you should think they meant thereby any projection upon
metals, or that any such preparation should thence be made; but the abstruse
mind of the Philosophers has another intent; In like manner they called their
matter by the name Martagon, to which they applied an occult Alchymical
operation, when as notwithstanding that [name] denotes nothing e^se but a
certain most occult similitude.

Besides, it is no small error that is risen in the Liquors of Vetegables, with
which very many have endeavored to coagulate Mercury, and afterward to
convert it (with fixatory waters) into Luna, supposing that he who by this way
could coagulate it, without the help of metals, should attain to be the
greatest Master. And although that the Liquors of some Vegetables do effect
this, it comes to pass merely from the Resinousness, fat, and earthly Sulphur
with which they abound. This [now] draws the Mercuries humidity and life unto
it self, whereby it mixeth it self with the substance thereof, by coagulation,
but without any profit. For I well know that no thick and external Sulphur in
Vegetables is fit for a perfect projection in Alchymy, which some have to their
great cost experienced. Albeit that some have coagulated Mercury with the white
and milky juice of Tithymal, by reason of the acute and intense heat existing
therein, and have called that Liquor Lac Virginis; but yet this is a false
foundation; The like may be supposed of the juice of Celandine, albeit it
colors as if it were of a Golden endowment. From hence they conceived a vain
fantasy, and at a certain and determinate time they plucked up this Vegetable,
out of which they hunted for a soul or Quintessence, whereby they might make a
coagulating and transmuting tincture; but verily from hence arose nothing butt
a foolish Error.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Errors of those who seek the Stone, from Vegetables, as above.
SOme of the Alchymists have expressed a juice out of Celandine, and boiled it.
to a thickness or consistency, and put it open to the Sun, that so it might be
Coagulated per se into a hard Mass, the which being afterward beaten into a
most small powder of a black or spadicious color, should turn Mercury in
projection into Sol, the which they found to be also vain. Others have admixed
Sal Ammoniack to this powder, others the Celcothar of Vitriol, supposing that
thereby they should arrive to their wished for end; They brought [it] by their
Solutions into a yellow water, that the Sal Ammoniack gave an ingress of the
tincture into the substance of the Mercury; yet nothing was thereby done. Some
there are that instead of the aforesaid things, do take the juices of Arsmart,
Bufonaria, Dracunculus, the leaves of Sallow, Tithymal, Cataputia, Flammula and
such like, and shut them up in Glasses with Mercury, for some days keeping
them in ashes; now thence it comes to pass that the Mercury is turned into
ashes, but rashly and without any fruit; For they were deceived with the vain
rumors of the Vulgar, who boast that he who is able to coagulate Mercury
without metals, has the entire Magistry, as we have before mentioned; Many of
them extracted Salts, Oiles, and Sulphurs out of the Vegetables by art, but all
in vain. For out of snch like Salts, Oiles, and Sulphurs, no coagulation of
Mercury, or perfect projection or Tincture can be made. But whereas the
Philosophers do compare their matter to a certain Golden Tree of seven boughs,
they mean that it [viz. the matter] does conclude the seven metals, in its
sperm, and that therein they lie hidden: on this account they called their
matter Vegetable; as also because as the natural trees do (in their time) bring
forth sundry flowers; so the matter of the stone does discover most fair
colors in the production of its Flowers; Likewise on this acount [the
comparison is suitable] because, there arises a certain matter out of the
Philosophical earth as a company of sprouts and twigs, like to the sponge of
the earth; therefore they say that the fruit of their Tree has its tendency to
the Heaven. Therefore they have disclosed and deciphered the whole knack of the
thing in the Vegetables as to the nature, but not in Vegetables as to the
matter; and also because their stone does contain in it self a soul, body, and
spirit, as the Vegetables do.

CHAP. VIII.
Of those who have sought the Stone in Animals.
THey have also by a certain kind of similitude called this matter Lac
Virginis, and the blessed blood of a Rosy color, the which notwithstanding is
agreeing to [or enjoyed] only by the Prophets and Sons of God. From thence the
Sophisters gathered, that this Philosophical matter was in the blood of Animals
or of man; hereon taking occasion also, because they are nourished by
Vegetables; Others have sought it in hairs, in Salt of Urine in Rebis; Others
in Hen-eggs, and in milk, and in the Calx of Egg-shels, with all which they
thought to have fixed Mercury. Some have extracted a Salt out of stinking piss;
supposing that to have been the matter of the stone. There wants not some
persons also that have judged the little stones fouud in Rebis, to be the
matter; Others have macerated the Membranes of Eggs in a most sharp Lixivium,
wherewith they have also mixed calcined Egg-shells most white like Snow; to
these they have attributed the Arcanum of fixation, for the transmuting of;
Others comparing the white of the Egg to silver, and the yoke to gold, have
chosen it for their matter, [and have therewith] admixed Common Salt, Sal
Armoniack, and burnt Tartar; these they have shut up together in a Glass and
putrified it in a B. M. and that so long, until the white color became as red
as blood. This they have destilled into a most stinking liquor wholly useless
for that work for which it was sought after. Others have putrified the white and
yelk of Eggs, from whence has been generated a Basilick, the which they have
burnt into a most red Powder, and have thought to tinge therewithal; the
author whereof was the Cardinal Gilbert in his Treatise; Many also have
macerated the Galls of Oxen and of other Creatures mixed with common Salt, and
distilled it into a Liquor, with which they having moistened the Cementatory
powders, supposed that by this Magistery they should tinge their metals, which
they call by the name of a part with a part, and thence came just nothing.
Others have attempted to transmute Tutia by the addition of Sanguis Draconis
and other things, [also] Copper and Electrum into Gold; others (according to
the Venetians art (as they call it) take twenty Lysard-like-creatures, or more
or less, and shut them in a pot, and make them even mad with hunger, that so
they may devour one the other, so long till but one of them survives, which
then is fed with the filings of Copper or Electrum, supposing that this Animal
will by the digestion only of his stomach, effect the wished for transmutation;
Last of all they burn this Animal into a Red powder, which they thought must be
Gold, but they were deceived; Others also having burned the fishes called
Tratas, have by melting found sometimes some Gold in them; but there is no other
reason of it but only this, viz. those fishes in Rivers and Brooks do sometimes
meet with small scalings and sparkles of Gold, and eat them; yet it is but
seldom; such Cheaters are to be found chiefly in the Courts of Princes,
[Verily] the matter of the Philosophers is not to be sought after in Animals;
and this I do admonish all; but yet it is known that the Philosophers have called
their stone Animal, because in its [or their] last operations, the virtue of
this most noble fiery mystery causes an obscure Liquor to sweat forth out of
tha^ matter in [their] Vessel, drop by drop* From thence they presaged and
foretold that in the last times there should come^ most pure man upon the
earth, by whom the redemption of the world should be accomplished; and that
this same man should emit or send forth bloody drop^ of a Rosy or red color,
by which mea^ he should redeem the world from sin^ After the like manner, also
the blood o^ their stone (yet, in its own kind) di^ free the Leprous mettalls
from their infirmities and Contagion. On this account therefore they supposed,
that they deservedly said their stone was animal; Concerning this Mystery thus
speaks Mercurius to King Calid, This Mystery is permitted only to the Prophets
of God to know, whence it comes to pass that this stone is called Animal. For
in the blood of this stone does its soul lie hid. It Is likewise composed of
body, spirit, and soul. On the same account they have also called it their
microcosm, because it has the likeness of all the things in the world, and
thence they again called it Animal, as Plato called the great world an Animal.

CHAP. IX.
Of such as have sought after the Stone in Minerals.
HEre we may add the many Ignorant men that suppose the stone to be threefold,
and to be hidden in a threefold stock or kind, viz. Vegetable, Animal, and
Mineral; Hence it is that they have sought for it in Minerals; [Now] this Opinion
is far wide of the Opinion of the Philosophers; For they affirm that their
stone is Uniformly Vegetable, Animal, and Mineral; Now here you are to note,
that Nature has distributed its Mineral sperm into various kinds, [or
subjects] viz. into Sulphurs, Salts, Borax'es, Nitres, Armoniacks, Allums,
Arsenicks, Atramenta or Vitriols, Tutiae's, Trematites, Orpments, Realgars,
Magnesias, Cinnaber, Antimony, Talch, Cachymia, Marcasites, etc. In all these
nature has not as yet attained to our matter, albeit that in some of the said
species it lays it self open in a wonderful aspect, for the transmutation of
imperfect metals that are to be brought to perfection; for verily, a long
experience, and fiery exercise do show many various permutations in the matter
of Minerals; not only from some colors into other Colors, but also out of one
essence into another, and from their imperfection to perfection; And although
that nature has by the means of Minerals prepared, attained some perfection,
and prosecuted it; yet the Philosophers will not, that the matter of the
Philosophic stone should proceed forth out of any of the Minerals, although
they say their stone is Mineral; Hence then the Sophisters taking occasion, do
persecute Mercury himself with various torments; Some with Sublimations,
Coagulations, precipitations, Mercurial waters and Aq. fort. etc. All which
erroneous ways are to be shunned, with the other sophistical preparations of
Minerals; the purgations, and fixations of Spirits and Metals; Wherefore all
the preparations of the stone as of Geber, Albertus Magnus, and the like, are
Sophistical, their Purgations, Cemenations, Sublimations, Distillations,
Rectifications, Circulations, Putrefactions, Conjunctions, Solutions,
Ascentions, Coagulations, Calcinations, and Incerations, are wholly
unprofitable; both in the tripode in the Athanor, in the reverbera^ory furnace,
in the melting furnace, the accidia or slow Henry, the dung, ashes, sand or
such like, and also in the Cucurbit, the Pelican, Retort, Viol, fixatory, etc.
The like is to be thought of the sublimation of Mercury by Mineral spirits, for
the white and the red, as by Vitriol, Saltpeter, Alum, Crocus, etc. Of all
which things, that Sophister Johannes de Rupescissa does prate in his Treatise
of the white and red Philosophic stone; The which [put them] altogether, are
all of them mere lying dreams. You must also shun the particular Sophistry of
Geber, as his sevenfold Sublimations, or Mortifications, and also revisitation
of Mercury, with his preparations by Salt of Rine, or [Salts] made by a
Sepulcher, al which things are false. Some others have endeavored to fix
Mercury by the Sulphurs of Minerals and Metals, but have been highly deceived;
Truly I have seen Mercury (in this art) to have been brought into a Mettalick
body by such like fixations, and resembling and counterfeiting good silver in
all likelihood and respect, but when it has been brought to the Test, then it
has appeared as it is, viz. false.

CHAP. X.
Of those who have sought after the stone, and [also] particulars in Minerals.
SOme Sophisters have tried to squeez out a fix Oil from Mercury seven times
sublimed and so often dissolved; and that by the means of Aq. fort. Strong
waters, whereby they would bring imperfect metals unto perfection; but they
have been constrained to relinquish this vain operation. Some have purged
Vitriol seven times by Calcination, Solution and Coagulation, and with an
addition of two parts of {sal ammoniac}, and by sublimation, that so it might
be resolved into a white water, whereto they have added a third part of Quick,
that it might be Coagulated by that water; then afterward they have so often
sublimed the Mercury from the said Vitriol, and {sal ammoniac}, that it went
into [or became] a stone; This [stone] they affirmed (being conceived of the
Vitriol) to be the red Sulphur of the Philosophers, with which they have (by
Solutions and Coagulations) made progress to [attain] the stone, but in
projection it all has come to nothing. Others have Coagulated Mercury by a
water of Alum, into an hard Mass like to Alum, the which they have
unprofitably fixed with fixatory waters. The Sophisters do propose to
themselves very many ways of fixing Mercury, but in Vain, for in him is
nothing perfect or constant to be had. Hence it is that it is a vanity to add
Minerals unto him by Sophistical processes; for by all of them he is stirred up
to a greater malice and is rendered more lively, and is rather brought to a
greater impurity, then to any perfection: So then the Philosophers matter is
not to be from thence sought for, for that it [viz. ] is an imperfect somewhat,
the which to bring to perfection will be very difficult, yea impossible for any
Sophisters progress; for there is nothing therein that can be stirred up or
compelled into perfection; Some have taken Arsenick often sublimed, and many
times dissolved with the Oil of Tartar, and Coagulated, the which they have
pretended to fix, and by which they would turn Copper into Silver, but yet even
that is nothing else but a mere Sophisticate whitening; for verily Arsenick
cannot at all be fixed, except the workman be an Artist, and does well know its
tinging Spirit, in which verily all the Philosophers have slept vainly
attempting to effect any thing thereof. Whoever therefore is ignorant of this
spirit, cannot have any hope of fixing it, or of giving it that Virtue as may
make it capable of the Virtue of transmutation; Wherefore I make known to all,
that the whitening whereof I spoke but now, is grounded on a false foundation,
and that thereby the Copper is deceitfully whitened but not changed; Now
Sophisters take the Copper thus counterfeited, and mix it with twice its weight
of Lune, and sell it to the Goldsmiths and Mint-men: And at last they
transmute themselves into false Coyners, not only they who sell, but such also
as buy it: Some Sophisters instead of white Arsenik do take red, and with this
they fall upon some false art; because (however it is prepared) it affords
nothing but a whiteness; Some again have gone further, and dealt in common
Sulphur, the which being so yellow, they have boiled in Vinegar, Lixivium, or
most sharp Wines, for a day and a night, until it became white; then after
this, have sublimed it from common Salt, and the Calx of Eggs, and boiled and
sublimed it, and that many times; yet for all this, it has been always
combustible, although white. Now with this they have notwithstanding
endeavored to fix and turn him into Gold, but in vain; yet indeed thence does
come the most excellent and fairest Cinnaber that ever I saw; This they suppose
to fix with the oil of Sulphur by cementation and fixation; it gives somewhat
of show or appearance, but falls out otherwise then desired. Others have
reduced common Sulphur into the form of a Liver, boiling it in Vinegar, with an
admixtion of Linseed Oil, or Oil of Tiles, or Oil Olive; Afterward have poured
it forth into a marble stone, and made the form of a Liver; The which they have
distilled into a Citrine Oil, first with a gentle fire; but they have (to their
loss) tried, that they could not do ought as to the transmutation of Lune into
Sol, as they supposed; and as there is an infinite number of Minerals, so also
is there much variety of their preparation; the which to make any farther
mention of in this place I shall forbear, because they require a peculiar
Treatise: beware also of Sophisticate Oils of Vitriol and Antimony; Likewise of
the Oils of the Metals, imperfect, or perfect, as and: because although the
operation of these be most potent in the nature of things, yet the true process
is known but to a very few, even to this day. You are also to abstain from the
Sophistical preparations of common Mercury, Arsenick, Sulphur and such like;
viz. by sublimation, descention, fixation with Vinegar, Saltpeter, Tartar,
Vitriol, Sal Ammoniack, in that way and manner which the books of Sophisters do
teach; Likewise avoid the Sophisticate Tinctures taken from Marcasites, and
Crocus, and of that Sophistication called by the name of a part with a part,
and of fix Lune, and such like trifles. For although they have some superficial
appearance of truth, (as the fixation of Lune, by little labor and industry)
yet the progress of the preparation thereof is of naught and invalid. Being
therefore moved with compassion toward the good Operators of this art, I am
willing to lay open, the very whole foundation of Philosophy, in 3. particular
Arcanums, viz. in one by Arsenick, in a second by Vitriol; and in the third, I
shall explain it by Antimony. Out of, or from which I will teach the true
projection upon and the imperfect metals.

CHAP. XI.
Of the true and perfect particular Arcanum of Arsenick, for the white Tincture.
SOme have written that Arsenick is compounded of Mercury and Sulphur; others
of earth and water; and most [say tis] of the nature of Sulphur; But whatever
matter it is of, the nature thereof is such, as to transmute Copper into
whiteness; Also it may be brought to that perfection of preparation, that it
may truly and perfectly tinge. But not by that way which evil Sophisters teach,
as are Geber in the sum of perfection, Albertus Magnus, Aristotle the Chemist,
in the book of the perfect Magistery, Rasis, and Polydorus; for those writers,
be they never so many, do either err, or write false things out of envy, and
propose receipts, because they are even ignorant of the truth. Arsenick
contains in it self three natural spirits, the first [is] Volatile, adustible,
Corrosive and penetrating all metals. This spirit whitens Venus, and after
some days makes it spongious; The which artifice pertains only to those who
exercise the Caustic Art. The second spirit is Chrystalline and sweet; The
third is a tinging spirit, separated from the others aforesaid. The true
Philosophers have searched after [or found] these three natural proprieties in
Arsenick for the perfect projection of the Wise men; But the Barbers who
exercise Chyrurgery, do desire that sweet and Chrystalline nature separated
from the Tinging spirit, for to use in the cure of wounds, and for Bubo's,
Carbuncles, Anthrax and such other filthy Ulcers, not cureable but by a mild
artifice or remedy. But [as for] that Tinging spirit, except the pure thereof
be separated from the impure, the fix from the Volatile; and the secret
tincture from the combustible, [it] will not at all answer your desire in
projection upon Mercury, Venus, or any other imperfect metal. All the
Philosophers have hidden this Arcanum, as a most excellent Mystery; This
tinging spirit, separated from the other two, as above, thou shall conjoyn to
the spirit of Lune, and digest them together for the space of thirty two days,
or until they have put on a new body; After that (at the fortieth natural day)
it shall be kindled into inflammation by the heat of the. the spirit appears in
a bright whiteness, and is endued with a perfect Tingeing Arcanum: Then it is at
length fit for projection, viz. One part thereof upon sixteen parts of an
imperfect body, according to the acuity or sharpness of the preparation; From
thence [then] appears shining Lune [or Silver] and as excellent as what comes
out of the bowels of the earth.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Arcanum of Vitriol, and the Red Tincture to be thence extracted.
VItriol is a very Noble Mineral, amongst the rest, [was] always of very much
admiration with the Philosophers, because the most high God has adorned it
with wonderful endowments. They have veiled over its Arcanum with
aenigmaticall figures, as thus, viz. Thou shall vifit the inward parts of the
earth, and shall find by rectification the occult stone, a true medicine; By
the earth they understood the Vitriol it self; and by the Inward part of the
Earth, its sweetness and redness; because in the occult part of the Vitriol, a
subtle, noble, and most fragrant juice and pure oil lies hid. The manner of
drawing it forth is not at all to be attempted by Calcination or distillation;
for it must not at all be deprived of its greeness; for as soon as ever it is
robbed thereof, the Arcanum of it also is gone, and so necessarily it must want
its virtues. Verily it is to observed here in this place, that not only the
Minerals, but also the Vegetables themselves and such like, that outwardly show
a viridity or greeness, contain an Oil within them as red as blood, the which
is their Arcanum. Thence it is evident that their ridiculous distillations of the
Apothecaries, are vain and foolish and of no moment, because they do not at all
know how to bring forth the bloodlike redness of the Vegetables. Nature it self
being wise, turns the waters of all Vegetables into a Citrine Color, and from
thence (afterward) into a most red Oil like blood; Now the cause of its coming
to pass so slowly on, is the too much headlongness of the ignorant distilling
operators, whereby the Viridity is absumed; They have not learned to
corroborate Nature in its virtues, whereby the noble virour [or greeness] ought
to be rectified into a redness, per se: For example sake, White wine digests it
self into a Citrine color; and in success of time the Green color of the
Grapes themselves is turnned per se into a red, lying hid under the Sky Color.
The greeness therefore of the Vegetables and Minerals being lost by the
sluggishness of the Operators, the essence of them, and the spirit of the Oil,
and most noble balsome of Arcana's is also lost.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Process of Vitriol for [or to] the red Tincture.
VItriol contains in it self many dirty and viscous [or slimy] imperfections;
therefore its greeness must be often extracted with water, and rectified until
it has put off all the Impurities of the earth; All which rectifications being
finished, there must be much care taken that the matter lie not open to the
Sun; because it will turn the greeness thereof into a paleness, and together
therewith swallow up the Arcanum: Let it be kept (covered over) in a stove,
that no defilement come thereto; [then] afterward let it be digested in a
glass shut for the space of some months, or so long until there appears
various colors, and the highest redness. But yet you must not think that (by
that process) the redness is sufficiently fixed, but must be farther purged
from the Interior accidental defilements of the earth, and that on this wise.
It Is to be rectified with Acetum until the earthly defilment be wholly removed,
and the feces separated; This now is the true and best rectification of its
Tincture, of which the blessed Oil is to be extracted; From it [then] being
diligently shut in a glass and an Alembick speedily set thereon, and the joints
done with bitumen [or luted] that the spirits exhale not, in the distillation
of its Oil, the spirit is to be drawn forth with a sweet and gentle fire. This
Oil is much more delectable and sweet then any dispensatory Aromatical balsome
whatsoever, and is void of all other acrediny or sharpness; Now in the bottom
of the Cucurbite there will reside a certain most white earth, bright and
shining like Snow, the which keep charily from all dust and filth. That same
earth is wholly separated from its redness; From thence [now] follows the
greatest Arcanum, viz. a Super-celestial marriage of the soul most highly
purified and washed by the blood of the Lamb, with its own bright, lustrous,
and purified body; This is the true super-celestial matrimony whereby the life
is prolonged even to [its] last appointed time after this manner; therefore the
soul and spirit of Vitriol (which are its blood) are coupled with their own
purified body that they may be eternally inseparable; Take therefore this our
foliated earth in a glass phial; pour thereto its Oil by little and little; the
body will in a moment receive and embrace its soul, for as much as the body is
most earnestly affected with the desire after its soul, and the soul does most
perfectly delight in the Embracements of the body; This conjunction therefore
of them being put into a furnace of secrets, continue it there for forty
days, which being over, thou shall have a most absolute oil of a wonderful
perfection; wherewith Mercury, and all the other imperfect metals are turned
into Gold. Now we will speak a word or two of the multiplication thereof. [viz.]
Take corporal Mercury, the proportion of two parts, the which wet over with
three parts of the like weight of the said Oil, and let them remain together
for forty days. By this proportion of weight, and by this order, the
multiplication may be made to Infinity.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Secrets and Arcana's of Antimony as to the red Tincture, for
transmutation.
ANtimony is a true Bathe for Gold; But the Philosophers have called it their
Examinator and Stilanx, or

The Poets say that in that bath Vulcan washed Phoebus, and purged him from all
filth and imperfection; It Is born of a most pure and most Noble Mercury and
Sulphur, under a Vitrioline stock or kind, in a mettalline form and splendor;
Some of the Philosophers have called it the white lead of the wise men, or
simply Lead. Take therefore Antimony, and that the very best, as much as thou will; this being dissolved into its own Aq. fort. let be cast out into Cold
water, adding a very little Crocus: that it may fall into a sediment at the
bottom of the Vessel; for otherwise it will not put off its feces; Now then
after it is thus dissolved, it will acquire a most high fairness; Put it into a
Glass fenced all about with a most compact Lute, or into a stone Bocia, or
bolt-head, and let be admixed thereto of calcined Tutia, sublimed to the
perfect degree of the fire, and diligently beware of Liquefaction, because it
breaks the glasses by the overmuch heat; from one pound of this Antimony is a
perfect sublimation to be had in the space of two days. This sublimate being
put in a phial that a third part may touch the water, and the Vessel Luted,
that the spirits fly not away, let it be hanged over a Tripode of secrets, and
let the work be urged at first with a gentle fire, like to the heat of the Sun
in the midst of Summer; then at length on the tenth day let it be a little
augmented. For by too much heat the glasses break, and sometimes also, the
furnace leaps a pieces. Whiles the Vapor ascends, various colors appear. Let
the fire be moderated and governed so long, until the matter be seen red;
Afterward let it be dissolved in most sharp Vinegar, and cast away the feces;
Let the Vinegar be abstracted and let [it] be again dissolved in common
distilled water, which must be again abstracted, and the sediment be distilled
with a most vehement fire, in a glass most accurately shut; [then] the whole
body of the Antimony will ascend into a most red Oil, resembling the color of
a Ruby, and will flow down drop by drop into the receiver, of a most fragrant
Odor, and most sweet Savor. This is the highest Arcanum of the Philosophers
in Antimony; the which most [of them] make [or place] amongst the Arcana's of
Oils. Then lastly, let the Oil of Sol be made after this manner; Take of the
purest Sol, as much as you will, the which you must dissolve in rectified
spirit of Wine; Let the spirit be sometimes abstracted therefrom, and be again
so often dissolved; Let the last Solution be kept with the spirit of wine, and
circulated for a month; Afterward let the the Volatile gold be distilled, and
the spirit of Wine by an Alembick three or four times, that it may fall down
into the Receiver, and be brought into its highest essence: To half an ounce of
that dissolved gold, let one Ounce of the oil of Antimony be added. This Oil
does presently embrace the other, in the heat of a B. So that it does not
easily let it go from it self, although the spirit of Wine be abstracted; By
this way shall thou have the highest mystery of Nature, and an Arcanum which
cant be equalled by any thing in the nature of things. These two Oils thus
united after the manner thus spoken of, are to be shut up in a Phial, and
hanged up in a Tripode for a Philosophical month and to be cherished with a
most gentle fire; Although if the fire be tempered after a due proportion, this
work will be finished in one and thirty days, and brought unto perfection,
whereby Mercury and all other Imperfect metals do acquire the perfection of
Gold.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Projection to be made by the Ministry and Arcanum of Antitimony.
THere can be no weight assigned in this work of projection although the
Tincture it self may be drawn from some subject by [or in] a certain and sure
proportion, and fit instruments; for that medicine does tinge sometimes thirty
or forty, sometimes sixty, eighty and an hundred parts of imperfect metal; so
that the chiefest knack or art in this business is about the mundation or
cleaning of the medicine, and in the industry of the operator; also according
to the greater [or lesser] cleaness and purity of the Imperfect body used
hereabouts. For example, One Venus is purer then another: from whence it comes
to pass that a determinate weight in projection cannot be had. This only is
worth the noting, that if it chances that the Operator has taken too much
tincture, he may correct this error by the addition of [more] imperfect metal.
But if there be too much of the subject whereby the virtues of the Tincture are
rendered too weak, this fault may be remedied easily by the Cineritium or Test,
or by Cementations, or by ablutions with Crude Antimony; as to this part [of
work] there is nothing that may hinder the Operator; only he is to set that
before himself, which is omitted by all the Philosophers, and of purpose
concealed by some; viz. in projections, the revivification of imperfect bodies
is necessary, that is, the Animation (or as I may so call it) the
spiritualization [of them] concerning which some have said, that their metals
ate not the vulgar, because they live and have a soul.

The Animation is thus done.
TAke Venus, reduce it into thin Plates, as much as you will, ten, twenty, or
forty pound; let them be incrustrated or smeared over with a pulse made only of
Arsenick and calcined Tartar, and let them be calcined in their Vessel for the
space of four and twenty hours; then at length let the Venus be beaten into
powder, be washed and cleansed exceeding well. Let the Calcination be repeated,
[together] with the ablutions three or four times; By this way it becomes
purged and cleansed from its gross viridity and its unclean Sulphur; Verily yon
must beware of the Calcinations that are made with common Sulphur; for it does
wholly deprave all the good is in a metal, and renders that which is evil
worse. [Now] to ten Marks -- of that putged Venus let be added one of pure
Lune; But that by the projection of the medicine the work may be the sooner
accelerated and hastened, and that it may the more easily penetrate the
imperfect body, and expel all such parts as are contrary to the natute of
Lune, that very thing may be easily done by the medium of a perfect ferment;
For the work is defiled by an unclean Sulphur, so that there will be [as twere]
a cloud stretched over the superficies of that which is transmuted, or the
metal will be mixed with some of the Offals or Scoria's of the Sulphur, and be
cast away with them. But verily, if you would project, of the red stone, for
the red transmutation, it must first fall [or be projected] upon Gold, and
afterward upon Lune, or upon any other purged metal, as we have declared
above; [then,] from thence does come most perfect Gold.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Universal matter of the stone of the Philosophers.
AFter the mortification of Vegetables [they] by the concurrence of two
Minerals, as Sulphur and Salt, are transmuted into a Mineral nature, so that at
length they become perfect minerals; for in the Mineral holes and dens and wide
fields of the earth, are found Vegetables which in long success of time, and by
the continued heat of Sulphur, do pu^ off the Vegetable nature, and put on a
Mineral; And that does chiefly happen, where the appropriate nutriment is taken
away from these Vegetables, whereby they are afterward constrained to take
their nourishment from the Sulphurs and Salts of the earth, so long, until
that which was before a Vegetable, do pass into a perfect Mineral; And thus out
of this Mineral condition a certain perfect Mettallick essence does sometimes
arise, and that by the progress of one degree into another: But to return to
the stone of the Philosophers, the matter whereof (as some have mentioned) is a
most difficult matter of all others to be found out, and abstruse for the
understanding; Now the way and the most certain rule of the finding out of this
as well as of all other things, what they contain, or are able to do, is a most
diligent examination of their Root and Sperm, whereby knowledge is attained;
for the accomplishment of which, the consideration of principles is very
necessary; as also by what way, and medium nature does at first go from
imperfection to the end of perfection; For the consideration whereof, it is
chiefly requisite, most certainly to know, that all things created by nature do
consist of three principles, viz. of natural Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt, mixed
into one, [so] that in some things they are Volatile, in other things fixed: As
often as a corporal Salt is thoroughly mixed with a spiritual Mercury and
Animated Sulphur into one body, then does nature begin to work in subterranean
places, (which serves for its vessels,) by a separating fire, by which the
gross and impure Sulphur is separated from the pure, and the Earth from the
Salt, and the cloudiness from the Mercury, those purer parts being reserved)
the which parts nature does again decoct together into a pure Geogamick --
body. The which Operation is accounted [of] by the Magi, as a Mixtion and
conjunction by the Union of the three, viz. body, soul, and spirit. This Union
being completed, from thence does result a pure Mercury, the which if it flows
through the subterrean passages and Veins thereof, and mess with a Caheick --
Sulphur, the Mercury is Coagulated by this [Sulphur] according to the condition
of the Sulphur. But notwithstanding, it is as yet volatile, and scarce decocted
into a metal for the space of an hundred years. Thence arose this so much
common an opinion, that Mercury and Sulphur are the matter of metals, the
which is also evident by the Relation of the Miners. Yet common Mercury and
common Sulphur are not the matter of metals, but the Mercury and Sulphur of
the Philosophers are incorporated and innate in perfect metals, and in the
forms of them, that they never fly from the fire, nor are depraved by the force
of the corruption of the Elements. Verily by the dissolution of that same
natural mixtion our Mercury is tamed or subjected, as all the Philosophers
speak; Under [or from] this form of words, comes Mercury to be extracted out of
perfect bodies, and [out of] the virtues [and puissance] of the earthly
planets. The which Hermes affirms in these words, The and (says he) are the
roots of this art. The Son of Hamuel says that the stone of the Philosophers
is a Coagulated water, viz. in Sol and Lune; from whence it is evidently clear,
that the matter of the stone is nothing else but and: this is also hereby
confirmed, in that every like thing generates and brings forth its like; And we
know that there are no more but two stones, white and red; there are alfo two
matters of the stone, Sol and Lune coupled together in a proper Matrimony, both
natural and artificial; And as we see, that either man or woman cannot generate
without the seed of both; in like manner, our Man and his Woman cannot
conceive, or frame onght for generation without both their Seeds and Spermes;
Thence have the Philosophers gathered, that a third thing is necessary, viz.
the Animated seed of both, of man and woman, without the which they have judged
all their whole work to be vain and foolish: Now such a Sperm is [their]
Mercury the which by a natural conjunction of both bodies of and, receives
their nature into it self in Union; and then at length and not before is the
work fitted for congress, ingress and Generation by the manly and feminine
virtue and power. On this account the Philosophers took occasion to say, that
Mercury is composed of body, soul, and spirit, and that it has assumed the
nature and property of all the Elements -- Therefore from a most powerful
ingenuity and discretion or understanding they have affirmed their stone to be
animal, the which also they have called their Adam, who carries his inv^sible
Eve hidden in his own body, from that moment of time wherein they were united
by the power of the most high God, the framer of all the creatures; for which
cause it may deservedly be said, that the Mercury of the Philosophers is
nothing else but their most abstruse compounded Mercury, and not that common:
Therefore have they discretly told the wise, that there is in Mercury
whatsoever the wise men seek. Almadir the Philosopher says, we do extract our
Mercury out of one perfect body, and two perfect natural conditions
incorporated together; the which [] indeed does thrust forth its perfection
outwardly, whereby it is able to resist the fire, and that its intrinsecal
imperfection may be defended by the extrinsecal perfections; By this place of
the most witty Philosopher, is the Adamical matter understood, the Limbus of
the Microcosm, the homogeneal, Only matter of all the Philosophers, whose
sayings also (which we have before mentioned) are merely golden, and to be had
in most high esteem, because they contain nothing superfluous, or invalid;
Briefly therefore the matter of the Philosophers stone is nothing else but a
fiery and perfect Mercury, extracted by -- Nature and Art, that is the
artificially prepared and true Hermaphrodite Adam, and Microcosm, That most
wise Mercurius the wisest of the Philosophers affirming the same, has called
the stone an Orphan: Therefore our Mercury is that very same that contains in
it self the perfections, forces and virtues of the Sun, and which runs through
the Streets and houses of all the Planets, and in its regeneration has
acquired or gotten the virtue of things above and beneath; to the marriage also
of which [things viz. above and below] it is compared, as is evident from the
whiteness and redness wound or heaped up together therein.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Preparation of the matter of the Philosophers stone.
THis is that which nature does most chiefly require, viz. that its own
Philosophic man be brought into a Mercurial substance, that it may spring
forth into the Philosophic stone. Moreover you are to note, that those common
preparations of Geber, Albertus Magnus, Th. Aquinas, Rupescisca, Polidorus, and
such like, are nothing else but some particular Solutions, Sublimations and
Calcinations, not at all pertaining to our Universal [work] which [work] does
want only the most secret fire of the Philosophers; Therefore the fire and
Azoth may suffice thee; [And whereas] the Philosophers do make mention of some
preparations, as of putrefaction, destillation, sublimation, calcination,
coagulation, dealbation, rubification, ceration, fixation, etc. you are to
understand, that in their Universal [work] Nature it self does accomplish all
the operations in the said matter, and not the workman, [and that] only in a
Philosophical Vessel, and with a such like fire, not a common fire. The white
and the red do proceed out of one root, without any medium. It Is dissolved by it
self, coupled by it self, albifyes, and rubifyes; is made saffrony and black by
it self, marries itself, and conceives in it self: It Is therefore to be
decocted, to be baked, to be fused, it ascends, and descends. All which
Operations, are indeed [but] one Operation made by the fire alone; But yet some
of the Philosophers have by a most high-graduated essence of Wine, dissolved
the body of Sol, have made it Volatile, so as to ascend by an Alembick,
subposing that this is the Volatile, true Philosophic matter, whereas it is
not; And although it be no contemptible Arcanum, to bring this perfect
mettalline body into a Volatile and spiritual Substance, yet notwithstanding
they err in the Separation of the Elements; the which process of [those] Monks,
viz. Lully, Richard the Englishman, Rupescisea, and others, is erroneous; By
which [process] they supposed to separate gold by this way into a subtle,
spiritual, and elementary power, each one a part; [and] afterward by
circulation and rectification to couple them again into one, but in vain; for
verily, although one Element may after a sort be separated from another, yet
nevertheless every element, after this manner separated, may again be sepatated
into another element, the which parts cannot at all (afterward) either, by
pellicanick circulation or destillation, return into one again, but they always
remain a Certain Volatile matter, and Aurum Potabile as they call it; The cause
why they could never arrive to their intention, is this; because nature is not
in the least willing to be thus distracted or separated, by humane
disjunctions, as by terrene [things] glasses and instruments. She her self
alone, knows her own operations, and the weights of the Elements, the
separations, rectifications and copulations of which she accomplisheth, without
the help of any Operator or Manual artifice; Only the matter is to be contained
in the secret fire, and in its occult Vessel; The Separation therefore of the
Elements is impossible [to be done] by man; which separation should it have
some appearance, yet notwithstanding is not true, whatsoever is spoken thereof
by Raimund Lully, and his English golden noble Work, which he is falsely
supposed to have framed. For Nature it self has in her self her proper
Separater (which does again conjoyn what it separates) without the help of man,
and does best know all [her Trade] and the proportion of every element, and not
man; whatever such erroneous Scriblers do (in their frivolous and false
receipts) boast of this their volatile Gold. This [then] is the opinion [or
mind] of the Philosophers, that when they have put their matter into the more
secret fire, it be all about cherished with its [own] moderate Philosophical
heat, that [so] beginning to pass through corruption it may grow black: This
operation they call putrefaction, and the blackness they name the head of the
Crow: They call the ascension and descension thereof distillation, ascension
and descension; they call the exsiccation, coagulation; and the dealbation,
calcination: And because it is fluid and soft in the heat, they have made
mention of Ceration; when it has ceased to ascend and remain liquid in the
bottom, then they say fixation is present.

After this manner therefore, the Appellations and terms of the Philosophical
operations are to be understood, and no otherwise.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Instruments and Philosophical Vessel.
THE Putatitious Philosophers have rashly understood [and imagined] the Occult
and Secret Philosophical Vessel, and Aristotle the Alchymist (not that Grecian
Academical Philosopher) has [conceited it] worser, in that he says the matter
is to be decocted in a threefold Vessel; but he has worst of all [understood
it] that says, viz. that the matter in its first separation, and first degree,
requires a Mettalline Vessel; in the second degree of Coagulation and
dealbation of its [own] earth, a glass Vessel; and in the third degree, for
fixation, an earthen Vessel. Nevertheless the Philosophers do understand by
this [Vessel] one Vessel only in all operations, even to the perfection of the
Red Stone; seeing therefore, that our matter is our root for the white and the
red; it is necessary that our Vessel ought to be on this wise, that the matter
therein may be governed by the Celestial Bodies; for the invisible Celestial
Influences and impressions of the Stars are exceeding necessary to the Work;
otherwise 'twill be impossible for the invincible Oriental, Persian, Chaldean
and Egyptian Stone to be accomplished; by which [Stone] Anaxagoras knew the
virtues of the whole Firmament, and foretold of the great Stone that should
descend [down] upon the earth out of Heaven, the which also happened after his
death. Verily our Vessel is most chiefly known to the Cabalists, because it
ought to be framed according to a truly Geometrical proportion and measure, and
of [or by] a Certain [and assured] Quadrature of a Circle: or thus, that thee
Spirit and soul of our matter, may in this Vessel, elevate with themselves
(answerable to the altitude of the heaven) the [things] separated from their
own body. If the Vessel be narrower or wider, higher or lower then is fit, and
then the ruling and operating Spirit and Soul desires the heat of our
Philosophical Secret Fire (which is indeed most acute) would stir up the matter
too violently, and urge it to overmuch operation, that the Vessel would leap
into a thousand pieces, to the hazard and danger of the body and life of the
Operator: whereas contrariwise, if it be more wide or capacious then for the
heat to operate upon the matter according to proportion, the work will also be
frustrate and vain. And therefore our Philosophical Vessel is to be framed with
the greatest diligence: But as for the matter of this our Vessel, they alone do
understand it, that in the first Solution of our fixed and perfect matter, have
adduced or brought this [matter] into its first Essence; and so much for this.
The Operator must likewise most accurately note what it is, that the matter (in
the first Solution) lets fall, and casts out from it self: The manner of
describing the form of the Vessel is difficult; it must be such as nature it
self requires [tis] to be sought for and searched after, out of one and the
other, that [so] it may (from the altitude of the Philosophic Heaven, elevated
from the Philosophic Earth) be able to operate upon the fruit of its own
earthly body. Verily it ought to have this Form, that a separation and
purification of the Elements (when the Fire drives the One from the other) may
be made, and that each [Element] may possess its own place in which it sticks;
and the Sun and the other Planets may exercise their operations round about the
Elemental Earth, and the course of them may not be hindered in their circuit, or
be stirred up with too swift a motion: Now according to all these things here
spoken of, it must have a just proportion of Roundness and Height: But the
Instruments for the first mundification of Mineral Bodies, are melting Vessels,
Bellows, Tongs, Capels, Cupels, Tests, Cementatory Vessels, Cineritiums,
Cucurbits, Bocia's for Aq. fort. and Aq. regia, and also some things as are
necessary for projection in the last Work.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the secret Fire of the Philosophers.
THis is the renowned Judgment and Opinion of the Philosophers, viz. the Fire
and Azoth may suffice; for the fire alone is the whole work, and the Entire
art: Moreover, as many as do build up their fire with coals, do err, containing
the Vessel in that heat, some have in vain attempted with the heat of
horse-dung; they have with the fire of Coals without a medium sublimed the
matter, but not dissolved it. Others have caused an heat with their Lamps,
affirming that to be the secret fire of the Philosophers, for the making of
their Stone; some have placed it in a Ball: [but] first in an heap of Ants
Eggs; others in Juniper Ashes; some have sought the fire in Calxvine, in
Tartar, Vitriol, Nitre, etc. Others in Aq. ardens, as Thomas Aquinas falsely
speaking of this fire, says, that God and the Angels cannot want this fire,
but do use it daily: What a blasphemy is this? Is it not a most manifest Lie,
that God cannot be without the Elemental Fire of Aq. ardens? All those heats
with those mediums spoken of, that are excited by the fire, are altogether
unprofitable for our work: Take heed thou be not seduced by Arnoldus de
villa nova, who wrote of this fire of Coals; for verily he will deceive thee
herein.

Almadir says, that the invisible rays alone of our fire are sufficient;
another brings in [as an] example, that the Celestial heat does by its
reflections, make for the Coagulation and perfection of Mercury, as also for
the Mettallick generation, by its continued motion; again the same [saith] make
a vaporous Fire, digesting and cocting [or ripening] continual, yet not flying
or boiling, shut close, compassed about with air, not burning, but altering and
penetrating. Now I have truly told you all the manner of the fire and of the
heat to be stirred up, if thou art a true Philosopher, thou will well
understand; thus much he. Salmanazar says, Our fire is a corrosive fire, which
spreds [as 'twere] ayr-like a cloud over our Vessel, in which cloud the rays of
this fire are hidden. [Now] if this dew [of the] Chaos and moisture of the
cloud fail, an error is committed. Again, Almadir says, unless the fire does
heat our Sun with its moisture, by the dung of the mountain, in or with a
temperate ascending, we shall not be partakers either of the white or the red
Stone. All these things do openly demonstrate unto us, the Occult Fire of the
Wise men. Briefly, this is the matter of our Fire, viz. that it be kindled by
the quiet Spirit of the sensible Fire, the which drives upwards (even as the
heated Chaos) directly opposite [or under] and above our Philosophic matter,
which heat glowing above, or below our Vessel, does after the manner of a
perfect generation, constantly urge or press onwards temperatly and without
intermission: Thus I.

CHAP. XX.
Of the ferment and Weights of the Philosophers.
THE Philosophers have very much labored in the Art of Ferments and
Fermentations, the which [art] seems to be the chiefest of [all] others;
concerning which also, some have made a Vow to GOD and to the Philosophers,
that they will never manifest the Arcanum of that thing either by similitudes
or parables. Whereas notwithstanding, Hermes the Father of all the Philosophers
in the Book of his 7. Treatises does most clearly lay open the Ferments,
saying, that it consists of nothing else but its own paste, and more largely
[saith] that the Ferment whitens the Confection, and hinders adustion; and does
wholly keep back and retard the Flux of the Tincture, does comfort bodies, and
increase union. Also he says, that this is the Key, and the end of the Work;
concluding that the Ferment is nothing else but the paste, as [the Ferment] of
Sol is nothing else but Sol, and of it is nothing else but Lune; others affirm
that the Ferment is the Soul, the which if it be not rightly prepared according
to the Magistery, it will effect nothing. Some Zealots, or zealous men of this
Art do seek the Art in common Sulphur, Arsenick, Tutia, Orpment, Vitriol, etc.
but in vain, because the substance which is sought after is the same with that
from which it must be drawn forth: It Is therefore to be noted, that the
Fermentations thereof [and of that kind] do not succeed as these Zealots would
have it, but (as appears by the thing spoken of above) only in natural
successes [or progress.] But now at last to come to the weight, it is to be
observed in a twofold manner; the first is natural, but the other is
artificial: The natural obtains its effect in the earth, by nature and
concordancy. Of the which Arnoldus speaks: If there be more of less earth
added, then nature endures or can bear, then the soul is choked, and no fruit
perceived thence-from, nor fixation: The same thing is to be considered of as
to the water, viz. If more or less thereof be taken, then 'twill bring as
inconvenient a loss; for the superfluity thereof will render the matter beyond
measure moist, and the defect thereof will render it dryer and harder then is
just. If there be too much air, then is there an impress of too much tincture;
if too little, then the body becomes pallid: Likewise if the fire be too
vehement, the matter is burnt up; if too remiss it has not the power of drying
up, nor of dissolving, nor of heating the other Elements; in these things does
the Elemental weight consist. But the Artificial [weight] is most occult; for
it is shut up in the Magical Art of Ponderation [or weights:] Now the
Philosophers say, that between the Spirit, Soul, and Body, the weight consists
of Sulphur, as the Guider of the work; for the soul does greatly desire
Sulphur, and does necessarily observe [it] by reason of [or in relation unto]
the weight. Understand it thus; our matter is united to a red fixed Sulphur, to
which [Sulphur] a third part of the Regiment or Governance is committed, even
unto the ultimate degree, that it may perfect [even] to infinity the operation
of the stone, and may therewith persist or abide, together with its fire, and
may consist of a weight equal with the matter it self, in all and through all,
without the variation of any degree of permutation or change. Therefore after
that the matter is fitted, and mixed in its proportionable weight, it is to be
excellently well shut with its Seal, in the Philosophers Vessel, and be
committed to the secret Fire, in the which the Philosophical Sun will arise,
and spring up, and will enlighten all things which expect its Light, and do
with exceeding much hope desire it. Thus in these few words we will conclude
the Arcanum of the Stone, which is not maimed or lame in any one point, nor
defective; for the which we give God immortal praises and thanks: Now we will
unlock to you our Treasure, which all the riches of the whole world is not able
to buy.

The Treasure of Treasures, by Theophrastus Paracelsus.
NAture has produced in the bowels of the earth one kind of Mineral, the which
is wonderful, and twofold; and this is to be found in sundry places of Europe.
The best that ever came to my hand, and that was proved so by experience, of
[or according to] the figure of the greater world, is in the East, of the
Astrum of the Sphere of the Sun; the other does consist in the Meridional [or
Southern] Astrum; in its first budding forth, it is the Viscus [or gum] of the
earth, produced [or brought forth] by its [own] Astrum into light; and is (in
its first Coagulation) adorned with a redness; in it are included all the
flowers and colors of the Minerals, of the which much has been spoken by the
Philosophers: And as to what appertains to the cold and moist nature, it has
been (by a kind of comparison) adapted [or suited] to water: But verily the
perfect experimental knowledge thereof, has hitherto lain hidden from very
many, yea almost all the Philosophers that have (before my time) hitherto shot
their Arrows toward the Mark, and having used vain Attempts have most widely
declined [and erred] from the true and complete scope. They have thought that
Mercury and Sulphur are the mother and father of all Metals; but verily they
have not remembered [or minded] the third: yea (which is more) there is none of
these that could yet take [or get] that Net pertaining to [this] Fishing into
[their] hands, because [this net] is agreeable to [or resembling] a true Water,
the Mother of Metals, the which [water] being separated by a Spagyrical
Artifice, lays open its Fishes, but such Fishes, as neither the Galenical
Fishing, nor Avicens broken and torn net can ever be able to catch or lay hold
of. Should I but demonstrate to our Modern Physicians, even the bare name only
of the Conjunction, Solution, and Coagulation, which Nature it self in the
beginning of the World has laid open and demonstrated in this its [own]
created [Subject] a year would hardly suffice; no, nor all the Paper that can
be got, would be enough to instruct or inform them: Verily, I say, that in this
Mineral, [there are three substances to be had, as Mercury, Sulpur and a
Mineral Water, of which [three] it is composed; and being separated
Spagyrically is dissolved in its Own proper [and] not yet ripe Liquor, and is
hidden as a Pear in its proper Tree. The hider of the Pear is the Tree, upon
the which as the Stars and Nature do agree [and work] together, it gives forth
green bows, and afterward in March yields Buds, and manifests Flowers, and
so proceeds on even to the production of the fruit of the Pear; then at Autumn
the fruits depart [or are ripe.] Not unlike hereto, is is to be considered of,
as to the Minerals in the bowels of the earth, which are thrust or brought
forth by the Astrum's or Stars; the which thing those Alchymists must chiefly
consider of, that breathe or pant after the Treasure of Nature: The manner of
which Artifice, as to its beginning, middle and end, I shall lay open in the
following Treatise, and also its Water, Sulphur and Balsom. By the Solution of
which three, and their Conjunction again into One, is the whole business of the
thing finished after this manner. Take the Mineral of Cinnatre, the which wash
and purge with a Celestial Water for three hours; then strain it and dissolve
it in Aq. Regis, made of Vitriol, Saltpeter and common Salt; Let it be
abstracted by an Alembick, be again poured on, and care taken by Cohovation,
that the pure be separated from the impure, as follows beneath. Let it
putrify in Horse-dung for a month, then afterward let the Elements be
separated; and when they discover their Signs, let them be distilled by an
Alembick in a fire of the first degree, whereby the water and the air do ascend
first, and then the fire, and that [is done] by the other degrees [of the Fire]
the which may be discerned by an expert Operatour: In the bottom of the Vessel
remains the earth, in the which lies hid [even] all that which many have sought
for, and but most few have found. This earth thou must shut up in a
Reverberatory, and Aritificially Calcine it, proceeding from the first to the
fifth degree, and in each degree the space of five hours; by this 'twill come
to pass that thou will have a Volatile Salt, exceeding subtle like an Alcool,
and the Stable and constant Astrum of the Fire and the Earth, the which thou
shall separate by the Elements of the water and the air which thou keptst
before. Then put it in digestion of a B. M. for eight hours, and thou shall see
that which is hitherto unknown unto, and not at all considered by many
Alchymists. Separate [them or it] according to thy experience artificially, and
after a Spagyrical manner, the earth it self will be rendered white in a
wonderful manner, out of which the Tincture has been extracted. Conjoyn the
Element of the Fire with the Alcolizated Salt of the earth by digestion, and a
Pellicanick Artifice, [then] that substance will yet again put [down] another
Sediment, the which thou shall separate from the pure: Then at length take the
Pellicanated Lion which at the beginning was sound out and obtained: [And] when
thou see the Tincture thereof, and the Element of the Fire above [or at top
of] the water, air, and earth, separate it by a Tritory or Separating-glass,
and strain the Sun thereof by inclination; for it is Aurum potabile. Moisten it
over with the sweet Alcoole of Wine, and let it be again abstracted until the
Acuity and sharpness of the Aq. Reg. be no more perceived: Separate this Oil of
Sol, and put it in a Retort, closed with an Hermetical Seal for its elevation,
that is, its exaltation, that it may be doubled in its degree: Take this Glass
[thus] shut, and put it in a cold place, it will not be there dissolved but
will be Coagulated; this is to be repeated three times, by Solution and
Coagulation. By this Artifice the Tincture of the Sun is perfected in its
degree. Then at length take twice as much of this Verus (most highly prepared
after a Spagyrical manner) to which pour the elements of the Water and Air
which thou keptst; dissolve and putrify it for a month as before: And when
it is come to its perfection, thou shall see the sign of the Elements, separate
the one from the other (for there will be an ocular appearance) viz. of the red
secret from the white; This then thou shall separate from the white, for it is
the red Tincture, so potent, that it can tinge all white bodies into redness,
or red [bodies] into whiteness, which is very wonderful; urge this Tincture by
a Retort, thou shall see a blackness to arise up, the which urge again by a
Retort, and that so often until it be white; Prosecute this thy work, neither
despair in thy mind, because of the very much labor. Rectify it so often
until you see the green Lion true and clear, ponderous and heavy, which tingeth
into perfect Gold: Do not desist from the work which we have now mentioned,
until thou have the signs [or marks] and see the Lion and Treasure, not to be
bought with [at] the the Treasure of the Tenth Lion [or Leo the Tenth] the Pope
of Rome. It Is well for him that has found it, and knows how to apply it for
Tincture. This is the true Balsom of the Celestial Astrum^, or Stars, the which
suffers not any body to go into putrefaction, nor does it leave either Lepry,
Gout, or Dropsy unexpelled, by (or in) the administration of one grain; if it
shall be fermented with the Sulphur of Sol: O thou German Charles, Where Is thy
Treasure? Where be thy Doctors and Physicians? Where are thy Boylers of Lignum
Guaicum? who do purge only and make Laxative. What! Is thy Heaven thus
provoked, and thy Stars [thus] wandered from the right course, and thy straight
Line declined unto another way? What! are thine eyes transmuted into Glass and
Carbuncle that they see those things only which pertain to ornament, and to a
superficial Spectacle, disdain and pride? Verily, if thy Doctors did but know,
that their Prince, whom they call Galen, did live with the Infernal [Spirits]
and that he wrote back from thence hither, whereby he might make evidently
known to the whole world the deserved Condemnation of himself, they would (out
of mere astonishment) flap themselves with the Foxes tail: Nor is Avicen to be
otherwise thought of, but that he sits in the Porch of Hell, with whom I have
had some Disputation and Controversy about his Aurum potabile, Philosophers
Stone, and Triacle. O ye troop of Sophisters, who plainly counterfeit the
Medicinal Art, whereas it is born from God, and committed to Nature, and not to
you ye most unworthy men; for ye do too too unworthily despise her. Look to it,
O ye Cheaters of Mankind, Ye who love the upper Seats, in the earth, whereupon
ye also sit: After my decease shall my Disciples arise, who shall lay you open
ye Hypocrites, and bring you abroad to the Light, together with your most
unclean Cooks; ye miserably deceive your Princes and Christian Potentates, and
bring them to the grave by your Medicine: Woe be unto you at the last Judgment
day. I hope that my Monarchy will triumph with the honor due unto me; not that
I extol my self, but Nature her self does extol me; for it is from her that I
am born a Physician; her I follow; she knows me, and I her, because I have seen
the Light that is in her, and have approved [or made it good] in the Figure of
the Microcosm, and have found it so in her world, the which is true. But to
return to what I began, I shall do enough for my Disciples, on whom also I
bestow my Doctrine, and do much favor them, as long as they seek it in the
light of nature, so that they do make experience, do get the knowledge of the
Stars, and become Learned in Philosophy; the nature of the water and every
thing that I have written will make apparent, and teach all things unto them.

Take therefore as much as thou will of the Liquor of the Minerals, of the Salt
of the red earth two parts, of the Sulphur of Sol one part; let them be put in
a Pelican, be dissolved and Coagulated, and that the third time: By this way
shall thou have the tincture of the Alchymists, the weight of which is not at
all to be described in this place, but in the book of transmutations: Whosoever
has one ounce of the Astrum of the Sun, and shall project it upon some ounce
of Gold, it shall tinge its own proper body. If he has the Astrum of, he shall
likewise tinge the whole body of Common Mercury. If the Astrum of, it shall in
like manner tinge the whole body of Venus into the best Gold, and into the
highest and durable perfection. The like is to be supposed of the Stars of the
other Metals, as,,, etc. Out of [all] which also are the Tinctures to be
extracted by the same reason or way, and which we shall not at all describe
here, because they are to be had in the Book of the nature of things, and of
the Archidoxis: In these few words, I have abundantly enough declared to the
true Alchymist, the first Ens of the Metals and Minerals of the Earth,
together with the Tincture of the Alchymists: Nor is there [any Cause] why any
Operator should be deterred with the space of nine months time, but let him
proceed on without tediousness in a Spagyrical way, by which he shall be able
in the space of forty Alchymical days to fix, extract, exalt, putrify,
ferment, and Coagulate the Stone of the Alchymists, to the honor of God, and
profit of his Neighbor.

To GOD alone be Praise, Honor and Glory for evermore, Amen.

THE WATER-STONE OF THE Wise Men.
THere have been ever since the beginning of the World in all Times [and
Seasons] many and several men, and most experienced Philosophers, highly
illuminated by GOD, and likewise [many] Gentiles have been found [at all times]
most learned in worldly wisdom, who have most diligently considered of the
nature and internal Virtues of the Creatures, and have thereupon endeavored to
learn [and know] them exactly: From [the consideration of] all which they bent
their study and made it their task, with much earnestness and labor to search
out and enquire, if any thing could be found in natural things that had a
possibility of conserving the terrene or earthy body of man (before destruction
and mortality [came in]) in a perpetual life, and in a whole, or sound, and
prosperous state: Now then by a singular Divine Influence, and by the light of
Nature they saw and knew, that 'twas expedient and fitting that [this]
singular, secret, and wonderful thing be in this world, the which the Almighty
God had appointed for the benefit of Mankind, viz. that all such things as
(throughout the whole universe) were imperfect, maimed, and corrupted, might be
again renewed by that singular secret Arcanum, and be again restored to their
perfect fullness [and State.]

So then by this most diligent search and inquiry of theirs they at length
found and learned, that nothing at all was to be found in this world, that
could free the earthy and corruptible body from death (the which was
constituted and imposed upon our first Parents, Adam and Eve, as a punishment,
and never suffered it self to be separated from their offspring [and children])
but only this one thing, the which being in it self [not] corruptible Naturally
is appointed by God for the benefit of man, to take away corruption, and to be
capable of healing again all imperfect bodies; to purify the old, and to
prolong the shortness of life, as in [the time of] the Ancient Patriarchs.

These wonderful Secrets, the honest and skillful Philosophers did (with their
greatest study and diligence) so long search for and inquire after, until they
found both them and the profitable use of them, by which they refresht and
preserved themselves all their life time.

This great and admirable mystery all the ancient Patriarchs truly knew and
possessed, and (without doubt) it was at the beginning revealed and discovered by
God himself to Adam the chiefest, or first father of the Fathers; and all the
Patriarchs received it afterward as by right of inheritance from Adam himself,
and by the virtues thereof they obtained bodily health, long life, and also
store of riches. Now, the aforesaid Gentiles after that they had obtained that
Divine and wonderful thing, they accounted it as a singular gift of God, and as
the highest and most secret Art; and did likewise perceive that it was
(according to Divine Providence) revealed but to a small part of men, and that
it is hid from the greatest part of this World: On this account they (likewise)
studiously to their utmost kept it concealed in every Age.

But yet notwithstanding, lest it should wholly vanish again, and be forgotten
after their decease, and being also desirous of the propagation thereof to
their Successors, and that it might be preserved in the time to come, they
sowed or planted it therefore in their Books, and by this means communicated,
and left behind them many most excellent instructions and teachings in their
Writings to their most faithful Disciples, but yet notwithstanding they so hid
and weaved over as 'twere all their Art with such Allegorical words, as that
even to this day there are but a few to be found that can draw thencefrom a
sufficient and sure foundation. Now they did thus, not in a rash mood, but for
some weighty Reasons, viz. that such as seek for this wisdom may invoke the
Almighty (in whose hand all things are) the more ardently and readier for the
obtaining thereof, and may (after that it is revealed unto them) ascribe the
honor and glory to GOD alone, and give him due thanks; and moreover [they writ
thus] lest the most noble Pearls should be cast before Swine. For were it made
known to the wicked world, then (it being so full of avarice) nothing else
would be desired but this thing only, and then at length all labor and
diligence would be neglected and a dissolute and beast-like life would follow.

But albeit that the so often spoken of Philosophers have disputed and discoursed
diversely and very much of that most excellent Art, and have hinted it (for the
now said reason) and pointed it out under various and sundry names, and
parables, and wonderful strange and sophisticate expressions: Yet nevertheless
they do by all these borrowed sayings unanimously and with one consent discover
and lead unto the One only end, and the One only matter, that does appertain
unto that Art. But yet the Searchers out of that secret matter do most
frequently wander and stray from that Art, and have thereby transgressed the
bounds and limits: for, in all ages, and even to this very day have been found
not only common men, but also many other excellent men, and in worldly wisdom
most expert, who pant (as 'twere) after that wisdom, and such as have bestowed
in the search thereof not only great study and diligence, but much labor and
cost, and have much desired the attainment thereof; and yet for all this, could
never arrive thereto, much less be made partakers thereof: Yea rather, very
many there have been who fishing with a golden hook, have frequently
precipitated themseves into irrecoverable losses, and have been at last
necessitated to abstain from any further search after that wisdom to their
great reproach and derision. Now lest any one should doubt of the fundamental
certainty of this Art, and happily account it (according to the manner and custom
of this wicked world) as a mere fiction, and falsity; I will therefore (setting
aside such as are mentioned in the holy Scripture it self) orderly reckon up,
and describe by name the authentic Philosophers, together with their
successors, who truly knew that Art, had it, and were made partakers thereof,
and these are, viz. Hermes Trismegist. Pythagoras, Benedictus Jesu, Alexander
the great, Plato, Theophrast. Avicen, Galenus, Hippocrates, Lucianus, Longanus,
Rasis, Archelaus, Rupescissa, the Author of the Greatet Rosearie, Marie the
Prophetess, Dionysius, Zacharius, Haly, Morien, Calid, Constantius, Serapion,
Albertus magnus, Estrod, Arnoldus de villa nova, Geber, Raymund Lully, Roger
Bacon, Alanus, Thomas Aquinas, Marcellus Palingenius, Some also as lived in our
times, as Bernard Trevisan, Basil Valentine, Philippus Theophrastus, and many
more. And likewise (without doubt) there are some who (even at this day) are
(by the grace of God) partakers thereof, and do even to this day enjoy it with
great silence. Whereas therefore the now reckoned up Philosophers have truly
written of that Supreme Magisterie, without any deceit, and have also learned
their demonstration out of the true foundation, and right fountain of nature,
yet notwithstanding there are (contrarily) many false Philosophers and
Deceivers, who falsely boast of the knowledge of that art, and do in like manner
endeavor to teach [or Comment upon] that art, and do basely and wickedly abuse
the writings of the aforesaid Philosophers, whereby to cover and hide their own
deceit, and so cast a mist before men's eyes, and thrust [their conceptions] upon
them at their pleasure; And therefore it is necessarily expedient, that as well
the deceived as the deceivers, do well consider this following admonition.

Note, O Chemist! the form of the letter in the Greek alphabet, and what it
points at; also it is elsewhere said, [viz.] Remember this, Deceive no man under
the pretense of right and truth; and beware, that thou closest not up the day
with a mournful tone.

Likewise.

Trust not that Chemist that shall distill thy money out of thy Chest;
therefore be wary; and if thou would shun loss and derision, then also shun
such wicked men; Follow such only as are of a single ingenuity, pious, modest
and humble; it is praiseworthy to be able, and to enjoy what is good.

But now, tell me where to find such?

You must enquire and search for them, they are rare, and are very scarce this
year [but thus may you know them] they excel the others both in weight,
substance, and workmanship or labor.

Seeing therefore that there are to be in many places found many faithful and
diligent Labourators and Disciples of this secret Philosophical art, who would
willingly attain thereto in a way true and certain, and void of many doubtings
[or ridles] but are (notwithstanding) so disturbed and involved in error, by
those aforesaid wicked men, and sophisticating cheaters, and by their barkings
and pretenses that are of no moment; insomuch that many are in a doubt what to
do, whether it is best for them to proceed on in the said art, or to go back
again: Therefore, I have intended to produce or publish, and explain a few true
and rightly founded [discoveries] concerning that Art. And although I judge my
self very unworthy and sufficiently rude [or rustical] to treat or write of so
great a mystery; Yet nevertheless, seeing that by the Grace of the most
glorious great God I have made such a progress, (that I may so speak without
vainglory) as but few, yea many innumerable thousands of men have not at all
arrived unto; and besides, that that talent which is most mercifully bestowed
by the omnipotent God, upon me an unworthy Tenant, may not lie wholly buried
with me, I will therefore show (as far forth as lawfully I may) from a faithful
heart, a short Compendium and Declaration of all that whole Art, to all the
Lovers of the same; and also by what means that art is to be attained unto, and
I will discover to thee the sure infallible, yea the most certain and most
right way; that so, happily the eyes of some may (by divine grace) be opened, and
that they may be drawn from their afore-conceived false opinion, and be led
into the right Path; and also that this divine miracle may be thereby so much
the better revealed. But for the better and easier understanding, and
remembering thereof, I will divide this Treatise into four Parts.

In the first Part, I Will show the beginning, and the way of the entrance of
that art, and how a man must prepare himself thereunto.

In the second, shall be showed (according to a Philosophical description and
instruction) how the matter of this Art is to be gotten and known; and
moreover, the manner of the whole preparation, and the institution of the
regiment [thereof] shall be demonstrated.

In the third, we shall speak of the most plentiful profit and benefit of that
Art; of the high and unspeakable efficacy and virtue thereto given and
attributed.

In the fourth Part, shall follow the Spiritual Allegory, the which may in all
things be compared with this magistery, it being a true painted Idea of the
true, celestial, everlasting, blessed, most high Cornerstone, wherein shall be
described briefly and plainly, (for I do not much mind many curious and
beauteous circumstances) the true and right golden Leadings (as 'twere) by the
hand, thereunto* appertaining.

THE First Part,
Psalm 25. v. 12. Who is he that fears the Lord? him shall he direct in the
best way.
FIrst of all, Every Godly Chemist that truly fears God, and is a Philosopher
of that Art, must (above all things) consider, that this Art and Arcanum, is to
be accounted, as not only the highest and greatest, but likewise as an holy
Art, (for the highest good and [stamp of the] most holy, celestial Omnipotent
God, is imprinted therein, and painted thereon;) if therefore any one thinks to
attain to that high and unspeakable mystery, let him know, that such an Art is
not in the power of man, but consists in the most gracious will [and pleasure]
of God, and that it is not the Will or Desire, but the mere Mercy of the
Almighty that helps [man] thereunto: It Is very expedient therefore, that (above
all things) thou be Pious, and that thy heart be lifted up to him alone, and
that thou ask that gift of him alone, by a true, most ardent, and undoubtful
praying; for from him alone it is to be obtained, and by him alone is given.

If therefore the Omnipotent God (who is the most certain Searcher of all
hearts) perceives and finds that thou have in thee a right and faithful mind,
void of deceit; and that thy endeavors in the search, and learning thereof,
are for no other end but the praise and glory of God, then without all doubt,
he will also (according to his promise) hear thee, and will so guide thee by
his holy Spirit, that thou may commodiously arrive, by mediums, to some
beginning, of which verily thou never had a thought, and shall moreover thy
self perceive in thine own heart, how the most merciful God has most
graciously heard thy prayer, and will even (as 'twere) forthwith exhibit thee a
revelation, and show thee an happy entrance.

Then after this, prostrate thy self upon thy knees, and with an humble and a
contrite heart, give unto him due thanks, praise, glory and honor, for the
hearing of thy prayers; and withal, beg and entreat him, again and again,
that he would vouchsafe also to propagate, by his holy Spirit, that grace he
has begun to show thee, and which thou have perceived in thine heart; and that
he would so guide thee, as rightly to use so high a mystery, (if it be now
perfectly revealed unto thee) and that thou may so manage it, that it may be
wholly directed to the only glory and honor of his most holy blessed name, and
to the benefit and succor of thy needy neighbor.

Besides, thou must consider, and then duly advise with thy self, that thou
never revealest that mystery to the wicked and unworthy one, (much less
communicate it) or make him a partaker thereof, for fear of the loss of thine
eternal health and happiness. Briefly, do not at any rate abuse it, but convert
it (as we said but now) to the glory of God only, and not to thine own proper
praise. Furthermore, thou must likewise consider, and believe that except thou
do thus, thou may happily run much hazard in the running of thy race; and
God will not leave thee unpunisht; and then it would have been a thousand times
better for thee never to have known any thing thereof.

These things being well weighed, and having (as 'twere) devoted thy self to
God therein, (who will not be mocked) and having prefixed to thy self on this
account a [good] scope and aim; then at length, first of all begin to learn,
how the Triune God did from the beginning ordain an universal nature; [then
learn] what that is, what it can do, and how it operates even to this very day
after a certain manner in all things, invisibly; and consists in the alone will
and pleasure of God, and has its abode there; For without the true knowledge
of nature, thou can hardly begin that work without rashness and danger; But
the quality and property of nature is, viz. that it be one only, true, simple
in its own perefect essence, and moreover that a certain occult Spirit be shut
up and hid therein.

If therefore, now, thou would know her, then its behovefull that thou be
even as Nature her self is, viz. true, simple, constant, patient, yea pious,
and no ways hurtful unto thy neighbor; but briefly, such an one must be a new
and regenerated man.

If therefore thou know thy self to be thus qualified, then nature will
presently suit it self to nature, and there will necessarily follow to thee an
evident unspeakable benefit both of body and soul.

For the diligent Search and Speculation of that Art will be so very
exceedingly profitable and assistant unto thee, that (provided thou rightly
know the principles therein) they will (as it were violently) draw and lead
thee to the knowledge of divine wonders, in so much that in comparison of it,
every temporal thing, and what is most highly valued by the world, will be
esteemed by thee as a thing of no price. But contrariwise, he that endeavors
by riches to aspire unto that Art, and labors to convert it to the pride and
vanity of this world, let such a one never persuade himself that he shall ever
attain his wished end: And therefore let thy mind, and consquently all thy
cogitations be estranged from all earthly things, and be (as it were) created
anew and given up to God alone; For, you must note this well, that these three,
viz. the body, soul and spirit, are to be suitable and alike, and it is necessary
that they operate together; for, if the heart and mind of man be not so
regulated after the like manner, as the whole work is to be wrought, thou, [O
man!] wilt also wholly err from the Art.

So therefore, may thou in all things conform all thy actions suitable
thereunto; for the Artist has nothing else here to do but to Sow, Plant, and
Water or Moisten, but God alone gives the increase: Therefore if God be against
any one, to him also nature is an enemy; and contrarily, if God be a friend,
then the heavens, the earth, and also all the elements are even constrained to
come to thy help. If therefore thou exactly considerest of this, and have ready
to thy hands the knowledge of the true first matter (which we shall hereafter
speak of) then may thou commodiously set about the manual operation, and make
a beginning of thy labor; wherein likewise it is fitting that thou implore the
grace and guidance of the Almighty in all thy purposes and actions; And then
thy affairs will not only succeed prosperously, but will also obtain a true,
happy, fortunate and desired end.

The 11. of Ecclesiast. 18. He that abides in the fear of the Lord, and
cleaves to his word, waiting upon his duty; [ -- ] nor black nor white moves
him; He, easily shall make silver and gold out of copper and tin: And shall (by
Gods help) do many more things: But especially if Jehovah favors him, he may
then well make Gold of Clay and dirt.

THE Second Part*
The 28. of Isaiah, v. 16. Therefore thus says the Lord, Behold I lay in Sion
a foundation stone, a tried stone, a precious Cornerstone, that is well
founded; He that has it shall not be confounded.
THE Philosophers in their writings, could never sufficiently praise this
so-often spoken of, and most noble Art, [both] before and after [its]
perfection; nor could they by any the highest and most excellent titles
worthily enough extol it; Therefore they have generally called it the Stone of
the Philosophers; the most ancient, occult, unknown, natural, and
incomprehensible [Stone;] yea they have called it the celestial, blessed, holy
and triune universal Stone of the wise men. But now, the cause why they termed
it a stone, and why they compared it to a stone, is (amongst other reasons)
chiefly this; when the matter thereof [doth] at the beginning [come] like a
mineral out of the earth, it is truly a stone; and then [again] because [this
matter] is hard and dry, because also it is beaten and ground [to dust] like a
stone, but especially [the reason is this] if it be divided into the three
parts (which nature her self has conjoined) then is it necessary that it
itself be again digested in all the same [parts] and made of the nature of a
constant wax-like flowing stone.

But as to the great concernment and necessity of such men's knowing the first,
otherwise or rather, the second matter of this secret Philosophical Stone, that
endeavor the attainment thereof, they, viz. the aforementioned Philosophers,
could not sufficiently inculcate or too too much press them to understand a
reason thereof, nor enough exhort them thereunto; the which matter is
(notwithstanding) one only thing, out of which only and alone this stone is
necessarily to be prepared, without any peregrine addition, albeit it be called
by a thousand names; the quality, species, and property whereof they have
wonderfully described, and have happily described it after a compendious way
and manner as follows, viz. That at the beginning it is conjoined of three, and
yet notwithstanding is but only one; likewise it is procreated and made of one,
two, three, four and five, and is also to be found in one and two, and is
everywhere. They also call it the Catholic [or universal] Magnesia, or Sperm
of the world, out of which all natural things have their original. Likewise,
that it is of a wonderful and singular birth and species or shape, and that it
has an unknown and an unsearchable nature, and that therefore it is neither hot
nor dry, like the earth, but is a certain perfect preparation of all the
elements; that it is also of a certain incorruptible body, which cannot be
touched by any element, and which may as to all its properties, and in all
[respects] be compared to the heaven which is above the four elements, and the
four qualities, and as a Q.E. and what cannot be destroyed. Likewise [they have
said] that it is as to its external corporality, figure, form, and shape a
stone, and yet notwithstanding is no stone, because it may be compared with the
white Gum; they also call it the water of the Ocean, Aqua vitae, yea a most
pure and most blessed water; but yet notwithstanding it is not the water of the
clouds, or of any common fountain, but a thick, permanent, saline [or saltish]
water, and (according to the diverse considerations of some) a dry water, that
moistens not the hands, or a certain pituitous [or phlegmy] water which arises
out of the saltish fatness of the earth; likewise they call it a twofold and
Azoth, whch is sustained by the supremest or highest and lowest vastness, [or]
of the celestia^ and terrestrial Globe; the which also i^ not consumed in any
fire; for it has in it self the universal and sparkling fire o^ the Light of
nature, and withal a certai^ celestial Spirit that penetrates all thing with
which [qualities] it was animate by God, at the beginning and (according to the
saying of the ancient Philosophers) blessed with, and is by Avicen called the
soul of the world, who said, viz. Even as the soul is to be found in all the
members of man's body, and does there move it self; so also is that spirit found
to be and to move it self in all elementary creatures, the which [spirit] is
likewise the indissoluble conjunction of the body and soul, and consequently a
most pure and most noble essence, wherein even all mysteries lie hidden; it is
also fully replenished with wonderful efficacy and virtue. Moreover they
ascribe thereunto an infinite power and divine efficacy and virtue; for they
say, that it is that Spirit of the Lord that filled the earth, and swim'd at
the top of the waters: They call it also the Spirit of truth, which is hidden
from the world, and such as cannot be comprehended or obtained without the
inspiration of the holy Spirit, or the information of such as know it; and yet
notwithstanding is in every thing and in every place to be found, [but] as to
its potency [tis] in this only alone, and altogether [or wholly perfect.
Briefly, [they say] that it is such a spiritual substance as is neither
celestial nor infernal, but an aereal, pure and excellent body, which is
posited as a medium betwixt the highest and lowest; it is likewise the most
choice and most precious thing under the whole heaven; Contrariwise it is
esteemed by such as understand not the thing, or are new beginners to learn it,
for a most vile thing, and most abject or base as 'twere, yet notwithstanding
though many a wise man seek after it, there are but a few that find it; it is
to be considered of [or be beheld] afar of, and is to be taken near at hand,
and besides, it is to be seen of all, yet is known but by a few, as is to be
seen in this here-following verse, viz,

This precious good, is divided into three, and yet is but one. It Is what the
world cares not for, but disesteems it. It has it in its sight, carries it in
its hands, yet is ignorant thereof; for it passes away with a sudden pace
without being known. [Yet] these treasures are the chiefest; and he that knows
the Art, the Expressions, and has the medium, will be richer then any other.

A Philosophical Enigma.
IN which the first material subject of the Art of the wise men, (otherwise
[called] the Phoenix of the Philosophers) being wholly divided, is to be
triplicitly [or threefold wise] found.

The Enigma Philosophical.
IF I tell thee of the three parts of every thing, thou have no cause to
complain, for I tell thee the truth. Thou need the three-leaved grass; sue
to Jehovah by thy prayers. Seek for one in three, and thou shall have one out
of three. It Is called by a thousand names; it is a body, soul and spirit; Is
beautified with Salt, Sulphur and an heavy Mercury. Trust me, if thou
understandest the three-leaved grass, and know the Voice and Song, then art
thou a wise Artist.

Another Enigma much more plain.
THere is one thing in this world, is everywhere to be found; and that as it
were accidentally or casually, without care; of a grayish and greenish color,
and of a wonderful power. In this thing is both a white and red color; It
flows hither like a swift stream, and runs away like a river; It wets not, and
is made of an heavy weight light. I could give it a thousand names, but
thousands know it not: It Is common to be seen, but the Art of it is difficult;
He that dissolves it by a medium, and finisheth it the third time, is a wise
man, and rightly has this noble subject.

Another Enigma.
THE place of the birth of this stone is everywhere; its conception is in the
deep, its birth in the earth, it finds life in the heavens; it dies in time,
and then at length obtains everlasting blessedness. If therefore any one has
ready at hand this thus-mentioned matter that is so virtuously endowed, (the
which is partly celestial, and partly terrestrial, and is at the beginning a
right confusion [or commixtion] or a certain mixed essence worthily so called,
whose color is not to be named [or, which has no proper color to be named by
-- ] and does know it rightly and well (the which knowledge has been accounted
at all times by the Philosophers for a principal member of this work) then must
all such things as are requisite thereunto, and which are required in the
preparation thereof, be with the greatest study [and diligence] performed: But
yet notwithstanding, before that the singular manual labor therewithal be
undertook, it is very necessary that every pious Artist do again recall to his
mind with much diligence, the doctrine aforesaid; and that withal he be
faithfully admonished not to infold (as 'twere) himself with that secret work,
and that unsearchable Spirit (that lies hidden thereunder) except he shall
first have diligently searched it in its profound qualities and proportion, and
according to the requisite conformity to nature: even as some of the
Philosophers do admonish us concerning that thing, and say, See thou have no
commerce with this Spirit, except thou first have an exact knowledge and
understanding thereof; For God is wonderful in his works, and his wisdom is
without number, and (as is aforesaid) he will not suffer himself to be mocked.
Verily, here might be some examples produced, viz. of many that have too too
slightly infolded themselves (as twere) [or intermedled] with this Art, and
having adventured thereon, their successes have been very bad, insomuch that
some have been found dead in the work it self, or else most grievously wounded
by some other unfortuate mischance; for it is not a thing of such a small
concernment as many dream and imagine, because the Philosophers compare it to
boys play, and women's work, and that they are able to do the same. The
Philosophers intention was otherwise then so; for they meant the following and
successive labor of this work; which is in it self easy enough, and utterly
[as twere] void of any great moment, and they accounted it as simple and easy
to such only as were ordained by God thereunto, and were endowed with the
knowledge thereof: Beware therefore, beware I say, and take heed to thy self
that thou do not over-rashly involve thy self in danger, but much more rather
begin thy purposed [work] with prayers poured out to God for divine help, (as
we have at the beginning faithfully admonished thee) and then shall thou fear
nothing at all, nor (happily) shall thou be subject to any danger.

If therefore now thou have employed thy self with much diligence in thy
Oratory, and have the known matter at hand, then may thou commodiously apply
thy self to a studious diligence in thy Laboratory, and apply thereto a
convenient Manual Labor, and so make a beginning.

First of all therefore it is necessary that (above all things) you dissolve
that so often spoken of first matter, or first Ens, which the Philosophers
likewise have called the highest good of nature; then is it to be purified from
aquosity [or its waterishness] and [its] terrestreity (for it does at first
appear to such as behold it an earthy, grave, heavy, gross, pituitous, and (as
it were a kind of cloudy and) aqueous body) and its darkish, and gross cloudy
shadow wherewith it is shadowed, must be removed by thee, that so by this means
its heart and inward soul that lies hidden therein, may [likewise and] next
that [precedent purifying] be by a more ample sublimation divided thereout of,
and be reduced into a sweet and pleasant Essence. But now all this may be done
by the great and excellent Catholic or Universal water, the which (by its most
swift and as 'twere flying course and passing to and fro) does moisten and make
fruitful the whole circuit of the earth; and [is] indeed [done] so sweetly,
fairly, clearly, brightly, and splendidly, that the splendour thereof appears
much fairer then Gold or Silver, or the brightness of the Carbuncle or Diamond,
and is admirable to behold; the which blessed water does hold [or cover over]
that said matter conjoined [with and] also enclosed therein: It [viz. the
water] extracts the heart, soul, and spirit; then moreover it is to be
distilled with its own proper Salt (the which [Salt] is implanted therein by
the aforesaid means [and] also in a peculiar way; and is (as to its internal
color) red or blood-like; but at its preparation, white, clear, bright, and
transparent, or resplendent, and is therefore called by the Philosophers the
Salt of wisdom) and be congealed, that it may be again reduced into one only
thing. And thus, by this thy process thus far exercised and used (which is
called the former Work) thou have [now] first of all separated the pure from
the impure, or thick and gross, and from the rough [or austere] [part;] the
which is [not] any more so rough [or austere] so grievous, so discourteous as
'twere, and inhumane, as it was at the beginning, but is most brightsom, and of
a most savoury odor, and of an aereal kind [or nature] in so much that were it
but freed from its Eni -- its evident and apparent, that it would of it self
(seeing thar notwithstanding it is in it self just [or right] and perfect)
betake it self [to the wing] and fly and vanish away. For which reason the
Wise men do also call it a Mercurial water, or the of; and also their [own]:
Now if you would use that subject in the aforementioned Species [or Form] for
Medicine, without any further preparation [of the same] thou will reap but
little help therefrom; but it would much rather (contrariwise) become a poison
unto thee: And therefore if thou would enjoy that as a most plenteous rich
gift and blessed profitableness and utility, then must thou make a further
progress, and by other singular mediums attempt something else.

But yet notwithstanding it is necessary that thou be admonished to be very
studious and diligent, as to thy operation, in heedfully observing the way of
nature, viz. how she in success [or length] of time, shows her self in [her]
operation, that by this means thou may direct all this thy labor according
to her [way.] So then if thou know that [thing,] then take of the aforesaid
prepared aqueous [or watery] matter twelve parts; and then again, afterward
[Make] three diverse [or distinct] parts of them; the two former parts of which
thou must preserve and keep very heedfully. [Then] again [add] in the first
place to the former third part, a certain other material matter (the which is
the body of Gold, being also a most elegant, highly gifted Creature by [the
pleasure of] God, (the which said body is nearest of kin to the first matter,
and also is most grateful and acceptable thereunto) [this I say] shall thou
place [and appoint] for the first Fermentation (computing one part to a
twelfth) and shall conjoyn it therewith; for both [the parts] being as 'twere
the form of the Spiritual prepared watery matter, [they I say] and this
earthly body of Sol, must be conjoined and reduced into one body.

But yet you are to note, that common Gold serves not for this affair, or
business, but is to be adjudged as unfitting, and as it were dead; and although
it be so dignified by the Omnipotent God, as that it is the most elegant and
most precious of all the other Metals; yet nevertheless, whilst it lay in the
Mines, it was [even there] impeaded [or hindred] in [its] growing on, in [or
to] its perfection: Besides its inward virtues, that is, its Sulphur and Soul,
are much weakened by the daily using thereof, and then it is daily also mixed
with unlawful and unlike things, such as have not a suitability or harmony
therewith; is united with, and defiled by them, and is thereby daily rendered
more and more unfit for this Work: Therefore make it thy chiefest study and
care to provide thee of pure Gold, such as has in it self a living Spirit, and
such as is not debilicated in its Sulphur (as we said before) nor falsified with
any deceit, but is found to be wholly pure ([such] as has passed through, or
through the heaven and sphere of, and has thereby purified it self from all
its defilements; for otherwise the other matter cannot (with its spirituality,
virtue, and efficacy) enter thereinto: For this Work does in all things require
a pure body, nor can it ever endure or brook ought of impurity with, at, or
about it self.

If therefore now these [unequal or] unlike parts, viz. of the water, and of
the Gold (for they are of very great unlikeness both as to Quantity as well as
Quality; for the first [of them] when it is prepared, is light, thin, subtle,
and soft; but the other is very heavy, firm, and hard) [when these therefore]
are conjoined in the Solutory Vessel [or Dish] and are reduced as it were into
a dry Liquor or Amalgama, then leave them at first for six or seven days in a
luke warm heat, that it may only have a kind of small warmth: Then again, take
out one Part of the three former [aforesaid] parts of the water, and put it in
a round Glass Vessel (like to a Phial or Egg) as was never used, put the
temperate liquor into the midst thereof; and then again leave it so for six or
seven days, and the body of is dissolved by the water, by little and little:
This being done, here begins the Conjunction of these two, and there is such a
sweet and dainty entrance of the one into the other, and such a mixtion, as is
like to Ice in warm water: And therefore the Philosophers have diversely
described it, and have compared it to a Bridegroom and his Bride (as Solomon in
his Canticles [hath done.]) [NOW] when this is done, then add likewise the
first reserved third part unto the others; but yet do not put it in all at one
time, or in one day, but at seven diverse turns; for else the body that you have
put in will be rendered over moist, and being at length drowned would be wholly
corrupted or destroyed.

For even as no seed when it is at first cast into the earth, can (if it has
over much water, rain, or moisture) thrive and bring forth fruits, but (as for
instance the Husband man's Corn) is drowned and choked; even so may the
Comparison hold with this same thing: [But now] having in like sort done this,
then Seal up your Glass, or little Glass Vessel most diligently, or else
Conglutinate [or Lute it up] lest happily the Composition, you put therein be
robbed of its odor, and lest it fly away. Then moreover put on your Alembick
[or] [over] and sub-minister [or put thereunder] a Fire of one [or the first]
degree; let it be gentle, continual, aereal, and vaporous, the heat whereof is
to be compared with [or to imitate] the heat of an Hen, sitting upon her Eggs.

Note.
THE Philosophers have delivered various Writings concerning the vaporous Fire,
the which they call the Fire of Wisdom, and withal (amongst other sayings) do
affirm, that it is not an Elemental and Material [Fire] but an Essential or
preternatural Fire, the which is also properly called a Divine Fire, that is,
the water of, which is to be incited [and stirred up] with the Common-fires
help, and by Art; at the beginning you must gently digest and concoct it; and
must be most especially careful and diligent, that nothing thereof sublime up,
or (to use the Parabolical Philosophic expressions) that the Wife does not
rule over the Man, nor the man abuse his Authority over his Rib [or Wife] etc.
and then it does of its own self perfect its process in a continual order,
without any other labor thereto belonging, save only the care and
administration of the fire; viz. that first of all the terrene body of the
[here] added, is to be wholly dissolved, ground, destroyed and putrified, and
so consequently be spoiled [or devested] of all the virtues and power that it
has (for verily at first it brings forth a darkish color, and then afterward
a perfectly black dark color; and is therefore by the Philosophers called the
head of the Crow, and is usually done in forty days time) and so furthermore
in them, the soul thereof is likewise put off [or loosned] from it, [and] is
carried up aloft, and is wholly and altogether separated, where (for some space
of time) it sticks without any virtues [and the body is just] like to dead
ashes in the bottom of the glass. But the true time and space being over, if
your Fire be increased one degree more, and it be digested without wearisomness
[or ceasing] it does then again let down it self by little and little, and drop
by drop, and imbibes, moistens, gives to drink, and does so conserve the body
that it be not at all combust, nor pine or wither away. Then again it lifts up
it self upwards [and aloft;] then again presently it lets it self down, and
thus it will do (perhaps) the seventh time; and then again the fire is to be
made one degree stronger; but yet not for this intent to have thee make haste
with thy Work; for verily the mediocrity and Regiment of the Fire is to be most
carefully and diligently administered; for in it is placed very exceeding much.
But now in the interim there will appear various signs and colors in the Glass
or Vessel, the which [colours] are to be especially observed, and well noted;
for, (according to them) is your direction to be taken [and framed.] So then
having seen an orderly succession of them it is a good testimony that a most
happy event will follow.

First of all there show themselves granes like the eyes of Fishes, then
[appears] a Circle about that matter, the which is as it were red; then shortly
after whitish; [then] moreover it becomes green and yellow, like the Peacocks
tail, [then] afterward most white, and then red and shining, [then] after a
certain time when a greater Fire is administered, and the extreme [or last] heat
given [thereto] the Soul and the Spirit is again perfectly united with its own
body lying in the bottom, into a certain dissoluble, and indissoluble Essence;
the which Union and Conjunction then (because of the unspeakable admiration
thereof,) cannot be seen and considered of without fear and trembling; and then
is seen and beheld the new raised up body, living, perfect and glorified, the
which has in it self a most elegant redness, of a purple color, and like a
Crimson or Scarlet dye, the tincture of which does also transmute, tinge, and
heal all the imperfect bodies; of which we shall speak more hereafter.

The Work therefore being happily brought to an end (by the help and assistance
of the most great and blessed God; and the Phoenix of the Wise men being
beheld) then upon thy bended knees, and with a devout heart give thanks to the
Omnipotent GOD (who has been the chief Guider of all this whole Work for those
his especial benefits that he has vouchsafed thee so graciously: And then
further, see that thou managest it well, to his praise and glory, and for the
benefit of the needy Members, and do not abuse it. See therefore thou have in
these [words] the true information of the whole Process, whereby this noble
Art, and high Work, and Philosophers Stone, like as the Philosophical Egg, may
be opened, prepared and finished.

For a Conclusion (for it is no ways expedient slightly to slip this over)
[observe] that if happily any mischance or error, or any misapprehension (which
may easily happen, and so vehemently impede the perfection) should be
committed, or intervene, then must a seasonable remedy be sought after, and the
evil [or errour] must be remedied. If therefore you perceive (in the first
place) that before dissolution and liquefaction, any thing sublimes it self up,
and ascends; or if there swim at top of the matter a red oil as 'twere (which
is a very evil testimony)

And Secondly, If it begins to become red, either together with, or before [the
white] or if after the whiteness it be red before its time:

Or Thirdly, If it will not, in the end, give it self forth [as 'twere] or not
suffer it self to be rightly Coagulated:

Or Fourthly, if the matter be so changed and inverted by the greatness of the
heat, that it will not (when it is taken out) presently melt upon a red hot
Iron, like to Wax, and tinge and paint [or colour] the Iron; and if
(afterward) it be found not abiding the fiery trial: All these things (I say)
are remarkable signs, by the which it may be gathered, That this work is not
rightly ordained and instituted, but that it has been neglected through want
of diligence and care.

All which defects (notwithstanding) and all these erroneous ways, if not too
too strong and powerful, and if in time looked unto, may be easily met withal,
and may be well corrected and restored: But the highest diligence of dealing
here with them is requisite, and consequently artificial manual apprehensions
[or operations] and ordinary, [or orderly] mediums which are necessarily to be
known to a skillful and experienced Artist.

But yet notwithstanding, for the sake of the Tyroes, or young beginners, that
are Lovers of this Art, and disciples thereof, (for their sake) I say, I will
orderly recite those mediums very briefly; as for example, if it chance to
happen that one or more of those aforesaid errors should come to pass, then
must you again take out of the glass the whole composition that you did put in,
and again dissolve it, and imbibe it with the aforesaid water of (which the
Philosophers also call Lac Virginis, or the first matter, [also] the milk, the
blood and the sweat thereof; also an indestructible fountain, or Aqua vitae,
the which notwithstanding contains in it self the greatest venom) and moisten
it, and [so] render it efficacious, and then again, [digest and] boil it so
long until there sublimes nothing up nor ascends aloft any more; or [until] the
congelation and fixation does rightly and perfectly show it self in the said
work, according to what is before mentioned; As for its following fermentation
and multiplication, we shall speak more thereof in the third part [where we
treat] of the utility and profit thereof. Besides, as to the time thereto
requisite, as to the time of dispatching each Act [or Scene] here should be
somewhat spoken a little more largely, but yet as to this there can be no
certain bounds prescribed, [or set time mentioned] for those aforesaid
Philosophers are of different opinions, as may evidently be seen in their
writings; for always some have obtained their end before other some. But we
have formerly admonished and told you, that nature is to be well observed in
all things (even as it represents it self in all things.) The which if any one
does do, and diligently observe that [I have said] and does likewise in every
thing observe a right medium, he may the sooner be able with such a work [or
proceeding] to arrive to the perfection. But I do exhort and withal inform
thee, as to this thing, that as to the entrance upon or beginning the former or
latter labor, thou do not exceed or outstrip as 'twere, in thy calculation,
this character X [its] middle or point, but divide it justly; and then
moreover, with the half part of this character, (that is V) must you go
backwards [or retrograde] in the composition of this work. The which being
done, then afterward if thou jointly recollectest [or unitest] it again, and
rightly numberest up XX [being] the part [or product] thereof; in that number
or time, (if no farther obstacle intercede) may thou attain to the end of thy
work. Be therefore content with such a time [or calculation;] for if thou
covetest the finding out a somewhat nearer end, it is rashly done of thee, and
presently succeeds an error; for verily one only hour may drive thee back an
whole month, whereas about such a time (as I have hinted) thy progress may
lead thee to hit the mark: But note well, that thou do not too too closely
[or niggardly as 'twere] contract [this] calculation; Or (as I informed thee
but now) at all exceed it; for should thou do so, thou would have an
abortive; For verily, many by their [as 'twere] abreviating hastiness and
unskilfulness, do, instead of their hoped for Elixir, obtain and get a certain
Nixir. And whereas in this thing much of concernment is placed as to this
Magical Science, I was the rather willing thus briefly to describe it to the
sons of wisdom, that they may consider and judge thereof more deeply.

An Enigma.
THere are seven Cities, and seven metals, so counted.

There are seven days, and a seventh number.

Seven Letters, and seven Words in order.

There are seven seasons, and so many places.

Seven Herbs, seven Arts, and seven little stones.

Divide seven with three, with [much] wariness.

Let be no coveting to precipitate the half [or rashly to shorten the time.]

Briefly, all things do quietly rest and prevail in this number.

The process of the whole work is here briefly declared.
The first or former Labor.
DIssolve the matter, and also Putrify it:

Afterward let it be distilled, and then Coagulate it.

The second or Latter Labor.
COnjoyn two things; Putrify them, then blacken them:

Digest them till it become whitened by thy Art.

Then at length rubifie it to the highest; Coagulation is a thing Profitable to
this Art; This done, fix it, and thou shall be a great man.

And if thou shall (after all these things) ferment this, thou have luckily
finished the whole work of the Art, Circularly.

Then have thou solemnly achieved such a noble portion as will (suddenly)
multiply for thee a thousand-fold riches.

Or thus, more briefly.
SEek three in one, and again seek one in three.

Dissolve, and conclude [or congeal] and thou shall be sure of the Art.

An Enigma, wherein also the Process is described.
THe Spirit it self is given to the body for a time [or in time] and that
refreshing [or cheering] Spirit washes the soul by Art.

That Spirit suddenly draws [or marries] the soul to it self, and then nothing
can dis-joyn or separate it from it self.

Then do they consist of three, and yet abide in one seat, until the body be
dissolved, ([which is] a noble work) and does putrify and die, and sepraate
from them.

But [then] (after some time) the spirit and the soul do come together in the
extreme [or utmost and last] heat; and each possesses its proper seat with
constancy.

Then an entire sound state and perfection is at hand.

And the work is made renowned, and attended on with great joy.

Proverbs 23. My Son, give me thy heart, and let my ways be delightful to
thine eyes.

THE Third Part,
Eccles. 43. v. 31, 32, 33. Who can magnify him as he is, and tell us how high
he is? We see but the least of his works, and much greater things are hid from
us, for the Lord made all that is, and makes them known to such as fear the
Lord.
AS to this so oft-spoken of highest Art, or profoundly comprehensible
Philosophers-stone, (provided it be brought to the desired end;) The
Philosophers could never sufficiently write enough, nor worthily enough
proclaim and celebrace its praise, virtue, efficacy and unspeakable benefit;
for first of all, they esteemed it as the highest and greatest felicity in this
earth, without the which none can arrive to perfection in this world; for
Morien says, he that has this stone, has every thing, nor needs any other
help; for there is in it all temporal felicity, bodily health, and all fortune
[or] wealth and riches.

Moreover they have so commended that same stone [unto us] because the spirit
and efficacy thereof (which lies therein hidden) is the spirit of the Q. Ess.
which [spirit] is under the circle of the Lunar brightness, yea [they have
called it] the supporter of the heaven, and the mover of the Sea; and besides,
[have said] that it is a chosen or choice spirit above all the other spirits;
that it is a most subtle, a most noble, and a most pure spirit; the which, all
the other Spirits are obedient unto as to their King: and which (likewise)
confers upon m^n all health and prosperity; heals all diseases, bestows upon
the pious, temporal honor and long life; but as for the evil ones who misuse
it, it subjects them to eternal Punishment.

Now in all those [aforesaid] things, it is found to be proved [or experienced]
perfect and infallible. Upon which account, Hermes and Aristotle call it, viz.
true without lies, certain, yea of all the most certain, the secret of all
secrets, of a divine efficacy, concealed and hid from fools. Briefly, they bave
termed it the very utmost and chiefest thing that can be seen under heaven, and
the wonderful epilogue and conclusion of all Philosophical operations:
Therefore some pious Philosophers are wholly of the opinion, that it was
revealed from above to our first Parent, the first man Adam, and that it was
sought for with a singular desire by all the holy Patriarcks: For it is said,
that Noah the framer of the Ark, and Moses that made the Tabernacle and the
Golden Vessels therein, and likewise Solomon that to the glory of God finished
the Temple, and many other curious works and ornaments of all kinds, and did
many other mighty great acts, did from thence obtain their long life and great
riches. Even (in like manner) the Philosophers will acknowledge the same, that
( viz.) by it they found out the seven Liberal Sciences, and Arts, and that
from thence they had their sustentation (or supply): furthermore, God bestowed
this upon them (for their benefit and comfort) that so they might not (through
poverty) hap to be impeded [or hindred] in their studies and search after
wisdom; and also, that they might not be necessitated to flatter with the rich
and wicked ones of this world for the sake of money, and to reveal their secret
Arcanaes unto them; and so be despised and mocked, (together with their wisdom)
because of their beggerliness.

Moreover, they have even yet other great and hidden mysteries of divine
wonders, and from thence also knew and learned the great riches of that glory,
[or his glory.] And therein their hearts have been so stirred up and inflamed
by God, that they have been led and guided on to a further knowledge of him:
For they sought not (by that treasure) after great riches, and worldly temporal
voluptuousness and pride, but rather conceived much pleasure, and [took] their
[delight] rejoicing at the miraculous seeing and knowing the creatures; the
which most excellent workmanship, and creatures of the omnipotent God they did
verily far otherwise consider of and behold, then (the more's the pity) is
wont at present to be done by the world at this day, who look upon them but
little otherwise then as heifers or calves do; and do (moreover) seek after and
covet the Learning of this most noble Art for Avarice, Luxury, Pride, and
Temporal honor and pleasure, and do herein (in such intentions and thoughts)
widely err from the true scope; for God does not communicate such gifts to the
wicked ones, and to the contemners of his Word, but to the godly only, such as
lead an honest and quiet life in this evil and unclean world, and do honestly
sustain themselves, and reach forth their helping hands to their needy
neighbors. According to the verses of the Poet, viz.

God gives the Art to the honest men alone,
Which all the worlds Gold cannot procure;
It Is not fit that the vulgar know it, for its
Wickedness; It does in vain therefore seek for this stone:
He that in secret possesses it, resides in any place he lists,
And fears neither mischance nor evil.
Few are there to be found to whom are given these sacred gifts.
It Is in Gods hands, and he bestows it on whom he pleases.
And although there are various writings published by others concerning the
operation, virtue, and utility of this Art, viz. how this Stone being prepared
and made more then perfect, is the highest of all Medicines, wherewith not only
all diseases, as the Gout and Leapry, are cured; but also being used by such as
are decrepid, it makes them to become young again, and restores unto them their
lost strength and former vigor; and does refresh and revive again such as are
half dead: yet nevertheless I shall omit to speak of that in this place, and in
this my Treatise, because I am no Physician, that so (by such an high extolling
and commendation thereof) I may not seem to prescribe any thing here to their
faculty or Profession: But whoever (by the grace of God) has it, and knows how
to use it commodiously, to him I say who enjoys it, I shall remit [or send] to
his home, both respect and glory: As to the other qualities and profitable Use,
such as daily experience does subject to the sight (part of which I my self
have through the Divine grace been made a partaker of) I shall here add a few
things.

First of all: As to what belongs to the knowledge of God, as also those
miracles of nature which have been manifested by the benefit of that Art, I
cannot sufficiently enough describe or declare it, according to its supreme
dignity. For in this a man shall be able most elegantly to see, as if 'twere
painted in a glass, the Image of the most holy Trinity, in one Divine
indissoluble Essence, and how it differs, and is (notwithstanding) but one only
God; and withal in the second person of the Deity, as concerning his
Assumption of Humane Flesh, his Nativity, Passion, Death, and Resurrection.
Likewise in his exaltation, and that eternal happiness merited by his death for
us men, his Creatures. Moreover also, [may be seen] as to the Purification of
Original Sin by obtained med^ums, without which the Counsels and Actions of all
men, and all their Works are in vain and nothing [worth.] Briefly, all the
Articles of the Christian Faith, and the whole process that a man must
necessarily pass, through various streights and tribulations, until he (at
length) does again arrive or rise up to a new Life, is likewise neatly
represented hereby, concerning which we shall speak more in the Fourth Part.

Secondly, As to what concerns the Corporal and Natural Utility that arises
from the having thereof; how by its Tincture it changes all the imperfect
Metals into clear and pure gold: I shall here likewise for the satisfaction
sake of my promise, briefly Demonstrate.

So thereofore, for to bring now the said Stone or Elixir to show its efficacy,
and moreover to cause it to serve for the now spoken of use, and to tinge, it is
necessary that it be further Fermented, and augmented; otherwise there can
hardly be obtained any profitable projection with its Tincture (by reason of
its great subtilty) upon the other imperfect Metals and bodies.

Therefore in the first place, take one part of the so often spoken of Medicine,
and to that one Part, add three other parts of the [same] weight, of the best
and choicest Gold, that has been well purged and putrified by Antimony, and
then afterward reduced into as thin Leaves as possibly can be, put them
together into a melting Pot, and place it in the Fire, that so the matter may
melt and flow well; according as the preparation thereof is well known to every
Artificer.

This done, the Composition thus put in, will be also transmuted into a pure
and effectual Tincture, insomuch that one part thereof will be capable of
transmuting and tinging a thousand parts of the simple Metals into pure Gold.

But yet you must here note, that by how much nearer the Metals are to the
matter, and by how much the purer they are, so much the more easy is the
admittance and reception, and the multiplication will also be the higher and
more commodious; for whatsoever impurity or improperness is found to be in
them, is separated, and is wholly cast away as the drossy fece of the Metals:
Thus then may a transmutation be made with the imperfect Metals, and with
unsound or faulty precious Stones; and Crystal may be [also] so tinged
therewith, that it may be well compared with the most noble and most precious
Stones; and moreover there are many other things that may be done thereby,
which are not at all to be revealed to the wicked world; But yet the
aforementioned Philosophers, and all such true Christians as at this day are
endued, and gifted by the most great and blessed God, with this Art and
Science, did account of those and such like other most excellent things of that
kind, as the meanest and least [excellency] in this Magistry; for verily those
[things] in comparison of the most excellent knowledge of things Celestial, and
being compared [I say] therewithal, was wholly accounted as a thing of naught,
and disesteemed.

For verily, know of a truth, that he to whom the most High has graciously
vouchsafed to bestow this Gift, does esteem of all the money and riches in this
earth (in comparison of the Celestial good) no better then of the dirt in the
Streets; for his heart and all his desire tends to this only, viz. that he may
behold in a heavenly manner, and may also in reality enjoy that in life
eternal, which he has seen here figured out (as 'twere) in an earthly manner
only; according to the testimony also of that wisest of Kings, King Solomon, in
his Book of Wisdom, chap. 5. where he says, I esteemed wisdom at a greater
price then Kingdoms and principalities, it was dearer to me then riches; all
gold in respect of her is as sand, and silver as dirt before her. Such
therefore as seek after this Art for no other end, but for temporal honor,
pleasure, and the sake of riches, are to be reckoned of as more foolish then
Fools, for verily they will never attain it: notwithstanding all their great
costs, labor and trouble, and their miserably tormenting their hearts, mind,
and all their cogitations. On which account the Philosophers esteemed of
temporal riches (for the most base abuse of them,) (not that in themselves they
be evil; for in Genesis 2. they are highly commended by Moses, and likewise in
many other places of Scripture, as a precious thing, and a great gift of God)
very disdainfully, and as destructive, because it is such a thing, as instead
of leading men to God, does rather cast a remora [and hindrance] upon men, from
arriving to a right and true good, and does convert likewise all that which is
^ight in this world, into a perverse confusion: even as that most famous
Marcellus Palingenius Stellatus in his Poem, which he has called the Zodiac
of life, has under the Sign of elegantly described it, and curiously pointed
out detestable Covetousness, to whom we shall at present refer the wel-minded
Reader.

Out of which it may be seen and collected, how viz. That most excellent man as
truly has this Art (as is to be perceived and understood in his Zodiac of
Nature) does esteem of those temporal goods of gold and silver, as a thing of
naught, and as a thing contemptible in respect of virtue.

And therefore they all preferred Wisdom and the knowledge of heavenly things
far before the earthy and fading things (as we advised before) and had in all
their life time, and consequently in all their Actions, an eye to the event and
end alone, that they might be able [or fit] to reap therefrom an immortal name
and perpetual praise; the which even that most wise Solomon does also teach in
the sixteenth chapter of his Proverbs, ver. 16. saying, Entertain or accept
wisdom, for it is better then gold, and understanding is more precious then
silver: And also in Chap. 22. he says, A good name, and [a good] report is
more precious then great riches, and the Art [or knowledge] is better then gold
or silver. So also Syrach's Son that Wise man in [his] 24. chapter does exhort
men, saying, See that thou retainest a good name, for its continuance is more
certain then a thousand treasures of gold. For these, and such other kind of
virtues, that flow forth from that Philosophy of the Stone, the Philosophers
could never sufficiently enough praise and celebrate that so often named stone.
And therefore their whole care and study, and all their Labor in their
writings was for this end, that that Art might be further enlarged, wisdom
embraced, and the life rendered conformable thereunto. But all [their Writing]
is, as to the unwise, obscure, dark and hard to be understood, even as Solomon
in his Proverbs, from the beginning thereof, even to chapter 6. does exceedingly
complain of, and bewail, and does to his utmost persuade men to the following
of that Wisdom, and in the 3. chap. of Ecclesiasticus: he says thus, My Son,
be content with a low estate; for better is it then all that which the world
covets after: By how much the greater thou art, so much the more must thou
humble thy self, and then the Lord will bless thee; for the most High God does
do even great things by the humble.

THE Fourth Part,
Psalm. 78. and Matthew. 13. 35. I will open my mouth in Parables, and utter
things hidden from the beginning of the world.
WHen the Omnipotent GOD was minded to reveal by his Divine voice any hard and
singular thing to Mankind, of his wonderful, high, and Celestial Mysteries,
it pleased him to do it for the most part Parabolically, the which notable
Parables in this earthly Life are daily obvious to our eyes, and are as 'twere
painted out unto, and set before us; for examples sake, when God (in Genesis
3.) intended to show to Adam in Paradise after his Fall, his punishment, viz.
Mortality and Corporal death, it pleased him to signify it in the following
manner; that whereas the earth has not by it self any life at all; and whereas
he was taken and framed out of the earth; therefore also must he be made like
the earth again: So in the 15. and 23. chapter of Genesis, when God would
discover to Abraham the increase of his Seed and Family, he bad him to behold
the Stars in the Heaven, the Sand in the Sea, and the dust of the earth, as a
Type. Such like various, very pleasant, and sweet Typical Prefigurations God
commanded his Prophets to propose and demonstrate to his People Israel, when he
would denounce [or declare] any singular thing unto them. This Christ himself
likewise, who is the mouth and foundation of truth, did do in his Testament,
and proposed all things in Parables, that so his Doctrine might be the better
understood; as for example, when he would hint unto us the highest happiness,
his Divine Word and Gospel, then does he use (for a type) the good and evil
seed, or tares, which the enemy sowed in the ground; likewise [he uses
typically] the hidden treasure, and pearl, the grain of wheat, the grain of
mustard seed, leaven, etc. as in Luke 18. Mat. 13. and 23. Luke 19. and Mat. 20.

Moreover, when he prefigurates to us the Kingdom of heaven, he proposes to us
the parable of the great Supper, and the wedding of the King; Even as also he
compares the whole Christian-Church, and the state thereof, with a Vineyard,
and a King requiring an account from his Servants. Likewise also he uses a
similitude of a noble Lord, who committed his goods to his servants; and of a
lost sheep, and Ox, and of a lost Son; and other such like Parables.

See Mat. 18. Luke 16. Mat. 25. Luke 18. Mark 12. Luke 10.

Seeing therefore that such like examples and similitudes were solely and alone
given for this end, that that which is Celestial, and consequently difficult to
comprehend by reason of humane frailty, might be the easier understood and
better conceived of by us; How much rather therefore [seemeth it expedient]
that the eternal God should propose unto us by some corporal figure, the
highest good, [viz.] His Son and our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who by his
obedience and merit, freed all mankind from eternal death, and restored the
Kingdom of heaven [again unto them] For verily that most high mystery of God
Almighty, is most difficultly comprehended by mankind, Ephesians. 3. Colos. 1. Esaias
45. verse 8. Let the heavens send down dew, and the clouds rain [on the just]
Let the earth open it self and wax green, and bring forth a Savior. And
although that this has been signified unto us (in the Old Testament, and
elsewhere in other types, as in the sacrifice of Isaac, in Jacobs Ladder, and in
the selling and wonderful state of Joseph, and in the brazen Serpent, in
Sampson, David and Jonas, etc. Yet nevertheless, the Omnipotent God has showed
[or taught] and clearly discovered to us men in the great Book of Nature, this
high and Celestial good, by another certain wonderful and secret thing, and
that very abundantly; that so we may be able to have likewise by this means [or
on this account] even a certain corporeal, visible, and apprehensible idea of
those Celestial goods and benefits.

The which terrestrial and corporeal thing, he himself has so proposed [or
published] in his Word, where he speaks thus by his Prophet Isaiah, in Chapter 28.
viz. Behold I lay in Sion a Corner stone, a tried and well-founded stone; he
that believes makes not haste. Likewise also the Kingly Prophet David speaks
thus by the Spirit of God, in the 118. Psalm, viz. The stone which the builders
refused, is become the Cornerstone. This is the Lords doing, and is wonderful
in our eyes; This prefiguration or representation, also the now-spoken-of
Cornerstone, Christ himself does in Mat. 21. derive [or convert] unto himself,
saying, Did you never read in the Scriptures, The stone which the builders
refused is become the Cornerstone? this is the Lords doing, and is wonderful
in our eyes; he that falls against it shall be broken; but he upon whom it
shall fall, shall be ground to powder: This likewise Saint Peter in Acts 4. and
in his Epistle; So also Paul in Romans 9. does repeat and describe this in almost
the self-same words.

Now all the chief Fathers and holy Patriarcks, as also all their successors,
illuminated by God, did (ever since the beginning of the world) expect (with
great desire) that proved, blessed and Celestial Stone, Jesus Christ, Luke 10.
v. 23, 24. and earnestly endeavored by their utmost and chiefest prayers, that
it would please God to communicate unto them, (according to his promises) the
beholding of Christ even in a bodily and visible shape. Romans 10. v. 12, 13. and
therefore having rightly known and obtained him in the Spirit, they were then
delighted with him all their life time, and consequently did (in all dangers)
even to the end of their lives, trust upon that invisible prop and support.

But although that that heavenly and blessed stone was given by God to all
mankind, without exceptions of rich or poor, and that without any merit, viz.
freely, as Mat. 11. v. 6. yet nevertheless there have been but a very few in
this world, even from the beginning to this very day, that could find it, and
apprehend or comprehend it; but rather has it been at all times hidden from
the greatest part of men, and has always been a grievous offense and scandal,
or stumbling to them; as Isaiah in the eighth Chapter prophesied thereof,
saying, It shall be a stone of offense, and a rock of stumbling. Also, a pit
and a gin where many shall stumble, fall and be broken, and took and ensnared.
The which [heavenly stone] old Father Simeon saw in the Spirit, in Luke 2. v.
34. where he says to Mary the Mother of that Celestial Cornerstone, viz.
Behold, behold this [stone] is set for the falling and rising of many in
Israel, and for a sign which shall be spoken against. The like does S. Paul
also testify in Romans 9. v. 32. saying, They stumbled at the stumbling stone,
and at the rock of offense, but he who believes in him shall not be
confounded. So likewise Saint Peter in his first Epistle, Chap. 2. v. 7, 8.
etc. This stone is precious to those tha^ believe; but to the unbelieving, a
stone o^ offense, and of stumbling, and a rock o^ scandal, [even to them] which
stumbl^ at the Word, and believe not on him, i^ [or by] whom they are placed
[o^ built up] Eccles. 43. So therefore, shall now show here fundamentally, how
the now mentioned precious, blessed an^ heavenly stone, does artificially [or
harmoniously] agree with this so-oft-mentioned terrestrial, Corporeal,
Philosophical stone, I will show both their descriptions, and the comparison of
the one with the other: Whereby it shall be known and seen (even invincibly)
viz. how the terrestrial Philosophical stone may be accounted as a true type of
the true, spiritual, and heavenly stone, Jesus Christ, [and how] he is herein
set before us, and discovered (as 'twere) in a visible shape by God, even in a
Corporeal manner.

First of all therefore, Even as in the true knowledge of the first matter (1
Cor. chapter 2. v. 7. but we speak of hidden things, etc.) of the aforesaid terrene
Philosophical stone, (for this is to be accounted of as a principal member [or
part] and [of] highest concealment [or secrecy]) it is very much behovefull for
those who [would] prepare it, (Romans 11. v. 33. Oh how profound, etc.) and that
endeavor thereby to obtain all that happiness as is provided by God for us to
eternity, and that are (withal) busied [or seriously bent] on the knowledge of
the eternal heavenly stone, (that is, of the true, right, and living God, and
Creator of heaven and earth, his indissoluble triune essence) (it is I say)
needful that they do know further and more things, and therefore also, (as I
have showed above in the first part) the way of the entering upon it, and the
universal nature, together with all its properties (without which that work
will be but rashly and in vain attempted) is to be above all other things well
learned and known; for if a man covets to arrive to the highest good, then is
it expedient that above all other things, he first learns rightly to know God,
then himself, (Acts 17. for in him we live, etc.) for the learning to know God
and ones self (that is, to know what men we are, from whence we have our
original, to what we were created, and how near a kin we are to God) is
deservedly to be accounted and esteemed of as the highest wisdom, without which
'twill be most difficult (yea impossible) for us to attain to the aforesaid
happiness.

But now, as to how, and where such a knowledge of that highest Celestial good
is to be found, known or learned; (Eccl. 24. I am every where, etc.) you must
know that it is and ought to be sought after, even as the terrestrial
Philosophic stone [is] the which [stone] is according to its description, in
one, and in two, which are to be everywhere found; it is in one only, and yet in
two; to this may it be compared; the which is no other thing then the eternal
Word of God, and the holy divine Scriptures of the Old and New Testament (as
Isaiah 8. Yea to the Law, etc.) in the which the right, celestial, fundamental
Cornerstone is to be Only and Solely sought for, and enquired after; even as
also God the Father at that Glorification made in Mount Tabor, does point with
his finger (as twere) at this his own Word, when he says, as in Mark 9 and
Luke 9. This is my beloved Son, hear him, etc. Likewise even Christ himself,
the very essential and eternal Word of God derives this to himself, ( Psalm
119.) In John 14. saying, I am the way, the truth, and the life, none comes
unto the Father but by me; [and therefore] to the holy divine Scripture, or
infallible testimony of the divine Word, ( Isaiah 34.) in Isaiah 8. it is said,
To the Law, and to the testimony: And Christ himself that said Corner-[stone]
does in John 5. partly also require it, when he says, Search the Scriptures,
for ye think to have life therein, and that is it which testifies of me.
Therefore David also in Psalm. 119. has a long time before confessed this same
thing, saying, I delight O Lord in thy testimonies, for they are my
Counselors: Thy word O Lord is a Light to my feet: I delight more in the way
of thy testimonies then in any riches: Again, I consider thy ways, and walk in
thy testimonies.

( See Genes. 13. Psalm 45. Isaiah 9. 49. Jerem. 32. John 10. 14. Romans 9. 1
Cor. 5.)

Moreover, as to where, and in what place of the holy Scripture, (Eccles. 24.
from the beginning of the world, etc.) the first matter of this heavenly stone,
or essence is founded and repaired [or placed] know, that it is in many places
to and again fundamentally and expressly demonstrated and set before your eyes,
but especially in Mich. 5. it is written, Whose going forth was from the
beginning, and from eternity; This self same thing also the Cornerstone it
self does also testify, John 8. When the Jews asked him who he was, he
answered, Even the same that I said unto you from the beginning; And moreover
he thus tells the Jews, viz, Verily, verily, I say unto you, before Abraham was,
I was. By which testimonies it does uncontroulably follow, that he had no
beginning, but had his first Ens from all eternity, and that it will so remain
without end to all eternity.

And although that that knowledge consists nowhere but only in the word of God,
viz. in the Old and New Testament; and may from it itself be gotten and
obtained; yet nevertheless, I will declare to such an one as seeks there-after,
(2 Timothy 3. And whereas thou from thy childhood, etc.) that he must herein use
the highest diligence; for whosoever does at the beginning err in that
knowledge, or miss the right subject, then is all the following labor that he
bestows thereon, vain, and fruitless. Therefore all [those that seek after it]
ought rightly to prove [or try] themselves, and here rightly to learn in the
separation [as it were] of the word, the true Golden apprehension [thereof] and
well and rightly to open the eyes (viz. of the mind and soul) and accutely [or
diligently] to behold and know it by the internal light, 1 John 5. the which
God at the beginning enkindled in nature, and in our heart. Now he that
endeavors to obtain that by the externality and corporality only (in a literal
way) without the internal eye and divine light, such an one may as soon take
Saul for Paul, and thencefrom choose and draw in (as it were) to himself an
erroneous way and sinister understanding instead of what is right: for even as
in this terrene stone, according to the description thereof, [it so happens
that] it is hidden from many thousands of men: So also does it daily appear (the
more is the pity and grief) in the knowledge of this Celestial stone, [it
being hidden] to the greatest part [of mankind]: the which is not to be imputed
to the Word or Letter (for as for that, it is well and firmly founded) but much
rather to the eye that is false in man, it is to be imputed only and solely to
that; Even as also Christ himself in Luke 11. and 1 Cor. 3. says, The eye is
the light of the body, but if thine eye be evil, then also thy whole body is
obscure and dark, and the Light in thee is made darkness. Likewise in Chap. 17.
He says, Behold, the Kingdom of God is within you. By which it is evidently
apparent that the knowledge of the Light in man must first of all [arise] from
within; and not be brought in from without; the which also the holy Scripture
does in many places bear testimony unto.

The which external object, (as we may so speak) or Letter, was written for our
weakness sake, by the internal Light of grace implanted in, and granted unto us
by God only for a testimony [or witness] Mat. 24. even as also the orall [or
uttered] received [or apprehended] word, is to be accounted and esteemed as a
stirring up, and as a mediate help and promotion thereunto. For example,
Suppose that there is a white and a black table set before thee, and it be
demanded of thee, which of those is white, and which black? Thou would hardly
resolve my Question thus propounded to thee, from the bare and mute objects of
the said tables, if thou had not the knowledge of those two diverse colors in
thee before, (John 2. But this I have written unto you concerning those that
seduce you) for the knowledge thereof does not arise from those tables, which
are dumb and dead, but arises from thy innate [understanding] and daily
exercised knowledge.

The objects do indeed (as we have said before) move [or quicken] the senses,
and set (as 'twere) an edge to knowledge, but do not at all bestow the
knowledge; for as for that, It must arise from within; from a knowledge and
discerning understanding of those colors: So likewise if any do desire from
thee a material, external fire, or a Light, [or kindling] out of a Pyrite [or
fire-stone] wherein the fire or the light is hidden; then it is expedient to make
it manifest, and extract (as 'twere) out of the stone, that same occult and
secret fire, and not to bring it into the stone; the which is to be done by a
steel (as appertaining hereunto) and by it the occult fire in the stone must be
excited [or stirred up] the which fire must (notwithstanding) be received by a
well prepared suitable firing or fuel, and so blown up, unless you will intend to
have it vanish and be extinguished.

The which being so done, you shall have a right shining brightsom fire, and as
long as you preserve and cherish it, you may do therewith what you please,
according to your desire. Even so likewise after the same manner is it with
that divine Celestial hidden Light in man; the which (as we have said before)
does not come into a man from without, but rather proceeds from within,
outward: Now this may (at the beginning) be made bright by a true faith in
God, and then furthermore by mediums, as reading, hearing, preaching, and also
afterward by the holy Spirit which Christ has restored unto us, and has
promised to give us, (John 14. No man comes unto the Father but by me) [this
may I say] be enkindled in the obscure and darkish, but yet glowing heart,
[which is] as 'twere a prepared fire, and be again rightly breathed on and made
shining; for in such an heart God will afterward operate and work; In such an
ones heart as believes, and in that one Light to which none can attain, does he
desire to have his abode. And although no man ever saw God with his external
bodily eyes, nor indeed can see him, yet nevertheless may he be seen, discerned
and known by the internal eyes of the heart. Moreover, although that that clear
Light has sent forth its brightness into the whole world, and does as yet
daily enlighten all men without any difference, yet (for all that) the world,
because of its corrupt and depraved nature [cannot, or] will not rightly see
it, much less know it: and therefore also are there so many erroneous ways,
and dangerous opinions vented thereabouts. The which is (in this thing) to be
well considered of, heeded and observed, viz. That God has not in vain, and
casually placed two eyes and as many ears in the top part of the body; for he
would thereby hint unto us, viz. That it is expedient for a man to learn and give
good heed unto a twofold sight and hearing, viz. internal and external; and by
the internal to judge of spiritual things, and the external is to perform its
part, 1 Cor. 2. The which distinction also in the Word of the Spirit and of the
Letter, is to be most diligently observed; for the sake whereof even I also am
willing here (by way of admonition) briefly to discover, and in a few words
only, to the more simple [sort] whereby they may the better be informed, and
attain to the better and more commodious [or profitable] knowledge of the
triune stone, in which the very top of the thing lies.

Now even as the matter of the terrene Philosophical stone is of no value or
esteem with the world, but is rather wholly rejected (as it were) even so
likewise, Christ the eternal Word of the Father, the most noble and celestial,
proved, triune stone is dis-esteemed by the greater part of men in this world,
and is (as 'twere) cast out of our sight, and indeed (to speak the truth)
there is almost nothing more unworthy, more vile and abject, then the saving
Word (of God) it self; and therefore in 1 Cor. 3. it is accounted, especially
by the wise ones of this world, for foolishness; Nay it is not only so
disesteemed and slighted, but also condemned as Heretical, and cast forth to
banishment; the which to hear (it being so great a blasphemy) is to a godly
heart, the highest grief. But however, be it as it will, it is behoveful that the
right believers be thereby tried, and that consequently the aforementioned
testimonies be yet rightly fulfilled, the which also John in his first Chapter
testifies saying, It (viz. the Word) was in the world, and the world knew it
not; Likewise, he came unto his own propriety, and yet was not received by his
own.

Even as also the Corporal and Terrene Water-stone of the Wise men, (whose
virtue and efficacy is unsearchable) is (in reference to its matter) called by
the Philosophers by sundry names. So likewise that Deity and that only light,
(whose virtue and Omnipotency is (in like manner) unsearchable) has many
various titles and names in the holy Scripture, the chiefest of which we shall
here orderly reckon up, on both hands: The stone of the Philosophers is called
the most ancient, the hidden or unknown, the natural, incomprehensible,
celestial, blessed, consecrated stone of the wise men; it is also called true,
without lies, the certainest of things most certain, the secret of all secrets;
a divine virtue and efficacy, hidden from fools, the highest and the lowest
that can be seen under heaven; the wonderful Conclusion, or knitter up of all
Philosophic works; it is likewise called a fit and perfect Agreement of all the
elements; an incorruptible body, that can be touched by no element. It Is
moreover called a Q. E. a double or twofold, and vivifying, which has in it
self a celestial Spirit, the healing of all the sick and imperfect metals, the
eternal light, the highest medicine for all diseases, the noble Phoenix, the
highest and most noble treasure, or choicest good of nature, the universal
triune stone, which is (by nature) conjoined of three, and yet nevertheless is
but only one; yea it is generated and [ingendred or] effected out of one, two,
three, four and five: Likewise it is called, the Catholic Magnesia, or Sperm of
the world; and by many other such names and Titles as are to be found amongst
the Philosophers, all which titles may not unfitly be reckoned up and
comprehended in the highest and most perfect number, viz. a thousand.

Even as therefore now this terrene Philosophical stone, I say, has (as in
reference to its matter) many and diverse, yea almost a thousand titles (as we
have said) and is therefore now and then called wonderful; Even so likewise
these and such like other aforementioned titles and names, may be much rather,
and that also in the highest degree said or published of God the Omnipotent
Good; for verily God, yea the Word of God, his eternal Son, is the right,
eternal, precious, and tried corner-fundamental-stone, which the builders
rejected and banished, Isaiah 28. Psalm 118. Mat. 21. Acts 4. Romans 9. 1 Pet. 2.
He is the true, the ancient, yea the most ancient, who was before the
foundations of the world were laid; yea even from eternity, Isaiah 45. Daniel
7. Esaias 43. Psalm 90. He is the right, the hidden, and unknown God,
supernatural, incomprehensible, celestial, blessed and most praiseworthy, Mark
16. the alone Savior, and consequently the God of all Gods, Deuteronomy. 10. He is
certain and true, and cannot lie; Numb. 23. Romans 3. yea the most certain of
all, and does even what pleases him, and is the alone Potentate, Genes. 17.
Ephesians. 3. He is the most secret [or unknown] and eternal, in whom all the
treasures, and mysteries of wisdom lie hidden, Romans 16. Col. 2. The alone
divine virtue and omnipotency, which is hid from, and unknown unto fools, or
the wise ones of this world. He is the right, the alone, and perfect agreement
of all the elements, from whom and by whom all things proceed, and in whom all
things are, Romans 11. James 1 viz. of an incorruptible essence, which no element
can dissolve or separate, Psalm 16. Acts 2. 13. Likewise, he is the Q. Es. yea
the essence of all essences, and yet notwithstanding is properly no essence; he
is the true and right duplicate Mercury, or the Giant [and Champion] of a
twofold substance, Matthew. 26. Even as it is sung (of him) in the Hymn or Song,
viz. By nature a God, a man, a worthy, etc. who has in himself a Celestial
Spirit, who [also] vivifies all things, yea, is the life it self, Wisd. 7.
Esai. 42. Joh. 14. He is the alone only perfect Savior of all the imperfect
bodies and men; the true, heavenly Physician of the soul, the eternal Light
that enlightens all men, Isa. 60. John 1. the highest medicine for all
diseases, the right Spiritual Panacaea, Wisd. 16. The noble Phoenix, that does
again refresh and quicken with his own blood, his own chickens, as are wounded
and slain by that old Serpent the Devil; Yea he is the choicest treasure, or
highest good in heaven and earth, Psalm 83. Wisdom 7. The triune universal
essence, which is called JEHOVAH, Deuteronomy. 6. and [is] of One [viz.] the divine
essence, then of two, God and man; [then moreover] of three, viz. Persons;
[also] of four, viz. three Persons and one divine essence. So likewise of five,
viz. three Persons and two essences, viz. divine, and withal humane. Besides,
God is the right Catholic Magnesia, or universal Sperm of the world, John 1.
of whom, and by whom, and in whom, all, both celestial, and terrestrial
creatures have their essence, motion and original, Genesis 1. John 1. Acts 17.
Romans 11. Heb. 1. and briefly, he is the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
ending, says the Lord, who is, who was, who is to come, the Almighty, Rev. 1.

But now, even as (in the aforementioned Philosophical work) it is not
sufficient to know the matter only, and to receive [or acknowledge] it for a
triune essence, and to learn the Quality and Property thereof; But it is
(moreover) necessary, that you know how to obtain it, and how to be made a
partaker of the benefit thereof; the which cannot be done by any other means,
then as we have said above, [viz.] those three things are to be first dissolved
and putrified, whereby its darkish shadow, and hairy rough essence, (wherewith
it was at first shadowed over, and was consequently beheld [and visible] in a
deformed and inhumane [or ungentle] shape) may be again taken off; then also,
even as by a further sublimation, its heart and internal soul that lies hid
therein, is to be again drawn out of it, by the universal, pleasant, and
fire-like-shining Seawater, and reduced into a certain corporal essentiality:
Even so, and (indeed) much less able are we to know that triune divine essence,
which is called JEHOVAH, unless it be first of all (in relation to us) even as
it were dissolved and putrified, and the veil of Moses, and the wrathful visage
or shape (the which shape is naturally to us all an impediment or hinderance,
and a terror) be took away therefrom, and that the heart and inward soul,
which lies hid therein, (that is his Son, who is the Lord Christ) be, by the
help and assistance of the holy Spirit (the which does likewise purify our
hearts like to clear, pure water, Ezekiel. 36. Esai. 44. yea does also (like to
the divine fire enlighten us) Jerem. 23. Mat. 3. and does fill us with a sweet
and pleasant comfort, John 16. Ephesians. 4.) produced thereout of, and learned,
and be furthermore converted or turned into an humane God, or God-man. But now,
even as in the Philosophic work, the matter being dissolved into its three
parts or principles, must be congealed with its own proper salt, and reduced
into one only essence; the which is afterward called the Salt of wisdom; So
likewise, [is it with] God, and his heart, that is, the Son must be united to
the Father by their proper Salt; the which [Salt] is in like manner,
essentially implanted in God, and must necessarily be believed and acknowledged
for one God, and not be accounted as two, or three Gods and Essences. If
therefore thou have by this means known God by his Son; and as it were
separated them; and have again (notwithstanding) coupled and conjoined them by
the Spirit of divine wisdom, and the bond of charity [or agreement] Then
behold, the invisible and unknown God, Isa. 45. is made visible, knowable and
intelligible; who does no more appear then as before, so wrathful and so
displeased, but appears after a most courteous, gentle and most friendly way
and manner, -- and does then suffer himself to be felt, beheld and seen by
thee; whereas formerly, God, (before that his Son Christ was formed and
fashioned in us, Gal. 4.) was much rather a terrible God, Deuteronomy. 7. 18. yea a
consuming fire, and is so called: But yet notwithstanding the knowledge of that
divine triune essence, is not as yet sufficiently, and fortunately or blessedly
enough used or conceived of, except thou make a further progress in the
knowledge of him (especially of his heart) and so growest more and more on; for
even as the abovesaid, and hitherto prepared subject in the Philosophical work,
is (without further preparation) rather hurtful then profitable to thee in
medicine for the body; even so also is Christ, 1 John 4. whom unless thou
know better and more perfect, he is but very little as yet conduceable [or
availeable] for a spiritual medicine for thy soul, but will much rather turn to
thy condemnation; and therefore also if thou would be made a partaker of him;
and of those celestial gifts and treasures, and enjoy them prosperously, then
is it necessary that thou proceedest on farther in the personal knowledge of
him, and not set him before thee, and conceive of him as pure-meer-God; but
well to observe that fullness of time appointed by God, Gal. 4. wherein he
received his additional, that is, God and man together, yea he was made the Son
of man.

For even as in the Philosophic work, it is again said, that if you would
bring your work to its effectual power, and make your tincture to perfect the
other simple metals, then it is expedient that you put to your first matter,
and unite therewith a certain other metallic highly dignified body, and of
near affinity to the aforesaid Prima materia, and such as is most acceptable
and grateful thereunto; and you must reduce them into one body. Even so is it
here in the Theological work of the divine nature of the Son of God, (if we
should well enjoy it, and be made partakers thereof) 'twas behoovful that (as
it were) another mettalline body, (that is, flesh and blood, the humanity or
the humane nature, which also is (amongst all the highest dignified creatures
of God in the earth) the one, that is nearest akin, is also the most
acceptable, and the most grateful, and besides, is created after his nature)
adjoined and united it self therewith, and consequently, 'twas fitting that
both were reduced and united into a certain undissolvable body.

But, (even as it is chiefly to be noted and observed in the aforementioned
Philosophical work, as we then informed you, that,) even as this common, or
vulgar body of gold, is not in the least agreeable or convenient for that work,
but because of its imperfection, and many other various defects that it is
subject unto, is unprofitable, and is to be accounted of as a dead thing, and
that likewise for that same reason there must be produced such [a body] as is
clear and pure, and without mixture, and such as was never falsified by any
deceit, but is free from all impurity, and without defect, and what was never
as yet debilitated in its eternal Sulphur; Even so, much less can there be, or
ought there to be any universal humane nature (such as is conceived in sin,
polluted with original transgression, and is daily falsified and defiled with
real sins, and preternatural infirmities, under which all men do generally lie)
accepted [of] imputed [to] and incorporated [with] the divine essence of the
Son of God, but only the unmixed, pure, and perfect humanity, void of all sin:
for if the earthly Adam, who was but a creature only, was (before the fall)
without sin, and was an holy and perfect man; how much more then is that
celestial Adam, which the only begotten Son of God has in himself?

And therefore the celestial, eternal, fundamental and Cornerstone Jesus
Christ, (according to the description of the Philosophic) is, and ever will
be, according to both his natures, of a most highly admirable birth and rise,
and consequently of an unsearchable nature and property. According [or in
relation] to his divinity [he was] from eternity, of the alone divine essence
of his celestial and eternal Father, true God, yea the Son of God, whose
out-going (as the Scripture testifies thereof) was from the beginning and
eternal ( Mich. 5. Psalm. 2. Mat. 16. Col. 1.) But as in reference to his
humanity, he was born in the fullness of time, without sin and fault, Isa. 53.
John 8. according as the Scripture testifies, a true and a perfect man; with a
body and also a soul, Mat. 26. so that now he is of an indissolvable, personal,
and God-man essence, that is, a true God, and true man, in one only person,
indissoluble to all eternity, and must and ought to be so acknowledged and
worshipped as God Omnipotent.

But yet notwithstanding, it could be wished that the eyes of the greater part
of the imaginary learned men were better opend, and their dark spectacles, and
their sophistical vizards that hang before them were removed, and that at
length they might yet once recover their lost sight, Luke 10. But especially,
all the Aristotelians, and the sophisticate, blind-sighted, purblind [as
'twere] in divine works, amongst whom there have been so many various and
diverse disputations even to this very day, in divine things, too too
unchristianlike; nor is there any end at all of the manifold distinctions,
divisions and permixtions, concerning the highly venerable Article of the union
of natures, and community [as 'twere] of Idioms in Christ, so well founded in
the holy Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3. But now, if they will not believe God or his
divine Word, they may yet notwithstanding by the conjunction made of the said
Chymicall work (as aforementioned) and by the unition of the two waters, viz.
of and, know the essence, and be able to feel him (as it were) with their
fingers. But alas! the highest Scholastic art of their Ethnic [or heathenish]
philosophy, so little or meanly founded in the holy Scripture or in Christian
Theology, and their fundamentals and Aristotelian precepts of no value or
moment, about substance and accidents, and many other more [devices] do not at
all lead them to the attainment thereof, little considering that Tertullian,
that old man, has not in vain written, That these Philosophers are the
Patriarchs or chief Fathers of the Heretics; But we conceive it no ways worth
our while to discourse more largely of this thing.

And moreover, even as (in the Philosophic work) that said composition, the
two essences being conjoined now together, must be placed over the fire, and be
putrified, ground or broken, and be well boiled, in which putrefaction and
boiling there do (until it be rendered more then perfect) in the mean while,
manifold and various acts or scenes fall in between, and diverse colors do show
themselves, about which you may find more written in the description of the
terrene work: Even so, this God-man and man-God person Jesus Christ, so
appointed by God, his heavenly Father, in this world, was cast into the fiery
furnace of tribulation, and was therein well boiled (as 'twere) that is, he was
encompassed with various troubles, reproaches, the Cross and tribulation, and
was changed and transmuted (as 'twere) into various shapes, that is, he
suffered hunger, Mat. 4. then presently upon his receiving of baptism, and
after his devoting himself to the ministry of the preaching the holy divine
Word, he was by the impulse of the holy Spirit in the desert, and there tempted
by Satan; and must there necessarily undergo with him a triple combat, for a
testimony and witness to all bought and purchased Christians, as having entered
upon Christianity, and professing the faith of Christ, are tempted by the
Devil, and are by various temptations again solicited and enticed to a falling
off from Christ.

Likewise, he was weary in John 4. also he cried and wept lamentably, Luke 19.
41. also he trembled, [and was sore amazed] Mark 14. he combated with death,
and sweated a sweat of blood, was likewise taken and was bound, Mat. 26. was
smitten on the face by the high Priests servant, was mocked, derided, spit on,
whipped, crowned [with thorns] condemned to death; and then fastened to the Cross
(which himself carried, Joh. 19.) betwixt two thieves, had Gall and Vinegar
given him to drink, Psalm 69. and cried out with a loud voice, and commended
his Spirit into the hands of God his Father, expired it, and at last dyed on
the Cross; and many other afflictions and tribulations did he necessarily
undergo in his life and at his death, of which you may read more at large in
the holy Evangelists.

And even as the Philosophers write, viz. that that boiling and putrefaction in
the aforementioned terrene work is usually made and perfected within forty
days: So are there described and laid down to us in the holy Scripture [a
description of] many and diverse miracles that God has done, by that
aforementioned number: as for instance, that of the people of Israel's, when
they abode in the desert for forty whole years, and had the trial of a very
hard exile, Psalm. 59. Deuteronomy. 8. Likewise Moses his being in Mount Sinai, Exodus
34. Also Elias in his flight, because of Ahab, 1 Kings 19. So Christ in the
desert fasted forty days and as many nights: Likewise also he preached on the
earth for forty months, and performed miracles: He lay forty [hours] in the
Sepulcher; and forty days (between his resurrection from the dead, and his
ascension into heaven) did he walk about and visit his Disciples, and showed
himself alive unto them, Acts 1. Likewise, the City of Jerusalem was destroyed
by the Romans and razed to the ground, the fortieth year after the ascension of
our Lord. But you must here principally note, that the Philosophers call that
putrefaction, because of its black color, ( Cantic. 1. I am black.) the head
of the Crow; Even so Christ himself, (Isa. 53. He had no form, nor, etc.) was
wholly deformed as to his form [and beauty] the most vile of all, full of
griefs and sorrows, and also was despised, in so much that we even hid our
faces because of him, and esteemed him as a thing of naught. Moreover himself
does likewise in Psalm 22. complain of that thing, viz. he was a worm and no
man, the mocking stock of men, and contempt of the People.

In like manner also, this may not unfitly be compared with Christ. viz. As
that Putrified body of Sol does lie for a season like to ashes in the bottom of
the glass, and dead without any efficacy, until by [the addition of] a stronger
heat, its soul does again let down it self drop by drop, and by little and
little, and does again imbibe the sick and as it were dead body, does moisten
it, give it to drink, and preserve it from a total destruction; even so
happened it to Christ, when he was in the Mount of Olives, and upon the Cross,
and was roasted (as it were) by the fire of the divine wrath, Mat. 26. 27. he
complained that he was wholly forsaken by his heavenly Father, and yet
nevertheless was he always refreshed and strengthened, Mark 4. Luke 22. and
imbued (as 'twere) and moistened and imbibed with the divine Nectar; even as
it is wont to be in the terrene body by a daily (airing for, and refreshment)
yea also, when in his most holy passion, and mediating death, his power and
strength, together with his Spirit, was wholly withdrawn from him, and he
plainly [or truly] arrived [or came] to the lower and deepest parts of the
earth, Acts 1. Ephesians. 1. 1 Peter 3. he was (notwithstanding) even yet
conserved, refreshed, and again lifted [or raised] up, by the virtue and power
of the eternal Deity, and thereby vivified and glorified, Romans 14. and here
'twas that his soul and spirit did first of all procure [or bring to pass] a
perfect, true, and indissolvable union with his dead body in the Sepulcher, and
by a most joyful and victorious resurrection and ascension to the heavens, was
it exalted through our Lord Jesus Christ, to the right hand of his Father; Mat.
28. Mark 16. with the which [body] he does now, by the efficacy and virtue of
the holy Spirit (as being a true God and Man, in equal power and glory) rule
and bear command over all things, Psalm. 8. and by his most efficacious Word
preserves and sustains all things, Heb. 1. yea he vivifies all things, Acts 17.
The which wonderful union, and also that divine exaltation cannot be well seen,
and much less considered of by Angels and men in heaven and on earth; yea and
under the earth, Phil. 2. 1 Pet. 1. without fear and trembling; Whose efficacy,
power, and rosey-coloured tincture is able to transmute us imperfect men and
sinners, even now, in body and soul, to tinge, and more then perfectly to cure
and heal us, concerning which we shall speak more anon.

Having now therefore, briefly and plainly disclosed to you, how viz. the
Celestial, Fundamental Cornerstone Jesus Christ may be compared with the
terrene Philosophical stone of the wise men, the matter and preparation whereof
is (as we have heard) a notable type and lively counterpoise (as 'twere) [and
resemblance] of the divine assumption of humane flesh in Christ: We therefore
likewise judge it necessary, that we also behold and learn his efficacy,
virtue, and Tincture, as also his fermentation and multiplication in us men,
who are destitute of efficacy and virtue, and are as it were Imperfect metals.

And albeit, that God created man, at the beginning, above all his other
Creatures, and made him a most noble and most perfect Creature, yea he made him
after his own Image, and breathed into him a living Spirit and an Immortal
Soul; Yet nevertheless, after his fall, was he transmuted into a deformed,
contrary and pernicions [or mortal] shape [and form.]

But now, to restore again such a most noble Creature to his former brightness
[or lustre] and perfection, the Omnipotent God did, out of his mere mercy,
ordain such a medium, as his [viz. mans] restitution might be brought to pass
by after the manner following, viz. as we have before said, that the more then
perfect stone, or Tincture after this its perfection, is to be (in the first
place) yet further fermented, augmented or multiplied, if at leastwise you
would obtain its manifold profit, and have its efficacy and operation
beneficial; Even so, also, Christ, that heavenly blessed stone, must (according
to his God-man perfection) be yet moreover also further fermented and
multiplied (as 'twere) with us, as with his members; that is, we must be
purifyed and united with him, by his own saving ticture of a Rosey color, and
be prepared and conformed to a pure, unfermented and celestial body: for (as
Paul testifies in Romans 8.) he is the first begotten among many brethren, yea
the first begotten before all other Creatures whatsoever, Coloss. 1. by whom
all things in Heaven and Earth are created and reconciled with God: for if we
who are naturally impure, mortal and imperfect, would be again, made pure,
newborn or regenerate, immortal and perfect, then verily, that cannot be done
by any other medium (Hebr. 13.) then by that celestial fundamental corner stone
only, Jesus Christ, who is alone holy, yea the most holy, Dan. 9. the newborn,
raised up and glorified heavenly King, who both is and eternally remains God
and man in one person.

Likewise, even as the stone of the Philosophers, and Chemical King, does (by
its tincture) bestow this benefit; and does also comprehend in it self (by its
perfected process) this efficacy and virtue, as to be capable of transmuting
and tinging the other imperfect simple and disesteemed metals into pure gold;
So also, yea* and much more rather does that heavenly King, that fundamental
corner stone Jesus Christ, only and alone purify us, by his blessed tincture,
that is, by his blood of a Rosey color, and cleanse us sinners and imperfect
men from our innate adamical defilements and dregs, yea he does more then
perfectly cure and heal us, 1 John. 1. and as the Scripture speaking thereof
does testify, that there is no other salvation nor medium either in the Heaven
or the Earth, whereby we may obtain everlasting blessedness and perfection, but
only the name of Jesus, Acts 4. For, albeit that the blind and mad world has
(by the cozenage and deceit of Satan) sought after many and various mediums and
ways of obtaining everlasting happiness and perfection, and have earnestly
busied themselves thereabout; yet notwithstanding Christ Jesus is the only and
alone Savior and Mediator, in whom, and by whom, we are justified, and
blessed before God, and are again purified from the Spiritual Leprosy of sin;
even like unto the one only terrene Savior and Chemical King by whom all the
imperfect metals do purchase and obtain their perfection; and moreover by it
are cured all diseases, but especially the incureable and corporal Leprosy: So
therefore all the other mediums, and those arts that are studied and contrived
by men themselves, viz. such as the Jews, Turks, Heathens, and other heretics
have published, and are as yet defended [and maintained] as necessary mediums,
are (to speak properly thereof) much rather void of Spirit, are false and
Sophisticate Alchimy (Col. 2. Beware least any one, etc.) by which we men are
not purifyed, but are hindered, are not vivifyed [or enlivened] but weakened, yea
are (at length) wholly mortifyed; like to the falsely so called Alchimy, which
has found out many and diverse tinctures and colors, by which men are not
only deceived, but likewise, as (too toomuch misery it is) daily experience
does more then enough testify, they are oftentimes cast into the peril and
danger of their goods and corporal life.

But now, if we men would be again purifyed from our impure filths and feces,
viz. from that Adamical Original sin, wherewith the whole nature of man was at
the beginning corrupted, as if it were with some destructive poison inspired
[or breathed] into our first parents by the devil, and in which we are all
conceived and born, Psalm. 51. Job 15. and would be again made perfect and
happy, John 3. then it must be done by a new regeneration of the holy Spirit;
yea by water and the spirit (even like as the Chemical King also is regenerated
by water and the spirit, and does [thereby] obtain its perfection) in which new
and spiritual regeneration, (1 Pet. 3.) the which is accomplished from above,
in the holy Baptism by the water and the spirit, must we be washed and
purifyed by the blood of Christ and so be made one body with him; and cloth
our selves with him as 'twere with a garment, as Paul says, in Col. 3. and
Ephesians. 5. for even as the Philosophers stone does aftetwards unite it self by
its Tincture with the other Metals, and is together with them reduced into a
perfect and indissoluble body; so also Christ (as being the head of us all, 1
Cor. 4. does even unite himself with his members by his rosey colored
tincture, and reduces and perfects it into a perfect body and building, Romans
12. 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 5. which is created according to God in ( Joh. 3.) right
and true Justice and holiness, Ephesians. 4. And verily, that regeneration of man
which is performed by the holy Spirit in holy Baptism, is properly no other
thing than a certain inward spiritual renewing of fallen man with God and
Christ, 1 Cor. 12. In so much that whereas before we were carnal in relation to
the birth made by our father and mother, and were by nature enemies to God, and
sons of wrath, (Romans 2.) Ephesians. 2. we are now by means of the second and
spiritual birth in holy Baptism, made friends and sons, yea heirs of God, and
coheirs with Christ, Heb. 3. For, for this reason Christ also dyed, and rose
and revived, Romans 14. that by this his process, that is, by his Passion, Death,
Resurrection, and Ascension, we might have an entrance into an holy place [or
house] not made with hands, and that he might prepare for us the way to an
everlasting Country. And therefore also is it necessary, that we likewise as
his brethren and sisters, ( Math. 12. Ephesians. 5. and Psalm. 22.) do follow him in
sufferings, Math. 8. and grow up and increase in an acceptable humility, Luke
12. and in other virtues; and moreover, that we be altother conformable [and
suitable] to [or for] his body; that so at last, even we also who have followed
him here in the regeneration, and are dead and mortifyed in him, may likewise
live with him and enter into his glory.

The which spiritual exhortation and Christian imitation of our celestial King
his life and deeds, comes not from our worth, merit, or proper and peculiar
pleasure (for the natural man is, together with all his faculties, blind, deaf,
and dead in spiritual things) but merely and only (1 Jo. 5.) by the efficacy
and operation of the holy Spirit, which is effectual and powerful in us, by the
blessed washing or bath of regeneration and baptism; after the same sort is it
with minerals and Metals, which being in themselves dead, ( Hebr. 10.) and
rusty as it were, and cannot possibly purify or amend themselves, are even by
the help of the spagyrical spirit purified, renewed, dissolved and perfected.

If therefore now we are again (as we have heard) regenerated by the water and
the spirit, (2 Cor. 5.) that is, by the blessed baptism, and by the red
fountain or stream tincted by Christ, and incorporated with the Lord Christ,
our heavenly King, (1 Cor. 3.) and are washed with his blood from our
hereditary sins, and are purified, and are made partakers of the first fruits
of his holy Spirit, Then is it expedient, that we be fed and that we drink at
the beginning, a little and a little, (according to the saying of St. Peter,
with pure and wholesome milk, like new born [babes] yea like infants in Christ,
until at length we becoming like living ( Apoc. 1.) and ripe stones, are built
up to a spiritual house and high Priesthood, and made fitting to offer up
spiritual Sacrifices, such as are well pleasing and acceptable to God through
Jesus Christ; for verily, a Christian man regenerated by the water and the
spirit, does not comprehend all at once, nor is able to apprehend all, but it is
needful that he grow up and increase day by day, and by little and little in
the knowledge of God and Christ.

For even as in the Philosophers work it is to be seen, how that at the
conjunction of the two [matters] of the Wise men, (Cant. 3. It was but a little
that I passed from them, etc.) viz. of the terrene gold, and of the watery
matter prepared as it were after a celestial manner, when (at the beginning)
they are put in a certain dissolving dish, or vessel, and reduced into as it
were a dry liquour, and ana; All is not put to the composition together, and at
one time, but one part is added after another, and that by little and little,
and at certain diverse times; Even so, yea and much more rather ought this to
be done in the Theological work; for as soon as the conjunction and spiritual
union is made of Man with Christ in Baptism, and that we are so reduced (as we
said before) into one body with him, so soon also [or, then] must such a man
learn the Christian faith by little and little, and comprehend one Article
after another, until at length he be altogether confirmed in them, and attain
to a perfect knowledge.

Therefore also the Christian faith ( Phil. 3.) is (like as is done with the
terrene watery prepared matter, of which we have made mention in its proper
place) divided in twelve Particles, or short Articles, according to the number
of the 12. Apostles, and further is then again distributed into 3. principal
Articles, as 1. Concerning our Creation. 2. Our Redemption. 3. Our
Sanctification, the which it is expedient that a man propose to himself to learn
one after the other. But yet it must be done by little and little, and at
diverse [distinct] times, [and seasons] least he should be burdened more then is
fit, and be (as it were) wholly overwhelmed with his learning of them, by which
he might happily be a loather thereof, and be plainly alienated from the faith.
To prevent which, even the third Article concerning our Sanctification may be
divided into 7. diverse members or particles; ([see] in the Communication of
[the book of] the infallible Epilogue or conclusion, Amen,) and may be pressed
upon men to learn at seven distinct times (according to the information given
in the terrene work; the which being done, and the faith being thus fully
comprehended from part to part, then the chiefest and most necessary thing is,
that a man does most diligently preserve in himself that knowledge of the faith
that he has so comprehended by the grace of God, and most cautiously beware
that he neither falsify it or lose it. And, even as (as we have before told
you) in the said Philosophical work you are to take for that fermentation and
multiplication of the only terrene King or mere and pure tincture, three
singular parts or Particles of the best pure, yea the most purified Gold,
purged by, not because of any defect in the stone, or imperfection of its
Tincture, but because of the impotency and weakness of the Metals themselves;
And (that you may the better understand my intention) [know] that although the
tincture or stone be perfectly prepared in it self; yet nevertheless, the gross
and imperfect Metals cannot (by reason of their natural infirmity and
weakness) draw to themselves and apprehend that (as I may so say) Angelical
perfection and subtility of the stone or Tincture unto it self, except a
commodious and requisite [medium] be also taken, by the which they will be
transmuted the more easily.

Even as therefore it is and ought to be so done (I say) in the Chemical work,
even so in like manner must there be had a very special care here in our
Theological work, ( Phil. 2.) of the spiritual renovation and Celestial
regeneration of man; for although that our Celestial King Jesus Christ has
perfectly freed us from all impurities, by that plenary obedience of his which
he performed to his heavenly Father in our stead, and has made us sons and
heirs of God; yet nevertheless we cannot in all things and wholly comprehend and
receive that saving and plainly divine tincture of himself, (neither his other
treasures and great benefits,) because of our innate infirmity and weakness (2
Cor. 4.) nor can we firmly apply it to our selves, [unless we do thus] viz. we
must (if we would rightly partake of him) come yet a little nearer, and must
have added those three saving singular parts, reckoned up and mentioned by God
himself, which parts are thereto requisite, and they are chiefly termed ( Ephesians.
2.)

(1) His holy Word, the which is pure, yea purer then Gold and Silver that has
been seven times tried in a furnace of earth, Psalm. 12. and 18. Yea, it is to
be loved more then thousands of golden wedges.

(2) A saving faith, the which is a singular gift of God ( Joh. 6. 2 Thessalonians. 3.)
and arises by the Word of God, Romans 10. and does also unite the hearts of men,
Acts 5. and is tried in the fire of tribulation, Gal. 3.

(3) A plain-hearted love to God and ones neighbor, the which likewise is the
gift of God, and the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13. yea it is God himself and
so is it called, 1 John 4. chap. by which singular [and principal] parts, viz.
the word faith, and charity, ( Ephesians. 5.) if they be exercised and made use of
after an orderly way and manner, then (first of all) the Lord Christ can
rightly operate in us simple and imperfect metals or men, and make a perfect
projection, and have a saving ingress with his divine tincture and heavenly
Unction; for without this [aforesaid medium] 'twill be most difficult for us to
lay hold on him, or to be made rightly partakers of his tincture. For presently
that terrible and lying false Chemist Satan does there show himself, and does
daily lay snares and gins for the new and regenerated Men and Sons of God,
(especially if they accomplish their covenant made with Christ in the holy
Baptism, and do as St. Paul bids to be done, viz. to fight a good valiant
fight, to keep the faith and a good conscience,) and endeavor by his faithful
[or trusty] helpers (1 Pet. 5. ^) such as are our flesh subject to sins, (
James 3.) and the wicked seducing world, to draw and headlongly to thrust them
into his dangerous net: and also (which grief be it spoken) he does most
oftentimes, by Gods permission, (for in Prove. 24. even the just man falls
seven times a day) bring many a one to a headlong fall. Even so he attempted
vehemently to ensnare and entrap the Lord Christ our head and Captain, and
earnestly tempted him presently upon his Baptism, and at his entrance upon his
holy ministry; and as he did then, so likewise after the like manne^ does he
evidently show and discover a^ all times and seasons his secret fly tricks*
subtilties, and deceits against the Christian Church even to this very day. Now
first he busied himself to tempt Christ by telling him of the great penury [or
want tribulations and various streights he was in, and that he should doubt of
the Word of God, and of his most merciful and gracious promise, pretending that
God was not his friend thus to suffer him to endure hunger so long in the
desert; But now if this temptation does not wor^ with Christians, then this
enemy sets upon men with anothet temptation, on the other side [or extream] and
would have them to rely upon God for more then he has promised them in his
Word, ( Deuteronomy* 10.) for so he endeavored to persuade even Christ himself, viz.
that he should cast himself down, ( Math. 4.) from the highest top of the
Temple; for God will sufficiently protect [and defend] him* But now, if this
will not do, he will ye^ shamelesly have a third temptation, and this is by
promising Riches, viz. that for money and temporal honors sake, he should
depart from God from his Divine Word, and become an Idolator, and fall down and
worship himself (viz. Satan) Thus feared he not boldly to wrestle with Christ
himself and to drive him to a fall. The which also the faithful God and Father
in Heaven ( Job 2.) does out of his peculiar Counsel and for certain causes,
sometimes permit such a thing to be done against his own [people] that so they
may by this means grow and increase in faith, hope, patience, in a true and
right invocation (or prayer) unto God, and may by those rudiments or
beginnings, and exercisings of the Cross, well prepare to themselves the way to
the last conflict [viz.] of death, (which, our old man must necessarily
undergo,) and that they may by this means obtain an eternal victory against
that enemy; the which will come to pass, if they first know all his tricks, and
most crafty snares; and do then valiantly and stoutly accomplish that as by the
divine grace meets with and opposes him.

For, whereas we are to fight and strive, not with flesh and blood, but with
Principalities and Powers, as Saint Paul speaks, viz. with the chiefest of this
world, (who rule in the darkness of this world) and with the evil Spirits under
heaven; therefore we are not in the least able to resist them or their
spiritual temptations by our own proper strength and power; but here we must
(according to the example of Christ our Savior and standard bearer) lay hold
on spiritual weapons; and with them and the Word of God (as with the sword of
the Spirit) Ephesians. 6. in or by Faith, are those our spiritual enemies to be
smitten and overcome. And to this purpose, 'twill seem necessary for us to do
as that Christian warrior Saint Paul the Apostle in Ephesians 6. commands to be
done; viz. We must betake our selves to the armoury [or storehouse] of the holy
Spirit, and there (1 Timothy 6.) take the iron breast plate of God, and put it on,
and our loins must be girt with truth, and we must be clad with the
breast plate of righteousness, and our feet must be shod [or harnessed] as
ready prepared for the Gospel of peace, and lets take the sword of the Spirit,
the which (as we said before) is the Word of God; But above all things, let us
take the shield of faith, by which we shall be able to blot out, and quench all
the fiery darts of the devil; for the faith in Jesus Christ is a most firm
buckler, the which the Devil can never perforate, nor possibly wound the heart
through it. Moreover, whereas the regiment of the fire also in the Philosophic
work is to be heeded with the greatest diligence, and must necessarily be
administered and attended on (in the coction [or digestion] of the matter)
without ceasing; and even as we have before briefly mentioned the Philosophical
fire (by which the whole business is chiefly to be perfected) v^z. what it
properly is, and how called, viz. an essential, a preternatural, and a divine
fire, that lies hid in the compound, and unto which must be afforded [or
administred] an help and stirring up with the terrene material fire, (1 Timothy
1.) Even so likewise, is the pure Word of God, or (which is the same) the
Spirit of God; (which is also compared with a fire, Jerem. 23. and is so
called) hidden in us men, forasmuch as it was indeed implanted in us by nature,
but by the corruption thereof, was again blotted out and made dark, ( Phil. 3.)
And therefore must there be an helping and succor exhibited after such a
manner by (as 'twere) a certain other external fire, that is, by a continual
and daily use and exercise of Piety and Christian Virtues in the time of joy
and sadness; as also by a diligent consideration of the pure divine Word, if
(at least) we would have that internal light of grace that is granted unto us,
and the Spirit of God to operate and work in us, and not be plainly
extinguished, ( Eccles. 10.) and with this aid and assistance must it be
continually blown up and incessantly quickened without wearisomness and
desistency. As for instance, it is wont thus to be done in earthly things; for if
a workman strongly files Iron, (which in it self is cold) it will by the
continuance of that motion become hot; So a Light or Lamp, Col. 3. unless it be
continually nourished with supply of oil, 'twill at length fail and be
extinguished: Even thus it is with man as to his internal fire; except it be
daily, and without wearisomness and tediousness exercised (as we said above) it
does by little and little decrease, until at length he be deprived wholly
thereof: Upon which account, the Word of God (as we have often informed you,
and as an important necessity requires it) is to be diligently heard, well
considered of, and to be exercised without ceasing.

And what we have here spoken as to hearing thereof, the which is not to be
done only with the external and beastlike eyes, but with the internal eyes of
the mind, (1 Timothy 1.) the same is to be understood of the sight after the same
manner. But that you may the better understand my meaning, know, that I speak
of the right and pure Word of God, and not of those humane glosses or
expositions of either the Ancients or Modern, nor of the Pharisaical Ferment
and Leaven of the Scribes, ( Romans 16.) which (with grief be it spoken) is now
adays preferred before the divine Word; or at leastwise, (though it be but as
it were mouse-dung mixed with pepper) is earnestly pressed upon men to be heard
and accounted of as the preaching of the word of God.

But I mean no such thing in the least; Those kinds of trifles, and such
Sermons as fill the ears of men only, I value not a rush; nor do I here speak
of such; but I speak (according as we have mentioned it in its proper place) of
the true and clarified Word of God, Psalm 19. and 119. that passed out of the
mouth of God, Deuteronomy. 8. Mat. 4. and is even yet [to this day] preached by the
holy Spirit, 1 Cor. 1. the which is not only (as some do reproachfully and
sottishly speak thereof) a mere empty sound, but is Spirit and Life, and the
saving Power of God, ( John 6.) to all such as believe therein. Concerning
which hearing, the Kingly Prophet David does thus speak (Psalm. 64.) I will hear
what the Lord will speak in me. Out of the which internal and divine hearing
the Word of God, (as out of a certain spring or fountain) a true vivifying
faith, which is efficacious by or through charity, ( Gal. 5.) does take its
original; for as Paul says, Romans 10. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by
the Word of God, (2 Pet. 2.)

So therefore, now, if the Word of God be pure and clear, then may the hearing
be also pure and clear, Luke 21. and so consequently that faith, which (as
'twere) flows out of that hearing, will be pure and uncorrupted, and is
effectual by charity, [and shows it self] as toward God in an humble obedience
to his holy Precepts and Will, and also in praying, in praising, and in giving
of thanks; and as toward ones neighbor in a well-minded loving exhibition [or
doing] of diverse good Works; insomuch that Charity is not the least, but (as
Paul says) the highest virtue of all others.

So likewise Christ himself in his long farewell Sermon at his departure, Ioh.
13. does with much dilgence exhort unto that exercise of Charity, and left
behind at that time this lesson as a farewell, saying, This is my Commaudement
that ye love one another, even as I also loved you; for so shall all men know
that ye are my Disciples. Likewise in 1 John 2. He that says he knows God, and
yet does not keep his Commandments, is a liar, and there is no truth in him;
But he that keeps his word, in him verily the Charity [or Love] of God is
perfect. And besides in 1 John 4. God is Charity [or Love] and he that abides
therein, abides in God, and God abides in him, Col. 1. By all this it is
evident, how that Charity is the true bond of Perfection, by which we are
incorporated into Christ himself; So that he is in us, and we in him, (2 John
3.) he in his Father, and his Father in him; and this is his will; The which
Christ himself does also testify in that place aforementioned, where he says,
If any one keeps my saying, he it is that loves me, and I will love him, and
(...) will come unto him, and make our abode with him. John 5. he says, If ye
shall keep my Commandments, ye abide in my love; concerning the which Charity,
and how it relates to our neighbor, it is elegantly described in 1 John 4. If
any one (says John) does say that he loves God, and yet hates his Brother,
he is a liar; for he that loves not his brother whom he has seen, how shall
he love God whom he has not seen? And this command have we from him, that he
who loves God, do love his brother also; But as to the property of that Love,
what it is, Saint Paul expresses it in the following words, 1 Cor. 13. Love
(says he) is long-suffering and kind, envieth not, vaunteth not it self,
neither is it puffed up, nor is it weary of doing good to its neighbor. It Is
therefore easy to be seen and understood, that [viz.] there can be no true and
right Love [or Charity] which does not serve its neighbor with good and
charitable works, Col. 3. and yet [indeed] there are many of [such as call
themselves] Christians that do rashly boast thereof: Moreover it is evident that
good works as are pleasing unto God, do not precede faith, but is as it is with
fruits which follow [or succeed] the stock and tree; the which if it be good,
does also bring forth good fruits; and for this cause, works do not make faith,
but faith makes works good, grateful and acceptable, Ierem. 5. Upon this
account therefore (the which is the chiefest thing here) we are justified by
faith alone, and obtain life eternal [thereby.]

If therefore now the regenerate man does so Christianly and piously behave
himself (after the aforesaid manner) in his life and in all his actions, then
also will he not in the least want his fruits. Such a man now is like unto the
composition in the terrene work; he is placed by God in the furnace of
tribulation, and is so long pressed with straights of all kinds, and with
various calamities and troubles, until he becomes dead to the old Adam and
flesh, Ephesians. 4. and be like a truly new man, which (according to God) is created
in a right and true justice and holiness, and is again risen up, as Saint Paul
in Romans 6. does testify, where he says, We together with Christ are buried in
death by baptism; for even as Christ is risen from the dead, so let us also
walk in newness of life. If this now be done, and that a man does daily cease
to sin, that so by this means sin may bear no more rule over him, then does the
solution of the adjoined body of gold (as in the terrene work) take its
original in him, and (as we have before said) the putrefaction, so that he
becomes (as 'twere) wholly dissolved, ground, destroyed, and putrified after a
spiritual manner; the which solution and putrefaction notwithstanding is wont
to be sooner done with one then another, but however it is fit that it be done
even in this temporal life. That is, such a man is so well digested, boiled and
mollified in the fire of tribulation, 1 Pet. 4. that he even despairs of all
his own power and strength, and seeks for his comfort in the alone grace and
mercy of God, 2 Cor. 4. in the which furnace of the Cross, and continual fire,
the man (like the terrene body of the gold) obtains the right black head of the
Crow, that is, he is made altogether deformed, and as to the world, Wisdom 5
(Job 30.) is only derided and mocked by it; and that not only forty days and
nights, or years, but oftentimes also for his whole life time, insomuch that he
necessarily undergoes many a time more grief of heart then comfort and
gladness, and more sadness then joy in this lifetime. And here then, by this
his spiritual death, his soul is wholly taken out, and is (as 'twere) carried
up on high; that is, he is as yet with his body on the earth, but with his
Spirit and soul (which lives no more now to the world but unto God, nor takes
delight in earthly things, but places his highest comfort in spiritual things,
2 Cor. 4.) he tends upwards to an eternal Life and Country, and does so
institute and order all his actions, that they are not earthly, but (as far
forth as may be done in this time [or place]) are heavenly; and now he lives no
more according to the flesh, but after the Spirit, not in the unfruitful works
of darkness, but (as in the daylight) in the works that abide the trial, (all
being done in God.) The which separation of the body and soul of man is done
(as is said [afore]) in spiritual dying to sin, and not in the corporal dying
of the sinful^ flesh: For even as it is with the solution of the body and soul
in the Philosophical^ [or terrene work] where indeed the body and soul are
separated as it were the one from the other, yet nevertheless have a most
straight [or close] coherency in the glass, and abide conjoynedly, [or
together] and moreover the soul does daily refresh the body, and preserve it
from final destruction; and do even to the time appointed by God 2 Cor. 5.
remain (as yet) inseparable Even so also the withered and as it were dead body
in man (1 Peter 3.) is not it this its School of [or exercise with] the Cross,
even wholly forsaken by the soul, but is daily (if the fervency of the
tribulation exceeds measure) moistened by the Spirit from above, with the
heavenly dew and divine Nectar, is imbibed comforted and preserved [thereby]
the which [is a] celestial refreshment and recreation of the deadened terrene
body in men; For our temporal death (which is the wages of our sins, Romans 6. is
not a right death, but a natural solution of body and soul, and is much rather
a kind of a gentle sleep, yea now ['tis] truly an indissoluble conjunction
(understand in the godly) of the Spirit of God and of the soul, and so remains.

Besides, it is very fitly compared with that wonderful ascending and descending
in the terrene work, as to its number, which happly is wont to be done seven
times; for there are to be found six thousand years troubles and tribulations,
viz. as long as the world shall endure. In which, such men as are void of all
comfort, are at all times, in their crosses, calamities, and diversities of
troubles, plentifully erected, comforted and strengthened again by the Spirit
of God; And this (praise and glory be to God [for it]) is even yet daily so
done, and likewise will be so long done until the great universal Sabbath and
day of rest of the seven thousandth year shall take its beginning; and there,
then, that spiritual refreshing or cooling shall in that change or time only
cease, and shall obtain its so long-wished for end; and in the room thereof
(when God shall be all in all, 2 Timothy 4.) shall that eternally abiding joy and
rejoicing be begun.

But during that digestion and coction of the spiritual dead body in man, there
will also after such a like manner, (as is to be seen in the terrene work) many
diverse colors and signs, that is, miseries, and troubles, and tribulations of
all kinds (the chiefest of which is that before mentioned temptation, which is
done and caused by the devil, the world, and our flesh) show and represent
themselves; all which do notwithstanding betoken a good beginning, viz. that
such a well vexed [or digested] man; will in the end obtain an happy, blessed
and wisht-for issue; whereof the Scripture likewise is a witness, in which (in
2 Timothy 3. and Acts 4.) it is written, viz. that all those as will live happy in
Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution, and that we must necessarily enter into
the Kingdom of heaven through many tribulations and streights. To which end
also, Saint Anstine says thus.

Do not wonder (my Brother) if (when thou shall be made a Christian) a thousand
troubles do beset thee round on every side, for Christ is the head of our
faith, and we are his members, and therefore we must not only follow him, but
also imitate his life: Now the life of Christ was encompassed with all kinds of
tribulations and extreme want; be was derided by the Scribes and Pharisees, and
was (finally) delivered up to a most shameful death for us miserable sinners:
Hence may thou easily conclude, that if God vouchsafe thee such a life, and
chastise thee with such a like persecution, he intends to bring thee into the
number of his Elect; for we cannot possibly come unto God without those
persecutions and tribulations: For such as endeavor to enter into Paradise,
must necessarily walk through the fire and water, though it be Peter, to whom
the keys of heaven are delivered, Or, Paul a chosen Vessel and Armor of God;
Or, John to whom all the secrets of God are revealed; For all must necessarily
confess, that by various tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of God.

Thus much Saint Austin says.

Moreover, this likewise is to be well heeded, viz. that the Chemical
Philosophers have stamped or signed Antimony with this same Character or Mark,
by [or through] which [] (as we have said in the Chemical preparation) the
following fermentation must be done [or pass] and that before it be put to the
obtained elixar or chemical King; or must undergo the sudatory [or stoving]
bath with the old white [or grey-headed] Saturn. The which may verily be
accounted of as a kind of miracle and mystery, and is to be so looked upon; for
even that form or figure is to be found also amongst us Christians, and is made
use of and set down almost in a like concealment [or secret hiding] for there
was a mast, [or piece of straight wood] with a cross piece at the top,
delivered into the hands of our chiefest Captain, and Emperor of the whole
Christianity; and by it is hinted unto us, that he, before he could arrive to a
peaceable and quiet Possession, must necessarily be well tried by the Cross,
miseries, and other calamities of this world; and be (as 'twere) tossed
therewith, and be by them exercised and proved; the typical prefiguration and
signification of which, those said Philosophers as lived in those ancient
times, did not (perhaps) rashly and casually only signify by such a sign [or
character] and that, even in the Chemical work, which requires also such a
Process.

All which things may not unfitly be referred to the aforementioned School [or
Lesson] of the Cross, and the tribulations and persecutions of Christians,
(viz) that they also, before they can enter into that everlasting rejoicing and
rest, must be constrained to lead and run their race through the burdensome and
difficult course of the world, or to undergo the School of conflicts [or
striving] and the sweating-Bath, with the old inimicitious Saturn, that is,
with the old Adam and Satan, Job 26.

Now, according to those before mentioned tribulations and calamities, there are
many and diverse signs and miracles, and also great changes here and there in
the world, that are well to be observed, and diligently considered of and
weighed; for there is mention made of wars, and rumors of wars, various sects,
the plague, and scarcity of corn, all which things are true forerunners and
messengers (as it were) of our redemption, and its being very near at hand.

Briefly, when the universal resurrection of the dead shall be at hand, then
(at first) those men that have overcome by the blood of the Lamb (for the
former new regeneration made in baptism, is the beginning only of this second
right, and now, (first of all) perfect, and new regeneration in life eternal)
shall quicken and rise up to that new and never fading life, their soul and
spirit being again so united with the body, and again reduced into an
indissoluble [or inseparable] eternally abiding copulation, [or conjunction;]
So that we shall be made, by the virtue and efficacy of the Omnipotent heavenly
King Christ (with whom we shall be by faith, really, truly and efficaciously
coupled, above the reason of all men) glorified with a pure, spiritual and
wonderful virtue, strength, agility, and glory, and excellency, yea shall be
made transparent, excellent, and more then perfectly happy, Isaiah 26. The
which wonderful unition of the body, soul and spirit, and likewise its divine
glorification, and this exaltation of the elect, may (as it is in the terrene
work) be considered of by us in this life, but not without amazement and
trembling, much less be seen without much terror.

And therefore, for this cause, even the very Angels themselves are (as 'twere)
ravished into admiration, and desire to peep into all these things: Where we
shall then reign (with Christ our eternal Prince of heaven, and with all the
Angels and ministering Spirits) in eternal joy and glorious majesty; and bear
rule over all things for evermore, Gal. 6.

And (that we may at last conclude) even as in the Chemical work Philosophical,
we added after the beginning a short, but yet necessary correcting of [or way
to amend] the neglected or corrupted composition (viz. how it may be
commodiously helped in time; where we likewise have orderly showed the whole
Process, together with the suitable means thereto appertaining) even so
likewise must be here considered in the Theological work, and that very
diligently, the correction [or amending] and the restitution of a miserable
spiritual sinner; as for instance, if happily either one or two [or the first and
second] defects, do show themselves in any man, that he falls into sin, by the
permission of God, and by the impulsion of the abominable Satan, of the wicked
world, and of his own flesh; and should slip, either through pride and
arrogance, the which are innate in us all, (and may be compared with the
dangerous sublimation, or redness, which we have termed the first and second
defect in the terrene Kingdom) Or else should (because of his enormious,
grievous and corporal sins that he has committed) at length despair of the
mercy of God, or should (by reason of the overmuth heat of tribulations) rise
up against God his Creator, and impatiently undergo the Cross, (which said two
defects have a resemblance with the third and fourth errors) Then must such a
miserable and infected man be (like as it is to be done with the terrene
composition, that you put in and spoiled) be again dissolved (in the first
place) that is, after the acknowledgement of his excess, he is to be again
absolved and purified (by the solutory [or dissolving] key of holy solution as
often as he shall need it) from his sins and daily defections; Then (moreover)
must he be necessarily fed, his thirst quenched, be refreshed and comforted (in
the holy Supper of the Lord, with the pure and heavenly milk, 1 Cor. 3. and
with the true sweat of the celestial Lamb, 1 John 5. as (if 'twere) with blood
and water, yea with water and the fountain of life; and even as it were, with
the fat feast of pure wine and marrow, Isaiah 25. (Apocal. 19.) and [that]
public [proffer] of the fountain of grace, Zach. 13. the which (like to the
Mercurial water in the Chemical work) is to the unworthy and wicked ones, the
highest poison, until at last (as it is with the terrene body [or work]) he
arrives to a final congelation and plenary fixation; that is, to a perfect and
abiding perfection of eternal happiness.

The which two most wholesome mediums for the curing and healing of a poor
miserable sinner, (viz. The holy absolution, and the holy Supper) the Faithful
and Omnipotent God has appointed for the benefit of man; and has delivered
and committed them to his most beloved Church, to be administered and
communicated in a time of necessity; For we are (there) by the now spoken of
absolution (or (as it is called) the office of the keys) a true repentance
going before, pronounced free and absolved; or else if we remain impenitent and
boldly persevere in our sins, then are we (by the Christian key of cursing and
excommunication, which does likewise appertain to that office) tied in our
sins, and delivered to Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit
may be saved in the day of the Lord, 1 Cor. 5.

The Epilogue or Conclusion.
THus have thou, my friend and courteous Reader, a brief and simple
demonstration and declaration, and (withal) an infallible counterpoise, and
allegorical comparison of the terrene Chemical, and the true Celestial stone
Jesus Christ, by whom thou may attain to a certain happiness and perfection,
not only here in this earthly life, but also in the life eternal: Now although
this comparing might have been more accurately (perhaps) and more copiously
handled in the before mentioned Theological work, yet you are to know, that I am
no Professor [or Teacher] of the Scripture, or any Aristotelian Thelogist [or
Divine] according as the custom of the World is now a days; but that I am a
citizen and a private person; for, as for that knowledge vouchsafed me by God,
I obtained it not by study in any of their famous Academies, or Universities,
but in the Universal School of nature, (Job 12.) and out of the great book of
Miracles (in which all the God-learned did for many ages past exercise
themselves) did I likewise learn. And therefore I have directed that
description of mine, not according to the decked and as 'twere, foot and half,
or lofty letter [and expression] but (as I said before) according to simplicity
and plainness. Besides, it is not my office [or function] to set down here any
more plentiful and larger treatise [or Commentary] about Theological things;
but that which I have done, I did it (as much as concerns me) for such as have
not as yet made such a large progress; to them was I willing to prescribe some
short delineation, whereby they may make an higher search thereinto. For it
seems to be the duty of every lover of the truth, by no means slightly to pass
over the wonders of God, nor to wrap them up in a perpetual silence, but to
celebrate, amplify and magnify them. Moreover I could willingly make a public
confession of my faith, viz. what I think or believe of the Articles of the
Christian Religion; But, alas! alas! the case stands thus at present, that many
pious Christians, Psalm. 116. are proclaimed for heretics by the rash judgments
of most slanderous lying back-biters, (unless they sing their song) and are
prosecuted with a bitter hatred, and are suspected of heresy. The which wicked
blasphemies of the world, and their rash judgments do not in the least offend
any true Christian that is reviled with those calumnies; for verily the Devil
and his filthy Children have always accustomed so to do, and have done the
same to Christ himself, and to all such as imitate his way, ( Psalm. 94. Jerem,
11.) and do even to this day do it; concerning which I shall not at present say
any more, but refer it to the supreme judge of all judges, who alone is the
true searching stone of all hearts, (1 Chronicles. 19.) God is the searcher of all
hearts.

Moreover as to what we have before spoken in relation to the aforementioned
terrene stone, we are here willing in this conclusion, (by way, (as 'twere) of
an overplus) to put the lover of the Chymick Art upon the consideration of the
former relation which I have made, and again faithfully to press it (as 'twere)
upon him. For even as in an excellent song some good clause is repeated oftener
then once only; so also as concerning this Point, the same is wont or fit to be
done by us, viz. that a man ought not to direct his purpose and his cogitations
to the terrene Philosophical stone, or make a beginning or entrance upon that
kind of labor, except he first know the Celestial [stone] aright, (for whose
sake it is that the terrene stone is given by God,) has prepared it, or at
least wise has begun to prepare them both jointly together in very deed and
with his utmost study, viz. the spiritual and corporal stone, Eccles. 1. And
herein I do (in this part) consent or agree with all the true Philosophers,
viz. that a beginning to labor in so high a work without the knowledge of
nature, is rashness, yea (also) the terrene stone is not only very difficulty
obtained without the true knowledge of the Celestial Cornerstone Christ, as in
whom the whole nature perfectly consists, but verily also in my judgment 'twill
be even almost impossible; this, I conceive it my part, diligently to note and
discover. And therefore this Point must well be considered of, nor must there
be such a greedy and inconsiderate striving after that supreme Art (as many men
are accustomed to do) when as (for the most part) they are not at all apt and
fit for such an Art, nor have been, no not so much as a very little, rightly
exercised in that so oft-spoken of knowledge [of Christ] unless they desire to
experimentate [or meet with] a shameful event and issue of that same thing.
For, as is the beginning, so (most an end) is the success of the event; and
this (with grief be it spoken) the experience it self of many a one can
witness; and this is to be merely imputed to their immature intention, and to
their ignorance.

But further, here is another thing to be more admired at; for there are some
men to be found that do not only earnestly seek for that supreme Art, but do
even endeavor to handle and to exercise it, Eccl. 7. and yet nevertheless are
in a doubt whether or no it be natural and truly magical, or whether it be
unnatural and nigromantical, and to be acquired only by spirits, and unlawful
mediums: Alas! my good man, It Is even no such matter; for the Devil and all
wicked men have not (without the divine permission) so much power as to have to
do with the very least portion of this Art, much less to have it as their own,
and to use it as they list themselves. No, no; it is not at all so; for (I say)
it consists only in the hands and power of God, that bestows it to whom he
will, and again takes it away at his pleasure. For no voluptuous men, much less
the cursed and hellish spirits are admitted to that Art, which has its
Original from and of God, but such an one only whose spirit is (contrary-wise)
simple, right, true, constant, and of a pure and pious essence. The which
spirit notwithstanding the secure and wicked world does not know even to this
day, and is therefore likewise ignorant in many things, as to the essence and
supreme mystery thereof; for as soon as it hears with its ears any thing spoken
thereof, and cannot so soon and easily comprehend it, then those worldly
companions, ( Wisd. 1.) do call it foolishness; and upon that score also, that
same spirit will (by reason of their blindness) be perpetually hidden, and will
(at last) be took from them altogether.

But now, that I may not proceed in the rementioning [of this thing] farther
from my purpose then is necessary, but may again touch it [or briefly handle
it] and so make an end; I am therefore very desirous to press this exceedingly
upon the pious artist, (by way of a friendly exhortation) viz. that according
as he orders his heart, mind, and his life and actions toward God, (Eccles.
18. and 29.) even so [answerable thereunto] shall he perceive an eminent
utility [and success] in the progress of the stone, and of the work that he
has under his hands, and that even daily and hourly; the which thing I my self
have observed all [my] days with the highest diligence and great devotion, and
have (even in very deed,) experienced it; And therefore every one must at the
beginning so direct all his actions, and so prepare himself, that he may
afterward obtain a more happy end thereby in the two [stones, earthy and
heavenly.]

But now here some may make this Objection, viz. that there are some to be
found, who have really had that same Philosophical stone or Tincture, by which
they have truly transmuted the simple Metals into Gold and Silver, and yet
nevertheless (according to what I have showed) have been very unfit for that
thing, nor have so well known the Celestial stone, ( Eccles. 19.) yea, do walk
even as yet in a vain and slight life, ( Wisdom 1.) To such I likewise answer,
that as for such men I shall leave them as I find them, and shall not here make
any disputation as to, where, and how they got that same tincture; But, that
themselves made and prepared the true and right tincture which I have here
spoken of in all this Treatise of mine, that no body (verily) shall persuade me
unto, much less can I be induced to believe it; especially considering that
tragical event into which those kind of vain men do (with the tincture that
they have) precipitate themselves; testimonies whereof, and such kinds of
examples we find (the more is the grief) even now to this very day. I shall
omit to speak how the Chymick Art, together with its appurtenances, is not only
one, but is diverse; And even as in other faculties there are diverse and mutable
sectaries [or such whom others follow] to be found, Genesis 30. But Jacob took the
Rods or Sticks, etc. So also is it in this art. They are all generally called
Chemists, but yet are not all informed and directed after one and the same
intention or scope.

But I do here speak only of the true artificial Alchimy, as is agreeable to
nature, the which does especially teach, viz. how the evil and impure is to be
known and distinguished from the good and pure, by which ( Prove. 2.) the
inbecillity and corruption of nature may be succored, and a right promotion
[or forwarding] may be administered; the which then, in the augmentation [and
encrease] of Metals, may be compared after such a like manner as the
endeavors of them are that would afford help to the ripening of any fruit,
that by some accident or other has been impeded from arriving to a just
maturity; or that obtain of one little grain or seed a manifold increase; and
it may be done and perfected with a very mean price. As for the other
sophisticate and false-chymick Art, I do not at all mean that, nor understand
it, neither do I desire to learn it, Eccles. 3.

For albeit those kind of masters do therein prate of many a crooked way, and
do vainly promise mere golden Mountains (which notwithstanding are happily far
enough off from them) yet, that false Chymick art bestows nothing at all
constant, but is only wont to spend much charges and costs, and procure rash
labors, and does (finally) oftentimes waste away the body and life it self.
And therefore if there be some one or other of those kind of Chemists that thou
may meet withal (who brag of the true Chemical Art, and of such an Art as is
agreeable to nature, and would willingly teach it thee, or any other body, for
the sake of money, and pretend that themselves are not able to disburse the
costs and charges that belong thereunto) then be faithfully admonished that
thou do not trust such men too much; for most times there lies a Snake in the
grass, (Mich. 2.) If I should be of an erring spirit, etc.

Besides, I can truly affirm, that all the cost which happily is to be expended
about the whole universal work, (setting aside the daily food and nourishing or
sustaining of the fire) does not exceed the price of 3. Florins; for the matter
(as we have heard above) is partly vile [or abject] and by reason of that its
vileness, partly contemptible as it were, and is everywhere to be found more
then enough for the supply of your necessity, and that without much trouble. So
also the labor is easy and not very laborious or painful. Briefly, the whole
Art is most simply and most easily comprehended by the pious, and by such as
are chosen by God thereunto, Psalm. 112. But it is most difficult to the impious
and wicked, and in a manner impossible, Prove. 3. And now, that I may at length
finish my Epilogue, therefore I shall as for a farewell communicate this
likewise unto thee, viz. that if the omnipotent God shall bestow upon thee his
grace (in revealing to thee that pious and holy Art,) then must thou rightly
use it, and be a silent man, and (for the sake of that thing) put a strong bolt
before thy mouth, Eccl. 23. O that I could keep, etc. v. 7. etc. and shut it
fast, lest happily thy arrogance and pride throw thee headlong (as well by God as
men) into danger, and loss, and into temporal and eternal destruction. And
therefore have an especial care thereunto.

Whoever seeks riches by this holy Art,
Let him be pious and simple, silent and upright.
He that does not thus, shall (on the contrary)
Be made poor, beggarly, bare and miserable.
All these things, my beloved friend, as well for admonitions as valedictions
sake I would not have concealed from thee, being fraught with an undoubted hope
that thou have sufficiently understood me in all points, (unless God has
barred up thine eyes and ears; for verily I could not disclose it more
faithfully and expressly, nor describe it more manifestly (with the keeping of a
good conscience) then I have done. So therefore if thou art not able to
understand or learn it from hence, then verily I fear me that thou will most
hardly comprehend it by any other institution.

The Appendix.
KNow likewise, that if (by reason of that gift vouchsafed thee by God) thou
hap to wax proud, or to be covetous under the cover or excuse of a provident
care of thy family and sparingness, and do hereby tempt thy self to a turning
away from God by little and little, then know (for I speak the truth) that that
Art will vanish from under thy hands, insomuch that thou shall not know how
thou did it. The which thing verily has befallen more then one beyond their
expectation.

In the Summary, etc. ['tis written]
IF thou followest this my doctrine, and be pious,
And take the matter that I have related unto thee;
If likewise thou preparest it after the accustomed manner,
Thou shall have the treasures of the whole World.
But now if thy intention be good, and that thou be careful [of good things]
the Omnipotent God may most graciously bestow upon thee his favor and divine
blessing. The which thing I pray God from the very root of my heart to bestow
upon thee.

A Prayer.
O Omnipotent eternal God, the Heavenly Father of Light, from whom even every
good and perfect thing proceeds; We beseech thee (of thy Infinite mercy) to
vouchsafe us rightly to know thine eternal wisdom, which is continually about
thy Throne, and by which all things were created and made, and are governed and
preserved even to this very day; send it us from thy holy Heaven, and from the
Throne of thy glory, that it may be together with us, and may assist us in our
labor, because it is the mistress of all Celestial and hidden Arts, yea it
also knows and understands all things; Grant that it may in some measure
accompany us in all works, that so by the Spirit thereof we may certainly and
without any error learn the true understanding and infallible process of this
most noble Art; that is, the miraculous Stone of the Wise men, (which thou have
hidden from the World, and art wont to reveal to thine elect only,) and may
then first begin rightly and truly that highest and chiefest work that we can
here accomplish, and may constantly proceed in that same labor, and also at
length happily finish it, and may eternally enjoy it with rejoicing, through
that Celestial and from eternity founded miraculous Cornerstone Jesus Christ,
who together with thee, O God the Father, and with the Holy Spirit, true God in
one divine indissoluble essence, rules and reigns, a tri-une God, most
worthy of praise for ever and evermore, Amen.

Joshua 21. v. 43, 45. And the Lord gave unto Israel all the Land which he
promised to give unto their Fathers. There failed not ought of any good thing
which the Lord had spoken to the house of Israel; all things came to pass.

Deuteronomy. 32. v. 3. Ascribe glory to our God only, Amen.

FINIS.
Books Printed, and are to be sold by Giles Calvert, at the black-spred Eagle,
at the West End of Paul's.
THe History of Diodorus Siculus, containing all that which is most memorable
and of greatest Antiquity in the first ages of the World, until the war of
Troy: in folio.

Renodaeus his Dispensatory, containing the whole body of Physic; discovering
the natures, and Properties, and virtues of Vegetals, Minerals and Animals: in
folio.

Gadburies Doctrine of Nativities.

Doctor Pordages Innocence appearing through the Dark Mists of pretended guilt:
in folio.

Cornelius Agrippa, his occult Philosophy in 3 Books in quarto.

Henry Laurence Lord President his book Entitled, Our Communion and War with
Angels, in quarto.

Christopher Goad his Sermons Entitled, Refreshing Drops, and Scorching Vials,
in quarto.

Samuel Gorton, his Exposition on the fifth Chapter of James, in quarto.

Samuel Hartlib of Bees and Silkworms, in quarto.

Williams, his Book called the Bloody Tenet of Persecution for cause of
conscience, in quarto.

Doctor Gells Sermon Entitled Noah's Flood returning, in quarto.

Several Pieces of Christopher Blackwood, now public Teacher in Ireland, in
quarto.

Jacob Behem his Signatura Rerum, or Signature of all things, in quarto.

His Epistles explaining many things written in his other Books, in quarto.

Of Election and Predestination, in quarto.

His Book Entitled Aurora, or the dayspring, lately printed in quarto.

Several Pieces of Isaac Penington Junior, in quarto.

The Spiritual journey of a yongman, a piece translated out of Dutch.

Biggs of the vanity of the Craft of Physic, or a new Dispensatory, in quarto.

Collier his Pulpit-guard routed, in quarto.

His Font-guard routed, in quarto.

Simon Hendon his key of Scripture Prophesies, in quarto*

Mr. Parker his Answer to the Assembly, in large octavo.

Several pieces of Thomas Collier, in large octavo.

Tillom on the eleventh Chapter of the Revelations, in large octavo.

Henry Laurence Lord President his Book of Baptism, in large octavo.

Reeves Sermons Entitled the Strait-Gate, in large octavo.

Several pieces of H. N. in octavo, namely, Prophecy of the Spirit of Love.
Revelatio Dei, or the Revelation of God.

Introduction to the Glass of Righteousness. Evangelium Regni, a joyful message
of the Kingdom, Spiritual Tabernacle. The first Exhortation. The Apology for
the service of Love, all in octavo.

Samuel Hartlibs Chemical addresses, in octavo.

Thomas Butler his little Bible of the Man, or the book of God opened in Man,
in octavo.

Crooked Paths made strait, or the ways of God made known in lost sinners, by
A. Yeomans, in octavo.

Laurences Gospel separation separated from abuses.

Simmons Saints like Christ, in octavo.

William Sedgwick his eleven Sermons, Entitled Some Flashes of Lightnings of
the Son of Man, in octavo.

A Word of Peace from the Prince of Peace, by J. Hatch in octavo.

Mysteries unvailed, wherein the Doctrine of Redemption by Christ is handled,
by Robert Gardner, in octavo*

Parnel his good tidings for Sinners, great joy for Saints* in octavo*

B^scos Glorious Mysteries, in octavo.

The confession and Fame of the Rosy Cross, by English Philolethes, in octavo.

Peytons History of the R^se* Reign and Ruin of the House of Stuarts in octavo.

Larkhams Sermons in octavo.

Bacons Catech^sm in twelves.

Corporations vindicated in their fundamental Liberties, by Charles Hotham, in
twelves.

John Saltmarsh his book of Free Grace, in twelves.

And his book Entitled Sparkles of Glory, or some beams of the morning Star,
in twelves.

Dawnings of Light, in twelves.


