REMARKS Upon the Two Years Reign of the Dauphin of France, when King of
England, in the time of King John. Submitted to the Commons of England in
Parliament.
OF all the Attempts made since the Norman Conquest for the Subversion of
English Liberty, that of the Dauphin of France, in King John's time, was the
most dangerous, and was rendered the more pernicious, by reason the Dauphin
entered the Kingdom by Consent of the People, and that he was received as a
Deliverer, and not as an Enemy; but he soon under the Umbrage of the former,
acted the latter, as by the sequel will appear.

Our English Chronicles tell us, that upon the Discontent betwixt King John and
the Barons, the latter invited the Dauphin of France, to rescue them from the
Pressure of King John, and the Londoners in conjunction with the Barons,
proclaimed the Dauphin King of Englannd; At his first coming, he published 3
Declarations, in each whereof he did set forth the Male Administration of King
John, and rendered him as Odious and Obnoxious to the People, as the hopes of
Dominion, Malice, and Invention could make him. And withal, that he himself
would govern Englishmen by their own Laws and Customs, redress their
Grievances, and by such sly Insinuations, the Dauphin weaned the People from
their Allegiance, and supplanted King John; but as soon as he got footing, and
the English Forts and Castles into his hands; an Army of Foreigners about him,
and the Power of France to back and second him, he soon forgot his
Declarations, and of all his Promises, never fulfilled one Tittle, but on the
contrary despised and rejected the English (excepting some corrupt Persons,
upon whom he prevailed for Gratuity's and Bribes, to betray their Country, and
to enslave all the rest of our Fellow Subjects) the best of the English thus
Harassed, and removed from all Places of Trust and Profit, and the rest
preferred; the new King (not doubting to make himself the absolute Master of
all) tacitly called into his Assistance all the Mercenary Foreigners he could
prevail withal, whereby he thought not to leave the Name nor the Memory of an
Englishman in England.

But the English in those days were a most Warlike, Victorious People, and
very resolute in the defense of their own Rights and Property's, which they
thought very improper for a Prince of their own Invitation and Election to
Invade; and for a Prince that could pretend to no color of Right or Title of
his own, but what he received from the People; and that had it not been for the
Courtesy of the same People, most certain it is, that no such foreign Prince
could have any such Power over them; And to lose their Rights by the boundless
Ambition of a King of their own making, they unanimously resolved in their own
Defense, to lose their Lives first, they being all well convinced, that such a
King was made for the Good of the Kingdom, and not the Kingdom made for the
Ravage of such a King.

The English thus justly angered and irritated against the Lawless Designs of
their New King, they watched his Motions, and observing him to prefer Tyranny
to Mercy, and that in Oppressions, Expenses, Ambition, and Maladministration,
he had far surpassed King John; and seeing their All exposed to the Merciless
Cruelty of his Foreign Needimites, here the English found their own Mistakes,
and concluded their flying from the Pressures of King John, for Refuge and
Protection to the Dauphin, was but leaping out of the Drying Pan into the Fire.

The English were not asleep, they had their Eyes open, and were very sensible
of their dismal Conditions, and of the Misery's and Afflictions, which the
Dauphin (in order to make himself absolute over them) thought to Entail upon
this Realm; and the Dauphin was as sensible of the People's Hatred: Thence flew
the contrary Desires of Revenge and Security in each other, which could not be
reconciled but by Mutual Injuries; here the Dauphin soon found himself in as
great Distress, as if he had been born under the Star of Hercules, who, when he
had Cut off one Hidra's Head, had his Labors continued by the sudden
Production of many. The Dauphin, the faster he cut off the English, the faster
they grew upon his Hands, and the more Potent Enemies he made himself; until he
had at last necessitated the whole Kingdom, to declare against him: Yet he did
not cease, but repeated his Crimes, insomuch, that he with his Cabinet Council
and Secretaries, filled the Nation with feigned Conspiracies, and Hellish
Inventions against himself, whereby to carry on his Wicked Designs, and Murder,
and Destroy the best Families in England; in order to which, he caused Spies to
be placed in every Family, whereby he broke Public Unions, and dissolved
Private Contracts; he Bribed Wives with their own Dishonours for to betray
their Husbands; and Encouraged Children with too early hopes of Patrimony, to
Rifle their Father's Cabinets; and Servants beyond Manumission, to reveal more
than their Master's Secrets: He punished Suspicion for manifest Crimes, and
Circumvented the Innocence of some to recover his own Guilt: For all those whom
he injured, he feared, and all he hated and feared, he Injured; he caused his
Emissaries at public Feasts, to gather up the loose Speeches of Men, made free
by Excess of Wine and other Liquors, and the Innocent Form of Table-talk, to be
turned into Compacts of Treason, until he had made every Man's House his Grave
or his Prison.

But the Dauphin finding all his Measures upon false Bottoms, and that his
English Favorites, by their Perverse Counsels contributed to his Ruin, and
could render him no more Service; all their Tricks and Sinister Dealings being
publicly discovered, which exposed them to the Universal hatred of the better
part of the English, or to those whose Integrity to the General Interest of
England, obliged them to signify their Abhorrence against all the Foreign and
Domestic Attempts, carried on, and hiddenly managed by Foreigners and some
English Favorites, for the Subversion of English Liberties; Here the Dauphin
thinking to Ingratiate himself with the People after so many Injuries, exposed
all his English Favorites to the Hatred of all their Fellow Subjects, throwing
the Odium of their own pernicious Councels upon their own Heads, and caused
them to be used and treated, as the Roman Edi^es, used their Beasts and
Malefactors in their Theaters, when they would recreate their People in their
Spectacula, made them accuse and destroy one another; lest what they had done
for him, they may practice against him, for that Instruments of great Crimes do
by their very Sight, mightily upbraid him that employed them, which was the
Case of the Dauphin, and of his corrupted Favorites.

But the English finding by Experience, that Ambulatory Governments are
Expensive and Destructive, and like Planets, which at their rising and setting
bring Storms and Tempests to usher them in and out; and so in Cases of
Traveling Governments, they are always attended with War, Taxes and Rapines.
So that betwixt the Ruin of the Old and Execution of the New, the Unhappy
People under such Governments, have their Treasure consumed, their Strength
decayed, and their Estates and Fortunes ruined, by being of contrary Party's
one against another; when as their Amity and Union, would heal their Wounds,
redress their Grievances, and make them Masters of their own Rights and
Liberties, whereof the English in those days were fully convinced, and united
in one Common Interest against the common Enemy that pretended to be their
Deliverer; Here the English proclaimed that the Dauphin, and all his Foreign
Gabells should depart the Kingdom by a Day; adjusted all Accounts with him, and
paid him what Expenses and Charges he could justly demand. And thus the
Dauphin's Reign, and the Fortune of his Favorites ended in Confusion.

B. B.

FINIS.

