THE BOOK OF COMMON PRAYER And Administration of the SACRAMENTS, AND OTHER
Rites and Ceremonies of the CHURCH,

According to the Use of the Church of England; Together with the PSALTER or
PSALMS OF DAVID,

Pointed as they are to be Sung or Said in Churches: AND THE Form and Manner of
Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased;
Printers to the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's. MDCXCIII.

The CONTENTS of this BOOK.
THe Acts for the Uniformity of Common Prayer. The Preface. Concerning the
Service of the Church. Concerning Ceremonies. The Order how the Psalter is
appointed to be read. The Order how the rest of the Holy Scripture is appointed
to be read. A Table of Proper Lessons and Psalms. The Calendar, with the Table
of Lessons. Tables and Rules for the Feasts and Fasts throughout the whole
Year. The Order for Morning Prayer. The Order for Evening Prayer. The Creed of
S. Athanasius. The Litany. Prayers and Thanksgivings upon several occasions.
The Collects, Epistles, and Gospels, to be used at the Ministration of the holy
Communion throughout the Year. The Order of the Ministration of the holy
Communion. The Order of Baptism, both Public and Private. The Order of Baptism
for those of riper years. The Catechism, with the Order for Confirmation of
Children. The Form of Solemnization of Matrimony. Visitation of the Sick, and
Communion of the Sick. The Order for the Burial of the Dead. Thanksgiving for
Women after Childbearing. A Commination, or denouncing of Gods anger and
judgments against Sinners. The Psalter. The Order of Prayers to be used at Sea.
The Form and Manner of Ordaining Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. A Form of
Prayer for the Fifth day of November. A Form of Prayer for the Thirtieth day of
January. A Form of Prayer for the Nine and twentieth day of May.
An ACT for the Uniformity of Common Prayer, and Service in the CHURCH, and
Administration of the SACRAMENTS.
PRIMO ELIZ.
WHere at the death of our late Sovereign Lord King Edward the Sixth, there
remained one uniform order of Common Service, and Prayer, and of the
Administration of Sacraments, Rites and Ceremonies in the Church of England,
which was set forth in one Book, entitled, The Book of Common Prayer, and
Administration of Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies in the Church of
England, Authorized by Act of Parliament holden in the fifth and sixth years of
our said late Sovereign Lord King Edward the sixth, entitled, An Act for the
Uniformity of Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments; The which
was repealed, and taken away by Act of Parliament, in the first year of the
reign of our late Sovereign Lady Queen Mary, to the great decay of the due
honor of God, and discomfort to the professors of the truth of Christ's
Religion:

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, That the
said Statute of Repeal, and every thing therein contained, only concerning the
said Book, and the Service, Administration of Sacraments, Rites and Ceremonies
contained or appointed in, or by the said Book, shall be void and of none
effect, from and after the Feast of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist next
coming: and, That the said Book, with the order of Service, and of the
Administration of Sacraments, Rites and Ceremonies, with the alteration and
additions therein added and appointed by this Statute, shall stand, and be,
from, and after the said Feast of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist, in full
force and effect, according to the tenor and effect of this Statute: Any thing
in the foresaid Statute of Repeal to the contrary notwithstanding.

And further be it Enacted by the Queens Highness, with the assent of the Lords
and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by Authority of the same,
That all, and singular Ministers in any Cathedral, or Parish Church, or other
place within this Realm of England, Wales, and the Marches of the same, or
other the Queens Dominions, shall from and after the Feast of the Nativity of
Saint John Baptist next coming, be bounden to say and use the Mattens,
Evensong, celebration of the Lords Supper, and Administration of each of the
Sacraments, and all their Common and open Prayer, in such order and form as is
mentioned in the said Book, so Authorized by Parliament in the said fifth and
sixth year of the Reign of King Edward the Sixth; with one alteration, or
addition of certain Lessons to be used on every Sunday in the year, and the
form of the Litany altered, and corrected, and two sentences only added in the
delivery of the Sacrament to the Communicants, and none other, or otherwise:
and, That if any manner of Parson, Vicar, or other whatsoever Minister, that
ought or should sing, or say Common Prayer mentioned in the said Book, or
minister the Sacraments, from and after the Feast of the Nativity of Saint John
Baptist next coming, refuse to use the said Common Prayers, or to minister the
Sacraments in such Cathedral, or Parish Church; or other places, as he should
use to minister the same, in such order and form, as they be mentioned, and set
forth in the said Book, or shall wilfully, or obstinately standing in the same,
use any other Rite, Ceremony, Order, Form, or manner of celebrating of the
Lords Supper openly, or privily, or Mattens, Evensong, Administration of the
Sacraments, or other open Prayers, then is mentioned and set forth in the said
Book, [Open Prayer in, and throughout this Act, is meant that Prayer which is
for other to come unto, or hear, either in Common Churches, or private
Chapels, or Oratories, commonly called the Service of the Church] or shall
preach, declare or speak any thing in the derogation, or depraving of the said
Book, or any thing therein contained, or of any part thereof, and shall be
thereof lawfully convicted, according to the Laws of this Realm, by verdict of
twelve men, or by his own confession, or by the notorious evidence of the fact;
he shall lose and forfeit to the Queens Highness, Her Heirs, and Successors,
for his first offense, the profit of all his Spiritual Benefices, or
Promotions, coming, or arising in one whole year next after this conviction:
And also that the person so convicted shall for the same offense suffer
imprisonment by the space of six months, without Bail, or Mainprise: And if any
such person, once convict of any offense concerning the premises, shall after
his first conviction, eftsoons, offend, and be thereof in form aforesaid
lawfully convict; That then the same person shall for his second offense suffer
imprisonment by the space of one whole year, and also shall therefore be
deprived ipso facto of all his Spiritual Promotions; and, That it shall be
lawful to all Patrons, or Donors of all and singular the same Spiritual
Promotions, or of any of them, to present, or collate to the same, as though
the person and persons so offending were dead: and, That if any such person or
persons, after he shall be twice convicted in form aforesaid, shall offend
against any of the premises the third time, and shall be thereof, in form
aforesaid, lawfully convicted; That then the person so offending, and convicted
the third time, shall be deprived ipso facto of all his Spiritual promotions,
and also shall suffer imprisonment during his life: And if the person that
shall offend, and be convict in form aforesaid, concerning any of the
premises, shall not be Beneficed, nor have any Spiritual Promotion; That then
the same person so offending, and convict, shall for the first offense suffer
imprisonment during one whole year next after his said Conviction, without Bail
or Mainprise: And if any such person not having any Spiritual Promotion, after
his first conviction, shall eftsoons offend in any thing concerning the
premises, and shall in form aforesaid be thereof lawfully convicted; That then
the same person shall for his second offense suffer imprisonment during his
life.

And it is Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person
or persons whatsoever, after the said Feast of the Nativity of Saint John
Baptist next coming, shall ^n any Enterludes, Plays, Songs, Rimes, or by other,
open words declare, or speak any thing in the derogation, depraving or
despising of the same Book, or of any thing therein contained, or any part
thereof, or shall by open fact, deed, o^ by open threatenings compel, or cause,
or otherwise procure, or maintain any Parson, Vicar, or other minister in any
Cathedral or Parish Church, or in Chapel, or in any other place, to sing, or
say any Common or open Prayer, or to minister any Sacrament otherwise, or in
any other manner and form then is mentioned in the said Book; or by any of the
said means shall unlawfully interrupt, or let any Parson, Vicar, or other
Minister in any Cathedral, or Parish Church, or Chapel, or any other place to
sing or say Common and open Prayer, or to minister the Sacraments, or any of
them, in such manner and form as is mentioned in the said Book; That then every
such person, being thereof lawfully convicted in form abovesaid, shall forfeit
to the Queen our Sovereign Lady, Her Heirs and Successors, for the first
offense an hundred marks: And if any person or persons, being once convict of
any such offense, eftsoons offend again any of the last recited offenses, and
shall in form aforesaid be thereof lawfully convict; That then the same person
so offending and convict, shall for the second offense forfeit to the Queen our
Sovereign Lady, Her Heirs and Successors, four hundred marks: and if any
person, after he in form aforesaid shall have been twice convict of any offense
concerning any of the last recited offenses, shall offend the third time, and
be thereof in form abovesaid lawfully convict; That then every person so
offending and convict, shall for his third offense forfeit to our Sovereign
Lady the Queen all his Goods and Chattels, and shall suffer imprisonment during
his life: And if any person or persons that for his first offense concerning
the premises, shall be convict in form aforesaid, do not pay the sum to be
paid by virtue of his conviction, in such manner and form as the same ought to
be paid, within six weeks next after his conviction; That then every person so
convict, and so not paying the same, shall for the same first offense, instead
of the said sum, suffer imprisonment by the space of six months without Bail or
Mainprise: and if any person, or persons, that for his second offense
concerning the premises shall be convict in form aforesaid, do not pay the
said sum to be paid by virtue of his conviction, and this estatute, in such
manner and form as the same ought to be paid, within six weeks next after his
said second conviction; That then every person so convicted, and not so paying
the same, shall for the same second offense in the stead of the said sum,
suffer imprisonment during twelve months without Bail or Mainprise^ and, That
from and after the said Feast of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist next
coming, all, and every person and persons, inhabiting within this Realm, or any
other the Queens Majesty's Dominions, shall diligently and faithfully, having
no lawful or reasonable excuse to be absent, endeavor themselves to resort to
their Parish Church, or Chapel accustomed, or upon reasonable let thereof, to
some usual place where Common Prayer, and such service of God shall be used in
such time of let, upon every Sunday and other days ordained and used to be kept
as holy days, and then and there to abide orderly and soberly during the time
of the Common Prayer, Preachings, or other Service of God there to be used and
ministered, upon pain of punishment by the Censures of the Church; and also upon
pain, that every person so offending shall forfeit for every such offense
twelve pence, to be levied by the Churchwardens of the Parish where such
offense shall be done, to the use of the poor of the the same Parish, of the
goods, lands, and tenements of such offender, by way of distress.

And for due execution hereof, the Queens most excellent Majesty, the Lords
Temporal, and all the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, do in Gods
name earnestly require and charge all the Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Ordinaries, that they shall endeavor themselves to the uttermost of their
knowledges, that the due and true execution hereof may be had throughout their
Diocesses, and Charges, as they will answer before God for such evils and
plagues, wherewith Almighty God may justly punish his people for neglecting
this good and wholesome Law. And for their Authority in this behalf, Be it
further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and singular the same
Archbishops, Bishops, and all other their Officers, exercising Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, as well in places exempt, as not exempt, within their Diocesses,
shall have full power and Authority by this Act to reform, correct and punish,
by Censures of the Church, all, and singular persons, which shall offend within
any of their Jurisdictions, or Diocesses, after the said Feast of the Nativity
of S. John Baptist next coming, against this Act and Statute: Any other Law,
Statute, Privilege, Liberty or Provision heretofore made, had or suffered to
the contrary notwithstanding.

And it is Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every
Justice of Oyer and Determiner, or Justices of Assize shall have full power and
Authority in every of their open and general Sessions, to enquire, hear, and
determine all, and all manner of offenses, that shall be committed, or done
contrary to any Article contained in this present Act, within the limits of the
Commission to them directed, and to make process for the execution of the same,
as they may do against any person being indicted before them of trespass, or
lawfully convicted thereof.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and
every Archbishop and Bishop shall and may at all time and times at his liberty
and pleasure, join and associate himself by virtue of this Act, to the said
Justices of Oyer and Determiner, or to the said Justices of Assize, at every of
the said open and general Sessions to be holden in any place within his
Diocese, for and to the inquiry, hearing, and determining of the offenses
aforesaid.

Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Books
concerning the said Services shall at the costs and charges of the Parishioners
of every Parish, and Cathedral Church, be attained and gotten before the said
Feast of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist next following; and that all such
Parishes and Cathedral Churches, or other places, where the said Books shall be
attained and gotten before the said Feast of the Nativity of S. John Baptist,
shall within three Weeks next after the said Books so attained and gotten, use
the said Service, and put the same in ure according to this Act.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person or
persons shall be at any time hereafter impeached, or otherwise molested of or
for any the offenses above mentioned, hereafter to be committed, or done
contrary to this Act, unless he or they so offending be thereof indicted at the
next general Sessions to be holden before any such Justices of Oyer and
Determiner, or Justices of Assize, next after any offense committed or done,
contrary to the tenor of this Act.

Provided always, and be it Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That all and singular Lords of the Parliament, for the third offense above
mentioned, shall be tried by their Peers.

Provided also, and be it Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
the Mayor of London, and all other Mayors, Bailiffs, and other Head-Officers of
all, and singular Cities, Boroughs, and Towns-corporate within this Realm,
Wales, and the Marches of the same, to the which Justices of Assize do not
commonly repair, shall have full Power and Authority by virtue of this Act, to
enquire, hear, and determine the offenses abovesaid, and every of them yearly,
within fifteen days after the Feasts of Easter and Saint Michael the Archangel,
in like manner and form as Justices of Assize, and Oyer and Determiner may do.

Provided always, and be it Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That all and singular Archbishops, and Bishops, and every of their Chancellors,
Commissaries, Archdeacons, and other Ordinaries, having any peculiar
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall have full power and Authority by virtue of
this Act, as well to enquire in their Visitation, Synods, and elsewhere within
their Jurisdiction, at any other time and place, to take Accusations, and
Informations of all, and every the things above mentioned, done, committed, or
perpetrated, within the limits of their Jurisdictions and Authority, as to
punish the same by admonition, excommunication, sequestration, or deprivation,
and other censures and process, in like form, as heretofore has been used in
like cases, by the Queens Ecclesiastical Laws.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That whatsoever person offending in the
premises, shall for the offense first receive punishment of the Ordinary,
having a testimonial thereof under the said Ordinaries seal, shall not for the
same offense eftsoons be convicted before the Justices; and likewise receiving
for the said offense punishment first by the Justices, he shall not for the
same offense eftsoons receive punishment of the Ordinary: Any thing contained
in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That such Ornaments of the Church, and of
the Ministers thereof shall be retained, and be in use, as were in this Church
of England by the Authority of Parliament in the second year of the Reign of
King Edward the Sixth, until other order shall be therein taken by the
Authority of the Queens Majesty, with the advice of Her Commissioners,
appointed and authorized under the Great Seal of England for causes
Ecclesiastical, or of the Metropolitan of this Realm: And also, That if there
shall happen any contempt, or irreverence to be used in the Ceremonies, or
Rites of the Church, by the misusing of the Orders appointed in this Book; the
Queens Majesty may by the like advice of the said Commissioners, or
Metropolitan, ordain and publish such further Ceremonies or Rites, as may be
most for the advancement of Gods glory, the edifying of his Church, and the due
reverence of Christ's holy Mysteries and Sacraments.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Laws, Statutes,
and Ordinances, wherein, or whereby any other Service, Administration of
Sacraments, or Common Prayer is limited, established, or set forth to be used
within this Realm, or any other the Queens Dominions, or Countries, shall from
henceforth be utterly void, and of none effect.

An Act for the Uniformity of Public Prayers, and Administration of
Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies: And for Establishing the Form of
Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons in the Church
of England.
XIV. CAROL. II.
WHereas in the first year of the late Queen Elizabeth, there was one Uniform
Order of Common Service and Prayer, and of the Administration of Sacraments,
Rites, and Ceremonies in the Church of England, (agreeable to the Word of God,
and usage of the primitive Church) Compiled by the Reverend Bishops and Clergy,
set forth in one Book, Entitled, The Book of Common Prayer, and Administration
of Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies in the Church of England, and
enjoined to be used by Act of Parliament, holden in the said First year of the
said late Queen, Entitled, An Act for the Uniformity of Common Prayer, and
Service in the Church, and Administration of the Sacraments, very comfortable
to all good People, desirous to live in Christian Conversation, and most
profitable to the estate of this Realm, upon the which the Mercy, Favor and
Blessing of Almighty God is in no wise so readily and plentifully poured, as by
Common Prayers, due us^g of the Sacraments, and often preaching of the Gospel,
with devotion of the hearers: And yet this notwithstanding, a great number of
people in diverse parts of this Realm, following their own sensuality, and
living without knowledge and due fear of God, do wilfully and schismatically
abstain, and refuse to come to their Parish-Churches, and other public places
where Common Prayer, Administration of the Sacraments, and preaching of the
Word of God is used, upon the Sundays and other days ordained and appointed to
be kept and observed as Holidays: And whereas by the great and scandalous
neglect of Ministers in the said Order, or Liturgy so set forth and enjoined as
aforesaid, great mischiefs and inconveniences, during the times of the late
unhappy troubles, have arisen and grown; and many people have been led into
Factions, and Schisms, to the great decay and scandal of the Reformed Religion
of the Church of England, and to the hazard of many souls: For prevention
whereof in time to come, for settling the peace of the Church, and for allaying
the present distempers which the indisposition of the time has contracted, The
Kings Majesty (according to his Declaration of the five and twentieth of
October, One thousand six hundred and sixty) granted his Commission under the
great Seal of England, to several Bishops and other Divines, to review the Book
of Common Prayer, and to prepare such Alterations and Additions, as they
thought fit to offer; And afterward the Convocations of both the Provinces of
Canterbury and York, being by his Majesty called and assembled (and now
sitting) His Majesty has been pleased to authorize and require the Presidents
of the said Convocations, and other the Bishops and Clergy of the same, to
review the said Book of Common Prayer, and the Book of the Form and manner of
the Making and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons; And that after
mature consideration, they should make such Additions and Alterations in the
said Books respectively, as to them should seem meet and convenient; And should
exhibit and present the same to His Majesty in writing, for his further
allowance or confirmation; Since which time, upon full and mature deliberation,
they the said Presidents, Bishops, and Clergy of both Provinces have
accordingly reviewed the said Books, and have made some Alterations which they
think fit to be incerted to the same; and some Additional Prayers to the said
Book of Common Prayer, to be used upon proper and emergent occasions; and have
exhibited and presented the same unto His Majesty in writing, in one Book,
Entitled, The Book of Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, and
other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church according to the use of the Church of
England; together with the Psalter, or Psalms of David, Pointed as they are to
be sung or said in Churches, and the Form and Manner of Making, Ordaining, and
Consecrating of Bishops, Priests and Deacons: All which His Majesty having duly
considered, has fully approved and allowed the same, and recommended to this
present Parliament, that the said Book of Common Prayer, and of the Form of
Ordination and Consecration of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, with the
Alterations and Additions which have been so made and presented to His Majesty
by the said Convocations, be the Book which shall be appointed to be used by
all that officiate in all Cathedral and Collegiate Churches and Chapels, and
in all Chapels of Colleges and Halls in both the Universities, and the
Colleges of Eaton and Winchester, and in all Parish-Churches and Chapels
within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, and by all that make, or Consecrate Bishops, Priests, or Deacons, in any
of the said places, under such Sanctions and Penalties as the Houses of
Parliament shall think fit. Now in regard that nothing conduces more to the
settling of the Peace of this Nation (which is desired of all good men) nor to
the honor of our Religion, and the propagation thereof, then an universal
agreement in the public Worship of Almighty God; and to the intent that every
person within this Realm may certainly know the Rule to which he is to conform
in Public Worship, and Administration of Sacraments, and other Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church of England, and the Manner how, and by whom Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, are and ought to be Made, Ordained and Consecrated;

Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by the Advice, and with the
consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That all and singular
Ministers, in any Cathedral, Collegiate, or Parish Church or Chapel, or other
place of Public Worship within this Realm of England, Dominion of Wales, and
Town of Berwick upon Tweed, shall be bound to say and use the Morning Prayer,
Evening Prayer, Celebration and Administration of both the Sacraments, and all
other the Public and Common Prayer, in such order and form as is mentioned in
the said Book annexed and joined to this present Act, and entitled, The Book
of Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church, according to the use of the Church of England;
together with the Psalter or Psalms of David, Pointed as they are to be sung or
said in Churches, and the Form and Manner of Making, Ordaining, and
Consecrating of Bishops, Priests and Deacons: and, That the Morning and Evening
Prayers therein contained, shall upon every Lords day, and upon all other days
and occasions, and at the times therein appointed, be openly and solemnly read
by all and every Minister or Curate in every Church, Chapel, or other place of
Public Worship within this Realm or England, and places aforesaid.

And to the end that Uniformity in the Public Worship of God (which is so much
desired) may be speedily effected, Be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That every Parson, Vicar, or other Minister whatsoever, who now has
and enjoys any Ecclesiastical Benefice or Promotion within this Realm of
England, or places aforesaid, shall in the Church, Chapel, or place of Public
Worship belonging to his said Benefice or Promotion, upon some Lords day before
the Feast of Saint Bartholomew, which shall be in the year of our Lord God, One
thousand six hundred sixty and two, openly, publicly, and solemnly read the
morning and Evening Prayer appointed to be read by, and according to the said
Book of Common Prayer, at the times thereby appointed, and after such reading
thereof shall openly and publicly, before the Congregation there assembled,
declare his unfeigned assent, and consent to the use of all things in the said
Book contained and prescribed, in these words, and no other;

I A. B. do here declare my unfeigned assent and consent to all, and everything
contained, and prescribed in, and by the Book, Entitled, The Book of Common
Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church, according to the use of the Church of England; together with the
Psalter or Psalms of David, Pointed as they are to be sung or said in Churches;
and the Form and Manner of Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating of Bishops,
Priests and Deacons;

And that all, and every such person, who shall (without some lawful
impediment, to be allowed and approved of by the Ordinary of the place) neglect
or refuse to do the same within the time aforesaid, or (in case of such
impediment) within one month after such impediment removed, shall ipso facto be
deprived of all his spiritual Promotions; And that from thenceforth it shall be
lawful to, and for all Patrons and Donors of all and singular the said
spiritual Promotions, or of any of them, according to their respective Rights,
and Titles, to present, or collate to the same, as though the person or persons
so offending or neglecting, were dead.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every person, who
shall hereafter be presented or collated, or put into any Ecclesiastical
Benefice, or Promotion within this Realm of England, and places aforesaid,
shall in the Church, Chapel, or place of public Worship, belonging to his
said Benefice or Promotion, within two months next after that he shall be in
the actual possession of the said Ecclesiastical Benefice or Promotion, upon
some Lords day, openly, publicly and solemnly read the Morning and Evening
Prayers appointed to be read by and according to the said Book of Common
Prayer, at the times thereby appointed, and after such reading thereof, shall
openly, and publicly before the Congregation there assembled, declare his
unfeigned assent, and consent to the use of all things therein contained and
prescribed, according to the form before appointed: And that all and every such
person, who shall (without some lawful impediment to be allowed and approved by
the Ordinary of the place) neglect or refuse to do the same within the time
aforesaid, or (in case of such impediment) within one month after such
Impediment removed, shall ipso facto be deprived of all his said Ecclesiastical
Benefices and Promotions; And, that from thenceforth, it shall and may be
lawful to, and for all Patrons and Donors of all and singular the said
Ecclesiastical Benefices and Promotions, or any of them (according to their
respective Rights and Titles) to present or collate to the same, as though the
person or persons so offending, or neglecting, were dead.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in all places where
the proper Incumbent of any Parsonage or Vicarage, or Benefice with Cure does
reside on his Living, and keep a Curate, the Incumbent himself in person (not
having some lawful Impediment, to be allowed by the Ordinary of the place)
shall once (at the least) in every month, openly and publicly read the Common
Prayers and Service, in and by the said Book prescribed, and (if there be
occasion) Administer each of the Sacraments, and other Rites of the Church, in
the Parish Church or Chapel of, or belonging to the same Parsonage, Vicarage,
or Benefice, in such order, manner and form, as in, and by the said Book is
appointed, upon pain to forfeit the sum of Five pounds to the use of the poor
of the Parish for every offense, upon conviction by confession, or proof of two
credible witnesses upon Oath before two Justices of the Peace of the County,
City, or Town-Corporate where the offense shall be committed, (which Oath the
said Justices are hereby empowered to administer) and in default of payment
within ten days, to be levied by distress, and sale of the goods and chattels
of the offender, by the Warrant of the said Justices, by the Churchwardens, or
Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish, rendering the surplusage to the party.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Dean, Canon,
and Prebendary of every Cathedral, or Collegiate Church, and all Masters, and
other Heads, Fellows, Chaplains, and Tutors of, or in any College, Hall, House
of Learning, or Hospital, and every public Professor and Reader in either of
the Universities, and in every College elsewhere, and every Parson, Vicar,
Curate, Lecturer, and every other person in holy Orders, and every
Schoolmaster keeping any public or private School, and every person
instructing, or teaching any Youth in any house or private family as a Tutor,
or Schoolmaster, who upon the first day of May, which shall be in the year of
our Lord God, One thousand six hundred sixty two, or at any time thereafter
shall be Incumbent, or have possession of any Deanery, Canonry, Prebend,
Mastership, Headship, Fellowship, Professors place, or Readers place,
Parsonage, Vicarage, or any other Ecclesiastical Dignity or Promotion, or of
any Curates place, Lecture, or School; or shall instruct, or teach any Youth,
as Tutor or Schoolmaster, shall before the Feast Day of Saint Bartholomew,
which shall be in the Year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred sixty two, or
at or before his, or their respective admission to be Incumbent or have
possession aforesaid, subscribe the Declaration or Acknowledgment following,
Scilicet,

I A. B. do declare, That it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever, to
take Arms against the King; and that I do abhor that traitorous position of
taking Arms by His Authority against his Person, or against those that are
commissionated by Him; and that I will conform to the Liturgy of the Church of
England, as it is now by Law established. And I do declare that I do hold,
there lies no obligation upon me, or on any other person from the Oath,
commonly called the Solemn League and Covenant, to endeavor any change, or
alteration of Government, either in Church or State, and that the same was in
it self an unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm against
the known Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom.

Which said Declaration and Acknowledgment shall be subscribed by every of the
said Masters and other Heads, Fellows, Chaplains, and Tutors of, or in any
College, Hall, or House of Learning, and by every public professor and Reader
in either of the Universities, before the Vice Chancellor of the respective
Universities for the time being, or his Deputy; And the said Declaration or
Acknowledgment shall be subscribed before the respective Archbishop, Bishop, or
Ordinary of the Diocese, by every other person hereby enjoined to subscribe the
same, upon pain that all and every of the persons aforesaid failing in such
subscription, shall lose and forfeit such respective Deanery, Canonry, Prebend,
Mastership, Headship, Fellowship, Professors place, Readers place, Parsonage,
Vicarage, Ecclesiastical Dignity, or promotion, Curates place, Lecture and
School, and shall be utterly disabled, and ipso facto, deprived of the same;
and that every such respective Deanery, Canonry, Prebend, Mastership, Headship,
Fellowship, Professors place, Readers place, Parsonage, Vicarage,
Ecclesiastical dignity or promotion, Curates place, Lecture and School shall be
void, as if such person so failing were naturally dead.

And if any Schoolmaster or other person, instructing or teaching Youth in any
private House or Family, as a Tutor or Schoolmaster, shall instruct or teach
any Youth, as a Tutor or Schoolmaster, before license obtained from his
respective Archbishop, Bishop, or Ordinary of the Diocese, according to the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm (for which he shall pay twelve pence only) and
before such subscription and acknowledgment made as aforesaid; then every such
Schoolmaster, and other instructing and teaching as aforesaid, shall for the
first offense suffer three months imprisonment without Bail or Mainprise; and
for every second and other such offense shall suffer three months Imprisonment
without Bail or Mainprise, and also forfeit to his Majesty the sum of Five
pounds.

And after such subscription made, every such Parson, Vicar, Curate, and
Lecturer shall procure a Certificate under the hand and seal of the respective
Archbishop, Bishop, or Ordinary of the Diocese, (who are hereby enjoined and
required upon demand to make and deliver the same) and shall publicly and
openly read the same, together with the Declaration, or Ackowledgment
aforesaid, upon some Lords day within three months then next following, in his
parish Church where he is to officiate, in the presence of the Congreatgion
there assembled, in the time of Divine Service; upon pain that every person
failing therein shall lose such Parsonage, Vicarage, or Benefice, Curates
place, or Lecturers place respectively, and shall be utterly disabled, and ipso
facto deprived of the same; and, that the said Parsonage, Vicarage, or
Benefice, Curates place, or Lecturers place shall be void, as if he were
naturally dead.

Provided always, That from and after the twenty fifth day of March, which
shall be in the year of our Lord God, one thousand six hundred eighty two,
there shall be omitted in the said Declaration or Acknowledgment so to be
subscribed and read, these words following, scilicet,

ANd I do declare, that I do hold there lies no obligation upon me, or on any
other person from the Oath, commonly called the Solemn League and Covenant, to
endeavor any change or alteration of Government, either in Church or State;
and that the same was in it self an unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the
Subjects of this Realm against the known Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom;

So as none of the persons aforesaid shall from thenceforth be at all obliged
to subscribe or read that part of the said Declaration or Acknowledgment.

Provided always, and be it Enacted, That from and after the Feast of Saint
Bartholomew, which shall be in the year of our Lord, One thousand six hundred
sixty and two, no person who now is Incumbent, and in possession of any
Parsonage, Vicarage, or Benefice, and who is not already in holy Orders by
Episcopal Ordination, or shall not before the said Feast Day of Saint
Bartholomew be ordained Priest, or Deacon, according to the Form of Episcopal
Ordination, shall have, hold, or enjoy the said Parsonage, Vicarage, Benefice
with Cure, or other Ecclesiastical Promotion within this Kingdom of England, or
the Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed; but shall be utterly
disabled, and ipso facto deprived of the same; and all his Ecclesiastical
Promotions shall be void, as if he were naturally dead.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person
whatsoever shall thenceforth be capable to be admitted to any Parsonage,
Vicarage, Benefice, or other Ecclesiastical promotion or dignity whatsoever,
nor shall presume to Consecrate and Administer the holy Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, before such time as he shall be ordained Priest, according to the form
and manner in and by the said Book prescribed, unless he have formerly been
made Priest by Episcopal Ordination, upon pain to forfeit for every offense the
sum of one hundred pounds; (one Moiety thereof to the Kings Majesty, the other
Moiety thereof to be equally divided between the Poor of the Parish where the
offense shall be committed, and such person or persons as shall sue for the
same by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information in any of his Majesty's
Courts of Record, wherein no Essoign, Protection, or Wager of Law shall be
allowed) and to be disabled from taking or being admitted into the Order of
Priest, by the space of one whole year next following.

Provided, that the penalties in this Act shall not extend to the Foreigners or
Aliens of the Foreign Reformed Churches, allowed, or to be allowed by the Kings
Majesty, His Heirs and Successors in England.

Provided always, That no Title to confer, or present by lapse, shall accrue by
any avoidance, or deprivation ipso facto by virtue of this Statute, but after
six months after notice of such voidance, or deprivation given by the Ordinary
to the Patron, or such sentence of deprivation openly and publicly Read in the
Parish Church of the Benefice, Parsonage, or Vicarage becoming void, or whereof
the Incumbent shall be deprived by virtue of this act.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no Form, or Order
of Common Prayers, Administration of Sacraments, Rites or Ceremonies shall be
openly used in any Church, Chapel, or other public place of or in any
College or Hall in either of the Universities, the Colleges of Westminster,
Winchester or Eaton, or any of them, other then what is prescribed and
appointed to be used in and by the said Book; and, That the present Governor
or Head of every College and Hall in the said Universities, and of the said
Colleges of Westminster, Winchester, and Eaton, within one month after the
Feast of Saint Bartholomew, which shall be in the year of our Lord, One
thousand six hundred sixty and two: And every Governor or Head of any of the
said Colleges, or Halls, Hereafter to be elected or appointed, within one
month next after his Election, or Collation, and Admission into the same
Government or Headship, shall openly and publicly in the Church, Chapel, or
other public place of the same College, or Hall, and in the presence of the
Fellows and Scholars of the same, or the greater part of them then resident,
subscribe unto the Nine and thirty Articles of Religion, mentioned in the
Statute made in the Thirteenth year of the Reign of the late Queen Elizabeth,
and unto the said Book, and declare his unfeigned assent and consent unto, and
approbation of the said Articles, and of the same Book, and to the use of all
the prayers, Rites, and Ceremonies, Forms, and Orders in the said Book
prescribed and contained, according to the Form aforesaid; and, That all such
Governors, or Heads of the said Colleges and Halls, or any of them as are, or
shall be in Holy Orders, shall once at least in every quarter of the year (not
having a lawful impediment) openly and publicly Read the Morning Prayer, and
Service, in and by the said Book appointed to be read, in the Church, Chapel,
or other public place of the same College or Hall, upon pain to lose, and be
suspended of, and from all the benefits and profits belonging to the same
Government or Headship, by the space of six months, by the Visitor or Visitors
of the same College or Hall; And if any Governor or Head of any College or
Hall, suspended for not subscribing unto the said Articles and Book, or for not
Reading of the Morning Prayer and Service as aforesaid, shall not at, or before
the end of six months next after such suspension, subscribe unto the said
Articles and Book, and declare his consent thereunto as aforesaid, or read the
Morning Prayer and Service as aforesaid, then such Government or Headship shall
be ipso facto void.

Provided always, that it shall and may be lawful to use the Morning and
Evening Prayer, and all other Prayers, and Service prescribed in and by the
said book, in the Chapels or other public places of the respective Colleges
and Halls in both the Universities, in the Colleges of Westminster,
Winchester, and Eaton, and in the Convocations of the Clergies of either
Province, in Latin; Any thing in this Act contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person shall be,
or be received as a Lecturer, or permitted, suffered, or allowed to preach as a
Lecturer, or to preach, or Read any Sermon or Lecture in any Church, Chapel,
or other place of public Worship within this Realm of England, or the Dominion
of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, unless he be first approved and
thereunto licensed by the Archbishop of the Province, or Bishop of the Diocese,
or (in case the Sea be void) by the Guardian of the Spiritualties, under his
Seal, and shall in the presence of the same Archbishop, or Bishop, or Guardian,
Read the Nine and thirty Articles of Religion, mentioned in the Statute of the
Thirteenth year of the late Queen Elizabeth, with Declaration of his unfeigned
assent to the same; and, That every person, and persons who now is, or
hereafter shall be Licensed, Assigned, Appointed, or Received as a Lecturer, to
preach upon any day of the week in any Church, Chapel, or place of public
Worship within this Realm of England, or places aforesaid, the first time he
preaches (before his Sermon) shall openly, publicly and solemnly Read the
Common Prayers and Service in and by the said Book appointed to be Read for
that time of the day, and then and there publicly and openly declare his
assent unto, and approbation of the said Book, and to the use of all the
Prayers, Rites and Ceremonies, Forms and Orders therein contained and
prescribed, according to the Form before appointed in this Act; and also shall
upon the first Lecture-day of every month afterward, so long as he continues
Lecturer, or Preacher there, at the place appointed for his said Lecture or
Sermon, before his said Lecture or Sermon, openly, publicly, and solemnly Read
the Common Prayers and Service in and by the said Book appointed to be Read for
that time of the day, at which the said Lecture or Sermon is to be preached,
and after such reading thereof, shall openly, and publicly, before the
Congregation there assembled, declare his unfeigned assent and consent unto,
and approbation of the said Book, and to the use of all the Prayers, Rites and
Ceremonies, Forms and Orders therein contained and prescribed, according to the
Form aforesaid; and, That all and every such person and persons who shall
neglect or refuse to do the same, shall from thenceforth be disabled to preach
the said, or any other Lecture or Sermon in the said, or any other Church,
Chapel, or place of public Worship, until such time as he and they shall
openly, publicly, and solemnly read the Common Prayers and Service appointed
by the said Book, and conform in all points to the things therein appointed and
prescribed, according to the purport, true intent, and meaning of this Act.

Provided always, That if the said Sermon or Lecture be to be preached or read
in any Cathedral, or Collegiate Church or Chapel, it shall be sufficient for
the said Lecturer openly at the time aforesaid, to declare his assent and
consent to all things contained in the said Book, according to the Form
aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person who
is by this Act disabled to preach any Lecture or Sermon, shall during the time
that he shall continue and remain so disabled, preach any Sermon or Lecture;
That then for every such offense the person and persons so offending shall
suffer three months imprisonment in the Common Goal without Bail or Mainprise,
and that any two Justices of the Peace of any County of this Kingdom and places
aforesaid, and the Mayor, or other chief Magistrate of any City, or
Town-corporate within the same, upon Certificate from the Ordinary of the place
made to him or them of the offense committed, shall, and are hereby required to
commit the person or persons so offending to the Goal of the County, City, or
Town-corporate accordingly.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That at
all and every time and times, when any Sermon or Lecture is to be preached, The
Common Prayers and Service in and by the said Book appointed to be read for
that time of the day shall be openly, publicly, and solemnly read by some
Priest or Deacon, in the Church, Chapel, or place of public Worship, where
the said Sermon or Lecture is to be preached, before such Sermon or Lecture be
preached; and, That the Lecturer then to preach shall be present at the reading
thereof.

Provided nevertheless, That this Act shall not extend to the
University-Churches in the Universities of this Realm, or either of them, when
or at such times as any Sermon or Lecture is preached or read in the same
Churches, or any of them, for, or as the public University-Sermon or Lecture;
but that the same Sermons and Lectures may be preached or read in such sort and
manner as the same have been heretofore preached or read; This Act, or any
thing herein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the several good
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, which have been formerly made, and are now in
force for the Uniformity of Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, within
this Realm of England, and places aforesaid, shall stand in full force and
strength to all intents and purposes whatsoever, for the establishing and
confirming of the said Book, Entitled, The book of Common Prayer, and
Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church,
according to the use of the Church of England together with the Psalter or
Psalms of David, Pointed as they are to be sung or said in Churches; and the
Form and Manner of Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons; herein before mentioned to be joined and annexed to this Act; and
shall be applied, practiced, and put in ure for the punishing of all offenses
contrary to the said Laws, with relation to the Book aforesaid, and no other.

Provided always, and be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in
all those Prayers, Litanies and Collects, which do any way relate to the King,
Queen, or Royal Progeny, the Names be altered and changed from time to time,
and fitted to the present occasion, according to the direction of lawful
Authority.

Provided also, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That a true
Printed Copy of the said Book, Entitled, The Book of Common Prayer, and
Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of the Church,
according to the use of the Church of England; together with the Psalter, or
Psalms of David, Pointed as they are to be sung or said in Churches; and the
Form and Manner of Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, shall at the cost and charges of the Parishioners of every
Parish Church and Chappelry, Cathedral Church, College, and Hall, be attained
and gotten before the Feast Day of Saint Bartholomew, in the year of our Lord,
One thousand six hundred sixty and two, upon pain of forfeiture of Three pounds
by the month, for so long time as they shall then after be unprovided thereof,
by every Parish, or Chappelry, Cathedral Church, College, and Hall, making
default therein.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Bishops of Hereford, S. David's, Asaph, Bangor, and Landaff, and their
Successors, shall take such order among themselves, for the souls health of the
Flocks committed to their charge within Wales, that the Book hereunto annexed
be truly and exactly Translated into the British or Welsh Tongue, and that the
same so Translated, and being by them, or any three of them at the least
viewed, perused, and allowed, be Imprinted to such number at least, so that one
of the said Books so Translated and Imprinted, may be had for every Cathedral,
Collegiate, and Parish Church, and Chapel of Ease in the said respective
Diocesses, and places in Wales, where the Welsh is commonly spoken or used,
before the First day of May, One thousand six hundred sixty five; and, That
from and after the Imprinting and Publishing of the said Book so Translated,
the whole Divine Service shall be used and said by the Ministers and Curates
throughout all Wales, within the said Diocesses where the Welsh Tongue is
commonly used, in the British or Welsh Tongue, in such manner and form as is
prescribed according to the Book hereunto annexed to be used in the English
Tongue, differing nothing in any Order or Form from the said English Book; for
which Book so Translated and Imprinted, the Churchwardens of every the said
Parishes shall pay out of the Parish-money in their hands for the use of the
respective Churches, and be allowed the same on their Account; and, That the
said Bishops and their Successors, or any three of them at the least, shall set
and appoint the Price for which the said Book shall be sold; And one other Book
of Common Prayer in the English Tongue shall be bought and had in every Church
throughout Wales, in which the Book of Common Prayer in Welsh is to be had, by
force of this Act, before the first day of May, One thousand six hundred sixty
and four, and the same Book to remain in such convenient places within the said
Churches, that such as understand them, may resort at all convenient times to
read and peruse the same, and also such as do not understand the said Language,
may by conferring both Tongues together, the sooner attain to the knowledge of
the English Tongue; Any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding; And
until printed Copies of the said Book so to be Translated may be had and
provided, the Form of Common Prayer, established by Parliament before the
making of this Act, shall be used as formerly in such parts of Wales, where the
English Tongue is not commonly understood.

And to the end that the true and perfect Copies of this Act and the said Book
hereunto annexed may be safely kept, and perpetually preserved, and for the
avoiding of all disputes for the time to come; Be it therefore Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That the respective Deans and Chapters of every Cathedral,
or Collegiate Church, within England and Wales, shall at their proper co^s and
charges, before the twenty fifth day of December, One thousand six hundred
sixty and two, obtain under the Great Seal of England a true and perfect Copy
of this Act, and of the said Book annexed hereunto, to be by the said Deans and
Chapters, and their Successors kept and preserved in safety for ever, and to be
also produced, and showed forth in any Court of Record as often as they shall
be thereunto lawfully required; and also there shall be delivered true and
perfect Copies of this Act, and of the same Book, into the respective Courts at
Westminster, and into the Tower of London, to be kept and preserved for ever
among the Records of the said Courts, and the Records of the Tower, to be also
produced and showed forth in any Court, as need shall require; which said Books
so to be exemplified under the Great Seal of England, shall be examined by such
persons, as the Kings Majesty shall appoint under the Great Seal of England for
that purpose, and shall be compared with the Original Book hereunto annexed,
and shall have power to correct, and amend in writing any Error committed by
the Printer in the Printing of the same book, or of any thing therein
contained, and shall certify in writing under their Hands and Seals, or the
Hands and Seals of any three of them at the end of the same Book, that they
have examined and compared the same Book, and find it to be a true and perfect
Copy; which said Books, and every one of them so exemplified under the Great
Seal of England, as aforesaid, shall be deemed, taken, adjudged and expounded
to be good, and available in the Law to all intents and purposes whatsoever,
and shall be accounted as good Records as this Book it self hereunto annexed;
any Law or Custom to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also, that this Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not be
prejudicial or hurtful unto the Kings Professor of the Law within the
University of Oxford, for, or concerning the Prebend of Shipton, within the
Cathedral Church of Sarum, united and annexed unto the place of the same Kings
Professor for the time being, by the late King James of blessed memory.

Provided always, That whereas the Six and thirtieth Article of the Nine and
thirty Article agreed upon by the Archbishops, and Bishops of both Provinces,
and the whole Clergy in the Convocation holden at London, in the year of our
Lord, One thousand five hundred sixty two, for the avoiding of diversities of
opinions, and for establishing of consent touching true Religion, is in these
words following, viz.

That the Book of Consecration of Archbishops, and Bishops, and Ordaining of
Priests and Deacons, lately set forth in the time of King Edward the Sixth, and
confirmed at the same time by Authority of Parliament, does contain all things
necessary to such Consecration and Ordaining, neither has it any thing that of
it self is superstitious, and ungodly; And therefore whosoever are Consecrated
or Ordered according to the Rites of that Book, since the second year of the
aforenamed King Edward unto this time, or hereafter shall be Consecrated or
Ordered according to the same Rites; We decree all such to be rightly, orderly,
and lawfully Consecrated and Ordered;

It be Enacted, and be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
all Subscriptions hereafter to be had or made unto the said Articles, by any
Deacon, Priest, or Ecclesiastical person, or other person whatsoever, who by
this Act, or any other Law now in force is required to subscribe unto the said
Articles, shall be construed and taken to extend, and shall be applied (for and
touching the said Six and thirtieth Article) unto the book containing the Form
and Manner of Making, Ordaining, and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests and
Deacons in this Act mentioned, in such sort and manner as the same did
heretofore extend unto the Book set forth in the time of King Edward the Sixth,
mentioned in the said Six and thirtieth Article; Any thing in the said Article,
or in any Statute, Act, or Canon heretofore had or made to the contrary
thereof, in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also, That the Book of Common Prayer, and Administration of the
Sacraments, and other Rites and Ceremonies of this Church of England, together
with the Form and Manner of Ordaining, and Consecrating Bishops, Priests and
Deacons, heretofore in use, and respectively established by Act of Parliament
in the First and Eighth years of Queen Elizabeth, shall be still used and
observed in the Church of England, until the Feast of Saint Bartholomew, which
shall be in the year of our Lord God, One thousand six hundred sixty and two.

The PREFACE.
IT has been the Wisdom of the Church of England, ever since the first
compiling of her public Liturgy, to keep the Mean between the two Extremes, of
too much stiffness in refusing, and of too much easiness in admitting any
variation from it. For, as on the one side common Experience shows, that
where a change has been made of things advisedly established (no evident
necessity so requiring) sundry inconveniences have thereupon ensued; and those
many times more, and greater then the evils that were intended to be remedied
by such change: so on the other side, the particular Forms of Divine Worship,
and the Rites and Ceremonies appointed to be used therein, being things in
their own nature indifferent, and alterable, and so acknowledged; it is but
reasonable, that upon weighty and important considerations, according to the
various exigency of times and occasions, such changes and alterations should be
made therein, as to those that are in place of Authority should from time to
time seem either necessary or expedient. Accordingly we find, that in the
Reigns of several Princes of blessed memory since the Reformation, the Church
upon just and weighty considerations her thereunto moving, has yielded to make
such Alterations in some particulars, as in their respective times were thought
convenient: Yet so, as that the main Body and essentials of it (as well in the
chiefest materials, as in the frame and order thereof) have still continued the
same unto this day, and do yet stand firm and unshaken, notwithstanding all the
vain attempts and impetuous assaults made against it by such men as are given
to change, and have always discovered a greater regard to their own private
Fancies and Interests, then to that duty they owe to the public.

By what undue means, and for what mischievous purposes the use of the Liturgy
(though enjoined by the Laws of the Land, and those Laws never yet repealed)
came, during the late unhappy confusions, to be discontinued, is too well known
to the World, and we are not willing here to remember. But when, upon his
Majesty's happy Restoration it seemed probable, that, amongst other things,
the use of the Liturgy also would return of course (the same having never been
legally abolished) unless some timely means were used to prevent it; those men,
Who under the late usurped powers had made it a great part of their business to
render the people disaffected thereunto, saw themselves in point of reputation
and interest concerned (unless they would freely acknowledge themselves to have
erred, which such men are very hardly brought to do) with their utmost
endeavors to hinder the restitution thereof. In order whereunto diverse
Pamphlets were published against the Book of Common Prayer, the old Objections
mustered up, with the addition of some new ones more then formerly had been
made, to make the number swell. In fine, great importunities were used to his
sacred Majesty, that the said Book might be revised, and such Alterations
therein, and Additions thereunto made, as should be thought requisite for the
ease of tender Consciences: Whereunto his Majesty, out of his pious inclination
to give satisfaction (so far as could be reasonably expected) to all his
Subjects of what persuasion soever, did graciously condescend.

In which Review we have endeavored to observe the like Moderation, as we find
to have been used in the like case in former times. And therefore of the sundry
Alterations proposed unto us, we have rejected all such as were either of
dangerous consequence (as secretly striking at some established Doctrine, or
laudable Practice of the Church of England, or indeed of the whole Catholic
Church of Christ) or else of no consequence at all, but utterly frivolous and
vain. But such Alterations as were tendered to us (by what persons, under what
pretenses, or to what purpose soever so tendered) as seemed to us in any degree
requisite or expedient, we have willingly, and of our own accord assented unto:
Not enforced so to do by any strength of Argument, convincing us of the
necessity of making the said Alterations: For we are fully persuaded in our
judgments (and we here profess it to the World) that the Book, as it stood
before established by Law, does not contain in it any thing contrary to the
Word of God, or to sound Doctrine, or which a godly man may not with a good
Conscience use and submit unto, or which is not fairly defensible against any
that shall oppose the same; if it shall be allowed such just and favorable
construction as in common Equity ought to be allowed to all Humane Writings,
especially such are set forth by Authority, and even to the very best
Translations of the holy Scripture it self.

Our general aim therefore in this Undertaking was, not to gratify this or
that Party, in any their unreasonable demands; but to do that, which to our
best understandings we conceived might most tend to the preservation of peace
and unity in the Church; the procuring of Reverence, and exciting of Piety and
Devotion in the public Worship of God; and the cutting off occasion from them
that seek occasion of cavil, or quarrel against the Liturgy of the Church. And
as to the several variations from the former Book, whether by Alteration,
Addition, or otherwise, it shall suffice to give this general Account, That
most of the Alterations were made, either first, for the better direction of
them that are to officiate in any part of Divine Service; which is chiefly done
in the Kalendars and Rubricks: Or secondly, for the more proper expressing of
some words or phrases of ancient usage, in terms more suitable to the Language
of the present times, and the clearer explanation of some other words and
phrases, that were either of doubtful signification, or otherwise liable to
misconstruction: Or thirdly, for a more perfect rendering of such portions of
holy Scripture, as are inserted into the Liturgy; which, in the Epistles and
Gospels especially, and in sundry other places, are now ordered to be read
according to the last Translation: and that it was thought convenient, that
some Prayers and Thanksgivings, fitted to special Occasions should be added in
their due places; particularly for those at Sea, together with an Office for
the Baptism of such as are of riper years; which, although not so necessary
when the former Book was compiled, yet by the growth of Anabaptism, through the
licentiousness of the late Times crept in amongst us, is now become necessary,
and may be always useful for the baptizing of Natives in our Plantations, and
others converted to the Faith. If any man who shall desire a more particular
Account of the several Alterations in any part of the Liturgy, shall take the
pains to compare the present Book with the former; we doubt not but the reason
of the change may easily appear.

And having thus endeavored to discharge our Duties in this weighty Affair, as
in the sight of God, and to approve our sincerity therein (so far as lay in us)
to the Consciences of all men; although we know it impossible (in such variety
of apprehensions, humors, and interests as are in the world) to please all;
nor can expect that men of factious, peevish, and perverse spirits should be
satisfied with any thing that can be done in this kind by any other then
themselves: Yet we have good hope, that what is here presented, and has been
by the Convocations of both Provinces with great diligence examined and
approved, will be also well accepted and approved by all sober, peaceable, and
truly conscientious Sons of the Church of England.

Concerning the Service of the CHURCH.
THere was never any thing by the wit of man so well devised, or so sure
established, which in continuance of time has not been corrupted: As among
other things, it may plainly appear by the Common Prayers in the Church,
commonly called Divine Service. The first original and ground whereof, if a man
would search out by the ancient Fathers, he shall find, that the same was not
ordained but of a good purpose, and for a great advancement of godliness. For
they so ordered the matter, that all the whole Bible, (or the greatest part
thereof) should be read over once every year; intending thereby, that the
Clergy, and especially such as were Ministers in the Congregation, should (by
often reading, and meditation in Gods Word) be stirred up to godliness
themselves, and be more able to exhort others by wholesome Doctrine, and to
confute them that were Adversaries to the Truth; and further, that the people
(by daily hearing of holy Scripture read in the Church) might continually
profit more and more in the knowledge of God, and be the more inflamed with the
love of his true Religion.

But these many years passed, this godly and decent Order of the ancient
Fathers has been so altered, broken, and neglected by planting in uncertain
Stories and Legends, with multitude of Responds, Verses, vain Repetitions,
Commemorations and Synodals; that commonly, when any Book of the Bible was
begun, after three or four Chapters were read out, all the rest were unread.
And in this sort the Book of Isaiah was begun in Advent, and the Book of
Genesis in Septuagesima; but they were only begun and never read through: After
like sort were other Books of holy Scripture used. And moreover, whereas Saint
Paul would have such Language spoken to the people in the Church, as they might
understand, and have profit by hearing the same; the Service in this Church of
England these many years, has been read in Latin to the people, which they
understand not; so that they have heard with their ears only, and their heart,
spirit, and mind have not been edified thereby. And furthermore,
notwithstanding that the ancient Fathers have divided the Psalms into seven
portions, whereof every one was called a Nocturn: Now of late time a few of
them have been daily said, and the rest utterly omitted. Moreover, the number
and hardness of the Rules called the Pie, and the manifold changings of the
Service was the cause, that to turn the Book only was so hard and intricate a
matter, that many times there was more business to find out what should be
read, then to read it when it was found out.

These inconveniences therefore considered, here is set forth such an Order,
whereby the same shall be redressed. And for a readiness in this matter, here
is drawn out a Calendar for that purpose, which is plain and easy to be
understood; wherein (so much as may be) the reading of holy Scripture is so set
forth, that all things shall be done in order, without breaking one piece from
another. For this cause be cut off Anthems, Responds, Invitatories, and such
like things as did break the continual course of the reading of the Scripture.

Yet, because there is no remedy, but that of necessity there must be some
Rules; therefore certain Rules are here set forth; which, as they are few in
number, so they are plain and easy to be understood. So that here you have an
Order for Prayer, and for the reading of the holy Scripture, much agreeable to
the mind and purpose of the old Fathers, and a great deal more profitable and
commodious then that which of late was used. It is more profitable, because
here are left out many things, whereof some are untrue, some uncertain, some
vain and superstitious; and nothing is ordained to be read, but the very pure
Word of God, the holy Scriptures, or that which is agreeable to the same; and
that in such a Language and Order, as is most easy and plain for the
understanding both of the Readers and Hearers. It is also more commodious, both
for the shortness thereof, and for the plainness of the Order, and for that the
Rules be few and easy.

And whereas heretofore there has been great diversity in saying and singing
in Churches within this Realm; some following Salisbury Use, some Hereford Use,
and some the Use of Bangor, some of York, some of Lincoln; now from henceforth
all the whole Realm shall have but one Use.

And forasmuch as nothing can be so plainly set forth, but doubts may arise in
the use and practice of the same; to appease all such diversity (if any arise)
and for the resolution of all doubts, concerning the manner how to understand,
do, and execute the things contained in this Book; the parties that so doubt,
or diversely take any thing, shall always resort to the Bishop of the Diocese,
who by his discretion shall take order for the quieting and appeasing of the
same; so that the same order be not contrary to any thing contained in this
book. And if the Bishop of the Diocese be in doubt, then he may send for the
Resolution thereof to the Archbishop.

THough it be appointed, That all things shall be read and sung in the Church
in the English Tongue, to the end, that the Congregation may be thereby
edified; yet it is not meant, but that when men say Morning and Evening Prayer
privately, they may say the same in any Language that they themselves do
understand.

And all Priests and Deacons are to say daily the Morning and Evening Prayer,
either privately or openly, not being let by sickness, or some other urgent
cause.

And the Curate that ministers in every Parish Church or Chapel, being at
home, and not being otherwise reasonably hindered, shall say the same in the
Parish Church or Chapel where he ministers, and shall cause a Bell to be
tolled thereunto a convenient time before he begin, that the people may come to
hear Gods Word, and to pray with him.

Of CEREMONIES, Why some be abolished, and some retained.
OF such Ceremonies as be used in the Church, and have had their beginning by
the Institution of Man, some at the first were of godly intent and purpose
devised, and yet at length turned to vanity and superstition: Some entered into
the Church by undiscreet Devotion, and such a Zeal as was without knowledge;
and for because they were winked at in the beginning, they grew daily to more
and more abuses, which not only for their unprofitableness, but also because
they have much blinded the people, and obscured the Glory of God, are worthy to
be cut away, and clean rejected: Other there be, which although they have been
devised by Man, yet it is thought good to reserve them still, as well for a
decent Order in the Church (for the which they were first devised) as because
they pertain to edification, whereunto all things done in the Church (as the
Apostle teaches) ought to be referred.

And although the keeping or omitting of a Ceremony, in it self considered, is
but a small thing; yet the wilful and contemptuous trangression and breaking of
a common Order and Discipline, is no small Offense before God. Let all things
be done among you, says St. Paul, in a seemly and due order; The appointment
of the which Order, pertains not to private men; therefore no man ought to
take in hand, or presume to appoint or alter any public or common Order in
Christ's Church, except he be lawfully called and authorized thereunto.

And whereas in this our time, the minds of men are so diverse, that some think
it a great matter of conscience to depart from a piece of the least of their
Ceremonies, they be so addicted to their old customs; and again on the other
side, some be so newfangled, that they would innovate all things, and so
despise the old, that nothing can like them, but that is new: It was thought
expedient, not so much to have respect how to please and satisfy either of
these parties, as how to please God, and profit them both. And yet lest any man
should be offended, whom good reason might satisfy, here be certain causes
rendered, why some of the accustomed Ceremonies be put away, and some retained
and kept still.

Some are put away, because the great excess and multitude of them has so
increased in these latter days, that the burden of them was intolerable;
whereof St. Augustine, in his time complained, that they were grown to such a
number, that the Estate of Christian people was in worse case concerning that
matter then were the Jews. And he counseled, that such yoke and burden should
be taken away, as time would serve quietly to do it. But what would St.
Augustine have said, if he had seen the Ceremonies of late days used among us;
whereunto the multitude used in his time was not to be compared? This our
excessive multitude of Ceremonies was so great, and many of them so dark, that
they did more confound and darken, then declare and set forth Christ's benefits
unto us. And besides this, Christ's Gospel is not a Ceremonial Law (as much of
Moses Law was) but it is a Religion to serve God, not in bondage of the figure
or shadow, but in the freedom of the spirit; being content only with those
Ceremonies which do serve to a decent Order, and godly Discipline, and such as
be apt to stir up the dull mind of man to the remembrance of his duty to God,
by some notable and special signification, whereby he might be edified.
Furthermore, the most weighty cause of the abolishment of certain Ceremonies
was, That they were so far abused; partly by the superstitious blindness of the
rude and unlearned, and partly by the unsatiable Avarice of such as sought more
their own lucre, then the Glory of God, that the Abuses could not well be taken
away, the thing remaining still.

But now as concerning those persons, which peradventure will be offended, for
that some of the old Ceremonies are retained still: if they consider, that
without some Ceremonies it is not possible to keep any Order, or quiet
Discipline in the Church, they shall easily perceive just cause to reform their
judgments. And if they think much that any of the old do remain, and would
rather have all devised anew: Then such men granting some Ceremonies convenient
to be had, surely where the old may be well used, there they cannot reasonably
reprove the old only for their age, without bewraying of their own folly. For
in such a case they ought rather to have reverence unto them for their
antiquity, if they will declare themselves to be more studious of unity and
concord, then of innovations and new-fangleness, which (as much as may be with
true setting forth of Christ's Religion) is always to be eschewed. Furthermore,
such shall have no just cause with the Ceremonies reserved to be offended. For
as those are taken away which were most abused, and did burden men's consciences
without any cause; so the other that remain, are retained for a Discipline and
Order, which (upon just causes) may be altered and changed, and therefore are
not to be esteemed equal with Gods Law. And moreover, they be neither dark nor
dumb Ceremonies, but are so set forth, that every man may understand what they
do mean, and to what use they do serve. So that it is not like that they in
time to come should be abused as other have been. And in these our doings we
condemn no other Nations, nor prescribe any thing but to our own people only:
for we think it convenient, that every Country should use such Ceremonies as
they shall think best to the setting forth of Gods honor and glory, and to the
reducing of the people to a most perfect and godly living, without error or
superstition; and that they should put away other things, Which from time to
time, they perceive to be most abused, as in men's ordinances it often chances
diversely in diverse Countries.

The Order how the Psalter is appointed to be read.
THe psalter shall be read through once every month, as it is there appointed,
both for Morning and Evening Prayer. But in February it shall be read only to
the Twenty eighth, or Twenty ninth day of the month.

And whereas January, March, May, July, August, October, and December, have One
and thirty days apiece; It is ordered, that the same Psalms shall be read the
last day of the said months, which were read the day before: So that the
Psalter may begin again the first day of the next month ensuing.

And whereas the CXIX Psalm is divided into XXII Portions, and is over long to
be read at one time; It is so ordered, that at one time shall not be read above
four or five of the said Portions.

And at the end of every Psalm, and of every such part of the CXIX Psalm, shall
be repeated this Hymn,

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost; As it was in
the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Note, That the Psalter follows the Division of the Hebrews, and the
Translation of the Great English Bible, set forth and used in the time of King
Henry the Eighth, and Edward the Sixth.

The Order how the rest of the holy Scripture is appointed to be read.
THe Old Testament is appointed for the first Lessons at Morning and Evening
Prayer; so as the most part thereof will be read every year once, as in the
Calendar is appointed.

The New Testament is appointed for the second Lessons at Morning and Evening
Prayer, and shall be read over orderly every year thrice, besides the Epistles
and Gospels; except the Apocalypse, out of which there are only certain proper
Lessons appointed upon diverse Feasts.

And to know what Lessons shall be read every day, look for the day of the
month in the Calendar following, and there ye shall find the Chapters that
shall be read for the Lessons both at Morning and Evening Prayer; Except only
the Moveable Feasts, which are not in the Calendar, and the immovable, where
there is a blank left in the Column of Lessons; the proper Lessons for all
which days are to be found in the Table of proper Lessons.

And note, that whenever proper Psalms or Lessons are appointed; then the
Psalms and Lessons of ordinary course appointed in the Psalter and Calendar (if
they be different) shall be omitted for that time.

Note also, that the Collect, Epistle, and Gospel appointed for the Sunday,
shall serve all the week after, where it is not in this Book otherwise ordered.

Proper LESSONS to be read at Morning and Evening Prayer on the Sundays and
other Holidays throughout the Year.
Lessons proper for Sundays.
Sundays of Advent. Mattins. Evensong. The first Isaiah 1. Isaiah 2. 2 5 24 3
25 26 4 30 32 Sundays after Christmas. The first 37 38 2 41 43 Sundays after
the Epiphany. The first 44 46 2 51 53 3 55 56 4 57 58 5 59 64 6 65 66
Septuagesima. Genesis 1 Genesis 2. Sexagesima. 3 6 Quinquagesima Lent. 9 to verse. 20
12 First Sunday 19 to verse. 30 22 2 27 34 3 39 42 4 43 45 5 Exodus 3. Exodus 5. 6
1 Lesson 9 10 2 Lesson Matthew. 26. Heb. 5 to v. 11 Easter Day. 1 Lesson Exodus
12. Exodus 14. 2 Lesson Romans 6. Acts 2. v. 22. Sundays after Easter. The first
Numb. 16. Numb. 22. 2 23, 24. 25 3 Deuteronomy. 4. Deuteronomy. 5. 4 6 7 5 8 9 Sunday after
Ascension-day. 12 13 Whitsunday. 1 Lesson Deuteronomy. 16. to v. 18. Isaiah 11. 2
Lesson Acts 10. v. 34. Acts 19 to v. 21. Trinity Sunday. 1 Lesson Genesis 1. Genesis
18. 2 Lesson Matthew. 3. 1 John 5. Sundays after Trinity. The first Josh. 10.
Josh. 23. 2 Judges 4. Judges 5. 3 1 Samuel 2. 1 Samuel 3. 4 12 13 5 15 17 6 2 Samuel
12. 2 Samuel 19. 7 21 24 8 1 King. 13. 1 King. 17 9 18 19 10 21 22 11 2 King. 5.
2 Kings 9. 12 10 18 13 19 23 14 Jerem. 5. Jerem. 22. 15 35 36 Sund. after Trin.
Mattins. Evensong. 16 Ezekiel. 2. Ezekiel. 13. 17 14 18 18 20 24 19 Dan. 3. Dan. 6.
20 Joel 2. Micah 6. 21 Habak. 2. Prove. 1. 22 Prove. 2. 3 23 11 12 24 13 14 25 15
16 26 17 19

Lessons proper for Holidays.
Mattins. Evensong. S. Andrew Prove. 20. Prove. 21. S. Thomas the Apostle. 23 24
Nativity of CHRIST. 1 Lesson Isai. 9. to ver. 8. Isai. 7. ver. 10. to ver. 17.
2 Lesson Luke 2. to ver. 15 Titus 3. ver. 4. to v. 9. S. Stephen. 1 Lesson
Prove. 28. Eccles. 4. 2 Lesson Acts 6. verse. 8. and chapter 7. to verse. 30. Acts 7.
v. 30. to v. 55. S. John. 1 Lesson Eccles. 5. Eccles. 6. 2 Lesson Apoc. 1.
Apoc. 22. Innocents day. Jer. 31. to ver. 18. Wisd. 1. Circumcision. 1 Lesson
Genesis 17. Deuteronomy. 10. v. 12. 2 Lesson Romans 2. Colos. 2. Epiphany. 1 Lesson Isaiah
60. Isaiah 49. 2 Lesson Luke 3. to v. 23. Joh. 2. to v. 12. Conversion of St.
Paul. 1 Lesson Wisd. 5. Wisd. 6. 2 Lesson Act. 22. to v. 22. Acts 26.
Purification of the Virgin Mary. Wisd. 9. Wisd. 12. S. Matthias. 19 Ecclus 1.
Annunciation of our Lady. Ecclus 2. 3 Wednesday before Easter. 1 Lesson Hos.
13. Hos. 14. 2 Lesson Joh. 11. v. 45. Thursday before Easter. 1 Lesson Dan. 9.
Jerem. 31. 2 Lesson John 13. Good Friday. 1 Lesson Genesis 22. to v. 20 Isa. 53. 2
Lesson John 18. 1 Pet. 2. Easter Even. 1 Lesson Zec. 9. Exodus 13. 2 Lesson Luke
23. v. 50. Heb. 4. Monday in Easter week. 1 Lesson Exodus 16. Exodus 17. 2 Lesson
Matthew. 28. Acts 3. Tuesday in Easter week. 1 Lesson Exodus 20. Exodus 32. 2
Lesson Luke 24. to v. 13 1 Cor. 15. S. Mark. Ecclus 4. Ecclus 5. S. Philip and
S. Jacob. Mattins. Evensong. 1 Lesson 7 9 2 Lesson John 1. v. 43.
Ascension-day. 1 Lesson Deuteronomy. 10. 2 Kings 2. 2 Lesson Luke 24. v. 44. Ephesians. 4.
to v. 17. Monday in Whitsun-week. 1 Lesson Genesis 11. to v. 10. Number. 11. v. 16.
to v. 30. 2 Lesson 1 Cor. 12. 1 Cor. 14. to v. 26. Tuesday in Whitsun week. 1
Lesson 1 Samuel 19. v. 18. Deuteronomy. 30. 2 Lesson. 1 Thessalonians. 5. v. 12. to v. 24. 1.
John 4. to v. 14. S. Barnabas. 1 Lesson Ecclus 10. Ecclus 12. 2 Lesson Acts 14.
Act. 15. to v. 36. S. John Baptist. 1 Lesson Malach. 3. Malach. 4. 2 Lesson
Matthew. 3. Mat. 14. to v. 13. S. Peter. 1 Lesson Ecclus 15. Ecclus 19. 2 Lesson.
Acts 3. Acts 4. S. James. Ecclus 21. Ecclus 22. S. Bartholomew. 24 29 S.
Matthew. 35 38 S. Michael. 1 Lesson Genesis 32. Dan. 10. v. 5. 2 Lesson Acts 12.
to v. 20. Jud. v. 6. to v. 16. S. Luke. Ecclus 51. Job 1. S. Simon and S. Jude.
Job 24, 25. 42 All Saints. 1 Lesson Wis. 3. to v. 10. Wis. 5, to v. 17. 2
Lesson Heb. 11. v. 33. etc. 12. to v. 7. Apoc. 19. to v. 17.

Proper Psalms on certain Days.
Mattins. Evensong. Christmas Day. Psalm. xix. xlv. lxxxv. Psalm. lxxxix. cx.
cxxxii. Ashwednesday. vi. xxxii. xxxviii. cii. cxxx. cxliii. Good Friday. xxii.
xl. live. lxix. lxxxviii. Easterday. Psalm. ii. lvii. cxi. Psalm. cxiii. cxiv.
cxviij. Ascension day. viii. xv. xxi. xxiv. xlvii. cviii. Whitsunday. xlviii.
lxviii. civ. cxiv.

The Calendar
JANUARY has xxxi. days.
MORNING Prayer. EVENING Prayer. 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 2 1 A
Circum. 2 b Genesis 1 Matthew. 1 Genesis 2 Romans 1 10 3 c 3 2 4 2 19 4 d 5 3 6 3 5 e 7 4
8 4 8 6 f Epiphany 7 g 9 5 12 5 16 8 A Lucian, P. 13 6 14 6 5 9 b 15 7 16 7 10
c 17 8 18 8 13 11 d 19 9 20 9 2 12 e 21 10 22 10 13 f Hillary B. 23 11 24 11 10
14 g 25 12 26 12 15 A 27 13 28 13 18 16 b 29 14 30 14 7 17 c 31 15 32 15 18 d
Prisca, R. 33 16 34 16 15 19 e 35 17 37 1 Cor. 1 4 20 f Fabian B. 38 18 39 2 21
g Agnes Virg. 40 19 41 3 12 22 A Vincent Sp. 42 20 43 4 1 23 b 44 21 45 5 24 c
46 22 47 6 9 25 d S. Paul Conv. 26 e 48 23 49 7 17 27 f 50 24 Exodus 1 8 6 28 g
Exodus 2 25 3 9 29 A 4 26 5 10 13 30 b K. C. M. Note, That Exodus 6. is to be
read only to verse 14,.
0 27 7 11 3 31 c 8 28 9 12

FEBRUARY has xxviii. days.
MORNING Prayer. EVENING Prayer. 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 1 d Fast.
Exodus 10 Mark 1 Exodus 11 1 Cor. 13 11 2 e P. Mary 2 14 19 3 f 12 3 13 15 8 4 g
14 4 15 16 5 A Agatha Sic. 16 5 17 2 Cor. 1 16 6 b 18 6 19 2 5 7 c 20 7 21 3 8
d 22 8 23 4 13 9 e 24 9 32 5 2 10 f 33 10 34 6 11 g Levit. 18 11 Lev. 19 7 10
12 A 20 12 26 8 13 b Number. 11 13 Number. 12 9 18 14 c Valentine. 13 14 14 10 7 15 d
16 15 17 11 16 e 20 16 21 12 15 17 f 22 Lu. 1 to 39 23 13 4 18 g 24 1. 39 25
Galat. 1 19 A 27 2 30 2 12 20 b 31 3 32 3 1 21 c Fast. 35 4 36 4 22 d S. Matt.
Deuteronomy. 1 5 Deuteronomy. 2 5 9 23 e 3 6 4 6 24 f 7 Ephesians. 1 17 25 g 5 8 6 2 6 26 A 7 9 8
3 27 b 9 10 10 4 14 28 c 11 11 12 5 29 13 Matthew. 7 14 Romans 12

MARCH has xxxi. days.
MORNING Prayer. EVENING Prayer. 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 3 1 d
David Arc. Deuteronomy 15 Luke 12 Deuteronomy. 16 Ephesians. 6 2 e Cedde. 17 13 18 Philip 1 11 3
f 19 14 20 2 4 g 21 15 22 3 19 5 A 24 16 25 4 8 6 b 26 17 27 Colos. 1 7 c
Perpetua. 28 18 29 2 16 8 d 30 19 31 3 5 9 e 32 20 33 4 10 f 34 21 Josh. 1 1
These. 1 13 11 g Josh. 2 22 3 2 2 12 A Greg. M. B. 4 23 5 3 13 b 6 24 7 4 10 14
c 8 John 1 9 5 15 d 10 2 23 2 These. 1 18 16 e 24 3 Judges 1 2 7 17 f Judges 2 4
3 3 18 g Ed. K. West. 4 5 5 1 Timothy 1 15 19 A 6 6 7 2, 3 4 20 b 8 7 9 4 21 c
Benedict, A. 10 8 11 5 12 22 d 12 9 13 6 1 23 e 14 10 15 2 Timothy 1 24 f Fast. 16
11 17 2 9 25 g An. Mary 12 3 26 A 18 13 19 4 17 27 b 20 14 21 Titus 1 6 28 c
Ruth. 1 15 Ruth 2 2, 3 29 d 3 16 4 Philem. 14 30 e 1 Samuel 1 17 1 Samuel 2 Hebr. 1
3 31 f 3 18 4 2

APRIL has xxx. days.
MORNING Prayer EVENING Prayer. 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 1 g 1 Samuel
5 John 19 1 Samuel 6 Hebr. 3 11 2 A 7 20 8 4 3 b Richard, B. 9 21 10 5 19 4 c S.
Ambrose. 11 Acts 1 12 6 8 5 d 13 2 14 7 16 6 e 15 3 16 8 5 7 f 17 4 18 9 8 g 19
5 20 10 13 9 A 21 6 22 11 2 10 b 23 7 24 12 11 c 25 8 26 13 10 12 d 27 9 28
James 1 13 e 29 10 30 2 18 14 f 31 11 2 Samuel 1 3 7 15 g 2 Samuel 2 12 3 4 16 A 4
13 5 5 15 17 b 6 14 7 1 Pet. 1 4 18 c 8 15 9 2 19 d Alphege, A. 10 16 11 3 12
20 e 12 17 13 4 1 21 f 14 18 15 5 22 g 16 19 17 2 Pet. 1 9 23 A S. George. 18
20 19 2 24 b 20 21 21 3 17 25 c S. Mark Ev. and M. 22 1 John 1 6 26 d 22 23 23
2 27 e 24 24 1 King 1 3 14 28 f 1 King. 2 25 3 4 3 29 g 4 26 5 5 30 A 6 27 7 2,
3 John

MAY has xxxj. days.
MORNING Prayer. EVENING Prayer. 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 2 1 b S.
Phil. Jude. 2 c and Iac. 1 Kings 8 Acts 28 1 Kings 9 Romans 1 9 3 d Invention of
the Cross. 10 Matthew. 1 11 2 8 4 e 12 2 13 3 5 f 14 3 15 4 16 6 g S. John Ev. 16
4 17 5 5 7 A 18 5 19 6 8 b 20 6 21 7 13 9 c 22 7 2 Kings 1 8 2 10 d 2 Kings 2 8
3 9 11 e 4 9 5 10 10 12 f 6 10 7 11 13 g 8 11 9 12 18 14 A 10 12 11 13 7 15 b
12 13 13 14 16 c 14 14 15 15 15 17 d 16 15 17 16 4 18 e 18 16 19 1 Cor. 1 19 f
Dunst. A. B. 20 17 21 2 12 20 g 22 18 23 3 1 21 A 24 19 25 4 22 b Ezra 1 20
Ezra 3 5 9 23 c 4 21 5 6 24 d 6 22 7 7 17 25 e 9 23 Neh. 1 8 6 26 f Augustine.
Neh. 2 24 4 9 27 g Ven. Bid. 5 25 6 10 14 28 A 8 26 9 11 3 29 b K. Chapter II. N.
and R. 10 27 13 12 30 c Esther 1 28 Esther 2 13 11 31 d 3 Mark 1 4 14

JUNE has xxx. days.
MORNING Prayer. EVENING Prayer. 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 1 e Nicom.
Esther 5 Mark 2 Esther 6 1 Cor. 15 19 2 f 7 3 8 16 8 3 g 9 4 Job 1 2 Cor. 1 16
4 A Job 2 5 3 2 5 5 b Boniface. 4 6 5 3 6 c 6 7 7 4 13 7 d 8 8 9 5 2 8 e 10 9
11 6 9 f 12 10 13 7 10 10 g 14 11 15 8 11 A S. Barn. A. and M. 18 12 b 16 12
17, 18 9 7 13 c 19 13 20 10 14 d 21 14 22 11 15 15 e 23 15 24, 25 12 4 16 f 26,
27 16 28 13 17 g S. Alban. 29 Luke 1 30 Galat. 1 12 18 A 31 2 32 2 1 19 b 33 3
34 3 20 c Edward. 35 4 36 4 9 21 d 37 5 38 5 22 e 39 6 40 6 17 23 f Fast. 41 7
42 Ephesians. 1 6 24 g S. Io. B. 25 A Prove. 1 8 Prove. 2 2 14 26 b 3 9 4 3 3 27 c 5
10 6 4 28 d Fast. 7 11 8 5 11 29 e S. Peter 30 f 9 12 10 6

JULY has xxxi. days.
MORNING Prayer. EVENING Prayer. 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 19 1 g
Prove. 11 Luke 13 Prove. 12 Philip. 1 8 2 A Mary Visit. 13 14 14 2 3 b 15 15 16 3
16 4 c Tr. Mart. B. 17 16 18 4 5 5 d 19 17 20 Colos. 1 6 e 21 18 22 2 13 7 f 23
19 24 3 2 8 g 25 20 26 4 9 A 27 21 28 1 These. 1 10 10 b 29 22 31 2 11 c Eccles.
1 23 Eccles. 2 3 18 12 d 3 24 4 4 7 13 e 5 John 1 6 5 14 f 7 2 8 2 These. 1 15
15 g Swithun B. 9 3 10 2 4 16 A 11 4 12 3 17 b Jerem. 1 5 Jerem. 2 1 Timothy 1 12
18 c 3 6 4 2, 3 1 19 d 5 7 6 4 20 e Margar. 7 8 8 5 9 21 f M. Magd. 9 9 10 6 22
g 11 10 12 2 Timothy 1 17 23 A 13 11 14 2 6 24 b Fast 15 12 16 3 25 c S. James 13
4 13 26 d S. Anne 17 14 18 Titus 1 3 27 e 19 15 20 2, 3 28 f 21 16 22 Philem.
11 29 g 23 17 24 Hebr. 1 30 A 25 18 26 2 19 31 b 27 19 28 3

AUGUST has xxxj. days.
MORNING Prayer. EVENING Prayer. 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 8 1 c
Lammas Jer. 29 John 20 Jer. 30 Heb. 4 16 2 d 31 21 32 5 5 3 e 33 Acts. 1 34 6 4
f 35 2 36 7 13 5 g Tr. Of our L. 37 3 38 8 2 6 A N. of Jesus. 39 4 40 9 7 b 41
5 42 10 10 8 c 43 6 44 11 9 d 45, 46 7 47 12 18 10 e S. Laurance 48 8 49 13 7
11 f 50 9 51 James 1 12 g 52 10 Lam. 1 2 15 13 A Lam. 2 11 3 3 4 14 b 4 12 5 4
15 c Ezekiel. 2 13 Ezekiel. 3 5 12 16 d 6 14 7 1 Pet. 1 1 17 e 13 15 14 2 18 f 18 16
33 3 9 19 g 34 17 Dan. 1 4 20 A Dan. 2 18 3 5 17 21 b 4 19 5 2 Pet. 1 6 22 c 6
20 7 2 23 d Fast. 8 21 9 3 14 24 e S. Bart. 22 1 John 1 3 25 f 10 23 11 2 26 g
12 24 Hosea 1 3 11 27 A Hos. 2, 3 25 4 4 28 b S. Aug. B 5, 6 26 7 5 19 29 c
Beh. Of John 8 27 9 2, 3 John 8 30 d 10 28 11 Jude. 31 e 12 Matthew. 1 13 Romans ^

SEPTEMBER has xxx. days.
MORNING Prayer. EVENING Prayer. 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 16 1 f
Giles Ab. and Conf. Hos. 1 Matthew. 2 Joel 1 Romans 2 5 2 g Joel ^ 3 3 3 3 A Amos 1
4 Amos 2 4 13 4 b 3 5 4 5 2 5 c 5 6 6 6 6 d 7 7 8 7 10 7 e Enurchus B 9 8
Obadiah 8 8 f Not. Mary Jonah 1 9 Jon. 2, 3 9 18 9 g 4 10 Mich. 1 10 7 10 A
Mich. 2 11 3 11 11 b 4 12 5 12 15 12 c 6 13 7 13 4 13 d Nah. 1 14 Nah. 2 14 14
e Holy Cross 3 15 Hab. 1 15 12 15 f Hab. 2 16 3 16 1 16 g Zeph 1 1 Zeph. 2 1
Cor. 1 17 A Lamb. 3 18 Hagg. 1 2 9 18 b Hagg. 2 19 Zech. 1 3 19 c Zcc. 2, 3 20
4, 5 4 17 20 d Fast. 6 21 7 5 6 21 e S. Matt. 22 6 22 f 8 23 9 7 14 23 g 10 24
11 8 3 24 A 12 25 13 9 25 b 14 26 Mal. 1 10 11 26 c S. Cyprian Mal. 2 27 3 11
19 27 d 4 28 Tob. 1 12 28 e Tobit. 2 Mark 1 3 13 8 29 f S. Mich. 2 14 30 g S.
Jerome. 4 3 6 15

OCTOBER has xxxi. days.
MORNING Prayer EVENING Prayer. 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 16 1 A
Remig. B. Tobit. 7 Mark 4 Tobit 8 1 Cor 16 5 2 b 9 5 10 2 Cor. 1 13 3 c 11 6 12
2 2 4 d 13 7 14 3 5 e Judeth. 1 8 Judeth. 2 4 10 6 f Faith. Virg. 3 9 4 5 7 g 5
10 ^ 6 18 8 A 7 11 8 7 7 9 b Dennis. 9 12 10 8 10 c 11 13 12 9 15 11 d 13 14 14
10 4 12 e 15 15 16 11 13 f Ed. Conf. wisd. 1 16 Wisd. 2 12 12 14 g 3 Lu. 1 to
39 4 13 1 15 A 5 139 6 Galat. 1 16 b 7 2 8 2 9 17 c Etheldred 9 3 10 3 18 d S.
Luke. 4 4 17 19 e 11 5 12 5 6 20 f 13 6 14 6 21 g 15 7 16 Ephesians. 1 14 22 A 17 8
18 2 3 23 b 19 9 Ecclus 1 3 24 c Ecclus 2 10 3 4 11 25 d Chrisp. M. 4 11 5 5 26
e 6 12 7 6 19 27 f Fast. 8 13 9 Philip. 1 8 28 g Sim. and 14 2 29 A Jude. 10 15
11 3 16 30 b 12 16 13 4 5 31 c Fast. 14 17 15 Col. 1

NOVEMBER has xxx. days.
MORNING Prayer. EVENING Prayer. 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 1 d All 13
2 e Saints. Ecclus 16 Luke 18 Ecclus 17 Colos 2 2 3 f 18 19 19 3 4 g 20 20 21 4
10 5 A Pap. C. 22 21 23 1 These. 1 6 b Leonard 24 22 Ecclus. 25. is to be read
only to verse 13.
25 2 18 7 c 27 23 28 3 7 8 d 29 24 Ecclus. 30. only to verse 18.
30 4 9 e 31 John 1 32 5 15 10 f 33 2 34 2 These. 1 4 11 g S. Martin 35 3 36 2
12 A 37 4 38 3 12 13 b Britius. B. 39 5 40 1 Timothy 1 1 14 c 41 6 42 2, 3 15 d
Machutus 43 7 44 4 9 16 e 45 8 Ecclus 46 only to verse 20.
46 5 17 f Hugh. B. 47 9 48 6 17 18 g 49 10 50 2 Timothy 1 6 19 A 51 11 Baruch 1 2
20 b Edm. K M. Baruch 2 12 3 3 14 21 c 4 13 5 4 3 22 d Ceci ia V. 6 14 H. of
sus. Titus 1 23 e S. Clem. Bell and D. 15 Isaiah 1 2, 3 11 24 f Isaiah 2 16 3
Philem. 19 25 g Cather. V. 4 17 5 Hebr. 1 26 A 6 18 7 2 8 27 b 8 19 9 3 28 c 10
20 11 4 16 29 d Fast. 12 21 13 5 5 30 e S. Andr. Acts 1 6

DECEMBER has xxxj. days.
MORNING Prayer. EVENING Prayer. 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 1 f Isaiah
14 Acts 2 Isai 15 Hebr. 7 13 2 g 16 3 17 8 2 3 A 18 4 19 9 10 4 b 20, 21 5 22
10 5 c 23 6 24 11 18 6 d Nicho. B. 25 7 to v. 30. 26 12 7 7 e 27 7.30 28 13 f
Concept 29 8 30 James 1 15 9 g Vir. Mary 31 9 32 2 4 10 A 33 10 34 3 11 b 35 11
36 4 12 12 c 37 12 38 5 1 13 d Lucy, Vir. 39 13 40 1 Pet. 1 14 e 41 14 42 2 9
15 f 43 15 44 3 16 g O Sapientia 45 16 46 4 17 17 A 47 17 48 5 6 18 b 49 18 50
2 Pet. 1 19 c 51 19 52 2 14 20 d Fast. 53 20 54 3 3 21 e S. Tho. 21 1 John 1 22
f 55 22 56 2 11 23 g 57 23 58 3 24 A Fast. 59 24 60 4 19 25 b Christm. 8 26 c
S. Steph. 27 d S. John. 16 28 e Innocen. 25 5 5 29 f 61 26 62 2 John 30 g 63 27
64 3 John 13 31 A Silvest. Bish 65 28 66 Jude

TABLES and RULES for the Moveable and Immovable Feasts; together with the
Days of Fasting and Abstinence, through the whole YEAR.
Rules to know when the Moveable Feasts, and Holy Days begin.
Easter Day (on which the rest depend) is always the first Sunday after the
first Full Moon which happens next after the One and twentieth day of March.
And, if the Full Moon happens upon a Sunday, Easter Day is the Sunday after.

Advent-Sunday is always the nearest Sunday to the Feast of S. Andrew, whether
before or after.

Septuagesima Sunday is Nine weeks before Easter. Sexagesima Sunday is Eight
weeks before Easter. Quinquagesima Sunday is Seven weeks before Easter.
Quadragesima Sunday is Six weeks before Easter.
Rogation-Sunday is Five weeks after Easter. Ascension-day is Forty days after
Easter. Whitsunday is Seven weeks after Easter. Trinity-Sunday is Eight weeks
after Easter.
A Table of the Feasts that are to be observed in the Church of England through
the Year.
The days of the Feasts of ALL Sundays in the Year. The Circumcision of our
Lord JESUS CHRIST. The Epiphany. The Conversion of St. Paul. The Purification
of the Blessed Virgin. S. Matthias the Apostle. The Annunciation of the Blessed
Virgin. St. Mark the Evangelist. St. Philip and St. Jacob the Apostles. The
Ascension of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. St. Barnabas. The Nativity of St. John
Baptist. St. Peter the Apostle. Monday and Tuesday in Easter-week. St. James
the Apostle. St. Bartholomew the Apostle. St. Matthew the Apostle. St. Michael
and all Angels. St. Luke the Evangelist. St. Simon and St. Jude the Apostles.
All Saints. St. Andrew the Apostle. St. Thomas the Apostle. The Nativity of our
Lord. St. Stephen the Martyr. St. John the Evangelist. The Holy Innocents.
Monday and Tuesday in Whitsun-week.

A Table of the Vigils, Fasts, and days of Abstinence, to be observed in the
Year.
THe Eves or Vigils before The Nativity of our Lord. THe Eves or Vigils before
The Purification of the Blessed Virgin Mary. THe Eves or Vigils before The
Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin. THe Eves or Vigils before Easter Day. THe
Eves or Vigils before Ascension-day. THe Eves or Vigils before Pentecost. THe
Eves or Vigils before St. Matthias. THe Eves or Vigils before St. John Baptist.
THe Eves or Vigils before St. Peter. THe Eves or Vigils before St. James. THe
Eves or Vigils before St. Bartholomew. THe Eves or Vigils before St. Matthew.
THe Eves or Vigils before St. Simon and St. Jude. THe Eves or Vigils before St.
Andrew. THe Eves or Vigils before St. Thomas. THe Eves or Vigils before All
Saints.

Note, That if any of these Feast-days fall upon a Monday, then the Vigil or
Fast Day shall be kept upon the Saturday, and not upon the Sunday next before
it.

Days of Fasting or Abstinence.
I. THe forty days of Lent. II. The Ember-days at the four Seasons, being the
Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday after the first Sunday in Lent. the Feast of
Pentecost. September 14. December 13.
III. The three Rogation-days, being the Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday before
Holy Thursday, or the Ascension of our Lord. IV. All the Fridays in the Year,
except Christmas day.
Certain Solemn Days, for which particular Services are appointed.
I. THe Fifth of November, being the day of the Papish Conspiracy. II. The
Thirtieth day of January, being the day of the Martyrdom of King Charles I.
III. The Nine and twentieth day of May, being the day of the Restitution of the
King and Royal Family, and Restoration of the Government after many years
interruption.
A TABLE of the Moveable Feasts, Calculated for Forty YEARS.
The Year of our LORD. Golden Number. The Epact. Dominical Letter. Sund. after
Epiph. Septuagesima Sunday The first day of Lent. Easter Day. Rogation Sunday.
Ascension-day. Whitsunday. Sundays after Trin. Advent-Sunday. 1661 9 9 F 4 Feb.
10 Feb. 27 Apr. 14 May 19 May 23 June 2 24 Dec. 1 1662 10 20 E 2 Jan. 26 12
Mar. 30 4 8 May 18 26 Nov. 30 1663 11 1 D 5 Feb. 15 Mar. 4 Apr. 19 24 28 June 7
23 29 1664 12 12 C B 4 7 Feb. 24 10 15 19 May 29 24 27 1665 13 23 A 2 Jan. 22 8
Mar. 26 Apr. 30 4 14 27 Dec. 3 1666 14 4 G 5 Feb. 11 28 Apr. 15 May 20 24 June
3 24 2 1667 15 15 F 3 3 20 7 12 16 May 26 25 1 1668 16 26 E D 1 Jan. 19 5 Mar.
22 Apr. 26 Apr. 30 10 27 Nov. 29 1669 17 7 C 4 Feb. 7 24 Apr. 11 May 16 May 20
30 24 28 1670 18 18 B 3 Jan. 30 16 3 8 12 22 25 27 1671 19 29 A 6 Feb. 19 Mar.
8 23 28 June 1 June 11 23 Dec. 3 1672 1 11 G F 4 4 Feb. 21 7 12 May 16 May 26
25 1 1673 2 22 E 2 Jan. 26 12 Mar. 30 4 8 18 26 Nov. 30 1674 3 3 D 5 Feb. 15
Mar. 4 Apr. 19 24 28 June 7 23 29 1675 4 14 C 3 Jan. 31 Feb. 17 4 9 13 May 23
25 28 1676 5 25 B A 2 23 9 Mar. 26 Apr. 30 4 14 27 Dec. 3 1677 6 6 G 5 Feb. 11
28 Apr. 15 May 20 24 June 3 24 2 1678 7 17 F 2 Jan. 27 13 Mar. 31 5 9 May 19 26
1 1679 8 28 E 5 Feb. 16 Mar. 5 Apr. 20 25 29 June 8 23 Nov. 30 1680 9 9 D C 4 8
Feb. 25 11 16 20 May 30 24 28 1681 10 20 B 3 Jan. 30 16 3 8 12 22 25 27 1682 11
1 A 5 Feb. 12 Mar. 1 16 21 25 June 4 24 Dec. 3 1683 12 12 G 4 4 Feb. 21 8 13 17
May 27 25 2 1684 13 23 F E 2 Jan. 27 13 Mar. 30 4 8 18 26 Nov. 3 1685 14 4 D 5
Feb. 15 Mar. 4 Apr. 19 24 28 June 7 23 29 1686 15 15 C 3 Jan. 31 Feb. 17 4 9 13
May 23 25 28 1687 16 26 B 2 23 9 Mar. 27 1 5 15 26 27 1688 17 7 A G 5 Feb. 12
Mar. 1 Apr. 15 20 24 June 3 24 Dec. 2 1689 18 18 F 2 Jan. 27 Feb. 13 Mar. 31 5
9 May 19 26 1 1690 19 29 E 5 Feb. 16 Mar. 5 Apr. 20 25 29 June 8 23 Nov. 30
1691 1 11 D 4 8 Feb. 25 12 17 21 May 31 24 29 1692 2 22 C B 2 Jan. 24 10 Mar.
27 1 5 15 26 27 1693 3 3 A 5 Feb. 12 Mar. 1 Apr. 16 21 25 June 4 24 Dec. 3 1694
4 14 G 4 4 Feb. 21 8 13 17 May 27 25 2 1695 5 25 F 1 Jan. 20 6 Mar. 24 Apr. 28
2 12 27 1 1696 6 6 E D 4 Feb. 9 26 Apr. 12 May 17 21 31 24 Nov. 29 1697 7 17 C
3 Jan. 31 17 4 9 18 23 25 28 School 8 28 B 6 Feb. 20 Mar. 9 24 29 June 2 June 12
22 27 1699 9 9 A 4 5 Feb. 22 9 14 May 18 May 28 25 Dec. 3 1700 10 20 G F 3 Jan.
28 14 Mar. 31 5 9 19 26 1

Note, that the Supputation of the year of our Lord in the Church of England
begins the Five and twentieth day of March.

To find EASTER for ever.
Golden Number A B C D E F G I April 9 10 11 12 6 7 8 II March 26 27 28 29 30
31 April 1 III April 16 17 18 19 20 14 15 IV April 9 3 4 5 6 7 8 V March 26 27
28 29 23 24 25 VI April 16 17 11 12 13 14 15 VII April 2 3 4 5 6 March 31 April
1 VIII April 23 24 25 19 20 21 22 IX April 9 10 11 12 13 14 8 X April 2 3 March
28 29 30 31 April 1 XI April 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 XII April 9 10 11 5 6 7 8
XIII March 26 27 28 29 30 31 25 XIV April 16 17 18 19 13 14 15 XV April 2 3 4 5
6 7 8 XVI March 26 27 28 22 23 24 25 XVII April 16 10 11 12 13 14 15 XVIII
April 2 3 4 5 March 30 31 April 1 XIX April 23 24 18 19 20 21 22

WHEN ye have found the Sunday Letter in the uppermost Line, guide your eye
downward from the same, till ye come right over against the Prime; and there is
showed both what Month, and what Day of the Month Easter falls that Year. But
note, That the name of the Month is set at the left hand, or else just with the
figure, and follows not, as in other Tables, by descent, but collateral.

THE ORDER FOR Morning and Evening PRAYER
Daily to be said and used throughout the Year.
THE Morning and Evening Prayer shall be used in the accustomed place of the
Church, Chapel or Chancel; Except it shall be otherwise determined by the
Ordinary of the place. And the Chancels shall remain as they have done in times
past.

And here is to noted, That such Ornaments of the Church and of the Ministers
thereof at all times of their Ministration, shall be retained and be in use, as
were in this Church of ENGLAND by the Authority of Parliament in the second
Year of the Reign of King Edward the Sixth.

THE Order for Morning Prayer, Daily throughout the YEAR.
At the beginning of Morning Prayer, the Minister shall read with a loud voice
some one, or more of these Sentences of the Scriptures, that follow. And then
he shall say that which is written after the said Sentences.

WHen the wicked man turns away from his wickedness that he has committed,
and does that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive. Ezekiel.
18.27.

I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me. Psalm. 51.3.

Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquites. Psalm. 51.9.

The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O
God, thou will not despise Psalm. 51.17.

Rent your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God: for
he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and
repents him of the evil. Joel 2.13.

To the Lord our God belong mercies, and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled
against him: neither have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in
his laws which he set before us. Dan. 9.9, 10.

O Lord, correct me, but with judgment; not in thine anger, lest thou bring me
to nothing. Jer. 10.24.

Repent ye; for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. S. Matthew. 3.2.

I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned
against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son. S.
Luke 15.18, 19.

Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord; for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified. Psalm. 143.2.

If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us. But if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. 1 S. John 1.8, 9.

DEarly beloved brethren, the Scripture moves us in sundry places to
acknowledge and confess our manifold sins and wickedness, and that we should
not dissemble nor cloak them before the face of Almighty God our heavenly
Father, but confess them with an humble, lowly, penitent, and obedient heart,
to the end that we may obtain forgiveness of the same by his infinite goodness
and mercy. And although we ought at all times humbly to acknowledge our sins
before God, yet ought we most chiefly so to do, when we assemble and meet
together to render thanks for the great benefits that we have received at his
hands, to set forth his most worthy praise, to hear his most holy word, and to
ask those things which are requisite and necessary, as well for the body as the
soul. Wherefore I pray and beseech you, as many as are here present, to
accompany me with a pure heart and humble voice, unto the throne of the
heavenly grace, saying after me.

A general Confession to be said of the whole Congregation, after the Minister,
all kneeling.

ALmighty and most merciful Father; We have erred and strayed from thy ways
like lost sheep. We have followed too much the devices and desires of our own
hearts. We have offended against thy holy laws. We have left undone those
things which we ought to have done; And we have done those things which we
ought not to have done; And there is no health in us. But thou, O Lord, have
mercy upon us, miserable offenders. Spare thou them, O God, which confess their
faults. Restore thou them that are penitent; According to thy promises declared
unto mankind in Christ Jesu our Lord. And grant, O most merciful Father, for
his sake; That we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life, To the
glory of thy holy Name. Amen.

The Absolution or Remission of sins, to be pronounced by the Priest alone,
standing the People still kneeling.

ALmighty God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who desires not the death
of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his wickedness and live; and has
given power and commandment to his Ministers to declare and pronounce to his
people, being penitent, the Absolution and Remission of their sins: He
pardons and absolveth all them that truly repent, and unfeignedly believe his
holy Gospel. Wherefore let us beseech him to grant us true repentance, and his
holy Spirit, that those things may please him which we do at this present, and
that the rest of our life hereafter may be pure and holy so that at the last we
may come to his eternal joy, through Jesus Christ our Lord

The People shall answer here and at the end of all other Prayers, Amen.

Then the Minister shall kneel and say the Lords Prayer with an audible voice;
the People also kneeling and repeating it with him, both here and wheresoever
else it is used in Divine Service.

OUr Father which art in heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil: For thine is the
Kingdom, And the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. Amen.

Then likewise he shall say,

O Lord, open thou our lips.

Answer. And our mouth shall show forth thy praise.


Priest. O God, make speed to save us.


Answer. O Lord, make haste to help us.


Here all standing up, the Priest shall say,

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost;

Answer. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without
end. Amen.


Priest. Praise ye the Lord.


Answer. The Lords Name be praised.


Then shall be said or sung this Psalm following: Except on Easter Day, upon
which another Anthem is appointed: and on the Nineteenth day of every month it
is not be read here, but in the ordinary course of the Psalms.

Venite, exultemus Domino. Psalm. 95.

O Come, let us sing unto the Lord: let us heartily rejoice in the strength of
our salvation.

Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving: and show our selves glad in
him with Psalms.

For the Lord is a great God: and a great King above all gods.

In his hand are all the corners of the earth: and the strength of the hills is
his also.

The sea is his, and he made it: and his hands prepared the dry land.

O come, let us worship and fall down: and kneel before the Lord our Maker.

For he is the Lord our God: and we are the people of his pasture, and the
sheep of his hand.

To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: as in the
provocation and as in the day of temptation in the wilderness, When your
Fathers tempted me: proved me, and saw my works.

Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and said: It is a people
that do err in their hearts, for they have not known my ways.

Unto whom I swear in my wrath: that they should not enter into my rest.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to holy the Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world with out end.
Amen.

Then shall follow the Psalms in order as they are appointed. And at the end of
every Psalm throughout the year, and likewise at the end of Benedicite,
Benedictus, Magnificat, and Nunc dimittis, shall be repeated;

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost;

Answ. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without
end. Amen.

Then shall be read distinctly with an audible voice the first Lesson taken out
of the Old Testament, as is appointed in the Calendar, (except there be proper
Lesons assigned for that day:) He that reads so standing, and turning
himself, as he may best be heard of all such as are present. And after that,
shall be said or sung in English, the Hymn, called Te deum Laudamus, daily
throughout the year.

Note that before every Lesson the Minister shall say, Here begins such a
Chapter, or Verse of such a Chapter of such a Book: And after every Lesson,
Here ends the First, or the Second Lesson.

Te Deum Laudamus.
WE praise thee, O God: we acknowledge thee to be the Lord.

All the earth does worship thee: the Father everlasting. To thee all Angels
cry aloud: the heavens, and all the Powers therein.

To thee Cherubin, and Seraphin: continually do cry,

Holy, Holy, Holy: Lord God of Sabbath.

Heaven and Earth are full of the Majesty: of thy glory.

The glorious company of the Apostles: praise thee.

The goodly fellowship of the Prophets: praise thee

The noble army of Martyrs: praise thee.

The holy Church throughout all the world: does acknowledge thee;

The Father: of an infinite Majesty;

Thine honorable, true: and only Son;

Also the holy Ghost: the Comforter.

Thou art the King of Glory: O Christ.

Thou art the everlasting Son: of the Father.

When thou tookest upon thee to deliver man: thou did not abhor Virgins womb.

When thou had overcome the sharpness of death: thou did open the kingdom
of heaven to all believers.

Thou sit at the right hand of God: in the Glory of the Father.

We believe, that thou shall come: to be our Judge.

We therefore pray thee, help thy servants: whom thou have redeemed with thy
precious blood.

Make them to be numbered with thy Saints: in glory everlasting.

O Lord, save thy people: and bless thine heritage.

Govern them: and lift them up for ever.

Day by day: we magnify thee;

And we worship thy Name: ever world without end.

Vouchsafe, O Lord: to keep us this day without sin.

O Lord, have mercy upon us: have mercy upon us.

O Lord, let thy mercy lighten upon us: as our trust is in thee.

O Lord, in thee have I trusted: let me never be confounded.

Or this Canticle, Benedicite, Omnia Opera Domini.

O All ye Works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify him
for ever.

O ye Angels of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify him for
ever.

O ye Heavens, bless ye the Lord, praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O ye Waters that be above the firmament, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and
magnify him for ever.

O all ye Powers of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify him
for ever.

O ye Sun and Moon, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O ye Stars of heaven, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O ye Showers and Dew, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O ye Winds of God, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O ye Fire and Heat, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O ye Winter and Summer, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify him for
ever.

O ye Dews and Frosts, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O ye Frost and Cold, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O ye Ice and Snow, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O ye Nights and Days, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O ye Light and Darkness, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify him for
ever.

O ye Lightnings and Clouds, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify him
for ever.

O let the Earth bless the Lord: yea, let it praise him, and magnify him for
ever.

O ye Mountains and Hills, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify him for
ever.

O all ye Green things upon the Earth, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and
magnify him for ever.

O ye Wells, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O ye Seas and Floods, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O ye Whales, and all that move in the waters, bless ye the Lord: praise him,
and magnify him for ever.

O all ye Fowls of the air, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify him for
ever.

O all ye Beasts and Cattle, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify him
for ever.

O ye Children of Men, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O let Israel bless the Lord: praise him, and magnify him for ever.

O ye Priests of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify him for
ever.

O ye Servants of the Lord, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify him for
ever.

O ye Spirits and Souls of the Righteous, bless ye the Lord: praise him and
magnify him for ever.

O ye Holy and Humble men of heart, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify
him for ever.

O Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, bless ye the Lord: praise him, and magnify
him for ever.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Then shall be read in like manner the Second Lesson, taken out of the New
Testament. And after that, the Hymn following; except when that shall happen to
be read in the Chapter for the day, or for the Gospel on St. John Baptist's day.

Benedictus. St. Luke 1.68.
BLessed be the Lord God of Israel: for he has visited and redeemed his people;

And has raised up a mighty salvation for us: in the house of his servant
David;

As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets: which have been since the world
began;

That we should be saved from our enemies: and from the hands of all that hate
us;

To perform the mercy promised to our forefathers: and to remember his holy
Covenant;

To perform the oath which he swear to our forefather Abraham: that he would
give us;

That we being delivered out of the hand of our enemies: might serve him
without fear;

In holiness and righteousness before him: all the days of our life.

And thou, Child, shall be called the prophet of the highest: for thou shall go
before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways;

To give knowledge of salvation unto his people: for the remission of their
sins,

Through the tender mercy of our God: whereby the Dayspring from on high has
visited us;

To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death: and to
guide our feet into the way of peace.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Or this Psalm, Jubilate Deo. Psalm. 100.

O Be joyful in the Lord, all ye lands: serve the Lord with gladness, and come
before his presence with a song.

Be ye sure that the Lord he is God: it is he that has made us, and not we our
selves, we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.

O go your way into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with
praise: be thankful unto him, and speak good of his Name.

For the Lord is gracious, his mercy is everlasting: and his truth endures
from generation to generation.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Then shall be sung, or said the Apostles Creed by the Minister, and the People
standing. Except only such days as the Creed of St. Athanasius is appointed to
be read.

I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth:

And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, Who was conceived by the holy
Ghost, Born of the Virgin Mary, Suffered under Pontius Pilate, Was crucified,
dead, and buried, He descended into hell; The third day he rose again from the
dead, He ascended into Heaven, And sits on the right hand of God the Father
Almighty; From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

I believe in the holy Ghost; The holy Catholic Church; The Communion of
Saints; The forgiveness of sins; The resurrection of the body, And the life
everlasting. Amen.

And after that, these Prayers following, all devoutly kneeling, the Minister
first pronouncing with a loud voice,

The Lord be with you.

Answer. And with thy spirit.


Minister. Let us pray.

Lord, have mercy upon us.

Christ, have mercy upon us.

Lord, have mercy upon us.


Then the Minister, Clerks, and People shall say the Lords Prayer with a loud
voice.

OUr Father, which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Then the Priest standing up shall say,

O Lord show thy mercy upon us.

Answer. And grant us thy salvation.


Priest. O Lord save the King.


Answer. And mercifully hear us when we call upon thee.


Priest. Endue thy Ministers with righteousness.


Answer. And make thy chosen people joyful.


Priest. O Lord, save thy people.


Answer. And bless thine inheritance.


Priest. Give peace in our time, O Lord


Answer. Because there is none other that fights for us, but only thou, O God.


Priest. O God make clean our hearts within us.


Answer. And take not thy holy Spirit from us.


Then shall follow three Collects; The first of the day, which shall be the
same that is appointed at the Communion; The second for Peace; The third for
Grace to live well. And the two last Collects shall never alter, but daily be
said at Morning Prayer throughout all the year, as follows; all kneeling.

The second Collect for Peace.

O God, who art the author of peace, and lover of concord, in knowledge of whom
stands our eternal life, whose service is perfect freedom; Defend us thy
humble servants in all assaults of our enemies, that we surely trusting in thy
defense, may not fear the power of any adversaries, through the might of Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

The third Collect for Grace.

O Lord our heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting God, who have safely
brought us to the beginning of this day; Defend us in the same with thy mighty
power, and grant that this day we fall into no sin, neither run into any kind
of danger; but that all our doings may be ordered by thy governance, to do
always that is righteous in thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

In Quires and Places where they sing, here follows the Anthem.

Then these five Prayers following are to be read here, except when the Litany
is read; and then only the two last are to be read, as they are there placed.

A Prayer for the Kings Majesty.

O Lord our heavenly Father, high and mighty King of kings, Lord of lords, the
only Ruler of princes, who do from thy throne behold all the dwellers upon
earth; Most heartily we beseech thee with thy favor to behold our most
gracious Sovereign Lord King WILLIAM, and so replenish him with the grace of
thy holy Spirit, that he may always incline to thy will, and walk in the way:
Endue him plenteously with heavenly gifts, grant him in health and wealth long
to live strengthen him that he may vanquish and overcome all his enemies; and
finally after this life he may attain everlasting joy and felicity, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the Royal Family.

ALmighty God, the fountain of all goodness, We humbly beseech thee to bless
CATHERINE the Queen Dowager, her Royal Highness the Princess ANNE of Denmark,
and all the Royal Family: Endue them with thy Holy Spirit; Enrich them with thy
Heavenly Grace; Prosper them with all Happiness; and bring them to thine
everlasting Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the Clergy and People.

ALmighty and everlasting God, who alone workest great marvels; Send down upon
our Bishops and Curates, and all Congregations committed to their charge, the
healthful Spirit of thy grace; and that they may truly please thee, pour upon
them the continual dew of thy blessing. Grant this, O Lord, for the honor of
our Advocate and Mediator, Jesus Christ. Amen.

A Prayer of St. Chrysostom.

ALmighty God, who have given us grace at this time with one accord to make our
common supplications unto thee, and do promise, that when two or three are
gathered together in thy Name, thou will grant their requests; Fulfill now, O
Lord, the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may be most expedient for
them; granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to
come life everlasting. Amen.

2 Cor. 13.14.
THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost be with us all evermore. Amen.

Here ends the Order of Morning Prayer throughout the Year.
The Order for Evening Prayer, Daily throughout the YEAR.
At the beginning of Evening Prayer, the Minister shall read with a loud voice
some one, or more of these Sentences of the Scriptures, that follow. And then
he shall say that which is written after the said Sentences.

WHen the wicked man turns away from his wickedness that he has committed,
and does that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive. Ezekiel.
18.27.

I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ^e me. Psalm. 51.3.

Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities. Psalm. 51.9.

The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O
God, thou will not despise. Psalm. 51.17.

Rent your heart, and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God: for
he is gracious and merciful, flow to anger, and of great kindness, and
repents him of the evil. Joel 2.13.

To the Lord our God belong mercies, and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled
against him: neither have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in
his laws which he set before us. Dan. 9.9, 10.

O Lord, correct me, but with judgment; not in thine anger, lest thou bring me
to nothing. Jer. 10.24.

Repent ye; for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. S. Matthew. 3.2.

I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned
against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son. S.
Luke 15.18, 19.

Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord; for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified. Psalm. 143.2.

If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us. But if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. 1 S. John 1.8, 9.

DEarly beloved brethren, the Scripture moves us in sundry places to
acknowledge and confess our manifold sins and wickedness, and that we should
not dissemble nor cloak them before the face of Almighty God our heavenly
Father, but confess them with an humble, lowly penitent, and obedient heart, to
the end that we may obtain forgiveness of the same by his infinite goodness and
mercy. And although we ought at all times humbly to acknowledge our sins before
God, yet ought we most chiefly so to do, when we assemble and meet together, to
render thanks for the great benefits that we have received at his hands, to set
forth his most worthy praise, to hear his most holy word, and to ask those
things which are requisite and necessary, as well for the body as the soul.
Wherefore I pray and beseech you, as many as are here present, to accompany me
with a pure heart, and humble voice, unto the throne of the heavenly grace,
saying after me.

A general Confession to be said of the whole Congregation, after the Minister,
all kneeling.

ALmighty and most merciful Father; We have erred and strayed from thy ways
like lost sheep. We have followed too much the devices and desires of our own
hearts. We have offended against thy holy laws. We have left undone those
things which we ought to have done; And we have done those things which we
ought not to have done; And there is no health in us. But thou, O Lord, have
mercy upon us, miserable offenders. Spare thou them, O God, which confess their
faults. Restore thou them that are penitent; According to thy promises declared
unto mankind in Christ Jesu our Lord. And grant, O most merciful Father, for
his sake; That we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life, To the
glory of thy holy Name. Amen.

The Absolution or Remission of sins, to be pronounced by the Priest alone,
standing; the People still kneeling.

ALmighty God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who desires not the death
of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his wickedness and live; and has
given power and commandment to his Ministers to declare and pronounce to his
people, being penitent, the Absolution and Remission of their sins: He
pardons and absolveth all them that truly repent, and unfeignedly believe his
holy Gospel. Wherefore let us beseech him to grant us true repentance, and his
holy Spirit, that those things may please him which we do at this present, and
that the rest of our life hereafter may be pure and holy, so that at the last
we may come to his eternal joy, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then the Minister shall kneel, and say the Lords Prayer; the People also
kneeling, and repeating it with him.

OUr Father, which art in heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil: For thine is the
Kingdom, And the Power, And the Glory, For ever and ever. Amen.

Then likewise he shall say,

O Lord, open thou our lips.

Answer. And our mouth shall show forth thy praise.


Priest. O God, make speed to save us.


Answer. O Lord, make haste to help us.


Here all standing up, the Priest shall say,

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost;

Answ. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without
end. Amen.


Priest. Praise ye the Lord.


Answ. The Lords Name be praised.


Then shall be said or sung the Psalms in order as they are appointed. Then a
Lesson of the Old Testament, as is appointed: And after that, Magnificat (or
the Song of the blessed Virgin Mary) in English, as follows.

Magnificat. S. Luke 1.46.

MY soul does magnify the Lord: and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior.

For he has regarded: the lowliness of his hand-maiden.

For behold, from henceforth: all generations shall call me blessed.

For he that is mighty has magnified me: and holy is his Name.

And his mercy is on them that fear him: throughout all generations.

He has showed strength with his arm: he has scattered the proud in the
imagination of their hearts.

He has put down the mighty from their seat: and has exalted the humble and
meek.

He has filled the hungry with good things: and the rich he has sent empty
away.

He remembering his mercy has helped his servant, Israel: as he promised to our
forefathers, Abraham and his seed for ever.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Or else this Psalm; except it be on the Nineteenth day of the Month, when it
is read in the ordinary course of the Psalms.

Cantate Domino. Psalm. 98.

O Sing unto the Lord a new song: for he has done mavelous things.

With his own right hand, and with his holy arm: has he gotten himself the
victory.

The Lord declared his salvation: his righteousness has he openly showed in
the sight of the heathen.

He has remembered his mercy and truth toward the house of Israel: and all the
ends of the world have seen the salvation of our God.

Show your selves joyful unto the Lord, all ye lands: sing, rejoice, and give
thanks.

Praise the Lord upon the harp: sing to the harp with a psalm of thanksgiving.

With trumpets also and shawms: O show your selves joyful before the Lord the
King.

Let the sea make a noise, and all that therein is: the round world, and they
that dwell therein.

Let the floods clap their hands, and let the hills be joyful together before
the Lord: for he comes to judge the earth.

With righteousness shall he judge the world: and the people with equity.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Then a Lesson of the New Testament, as it is appointed: And after that, Nunc
dimittis ( or the Song of Simeon) in English, as follows.

Nunc dimittis. S. Luke 2.29.

LOrd, now let thou thy servant depart in peace: according to thy word.

For mine eyes have seen: thy salvation, Which thou have prepared: before the
face of all people;

To be a light to lighten the Gentiles: and to be the glory of thy people
Israel.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Or else this Psalm; Except it be on the Twelfth day of the Month. Deus
misereatur. Psalm. 67.

GOd be merciful unto us, and bless us: and show us the light of his
countenance, and be merciful unto us.

That thy way may be known upon earth: thy saving health among all nations.

Lee the people praise thee, O God: yea, let all the people praise thee.

O let the nations rejoice and be glad: for thou shall judge the folk
righteously, and govern the nations upon earth.

Let the people praise thee, O God: let all the people praise thee.

Then shall the earth bring forth her increase: and God, even our own God,
shall give us his blessing.

God shall bless us: and all the ends of the world shall fear him.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Then shall be said or sung the Apostles Creed by the Minister, and the People,
standing.

I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth:

And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, Who was conceived by the holy
Ghost, Born of the Virgin Mary, Suffered under Pontius Pilate, Was crucified,
dead, and buried, He descended into hell; The third day he rose again from the
dead, He ascended into Heaven, And sits on the right hand of God the Father
Almighty; From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

I believe in the holy Ghost; The holy Catholic Church; The Communion of
Saints; The forgiveness of sins; The resurrection of the body, And the life
everlasting. Amen.

And after that, these Prayers following, all devoutly kneeling, the Minister
first pronouncing with a loud voice,

The Lord be with you.

Answer. And with thy spirit.


Minister. Let us pray.

Lord, have mercy upon us.

Christ, have mercy upon us.

Lord, have mercy upon us.


Then the Minister, Clerks, and People shall say the Lords Prayer with a loud
voice.

OUr Father, which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Then the Priest standing up shall say,

O Lord, show thy mercy upon us.

Answer. And grant us thy salvation.


Priest. O Lord, save the King.


Answer. And mercifully hear us when we call upon thee.


Priest. Endue thy Ministers with righteousness.


Answer. And make thy chosen people joyful.


Priest. O Lord, save thy people.


Answer. And bless thine inheritance.


Priest. Give peace in our time, O Lord.


Answer. Because there is none other that fights for us, but only thou, O God.


Priest. O God, make clean our hearts within us.


Answer. And take not thy holy Spirit from us.


Then shall follow three Collects; The first of the Day, The second for Peace;
The third for Aid against all perils, as hereafter follows: Which two last
Collects shall be daily said at Evening Prayer without alteration.

The second Collect at Evening Prayer.

O God from whom all holy desires, all good counsels, and all just works do
proceed; Give unto thy servants that peace which the world cannot give, that
both our hearts may be set to obey thy commandments, and also that by thee we
being defended from the fear of our enemies, may, pass our time in rest and
quietness, through the merits of Jesus Christ our Savior. Amen.

The third Collect for Aid against all Perils.

LIghten our darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great mercy defend
us from all perils and dangers of this night, for the love of thy only Son, our
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

In Quires and Places where they Sing, here follows the Anthem.

A Prayer for the Kings Majesty.

O Lord our heavenly Father, high and mighty King of kings, Lord of lords, the
only Ruler of princes, who do from thy throne behold all the dwellers upon
earth; Most heartily we beseech thee with thy favor to behold our most
gracious Sovereign Lord King WILLIAM and so replenish him with the grace of thy
holy Spirit, that he may always incline to thy will, and walk in thy way: Endue
him plenteously with heavenly gifts, grant him in health and wealth long to
live, strengthen him that he may vanquish and overcome all his enemies; and
finally after this life, he may attain everlasting joy and felicity, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the Royal Family.

ALmighty God, the fountain of all goodness, We humbly beseech thee to bless
Catherine the Queen Dowager, her Royal Highness the Princess Anne of Denmark,
and all the Royal Family: Endue them with thy Holy Spirit; Enrich them with thy
heavenly grace; Prosper them with all happiness; and bring them to thine
everlasting kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the Clergy and People.

ALmighty and everlasting God, who alone workest great marvels; Send down upon
our Bishops, and Curates, and all Congregations committed to their charge, the
healthful Spirit of thy grace; and that they may truly please thee, pour upon
them the continual dew of thy blessing. Grant this, O Lord, for the honor of
our Advocate and Mediator, Jesus Christ. Amen.

A Prayer of St. Chrysostom.

ALmighty God, who have given us grace at this time with one accord, to make
our common supplications unto thee, and do promise, that when two or three
are gathered together in thy Name, thou will grant their requests; Fulfill now,
O Lord, the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may be most expedient for
them; granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to
come life everlasting. Amen.

2 Cor. 13.14.
THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost be with us all evermore. Amen.

Here ends the Order of Evening Prayer throughout the Year.
Upon these Feasts; Christmas- day, the Epiphany, St. Matthias, Easter- day,
Ascension- day, Whitsun- day, S. John Baptist, S. Janes, S. Bartholomew, S.
Matthew, S. Simon and S. Jude, S. Andrew, and upon Trinity Sunday shall be sung
or said at Morning Prayer, instead of the Apostles Creed, his Confession of our
Christian Faith, commonly called the Creed of Saint Athanasius, by the Minister
and People standing.

Quicunque vult.

WHosoever will be saved: before all things it is necessary that he hold the
Catholic Faith.

Which Faith, except every one do keep whole and undefiled: without doubt he
shall perish everlastingly.

And the Catholic Faith is this: That ve worship one God in Trinity, and
Trinity in Unity;

Neither confounding the persons: nor dividing the substance.

For there is one person of the Father, another of the Son: and another of the
Holy Ghost.

But the Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost is all one:
the Glory equal, the Majesty coeternal.

Such as the Father is, such is the Son: and such is the Holy Ghost.

The Father uncreate, the Son uncreate: and the Holy Ghost uncreate.

The Father incomprehensible, the Son incomprehensible: and the Holy Ghost
incomprehensible.

The Father eternal, the Son eternal: and the Holy Ghost eternal.

And yet they are not three eternals: but one eternal.

As also there are not three incomprehensibles, nor three uncreated: but one
uncreated, and one incomprehensible.

So likewise the Father is Almighty, the Son Almighty: and the Holy Ghost
Almighty.

And yet they are not three Almighties: but one Almighty.

So the Father is God, the Son is God: and the Holy Ghost is God.

And yet they are not three Gods: but one God.

So likewise the Father is Lord, the Son Lord: and the Holy Ghost Lord;

And yet not three Lords: but one Lord.

For like as we are compelled by the Christian verity: to acknowledge every
person by himself to be God and Lord;

So are we forbidden by the Catholic Religion: to say, There be three Gods, or
three Lords.

The Father is made of none: neither created, nor begotten.

The Son is of the Father alone: not made, nor created, but begotten.

The Holy Ghost is of the Father, and of the Son: neither made, nor created,
nor begotten, but proceeding.

So there is one Father, not three Fathers; one Son, not three Sons: one Holy
Ghost, not three Holy Ghosts.

And in this Trinity none is before, or after other: none is greater, or less
then another;

But the whole three persons are coeternal together: and coequal.

So that in all things, as is aforesaid: the Unity in Trinity, and the Trinity
in Unity is to be worshipped.

He therefore that will be saved: must thus think of the Trinity.

Furthermore it is necessary to everlasting salvation: that he also believe
rightly the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ.

For the right faith is, that we believe and confess: that our Lord Jesus
Christ the Son of God, is God and Man;

God of the substance of the Father, begotten before the Worlds: and Man of the
substance of his Mother, born in the World;

Perfect God, and perfect Man: of a reasonable soul, and humane flesh
subsisting;

Equal to the Father, as touching his Godhead: and inferior to the Father, as
touching his Manhood.

Who although he be God, and Man: yet he is not two, but one Christ;

One; not by conversion of the Godhead into flesh: but by taking of the Manhood
into God;

One altogether; not by confusion of substance: but by unity of person.

For as the reasonable soul and flesh is one man: so God and Man is one Christ.

Who suffered for our salvation: descended into hell, rose again the third day
from the dead.

He ascended into heaven, he sits on the right hand of the Father, God
Almighty: from whence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

At whose coming all men shall rise again with their bodies: and shall give
account for their own works.

And they that have done good, shall go into life everlasting: and they that
have done evil, into everlasting fire.

This is the Catholic Faith: which except a man believe faithfully, he cannot
be saved.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Here follows the Litany, or General Supplication, to be sung or said after
Morning Prayer upon Sundays, Wednesdays and Fridays, and at other times, when
it shall be commanded by the Ordinary.
O God the Father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son, Redeemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son, Redeemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father, and the Son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father, and the Son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

Remember not, Lord, our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers,
neither take thou vengeance of our sins: spare us, good Lord, spare thy people
whom thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us
for ever.

Spare us, good Lord.

From all evil and mischief, from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the
devil, from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation,

Good Lord, deliver us.

From all blindness of heart; from pride, vainglory, and hypocrisy; from
envy, hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness,

Good Lord, deliver us.

From fornication, and all other deadly sin; and from all the deceits of the
world, the flesh, and the devil,

Good Lord, deliver us.

From lightning and tempest; from plague, pestilence, and famine; from battle,
and murder, and from sudden death,

Good Lord, deliver us.

From all sedition, privy conspiracy, and rebellion; from all false doctrine,
heresy, and schism; from hardness of heart, and contempt of thy Word and
Commandment,

Good Lord, deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy Incarnation; by thy holy Nativity and Circumcision;
by thy Baptism, Fasting, and Temptation,

Good Lord, deliver us.

By thine Agony, and bloody Sweat; by thy Cross and Passion; by thy precious
Death, and Burial; by thy glorious Resurrection and Ascension; and by the
coming of the Holy Ghost,

Good Lord, deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation; in all time of our wealth; in the hour of
death, and in the day of judgment,

Good Lord, deliver us.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us, O Lord God, and that it may please thee
to rule and govern thy holy Church universal in the right way;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of
thee, in righteousness and holiness of life, thy Servant WILLIAM, our most
gracious King and Governor;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to rule his heart in thy faith, fear, and love, and
that he may evermore have affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honor and glory;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to be his defender and keeper, giving him the victory
over all his enemies;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and preserve CATHERINE the Queen Dowager, Her
Royal Highness the Princess ANNE of Denmark and all the Royal Family;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, with
true knowledge and understanding of thy Word, and that both by their preaching
and living they may set it forth, and show it accordingly;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the Council, and all the
Nobility, with grace, wisdom, and understanding;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace
to execute justice, and to maintain truth;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all Nations unity, peace, and concord;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy commandments;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all thy people increase of grace, to hear
meekly thy word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the
fruits of the Spirit;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth all such as have erred
and are deceived;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort, and
help the weak-hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat down
Satan under our feet;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to succor, help, and comfort all that are in danger,
necessity, and tribulation;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travel by land or by water, all
women laboring of child, all sick persons and young children, and to show thy
pity upon all prisoners and captives;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to defend and provide for the fatherless children and
widows, and all that are desolate and oppressed;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecutors, and slanderers,
and to turn their hearts;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of
the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our
fins, negligences, and ignorances, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy
Spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy Word;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us.

O Lamb of God: that take away the sins of the world;

Grant us thy peace.

O Lamb of God: that take away the sins of the world;

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ, hear us.

O Christ, hear us.

Lord, have mercy upon us.

Lord, have mercy upon us.

Christ, have mercy upon us.

Christ, have mercy upon us.

Lord, have mercy upon us.

Lord, have mercy upon us.

Then shall the Priest, and the People with him, say the Lords Prayer.

OUr Father, which art in heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Priest. O Lord, deal not with us after our sins.


Answer. Neither reward us after our iniquities.


Let us pray.

O God merciful Father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor
the desire of such as be sorrowful; Mercifully assist our prayers that we make
before thee in all our troubles and adversities whenever they oppress us; and
graciously here us, that those evils which the craft and subtilty of the devil
or man works against us, he brought to naught, and by the providence of thy
goodness they may be dispersed, that we thy servants, being hurt by no
persecutions, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord, arise, help us, and deliver us for thy Names sake:

O God, we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us the
noble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before them.

O Lord, arise, help us, and deliver us for thine Honor.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost.

Answer. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without
end. Amen.

From our enemies defend us, O Christ.

Graciously look upon our afflictions.

Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts.

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.

O Son of David, have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us; O Christ.

Graciously hear us, O Christ; Graciously hear us, O Lord Christ.


Priest. O Lord, let thy mercy be showed upon us,


Answer. As we do put our trust in thee.


Let us pray.

WE humbly beseech thee, O Father, Mercifully to look upon our infirmities; and
for the glory of thy Name turn from us all those evils that we most righteously
have deserved; and grant, that in all our troubles we may put our whole trust
and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in holiness and pureness
of living, to thy honor and glory, through our only Mediator and Advocate,
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer of St. Chrysostom.

ALmighty God, who have given us grace at this time with one accord, to make
our common supplications unto thee, and do promise, that when two or three
are gathered together in thy Name, thou will grant their requests; Fulfill now,
O Lord, the desires and petitions of thy servants, as may be most expedient for
them; granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to
come life everlasting. Amen.

2 Cor. 13.14.
THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost be with us all evermore. Amen.

Here ends the Litany.
PRAYERS and THANKSGIVINGS upon several Occasions, to be used before the two
final Prayers of the Litany or of Morning and Evening Prayer.
PRAYERS.
For Rain.

O God heavenly Father, who by thy Son Jesus Christ has promised to all them
that seek thy Kingdom and the righteousness thereof, all things necessary to
their bodily sustenance; Send us, we beseech thee, in this our necessity, such
moderate rain and showers, that we may receive the fruits of the earth to our
comfort, and to thy honor, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For fair Weather.

O Almighty Lord God, who for the sin of man did once drown all the world,
except eight persons, and afterward of thy great mercy did promise never to
destroy it so again; We humbly beseech thee, that although we for our
iniquities have worthily deserved a plague of rain and waters, yet upon our
true repentance thou will send us such weather, as that we may receive the
fruits of the earth in due season, and learn both by thy punishment to amend
our lives, and for thy clemency to give thee praise and glory, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

In the time of Dearth and Famine.

O God heavenly Father, whose gift it is, that the rain does fall, the earth is
fruitful, beasts increase, and fishes do multiply; Behold, we beseech thee, the
afflictions, of thy people, and grant that the scarcity and dearth (which we do
now most justly suffer for our iniquity (may through thy goodness be mercifully
turned into cheapness and plenty, for the love of Jesus Christ our Lord; to
whom with thee, and the holy Ghost be all honor and glory, now and for ever.
Amen.

Or this.

O God merciful Father, who in the time of Elisha the prophet did suddenly in
Samaria turn great scarcity and dearth into plenty and cheapness; Have mercy
upon us, that we who are now for our sins punished with like adversity, may
likewise find a seasonable relief: Increase the fruits of the earth by thy
heavenly benediction; and grant that we, receiving thy bountiful liberality,
may use the same to thy glory, the relief of those that are needy, and our own
comfort, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

In the time of War and Tumults.

O Almighty God, King of all kings, and Governor of all things, whose power no
creature is able to resist, to whom it belongs justly to punish sinners, and
to be merciful to them that truly repent; Save and deliver us, we humbly
beseech thee, from the hands of our enemies; abate their pride, assuage their
malice, and confound their devices, that we, being armed with thy defense, may
be preserved evermore form all perils, to glorify thee, who art the only giver
of all victory, through the merits of thy only Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

In the time of any common Plague or Sickness.

O Almighty God, who in thy wrath did send a plague upon thine own people in
the wilderness for their obstinate rebellion against Moses and Aaron, and also
in the time of King David did slay with the plague of pestilence threescore
and ten thousand, and yet remembering thy mercy did save the rest; Have pity
upon us miserable sinners, who now are visited with great sickness and
mortality; that like as thou did then accept of an atonement, and did
command the destroying angel to cease from punishing; so it may now please thee
to withdraw from us this plague and grievous sickness, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

In the Ember weeks, to be said every day, for those that are to be admitted
into holy Orders.

ALmighty God our heavenly Father, who have purchased to thy self an universal
Church, by the precious blood of thy dear Son; Mercifully look upon the same,
and at this time so guide and govern the minds of thy servants the Bishops and
Pastors of thy flock, that they may lay hands suddenly on no man, but
faithfully and wisely make choice of fit persons to serve in the sacred
ministry of thy Church. And to those which shall be Ordained to any holy
Function, give thy grace and heavenly benediction, that both by their life and
doctrine they may set forth thy glory, and set forward the salvation of all
men, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Or this.

ALmighty God, the giver of all good gifts, who of thy divine providence have
appointed diverse orders in thy Church; Give thy grace, we humbly beseech thee,
to all those who are to be called to any office and administration in the same;
and so replenish them with the truth of thy Doctrine, and endue them with
innocence of life, that they may faithfully serve before thee, to the glory of
thy great Name, and the benefit of thy holy Church, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for the High Court of Parliament, to be read during their Session.

MOst gracious God, we humbly beseech thee, as for this Kingdom in general, so
especially for the High Court of Parliament, under our most religious and
gracious King at this, time assembled: That thou would be pleased to direct
and prosper all their Consultations to the advancement of thy glory, the good
of thy Church, the safety, honor, and welfare of our Sovereign and his
Kingdoms; that all things may be so ordered and settled by their endeavors,
upon the best and surest foundations, that peace and happiness, truth and
justice, religion and piety may be established among us for all generations.
These and all other necessaries for them, for us, and thy whole Church, we
humbly beg in the Name and mediation of Jesus Christ our most blessed Lord and
Savior. Amen.

A Collect or Prayer for all Conditions of Men, to be used at such times when
the Litany is not appointed to be read.

O God, the creator and preserver of all mankind, we humbly beseech thee for
all sorts and conditions of men, that thou would be pleased to make thy ways
known unto them; thy saving health unto all Nations. More especially we pray
for the good estate of the Catholic Church; that it may be so guided and
governed by thy good Spirit, that all who profess and call themselves
Christians, may be lead into the way of truth, and hold the faith in unity of
spirit, in the bond of peace, and in righteousness of life. Finally we commend
to thy fatherly goodness, all those who are any ways afflicted, or distressed
in mind, body, or estate, [ This to be said when any desire the Prayers of the
Congregation.
especially those for whom our Prayers are desired] that it may please thee to
comfort and relieve them according to their several necessities, giving them
patience under their sufferings, and a happy issue out of all their
afflictions. And this we beg for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

A Prayer that may be said after any of the former.

O God, whose nature and property is ever to have mercy and to forgive; Receive
our humble petitions; and though we be tied and bound with the chain of our
sins, yet let the pitifulness of thy great mercy loose us, for the honor of
Jesus Christ our Mediator and Advocate. Amen.

THANKSGIVINGS.
A General Thanksgiving.

ALmighty God, Father of all mercies, we thine unworthy servants do give thee
most humble and hearty thanks for all thy goodness and loving kindness to us,
and to all men. [ This to be said when any that have been prayed for, desire to
return praise.
Particularly to those who desire now to offer up their praises and
thanksgivings for thy late mercies vouchsafed unto them.] We bless thee for our
creation, preservation, and all the blessings of this life, but above all for
thine inestimable love in the redemption of the world by our Lord Jesus Christ;
for the means of grace, and for the hope of glory. And we beseech thee give us
that due sense of all thy mercies, that our hearts may be unfeignedly thankful,
and that we may show forth thy praise, not only with our lips, but in our
lives, by giving up our selves to thy service, and by walking before thee in
holiness and righteousness all our days, through Jesus Christ our Lord; to whom
with thee and the Holy Ghost be all honor and glory, world without end. Amen.

For Rain.

O God our heavenly Father, who by thy gracious providence do cause the
former and the latter rain to descend upon the earth, that it may bring forth
fruit for the use of man; We give thee humble thanks that it has pleased thee
in our great necessity to send us at the last a joyful rain upon thine
inheritance, and to refresh it when it was dry, to the great comfort of us thy
unworthy servants, and to the glory of thy holy Name, through thy mercies in
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For fair Weather.

O Lord God, who have justly humbled us by thy late plague of immoderate rain
and waters, and in thy mercy have relieved and comforted our souls by this
seasonable and blessed change of weather; We praise and glorify thy holy Name
for this thy mercy, and will always declare thy loving kindness from generation
to generation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For Plenty.

O Most merciful Father, who of thy gracious goodness have heard the devout
prayers of thy Church, and turned our dearth and scarcity into cheapness and
plenty; We give thee humble thanks for this thy special bounty, beseeching thee
to continue thy loving kindness unto us, that our land may yield us her fruits
of increase, to thy glory and our comfort, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For Peace and Deliverance from our Enemies.

O Almighty God, who art a strong tower of defense unto thy servants against
the face of their enemies; We yield thee praise and thanksgiving for our
deliverance from those great and apparent dangers wherewith we were compassed.
We acknowledge it thy goodness that we were not delivered over as a prey unto
them; beseeching thee still to continue such thy mercies toward us, that all
the world may know that thou art our Savior and mighty Deliverer, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For Restoring Public Peace at home.

O Eternal God our heavenly Father, who alone make men to be of one mind in a
house, and stillest the outrage of a violent and unruly people; We bless thy
holy Name that it has pleased thee to appease the seditious tumults which have
been lately raised up amongst us; most humbly beseeching thee to grant to all
of us grace, that we may henceforth obediently walk in thy holy commandments,
and leading a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, may
continually offer unto thee our sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving for these
thy mercies toward us, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For Deliverance from the Plague, or other common Sickness.

O Lord God, who have wounded us for our sins, and consumed us for our
transgressions by thy late heavy and dreadful Visitation, and now in the midst
of judgment remembering mercy, have redeemed our souls from the jaws of death;
We offer unto thy Fatherly goodness our selves, our souls and bodies, which
thou have delivered to be a living sacrifice unto thee, always praising and
magnifying thy mercies in the midst of thy Church, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Or this.

WE humbly acknowledge before thee, O most merciful Father, that all the
punishments which are threatened in thy law, might justly have fallen upon us by
reason of our manifold transgressions and hardness of heart. Yet seeing it has
pleased thee of thy tender mercy, upon our weak and unworthy humiliation, to
assuage the contagious sickness, wherewith we lately have been sore afflicted,
and to restore the voice of joy and health into our dwellings; we offer unto
thy divine Majesty the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, lauding and
magnifying thy glorious Name for such thy preservation and providence over us,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Collects, Epistles, and Gospels
To be used throughout the Year.
Note, that the Collect appointed for every Sunday, or for any Holy Day that
has a Vigil or Eve, shall be said at the Evening Service next before.

The first Sunday in Advent.
The Collect.
ALmighty God, give us grace that we may cast away the works of darkness, and
put upon us the armor of light now in the time of this mortal life (in which
thy Son Jesus Christ came to visit us in great humility;) that in the last day
when he shall come again in his glorious Majesty, to judge both the quick and
dead, we may rise to the life immortal, through him who lives and reigns
with thee and the Holy Ghost, now and ever. Amen.

This Collect is to be repeated every day with the other Collects in Advent,
until Christmas-Eve.

The Epistle. Romans 13.8.
OWe no man any thing, but to love one another: for he that loves another has
fulfilled the law. For this, Thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not
kill, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not bear false witness, Thou shall not
covet; and if there be any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in
this saying, namely, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Love works no
ill to his neighbor, therefore love is the fulfilling of the law. And that,
knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out of sleep: for now is
our salvation nearer then when we believed. The night is far spent, the day is
at hand; let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the
armor of light. Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and
drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying. But
put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the flesh, to
fulfill the lusts thereof.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 21.1.
WHen they drew nigh unto Jerusalem, and were come to Bethphage, unto the mount
of Olives, then sent Jesus two disciples, saying unto them, Go into the village
over against you, and straightway ye shall find an ass tied, and a colt with
her: loose them and bring them unto me. And if any man say ought unto you, ye
shall say. The Lord has need of them; and straightway he will send them. All
this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet,
saying, Tell ye the daughter of Sion, Behold thy King comes unto thee, meek,
and sitting upon an ass, and a colt the fool of an ass. And the disciples went,
and did as Jesus commanded them, and brought the ass, and the colt, and put on
them their clothes, and they set him thereon. And a very great multitude spread
their garments in the way, others cut down branches from the trees, and strawed
them in the way. And the multitudes that went before, and that followed, cried,
saying, Hosanna to the Son of David: blessed is he that comes in the Name of
the Lord, Hosanna in the highest. And when he was come into Jerusalem, all the
city was moved, saying, Who is this? And the multitude said, This is Jesus the
Prophet of Nazareth of Galilee. And Jesus went into the temple of God; and cast
out all them that sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of
the money changers, and the seats of them that sold doves, and said unto them,
It is written, My house shall be called the house of prayer, but ye have made
it a den of thieves.

The second Sunday in Advent.
The collect.
BLessed Lord, who have caused all holy Scriptures to be written for our
learning; Grant that we may in such wise hear them, read, mark, learn, and
inwardly digest them, that by patience and comfort of thy holy Word, we may
embrace, and ever hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting life, which thou
have given us in our Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

The Epistle. Romans 15.4.
WHatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning; that
we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, Now the God
of patience and consolation, grant you to be like-minded one toward another,
according to Christ Jesus: That ye may with one mind, and one mouth glorify
God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Wherefore receive ye one
another, as Christ also received us, to the glory of God. Now I say, that Jesus
Christ was a minister of the circumcision, for the truth of God, to confirm the
promises made unto the fathers: and that the Gentiles might glorify God for
his mercy, as it is written, For this Cause I will confess to thee among the
Gentiles, and sing unto thy Name. And again he says, Rejoice, ye Gentiles,
with his people. And again, praise the Lord, all ye Gentiles, and laud him, all
ye people. And again, Esaias says, There shall be a root of Jesse, and he that
shall rise to reign over the Gentiles, in him shall the Gentiles trust. Now the
God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that ye may abound in
hope, through the power of the Holy Ghost.

The Gospel. S. Luke 21.25.
ANd there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars; and
upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity, the sea and the waves
roaring; men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those things
which are coming on the earth: for the powers of heaven shall be shaken. And
then shall they see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great
glory. And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up
your heads; for your redemption draws nigh. And he spoke to them a parable,
Behold, the figtree, and all the trees; When they now shoot forth, ye see and
know of your own selves, that summer is now nigh at hand. So likewise ye, when
ye see these things come to pass, know ye that the kingdom of God is nigh at
hand. Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not pass away, till all be
fulfilled: Heaven and earth shall pass away; but my word shall not pass away.

The third Sunday in Advent.
The collect.
O Lord Jesu Christ, who at the first coming did send thy messenger to
prepare thy way before thee; Grant that the Ministers and Stewards of thy
mysteries, may likewise so prepare and make ready thy way, by turning the
hearts of the disobedient to the wisdom of the just, that at thy second coming
to judge the world, we may be found an acceptable people in thy sight, who
live and reignest with the Father and the holy Spirit, ever one God, world
without end. Amen.

The Epistle. 1 Cor. 4.1.
LEt a man so account of us, as of the ministers of christ; and stewards of the
mysteries of God. Moreover, it is required in stewards, that a man be found
faithful. But with me it is a very small thing, that I should be judged of you,
or of man's judgment: yea, I judge not mine own self. For I know nothing by my
self, yet am I not hereby justified; but he that judges me, is the Lord.
Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
counsels of the hearts; and then shall every man have praise of God.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 11.2.
NOw when John had heard in the prison the works of Christ, he sent two of his
disciples, and said unto him, Art thou he that should come, or do we look for
another? Jesus answered and said unto them, Go and show John again those things
which ye do hear and see: The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the
lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor
have the gospel preached to them. And blessed is he whosoever shall not be
offended in me. And as they departed, Jesus began to say unto the multitudes
concerning John, What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken
with the wind? But what went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment?
behold, they that wear soft clothing are in kings houses. But what went ye out
for to see? A prophet? yea, I say unto you, and more then a prophet. For this
is he of whom it is written, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which
shall prepare thy way before thee.

The fourth Sunday in Advent.
The collect.
O Lord, raise up (we pray thee) thy power, and come among us, and with great
might succor us; that whereas through our sins and wickedness, we are sore let
and hindered in running the race that is set before us, thy bountiful grace and
mercy may speedily help and deliver us, through the satisfaction of thy Son our
Lord; to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost be honor and glory, world without
end. Amen.

The Epistle. Phil. 4.4.
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say, Rejoice. Let your moderation be
known unto all men. The Lord is at hand. Be careful for nothing: but in every
thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let your requests be made
known unto God. And the peace of God which passes all understanding, shall
keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus.

The Gospel. S. John 1.19.
THis is the record of John, when the Jews sent Priests and Levites from
Jerusalem to ask him, Who art thou? And he confessed, and denied not; but
confessed, I am not the Christ. And they asked him, What then? Art thou Elias?
And he says, I am not. Art thou that prophet? And he answered, No. Then said
they unto him, Who art thou? that we may give an answer to them that sent us.
What say thou of thy self? He said, I am the voice of one crying in the
wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lord, as said the prophet Esaias: And
they which were sent, were of the Pharisees. And they asked him, and said unto
him, Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not that Christ, nor Elias, neither
that prophet? John answered them, saying, I baptize with water: but there
stands one among you, whom ye know not. He it is who coming after me, is
preferred before me, whose shoes latchet I am not worthy to unloose. These
things were done in Bethabara beyond Jordan, where John was baptizing.

The NATIVITY of our LORD, or the Birthday of CHRIST, commonly called
Christmas Day.
The Collect.
ALmighty God, who have given us thy only begotten Son to take our nature upon
him, and as at this time to be born of a pure Virgin; Grant that we being
regenerate, and made thy children by adoption and grace, may daily be renewed
by thy holy Spirit, through the same our Lord Jesus Christ, who lives and
reigns with thee, and the same Spirit, ever one God, world without end. Amen.

The Epistle. Heb. 1.1.
GOd who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in time past unto the
fathers by the prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son,
whom he has appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds. Who
being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person, and
upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged
our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high: Being made so much
better then the angels, as he has by inheritance obtained a more excellent
Name then they. For unto which of the angels said he at any time, Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee? And again, I will be to him a Father, and
he shall be to me Son? And again, when he brings in the first-begotten into
the world, he says, And let all the angels of God worship him. And of the
angels he says, Who makes his angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of
fire. But unto the Son he says, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever, a
scepter of righteousness is the scepter of thy Kingdom. Thou have loved
righteousness, and hated iniquity; therefore God, even thy God has anointed
thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. And, Thou Lord, in the
beginning have laid the foundation of the earth; and the heavens are the works
of thine hands. They shall perish, but thou remainest; and they all shall wax
old as does a garment; and as a vesture shall thou fold them up, and they shall
be changed; but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail.

The Gospel. S. John 1.1.
IN the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him, and
without him was not any thing made, that was made. In him was life, and the
life was the light of men. And the light shines in darkness, and the darkness
comprehended it not. There was a man sent from God, whose name was John. The
same came for a witness, to bear witness of the light, that all men through him
might believe. He was not that light, but was sent to bear witness of that
light. That was the true light, which lights every man that comes into the
world. He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew
him not. He came unto his own, and his own received him not. But as many as
received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them
that believe on his name: Which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. And the Word was made flesh, and
dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of
the Father) full of grace and truth.

S. Stephens day.
The Collect.
GRant, O Lord, that in all our sufferings here upon earth, for the testimony
of thy truth, we may steadfastly look up to heaven, and by faith behold the
glory that shall be revealed; and being filled, with the Holy Ghost, may learn
to love and bless our persecuters by the example of thy first Martyr Saint
Stephen, who prayed for his murderers to thee, O blessed Jesus, who stand at
the right hand of God to succor all those that suffer for thee, our only
Mediator and Advocate. Amen.

Then shall follow the Collect of the Nativity, which shall be said continually
unto New Years Eve.

For the Epistle. Acts 7.55.
STephen being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly into heaven, and
saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God, and said,
Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand
of God. Then they cried out with a loud voice, and stopped their ears, and ran
upon him with one accord, and cast him out of the city, and stoned him; and the
witnesses laid down their clothes at a young man's feet, whose name was Saul.
And they stoned Stephen, calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus receive my
spirit. And he kneeled down and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin
to their charge. And when he had said this, he fell asleep.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 23.34.
BEhold, I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and scribes; and some of them
ye shall kill and crucify; and some of them shall ye scourge in your
synagogues, and persecute them from city to city; that upon you may come all
the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel, unto
the blood of Zacharias, son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and
the altar. Verily I say unto you, all these things shall come upon this
generation. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest
them which are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered the children
together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would
not. Behold, your house is left unto you desolate. For I say unto you, ye shall
not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed is he that comes in the Name
of the Lord.

S. John the Evangelists day.
The collect.
MErciful Lord, we beseech thee to cast thy bright beam of light upon thy
Church, that it being enlightened by the doctrine of thy blessed Apostle and
Evangelist Saint John, may so walk in the light of thy truth, that it may at
length attain to the light of everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

The Epistle. 1 S. John. 1.1.
THat which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen
with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the
word of life; (for the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear
witness, and show unto you that eternal life, which was with the Father, and
was manifested unto us) That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you,
that ye also may have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. And these things write we unto you, that
your joy may be full. This then is the message which we have heard of him, and
declare unto you, That God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. If we
say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not
the truth: But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us
from all sin. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the
truth is not in us. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive
us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If we say that we have
not sinned, we make him a liar, and his Word is not in us.

The Gospel. S. John 21.19.
JEsus said unto Peter, Follow me. Then Peter turning about, sees the disciple
whom Jesus loved, following, which also leaned on his breast at supper, and
said, Lord, which is he that betrayeth thee? Peter seeing him, says to Jesus,
Lord, and what shall this man do? Jesus says unto him, If I will that he tarry
till I come, what is that to thee? Follow thou me. Then went this saying abroad
among the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto
him, He shall not die; but if I will that he tarry till I come, wh^ is that to
thee? This is the disciple which testifies of these things, and wrote these
things, and we know the his testimony is true. And there are also many other
things which Jesus did, the which if they should be written every one, I
suppose, that even the world it self could not contain the books that should be
written.

The Innocents day.
The collect.
O Almighty God, who out of the mouths of babes and sucklings have ordained
strength, and made infants to glorify thee by their deaths; Mortify and
kill all vices in us, and so strengthen us by thy grace, that by the innocence
of our lives, and constancy of our faith even unto death, we may glorify thy
holy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For the Epistle Rev. 14.1.
I Looked, and lo, a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred
forty and four thousand, having his Fathers name written in their foreheads.
And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as the voice
of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of harpers harping with their harps:
and they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before the four
beasts, and the elders; and no man could learn that song but the hundred and
forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from the earth. These are they
which were not defiled with women, for they are virgins: these are they which
follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes: these were redeemed from among men,
being the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb. And in their mouth was found
no guile; for they are without fault before the throne of God.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 2.13.
THe angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise, and take
the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be thou there until I
bring thee word; for Herod will seek the young child to destroy him. When he
arose, he took the young child and his mother by night, and departed into
Egypt, and was there until the death of Herod; that it might be fulfilled which
was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called my
Son. Then Herod when he saw that he was mocked of the wisemen; was exceeding
wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the children that were in Bethlehem, and in
all the coasts thereof, from two years old and under, according to the time
which he had diligently enquired of the wisemen. Then was fulfilled that which
was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying, In Rama was there a voice heard,
lamentation, and weeping, and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children,
and would not be comforted, because they are not.

The Sunday after Christmas Day.
The collect.
ALmighty God, who have given us thy only begotten Son to take our nature upon
him, and as at this time to be born of a pure Virgin; Grant that we being
regenerate, and made thy children by adoption and grace, may daily be renewed
by thy holy Sprit, through the same our Lord Jesus Christ, who lives and
reigns with thee, and the same Spirit, ever one God, world without end. Amen.

The Epistle. Gal. 4.1.
NOw I say, that the heir as long as he is a child, differs nothing from a
servant, though he be lord of all; but is under tutours and governors, until
the time appointed of the father. Even so we, when we were children, were in
bondage under the elements of the world: but when the fullness of the time was
come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem
them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. And
because ye are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son;
and if a son, then an heir of God through Christ.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 1.18.
THe birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When as his mother Mary was
espoused to Joseph (before they came together) she was found with child of the
Holy Ghost. Then Joseph her husband being a just man, and not willing to make
her a public example, was minded to put her away privily. But while he thought
on these things, behold, the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream,
saying, Joseph thou son of David, fear not to take unto thee Mary thy wife; for
that which is conceived in her, is of the Holy Ghost. And she shall bring forth
a Son, and thou shall call his name Jesus; for he shall save his people from
their sins. (Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken
of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Behold, a Virgin shall be with child, and
shall bring forth a Son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being
interpreted, is, God with us.) Then Joseph being raised from sleep, did as the
angel of the Lord had bidden him, and took unto him his wife: And knew her not
till she had brought forth her firstborn Son; and he called his name Jesus.

The Circumcision of Christ.
The collect.
ALmighty God, who made thy blessed Son to circumcised, and obedient to the
law for man; Grant us the true circumcision of the Sprit, that our hearts and
all our members being mortifed from all wordly and carnal lusts, we may in all
things obey thy blessed will, through the same thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

The Epistle. Romans 4.8.
BLessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin. Comes this
blessdness then upon the circumcision only, or upon the uncircumcision also?
For we say, that faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness. How was it
then reckoned? when he was in circumcision, or in uncircumcision? not in
circumcision, but in uncircumcision. And he received the sign of circumcision,
a seal of the righteousness of the faith, which he had yet being uncircumcised;
that he might be the father of all them that believe, though they be not
circumcised; that righteousness might be imputed unto them also: And the father
of circumcision to them who are not of the circumcision only, but also walk in
the steps of that faith of our father Abraham, which he had being yet
uncircumcised. For the promise, that he should be the heir of the world, was
not to Abraham or to his seed, through the law, but through the righteousness
of faith. For if they which are of the law be heirs, faith is made void, and
the promise made of none effect.

The Gospel. S. Luke 2.15.
ANd it came to pass, as the angels were gone away from them into heaven, the
shepherds said one to another, Let us now go even unto Bethlehem, and see this
thing which is come to pass, which the Lord has made known unto us. And they
came with haste and found Mary and Joseph, and the babe lying in amanger. And
when they had seen it, they made known abroad the saying which was told them
concerning this child. And all they that heard it, wondered at those things
which were told them by the shepherds. But Mary kept all these things, and
pondered them in her heart. And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising
God for all the things that they had heard and seen, as the was told unto them.
And when eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of the child, his
name was called JESUS, which was so named of the angel before he was conceived
in the womb.

The same Collect, Epistle, and Gospel shall serve for every day after, unto
the Epiphany.

The Epiphany, or the Manifestation of Christ to the Gentiles.
The collect.
O God, who by the leading of a Star did manifest thy only begotten Son to
the Gentiles; Mercifully grant, that we which know thee now by faith, may after
this life have the fruition of thy glorious Godhead, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. Ephesians. 3.1.
FOr the cause, I Paul, the prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Gentiles; if ye
have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God, which is given me to
you-ward: How that by revelation he made known unto me the mystery (as I wrote
before in few words, whereby when ye read ye may understand my knowledge in the
mystery of Christ) which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men,
as it is now revealed unto his holy Apostles and Prophets by the Spirit; That
the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, and of the same body, and partakers of his
promise in Christ, by the Gospel: whereof I was made a minister, according to
the gift of the grace of God given unto me by the effectual working of his
power. Unto me, who am less then the least of all saints, is this grace given,
that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ; and
to make all men see, what is the fellowship of the mystery, which from the
beginning of the world has been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus
Christ: To the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly
places, might be known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God, according to
the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord. In whom we have
boldness and access with confidence by the faith of him.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 2.1.
WHen Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea, in the days of Herod the king,
behold, there came wisemen from the east to Jerusalem, saying, Where is he that
is born King of the Jews? for we have seen his star in the east, and are come
to worship him. When Herod the king had heard these things, he was troubled,
and all Jerusalem with him. And when he had gathered all the chief priests and
scribes of the people together, he demanded of them, where Christ should be
born. And they said unto him, In Bethlehem of Judea: For thus it is written by
the prophet, And thou Bethlehem in the land of Juda, art not the least among
the princes of Juda: For out of thee shall come a Governor that shall rule my
people Israel. Then Herod, when he had privily called the wisemen, enquired of
them diligently what time the star appeared. And he sent them to Bethlehem, and
said, Go, and search diligently for the young child, and when ye have found
him, bring me word again, that I may come and worship him also. When they had
heard the king, they departed; and lo, the star which they saw in the east,
went before them, till it came and stood over where the young child was. When
they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy. And when they were
come into the house, they saw the young child with Mary his mother, and fell
down and worshipped him: And when they had opened their treasures, they
presented unto him gifts, gold, and frankincense, and myrrh. And being warned
of God in a dream, that they should not return to Herod, they departed into
their own country another way.

The first Sunday after the Epiphany.
The collect.
O Lord, we beseech thee mercifully to receive the prayers of thy people which
call upon thee, and grant that they may both perceive, and know what things
they ought to do, and also may have grace and power faithfully to fulfill the
same, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. Rom 12.1.
I Beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your
bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable
service. And be not conformed to this world; but be ye transformed by the
renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and
perfect will of God. For I say, through the grace given unto me, to every man
that is among you, not to think of himself more highly then he ought to think,
but to think soberly, according as God has dealt to every man the measure of
faith. For as we have many members in one body, and all members have not the
same office; so we being many are one body in Christ, and every one members one
of another.

The Gospel. S. Luke 2.41.
NOw his parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the passover. And
when he was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem, after the custom of
the feast. And when they had fulfilled the days, as they returned, the child
Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem, and Joseph and his mother knew not of it.
But they supposing him to have been in the company, went a days journey, and
they sought him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance. And when they found him
not, they turned back to Jerusalem, seeking him. And it came to pass that after
three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors,
both hearing them and asking them questions. And all that heard him were
astonished at his understanding and answers. And when they saw him, they were
amazed: and his mother said unto him, Son, why have thou thus dealt with us?
behold, thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing. And he said unto them, how
is it, that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my Fathers business?
And they understood not the saying which he spoke unto them. And he went down
with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject unto them: but his mother kept
all these sayings in her heart. And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and
in favor with God and man.

The second Sunday after the Epiphany.
The collect.
ALmighty and everlasting God, who do govern all things in heaven and earth;
Mercifully hear the supplication of thy people, and grant us thy peace all the
days of our life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. Romans 12.6.
HAving then gifts, differing according to the grace that is given to us,
whether prophecy, let us prophecy according to the proportion of faith; or
ministry, let us wait on our ministering; or he that teaches, on teaching; or
he that exhorts, on exhortation: he that gives, let him do it with
simplicity; he that rules, with diligence; he that shows mercy, with
cheerfulness. Let love be without dissimulation. Abhor that which is evil,
cleave to that which is good. Be kindly affectioned one to another with
brotherly love, in honor preferring one another: not slothful in business;
fervent in spirit; serving the Lord; rejoicing in hope; patient in tribulation;
continuing instant in prayer; distributing to the necessity of saints; given to
hospitality. Bless them which persecute you; bless and curse not. Rejoice with
them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep. Be of the same mind one
toward another. Mind not high things, but condescend to men of low estate.

The Gospel. S. John 2.1.
ANd the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee, and the mother of
Jesus was there. And both Jesus was called and his disciples to the marriage.
And when they wanted wine, the mother of Jesus says unto him, They have no
wine. Jesus says unto her, Woman, what have I to do with thee? mine hour is
not yet come. His mother says unto the servants, Whatsoever he says unto you,
do it. And there were set there six water-pots of stone, after the manner of
the purifying of the Jews, containing two or three firkins apiece. Jesus says
unto them, Fill the water-pots with water. And they filled them up to the brim.
And he says unto them, draw out now, and bear unto the governor of the feast.
And they bare it. When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was
made wine, and knew not whence it was, (but the servants which drew the water
knew) the governor of the feast called the bridegroom, and says unto him,
Every man at the beginning does set forth good wine, and when men have well
drunk, then that which is worse: but thou have kept the good wine until now.
This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested forth
his glory, and his disciples believed on him.

The third Sunday after Epiphany.
The collect.
ALmighty and everlasting God, mercifully look upon our infirmities, and in all
our dangers and necessities, stretch forth thy right hand to help and defend
us, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. Rom 12.16.
BE not wise in your own conceits. Recompense to no man evil for evil. Provide
things honest in the sight of all men. If it be possible, as much as lies in
you, live peaceably with all men. Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but
rather give place unto wrath; for it is written, Vengeance is mine; I will
repay, says the Lord. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst,
give him drink: for in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire on his head. Be
not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 8.1.
WHen he was come down from the mountain, great multitudes followed him. And
behold, there came a leper and worshipped him, saying, Lord if thou will, thou
can make me clean. And Jesus put forth his hand and touched him, saying, I
will, be thou clean. And immediately his leprosy was cleansed. And Jesus says
unto him. See thou tell no man, but go thy way, show thy self to the priest,
and offer the gift that Moses commanded for a testimony unto them. And when
Jesus was entered into Capernaum, there came unto him a Centurion beseeching
him, and saying, Lord, my servant lies at home sick of the palsy, grievously
tormented. And Jesus says unto him, I will come and heal him. The Centurion
answered and said, Lord, I am not worthy that thou should come under my
roof; But speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed. For I am a man
under authority, having soldiers under me: and I say unto this man, Go, and he
goes; and to another, Come, and he comes; and to my servant, Do this, and he
does it. When Jesus heard it, he marvelled, and said to them that followed,
Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel. And I
say unto you, that many shall come from the east and west, and shall sit down
with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven. But the children
of the kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness: there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth. And Jesus said unto the Centurion, Go thy way, and as
thou have believed, so be it done unto thee. And his servant was healed in the
self-same hour.

The fourth Sunday after the Epiphany.
The collect.
O God, who know us to be set in the midst of so many and great dangers,
that by reason of the frailty of our nature we cannot always stand upright;
Grant to us such strength and protection, as may support us in all dangers, and
carry us through all temptations, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. Romans 13.1.
LEt every soul be subject unto the higher powers; for there is no power but of
God: the powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the
power, resists the ordinance of God: and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves damnation. For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the
evil. Will thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and
thou shall have praise of the same: for he is the minister of God to thee for
good. But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he bears not the
sword in vain: for he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon
him that does evil. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath,
but also for conscience sake. For, for this cause pay you tribute also; for
they are Gods ministers, attending continually upon this very thing. Render
therefore to all their dues; tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom
custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 8.23.
ANd when he was entered into a ship, his disciples followed him. And behold,
there arose a great tempest in the sea, insomuch that the ship was covered with
the waves: but he was asleep. And his disciples came to him, and awoke him,
saying, Lord, save us, we perish. And he says unto them, Why are ye fearful, O
ye of little faith? Then he arose, and rebuked the winds and the sea, and there
was a great calm. But the men marvelled, saying, What manner of man is this,
that even the winds and the sea obey him? And when he was come to the other
side into the country of the Gergesenes, there met him two possessed with
devils, coming out of the tombs, exceeding fierce, so that no man might pass by
that way. And behold, they cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee,
Jesus thou Son of God? art thou come hither to torment us before the time? And
there was a good way off from them an herd of many swine, feeling. So the
devils besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, suffer us to go away into the
herd of swine. And he said unto them. Go. And when they were come out, they
went into the herd of swine: and behold, the whole herd of swine ran violently
down a steep place into the sea, and perished in the waters.

And they that kept them fled, and went their ways into the city, and told
every thing, and what was befaln to the possessed of the devils. And behold,
the whole city came out to meet Jesus: and when they saw him, they besought him
that he would depart out of their coasts.

The fifth Sunday after the Epiphany.
The collect.
O Lord, we beseech thee to keep thy Church, and household continually in thy
true religion, that they who do lean only upon the hope of thy heavenly grace,
may evermore be defended by thy mighty power, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

The Epistle Col. 3.12.
PUt on therefore (as the elect of God, holy and beloved) bowels of mercies,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one another,
and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any; even as
Christ forgave you, so also do ye. And above all these things, put on charity,
which is the bond of perfectness. And let the peace of God rule in your hearts,
to the which also ye are called in one body; and be ye thankful. Let the word
of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one
another in psalms and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your
hearts to the Lord. And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of
the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God, and the Father by him.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 13.24.
THe kingdom of heaven is likened unto a man, which sowed good seed in his
field. But while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat, and
went his way. But when the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit, then
appeared the tares also. So the servants of the householder came and said unto
him, Sir, did not thou sow good seed in thy field? from whence then has it
tares? He said unto them, An enemy has done this. The servants said unto him,
Will thou then that we go and gather them up? But he said, Nay; lest while ye
gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat with them. Let both grow
together until the harvest; and in the time of harvest I will say to the
reapers, Gather ye together first the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn
them: but gather the wheat into my barn.

The sixth Sunday after the Epiphany.
The collect.
O God, whose blessed Son was manifested, that he might destroy the works of
the devil, and make us the sons of God, and heirs of eternal life; Grant us, we
beseech thee, that having this hope, we may purify our selves even as he is
pure; that when he shall appear again with power and great glory, we may be
made like unto him in his eternal and glorious kingdom, where with thee, O
Father, and thee, O holy Ghost, he lives and reigns ever one God world
without end. Amen.

The Epistle. 1 S. John 3.1.
BEhold, what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should
be called the sons of God: therefore the world knows us not, because it knew
him not. Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what
we shall be: but we know, that when he shall appear we shall be like him; for
we shall see him as he is. And every man that has this hope in him, purifieth
himself, even as he is pure. Whosoever commits sin, transgresses also the
law: for sin is the transgression of the law. And ye know that he was
manifested to take away our sins; and in him is no sin. Whosoever abides in
him, sins not: whosoever sins, has not seen him, neither known him.
Little children, let no man deceive you: he that does righteousness is
righteous, even as he is righteous. He that committeh sin is of the devil: for
the devil sins from the beginning. For this purpose the Son of God was
manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 24.23.
THen if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there: believe it
not. For there shall arise false Christ's and false prophets, and shall show
great signs and wonders; insomuch that (if it were possible) they shall deceive
the very elect. Behold, I have told you before. Wherefore, if they shall say
unto you, Behold, he is in the desert, go not forth: behold, he is in the
secret chambers, believe it not. For as the lightning comes out of the east,
and shines even unto the west: so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.
For wheresoever the carcass is, there will the eagles be gathered together.
Immediately after the tribulation of those days, shall the sun be darkened, and
the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and
the powers of the heavens shall be shaken. And then shall appear the sign of
the Son of man in heaven: and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and
they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and
great glory. And he shall send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and
they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from one end of
heaven to the other.

The Sunday called Septuagesima, or the third Sunday before Lent.
The collect.
O Lord, we beseech thee favorably to hear the prayers of thy people, that we
who are justly punished for our offenses, may be mercifully delivered by thy
goodness, for the glory of thy Name, through Jesus Christ our Savior, who
lives and reigns with thee and the Holy Ghost ever one God, world without
end. Amen.

The Epistle. 1 Cor. 9.24.
KNow ye not that they which run in a race, run all, but one receives the
prize? So run that ye may obtain. And every man that striveth for the mastery,
is temperate in all things: Now they do it to obtain a corruptible crown, but
we an incorruptible. I therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so fight I, not as
one that beats the air: But I keep under my body, and bring it into
subjection, lest that by any means when I have preached to others, I my self
should be a castaway.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 20.1.
THe kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an householder, which went out
early in the morning to hire laborers into his vineyard. And when he had
agreed with the laborers for a penny a day, he sent them into his vineyard. And
he went out about the third hour, and saw others standing idle in the
marketplace, and said unto them, Go ye also into the vineyard, and whatsoever
is right, I will give you. And they went their way. Again he went out about the
sixth and ninth hour, and did likewise. And about the eleventh hour he went
out, and found others standing idle, and says unto them, Why stand ye here all
the day idle? They say unto him, Because no man has hired us. He says unto
them, Go ye also into the vineyard, and whatsoever is right, that shall ye
receive. So when even was come, the Lord of the vineyard says unto his
steward, Call the laborers, and give them their hire, beginning from the last
unto the first. And when they came that were hired about the eleventh hour,
they received every man a penny. But when the first came, they supposed that
they should have received more; and they likewise received every man a penny.
And when they had received it, they murmured against the good man of the house,
saying, These last have wrought but one hour, and thou have made them equal
unto us, which have born the burden and heat of the day. But he answered one of
them, and said, Friend, I do thee no wrong: did not thou agree with me for a
penny? Take that thine is, and go thy way: I will give unto this last even as
unto thee. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? Is thine
eye evil, because I am good? So the last shall be first, and the first last:
for many be called, but few chosen.

The Sunday called Sexagesima, or the second Sunday before Lent.
The collect.
O Lord God, who see that we put not our trust in any thing that we do;
Mercifully grant, that by thy power we may be defended against all adversity,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. 2 Cor. 11.19.
YE suffer fools gladly, seeing ye your selves are wise. For ye suffer if a man
bring you into bondage, if a man devour you, if a man take of you, if a man
exalt himself, if a man smite you on the face. I speak as concerning reproach,
as though we had been weak: howbeit, whereinsoever any is bold (I speak
foolishly) I am bold also. Are they Hebrews? so am I: are they Israelites? so
am I: are they the seed of Abraham? so am I: are they ministers of Christ? (I
speak as a fool) I am more: in labors more abundant; in stripes above measure;
in prisons more frequent; in deaths often. Of the Jews five times received I
forty stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten with rods. Once was I stoned.
Thrice I suffered shipwreck. A night and a day I have been in the deep: in
journeying often; in perils of waters; in perils of robbers; in perils by mine
own contrymen; in perils by the heathen; in perils in the city; in perils in
the wilderness; in perils in the sea; in perils among false brethren; in
weariness and painfulness; in watchings often; in hunger and thirst; in
fastings often; in cold and nakedness; besides those things that are without,
that which comes upon me daily, the care of all the Churches. Who is weak, and
I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? If I must needs glory, I will
glory of the things which concern mine infirmities. The God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which is blessed for evermore, knows that I lie not.

The Gospel. S. Luke 8.4.
WHen much people were gathered together, and were come to him out of every
city, he spoke by a parable, A sower went out to sow his seed: and as he sowed,
some fell by the way-side, and it was trodden down, and the fowls of the air
devoured it. And some fell upon a rock, and as soon as it was sprung up, it
withered away, because it lacked moisture. And some fell among thorns, and the
thorns sprang up with it, and choked it. And other fell on good ground, and
sprang up, and bare fruit an hundredfold. And when he had said these things, he
cried, He that has ears to hear, let him hear. And his disciples asked him,
saying, What might this parable be? And he said, Unto you it is given to know
the mysteries of the kingdom of God: but to others in parables; that seeing
they might not see, and hearing they might not understand. Now the parable is
this; The seed is the word of God. Those by the way-side are they that hear;
then comes the devil, and takes away the word out of their hearts, lest they
should believe and be saved. They on the rock, are they, which when they hear,
receive the word with joy; and these have no root, which for a while believe,
and in time of temptation fall away. And that which fell among thorns, are
they, which when they have heard, go forth, and are choked with cares and
riches, and pleasures of this life, and bring no fruit to perfection. But that
on the good ground, are they, which in an honest and good heart, having heard
the word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience.

The Sunday called Quinquagesima, or the next Sunday before Lent.
The collect.
O Lord, who have taught us, that all our doings without charity are nothing
worth; Send thy Holy Ghost, and pour into our hearts that most excellent gift
of charity, the very bond of peace and of all virtues, without which whosoever
lives is counted dead before thee. Grant this for thine only Son Jesus Christ's
sake. Amen.

The Epistle. 1 Cor. 13.1.
THough I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I
am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift
of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have
all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have no charity, I am nothing.
And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to
be burned, and have not charity, it profits me nothing. Charity suffers
long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not it self, is not
puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily
provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in iniquity, but rejoices in the
truth; bears all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures
all things. Charity never fails: but whether there be prophecies, they shall
fail; whether there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be knowledge,
it shall vanish away. For we know in part, and we prophecy in part. But when
that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away.
When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a
child; but when I became a man, I put away childish things. For now we see
through a glass darkly; but then face to face: now I know in part; but then
shall I know even as also I am known. And now abides faith, hope, charity,
these three; but the greatest of these is charity.

The Gospel. S. Luke 18.31.
THen Jesus took unto him the twelve, and said unto them, Behold, we go up to
Jerusalem, and all things that are written by the prophets concerning the Son
of man shall be accomplished. For he shall be delivered unto the Gentiles, and
shall be mocked, and spitefully entreated, and spitted on. And they shall
scourge him, and put him to death; and the third day he shall rise again. And
they understood none of these things: and this saying was hid from them,
neither knew they the things which were spoken. And it came to pass, that as he
was come nigh unto Jericho, a certain blind man sat by the way-side begging:
and hearing the multitude pass by, he asked what it meant. And they told him,
that Jesus of Nazareth passes by. And he cried, saying, Jesus thou Son of
David, have mercy on me. And they which went before rebuked him, that he should
hold his peace: but he cried so much the more, Thou Son of David, have mercy on
me. And Jesus stood and commanded him to be brought unto him and when he was
come near, he asked him, saying, What will thou that I should do unto thee? And
he said, Lord, that I may receive my fight. And Jesus said unto him, Receive
thy fight; thy faith has saved thee. And immediately he received his sight,
and followed him, glorifying God: and all the people when they saw it, gave
praise unto God.

The first day of Lent, commonly called Ashwednesday.
The collect.
ALmighty and everlasting God, who hate nothing that thou have made, and do
forgive the sins of all them that are penitent; Create and make in us new and
contrite hearts, that we worthily lamenting our sins, and acknowledging our
wretchedness, may obtain of thee, the God of all mercy, perfect remission and
forgiveness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

This Collect is to be read every day in Lent, after the Collect appointed for
the Day.

For the Epistle. Joel 2.12.
TUrn ye even to me, says the Lord, with all your heart, and with fasting, and
with weeping, and with mourning. And rent your heart, and not you garments, and
turn unto the Lord your God: for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger,
and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil. Who knows if he will
return, and repent, and leave a blessing behind him, even a meat offering and a
drink offering unto the Lord your God? Blow the trumpet in Zion, sanctify a
fast, call a solemn assembly, gather the people, sanctify the congregation,
assemble the elders gather the children, and those that suck the breasts; let
the bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her closet; let
the priests, the ministers of the Lord, weep between the porch and the altar,
and let them say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine heritage to
reproach that the heathen should rule over them: Wherefore should they say among
the people, Where is their God?

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 6.16.
WHen ye fast, be not as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance: for they
disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily I say unto
you, they have their reward. But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head,
and wash thy face, that thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father
which is in secret; and thy Father which sees in secret, shall reward thee
openly. Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust
does corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal. But lay up for your
selves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust does corrupt, and where
thieves do not break through nor steal. For where your treasure is, there will
your heart be also.

The first Sunday in Lent.
The collect.
O Lord, who for our sake did fast forty days and forty nights; Give us
grace to use such abstinence, that our flesh being subdued to the Spirit, we
may ever obey thy godly motions in righteousness and true holiness, to thy
honor and glory, who live and reignest with the Father and the Holy Ghost,
one God, world without end. Amen.

The Epistle. 2 Cor. 6.1.
WE then as workers together with him, beseech you also, that ye receive not
the grace of God in vain: (For he says, I have heard thee in a time accepted,
and in the day of salvation have I succored thee: behold, now is the accepted
time; behold, now is the day of salvation) Giving no offense in any thing, that
the ministry be not blamed; but in all things approving our selves as the
ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in
distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labors, in watchings,
in fastings; by pureness, by knowledge, by long-suffering, by kindness, by the
Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the word of truth, by the power of God, by
the armor of righteousness on the right hand and on the left, by honor and
dishonor, by evil report and good report; as deceivers, and yet true; as
unknown, and yet well known, as dying and behold, we live; as chastened, and
not killed; as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich;
as having nothing, and yet possessing all things.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 4.1.
THen was Jesus led up of the spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted of the
devil. And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward
an hungered. And when the tempter came to him, he said. If thou be the Son of
God, command that these stones be made bread. But he answered and said, It is
written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds
out of the mouth of God. Then the devil takes him up into the holy city, and
sets him on a pinnacle of the temple, and says unto him, If thou be the Son
of God, cast thy self down; for it is written, He shall give his angels charge
concerning thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time
thou dash thy foot against a stone. Jesus said unto him, It is written again,
Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Again the devil takes him up into an
exceeding high mountain, and shows him all the kingdoms of the world, and the
glory of them; and says unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. Then says Jesus unto him, Get thee hence,
Satan; for it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve. Then the devil leaves him, and behold, angels came and
ministered unto him.

The second Sunday in Lent.
The collect.
ALmighty God, who see that we have no power of our selves to help our
selves; Keep us both outwardly in our bodies, and inwardly in our souls; that
we may be defended from all adversities which may happen to the body; and from
all evil thoughts which may assault and hurt the soul, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. 1 These. 4.1.
WE beseech you, brethren, and exhort you by the Lord Jesus; that as ye have
received of us how you ought to walk, and to please God, so ye would abound
more and more. For ye know what commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus. For
this is the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye should abstain from
fornication; that every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in
sanctification and honor; not in the lust of concupiscence, even as the
Gentiles which know not God; that no man go beyond, and defraud his brother in
any matter, because that the Lord is the avenger of all such, as we also have
forewarned you, and testified. For God has not called us unto uncleanness, but
unto holiness. He therefore that despises, despises not man, but God, who
has also given unto us his holy Spirit.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 15.21.
JEsus went thence, and departed into the coasts of Tire and Sidon. And behold,
a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried unto him, saying, Have
mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of David, my daughter is grievously vexed with a
devil. But he answered her not a word. And his disciples came and besought him,
saying, Send her away, for she cries after us. But he answered and said, I am
not sent, but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Then came she and
worshipped him, saying, Lord, help me. But he answered and said, It is not meet
to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to dogs. And she said, Truth, Lord;
yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters table. Then Jesus
answered and said unto her, O woman, great is thy faith: be it unto thee even
as thou will. And her daughter was made whole from that very hour.

The third Sunday in Lent.
The collect.
WE beseech thee, Almighty God, look upon the hearty desires of thy humble
servants, and stretch forth the right hand of thy Majesty to be our defense
against all our enemies, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. Ephesians. 5.1.
BE ye therefore followers of God, as dear children; and walk in love, as
Christ also has loved us, and has given himself for us, an offering and a
sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor. But fornication, and all
uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be once named amongst you, as becomes
saints; neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not
convenient; but rather giving of thanks. For this ye know, that no whoremonger,
nor unclen person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater, has any inheritance
in the kingdom of Christ, and of God. Let no man deceive you with vain words:
for because of these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience. Be not ye therefore partakers with them; For ye were sometimes
darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord: walk as children of light; (For the
fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness, and righteousness, and truth) proving
what is acceptable unto the Lord. And have no fellowship with the unfruitful
works of darkness, but rather reprove them: For it is a shame even to speak of
those things which are done of them in secret. But all things that are
reproved, are made manifest by the light: for whatsoever does make manifest, is
light. Wherefore he says, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead,
and Christ shall give thee light.

The Gospel. S. Luke. 11.14.
JEsus was casting out a devil, and it was dumb. And it came to pass when the
devil was gone out, the dumb spoke; and the people wondered. But some of them
said, He casts out devils through Beelzebub, the chief of the devils. And
other tempting him, sought of him a sign from heaven. But he knowing their
thoughts, said unto them, Every kingdom divided against it self, is brought to
desolation; and a house divided against a house, falls. If Satan also be
divided against himself, how shall his kingdom stand? because ye say that I
cast out devils through Beelzebub. And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by
whom do your sons cast them out? therefore shall they be your judges. But if I
with the finger of God cast out devils, no doubt the kingdom of God is come
upon you. When a strong man armed keeps his palace, his goods are in peace;
but when a stronger then he shall come upon him, and overeome him, he takes
from him all his armor wherein he trusted, and divides his spoils. He that is
not with me, is against me: and he that gathers not with me, scatters. When
the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks through dry places, seeking
rest; and finding none, he says, I will return unto my house whence I came
out. And when he comes, he finds it swept and garnished. Then goes he and
takes to him seven other spirits more wicked then himself, and they enter in,
and dwell there; and the last state of that man is worse then the first. And it
came to pass as he spoke these things, a certain woman of the company lift up
her voice, and said unto him, Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps
which thou have sucked. But he said, Yea, rather blessed are they that hear the
Word of God, and keep it.

The fourth Sunday in Lent.
The collect.
GRant, we beseech thee, Almighty God, that we, who for our evil deeds do
worthily deserve to be punished, by the comfort of thy grace may mercifully be
relieved, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

The Epistle. Gal. 4.21.
TEll me that desire to be under the law, do ye not hear the law? For it is
written, that Abraham had two sons, the one by a bond-maid, the other by a
freewoman. But he who was of the bondwoman, was born after the flesh; but he
of the freewoman was by promise. Which things are an allegory: for these are
the two covenants; the one from the mount Sinai, which gendreth to bondage,
which is Agar. For this Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and answers to
Jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage with her children. But Jerusalem
which is above is free; which is the mother of us all. For it is written,
Rejoice thou barren that bear not; break forth and cry; thou that
traivailest not: for the desolate has many mo children then she which has an
husband. Now we brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of promise. But as
then, he that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the
spirit; even so it is now. Nevertheless, what says the Scripture? Cast out the
bondwoman and her son; for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with
the son of the freewoman. So then, brethren, we are not children of the
bondwoman, but of the free.

The Gospel. S. John. 6.1.
JEsus went over the sea of Galilee, which is the sea of Tiberias. And a great
multitude followed him, because they saw his miracles which he did on them that
were diseased. And Jesus went up into a mountain, and there he sat with his
disciples. And the passover, a feast of the Jews, was nigh. When Jesus then
lift up his eyes, and saw a great company come unto him, he says unto Philip,
Whence shall we buy bread, that these may eat? (And this he said to prove him;
for he himself knew what he would do.) Philip answered him, Two hundred
peny-worth of bread is not sufficient for them, that every one of them may take
a little. One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, says unto him,
There is a lad here, which has five barley-loaves, and two small fishes: but
what are they among so many? And Jesus said, Make the men sit down. Now there
was much grass in the place. So the men sat down, in number about five
thousand. And Jesus took the loaves, and when he had given thanks, he
distributed to the disciples, and the disciples to them that were set down, and
likewise of the fishes as much as they would. When they were filled, he said
unto his disciples, Gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost.
Therefore they gathered them together, and filled twelve baskets with the
fragments of the five barley-loaves, which remained over and above unto them
that had eaten. Then those men, when they had seen the miracle that Jesus did,
said, This is of a truth that Prophet that should come into the world.

The fifth Sunday in Lent.
The collect.
WE beseech thee, Almighty God, mercifully to look upon thy people; that by thy
great goodness they may be governed and preserved evermore, both in body and
soul, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. Heb. 9.11.
CHrist being come an high Priest of good things to come, by a greater and more
perfect tabernacle, not made with hands; that is to say, not of this building;
neither by the blood of goats and calves; but by his own blood he entered in
once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us. For if the
blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean,
sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh; how much more shall the blood of
Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God,
purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living God? And for this
cause he is the mediator of the new Testament, that by means of death, for the
redemption of the transgressions that were under the first Testament, they
which are called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance.

The Gospel. S. John 8.46.
JEsus said, Which of you convinces me of sin? And if I say the truth, why do
ye not believe me? He that is of God, hears Gods words; ye therefore hear
them not, because ye are not of God. Then answered the Jews, and said unto him,
Say we not well, that thou art a Samaritan, and have a devil? Jesus answered, I
have not a devil, but I honor my Father, and ye do dishonor me. And I seek
not mine own glory; there is one that seeks and judges. Verily verily I say
unto you, If a man keep my saying, he shall never see death. Then said the Jews
unto him, Now we know that thou have a devil. Abraham is dead, and the
prophets; and thou say, If a man keep my saying, he shall never taste of
death. Art thou greater than our father Abraham, which is dead? and the
prophets are dead: whom make thou thy self? Jesus answered, If I honor my
self, my honor is nothing; it is my Father that honors me, of whom ye say,
that he is your God; yet ye have not known him; but I know him: and if I should
say, I know him not, I shall be a liar like unto you; but I know him, and keep
his saying. Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was
glad. Then said the Jews unto him, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and have
thou seen Abraham? Jesus said unto them, Verily verily, I say unto you, Before
Abraham was, I am. Then took they up stones to cast at him: but Jesus hid
himself, and went out of the temple.

The Sunday next before Easter.
The collect.
ALmighty and everlasting God, who of thy tender love toward mankind, have
sent thy Son, our Savior Jesus Christ, to take upon him our flesh, and to
suffer death upon the cross; that all mankind should follow the example of his
great humility; Mercifully grant, that we may both follow the example of his
patience, and also be made partakers of his resurrection, through the same
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. Phil. 2.5.
LEt this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: who being in the form
of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God: but made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the
likeness of men: and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore God also
has highly exalted him, and given him a Name which is above every name; that
at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in
earth, and things under the earth; and that every tongue should confess that
Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 27.1.
WHen the morning was come, all the chief priests and elders of the people took
counsel against Jesus to put him to death. And when they had bound him, they
led him away, and delivered him to Pontius Pilate the governor. Then Judas who
had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned, repented himself, and
brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders,
saying, I have sinned, in that I have betrayed the innocent blood. And they
said, What is that to us? see thou to that. And he cast down the pieces of
silver in the temple, and departed, and went and hanged himself. And the chief
priests took the silver pieces, and said, It is not lawful for to put them into
the treasury, because it is the price of blood. And they took counsel, and
bought with them the potters field to bury strangers in. Wherefore that field
was called, The field of blood unto this day. (Then was fulfilled that which
was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying, And they took the thirty pieces of
silver, the price of him that was valued, whom they of the children of Israel
did value, and gave them for the potters field, as the Lord appointed me.) And
Jesus stood before the governor; and the governor asked him, saying, Art thou
the King of the Jews? and Jesus said unto him, Thou seyest. And when he was
accused of the chief priests and elders, he answered nothing. Then says Pilate
unto him, Hear thou not how many things they witness against thee? And he
answered him to never a word, insomuch that the governor marvelled greatly.
Now at that feast the governor was wont to release unto the people a prisoner,
whom they would. And they had then a notable prisoner, called Barabbas.
Therefore when they were gathered together, Pilate said unto them, whom will ye
that I release unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus, which is called Christ? For he
knew that for envy they had delivered him. When he was set down on the
judgment seat, his wife sent unto him, saying, Have thou nothing to do with
that just man: for I have suffered many things this day in a dream because of
him. But the chief priests and elders persuaded the multitude that they should
ask Barabbas, and destroy Jesus. The governor answered and said unto them,
Whether of the twain will ye that I release unto you? They said, Barabbas.
Pilate says unto them, What shall I do then with Jesus, which is called
Christ? They all say unto him, Let him be crucified. And the governor said,
Why, what evil has he done? But they cried out the more, saying, Let him be
crucified. When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but that rather a
tumult was made, he took water, and washed his hands before the multitude,
saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person: see ye to it. Then
answered all the people, and sid, His blood be on us, and on our children. Then
released he Barabbas unto them: and when he had scourged Jesus, he delivered
him to be crucified. Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the
common hall, and gathered unto him the whole band of soldiers. And they
stripped him, and put on him a scarlet robe. And when they had platted a crown
of thorns, they put it upon his head, and a reed in his right hand: and they
bowed the knee before him, and mocked him, saying, Hail, king of the Jews. And
they spit upon him, and took the reed, and smote him on the head. And after
that they had mocked him, they took the robe off from him, and put his own
raiment on him, and led him away to crucify him. And as they came out, they
found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name: him they compelled to bear his cross. And
when they were come unto a place called Golgotha, that is to say, a place of a
scull, they gave him vinegar to drink, mingled with gall: and when he had
tasted thereof, he would not drink. And they crucified him, and parted his
garments, casting lots: that it might be fulfilled, which was spoken by the
prophet, They parted my garments among them, and upon my vesture did they cast
lots. And sitting down, they watched him there; and set up over his head his
accusation written, THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS. Then were there two
thieves crucified with him: one on the right hand, and another on the left. And
they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads, and saying, Thou that
destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three days, save thy self: if thou be
the Son of God, come down from the cross. Likewise also the chief priests
mocking him, with the scribes and elders, said, He saved others, himsetf he
cannot save: if he be the King of Israel, let him now come down from the cross,
and we will believe him. He trusted in God; let him deliver him now if he will
have him: for he said, I am the Son of God. The thieves also which were
crucified with him, cast the same in his teeth. Now from the sixth hour there
was darkness over all the land, unto the ninth hour. And about the ninth hour,
Jeses cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli, lama sabachtbani? that is to
say, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Some of them that stood there,
when they heard that, said, This man calls for Elias. And straightway one of
them ran, and took a sponge and filled it with vinegar, and put it on a reed,
and gave him to drink. The rest said, Let be, let us see whether Elias will
come to save him. Jesus, when he had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up
the ghost. And behold, the vail of the temple was rent in twain from the top to
the bottom, and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent, and the graves were
opened, and many bodies of saints which slept, arose and came out of the graves
after his refurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto many.
Now when the centurion, and they that were with him, watching Jesus, saw the
earthquake, and those things that were done, they feared greatly, saying, Truly
this was the Son of God.

Monday before Easter.
For the Epistle. Isai. 43.1.
WHo is this that comes from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah? this that
is glorious in his apparel, traveling in the greatness of his strength? I that
speak in righteousness, mighty to save. Wherefore art thou red in thine
apparel, and thy garments like him that treads in the wine-fat? I have trodden
the wine press alone, and of the people there was none with me: for I will
tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury, and their blood shall be
sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment. For the day of
vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come. And I looked
and there was none to help; and I wondered that there was none to uphold;
therefore mine own arm brought salvation unto me, and my fury it upheld me. And
I will tread down the people in mine anger, and make them drunk in my fury, ana
I will bring down their strength to the earth. I will mention the loving
kindnesses of the Lord, and the praises of the Lord, according to all that the
Lord has bestowed on us, and the great goodness toward the house of Israel,
which he has bestowed on them, according to his mercies, and according to the
multitude of his loving kindnesses. For he said, Surely they are my people,
children that will not lie: so he was their Savior. In all their affliction he
was afflicted, and the angel of his presence saved them: in his love, and in
his pity he redeemed them, and he bare them, and carried them all the days of
old. But they rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit, therefore he was turned to
be their enemy, and he fought against them. Then he remembered the days of old,
Moses and his people, saying, Where is he that brought them up out of the sea,
with the shepherd of his flock? Where is he that put his holy spirit within
him? that led them by the right hand of Moses, with his glorious arm, dividing
the water before them, to make himself an everlasting Name? That led them
through the deep as an horse in the wilderness, that they should not stumble?
as a beast goes down into the valley, the spirit of the Lord caused him to
rest: so did thou lead thy people, to make thy self a glorious Name. Look
down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy holiness, and of thy
glory: Where is thy zeal, and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels, and of
thy mercies toward me? are they restrained? Doubtless thou art our Father,
though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not: thou, O Lord,
art our Father, our Redeemer, thy Name is from everlasting. O Lord, why have
thou made us to err from thy ways? and hardened our heart from thy fear? Return
for thy servants sake, the tribes of thine inheritance. The people of thy
holiness have possessed it but a little while: our adversaries have trodden down
thy sanctuary. We are thine, thou never barest rule over them; they were not
called by thy Name.

The Gospel S. Mark 14.1.
AFter two days was the feast of the passover, and of unleavened bread: and the
chief priests and the scribes sought how they might take him by craft, and put
him to death. But they said, Not on the feast day, lest there be an uprore of
the people. And being in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, as he sat at
meat, there came a woman, having an alabaster-box of ointment of spikenard,
very precious, and she brake the box, and poured it on his head. And there were
some that had indignation within themselves, and said, Why was this waste of
the ointment made? For it might have been sold for more then three hundred
pence, and have been given to the poor: and they murmured against her. And
Jesus said, Let her alone, why trouble you her? she has wrought a good work on
me. For ye have the poor with you always, and whenever ye will, ye may do
them good: but me ye have not always. She has done what she could: she is come
aforehand to anoint my body to the burying. Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever
this Gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world, this also that she
has done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her. And Judas Iscariot, one of
the twelve, went unto the chief priests to betray him unto them. And when they
heard it, they were glad, and promised to give him money. And he sought how he
might conveniently betray him. And the first day of unleavened bread, when they
killed the passover, his disciples said unto him, Where will thou that we go
and prepare, that thou may eat the passover? And he sends forth two of his
disciples, and says unto them. Go ye into the city, and there shall meet you a
man bearing a pitcher of water: follow him. And wheresoever he shall go in, say
ye to the good man of the house, The master says, Where is the guest-chamber,
where I shall eat the passover with my disciples? And he will show you a large
upper room furnished and prepared, there make ready for us. And his disciples
went forth, and came into the city, and found as he had said unto them: and
they made ready the passover. And in the evening he comes with the twelve. And
as they sat, and did eat, Jesus said, Verily I say unto you, one of you which
eats with me, shall betray me. And they began to be sorrowful, and to say
unto him one by one, Is it I? and another said, Is it I? And he answered and
said unto them, It is one of the twelve that dippeth with me in the dish. The
Son of man indeed goes, as it is written of him: but woe to that man by whom
the Son of man is betrayed: good were it for that man if he had never been
born. And as they did eat, Jesus took bread, and blessed, and brake it, and
gave to them, and said, Take, eat: This is my body. And he took the cup, and
when he had given thanks, he gave it to them: and they all drank of it. And he
said unto them, This is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many.
Verily I say unto you, I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine, until
that day that I drink it new in the kingdom of God. And when they had sung un
hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives. And Jesus says unto them, All ye
shall be offended because of me this night: for it is written, I will smite the
shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered. But after that I am risen, I will
go before you into Galilee. But Peter said unto him, Although all shall be
offended, yet will not I. And Jesus says unto him, Verily I say unto thee,
that this day, even in this night, before the cock crow twice, thou shall deny
me thrice. But he spoke the more vehemently, If I should die with thee, I will
not deny thee in any wise. Likewise also said they all. And they came to a
place which was named Gethsemane: and he says to his disciples, Sit ye here,
while I shall pray. And he takes with him Peter, and James, and John, and
began to be sore amazed, and to be very heavy, and says unto them, My soul is
exceeding sorrowful unto death; tarry ye here, and watch. And he went forward a
little, and fell on the ground, and prayed, that if it were possible the hour
might pass from him. And he said, Abba, Father; all things are possible unto
thee; take away this cup from me: nevertheless, not what I will, but what thou will. And he comes and finds them sleeping, and says unto Peter, Simon,
sleep thou? could not thou watch one hour? Watch ye and pray, lest ye
enter into temptation: the spirit truly is ready, but the flesh is weak. And
again he went away, and prayed and spoke the same words. And when he returned,
he found them asleep again, (for their eyes were heavy) neither wist they what
to answer him. And he comes the third time, and says unto them, Sleep on now,
and take your rest: it is enough, the hour is come; Behold, the Son of man is
betrayed into the hands of sinners. Rise up, let us go; lo, he that betrayeth
me is at hand. And immediately, while he spoke, comes Judas, one of the
twelve, and with him a great multitude with swords, and staves, from the chief
Priests, and the Scribes, and the Elders. And he that betrayed him, had given
them a token, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he; take him, and
lead him wa safely. And as soon as he was come, he goes straightway to him,
and says, Master, master, and kissed him. And they laid their hands on him,
and took him. And one of them that stood by, drew a sword, and smote a servant
of the high Priest and cut off his ear. And Jesus answered, and said unto them,
Are ye come out as against a thief with swords and with staves, to take me? I
was daily with you in the temple, teaching, and ye took me not: but the
Scriptures must be fulfilled. And they all forsook him, and fled. And there
followed him a certain young man, having a linen cloth cast about his naked
boby; and the young men laid hold on him. And he left the linen cloth, and fled
from them naked. And they led Jesus away to the high Priest, and with him were
assembled all the chief Priests, and the Elders, and the Scribes; and Peter
followed him afar off, even, into the the palace of the high Priest: and he sat
with the servants, and warmed himself at the fire. And the chief Priests, and
all the council sought for witness against Jesus to put him to death, and found
none. For many bare false witness against him, but their witness agreed not
together. And there arose certain, and bare false witness against him, saying,
We heard him say, I will destroy this temple that is made with hands, and
within three days I will build another made without hands. But neither so did
their witness agree together. And the high Priest stood up in the midst, and
asked Jesus, saying, Answerest thou nothing? what is it which these witness
against thee? But he held his peace, and answered nothing. Again the high
Priest asked him, and said unto him, Art thou the Christ, the Son of the
Blessed? And Jesus said, I am; and ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the
right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. Then the high Priest
rent his clothes, and says, What need we any further witnesses? ye have heard
the blasphemy: what think ye? And they all condemned him to be guilty of death.
And some began to spit on him, and to cover his face, and to buffet him, and to
say unto him, Prophecy; and the servants did strike him with the palms of
their hands. And as Peter was beneath in the palace, there comes one of the
maids of the high priest; and when she saw Peter warming himself, she looked
upon him, and said, And thou also wast with Jesus of Nazareth. But he denied,
saying, I know not, neither understand I what thou say. And he went out into
the porch, and the cock crew. And a maid saw him again, and began to say to
them that stood by. This is one of them. And he denied it again. And a little
after, they that stood by said again to Peter, Surely thou art one of them; for
thou art a Galilean, and thy speech agrees thereto. But he began to curse and
to swear, saying, I know not this man of whom ye speak. And the second time the
cock crew. And Peter called to mind the word that Jesus said unto him, Before
the crow twice, thou shall deny me thrice. And when he thought thereon, he wept.

Tuesday before Easter.
For the Epistle. Isaiah 50.5.
THe Lord God has opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious, neither turned
away back. I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked of
the hair: I hid not my face from shame and spitting. For the Lord God will help
me, therefore shall I not be confounded: therefore have I set my face like a
flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed. He is near that justifies me,
who will contend with me? Let us stand together; who is mine adversary? let him
come near to me. Behold, the Lord God will help me; who is he that shall
condemn me? Lo, they all shall wax old as a garment: the moth shall eat them
up. Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his
servant, that walks in darkness, and has no light? let him trust in the Name
of the Lord, and stay upon his God. Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that
compass your selves about with sparks; walk in the light of your fire, and in
the sparks that ye have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand, ye shall lie
down in sorrow.

The Gospel. S. Mark 15.1.
ANd straightway in the morning, the chief priests held a consultation with the
elders and scribes, and the whole council, and bound Jesus, and carried him
away, and delivered him to Pilate. And Pilate asked him, Art thou the king of
the Jews? And he answering, said unto him, Thou say it. And the chief
priests accused him of many things: but he answered nothing. And Pilate asked
him again, saying, Answerest thou nothing? behold how many things they witness
against thee. But Jesus yet answered nothing: so that Pilate marvelled. Now at
that feast he released unto them one prisoner, whomsoever they desired. And
there was one named Barabbas, which lay bound with them that had made
insurrection with him, who had committed murder in the insurrection. And the
multitude crying aloud, began to desire him to do as he had ever done unto
them. But Pilate answered them, saying, Will ye that I release unto you the
king of the Jews? (For he knew that the chief priests had delivered him for
envy) But the chief priests moved the people, that he should rather release
Barabbas unto them. And Pilate answered, and said again unto them, What will ye
then that I shall do unto him whom ye call the king of the Jews? And they cried
out again, Crucify him. Then Pilate said unto them, Why, what evil has he
done? And they cried out the more exceedingly, Crucify him. And so Pilate,
willing to content the people, released Barabbas unto them, and delivered
Jesus, when he had scourged him, to be crucified. And the soldiers led him
away into the hall called Pretorium and they call together the whole band. And
they clothed him with purple, and platted a crown of thorns, and put it about
his head, and began to salute him, Hail king of the Jews. And they smote him on
the head with a reed, and did spit upon him, and bowing their knees, worshipped
him. And when they had mocked him, they took off the purple from him, and put
his own clothes on him, and led him out to crucify him. And they compel one
Simon a Cyrenean, who passed by, coming out of the country, the father of
Alexander and Rufus, to bear his cross. And they bring him unto the place
Golgotha, which is, being interpreted, the place of a scull. And they gave him
to drink, wine mingled with myrrh; but he received it not. And when they had
crucified him, they parted his garments, casting lots upon them, what every man
should take. And it was the third hour, and they crucified him. And the
superscription of his accusation was written over, THE KING OF THE JEWS. And
with him they crucify two thieves, the one on his right hand, and the other on
his left. And the Scripture was fulfilled, which says, And he was numbered with
the transgressors. And they that passed by, railed on him, wagging their
heads, and saying, Ah, thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in
three days, save thy self, and come down from the cross. Likewise also the
chief priests mocking, said among themselves, with the scribes, He saved
others, himself he cannot save. Let Christ the king of Israel descend now from
the cross, that we may see and believe. And they that were crucified with him,
reviled him. And when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness over the
whole land, until the ninth hour. And at the ninth hour, Jesus cried with a
loud voice, saying, Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachtbani? which is, being interpreted,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And some of them that stood by, when
they heard it, said, Behold, he calls Elias. And one ran, and filled sponge
full of vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink, saying, Let
alone; let us see whether Elias will come to take him down. And Jesus cried
with a loud voice, and gave up the ghost. And the vail of the temple was rent
in twain from the top to the bottom. And when the centurion which stood over
against him, saw that he so cried out, and gave up the ghost, he said, Truly
this man was the Son of God.

Wednesday before Easter.
The Epistle. Heb. 9.16.
WHere a testament is, there must also of necessity be the death of the
testatour: for a testament is of force after men are dead; otherwise it is of
no strength at all whilst the testatour lives. Whereupon, neither the first
testament was dedicated without blood: for when Moses had spoken every precept
to all the people, according to the law, he took the blood of calves, and of
goats, with water and scarlet wool, and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book
and all the people, saying, This is the blood of the testament, which God has
enjoined unto you. Moreover, he sprinkled likewise with blood both the
tabernacle, and all the vessels of the ministry. And almost all things are by
the law purged with blood; and without shedding of blood is no remission. It
was therefore necessary that the patterns of things in the heavens should be
purified with these; but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices
then these. For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands,
which are the figures of the true, but into heaven it self, now to appear in
the presence of God for us; nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the
high priest enters into the holy place every year with blood of others: for
then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the world; but now
once in the end of the world has he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice
of himself. And as it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the
Judgment: so Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many; and unto them
that look for him, shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation.

The Gospel. S. Luke 22.1.
NOw the feast of unleavened bread drew nigh, which is called the passover. And
the chief Priests and Scribes sought how they might kill him; for they feared
the people. Then entered Satan into Judas surnamed Iscariot, being of the number
of the twelve. And he went his way, and communed with the chief Priests and
captains how he might betray him unto them. And they were glad, and covenanted
to give him money. And he promised, and sought opportunity to betray him unto
them, in the absence of the multitude. Then came the day of unleavened bread,
when the passover must be killed. And he sent Peter and John, saying, Go and
prepare us the passover, that we may eat. And they said unto him, Where will thou that we prepare? And he said unto them, Behold, when ye are entered into
the city, there shall a man meet you, bearing a pitcher of water; follow him
into the house where he enters in. And ye shall say unto the good man of the
house, The master says unto thee, Where is the guest-chamber, where I shall
eat the passover with my disciples? And he shall show you a large upper room
furnished; there make ready. And they went, and found as he had said unto them:
and they made ready the passover. And when the hour was come, he sat down, and
the twelve Apostles with him. And he said unto them, With desire I have desired
to eat this passover with you before I suffer. For I say unto you, I will not
any more eat thereof, until it be fulfilled in the kingdom of God. And he took
the cup, and gave thanks, and said, Take this, and divide it among your selves.
For I say unto you, I will not drink of the fruit of the vine, until the
kingdom of God shall come. And he took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it,
and gave unto them, saying, This is my body, which is given for you: this do in
remembrance of me. Likewise also the cup after supper, saying, This cup is the
new Testament in my blood, which is shed for you. But behold, the hand of him
that betrayeth me, is with me on the table. And truly the Son of man goes as
it was determined; but woe unto that man, by whom he is betrayed. And they began
to enquire among themselves, which of them it was that should do this thing.
And there was also a strife among them, which of them should be accounted the
greatest. And he said unto them, The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship
over them, and they that exercise authority upon them, are called benefactours.
But ye shall not be so; but he that is greatest among you, let him be as the
younger; and he that is chief, as he that does serve. For whether is greater,
he that sits at meat, or he that serves? is not he that sits at meat?
But I am among you as he that serves. Ye are they which have continued with me
in my temptations. And I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father has
appointed unto me; that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit
on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. And the Lord said, Simon,
Simon, behold, Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat:
But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not; and when thou art
converted, strengthen thy brethren. And he said unto him, Lord, I am ready to
go with thee both into prison and to death. And he said, I tell thee Peter, the
cock shall not crow this day, before that thou shall thrice deny that thou
know me. And he said unto them, When I sent you without purse, and scrip,
and shoes, lacked ye any thing? And they said, Nothing. Then said he unto them,
But now, he that has a purse, let him take it, and likewise his scrip: and he
that has no sword, let him sell his garment, and buy one. For I say unto you,
that this that is written, must yet be accomplished in me, And he was reckoned
among the transgressors: for the things concerning me have an end. And they
said, Lord, behold, here are two swords. And he said unto them, It is enough.
And he came out, and went, as he was wont, to the mount of Olives, and his
disciples also followed him. And when he was at the place, he said unto them,
Pray, that ye enter not into temptation. And he was withdrawn from them about a
stones cast, and kneeled down; and prayed, saying, Father, if thou be willing,
remove this cup from me: nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done. And
there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him. And being in
an agony, he prayed more earnestly; and his sweat was as it were great drops of
blood falling down to the ground. And when he rose up from prayer, and was come
to his disciples, he found them sleeping for sorrow, and said unto them, Why
sleep ye? rise and pray, lest ye enter into temptation. And while he yet spoke,
behold, a multitude, and he that was called Judas, one of the twelve, went
before them, and drew near unto Jesus to kiss him. But Jesus said unto him,
Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a kiss? When they who were about him,
saw what would follow, they said unto him, Lord, shall we smite with the sword?
And one of them smote the servant of the high Priest, and cut off his right
ear. And Jesus answered and said, Suffer ye thus far. And he touched his ear,
and healed him. Then Jesus said unto the chief Priests, and captains of the
temple, and the Elders who were come to him, Be ye come out as against a thief,
with swords and staves? When I was daily with you in the temple, ye stretched
forth no hands against me: but this is your hour, and the power of darkness.
Then took they him, and led him, and brought him into the high Priests house,
and Peter followed afar off. And when they had kindled a fire in the midst of
the hall, and were set down together, Peter sat down among them. But a certain
maid beheld him, as he sat by the fire, and earnestly looked upon him, and
said, This man was also with him. And he denied him, saying, Woman, I know him
not. And after a little while another saw him, and said, Thou art also of them.
And Peter said, Man, I am not. And about the space of one hour after, another
confidently affirmed, saying, Of a truth this fellow also was with him; for he
is a Galilean. And Peter said, Man, I know not what thou say. And
immediately while he yet spoke, the cock crew. And the Lord turned, and looked
upon Peter; and Peter remembered the word of the Lord, how he had said unto him,
Before the cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice. And Peter went out and wept
bitterly. And the men that held Jesus, mocked him, and smote him. And when they
had blind-folded him, they struck him on the face, and asked him, saying,
Prophecy, who is it that smote thee? And many other things blasphemously spoke
they against him. And as soon as it was day, the elders of the people, and the
chief priests and the scribes came together, and led him into their council,
saying, Art thou the Christ? tell us. And he said unto them, If I tell you, you
will not believe. And if I also ask you, you will not answer me, nor let me go.
Hereafter shall the Son of man sit on the right hand of the power of God. Then
said they all, Art thou the Son of God? And he said unto them, Ye say that I
am. And they said, What need we any further witness? for we our selves have
heard of his own mouth.

Thursday before Easter.
The Epistle. 1 Cor. 11.17.
IN this that I declare unto you, I praise you not; that you come together, not
for the better, but for the worse. For first of all, when ye come together in
the Church. I hear that there be divisions among you, and I partly believe it.
For there must be also heresies among you, that they who are approved may be
made manifest among you. When ye come together therefore into one place, this
is not to eat the Lords supper: For in eating, every one takes before other
his own supper: and one is hungry, and another is drunken. What, have ye not
houses to eat and to drink in? or despise ye the Church of God, and shame them
that have not? What shall I say to you? shall I praise you in this? I praise
you not. For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you,
That the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread; and
when he had given thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat; this is my body,
which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of me. After the same manner
also he took the cup, when he had supped, saying, This cup is the new testament
in my blood: this do ye as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. For as
often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords death till
he come. Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the
Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. But let a
man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup.
For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to
himself, not discerning the Lords body. For this cause many are weak and sickly
among you, and many sleep. For if we would judge our selves, we should not be
judged. But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should
not be condemned with the world. Wherefore, my brethren, when ye come together
to eat, tarry one for another. And if any man hunger, let him eat at home; that
ye come not together unto condemnation. And the rest will I set in order when I
come.

The Gospel. S. Luke 23.1.
THe whole multitude of them arose, and led him unto Pilate. And they began to
accuse him, saying, We found this fellow perverting the nation, and forbidding
to give tribute to Caesar, saying, that he himself is Christ a king. And Pilate
asked him, saying, Art thou the King of the Jews? And he answered him and said,
Thou say it. Then said Pilate to the chief Priests, and to the people, I
find no fault in this man. And they were the more fierce, saying, He stirs
up the people, teaching throughout all Jewry, beginning from Galilee to this
place. When Pilate heard of Galilee, he asked whether the man were a Galilean.
And as soon as he knew that he belonged unto Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him
to Herod, who himself was also at Jerusalem at that time. And when Herod saw
Jesus, he was exceeding glad, for he was desirous to see him of a long season,
because he had heard many things of him, and he hoped to have seen some miracle
done by him. Then he questioned with him in many words; but he answered him
nothing. And the chies Priests and Scribes stood and vehemently accused him.
And Herod with his men of war set him at naught, and mocked him and arrayed him
in a gorgeous robe, and sent him again to Pilate. And the same day Pilate and
Herod were made friends together; for before they were at enmity between
themselves. And Pilate, when he had called together the chief priests, and the
rulers, and the people, said unto them, Ye have brought this man unto me, as
one that perverteth the people, and behold, I having examined him before you,
have found no fault in this man touching those things whereof ye accuse him:
No, nor yet Herod: for I sent you to him, and lo, nothing worthy of death is
done unto him. I will therefore chastise him, and release him. For of necessity
he must release one unto them at the feast. And they cried out all at once,
saying, Away with this man, and release unto us Barabbas: (Who for a certain
sedition made in the city, and for murder was cast in prison) Pilate therefore
willing to release Jesus, spoke again to them. But they cried, saying, Crucify
him, crucify him. And he said unto them the third time, Why, what evil has he
done? I have found no cause of death, in him: I will therefore chastise him,
and let him go. And they were instant with loud voices, requiring that he might
be crucified: and the voices of them, and of the chief priests prevailed. And
Pilate gave sentence, that it should be as they required. And he released unto
them, him that for sedition and murder was cast into prison, whom they had
desired; but he delivered Jesus to their will. And as they led him away, they
laid hold upon one Simon a Cyrenean, coming out of the country, and on him
they laid the cross, that he might bear it after Jesus. And there followed him
a great company of people, and of women, who also bewailed and lamented him.
But Jesus turning unto them, said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but
weep for your selves, and for your children. For behold, the days are coming,
in which they shall say, Blessed are the barren, and the wombs that never bare,
and the paps which never gave suck. Then shall they begin to say to the
mountains, Fall on us; and to the hills, Cover us. For if they do these things
in a green tree, what shall be done in the dry? And there were also two other
malefactors led with him to be put to death. And when they were come to the
place which is called Calvary, there they crucified him; and the malefactors,
one on the right hand, and the other on the left. Then said Jesus, Father,
forgive them, for they know not what they do. And they parted his raiment, and
cast lots. And the people stood beholding; and the rulers also with them
derided him, saying, He saved others, let him save himself, if he be Christ the
chosen of God. And the soldiers also mocked him, coming to him, and offering
him vinegar, and saying, If thou be the king of the Jews, save thy self. And a
superscription also was written over him in letters of Greek, and Latin, and
Hebrew, THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS. And one of the malefactors, which were
hanged, railed on him, saying, If thou be Christ, save thy self and us. But the
other answering, rebuked him, saying, Do not thou fear God, seeing thou art
in the same condemnation? And we indeed justly; for we receive the due reward
of our deeds, but this man has done nothing amiss. And he said unto Jesus,
Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom. And Jesus said unto him,
Verily I say unto thee, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise. And it was
about the sixth hour. And there was a darkness over all the earth, until the
ninth hour. And the sun was darkened, and the vail of the temple was rent in
the midst. And when Jesus had cried with a loud voice, he said, Father, into
thy hands I commend my spirit: and having said thus, he gave up the ghost. Now
when the Centurion saw what was done, he glorified God, saying, Certainly this
was a righteous man. And all the people that came together to that sight,
beholding the things that were done, smote their breasts, and returned. And all
his acquaintance, and the women that followed him from Galilee, stood afar off,
beholding these things.

Good Friday.
The Collects.
ALmighty God, we beseech thee graciously to behold this thy family, for which
our Lord Jesus Christ was contented to be betrayed, and given up into the hands
of wicked men, and to suffer death upon the cross, who now lives and reigns
with thee and the Holy Ghost, ever one God, world without end. Amen.

ALmighty and everlasting God, by whose Spirit the whole body of the Church is
governed and sanctified; Receive our supplications and prayers which we offer
before thee for all estates of men in thy holy Church, that every member of the
same in his vocation and ministry, may truly and godly serve thee, through our
Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. Amen.

O Merciful God, who have made all men, and hate nothing that thou have made,
nor would the death of a sinner, but rather that he should be converted and
live; Have mercy upon all Jews, Turks, Infidels, and Heretics, and take from
them all ignorance; hardness of heart, and contempt of thy Word; and so fetch
them home, blessed Lord, to thy flock, that they may be saved among the remnant
of the true Israelites, and be made one fold under one Shepherd Jesus Christ
our Lord, who lives and reigns with thee and the holy Spirit, one God, world
without end. Amen.

The Epistle. Heb. 10.1.
THe law having a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of the
things, can never with those sacrifices which they offered year by year
continually, make the comers thereunto perfect: for then would they not have
ceased to be offered; because that the worshippers once purged, should have had
no more conscience of sins. But in those sacrifices there is a remembrance
again made of sins every year. For it is not possible that the blood of bulls
and of goats should take away sins: Wherefore when he comes into the world, he
says, Sacrifice and offering thou would not, but a body have thou prepared
me: In burnt-offerings, and sacrifices for sin thou have had no pleasure: Then
said I, Lo, I come (in the Volume of the book it is written of me) to do thy
will, O God. Above, when he said, Sacrifice and offering, and burnt-offerings,
and offering for sin thou would not, neither had pleasure therein, which
are offered by the law: Then said he, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God. He
takes away the first, that he may establish the second. By the which will we
are sanctified, through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.
And every priest stands daily ministering, and offering often times the same
sacrifices which can never take away sins. But this man after he had offered
one sacrifice for sins, for ever sat down on the right hand of God; from
henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his footstool. For by one
offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified: Whereof the Holy
Ghost also is a witness to us: For after that he had said before, This is the
covenant that I will make with them that after those days, says the Lord, I
will put my laws into their hearts, and in their minds will I write them; and
their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. Now where remission of these
is, there is no more offering for sin. Having therefore, brethren, boldness to
enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, which he
has consecrated for us, through the vail, that is to say, his flesh: And
having an high Priest over the house of God; let us draw near with a true
heart, in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water. Let us hold fast the
profession of our faith without wavering: (for he is faithful that promised)
And let us consider one another to provoke unto love, and to good works; not
forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is; but
exhorting one another: and so much the more, as ye see the day approaching.

The Gospel S. John 19.1.
PIlate therefore took Jesus, and scourged him. And the soldiers platted a
crown of thorns, and put it on his head, and they put on him a purple robe, and
said, Hail king of the Jews: And they smote him with their hands. Pilate
therefore went forth again, and says unto them, Behold, I bring him forth to
you, that ye may know that I find no fault in him. Then came Jesus forth,
wearing the crown of thorns, and the purple robe. And Pilate says unto them,
Behold the man. When the chief Priests therefore and officers saw him, they
cried out, saying, Crucify him, crucify him. Pilate says unto them, Take ye
him, and crucify him: for I find no fault in him. The Jews answered him, We
have a law, and by our law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of
God. When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he was the more afraid; and went
again into the judgment-hall, and says unto Jesus, Whence art thou? But Jesus
gave him no answer. Then says Pilate unto him, Speak thou not unto me?
know thou not, that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to release
thee? Jesus answered, Thou could have no power at all against me, except it
were given thee from above: therefore he that delivered me unto thee has the
greater sin. And from thenceforth Pilate sought to release him: but the Jews
cried out, saying, If thou let this man go, thou art not Cesars friend:
Whosoever makes himself a king, speaks against Caesar. When Pilate therefore
heard that saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down in the judgment seat,
in a place that is called the Pavement, but in the Hebrew, Gabbatha. And it was
the preparation of the passover, and about the sixth hour: and he says unto
the Jews, Behold your king. But they cried out, Away with him, away with him,
crucify him. Pilate says unto them, Shall I crucify your king? The chief
Priests answered, We have no king but Caesar. Then delivered he him therefore
unto them to be crucified: and they took Jesus and led him away. And he bearing
his cross, went forth into a place called the place of a scull, which is called
in the Hebrew, Golgotha: Where they crucified him, and two other with him, on
either side one, and Jesus in the midst. And Pilate wrote a title, and put it
on the cross. And the writing was, JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS. This
title then read many of the Jews: for the place where Jesus wa crucified was
nigh to the city: and it was written in Hebrew, and Greek, and Latin. Then said
the chief Priest of the Jews to Pilate, Write not, The king of the Jews; but
that he said, I am the king of the Jews. Pilate answered, What I have written,
I have written. Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took his
garments (and made four parts, to every soldier a part) and also his coat: now
the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout. They said therefore
among themselves, Let us not rend it, but cast lots for it, whose it shall be:
that the Scripture might be fulfilled, which says, They parted my raiment
among them, and for my vesture they did cast lots. These things therefore the
soldiers did. Now there stood by the cross of Jesus, his mother, and his
mothers sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalen. When Jesus
therefore saw his mother, and the disciple standing by, whom he loved, he says
unto his mother, Woman, behold thy son. Then says he to the disciple, Behold
thy mother. And from that hour that disciple took her unto his own home. After
this, Jesus knowing that all things were accomplished, that the Scripture might
be fulfilled, says, I thirst. Now there was set a vessel full of vinegar: and
they filled a sponge with vinegar, and put it upon hyssop, and put it to his
mouth. When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, It is finished:
and he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost. The Jews therefore because it was
the preparation, that the bodies should not remain upon the cross on the
sabbath day (for that sabbath day was an high day) besought Pilate that their
legs might be broken, and that they might be taken away. Then came the
soldiers, and brake the legs of the first, and of the other which was
crucified with him. But when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was dead
already, they brake not his legs. But one of the soldiers with a spear pierced
his side, and forthwith came there out blood and water. And he that saw it bare
record, and his record is true: and he knows that he says true, that ye
might believe. For these things were done, that the Scripture should be
fulfilled, A bone of him shall not be broken. And again, another Scripture
says, They shall look on him, whom they peirced.

Easter Even.
The collect.
GRant, O Lord, that as we are baptized into the death of thy blessed Son our
Savior Jesus Christ; so by continual mortifying our corrupt affections, we may
be buried with him, and that through the grave and gate of death, we may pass
to our joyful resurrection, for his merits, who died, and was buried, and rose
again for us, thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. 1 S. Pet. 3.17.
IT is better if the will of God be so, that ye suffer for well-doing, then for
evil-doing. For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust; (that he might bring us to God) being put to death in the flesh, but
quickened by the Spirit: By which also he went and preached unto the spirits in
prison; which sometime were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God
waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing; wherein few, that
is, eight souls, were saved by water. The like figure whereunto, even baptism,
does also now save us, (not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the
answer of a good conscience toward God) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ:
Who is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God, angels, and
authorities, and powers being made subject unto him.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 27.57.
WHen the even was come, there came a rich man of Arimathea, named Joseph, who
also himself was Jesus disciple. He went to Pilate, and begged the body of
Jesus, Then Pilate commanded the body to be delivered: And when Joseph had
taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean linen cloth, and laid it in his own
new tomb, which he had hewn out in the rock; and he rolled a great stone to the
door of the sepulcher, and departed. And there was Mary Magdalene, and the
other Mary sitting over against the sepulcher. Now the next day that followed
the day of the preparation, the chief Priests and Pharisees came together unto
Pilate, saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiver said, while he was yet
alive, After three days I will rise again. Command therefore that the sepulcher
be made sure until the third day, lest his disciples come by night and steal
him away, and say unto the people, He is risen from the dead: so the last
error shall be worse then the first. Pilate said unto them, Ye have a watch,
go your way, make it as sure as you can. So they went and made the sepulcher
sure, sealing the stone, and setting a watch.

Easter Day.
At Morning Prayer, instead of the Psalm, O come let us, etc. these Anthems
shall be sung or said.

CHrist our passover is sacrificed for us: therefore let us keep the feast. Not
with the old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness: but with
the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. 1 Cor. 5.7.

CHrist being raised from the dead, dies no more: death has no more dominion
over him. For in that he died, he died unto sin once: but in that he lives, he
lives unto God. Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto
sin: but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans 6.9.

CHrist is risen from the dead: and become the first fruits of them that slept.
For since by man came death: by man came also the resurrection of the dead. For
as in Adam all die: even so in Christ shall all be made alive. 1 Cor. 15.20.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;

Answer. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without
end Amen.


The Collect.
ALmighty God, who through thine only begotten Son Jesus Christ, have overcome
death, and opened unto us the gate of everlasting life; We humbly beseech thee,
that as by thy special grace preventing us, thou do put into out minds good
desires; so by thy continual help we may bring the same to good effect, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, who lives and reigns with thee, and the Holy Ghost,
ever one God, world without end. Amen.

The Epistle. Col. 3.1.
IF ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where
Christ sits on the right hand of God. Set your affection on things above,
not on things on the earth: For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ
in God. When Christ who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear
with him in glory. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth;
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscense and
covetousness, which is idolatry: For which things sake the wrath of God comes
on the children of disobedience. In the which ye also walked sometime when ye
lived in them.

The Gospel. S. John 20.1.
THe first day of the week comes Mary Magdalen early, when it was yet dark,
unto the sepulcher, and sees the stone taken away from the sepulcher. Then she
runs and comes to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved,
and says unto them, They have taken away the Lord out of the sepulcher, and we
know not where they have laid him. Peter therefore went forth, and that other
disciple, and came to the sepulcher. So they ran both together, and the other
disciple did outrun Peter, and came first to the sepulcher, and he stouping
down, and looking in, saw the linen clothes lying, yet went he not in. Then
comes Simon Peter following him, and went into the sepulcher, and feeth the
linen clothes lie; and the napkin that was about his head, not lying with the
linen clothes, but wrapped together in a place by it self. Then went in also
that other disciple which came first to the sepulcher, and he saw and believed.
For as yet they knew not the Scripture, that he must rise again from the dead.
Then the disciples went away again unto their own home.

Monday in Easter Week.
The collect.
ALmighty God, who through thy only begotten Son Jesus Christ have overcome
death, and opened unto us the gate of everlasting life; We humbly beseech thee,
that as by thy special grace preventing us, thou do put into our minds good
desires so by thy continual help we may bring the same to good effect, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, who lives and reigns with thee and the Holy Ghost,
ever one God, world without end. Amen.

For the Epistle. Acts 10.34.
PEter opened his mouth, and said, Of a truth I perceive that God is no
respecter of persons; but in every nation he that fears him, and works
righteousness, is accepted with him. The word which God sent unto the children
of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ (he is Lord of all) That word (I
say) you know, which was published throughout all Judea, and began from
Galilee, after the baptism which John preached: How God anointed Jesus of
Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and with power, who went about doing good, and
healing all that were oppressed of the devil: for God was with him. And we are
witnesses of all things which he did, both in the land of the Jews, and in
Jerusalem, whom they flew, and hanged on a tree: Him God raised up the third
day, and showed him openly; not to all the people, but unto witnesses chosen
before of God, even to us, who did eat and drink with him after he arose from
the dead. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify that
it is he who was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead. To him give
all the prophets witness that through his Name, whosoever believes in him,
shall receive remission of sins.

The Gospel. S. Luke 24.13.
BEhold, two of his disciples went that same day to a village called Emmaus,
which was from Jerusalem about threescore furlongs. And they talked together of
all these things which had happened. And it came to pass, that while they
communed together, and reasoned, Jesus himself drew near, and went with them.
But their eyes, were holden, that they should not know him. And he said unto
them, What manner of communications are these that ye have one to another, as
ye walk and are sad? And the one of them whose name was Cleopas, answering said
unto him, Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and have not known the things
which are come to pass there in these days? And he said unto them, What things?
And they said unto him, Concerning Jesus of Nazareth who was a prophet mighty
in deed and word, before God and all the people: And how the chief priests, and
our rulers delivered him to be condemned death, and have crucified him. But we
trusted that it had been he, who should have redeemed Israel: and beside all
this, to day is the third day since these things were done. Yea, and certain
women also of our company made us astonished, who were early at the sepulcher;
and when they found not his body, they came, saying, that they had also seen a
vision of angels, which said that he was alive. And certain of them who were
with us, went to the sepulcher, and found it even so as the women had said; but
him they saw not. Then he said unto them; O fools, and slow of heart to believe
all that the prophets have spoken! ought not Christ to have suffered these
things, and to enter into his glory? And beginning at Moses, and all the
prophets, he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures, the things concerning
himself. And they drew nigh unto the village, whither they went; and he made as
though he would have gone further. But they constrained him, saying, Abide with
us, for it is toward evening, and the day is far spent. And he went in to
tarry with them. And it came to pass, as he sat at meat with them, he took
bread, and blessed it, and brake, and gave to them. And their eyes were opened,
and they knew him, and he vanished out of their sight. And they said one to
another, Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked with us by the way,
and while he opened to us the Scriptures? And they rose up the same hour, and
returned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered together, and them that
were with them, saying, The Lord is risen indeed, and has appeared to Simon.
And they told what things were done in the way, and how he was known of them in
breakings of bread.

Tuesday in Easter Week.
The collect.
ALmighty God, who through thy only begotten Son Jesus Christ have overcome
death, and opened unto us the gate of everlasting life; We humbly beseech thee,
that as by thy special grace preventing us thou do put into our minds good
desires, so by thy continual help we may bring the same to good effect, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, who lives and reigns with thee, and the Holy Ghost,
ever one God, world without end. Amen.

For the Epistle. Acts 13.26.
MEn and brethren, children of the stock of Abraham, and whosoever among you
fears God, to you is the word of this salvation sent. For they that dwell at
Jerusalem, and their rulers, because they knew him not, nor yet the voices of
the prophets which are read every sabbath day, they have fulfilled them in
condemning him. And though they found no cause of death in him, yet desired
they Pilate that he should be slain. And when they had fulfilled all that was
written of him, they took him down from the tree, and laid him in a sepulcher.
But God raised him from the dead: And he was seen many days of them which came
up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, Who are his witnesses unto the people.
And we declare unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which was made unto
the fathers; God has fulfilled the same unto us their children, in that he
has raised up Jesus again, as it is also written in the second psalm, Thou art
my Son, this day have I begotten thee. And as concerning that he raised him up
from the dead, now no more to return to corruption, he said on this wise, I
will give you the sure mercies of David. Wherefore he says also in another
psalm, Thou shall not suffer thine holy one to see corruption. For David after
he had served his own generation by the will of God, fell on sleep, and was
laid unto his fathers, and saw corruption. But he whom God raised again, saw no
corruption: Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren, that through this
man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins: And by him all that believe
are justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the law
of Moses. Beware therefore, lest that come upon you, which is spoken of in the
prophets; Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish: for I work a work in
your days, a work which you shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it
unto you.

The Gospel S. Luke 24.36.
JEsus himself stood in the midst of them, and says unto them, Peace be unto
you. But they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they had seen a
spirit. And he said unto them, Why are ye troubled, and why do thoughts arise
in your hearts? Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self* handle me,
and see; for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. And when he
had thus spoken, he showed them his hands and his feet. And while they yet
believed not for joy, and they gave him a piece of a broiled fish, and of an
honeycomb. And he took it, and did eat before them. And he said unto them,
These are the words which I spoke unto you, while I was yet with you, that all
things must be fulfilled which were written in the law of Moses, and in the
Prophets, and in the Psalms concerning me. Then opened he their, understanding,
that they might understand the Scriptures, and said unto them, Thus it is
written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the
third day; and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his
Name among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. And ye are witnesses of these
things.

The first Sunday after Easter.
The collect.
ALmighty Father, who have given thine only Son to die for our sins, and to
rise again for our justification; Grant us so to put away the leaven of malice
arid wickedness, that we may always serve thee in pureness of living and truth,
through the merits of the same thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. 1 S. John 5.4.
WHatsoever is born of God overcomes the world; and this is the victory that
overcomes the world, even our faith. Who is he that overcomes the world, but
he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God? This is he that came by water
and blood, even Jesus Christ; not by water only, but by water and blood: and it
is the Spirit that bears witness, because the Spirit is truth. For there are
three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and
these three are one. And there are three that bear witness in earth, the
spirit, and the water, and the blood: and these three agree in one. If we
receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater: for this is the
witness of God, which he has testified of his Son. He that believes on the
Son of God, has the witness in himself: he that believes not God, has made
him a liar, because he believes not the record that God gave of his Son. And
this is the record, That God has given to us eternal life; and this life is in
his Son. He that has the Son has life, and he that has not the Son has not
life.

The Gospel. S. John 20.19.
THe same day at evening, being the first day of the week, when the doors were
shut, where the disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and
stood in the midst, and says unto them, Peace be unto you. And when he had so
said, he showed unto them his hands and his side. Then were the disciples glad
when the saw the Lord. The said Jesus to them again, Peace be unto you: As my
Father has sent me, even so send I you. And when he had said this, he breathed
on them, and says unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost. Whose soever sins ye
remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are
retained.

The second Sunday after Easter.
The collect.
Almighty God, who have given thine only Son to be unto us both a sacrifice for
sin, and also an ensample of godly life; Give us grace that we may always most
thankfully receive that his inestimable benefit, and also daily endeavor our
selves to follow the blessed steps of his most holy life, through the same
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. 1 S. Pet. 2.19.
THis is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief,
suffering wrongfully. For what glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your
faults, ye shall take it patiently? But if when ye do well, and suffer for it,
ye take it patiently; this is acceptable with God. For even hereunto were ye
called: because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye
should follow his steps: Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth:
Who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not;
but committed himself to him that judges righteously: Who his own self bare
our sins in his own body on the tree, that we being dead to sin, should live
unto righteousness; by whose stripes ye were healed. For ye were as sheep going
astray; but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of your souls.

The Gospel. S. John 10.11.
JEsus said, I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd gives his life for the
sheep. But he that is an hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep
are not, sees the wolf comings and leaves the sheep, and flees; and the wolf
catches them, and scatters the sheep. The hireling sheep, because he is an
hireling, and cares not for the sheep. I am the good shepherd, and know my
sheep, and am known of mine. As the Father knows me, even so know I the
Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep. And other sheep I have, which are
not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and
there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.

The third Sunday after Easter.
The collect.
ALmighty God, who show to them that be in error the light of thy truth, to
the intent that they may return into the way of righteousness; Grant unto all
them that are admitted into the fellowship of Christ's Religion, that they may
eschew those things that are contrary to their Profession, and follow all such
things as are agreeable to the same, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

The Epistle. 1 S. Pet. 2.11.
DEarly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly
lusts, which war against the soul; having your conversation honest among the
Gentiles; that whereas they speak against you as evildoers, they may by your
good works which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation.
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be
to the King as supreme; or unto governors, as unto them that are sent by him,
for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them that do well. For
so is the will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence, the
ignorance of foolish men: as free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness; but as the servants of God. Honor all men. Love the
brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the King.

The Gospel. S. John 16.16.
JEsus said to his disciples. A little while and ye shall not see me; and
again, a little while and ye shall see me, because I go to the Father. Then
said some of his disciples among themselves, What is this that he says unto
us, A little while and ye shall not see me; and again, a little while and ye
shall see me; and, Because I go to the Father? They said therefore. What is
this that he says, A little while? we cannot tell what he says. Now Jesus
knew that they were desirous to ask him, and said unto them* Do ye enquire
among your selves of that I said, A little while and ye shall not see me; and
again, a little while and ye shall see me? Verily, verily I say unto you, that
ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice: and ye shall be
sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. A woman when she is in
travail, has sorrow, because her hour is come: but as soon as she is delivered
of the child, she remembers no more the anguish, for joy that a man is born
into world. And ye now therefore have sorrow: but I will see you again, and
your heart shall rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you.

The fourth Sunday after Easter.
The collect.
O Almighty God, who alone can order the unruly wills and affections of
sinful men; Grant unto thy people, that they may love the thing which thou
command, and desire that which thou do promise; that so among the sundry
and manifold changes of the world, our hearts may surely there be fixed, where
true joys are to be found, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle S. Jam. 1.17.
EVery good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from
the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning.
Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, that we should be a kind of
first fruits of his creatures. Wherefore, my beloved brethren, let every man be
swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath; for the wrath of man works not
the righteousness of God. Wherefore lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity
of naughtiness, and receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to
save your souls.

The Gospel. S. John 16.5.
JEsus said unto his disciples, Now I go my way to him that sent me, and none
of you asks me, Whither go thou? But because I have said these things unto
you, sorrow has filled your heart. Nevertheless, I tell you the truth, it is
expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not
come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you. And when he is come,
he will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment: Of
sin; because they believe not on me: Of righteousness; because I go to my
Father, and ye see me no more: Of judgment; because the prince of this world is
judged. I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now.
Howbeit, when he, the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all
truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that
shall he speak, and he will show you things to come. He shall glorify me for
he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you. All things that the
Father has, are mine: therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall
show it unto you.

The fifth Sunday after Easter.
The collect.
O Lord, from whom all good things do come; Grant to us thy humble servants,
that by thy Holy inspiration we may think those things that be good, and by thy
merciful guiding may perform the same, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

The Epistle. S. Jam. 1.22.
BE ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves. For
if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding
his natural face in a glass. For he beholds himself, and goes his way, and
straightway forgets what manner of man he was. But whosoever looks into the
perfect law of liberty, and continues therein; he being not a forgetful
hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his deed. If any
man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives
his own heart, this man's religion is vain. Pure religion, and undefiled before
God, and the Father, is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their
affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world.

The Gospel. S. John 16.23.
VErily, verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name,
he will give it you. Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my Name: Ask, and ye
shall receive, that your joy may be full. These things have I spoken unto you
in proverbs, the time comes when I shall no more speak unto you in proverbs,
but I shall show you plainly of the Father. At that day ye shall ask in my
Name: and I say not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you; for the
Father himself loves you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I
came out from God. I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world:
Again, I leave the world, and go to the Father. His disciples said unto him,
Lo, now speak thou plainly, and speak no proverb. Now are we sure that
thou know all things, and need not that any man should ask thee: by this
we believe that thou came forth from God. Jesus answered them, Do ye now
believe? Behold the hour comes, yea, is now come, that ye shall be scattered
every man to his own, and shall leave me alone: and yet I am not alone, because
the Father is with me. These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might
have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation; but be of good cheer, I
have overcome the world.

The Ascension-day.
The collect.
GRant, we beseech thee, Almighty God, that like as we do believe thy only
begotten Son our Lord Jesus Christ to have ascended into the heavens; so we may
also in heart and mind thither ascend, and with him continually dwell, who
lives and reigns with thee, and the Holy Ghost, one God, world without end.
Amen.

For the Epistle. Acts 1.1.
THe former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus began both to
do and teach, until the day in which he was taken up, after that he through the
Holy Ghost had given commandments unto the Apostles whom he had chosen. To whom
also he showed himself alive after his passion, by many infallible proofs,
being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the
kingdom of God: and being assembled together with them, commanded them that
they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father,
which, says he, ye have heard of me. For John truly baptized with water, but
ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence. When they
therefore were come together, they asked of him, saying, Lord, will thou at
this time restore again the kingdom to Israel? And he said unto them, It is not
for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father has put in his own
power. But ye shall receive power after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you;
and ye shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in
Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth. And when he had spoken these
things, while they beheld, he was taken up, and a cloud received him out of
their sight. And while they looked steadfastly toward heaven, as he went up,
behold, two men stood by them in white apparel; which also said, Ye men of
Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? This same Jesus which is taken up
from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner, as ye have seen him go into
heaven.

The Gospel. S. Mark 16.14.
JEsus appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat, and upbraided them with
their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they believed not them which had
seen him after he was risen. And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world,
and preach the Gospel to every creature. He that believes and is baptized,
shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall be damned. And these signs
shall follow them that believe: In my Name shall they cast out devils, they
shall speak with new tongues, they shall take up serpents, and if they drink
any deadly thing it shall not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and
they shall recover. So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was
received up into heaven, and sat on the right hand of God. And they went forth
and preached every where, the Lord working with them, and confirming the Word
with signs following.

Sunday after Ascension-day.
The collect.
O God the King of glory, who have exalted thine only Son Jesus Christ with
great triumph unto thy Kingdom in heaven; We beseech thee leave us not
comfortless; but send to us thine Holy Ghost to comfort us, and exalt us unto
the same place whither our Savior Christ is gone before, who lives and
reigns with thee, and the Holy Ghost, one God, world without end. Amen.

The Epistle. 1 S. Peter 4.7.
THe end of all things is at hand; be ye therefore sober, and watch unto
prayer. And above all things have servent charity among your selves: for
charity shall cover the multitude of sins. Use hospitality one to another
without grudging. As every man has received the gift, even so minister the
same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God. If any man
speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God: If any man minister, let him do it
as of the ability which God gives, that God in all things may be glorified
through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

The Gospel, S. John 15.26. and part of the 16. Chap.
WHen the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even
the Spirit of truth, which proceeds from the Father, he shall testify of me.
And ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been with me from the
beginning. These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be offended.
They shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time comes, that whosoever
kills you, will think that he does God service. And these things will they
do unto you, because they have not known the Father, nor me; but these things
have I told you, that when the time shall come, ye may remember that I told you
of them.

Whitsunday.
The collect.
GOd, who as at this time did teach the hearts of thy faithful people, by the
sending to them the light of thy holy Spirit; Grant us by the same Spirit to
have a right judgment in all things, and evermore to rejoice in his holy
comfort, through the merits of Christ Jesus our Savior, who lives and
reigns with thee, in the unity of the same Spirit, one God, world without
end. Amen.

For the Epistle. Acts 2.1.
WHen the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in one
place. And suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as of a rushing mighty
wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting. And there appeared
unto them cloven tongues, like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them: And
they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other
tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance. And there were dwelling at
Jerusalem, Jews, devout men, out of every Nation under heaven. Now when this
was noised abroad, the multitude came together, and were confounded, because
that every man heard them speak in his own language. And they were all amazed,
and marvelled, saying one to another, Behold, are not all these which speak,
Galileans? And how hear we every man in our own tongue wherein we were born?
Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, and in
Judea, and Cappadocia, in Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, in Egypt, and
in the parts of Lybia, about Cyrene, and strangers of Rome, Jews and
Proselytes, Cretes and Arabians, we do hear them speak in our tongues the
wonderful works of God.

The Gospel. S. John 14.15.
JEsus said unto his disciples, If ye love me keep my commandments. And I will
pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide
with you for ever; even the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive,
because it sees him not, neither knwoeth him; but ye know him; for he dwells
with you, and shall be in you. I will not leave you comfortless; I will come to
you. Yet a little while, and the world sees me no more; but ye see me: because
I live, ye shall live also. At that day ye shall know, that I am in my Father,
and you in me, and I in you. He that has my commandments, and keeps them, he
it is that loves me; and he that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I
will love him, and will manifest my self to him. Judas says unto him, (not
Iscariot) Lord, how is it that thou will manifest thy self unto us, and not
unto the world? Jesus answered and said unto him, If a man love me, he will
keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make
our abode with him. He that loves me not, keeps not my sayings: and the word
which you hear, is not mine, but the Fathers which sent me. These things have I
spoken unto you, being yet present with you. But the Comforter, which is the
Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my Name, he shall teach you all
things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto
you. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world gives,
give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. Ye
have heard how I said unto you, I go away, and come again unto you. If ye loved
me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father: for my Father is
greater then I. And now I have told you before it come to pass, that when it is
come to pass, ye might believe. Hereafter I will not talk much with you: for
the prince of this world comes, and has nothing in me. But that the world may
know that I love the Father; and as the Father gave me commandment, even so I
do.

Monday in Whitsun Week.
The collect.
GOd, who as at this time did teach the hearts of thy faithful people, by the
sending to them the light of thy holy Spirit; Grant us by the same Spirit to
have a right judgment in all things, and evermore to rejoice in his holy
comfort, through the merits of Christ Jesu our Savior, who lives and reigns
with thee in the unity of the same Spirit, one God, world without end. Amen.

For the Epistle. Acts 10.34.
THen Peter opened his mouth, and said, Of a truth I perceive that God is no
respecter of persons; but in every Nation he that fears him, and works
righteousness, is accepted with him. The word which God sent unto the children
of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ, (he is Lord of all) That word, I
say, you know, which was published throughout all Judea, and began from
Galilee, after the baptism which John preached: How God anointed Jesus of
Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power, who went about doing good, and
healing all that were oppressed of the devil: for God was with him. And we are
witnesses of all things which he did, both in the land of the Jews, and in
Jerusalem; whom they slew and hanged on a tree: Him God raised up the third
day, and showed him openly; not to all the people, but unto witnesses chosen
before of God; even to us, who did eat and drink with him after he rose from
the dead. And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify that
it is he which was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead. To him
give all the Prophets witness, that through his Name whosoever believes in
him, shall receive remission of sins. While Peter yet spoke these words, the
Holy Ghost fell on all them who heard the word. And they of the circumcision
who believed, were astonised, as many as came with Peter, because that on the
Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the Holy Ghost. For they heard them
speak with tongues, and magnify God. Then answered Peter, Can any man forbid
water, that these should not be baptized, who have received the Holy Ghost as
well as we? And he commanded them to be baptized in the Name of the Lord. Then
prayed they him to tarry certain days.

The Gospel. S. John 3.16.
GOd so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent
not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the world through him
might be saved. He that believes on him, is not condemned: but he that
believes not, is condemned already, because he has not believed in the Name
of the only begotten Son of God. And this is the condemnation, that light is
come into the world, and men loved darkness rather then light, because their
deeds were evil. For every one that does evil, hates the light, neither
comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. But he that does
truth, comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are
wrought in God.

Tuesday in Whitsun Week.
The collect.
GOd, who as at this time did teach the hearts of thy faithful people by the
sending to them the light of thy holy Spirit; Grant us by the same Spirit to
have a right judgment in all things, and evermore to rejoice in his holy
comfort, through the merits of Christ Jesu our Savior, who lives and reigns
with thee in the unity of the same^ Spirit, one God, world without end. Amen.

For the Epistle. Acts 8.14.
WHen the Apostles who were at Jerusalem, heard that Samaria had received the
word of God, they sent unto them Peter and John; who when they were come down,
prayed for them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost. (For as yet he was
fallen upon none of them: only they were baptized in the Name of the Lord
Jesus) Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost.

The Gospel. S. John 10.1.
VErily, verily I say unto you, He that enters not by the door into the
sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber.
But he that enters in by the door, is the shepherd of the sheep. To him the
porter opens; and the sheep hear his voice, and he calls his own sheep by
name, and leads them out. And when he puts forth his own sheep, he goes
before them, and the sheep follow him; for they know his voice. And a stranger
will they not follow; but will flee from him; for they know not the voice of
strangers This parable spoke Jesus unto them: but they understood not what
things they were which he spoke unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again,
Verily, verily I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came
before me are thieves and robbers; but the sheep did not hear them. I am the
door; by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out,
and find pasture. The thief comes not but for to steal, and to kill, and to
destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more
abundantly.

Trinity Sunday.
The collect.
ALmighty and everlasting God, who have given unto us thy servants grace by the
confession of a true Faith to acknowledge the glory of the eternal Trinity, and
in the power of the divine Majesty to worship the Unity; We beseech thee, that
thou would keep us steadfast in this Faith, and evermore defend us from all
adversities, who live and reignest one God, world without end. Amen.

For the Epistle. Rev. 4.1.
AFter this I looked, and behold, a door was opened in heaven: and the first
voice which I heard, was as it were of a trumpet, talking with me; which said,
Come up hither, and I will show thee things which must be hereafter. And
immediately I was in the Spirit; and behold, a throne was set in heaven, and
one sat on the throne, and he that sat, was, to look upon, like a jasper, and a
sardine stone: and there was a rainbow round about the throne, in sight like
unto an emerald. And round about the throne were four and twenty seats; and
upon the seats I saw four and twenty elders sitting, clothed in white raiment;
and they had on their heads crowns of gold. And out of the throne proceeded
lightnings, and thundrings, and voices. And there were seven lamps of fire
burning before the throne, which are the seven Spirits of God. And before the
throne there was a sea of glass like unto crystal: and in the midst of the
throne, and round about the throne, were four beasts full of eyes before and
behind. And the first beast was like a lion, and the second beast like a calf,
and the third beast had a face as a man, and the fourth beast was like a flying
eagle. And the four beasts had each of them six wings about him, and they were
full of eyes within, and they rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy,
Lord God Almighty, who was, and is, and is to come. And when those beasts give
glory, and honor, and thanks to him that sat on the throne, who lives for
ever and ever, the four and twenty elders fall down before him that sat on the
throne, and worship him that lives for ever and ever, and cast their crowns
before the throne, saying, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and
honor, and power; for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they
are and were created.

The Gospel. S. John 3.1.
THere was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews. The
same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him, Rabbi, we know that thou art a
teacher come from God: For no man can do these miracles that thou do, except
God be with him. Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily I say unto
thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. Nicodemus
says unto him, How can a man be born when he is old? can he enter the second
time into his mothers womb, and be born? Jesus answered, Verily, verily I say
unto thee, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the kingdom of God. That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and that
which is born of the Spirit, is spirit. Marvel not that I said unto thee, ye
must be born again. The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the
sound thereof; but can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes; so is
every one that is born of the Spirit. Nicodemus answered and said unto him, How
can these things be? Jesus answered and said unto him, Art thou a master of
Israel, and know not these things? Verily, verily I say unto thee, We speak
that we do know, and testify that we have seen, and ye receive not our
witness. If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not; how shall ye
believe if I tell you of heavenly things? And no man has ascended up to
heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man, who is in
heaven. And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness: even so must the
Son of man be lifted up; that whosoever believes in him, should not perish,
but have eternal life.

The first Sunday after Trinity.
The collect.
O God, the strength of all them that put their trust in thee; Mercifully
accept our prayers: and because through the weakness of our mortal nature we
can do no good thing without thee, grant us the help of thy grace, that in
keeping thy commandments we may please thee, both in will and deed, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. 1 S. John. 4.7.
BEloved, let us love one another; for love is of God, and every one that
loves is born of God, and knows God. He that loves not, knows not God;
for God is love. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because
that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through
him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his
Son to be the propitiation for our sins. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought
also to love one another. No man has seen God at any time. If we love one
another, God dwells in us, and his love is perfected in us. Hereby know we
that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit. And
we have seen and do testify, that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of
the world. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells
in him, and he in God. And we have known and believed the love that God has to
us. God is love; and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him.
Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of
judgment, because as he is, so are we are in this world. There is no fear in
love, but perfect love casts out fear; because fear has torment: He that
fears, is not made perfect in love. We love him, because he first loved us.
If a man say, I love God, and hates his brother, he is a liar: for he that
loves not his brother, whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not
seen? And this commandment have we from him, that he who loves God, love his
brother also.

The Gospel. S. Luke 16.19.
THere was a certain rich man, who was clothed in purple and fine linen, and
fared sumptuously every day. And there was a certain beggar, named Lazarus, who
was laid at his gate full of sores; and desiring to be fed with the crumbs
which fell from the rich man's table: moreover, the dogs came and licked his
sores. And it came to pass that the beggar died, and was carried by the angels
into Abraham's bosom: the rich man also died, and was buried. And in hell he
lift up his eyes, being in torments, and sees Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in
his bosom. And he cried, and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send
Lazarus that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue, for
I am tormented in this flame. But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy
lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now
he is comforted, and thou art tormented. And besides all this, between us and
you there is a great gulf fixed: so that they who would pass from hence to you,
cannot; neither can they pass to us, that would come from thence. Then he said,
I pray thee therefore, father, that thou would send him to my fathers house:
For I have five brethren; that he may testify unto them, lest they also come
into this place of torment. Abraham says unto him, They have Moses and the
prophets; let them hear them. And he said, Nay, father Abraham; but if one went
unto them from the dead, they will repent. And he said unto him, If they hear
not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose
from the dead.

The second Sunday after Trinity.
The collect.
O Lord, who never failest to help and govern them whom thou do bring up in
thy steadfast fear and love; Keep us, we beseech thee, under the protection of
thy good providence, and make us to have a perpetual fear and love of thy holy
Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. 1 S. John 3.13.
MArvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you. We know that we have passed
from death unto life, because we love the brethren: He that loves not his
brother, abides in death. Whosoever hates his brother, is a murderer; and ye
know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in him. Hereby perceive we the
love of God, because he laid down his life for us: and we ought to lay down our
lives for the brethren. But whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his brother
have need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him; how dwells the
love of God in him? My little children, let us not love in word, neither in
tongue; but in deed, and in truth. And hereby we know mat we are of the truth,
and shall assure our hearts before him. For if our heart condemn us, God is
greater then our heart, and knows all things. Beloved, if our heart condemn
us not, then have we confidence toward God. And whatsoever we ask, we receive
of him, because we keep his commandments, and do those things that are pleasing
in his sight. And this is his commandment, that we should believe on the Name
of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave us commandment. And
he that keeps his commandments dwells in him, and he in him: and hereby we
know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given us.

The Gospel. S. Luke 14.16.
A Certain man made a great supper, and bade many, and sent his servant at
supper-time to say to them that were bidden, Come, for all things are now
ready. And they all with one consent began to make excuse: The first said unto
him, I have bought a piece of ground, and I must needs go and see it; I pray
thee have me excused. And another said, I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I
go to prove them; I pray thee have me excused. And another said, I have married
a wife, and therefore I cannot come. So that servant came, and showed his Lord
these things. Then the master of the house being angry, said to his servant, Go
out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the
poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind. And the servant said, Lord,
it is done as thou have commanded, and yet there is room. And the Lord said
unto the servant, Go out into the highways, and hedges, and compel them to
come in, that my house may be filled. For I say unto you, that none of those
men which were bidden, shall taste of my supper.

The third Sunday after Trinity.
The collect.
O Lord, we beseech thee mercifully to hear us; and grant that we, to whom thou
have given an hearty desire to pray, may be thy mighty aid be defended and
comforted in all dangers and adversities, though Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. 1 S. Pet. 5.5.
ALl of you be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility: for God
resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. Humble your selves
therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time;
casting all your care upon him, for he cares for you. Be sober, be vigilant,
because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walks about, seeking whom
he may devour. Whom resist steadfast in the faith, knowing that the same
afflictions are accomplished in your breathren that are in the world. But the
God of all grace, who has called us into his eternal glory by Christ Jesus,
after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen,
settle you. To him be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

The Gospel. S. Luke 15.1.
THen drew near unto him all the Publicans and sinners for to hear him. And the
Pharisees and Scribes murmured, saying, This man receives sinners, and eats
with them. And he spoke this parable unto them, saying, What man of you having
an hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, does not leave the ninety and nine in
the wilderness, and go after that which is lost, until he find it? And when he
has found it, he lays it on his shoulders, rejoicing. And when he comes
home, he calls together his friends and neighbors, saying unto them, Rejoice
with me, for I have found my sheep which was lost. I say unto you, that
likewise joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repents, more then over
ninety and nine just persons which need no repentance. Either what woman having
ten pieces of silver, if she lose one piece, does not light a candle, and sweep
the house, and seek diligently till she find it? And when she has found it,
she calls her friends and her neighbors together, saying, Rejoice with me,
for I have found the piece which I had lost. Likewise I say unto you, There is
joy the presence of the angels of God, over one sinner that repents.

The fourth Sunday after Trinity.
The collect.
O God, the protector of all that trust in thee, without whom nothing is
strong, nothing is holy; Increase and multiply upon us thy mercy, that thou
being our ruler and guide, we may so pass through things temporal, that we
finally lose not the things eternal: Grant this, O heavenly Father, for Jesus
Christ's sake our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. Romans 8.18.
I Reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be
compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us. For the earnest
expectation of the creature waits for the manifestation or the sons of God.
For the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of
him who has subjected the same in hope: Because the creature it self also
shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of
the children of God. For we know that the whole creation groneth, and
travaileth in pain together until now. And not only they, but our selves also,
which have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves groan within our
selves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body.

The Gospel. S. Luke 6.36.
BE ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful. Judge not, and ye
shall not be judged: condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned: forgive, and
ye shall be forgiven: give, and it shall be given unto you: good measure,
pressed down, and shaken together, and running over shall men give into your
bosom. For with the same measure that ye mete withal; it shall be measured to
you again. And he spoke a parable unto them, Can the blind lead the blind?
shall they not both fall into the ditch? The disciple is hot above his master;
but every one that is perfect shall be as his master. And why beholdest thou
the mote that is in thy brothers eye but perceivest not the beam that is in
thine own eye? Either how can thou say to thy brother, Brother, let me pull
out the mote that is in thine eye, when thou thy self beholdest not the beam
that is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, cast out first the beam but of thine
own eye, and then shall thou see clearly to pull out the mote that is in thy
brothers eye.

The fifth Sunday after Trinity
The collect.
GRant, O Lord, we beseech thee, that the course of this world may be so
peaceably ordered by thy governance, that thy Church may joyfully serve thee in
all godly quietness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. 1 S. Pet. 3.8.
BE ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another, love as brethren, be
pitiful, be courteous; not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing; but
contrariwise blessing; knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye should
inherit a blessing. For he that will love life, and see good days, let him
refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile. Let him
eschew evil, and do good; let him seek peace, and ensue it. For the eyes of the
Lord are over the righteous, and his ears are open unto their prayers: but the
face of the Lord is against them that do evil. And who is he that will harm
you, if ye be followers of that which is good? But and if ye suffer for
righteousness sake, happy are ye, and be not afraid of their terror, neither
be troubled; but sanctify the Lord God in your hearts.

The Gospel. S. Luke 5.1.
IT came to pass, that as the people pressed upon him to hear the word of God,
he stood by the lake of Gennesareth; and saw two ships standing by the lake:
but the fishermen were gone out of them, and were washing their nets. And he
entered into one of the ships, which was Simons, and prayed him that he would
thrust out a little from the land: and he sat down and taught the people out of
the ship. Now when he had left speaking, he said unto Simon, Lanch out into the
deep, and let down your nets for a draught. And Simon answering, said unto him,
Master, we have toiled all the night, and have taken nothing; nevertheless, at
thy word I will let down the net. And when they had this done, they enclosed a
great multitude of fishes, and their net brake. And they beckoned unto their
partners which were in the other ship, that they should come and help them. And
they came and filled both the ships, so that they began to sink. When Simon
Peter saw it, he fell down at Jesus knees, saying, Depart from me, for I am a
sinful man, O Lord. For he was astonished, and all that were with him, at the
draught of the fishes which they had taken: And so was also James, and John,
the sons of Zebedee, who were partners with Simon. And Jesus said unto Simon,
Fear not, from henceforth thou shall catch men. And when they had brought their
ships to land, they forsook all, and followed him.

The sixth Sunday after Trinity.
The collect.
O God, who have prepared for them that love thee, such good things as pass
man's understanding; Pour into our hearts such love toward thee, that we loving
thee above all things, may obtain thy promises, which exceed all that we can
desire, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. Romans 6.3.
KNow ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were
baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into
death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we have been
planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness
of his resurrection: Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that
the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin.
For he that is dead, is freed from sin. Now if we be dead with Christ, we
believe that we shall also live with him; knowing that Christ being raised from
the dead, dies no more; death has no more dominion over him. For in that he
died, he died unto sin once: but in that he lives, he lives unto God.
Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto sin: but alive unto
God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 5.20.
JEsus said unto his disciples, Except your righteousness shall exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the
kingdom of heaven. Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou
shall not kill: and whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the judgment.
But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause,
shall be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever shall say to his brother,
Racha, shall be in danger of the council: but whosoever shall say, Thou fool,
shall be in danger of hellfire. Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar,
and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee; leave there thy
gift before the altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and
then come and offer thy gift. Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou
art in the way with him; lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the
judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison.
Verily I say unto thee, thou shall by no means come out thence, till thou have
paid the uttermost farthing.

The seventh Sunday after Trinity.
The collect.
Lord of all power and might, who art the author, and giver of all good things;
Graft in Our hearts the love of thy Name, increase in us true religion, nourish
us with all goodness, and of thy great mercy keep us in the same, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. Romans 6.19.
I Speak after the manner of men, because of the infirmity of your flesh: for
as ye have yielded your members servants to uncleanness, and to iniquity, unto
iniquity; even so now yield your members servants to righteousness, unto
holiness. For when ye were the servants of sin, ye were free from
righteousness. What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now
ashamed? for the end of those things is death. But now being made free from
sin, and become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end
everlasting life. For the wages of sin is death: but the gift of God is eternal
life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Gospel. S. Mark 8.1.
IN those days the multitude being very great, and having nothing to eat, Jesus
called his disciples unto him, and says unto them, I have compassion on the
multitude, because they have now been with me three days, and have nothing to
eat: And if I send them away fasting to their own houses, they will faint by
the way: for diverse of them came from far. And his disciples answered him, From
whence can a man satisfy these men with bread here in the wilderness? And he
asked them, How many loaves have ye? And they said, Seven. And he commanded the
people to sit down on the ground: and he took the seven loaves, and gave
thanks, and brake, and gave to his disciples to set before them: and they did
set them before the people. And they had a few small fishes; and he blessed,
and commanded to set them also before them. So they did eat, and were filled:
and they took up of the broken meat that was left, seven baskets. And they that
had eaten were about four thousand; and he sent them away.

The eighth Sunday after Trinity.
The collect.
O God, whose never-failing providence orders all things both in heaven and
earth; We humbly beseech thee to put away from us all hurtful things, and to
give us those things which be profitable for us, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

The Epistle. Romans 8.12.
BRethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the flesh: For if ye
live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye through the Spirit do mortify
the deeds of the body, ye shall live. For as many as are led by the Spirit of
God, they are the sons of God. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage
again to fear: but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry,
Abba, Father. The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are
the children of God. And if children, then heirs: heirs of God, and joynt-heirs
with Christ: if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
together.

The Gospel S. Matthew. 7.15.
BEware of false prophets, which come to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly
they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know them by their fruits: Do men gather
grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Even so every good tree brings forth
good fruit; but a corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit. A good tree cannot
bring forth evil fruit; neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit.
Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the
fire. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them. Not every one that says
unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: but he that does
the will of my Father who is in heaven.

The ninth Sunday after Trinity.
The collect.
GRant to us, Lord, we beseech thee, the Spirit to think and do always such
things as be rightful; that we who cannot do any thing that is good without
thee, may by thee be enabled to live according to thy will, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. 1 Cor. 10.1.
BRethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our fathers
were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea; and were all baptized
unto Moses in the cloud, and in the sea; and did all eat the same spiritual
meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink: (for they drank of that
spiritual Rock that followed them; and that Rock was Christ.) But with many of
them God was not well pleased; for they were overthrown in the wilderness. Now
these things were our examples, to the intent we should not lust after evil
things, as they also lusted. Neither be ye idolaters, as were some of them; as
it is written, The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play.
Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them committed, and fell in one
day three and twenty thousand. Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them
also tempted, and were destroyed of serpents. Neither murmr ye, as some of
them also murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer. Now all these things
happened unto them for ensamples: and they are written for our admonition, upon
whom the ends of the world are come. Wherefore let him that thinks he
stands take heed lest he fall. There has no temptation taken you, but such
as is common to man: but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted
above that ye are able; but will with the temptation also make a way to escape,
that ye may able to bear it.

The Gospel. S. Luke. 16.1.
JEsus said unto his disciples. There was a certain rich man who had a steward,
and the same was accused unto him, that he had wasted his goods. And he called
him, and said unto him, How is it that I hear this of thee? Give an account of
thy stewardship; for thou may be no longer steward. Then the steward said
within himself, What shall I do? for my lord takes away from me the
stewardship: I cannot dig, to beg I am ashamed. I am resolved what to do, that
when I am put out of the stewardship, they may receive me into their houses. So
he called every one of his lords debtors unto him, and said unto the first, How
much owe thou unto my lord? And he said, An hundred measures of oil. And he
said unto him, Take thy bill, and sit down quickly, and write fifty. Then said,
he to another, And how much owe thou? And he said, An hundred measures of
wheat. And he said unto him, Take thy bill and write fourscore. And the lord
commended the unjust steward, because he had done wisely: for the children of
this world are in their generation wiser then the children of light. And I say
unto you, Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that
when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations.

The tenth Sunday after Trinity.
The collect.
LEt thy merciful ears, O Lord, be open to the prayers of thy humble servants;
and that they may obtain their petitions, make them to ask such things as shall
please thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. I Cor. 12.1.
COncerning spiritual gifts, brethren, I would not have you ignorant. Ye know
that ye were Gentiles carried away unto these dumb idols, even as ye were lad.
Wherefore I give you to understand, that no man speaking by the Spirit of God,
calls Jesus accursed; and that no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by
the Holy Ghost. Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit. And
there are differences of administrations, but the same Lord. And there are
diversities of operations, but it is the same God, who works all in all. But
the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. For to
one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom; to another the word of knowledge
by the same Spirit; to another says by the same Spirit; to another the gifts
of healing by the same Spirit; to another the working of miracles; to another
prophecy; to another discerning of spirits; to another diverse kinds of tongues;
to another the interpretation of tongues. But all these works that one and
the self-same Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will.

The Gospel. S. Luke 19.41
ANd when he was come near, he beheld the city, and wept over it, saying, If
thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong
unto thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes. For the days shall come
upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee
round, and keep thee in on every side, and shall lay thee even with ground, and
thy children within thee: and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon
another, because thou knew not the time of thy visitation. And he went into
the temple, and began to cast out them that sold therein, and them that bought
saying unto them, It is written, My house is the house of prayer, but ye have
made it a den of thieves. And he taught daily in the temple.

The eleventh Sunday after trinity.
The collect.
O God, who declarest thy Almighty power most chiefly in showing mercy and
pity; Mercifully grant unto us such a measure of thy grace, that we running the
way of thy commandments, may obtain thy gracious promises, and be made
partakers of thy heavenly treasure, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. 1 Cor. 15.1.
BRethren, I declare unto you the Gospel which I preached unto you, which also
you have received, and wherein ye stand. By which also ye are saved, if ye keep
in memory what I preached unto you, unless ye have believed in vain. For I
delivered unto you first of all, that which I also received, how that Christ
died for Our sins, according to the Scriptures; and that he was buried; and
that he rose again the third day according to the Scriptures; and that he was
seen of Cephas, then of the twelve. After that, he was seen of above five
hundred brethren at once; of whom the greater part remain unto this present;
but some are fallen asleep. After that, he was seen of James; then of all the
Apostles; and last of all he was seen of me also, as of one born out of due
time: For I am the least of the Apostles, that am not meet to be called an
Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God. But by the grace of God I am
what I am: and his grace which was bestowed upon me, was not in vain; but I
labored more abundantly then they all; yet not I, but the grace of God which
was with me: Therefore whether it were I, or they, so we preach, and so ye
believed.

The Gospel. S. Luke 18.9.
JEsus spoke this parable unto certain which trusted in themselves, that they
were righteous, and despised others; Two men went up into the temple to pray;
the one a Pharisee, and the other a Publican. The Pharisee stood and prayed
thus with himself, God, I thank thee, that I am not as other men are,
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican. I fast twice in the
week, I give tithes of all that I possess. And the Publican standing afar off,
would not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast,
saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. I tell you, this man went down to his
house justified rather then the other: for every one that exalts himself,
shall be abased; and he that humbles himself shall be exalted.

The twelfth Sunday after Trinity.
The collect.
ALmighty and everlasting God, who art always more ready to hear, then we to
pray, and art wont to give more then either we desire, or deserve; Pour down
upon us the abundance of thy mercy, forgiving us those good things which we are
not worthy to ask, but through the merits and mediation of Jesus Christ thy Son
our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. 2 Cor. 3.4.
Such trust have we through Christ to Godward. Not that we are sufficient of
our selves to think any thing as of our selves; but our sufficiency is of God.
Who also has made us able ministers of the new Testament; not of the letter,
but of the Spirit: for the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life. But if
the ministration of death written and engraven in stones was glorious; so that
the children of Israel could not steadfastly behold the face of Moses for the
glory of his countenance, which glory was to be done away; How shall not the
ministration of the Spirit be rather glorious? For if the ministration of
condemnation be glory, much more does the ministration of righteousness exceed
in glory.

The Gospel. S. Mark 7.31.
JEsus departing from the coasts of Tire and Sidon, came unto the sea of
Galilee, through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis. And they bring unto him
one that was deaf, and had an impediment in his speech; and they beseech him to
put his hand upon him. And he took him aside from the multitude, and put his
fingers into his ears, and he spit, and touched his tongue; and looking up to
heaven, he sighed, and says unto him, Ephphatha, that is, Be opened. And
straightway his ears were opened, and the string of his tongue was loosed, and
he spoke plain. And he charged them that they should tell no man; but the more
he charged them; so much the more a great deal they published it, and were
beyond measure astonished, saying, He has done all things well; he makes both
the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak.

The thirteenth Sunday after Trinity.
The collect.
ALmighty and merciful God, of whose only gift it comes that thy faithful
people do unto thee true and laudable service; Grant, we beseech thee, that we
may so faithfully serve thee in this life, that we fail not finally to attain
thy heavenly promises, through the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistile. Gal. 3.16.
TO Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He says not, And to seeds, as
of many; but as of one; And to thy seed, which is Christ. And this I say, that
the covenant that was confirmed before of God in Christ, the law which was four
hundred and thirty years after, cannot disanul, that it should make the promise
of none effect. For if the inheritance be of the law, it is no more of promise;
but God gave it to Abraham by promise. Wherefore then serves the law? It was
added because of transgressions, till the seed should come, to whom the promise
was made; and it was ordained by angels in the hand of a mediator. Now a
mediator is not a mediator of one, but God is one. Is the law then against
the promises of God? God forbid: for if there had been a law given, which could
have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the law. But the
Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus
Christ might be given to them that believe.

The Gospel. S. Luke 10.23.
BLessed are the eyes which see the things that ye see. For I tell you, that
many prophets and kings have desired to see those things which ye see, and have
not seen them* and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them.
And behold, a certain lawyer stood up, and tempted him, saying, Master, what
shall I do to inherit eternal life? He said unto him, What is written in the
law? How read thou? And he answering, said, Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with
all thy mind, and thy neighbor as thy self. And he said unto him, Thou have
answered right; this do, and thou shall live. But he willing to justify
himself, said unto Jesus, and who is my neighbor? And Jesus answering said, A
certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves, which
stripped him of his raiment, and wounded him, and departed, leaving him
half-dead. And by chance there came down a certain priest that way, and when he
saw him, he passed by on the other side. And likewise a Levite, when he was at
the place, came and looked on him, and passed by on the other side. But a
certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was; and when he saw him, he
had compassion on him, and went to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring in
oil, and wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought him to an inn, and
took care of him. And on the morrow when he departed, he took out two pence,
and gave them to the host, and said unto him, Take care of him, and whatsoever
thou spendest more, when I come again I will repay thee. Which now of these
three, think thou, was neighbor unto him that fell among the thieves? And
he said, He that showed mercy on him. Then said Jesus unto him, Go and do thou
likewise.

The fourteenth Sunday after Trinity.
The collect.
ALmighty and everlasting God, give unto us the increase of faith, hope, and
charity; and that we may obtain that which thou do promise, make us to love
that which thou do command, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. Gal. 5.16.
I Say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh.
For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; and
these are contrary the one to the other; so that ye cannot do the things that
ye would. But if ye be led by the Spirit, ye are not under the law. Now the
works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery, fornication,
uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance,
emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness,
revellings, and such like: of the which I tell you before, as I have also told
you in time past, that they who do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of
God. But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no
law. And they that are christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections
and lusts.

The Gospel. S. Luke 17.11.
ANd it came to pass, as Jesus went to Jerusalem, that he passed through the
midst of Samaria and Galilee. And as he entered into a certain village, there
met him ten men that were lepers, who stood afar off. And they lifted up their
voices, and said, Jesus master, have mercy on us. And when he saw them, he said
unto them, Go show your selves unto the priests. And it came to pass, that as
they went, they were cleansed. And one of them, when he saw that he was healed,
turned back, and with a loud voice glorified God, and fell down on his face at
his feet, giving him thanks; and he was a Samaritan. And Jesus answering, said,
Were there not ten cleansed? but where are the nine? There are not found that
returned to give glory to God, save this stranger. And he said unto him, Arise,
go thy way, thy faith has made thee whole.

The fifteenth Sunday after Trinity.
The collect.
KEep, we beseech thee, O Lord, thy Church with thy perpetual mercy. And
because the frailty of man without thee cannot but fall, keep us ever by thy
help from all things hurtful, and lead us to all things profitable to our
salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. Gal. 6.11.
YE see how large a letter I have written unto you with mine own hand. As many
as desire to make a fair show in the flesh, they constrain you to be
circumcised, only lest they should suffer persecution for the cross of Christ.
For neither they themselves who are the circumcised keep the law; but desire to
have you circumcised, that they may glory in your flesh. But God forbid that I
should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world. For in Christ Jesus neither
circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature. And as
many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the
Israel of God. From henceforth let no man trouble me, for I bear in my body the
marks of the Lord Jesus. Brethren, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with
your spirit. Amen.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 6.24.
NO man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the
other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve
God and Mammon. Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what
ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put
on: Is not the life more then meat, and the body then raiment? Behold the fowls
of the air; for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet
your heavenly Father feeds them: Are ye not much better then they? Which of
you by taking thought can add one cubit unto his stature? And why take ye
thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the field how they grow: they toil
not, neither do they spin: And yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his
glory was not arrayed like one of these. Wherefore if God so clothe the grass of
the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the oven; shall he not
much more clothe you, O ye of little faith? Therefore take no thought, saying,
What shall we eat? or what shall we drink? or wherewithal shall we be clothed?
(for after all these things do the Gentiles seek) for your heavenly Father
knows that ye have need of all these things. But seek ye first the kingdom of
God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you. Take
therefore no thought for the morrow; for the morrow shall take thought for the
things of it self: sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.

The sixteenth Sunday after Trinity.
The collect.
O Lord we beseech thee, let thy continual pity cleanse and defend thy Church;
and because it cannot continue in safety without thy succor, preserve it
evermore by thy help and goodness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistale. Ephesians. 3.13.
I Desire that ye saint not at my tribulations for you, which is your glory.
For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of
whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named, that he would grant you
according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his
Spirit in the inner man: That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that ye
being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all saints,
what is the breadth and length, and depth, and height; and to know the love of
Christ, which passes knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fullness
of God. Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we
ask or think, according to the power that works in us, unto him be glory in
the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world without end. Amen.

The Gospel S. Luke 7.11.
ANd it came to pass the day after, that Jesus went into a city called Nain,
and many of his disciples went with him, and much people. Now when he came nigh
to the gate of the city, behold, there was a dead man carried out, the only son
of his mother, and she was a widow; and much people of the city was with her.
And when the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said unto her, Weep
not. And he came and touched the bier, (and they that bare him stood still) and
he said, Young man, I say unto thee, Arise. And he that was dead, sat up, and
began to speak: and he delivered him to his mother. And there came a fear on
all, and they glorified God, saying, that a great Prophet is risen up among us,
and that God has visited his people. And this rumor of him went forth
throughout all Judea, and throughout all the region round about.

The seventeenth Sunday after Trinity.
The collect.
LOrd, we pray thee, that thy grace may always prevent and follow us; and make
us continually to be given to all good works, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

The Epistle. Ephesians. 4.1.
I Therefore the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that ye walk worthy of the
vocation wherewith ye are called, with all lowliness and meekness, with
long-suffering, forbearing one another in love; endeavoring to keep the unity
of the Spirit in the bond of peace. There is one body, and one Spirit, even as
ye are called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism,
one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.

The Gospel. S. Luke 14.1.
IT came to pass, as Jesus went into the house of one of the chief Pharisees to
eat bread on the sabbath day, that they watched him. And behold, there was a
certain man before him who had the dropsy. And Jesus answering, spoke unto the
lawyers and Pharisees, saying, Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath day? And
they held their peace. And he took him and healed him, and let him go; and
answered them, saying, Which of you shall have an ass, or an ox fallen into a
pit, and will not straightway pull him out on the sabbath day? And they could
not answer him again to these things. And he put forth a parable to those who
were bidden, when he marked how they chose out the chief rooms, saying unto
them, When thou art bidden of any man to a wedding, sit not down in the highest
room, lest a more honorable man then thou be bidden of him: And he that bade
thee and him, come and say to thee, Give this man place; and thou begin with
shame to take the lowest room. But when thou art bidden, go and sit down in the
lowest room, that when he that bade thee comes, he may say unto thee, Friend,
go up higher: then shall thou have worship in the presence of them that sit at
meat with thee. For whosoever exalts himself, shall be abased; and he that
humbles himself, shall be exalted.

The eighteenth Sunday after Trinity.
The collect.
LOrd, we beseech thee, grant thy people grace to withstand the temptations of
the world, the flesh, and the devil, and with pure hearts and minds to follow
thee the only God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. 1 Cor. 1.4.
I Thank my God always on your behalf, for the grace of God which is given you
by Jesus Christ; that in every thing ye are enriched by him, in all utterance,
and in all knowledge, even as the testimony of Christ was confirmed in you: So
that ye come behind in no gift; waiting for the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in
the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 22.34.
WHen the Pharisees had heard that Jesus had put the Sadducees to silence, they
were gathered together. Then one of them, who was a lawyer, asked him a
question, tempting him, and saying, Master, which is the great commandment in
the law? Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and
great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. On these two commandments hang all the law and the
prophets. While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them saying,
What think ye of Christ? whose son is he? They say unto him, The son of David.
He says unto them, How then does David in Spirit call him Lord, saying, The
Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies
thy footstool? If David then call him Lord, how is he his Son? And no man was
able to answer him a word, neither durst any man (from that day forth) ask him
any mo questions.

The nineteenth Sunday after Trinity.
The collect.
O God, forasmuch as without thee we are not able to please thee; Mercifully
grant, that thy holy Spirit may in all things direct, and rule our hearts,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. Ephesians. 4.17.
THis I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk not as
other Gentiles walk in the vanity of their mind; having the understanding
darkened; being alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in
them, because of the blindness of their heart: who being past feeling, have
given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with
greediness. But ye have not so learned Christ: If so be that ye have heard him,
and have been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus: That ye put off
concerning the former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt according to
the deceitful lusts; and be renewed in the spirit of your mind; and that ye put
on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.
Wherefore putting away lying, speak every man truth with his neighbor; for we
are members one of another. Be ye angry and sin not. Let not the sun go down
upon your wrath: neither give place to the devil. Let him that stole, steal no
more; but rather let him labor, working with his hands the thing which is
good, that he may have to give to him that needs. Let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to the use of
edifying, that it may minister grace unto the hearers. And grieve not the holy
Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption. Let all
bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil-speaking be put away
from you, with all malice. And be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted,
forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 9.1.
JEsus entered into a ship, and passed over, and came into his own city. And
behold, they brought to him a man sick of the palsy, lying on a bed. And Jesus
seeing their faith, said unto the sick of the palsy, Son be of good cheer, thy
sins be forgiven thee. And behold, certain of the Scribes said within
themselves, This man blasphemeth. And Jesus knowing their thoughts, said,
Wherefore think ye evil in your hearts? For whether is easier to say, Thy sins
be forgiven thee? or to say, Arise, and walk? But that ye may know that the Son
of man has power on earth to forgive sins, (then says he to the sick of the
palsy) Arise, take up thy bed, and go unto thine house. And he arose, and
departed to his house. But when the multitude saw it, they marvelled, and
glorified God, who had given such power unto men.

The twentieth Sunday after Trinity.
The collect.
O Almighty and most merciful God, of thy bountiful goodness keep us, we
beseech thee, from all things that may hurt us; that we being ready both in
body and soul, may cheerfully accomplish those things that thou would have
done, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. Ephesians. 5.15.
SEe then that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the
time, because the days are evil. Wherefore be ye not unwise, but understanding
what the will of the Lord is. And be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess;
but be filled with the Spirit; speaking to your selves in psalms, and hymns,
and spiritual songs; singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord;
giving thanks always for all things unto God, and the Father, in the Name of
our Lord Jesus Christ; submitting your selves one to another in the fear of God.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 22.1.
JEsus said, The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, who made a
marriage for his son; and sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden
to the wedding; and they would not come. Again, he sent forth other servants,
saying, Tell them who are bidden, Behold, I have prepared my dinner; my oxen
and my fatlings are killed, and all things are ready, come unto the marriage.
But they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his farm, another to his
merchandise: And the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully,
and slew them. But when the king heard thereof, he was wroth; and he sent forth
his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burnt up their city. Then says
he to his servants, The wedding is ready, but they who were bidden were not
worthy: Go ye therefore into the highways, and as many as ye shall find, bid
to the marriage. So those servants went out into the highways, and gathered
together all as many as they found, both bad and good; and the wedding was
furnished with guests. And when the king came in to see the guests, he saw
there a man who had not on a wedding garment. And he says unto him, Friend,
how came thou in hither, not having a wedding garment? and he was speechless.
Then said the king to his servants, Bind him hand and foot, and take him away,
and cast him into outer darkness: There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
For many are called, but few are chosen.

The one and twentieth Sunday after Trinity.
The collect.
GRant, we beseech thee, merciful Lord, to thy faithful people pardon and
peace, that they may be cleansed from all their sins, and serve thee with a
quiet mind, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. Ephesians. 6.10.
My brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the
whole armor of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the
devil. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against principalities,
against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against
spiritual wickedness in high places. Wherefore take unto you the whole armor
of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all,
to stand. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, and having
on the breast plate of righteousness; and your feet shod with the preparation
of the gospel of peace: Above all, taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye
shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. And take the helmet
of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God: Praying
always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto
with all perseverance and supplication for all saints; and for me, that
utterance may be given unto me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to make known
the mystery of the gospel; for which I am an ambassador in bonds: that therein
I may speak boldly, as I ought to speak.

The Gospel. S. John 4.46.
THere was a certain noble man whose son was sick at Capernaum. When he heard
that Jesus was come out of Judea into Galilee, he went unto him, and besought
him, that he would come down, and heal his son; for he was at the point of
death. Then said Jesus unto him, Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will not
believe. The noble man says unto him, Sir, come down ere my child die. Jesus
says unto him, Go thy way, thy son lives. And the man believed the word that
Jesus had spoken unto him, and he went his way. And as he was now going down,
his servants met him, and told him, saying, Thy son lives. Then enquired he of
them the hour when he began to amend: And they said unto him, Yesterday at the
seventh hour the fever left him. So the father knew that it was at the same
hour, in the which Jesus said unto him, Thy son lives; and himself believed,
and his whole house. This is again the second miracle that Jesus did, when he
was come out of Judea into Galilee.

The two and twentieth Sunday after Trinity.
The collect.
LOrd, we beseech thee to keep thy household the Church in continual godliness,
that through thy protection it may be free from all adversities, and devoutly
given to serve thee in good works, to the glory of thy Name, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. Phil. 1.3.
I Thank my God upon every remembrance of you, (always in every prayer of mine
for you all, making request with joy) for your fellowship in the gospel from
the first day until now; being confident of this very thing, that he who has
begun a good work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ; even
as it is meet for me to think this of you all, because I have you in my heart,
inasmuch as both in my bonds, and in the defense and confirmation of the
gospel, ye all are partakers of my grace. For God is my record, how greatly I
long after you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ. And this I pray, that your
love may abound yet more and more in knowledge, and in all judgment: That ye
may approve things that are excellent, that ye may be sincere, and without
offense till the day of Christ: Being filled with the fruits of righteousness,
which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 18.21.
PEter said unto Jesus, Lord, how often shall my brother sin against me, and I
forgive him? till seven times? Jesus says unto him, I say not unto thee, until
seven times; but until seventy times seven. Therefore is the kingdom of heaven
likened unto a certain king, who would take account of his servants. And when
he had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him, who ought him ten thousand
talents. But forasmuch as he had not to pay, his lord commanded him to be sold,
and his wife and children, and all that he had, and payment to be made. The
servant therefore fell down and worshipped him, saying, Lord, have patience
with me, and I will pay thee all. Then the lord of that servant was moved with
compassion, and loosed him, and forgave him the debt. But the same servant went
out and found one of his fellow servants, who ought him an hundred pence; and
he laid hands on him, and took him by the throat, saying, Pay me that thou
owe. And his fellow servants fell down at his feet, and besought him, saying,
Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all. And he would not; but went and
cast him into prison, till he should pay the debt. So when his fellow servants
saw what was done, they were very sorry, and came and told unto their lord all
that was done. Then his lord, after that he had called him, said unto him, O
thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because thou defiredst me:
Should not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow servants, even as I
had pity on thee? And his lord was wroth, and delivered him to the tormenters,
till he should pay all that was due unto him. So likewise shall my heavenly
Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his
brother their trespasses.

The three and twentieth Sunday after Trinity.
The collect.
O God, our refuge and strength, who art the author of all godliness; Be ready,
we beseech thee, to hear the devout prayers of thy Church; and grant that those
things which we ask faithfully, we may obtain effectually, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. Phil. 3.17.
BRethren, be followers together of me, and mark them who walk so, as ye have
us for an ensample. (For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell
you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ; whose end
is destruction, whose god is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame,
who mind earthly things) For our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we
look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ; who shall change our vile body,
that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body according to the working
whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 22.15.
THen went the Pharisees and took counsel how they might entangle him in his
talk. And they sent out unto him their disciples, with the Herodians, saying,
Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God in truth,
neither carest thou for any man: for thou regardest not the person of men. Tell
us therefore, What think thou? Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar, or
not? But Jesus perceived their wickedness, and said, Why tempt ye me, ye
hypocrites? Show me the tribute-money. And they brought unto him a penny. And he
says unto them, Whose is this image and superscription? They say unto him,
Cesars. Then says he unto them, Render therefore unto Caesar, the things which
are Cesars; and unto God, the things that are Gods. When they had heard these
words, they marvelled, and left him, and went their way.

The four and twentieth Sunday after Trinity.
The collect.
O Lord, we beseech thee, absolve thy people from their offenses; that through
thy bountiful goodness we may all be delivered from the bands of those sins,
which by our frailty we have committed. Grant this, O heavenly Father, for
Jesus Christ's sake, our blessed Lord and Savior. Amen.

The Epistle. Colos. 1.3.
WE give thanks to God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, praying always
for you, since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love which ye
have to all the saints; for the hope which is laid up for you in heaven,
whereof ye heard before in the word of the truth of the Gospel; which is come
unto you, as it is in all the world, and brings forth fruit, as it does also
in you, since the day ye heard of it, and knew the grace of God in truth. As ye
also learned of Epaphras our dear fellow servants, who is for you a faithful
minister of Christ; who also declared unto us your love in the Spirit. For this
cause we also, since the day we heard it, do not cease to pray for you, and to
desire that ye might be filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and
spiritual understanding. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all
pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of
God; strengthened with all might, according to his glorious power, unto all
patience and long-suffering, with joyfulness; giving thanks unto the Father,
who has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 9.18.
WHile Jesus spoke these things unto John's disciples, behold, there came a
certain ruler and worshipped him, saying, My daughter is even now dead; but
come and lay thy hand upon her, and she shall live. And Jesus arose, and
followed him, and so did his disciples, (And behold, a woman which was diseased
with an issue of blood twelve years, came behind him, and touched the hem of
his garment. For she said within her self, If I may but touch his garment, I
shall be whole. But Jesus turned him about and when he saw her, he said,
Daughter, be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole. And the woman was
made whole from that hour) And when Jesus came into the rulers house, and saw
the minstrels and the people making a noise, he said unto them, Give place; for
the maid is not dead, but sleeps. And they laughed him to scorn. But when the
people were put forth, he went in, and took her by the hand, and the maid
arose. And the same hereof went abroad into all that land.

The twenty fifth Sunday after Trinity.
The collect.
STir up, we beseech thee, O Lord, the wills of thy faithful people, that they
plenteously bringing forth the fruit of good works, may of thee be plenteously
rewarded, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For the Epistle. Jer. 23.5.
BEhold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a
righteous branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute
judgment and justice in the earth. In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel
shall dwell safely: and this is his Name whereby he shall be called, THE LORD
OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. Therefore behold, the days come, says the Lord, that they
shall no more say, The Lord lives, who brought up the children of Israel out
of the land of Egypt; But, The Lord lives, who brought up, and who led the
seed of the house of Israel out of north-countrey, and from all countries
whither I had driven them, and they shall dwell in their own land.

The Gospel. S. John 6.5.
WHen Jesus then lift up his eyes, and saw a great company come unto him, he
says unto Philip, Whence shall we buy bread that these may eat? (And this he
said to prove him: for he himself knew what he would do) Philip answered him,
Two hundred pennyworth of bread is not sufficient for them, that every one of
them may take a little. One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother,
says unto him, There is a lad here, who has five barley-loaves, and two small
fishes; but what are they among so many? And Jesus said, Make the men sit down.
Now there was much grass in the place. So the men sat down, in number about
five thousand. And Jesus took the loaves, and when he had given thanks, he
distributed to the disciples, and the disciples to them that were set down, and
likewise of the fishes as much as they would. When they were filled, he said
unto his disciples, Gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost.
Therefore they gathered them together, and filled twelve baskets with the
fragments of the five barley-loaves, which remained over and above unto them
that had eaten. Then those men, when they had seen the miracle that Jesus did,
said, This is of a truth that Prophet that should come into the world.

If there be any mo Sundays before Advent-Sunday, the Service of some of those
Sundays that were omitted after the Epiphany, shall be taken in to supply so
many as are here wanting. And if there be fewer, the overplus may be omitted:
Provided, that this last Collect, Epistle, and Gospel, shall always be used
upon the Sunday next before Advent.

Saint Andrews day.
The collect.
ALmighty God, who did give such grace unto thy holy Apostle Saint Andrew,
that he readily obeyed the calling of thy Son Jesus Christ, and followed him
without delay; Grant unto us all, that we being called by thy holy Word; may
forthwith give up our selves obediently to fulfill thy holy Commandments,
through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. Romans 10.9.
IF thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in
thine heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. For
with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession
is made unto salvation. For the Scripture says, Whosoever believes on him,
shall not be ashamed. For there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek:
For the same Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him. For whosoever
shall call upon the Name of the Lord, shall be saved. How then shall they call
on him in whom they have not believed? And how shall they believe in him of
whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a preacher? And how
shall they preach, except they be sent? as it is written, How beautiful are the
feet of them that preach the gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good
things! But they have not all obeyed the gospel. For Esaias says, Lord, who
has believed our report? So then, says comes by hearing, and hearing by the
word of God. But I say, Have they not heard? Yes verily, their sound went into
all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world. But I say, Did not
Israel know? First Moses says, I will provoke you to jealousy by them that
are no people, and by a foolish nation I will anger you. But Esaias is very
bold, and says, I was found of them that sought me not; I was made manifest
unto them that asked not after me. But to Israel he says, All day long I have
stretched forth my hands unto a disobedient and gainsaying people.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 4.18.
JEsus walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon called Peter, and
Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea: (for they were fishers) And he
says unto them, follow me, and I will make you fishers of men. And they
straightway left their nets, and followed him. And going on from thence, he saw
other two brethren, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in a ship
with Zebedee their father, mending their nets; and he called them. And they
immediately left the ship and their father, and followed him.

Saint Thomas the Apostle.
The collect.
ALmighty and everliving God, who for the more confirmation of the Faith did
suffer thy holy Apostle Thomas to be doubtful in thy Sons resurrection; Grant
us so perfectly and without all doubt to believe in thy Son Jesus Christ, that
our faith in thy sight may never be reproved. Hear us, O Lord, through the same
Jesus Christ, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost be all honor and glory now
and for evermore. Amen.

The Epistle. Ephesians. 2.19.
NOw therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens
with the saints, and of the household of God; and are built upon the foundation
of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
cornerstone; in whom all the building fitly framed together, grows unto an
holy temple in the Lord; in whom ye also are builded together for an habitation
of God through the Spirit.

The Gospel. S. John 20.24.
THomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came.
The other disciples therefore said unto him, We have seen the Lord. But he said
unto them, Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my
finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will
not believe. And after eight days again his disciples were within, and Thomas
with them: then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and
said, Peace be unto you. Then says he to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and
behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side, and be
not faithless, but believing. And Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord,
and my God. Jesus says unto him, Thomas, because thou have seen me, thou have
believed; blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed. And many
other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his disciples, which are not
written in this book. But these are written, that ye might believe that Jesus
is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing, ye might have life through
his Name.

The Conversion of Saint Paul.
The collect.
O God, who through the preaching of the blessed Apostle Saint Paul have caused
the light of the Gospel to shine throughout the world; Grant we beseech thee,
that we having his wonderful Conversion in remembrance, may show forth our
thankfulness unto thee for the same, by following the holy doctrine which he
taught, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For the Epistle. Acts 9.1.
ANd Saul yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of
the Lord, went unto the high priest, and desired of him letters to Damascus to
the synagogues, that if he found any of this way, whether they were men or
women, he might bring them bound unto Jerusalem. And as he journeyed he came
near Damascus and suddenly there shined round about him a light from heaven.
And he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me? And he said, who art thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am
Jesus whom thou persecutest: it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.
And he trembling and astonished, said, Lord, what will thou have me to do? And
the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the city, and it shall be told thee
what thou must do. And the men which journeyed with him stood speechless,
hearing a voice, but seeing no man. And Saul arose from the earth, and when his
eyes were opened, he saw no man; but they led him by the hand, and brought him
into Damascus. And he was three days without sight, and neither did eat nor
drink. And there was a certain disciple at Damascus* named Ananias, and to him
said the Lord in a vision, Ananias. And he said, Behold, I am hear, Lord. And
the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the street which is called Straight,
and enquire in the house of Judas for one called Saul of Tarsus: for behold, he
prays, and has seen in a vision a man named Ananias, coming in, and putting
his hand on him, that he might receive his sight. Then Ananias answered, Lord,
I have heard by many of this man, how much evil he has done to thy saints at
Jerusalem; and here he has authority from the chief priests to bind all that
call on thy Name. But the Lord said unto him, Go thy way; for he is a chosen
vessel unto me, to bear my Name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the
children of Israel. For I will show him how great things he must suffer for my
Names sake. And Ananias went his way, and entered into the house; and putting
his hands on him, said, Brother Saul, the Lord (even Jesus that appeared unto
thee in the way as thou came) has sent me, that thou might receive thy
sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost. And immediately there fell from his
eyes as it had been scales; and he received sight forthwith, and arose, and was
baptized. And when he had received meat, he was strengthened. Then was Saul
certain days with the disciples which were at Damascus. And straightway he
preached Christ in the synagogues, that he is the Son of God. But all that
heard him were amazed, and said, Is not this he that destroyed them which
called on this Name in Jerusalem, and came hither for that intent, that he
might bring them bound unto the chief priests? But Saul increased the more in
strength, and confounded the Jews which dwelt at Damascus, proving that this is
very Christ.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 19.27.
PEter answered and said unto Jesus, Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed
thee, what shall we have therefore? And Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto
you, that ye which have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of man
shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones,
judging the twelve tribes of Israel. And every one that has forsaken houses,
or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands
for my Names sake, shall receive an hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting
life. But many that are first shall be last, and the last shall be first.

The Presentation of Christ in the Temple, commonly called, The Purification of
Saint Mary the Virgin.
The collect.
ALmighty and everliving God, we humbhly beseech thy Majesty, that as thy Only
begotten Son was this day presented in the Temple in substance of our flesh; so
we may be presented unto thee with pure and clean hearts, by the same thy Son
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For the Epistle. Mal. 3.1.
BEhold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and
the Lord whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple; even the messenger of
the covenant, whom ye delight in; behold, he shall come, says the Lord of
hosts. But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he
appears? for he is like a refiners fire, and like fullers soap. And he shall
sit as a refiner and purifier of silver; and he shall purify the sons of Levi,
and purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an
offering in righteousness. Then shall the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be
pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years. And I
will come near to you to judgment, and I will be a swift witness against the
sorcerers, and against the adulterers, and against false swearers, and against
those that oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow and the fatherless, and
that turn aside the stranger from his right, and fear not me says the Lord of
hosts.

The Gospel. S. Luke 2.22.
ANd when the days of her purification, according to the law Moses, were
accomplished, they brought him to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord, (as it
is written in the law of the Lord, Every male that opens the womb, shall be
called holy to the Lord) and to offer a sacrifice, according to that which is
said in the law of the Lord, a pair of turtle-doves, or two young pigeons. And
behold, there was a man in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon; and the same man
was just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel: and the Holy Ghost
was upon him. And it was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost that he should not
see death before he had seen the Lords Christ. And he came by the Spirit into
the temple; and when the parents brought in the child Jesus, to do for him
after the custom of the law, then took he him up in his arms, and blessed God,
and said, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy
word. For mine eyes have seen thy salvation; which thou have prepared before
the face of all people, a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy
people Israel. And Joseph and his mother marvelled at those things which were
spoken of him. And Simeon blessed them, and said unto Mary his mother, Behold,
this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel; and for a
sign which shall be spoken against. (Yea, a sword shall pierce through thy own
soul also) that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed. And there was one
Anna a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Aser; she was of a
great age, and had lived with an husband seven years from her virginity. And
she was a widow of about fourscore and four years; which departed not from the
temple, but served God with fastings and prayers night and day. And she coming
in that instant, gave thanks likewise unto the Lord, and spoke of him to all
them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem. And when they had performed all
things according to the law of the Lord, they returned into Galilee to their
own city Nazareth. And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with
wisdom; and the grace of God was upon him.

Saint Matthias day.
The collect.
O Almighty God, who into the place of the traitor Judas did choose thy
faithful servant Matthias to be of the number of the twelve Apostles; Grant
that thy Church being always preserved from false Apostles, may be ordered and
guided by faithful and true Pastors, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

For the Epistle. Acts 1.15.
IN those days Peter stood up in the midst of the disciples, and said, (The
number of the names together, were about an hundred and twenty) Men and
brethren, this Scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the Holy Ghost
by the mouth of David spoke before concerning Judas, who was guide to them that
took Jesus: for he was numbered with us, and had obtained part of this ministry.
Now this man purchased a field with the reward of iniquity and falling
headlong, he burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out. And it
was known unto all the dwellers at Jerusalem, insomuch as that field is called
in their proper tongue, Aceldama, that is to say, The field of blood. For it is
written in the book of Psalms, Let his habitation be desolate, and let no man
dwell therein, and his Bishopric let another take. Wherefore of these men
which have companied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out
among us, beginning from the baptism of John, unto that same day that he was
taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a witness with us of his
Resurrection. And they appointed two, Joseph called Barsabas, who was surnamed
Justus, and Matthias. And they prayed, and said, Thou, Lord, which know the
hearts of all men, show whether of these two thou have chosen; that he may take
part of this ministry and apostleship, from which Judas by transgression fell,
that he might go to his own place. And they gave forth their lots; and the lot
fell upon Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven Apostles.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 11.25.
AT that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven
and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and
have revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy
sight. All things are delivered unto me of my Father: and no man knows the
Son but the Father; neither knows any man the Father, save the Son, and he to
whomsoever the Son will reveal him. Come unto me all ye that labor and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me,
for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For
my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.

The Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary.
The collect.
WE beseech thee, O Lord, pour thy grace into our hearts, that as we have known
the Incarnation of thy Son Jesus Christ by the message of an angel; so by his
cross and passion we may be brought unto the glory of his Resurrection, through
the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For the Epistle. Isa. 7.10.
MOreover the Lord spoke again unto Ahaz, saying, Ask thee a sign of the Lord
thy God, ask it either in the depth, or in the height above. But Ahaz said, I
will not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord. And he said, Hear ye now, O house
of David, is it a small thing for you to weary men, but will ye weary my God
also? Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign, Behold, a Virgin shall
conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his name Immanuel. Butter and honey
shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil, and choose the good.

The Gospel. S. Luke 1.26.
ANd in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a city of
Galilee, named Nazareth, to a virgin espoused to a man, whose name was Joseph,
of the house of David; and the virgins name was Mary. And the angel came in
unto her, and said, Hail, thou that art highly favored, the Lord is with thee;
blessed art thou among women. And when she saw him, she was troubled at his
saying, and cast in her mind what manner of salutation this should be. And the
angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary; for thou have found favor with God. And
behold, thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Son, and shall call
his name Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest;
and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David. And he
shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be
no end. Then said Mary unto the angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not a
man? And the angel answered and said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come upon
thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that
holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. And
behold, thy cousin Elizabeth, she has also conceived a son in her old age; and
this is the sixth month with her who was called barren. For with God nothing
shall be unpossible. And Mary said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto
me according to thy word. And the angel departed from her.

Saint Marks day.
The collect.
O Almighty God, who have instructed thy holy Church with the heavenly Doctrine
of thy Evangelist Saint Mark; Give us grace, that being not like children
carried away with every blast of vain doctrine, we may be established in the
truth of thy holy Gospel, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. Ephesians. 4.7.
UNto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of
Christ. Wherefore he says, When he ascended up on high, he led captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men. (Now that he ascended, what is it but that he
also descended first into the lower parts of the earth? He that descended is
the same also that ascended up far above all heavens, that he might fill all
things) And he gave some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and
some pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of
the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ; till we all come in the
unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man,
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; that we henceforth be
no more children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, by the slight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in
wait to deceive; but speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all
things, which is the head, even Christ. From whom the whole body fitly joined
together, and compacted by that which every joint supplieth, according to the
effectual working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the body,
unto the edifying of it self in love.

The Gospel. S. John 15.1.
I Am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman. Every branch in me that
bears not fruit, he takes away; and every branch that bears fruit, he
purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit. Now ye are clean through the
word which I have spoken unto you. Abide in me, and I in you. As the branch
cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye,
except ye abide in me. I am the vine, ye are the branches. He that abides in
me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit; for without me ye can do
nothing. If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is
withered; and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are
burned. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye
will, and it shall be done unto you. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye
bear much fruit; so shall ye be my disciples. As the Father has loved me, so
have I loved you; continue ye in my love. If ye keep my commandments, ye shall
abide in my love; even as I have kept my Fathers commandments, and abide in his
love. These things have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and
that your joy might be full.

Saint Philip and Saint James day.
The collect.
O Almighty God, whom truly to know is everlasting life; Grant us perfectly to
know thy Son Jesus Christ to be the way, the truth, and the life, that
following the steps of thy holy Apostles, Saint Philip and Saint James, we may
steadfastly walk in the way that leads to eternal life, through the same thy
Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. S. James 1.1.
JAmes a servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ,
to the twelve tribes which are scattered abroad, greeting.
My brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations; knowing
this, that the trying of your faith works patience. But let patience have her
perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing. If any of you
lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all men liberally, and
upbraideth not, and it shall be given him. But let him ask in faith nothing
wavering; for he that wavereth is like a wave of the sea, driven with the wind,
and tossed. For let not that man think that he shall receive any thing of the
Lord. A double-minded man is unstable in all his ways. Let the brother of low
degree rejoice in that he is exalted; but the rich in that he is made low;
because as the flower of the grass he shall pass away. For the sun is no sooner
risen with a burning heat, but it withers the grass, and the flower thereof
falls, and the grace of the fashion of it perishes: so also shall the rich
man fade away in his ways. Blessed is the man that endures temptation; for
when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has
promised to them that love him.

The Gospel. S. John 14.1.
ANd Jesus said unto his disciples, Let not your heart be trouble; ye believe
in God, believe also in me. In my Fathers house are many mansions; if it were
not so, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you: And if I go and
prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto my self, that
where I am, there ye may be also. And whither I go, ye know, and the way ye
know. Thomas says unto him, Lord, we know not whither thou go, and how can
we know the way? Jesus says unto him, I am the way, the truth, and the life;
no man comes unto the Father but by me. If ye had known me, ye should have
known my Father also; and from henceforth ye know him, and have seen him.
Philip says unto him, Lord, show us the Father, and it suffices us. Jesus
says unto him, Have I been so long time with you, and yet have thou not known
me, Philip? He that has seen me, has seen the Father; and how say thou
then, Show us the Father? Believe thou not that I am in the Father, and the
Father in me? The words that I speak unto you, I speak not of my self; but the
Father that dwells in me, he does the works. Believe me, that I am in the
Father, and the Father in me; or else believe me for the very works sake.
Verily, verily I say unto you, He that believes on me, the works that I do,
shall he do also, and greater works then these shall he do; because I go unto
my Father. And whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, that will I do, that the
Father may be glorified in the Son. If ye shall ask any thing in my Name, I
will do it.

Saint Barnabas the Apostle.
The collect.
O Lord God Almighty, who did endue thy holy Apostle Barnabas with singular
gifts of the holy Ghost; Leave us not we beseech thee destitute of thy manifold
gifts, nor yet of grace to use them always to thy honor and glory, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For the Epistle. Acts 11.22.
TIdings of these things came unto the ears of the Church which was in
Jerusalem; and they sent forth Barnabas, that he should go as far as Antioch.
Who when he came, and had seen the grace of God, was glad, and exhorted them
all, that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord. For he was a
good man, and full of the Holy Ghost, and of faith; and much people was added
unto the Lord. Then departed Barnabas to Tarsus for to seek Saul. And when he
had found him, he brought him unto Antioch. And it came to pass, that a whole
year they assembled themselves with the Church, and taught much people; and the
disciples were called Christians first in Antioch. And in these days came
prophets from Jerusalem unto Antioch. And there stood up one of them, named
Agabus, and signified by the Spirit, that there should be great dearth
throughout all the world; which came to pass in the days of Claudius Caesar.
Then the disciples, every man according to his ability, determined to send
relief unto the brethren which dwelt in Judea. Which also they did, and sent it
to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.

The Gospel. S. John 15.12.
THis is my commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved you. Greater
love has no man then this, that a man lay down his life for his friends. Ye
are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. Henceforth I call you not
servants; for the servant knows not what his lord does: but I have called
you friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father, I have made known
unto you. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you that
ye should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain; that
whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my Name, he may give it you.

Saint John Baptist.
The collect.
ALmighty God, by whose providence thy servant John Baptist was wonderfully
born, and sent to prepare the way of thy Son our Savior by preaching of
repentance; make us so to follow his doctrine and holy life, that we may truly
repent according to his preaching, and after his example constantly speak the
truth, boldly rebuke vice, and patiently suffer for the truths sake, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For the Epistle. Isai. 40.1.
COmfort ye, comfort ye my people, says your God. Speak ye comfortably to
Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her
iniquity is pardoned; for she has received of the Lords hand double for all
her sins. The voice of him that cries in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of
the Lord, make straight in the desert a high way for our God. Every valley
shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made low, and the
crooked shall be made straight, and the rough places plain. And the glory of
the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together; for the mouth
of the Lord has spoken it. The voice said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry?
All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the
field. The grass withers, the flower fades, because the Spirit of the Lord
blows upon it: surely the people is grass. The grass withers, the flower
fades, but the word of our God shall stand for ever. O Zion, that bring
good tidings, get thee up into the high mountain: O Jerusalem, that bring
good tidings, lift up thy voice with strength; lift it up, be not afraid: say
unto the cities of Judah, Behold your God. Behold, the Lord God will come with
strong hand, and his arm shall rule for him; behold, his reward is with him,
and his work before him. He shall feed his flock like a shepherd, he shall
gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in this bosom, and shall gently
lead those that are with young.

The Gospel. S. Luke 1.57.
Elizabeth's full time came that she should be delivered; and she brought forth
a son. And her neighbors and her cousins heard how the Lord had showed great
mercy upon her, and they rejoiced with her. And it came to pass, that on the
eighth day they came to circumcise the child, and they called him Zacharias,
after the name of his father. And his mother answered and said, Not so; but he
shall be called John. And they said unto her, There is none of thy kindred that
is called by this name. And they made signs to his father, how he would have
him called. And he asked for a writing-table, and wrote, saying, His name is
John. And they marvelled all. And his mouth was opened immediately, and his
tongue loosed, and he spoke and praised God. And fear came on all that dwelt
round about them; and all these sayings were noised abroad throughout all the
hill-countrey of Judea. And all they that had heard them, laid them up in their
hearts, saying, What manner of child shall this be? And the hand of the Lord
was with him. And his father Zacharias was filled with the Holy Ghost, and
prophesied, saying, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for the has visited and
redeemed his people, and has raised up an horn of salvation for us in the
house of his servant David; as he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets,
which have been since the world began; that we should be saved from our
enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us; to perform the mercy promised
to our fathers, and to remember his holy covenant; the oath which he swear to
our father Abraham, that he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of
the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of our life. And thou child, shall be
called the Prophet of the Highest; for thou shall go before the face of the
Lord to prepare his ways; to give knowledge of salvation unto his people by the
remission of their sins, through the tender mercy of our God, whereby the
Dayspring from on high has visited us; to give light to them that sit in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of peace.
And the Child grew, and waxed strong in spirit; and was in the deserts till the
day of his showing unto Israel.

Saint Peter's day.
The collect.
O Almighty God, who by thy Son Jesus Christ did give to the Apostle Saint
Peter many excellent gifts, and commandedst him earnestly to feed thy flock;
Make, we beseech thee, all Bishops and Pastors, diligently to preach thy holy
Word, and the people obediently to follow the same, that they may receive the
crown of everlasting glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For the Epistle. Acts 12.1.
ABout that time Herod the king stretched forth his hands to vex certain of the
Church. And he killed James the brother of John with the sword. And because he
saw it pleased the Jews, he proceeded further to take Peter also. (Then were
the days of unleavened bread) And when he had apprehended him, he put him in
prison, and delivered him to four quaternions of soldiers to keep him,
intending after Easter to bring him forth to the people. Peter therefore was
kept in prison; but prayer was made without ceasing of the Church unto God for
him. And when Herod would have brought him forth, the same night Peter was
sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains; and the keepers before
the door kept the prison. And behold, the angel of the Lord came upon him and a
light shined in the prison; and he smote Peter on the side, and raised him up,
saying, Arise up quickly. And his chains fell off from his hands. And the angel
said unto him, Gird thy self, and bind on thy sandals: and so he did. And he
says unto him, Cast thy garment about thee, and follow me. And he went out and
followed him, and wist not that it was true which was done by the angel; but
thought he saw a vision. When they were past the first and the second ward,
they came unto the iron gate that leads unto the city which opened to them of
his own accord; and they went out, and passed on through one street, and
forthwith the angel departed from him. And when Peter was come to himself, he
said, Now I know of a surety, that the Lord has sent his angel, and has
delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from all the expectation of the
people of the Jews.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 16.13.
WHen Jesus came into the coasts of Cesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples,
saying whom do men say that I, the Son of man, am? And they said, Some say that
thou art John the Baptist, some Elias, and others Jeremias, or one of the
prophets. He says unto them, But whom say ye that I am? And Simon Peter
answered and said, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God. And Jesus
answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona: for flesh and
blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven. And I
say also unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my
Church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give
unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever thou shall bind on
earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth,
shall be loosed in heaven.

Saint James the Apostle.
The collect.
GRant, O merciful God, that as thine holy Apostle Saint James, leaving his
father and all that he had, without delay was obedient unto the calling of thy
Son Jesus Christ, and followed him; so we forsaking all worldly and carnal
affections, may be evermore ready to follow thy holy commandments, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For the Epistle. Acts 11.27, and part of Chap. 12.
IN those days came prophets from Jerusalem unto Antioch. And there stood up
one of them, named Agabus, and signified the Spirit that there should be great
dearth throughout all the world; which came to pass in the days of Claudius
Caesar. Then the disciples, every man according to his ability, determined to
send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in Judea. Which also they did, and
sent it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul. Now about that time,
Herod the king stretched forth his hands to vex certain of the Church. And he
killed James the brother of John with the sword. And because he saw it pleased
the Jews, he proceeded further to take Peter also.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 20.20.
THen came to him the mother of Zebedees Children, with her sons, worshipping
him, and desiring a certain thing of him. And he said unto her, What will thou?
She says unto him, Grant these my two sons may sit, the one on thy right hand,
and the other on the left, in thy Kingdom. But Jesus answered and said, Ye know
not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and to
be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with? They say unto him, We are
able. And he says unto them, Ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and be baptized
with the baptism that I am baptized with: but to sit on my right hand, and on
my left, is not mine to give, but it shall be given to them for whom it is
prepared of my Father. And when the ten heard it, they were moved with
indignation against the two brethren. But Jesus called them unto him, and said,
Ye know that the princes of Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that
are great, exercise authority upon them. But it shall not be so among you: but
whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister; and whosoever will
be chief among you, let him be your servant: Even as the Son of man came not to
be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.

Saint Bartholomew the Apostle.
The collect.
O Almighty and everlasting God, who did give to thine Apostle Bartholomew
grace truly to believe and to preach thy Word; Grant, we beseech thee, unto thy
Church to love that Word which he believed, and both to preach and receive the
same, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For the Epistle. Acts 5.12.
BY the hands of the Apostles were many signs and wonders wrought among the
people, (and they were all with one accord in Solomon's porch. And of the rest
durst no man join himself to them: but the people magnified them. And believers
were the more added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women) Insomuch
that they brought forth the sick into the streets, and said them on beds and
couches, that at the least the shadow of Peter passing by might overshadow some
of them. There came also a multitude out of the cities round about unto
Jerusalem, bringing sick folks, and them which were vexed with unclean spirits,
and they were healed every one.

The Gospel. S. Luke 22.24.
ANd there was also a strife among them, which of them should be accounted the
greatest. And he said unto them, The Kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship
over them; and they that exercise authority upon them, are called benefactors.
But ye shall not be so: but he that is greatest among you, let him be as the
younger; and he that is chief, as he that does serve. For whether is greater,
he that sits at meat, of he that serves? is not he that sits at meat?
but I am among you as he that serves. Ye are they which have continued with me
in my temptations. And I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has
appointed unto me; that ye may eat and drink at my table in my Kingdom, and sit
on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

Saint Matthew the Apostle.
The collect.
O Almighty God, who by thy blessed Son did call Matthew from the receipt or
custom, to be an Apostle and Evangelist; Grant us grace to forsake all covetous
desires and inordinate love of riches, and to follow the same thy Son Jesus
Christ, who lives and reigns with thee and the Holy Ghost, one God, world
without end. Amen.

The Epistle. 2 Cor. 4.1.
THerefore seeing we have this ministry, as we have received mercy we faint
not; but have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in
craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of
the truth, commending our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God.
But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost: In whom the god of
this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of
the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them.
For we preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and our selves your
servants for Jesus sake. For God who commanded the light to shine out of
darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 9.9.
ANd as Jesus passed forth from thence, he saw a man named Matthew, sitting at
the receipt of Custom: and he says unto him, Follow me. And he arose, and
followed him. And it came to pass, as Jesus sat at meat in the house, behold,
many Publicans and sinners came and sat down with him and his disciples. And
when the Pharisees saw it, they said unto his disciples, Why eats your Master
with Publicans and sinners? But when Jesus heard that, he said unto them, They
that be whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick. But go ye and learn
what that means, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice; for I am not came to
call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

Saint Michael and all Angels.
The collect.
O Everlasting God, who have ordained and constituted the services of Angels
and men in a wonderful order; Mercifully grant, that as thy holy Angels always
do thee service in heaven; so by thy appointment they may succor and defend us
on earth, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For the Epistle. Rev. 12.7.
THere was war in heaven: Michael and his Angels fought against the dragon, and
the dragon fought and his angels; and prevailed not, neither was their place
found any more in heaven. And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent,
called the devil and Satan, which deceives the whole world; he was cast out
into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him. And I heard a loud voice
saying in heaven, Now is come salvation, and strength, and the kingdom of our
God, and the power of his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is cast down,
which accused them before our God day and night. And they overcame him by the
blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; and they loved not their
lives unto the death. Therefore rejoice, ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them.
Woe to the inhabiters of the earth and of the sea: for the devil is come down
unto you, having great wrath, because he knows that he has but a short time.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 18.1.
AT the same time came the disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who is the greatest in
the kingdom of heaven? And Jesus called a little child unto him, and set him in
the midst of them, and said, Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and
become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.
Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the same is
greatest in the kingdom of heaven. And whosoever shall receive one such little
child in my Name, receives me. But whosoever shall offend one of these little ones
which believe in me, it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about
his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea. Woe unto the world,
because of offenses: for it must needs be that offenses come; but woe to that
man by whom the offense comes. Wherefore if thy hand or thy foot offend thee,
cut them off, and cast them from thee: it is better for thee to enter into life
halt or maimed, rather then having two hands or two feet, to be cast into
everlasting fire. And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from
thee: it is better for thee to enter into life with one eye, rather then having
two eyes, to be cast into hellfire. Take heed that ye despise not one of these
little ones; for I say unto you, that in heaven their angels do always behold
the face of my Father which is in heaven.

Saint Luke the Evangelist.
The collect.
ALmighty God, who calledst Luke the Physician, whose praise is in the Gospel,
to be an Evangelist, and Physician of the soul; May it please thee, that by the
wholesome medicines of the doctrine delivered by him, all the diseases of our
souls may be healed, through the merits of thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. 2 Timothy 4.5.
WAtch thou in all things, endure afflictions, do the work of an Evangelist,
make full proof of thy ministry. For I am now ready to be offered, and the time
of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day:
and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing. Do thy
diligence to come shortly unto me: For Demas has forsaken me, having loved
this present world, and is departed unto Thessalonica; Crescens to Galatia,
Titus unto Dalmatia. Only Luke is with me. Take Mark and bring him with thee:
for he is profitable to me for the ministry. And Tychicus have I sent to
Ephesus. The cloak that I left at Troas with Carpus, when thou come bring
with thee, and the books, but especially the parchments. Alexander the
coppersmith did me much evil: the Lord reward him according to his works. Of
whom be thou ware also, for he has greatly withstood our words.

The Gospel. S. Luke 10.1.
THe Lord appointed other seventy also, and sent them two and two before his
face into every city and place whither he himself would come. Therefore said he
unto them, The harvest truly is great, but the laborers are few; pray ye
therefore the Lord of the harvest that he would send forth laborers into his
harvest. Go your ways, behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves. Carry
neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes, and salute no man by the way. And into
whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this house. And if the son of
peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it: if not, it shall turn to you
again. And in the same house remain, eating and drinking such things as they
give: for the labourer is worthy of his hire.

Saint Simon and Saint Jude Apostles.
The collect.
O Almighty God, who have built thy Church upon the foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the head cornerstone; Grant us so to
be joined together in unity of spirit by their doctrine, that we may be made an
holy temple acceptable unto thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. S. Jude 1.
JUde the servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to them that are
sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ, and called: Mercy
unto you, and peace, and love be multiplied. Beloved when I gave all diligence
to write unto you of the common salvation, it was needful for me to write unto
you, and exhort you, that ye should earnestly contend for the Faith which was
once delivered unto the saints. For there are certain men crept in unawares,
who were before of old ordained to this condemnation; ungodly men, turning the
grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our
Lord Jesus Christ. I will therefore put you in remembrance, though ye once knew
this, how that the Lord having saved the people out of the land of Egypt,
afterward destroyed them that believed not. And the angels which kept not their
first estate, but left their own habitation, he has reserved in everlasting
chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day. Even as Sodom and
Gomorrha, and the cities about them in like manner giving themselves over to
fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an example,
suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. Likewise also these filthy dreamers
defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities.

The Gospel. S. John 15.17.
THese things I command you, that ye love one another. If the world hate you,
ye know that it hated me, before it hated you. If ye were of the world, the
world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have
chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you. Remember the word
that I said unto you, The servant is not greater then the Lord: if they have
persecuted me, they will also persecute you; if they have kept my saying, they
will keep yours also. But all these things will they do unto you for my Names
sake, because they know not him that sent me. If I had not come and spoken unto
them, they had not had sin: but now they have no cloak for their sin. He that
hates me, hates my father also. If I had not done among them the works which
none other man did, they had not had sin; but now have they both seen, and
hated both me and my Father. But this comes to pass, that the word might be
fulfilled, that is written in their law, They hated me without a cause. But
when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the
Spirit of truth, which proceeds from the Father, he shall testify of me. And
ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been with me from the beginning.

All Saints day.
The collect.
O Almighty God, who have knit together thine elect in one communion and
fellowship, in the mystical body of thy Son Christ our Lord; Grant us grace so
to follow thy blessed Saints in all virtuous and godly living, that we may come
to those unspeakable joys, which thou have prepared for them that unfeignedly
love thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

For the Epistle. Rev. 7.2.
ANd I saw another angel ascending from the east, having the seal of the living
God; and he cried with a loud voice to the four angels, to whom it was given to
hurt the earth and the sea, saying, Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor
the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads. And
I heard the number of them which were sealed; and there were sealed an hundred
and forty and four thousand, of all the tribes of the children of Israel.

Of the tribe of Juda were sealed twelve thousand.

Of the tribe of Reuben were sealed twelve thousand.

Of the tribe of Gad were sealed twelve thousand.

Of the tribe of Aser were sealed twelve thousand.

Of the tribe of Nephthalim were sealed twelve thousand.

Of the tribe of Manasses were sealed twelve thousand.

Of the tribe of Simeon were sealed twelve thousand.

Of the tribe of Levi were sealed twelve thousand.

Of the tribe of Isachar were sealed twelve thousand.

Of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed twelve thousand.

Of the tribe of Joseph were sealed twelve thousand.

Of the tribe of Benjamin were sealed twelve thousand.

After this I beheld, and lo, a great multitude which no man could number, of
all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne,
and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands: And
cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God, which sits upon the
throne, and unto the Lamb. And all the angels stood round about the throne, and
about the elders, and the four beasts, and fell before the throne on their
faces, and worshipped God, saying, Amen; Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and
thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might be unto our God for ever and
ever. Amen.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 5.1.
JEsus seeing the multitudes, went up into a mountain; and when he was set, his
disciples came unto him. And he opened his mouth, and taught them, saying,
Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed
are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the meek: for
they shall inherit the earth. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after
righteousness: for they shall be filled. Blessed are the merciful: for they
shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.
Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God.
Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake: for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you,
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be
exceeding glad; for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the
prophets which were before you.

The ORDER for the Administration of the LORDS SUPPER, or HOLY COMMUNION.
SO many as intend to be partakers of the Holy Communion, shall signify their
Names to the Curate at least sometime the day before.

And if any of those be an open and notorious evil liver, or have done any
wrong to his Neighbors by word or deed, so that the Congregation be thereby
offended; the Curate having knowledge thereof, shall call him and advertise
him, that in any wise he presume not to come to the Lords Table, until he has
openly declared himself to have truly repented and amended his former naughty
life, that the Congregation may thereby be satisfied, which before were
offended; and that he has recompensed the Parties to whom he has done wrong,
or at least declare himself to be in full purpose so to do, as soon as he
conveniently may.

The same Order shall the Curate use with those betwixt whom he perceives
malice and hatred to reign; not suffering them to be partakers of the Lords
Table, until he know them to be reconciled. And if one of the Parties so at
variance, be content to forgive from the bottom of his heart all that the other
has trespassed against him, and to make amends for that he himself has
offended; and the other Party will not be persuaded to a godly unity, but
remain still in his frowardness and malice: the Minister in that case ought to
admit the penitent Person to the Holy Communion, and not him that is obstinate.
Provided that every Minister so repelling any, as is specified in this, or the
next precedent Paragraph of this Rubric, shall be obliged to give an account
of the same to the Ordinary within fourteen days after at the farthest. And the
Ordinary shall proceed against the offending Person according to the Canon.

The Table at the Communion-time having a fair white Linen Cloth upon it, shall
stand in the body of the Church, or in the Chancel, where Morning and Evening
Prayer are appointed to be said. And the Priest standing at the North-side of
the Table, shall say the Lords Prayer, with the Collect following, the People
kneeling.

OUR Father, which art in heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, As it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Collect.
ALmighty God, unto whom all hearts be open, all desires known, and from whom
no secrets are hid; Cleanse the thoughts of our hearts by the inspiration of
thy holy Spirit, that we may perfectly love thee, and worthily magnify thy
holy Name, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall the Priest, turning to the People, rehearse distinctly all the TEN
COMMANDMENTS; and the People still kneeling, shall after every Commandment ask
God mercy for their transgression thereof for the time past, and grace to keep
the same for the time to come, as follows.

Minister. GOd spoke these words, and said, I am the Lord thy God: Thou shall
have none other gods but me.


People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.


Minister. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness
of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water
under the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them: for I the
Lord thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the
children unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show
mercy unto thousands in them that love me, and keep my commandments.


People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.


Minister. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the
Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.


People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.


Minister. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath Day. Six days shall thou
labor and do all that thou have to do; but the seventh day is the Sabbath of
the Lord thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou, and thy son, and
thy daughter, thy manservant, and thy maidservant, thy cattle, and the
stranger that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth, the sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore
the Lord blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.


People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.


Minister. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the
land which the Lord thy God gives thee.


People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.


Minister. Thou shall do no murder.


People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.


Minister. Thou shall not commit adultery.


People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.


Minister. Thou shall not steal.


People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.


Minister. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.


People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this law.


Minister. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor
any thing that is his.


People. Lord, have mercy upon us, and write all these thy laws in our hearts,
we beseech thee.


Then shall follow one of these two Collects for the King, the Priest standing
as before, and saying,

Let us pray.

ALmighty God, whose kingdom is everlasting, and power infinite; Have mercy
upon the whole Church, and so rule the heart of thy chosen servant (...), that
he (knowing whose Minister he is) may above all things seek thy honor and
glory; and that we and all his subjects (duly considering whose authority he
has) may faithfully serve, honor, and humbly obey him, in thee, and for thee,
according to thy blessed Word and Ordinance, through Jesus Christ our Lord, who
with thee and the holy Ghost, lives and reigns ever one God, world without
end Amen.

Or.

ALmighty and everliving God, we are taught by thy holy Word, that the hearts
of Kings are in thy rule and governance, and that thou do dispose and turn
them as it seems best to thy godly wisdom; We humbly beseech thee so to
dispose and govern the heart of WILLIAM thy servant, our King and Governor,
that in all his thoughts, words and works, he may ever seek thy honor and
glory, and study to preserve thy people committed to his charge, in wealth,
peace, and godliness. Grant this, O merciful Father, for thy dear Sons sake
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall be said the Collect of the Day. And immediately after the Collect,
the Priest shall read the Epistle, saying, The Epistle [ or, The portion of
Scripture appointed for the Epistle] is written in the -- Chapter of --
beginning at the -- Verse. And the Epistle ended, he shall say, Here ends the
Epistle. Then shall he read the Gospel, (the People all standing up) saying,
The holy Gospel is written in the -- Chapter of -- beginning at the -- Verse.
And the Gospel ended, shall be sung or said the Creed following, the People
still standing, as before.

I Believe in one God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth, And of
all things visible and invisible:

And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, Begotten of his
Father before all worlds, God of God, Light of Light, Very God of very God,
Begotten, not made, Being of one substance with the Father, By whom all things
were made: Who for us men, and for our salvation came down from heaven, And was
incarnate by the holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, And was made man, And was
crucified also for us under Pontius Pilate. He suffered and was buried, And the
third day he rose again according to the Scriptures, And ascended into heaven,
And sits on the right hand of the Father. And he shall come again with glory
to judge both the quick and the dead: Whose kingdom shall have no end.

And I believe in the Holy Ghost, The Lord and giver of life, Who proceeds
from the Father and the Son* Who with the Father and the Son together is
worshipped and glorified, Who spoke by the prophets. And I believe one
Catholic and Apostolic Church. I acknowledge one Baptism for the remission of
sins, And I look for the Resurrection of the dead, And the life of the world to
come. Amen.

Then the Curate shall declare unto the People what Holy Days, or Fasting-days
are in the Week following to be observed. And then also (if occasion be) shall
notice be given of the Communion; and the Banns of Matrimony published; and
Briefs, Citations, and Excommunications read. And nothing shall be proclaimed
or published in the Church, during the time of Divine Service, but by the
Minister: Nor by him any thing, but what is prescribed in the Rules of this
Book, or enjoined by the King, or by the Ordinary of the Place.

Then shall follow the Sermon, or one of the Homilies already set forth, or
hereafter to be set forth by Authority.

Then shall the Priest return to the Lords Table, and begin the Offertory,
saying one or more of these Sentences following, as he thin keth most
convenient in his discretion.

LEt your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven. S. Matthew. 5.16.

Lay not up for your selves treasure upon earth, where the rust and moth does
corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal: but lay up for your selves
treasures in heaven, where neither rust nor moth does corrupt, and where
thieves do not break through and steal. S. Matthew. 6.19, 20.

Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even so do unto them; for
this is the law and the prophets. S. Matthew. 7.12.

Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven. S. Matthew.
7.21.

Zaccheus stood forth, and said unto the Lord, Behold, Lord, the half of my
goods I give to the poor, and if I have done any wrong to any man, I restore
fourfold. S. Luke 19.8.

Who goes a warfare at any time of his own cost? Who planteth a vineyard, and
eats not of the fruit thereof? Or who feeds a flock, and eats not of the
milk of the flock? 1 Cor. 9.7.

If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter if we shall
reap your worldly things? 1 Cor. 9.11.

Do ye not know that they who minister about holy things, live of the
sacrifice? and they who wait at the altar, are partakers with the altar? Even
so has the Lord also ordained, that they who preach the Gospel should live of
the Gospel. 1 Cor. 9.13, 14.

He that sows little, shall reap little: and he that sows plenteously,
shall reap plenteously. Let every man do according as he is disposed in his
heart, not grudgingly, or of necessity; for God loves a cheerful giver. 2 Cor.
9.6, 7.

Let him that is taught in the word, minister unto him that teaches, in all
good things. Be not deceived, God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows,
that shall he reap. Gal. 6.6, 7.

While we have time, let us do good unto all men, and specially unto them that
are of the household of faith. Gal. 6.10.

Godliness is great riches, if a man be content with that he has: for we
brought nothing into the world, neither may we carry any thing out. 1 Timothy 6.6,
7.

Charge them who are rich in this world, that they be ready to give, and glad
to distribute, laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the
time to come, that they may attain eternal life. 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19.

God is not unrighteous, that he will forget your works and labor that
proceeds of love; which love ye have showed for his Names sake, who have
ministered unto the saints, and yet do minister. Heb 6.10.

To do good, and to distribute, forget not; for with such sacrifices God is
pleased. Heb. 13.16.

Whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his brother have need, and shuts up
his compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? 1 S. John 3.17.

Give alms of thy goods, and never turn thy face from any poor man, and then
the face of the Lord shall not be turned away from thee. Tob 4.7.

Be merciful after thy power. If thou have much, give plenteously. If thou have
little, do thy diligence gladly to give of that little: for so gatherest thou
thy self a good reward in the day of necessity. Tob. 4.8.9.

He that has pity upon the poor, lends unto the Lord: and look what he
lays out, it shall be paid him again. Prove. 19.17.

Blessed be the man that provideth for the sick and needy: the Lord shall
deliver him in the time of trouble. Psalm 4.1.1.

Whilst these sentences are in reading, the Deacons, Churchwardens, or other
fit Person appointed for that purpose, shall receive the Alms for the Poor, and
other Devotions of the People, in a decent Basin, to be provided by the Parish
for that purpose; and reverently bring it to the Priest, who shall humbly
present and place it upon the holy Table.

And when there is a Communion, the Priest shall then place upon the Table so
much Bread and Wine, as he shall think sufficient. After which done, the Priest
shall say,

Let us pray for the whole state of Christ's Church militant here in earth.

ALmighty and everliving God, who by the holy Apostle have taught us to make
prayers and supplications, and to give thanks for all men; We humbly beseech
thee most mercifully [to accept our alms and oblations, and] to receive these
our prayers, If there be no alms or oblations, then shall the words [of
accepting our alms and oblations] be left out unsaid.
which We offer unto thy divine Majesty, beseeching thee to inspire continually
the universal Church with the spirit of truth, unity, and concord: and grant
that all they that do confess thy holy Name, may agree in the truth of thy holy
Word, and live in unity and godly love. We beseech thee also to save and defend
all Christian Kings, Princes and Governors; and especially, thy servant (...),
that under him we may be godly and quietly governed: and grant unto his whole
Council, and to all that are put in Authority under him, that they may truly
and indifferently minister justice, to the punishment of wickedness and vice,
and to the maintenance of thy true Religion and virtue. Give grace, O heavenly
Father, to all Bishops, and Curates, that they may both by their life and
doctrine set forth thy true and lively Word, and rightly and duly administer
thy holy Sacraments: And to all thy people give thy heavenly grace; and
especially to this Congregation here present, that with meek heart and due
reverence they may hear and receive thy holy Word, truly serving thee in
holiness and righteousness all the days of their life. And we most humbly
beseech thee of thy goodness, O Lord, to comfort and succor all them, who in
this transitory life are in trouble, sorrow, need, sickness, or any other
adversity. And we also bless thy holy Name, for all thy servants departed this
life in thy faith and fear; beseeching thee to give us grace so to follow their
good examples, that with them we may be partakers of thy heavenly kingdom.
Grant this, O Father, for Jesus Christ's sake our only Mediator and Advocate.
Amen.

When the Minister gives warning for the Celebration of the holy Communion,
(which he shall always do upon the Sunday or some Holy Day immediately
preceding) after the Sermon or Homily ended, he shall read this exhortation
following.

DEarly beloved, on -- day next, I purpose, through Gods assistance, to
administer to all such as shall be religiously and devoutly disposed, the most
comfortable Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, to be by them received
in remembrance of his meritorious cross and passion whereby alone we obtain
remission of our sins, and are made partakers of the kingdom of heaven.
Wherefore it is our duty to render most humble and hearty thanks to Almighty
God our heavenly Father, for that he has given his Son our Savior Jesus
Christ, not only to die for us, but also to be our spiritual food and
sustenance in that holy Sacrament. Which being so divine and comfortable a
thing to them who receive it worthily, and so dangerous to them that will
presume to receive it unworthily; my duty is to exhort you in the mean season
to consider the dignity of that holy Mystery, and the great peril of the
unworthy receiving thereof, and so to search and examine your own consciences,
(and that not lightly, and after the manner of dissemblers with God; but so)
that ye may come holy and clean to such a heavenly feast, in the
marriage-garment required by God in holy Scripture, and be received as worthy
partakers of that holy Table.

The way and means thereto is: First, to examine your lives and conversations
by the rule of Gods commandments; and whereinsoever ye shall perceive your
selves to have offended, either by will, word, or deed, there to bewail your
own sinfulness, and to confess your selves to Almighty God, with full purpose
of amendment of life. And if ye shall perceive your offenses to be such as are
not only against God, but also against your neighbors, then ye shall reconcile
your selves unto them, being ready to make restitution and satisfaction
according to the uttermost of your powers, for all injuries and wrongs done by
you to any other; and being likewise ready to forgive others that have offended
you, as ye would have forgiveness of your offenses at Gods hand: for otherwise
the receiving of the holy Communion does nothing else but increase your
damnation. Therefore if any of you be a blasphemer of God, an hinderer or
slanderer of his Word, an adulterer, or be in malice, or envy, or in any other
grievous crime; Repent you of your sins, or else come not to that holy Table,
lest after the taking of that holy Sacrament, the devil enter imto you, as he
entered into Judas, and fill you full of all iniquities, and bring you to
destruction both of body and soul.

And because it is requisite, that no man should come to the holy Communion,
but with a full trust in Gods mercy, and with a quiet conscience; therefore if
there be any of you, who by this means cannot quiet his own conscience herein,
but required further comfort or counsel; let him come to me, or to some other
discreet and learned Minister of Gods Word, and open his grief, that by the
ministry of Gods holy Word he may receive the benefit of absolution, together
with ghostly counsel and advice, to the quieting of his conscience, and
avoiding of all scruple and doubtfulness.

Or in case he shall see the People negligent to come to the holy Communion, in
stead of the former, he shall use this Exhortation.

DEarly beloved brethren, on -- I intend by Gods grace, to celebrate the Lords
Supper: unto which in Gods behalf I bid you all that are here present, and
beseech you for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, that ye will not refuse to come
thereto, being so lovingly called and bidden by God himself. Ye know how
grievous and unkind a thing it is, when a man has prepared a rich feast,
decked his table with all kind of provision, so that there lacks nothing but
the guests to sit down, and yet they who are called (without any cause) most
unthankfully refuse to come. Which of you in such a case would not be moved?
Who would not think a great injury and wrong done unto him? Wherefore, most
dearly beloved in Christ, take ye good heed, lest ye withdrawing your selves
from this holy Supper, provoke Gods indignation against you. It is an easy
matter for a man to say, I will not communicate, because I am otherwise hindered
with worldly business. But such excuses are not so easily accepted and allowed
before God. If any man say, I am a grievous sinner, and therefore am afraid to
come: wherefore then do ye not repent and amend? When God calls you, are ye
not ashamed to say you will not come? When ye should return to God, will ye
excuse your selves, and say ye are not ready? Consider earnestly with your
selves, how little such feigned excuses will avail before God. They that
refused the feast in the Gospel, because they had bought a farm, or would try
their yokes of oxen, or because they were married, were not so excused, but
counted unworthy of the heavenly feast. I for my part shall be ready, and
according to mine Office, I bid you in the Name of God, I call you in Christ's
behalf, I exhort you, as you love your own salvation, that ye will be partakers
of this holy Communion. And as the Son of God did vouchsafe to yield up his
soul by death upon the cross for your salvation: so it is your duty to receive
the Communion, in remembrance of the sacrifice of his death, as he himself has
commanded: Which if ye shall neglect to do, consider with your selves how great
injury ye do unto God, and how sore punishment hangs over your heads for the
same; when ye wilfully abstain from the Lords Table, and separate from your
brethren, who come to feed on the banquet of that most heavenly food. These
things if ye earnestly consider, ye will by Gods grace return to a better mind:
for the obtaining whereof, we shall not cease to make our humble petitions unto
Almighty God our heavenly Father.

At the time of the Celebration of the Communion, the Communicants being
conveniently placed for the receiving of the holy Sacrament, the Priest shall
say this Exhortation.

DEarly beloved in the Lord, ye that mind to come to the holy Communion of the
body and blood of our Savior Christ, must consider how Saint Paul exhorts
all persons diligently to try and examine themselves, before they presume to
eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup. For as the benefit is great, if with
a true penitent heart and lively faith we receive that holy Sacrament (for then
we spiritually eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood; then we dwell in
Christ, and Christ in us; we are one with Christ, and Christ with us:) So is
the danger great, if we receive the same unworthily. For then we are guilty of
the body and blood of Christ our Savior; we eat and drink our own damnation,
not considering the Lords body; we kindle Gods wrath against us; we provoke him
to plague us with diverse diseases, and sundry kinds of death. Judge therefore
your selves, brethren, that ye be not judged of the Lord; repent you truly for
your sins past; have a lively and steadfast faith in Christ our Savior; amend
your lives, and be in perfect charity with all men, so shall ye be meet
partakers of those holy Mysteries. And above all things ye must give most
humble and hearty thanks to God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, for
the redemption of the world by the death and passion of our Savior Christ,
both God and man, who did humble himself even to the death upon the Cross, for
us miserable sinners, who lay in darkness and the shadow of death, that he
might make us the children of God, and exalt us to everlasting life. And to the
end that we should always remember the exceeding great love of our Master, and
only Savior, Jesus Christ, thus dying for us, and the innumerable benefits
which by his precious bloud-shedding he has obtained to us; he has instituted
and ordained holy Mysteries, as pledges of his love, and for a continual
remembrance of his death, to our great and endless comfort. To him therefore
with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, let us give (as we are most bounden)
continual thanks, submitting our selves wholly to his holy will and pleasure,
and studying to serve him in true holiness and righteousness all the days of
our life. Amen.

Then shall the Priest say to them that come to receive the holy Communion,

YE that do truly and earnestly repent you of your sins, and are in love and
charity with your neighbors, and intend to lead a new life, following the
commandments of God, and walking from henceforth in his holy ways; Draw near
with faith, and take this holy Sacrament to your comfort; and make your humble
confession to Almighty God, meekly kneeling upon your knees.

Then shall this general Confession be made, in the name of all those that are
minded to receive the holy Communion, by one of the Ministers, both he and all
the People kneeling humbly upon their knees, and saying,

ALmighty God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Maker of all things, Judge of
all men; We acknowledge and bewail our manifold sins and wickedness, Which we
from time to time most grievously have committed, By thought, word, and deed,
Against thy divine Majesty, Provoking most justly thy wrath and indignation
against us. We do earnestly repent, And are heartily sorry for these our
misdoings; The remembrance of them is grievous unto us; The burden of them is
intolerable. Have mercy upon us, Have mercy upon us, most merciful Father; For
thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, Forgive us all that is past, And grant
that we may ever hereafter Serve and please thee In newness of life, To the
honor and glory of thy Name, Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall the Priest (or the Bishop being present) stand up, and turning
himself to the People, pronounce this Absolution.

ALmighty God our heavenly Father, who of his great mercy has promised
forgiveness of sins to all them that with hearty repentance and true faith turn
unto him; Have mercy upon you, pardon and deliver you from all your sins,
confirm and strengthen you in all goodness, and bring you to everlasting life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall the Priest say,

Hear what comfortable words our Savior Christ says unto all that truly turn
to him.

COme unto me all that travel and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you. S.
Matthew. II. 28.

So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, to the end that
all that belive in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. S. John
3.16.

Hear also what Saint Paul says.

This is a true saying, and worthy of all men to be received, that Christ Jesus
came into the world to save sinners. I Tim. 1.15.

Hear also what Saint John says.

If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. I S. John 2.1.

After which the Priest shall proceed, saying,

Lift up your hearts.

Answer. We lift them up unto the Lord.


Priest. Let us give thanks unto our Lord God.


Answer. It is meet and right so to do.


Then shall the Priest turn to the Lords Table, and say,

IT is very meet, right, and our bounden duty, that we should at all times, and
in all places give thanks unto thee, O Lord, These words [Holy Father] must be
omitted on Trinity Sunday.
Holy Father, Almighty, everlasting God.

Here shall follow the proper Preface, according to the time, if there be any
specially appointed: or else immediately shall follow,

THerefore with Angels and Archangels, and with all the company of heaven, we
laud and magnify thy glorious Name, evermore praising thee, and saying, Holy,
holy, holy, Lord God of hosts, Heaven and earth are full of thy glory. Glory be
to thee, O Lord most High. Amen.

Proper Prefaces.

Upon Christmas Day, and seven days after.

BEcause thou did give Jesus Christ thine only Son to be born as at this time
for us, who by the operation of the holy Ghost was made very man of the
substance of the Virgin Mary his mother, and that without spot of sin, to make
us clean from all sin. Therefore with Angels, etc.

Upon Easter Day, and seven days after.

BUt chiefly are we bound to praise thee for the glorious resurrection of thy
Son Jesus Christ our Lord: for he is the very Paschal Lamb which was offered
for us, and has taken away the sin of the world; who by his death has
destroyed death, and by his rising to life again has restored to us
everlasting life. Therefore, etc.

Upon Ascension-day, and seven days after.

THrough thy most dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who after his most
glorious resurrection manifestly appeared to all his Apostles, and in their
sight ascended up into heaven to prepare a place for us; that where he is,
thither we might also ascend, and reign with him in glory. Therefore with
Angels, etc.

Upon Whitsunday, and six days after.

THrough Jesus Christ our Lord; according to whose most true promise, the holy
Ghost came down as at this time from heaven with a sudden great sound, as it
had been a mighty wind, in the likeness of fiery tongues, lighting upon the
Apostles, to teach them, and to lead them to all truth, giving them both the
gift of diverse languages, and also boldness with fervent zeal, constantly to
preach the Gospel unto all nations, whereby we have been brought out of
darkness and error into the clear light and true knowledge of thee, and of thy
Son Jesus Christ. Therefore with Angels, etc.

Upon the Feast of Trinity only.

WHo art one God, one Lord; not one only person, but three persons in one
substance. For that which we believe of the glory of the Father, the same we
believe of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, without any difference or
inequality. Therefore, etc.

After each of which Prefaces, shall immediately be sung or said,

THerefore with Angels and Archangels, and with all the company of heaven, we
laud and magnify thy glorious Name, evermore praising thee, and saying, Holy,
holy, holy, Lord God of hosts, Heaven and earth are full of thy glory. Glory be
to thee, O Lord most High. Amen.

Then shall the Priest, kneeling down at the Lords Table, say in the name of
all them that shall receive the Communion, this Prayer following.

WE do not presume to come to this thy Table, O merciful Lord, trusting in our
own righteousness, but in thy manifold and great mercies. We are not worthy so
much as to gather up the crumbs under thy Table. But thou art the same Lord,
whose property is always to have mercy; Grant us therefore, gracious Lord, so
to eat the flesh of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, and to drink his blood, that our
sinful bodies may be made clean by his body, and our souls washed through his
most precious blood, and that we may evermore dwell in him, and he in us. Amen.

When the Priest, standing before the Table, has so ordered the Bread and
Wine; that he may with the more readiness and decency break the Bread before
the People, and take the Cup into his hands, he shall say the Prayer of
Consecration as follows.

ALmighty God, our heavenly Father, who of thy tender mercy did give thine
only Son Jesus Christ to suffer death upon the cross for our redemption, who
made there (by his one oblation of himself once offered) a full, perfect and
sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction for the sins of the whole
world, and did institute, and in his holy Gospel command us to continue a
perpetual memory of that his precious death until his coming again; Hear us, O
merciful Father, we most humbly beseech thee, and grant that we receiving these
thy creatures of bread and wine, according to thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ's
holy institution, in remembrance of his death and passion, may be partakers of
his most blessed body and blood: who in the same night that he was betrayed
Here the Priest is to take the Paten into his hands:
took bread, and when he had given thanks, And here to break the bread:
he brake it, and gave it to his disciples, saying, Take, eat, And here to lay
his hand upon all the bread.
this is my body which is given for you, do this in remembrance of me. Likewise
after Supper, Here he is to take the cup into his hand:
he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to them, saying,
Drink ye all of this, for this And here to lay his hand upon every vessel (be
it Chalice or Flagon) in which there is any wine to be consecrated.
is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for you and for many for the
remission of sins: Do this, as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance of me.
Amen.

Then shall the Minister first receive the Communion in both kinds himself, and
then proceed to deliver the same to the Bishops, Priests, and Deacons in like
manner (if any be present) and after that to the People also in order, into
their Hands, all meekly kneeling. And when he delivers the bread to any one,
he shall say,

THe body of our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee, preserve thy body
and soul unto everlasting life. Take and eat this in remembrance that Christ
died for thee, and feed on him in thy heart by faith with thanksgiving.

And the Minister that delivers the Cup to any one, shall say,

THe blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was shed for thee, preserve thy body
and soul unto everlasting life. Drink this in remembrance that Christ's blood
was shed for thee, and be thankful.

If the Consecrated Bread or Wine be all spent before all have communicated;
the Priest is to consecrate more according to the Form before prescribed:
Beginning at [Our Savior Christ in the same night, etc.] for the blessing of
the Bread; and at [Likewise after Supper, etc.] for the blessing of the Cup.

When all have communicated, the Minister shall return to the Lords Table, and
reverently place upon it what remains of the consecrated Elements, covering
the same with a fair Linen Cloth.

Then shall the Priest say, the Lords Prayer, the People repeating after him
every Petition.

OUr Father which art in heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, As it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. For thine is the
Kingdom, The Power and the Glory, For ever and ever. Amen.

After shall be said, as follows.

O Lord and heavenly Father, we thy humble servants entirely desire thy
Fatherly goodness, mercifully to accept this our sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving; most humbly beseeching thee to grant, that by the merits and
death of thy Son Jesus Christ, and through faith in his blood, we and all thy
whole Church may obtain remission of our sins, and all other benefits of his
passion. And here we offer and present unto thee, O Lord, our selves, our souls
and bodies, to be a reasonable, holy, and lively sacrifice unto thee; humbly
beseeching thee, that all we who are partakers of this holy Communion, may be
fulfilled with thy grace and heavenly benediction. And although we be unworthy
through our manifold sins to offer unto thee any sacrifice; yet we beseech thee
to accept this our bounden duty and service; not weighing our merits, but
pardoning our offenses, through Jesus Christ our Lord; by whom, and with whom,
in the unity of the Holy Ghost, all honor and glory be unto thee, O Father
Almighty, world without end. Amen.

Or this.

ALmighty and everliving God, we most heartily thank thee, for that thou do
vouchsafe to feed us, who have duly received these holy Mysteries, with the
spiritual food of the most precious body and blood of thy Son our Savior Jesus
Christ; and do assure us thereby of thy favor and goodness toward us; and
that we are very members incorporate in the mystical body of thy Son, which is
the blessed company of all faithful people; and are also heirs through hope of
thy everlasting kingdom, by the merits of the most precious death and passion
of thy dear Son. And we most humbly beseech thee, O heavenly Father, so to
assist us with thy grace, that we may continue in that holy fellowship, and do
all such good works as thou have prepared for us to walk in through Jesus
Christ our Lord, to whom with thee, and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory
world without end. Amen.

Then shall be said or sung;

GLory be to God on high, and in earth peace, good will toward men. We praise
thee, we bless thee, we worship thee, we glorify thee, we give thanks to thee
for thy great glory, O Lord God, heavenly King, God the Father Almighty.

O Lord, the only begotten Son Jesu Christ; O Lord God, Lamb of God, Son of the
Father, that take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us. Thou that
take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us. Thou that take away
the sins of the world, receive our prayer. Thou that fittest at the right hand
of God the Father, have mercy upon us.

For thou only art holy, thou only art the Lord, thou only, O Christ, with the
holy Ghost, art most high in the glory of God the Father. Amen.

Then the Priest (or Bishop, if he be present) shall let them depart with this
Blessing.

THe peace of God which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds
in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord: And the
blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, be amongst
you, and remain with you always. Amen.

Collects to be said after the Offertory, when there is no Communion, every
such day one or more; and the same may be said also, as often as occasion shall
serve, after the Collects either of Morning or Evening Prayer, Communion, or
Litany, by the discretion of the Minister.

ASsist us mercifully, O Lord, in these our supplications and prayers, and
dispose the way of thy servants toward the attainment of everlasting
salvation; that among all the changes and chances of this mortal life, they may
ever be defended by thy most gracious and ready help, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

O Almighty Lord, and everlasting God, vouchsafe, we beseech thee, to direct,
sanctify, and govern both our hearts and bodies in the ways of thy laws, and
in the works of thy commandments, that through thy most mighty protection, both
here and ever, we may be preserved in body and soul, through our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

GRant, we beseech thee, Almighty God, that the words which we have heard this
day with our outward ears, may through thy grace be so grafted inwardly in our
hearts, that they may bring forth in us the fruit of good living, to the honor
and praise of thy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PRevent us, O Lord, in all our doings, with thy most gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help, that in all our works begun, continued, and
ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy Name, and finally by thy mercy obtain
everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

ALmighty God, the fountain of all wisdom, who know our necessities before
we ask, and our ignorance in asking; We beseech thee to have compassion upon
our infirmities; and those things which for our unworthiness we dare not, and
for our blindness we cannot ask, vouchsafe to give us for the worthiness of thy
Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

ALmighty God, who have promised to hear the petitions of them that ask in thy
Sons Name; We beseech thee mercifully to incline thine ears to us that have
made now our prayers and supplications unto thee, and grant that those things
which we have faithfully asked according to thy will, may effectually be
obtained, to the relief of our necessity, and to the setting forth of thy
glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

UPon the Sundays and other Holidays (if there be no Communion) shall be said
all that is appointed at the Communion, until the end of the general Prayer
[For the good estate of the Catholic Church of Christ] together with one or mo
of these Collects last before rehearsed, concluding with the Blessing.

And there shall be no Celebration of the Lords Supper, except there be a
convenient number to communicate with the Priest, according to his discretion.

And if there be not above twenty Persons in the Parish, of discretion to
Receive the Communion; yet there shall be no Communion, except four (or three
at the least) Communicate with the Priest.

And in Cathedral and Collegiate Churches and Colleges, where there are many
Priests and Deacons, they shall all Receive the Communion with the Priest every
Sunday at the least, except they have a reasonable cause to the contrary.

And to take away all occasion of dissension, and superstition, which any
Person has or might have concerning the Bread and Wine, it shall suffice that
the Bread be such as is usual to be eaten; but the best and purest Wheat Bread
that conveniently may be gotten.

And if any of the Bread and Wine remain unconsecrated, the Curate shall have
it to his own use: but if any remain of that which was Consecrated, it shall
not be carried out of the Church, but the Priest, and such other of the
Communicants as he shall then call unto him, shall immediately after the
Blessing, reverently eat and drink the same.

The Bread and Wine for the Communion shall be provided by the Curate and the
Churchwardens, at the Charges of the Parish.

And Note, That every Parishioner shall Communicate at the least three times in
the Year, of which Easter to be one. And yearly at Easter every Parishioner
shall reckon with the Parson, Vicar, or Curate, or his or their Deputy, or
Deputies, and pay to them or him all Ecclesiastical Duties, accustomably due,
then and at that time to be paid.

After the Divine Service ended, the Money given at the Offertory shall be
disposed of to such pious and charitable uses, as the Minister and
Churchwardens shall think fit. Wherein if they disagree, it shall be disposed
of as the Ordinary shall appoint.

WHereas it is ordained in this Office for the Administration of the Lords
Supper, that the Communicants should receive the same Kneeling; (which Order is
well meant, for a signification of our humble and grateful acknowledgment of
the benefits of Christ therein given to all worthy Receivers, and for the
avoiding of such profanation, and disorder in the holy Communion, as might
otherwise ensue) Yet, lest the same Kneeling should by any Persons, either out
of ignorance and infirmity, or out of malice and obstinacy, be misconstrued and
depraved; It is here declared, That thereby no Adoration is intended, or ought
to be done, either unto the Sacramental Bread and Wine there bodily received,
or unto any Corporal Presence of Christ's Natural Flesh and Blood. For the
Sacramental Bread and Wine remain Still in their very Natural Substances, and
therefore may not be adored, (for that were Idolatry, to be abhorred of all
faithful Christians) And the Natural Body and Blood of our Savior Christ are
in Heaven, and not here; it being against the truth of Christ's Natural Body, to
be at one time in more places then one.

The MINISTRATION of Public BAPTISM of INFANTS, to be used in the CHURCH.
THE People are to be admonished, that it is most convenient that Baptism
should not be administered but upon Sundays and other Holy Days, when the most
number of People come together: as well for that the Congregation there present
may testify the receiving of them that be newly Baptized into the number of
Christ's Church; as also because in the Baptism of Infants, every man present
may be put in remembrance of his own profession made to God in his Baptism. For
which cause also it is expedient that Baptism be ministered in the vulgar
Tongue. Nevertheless (if necessity so require) Children may be Baptized upon
any other day.

And Note, that there shall be for every male-child to be Baptized, two
Godfathers and one Godmother: and for every female, one Godfather and two
Godmothers.

When there are Children to be Baptized, the Parents shall give knowledge
thereof over night, or in the morning before the beginning of Morning Prayer,
to the Curate. And then the Godfathers and Godmothers and the People, with the
Children must be ready at the Font, either immediately after the last Lesson at
Morning Prayer, or else immediately after the last Lesson at Evening Prayer, as
the Curate by his discretion shall appoint. And the Priest coming to the Font
(which is then to be filled with pure Water) and standing there, shall say,

Has this Child been already Baptized, or no?

If they answer, No: then shall the Priest proceed as follows.

DEarly beloved, forasmuch as all men are conceived and born in sin, and that
our Savior Christ says, None can enter into the Kingdom of God, except he be
regenerate and born anew of water and of the Holy Ghost; I beseech you to call
upon God the Father, through our Lord Jesus Christ, that of his bounteous mercy
he will grant to this Child that thing which by nature he cannot have, that he
may be baptized with water and the Holy Ghost, and received into Christ's holy
Church, and be made a lively member of the same.

Then shall the Priest say, Let us pray.

ALmighty and everlasting God, who of thy great mercy did save Noah and his
family in the Ark from perishing by water, and also did safely lead the
children of Israel thy people through the Red sea, figuring thereby thy holy
baptism; and by the baptism of thy well-beloved Son Jesus Christ in the river
Jordan, did sanctify water to the mystical washing away of sin; We beseech
thee for thine infinite mercies, that thou will mercifully look upon this
Child; wash him and sanctify him with the Holy Ghost, that he being delivered
from thy wrath, may be received into the ark of Christ's Church; and being
steadfast in faith, joyful through hope, and rooted in charity, may so pass the
waves of this troublesome world, that finally he may come to the land of
everlasting life; there to reign with thee world without end, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

ALmighty and immortal God, the aid of all that need, the helper of all that
flee to thee for succor, the life of them that believe, and the resurrection
of the dead; We call upon thee for this Infant, that he coming to thy holy
Baptism, may receive remission of his sins by spiritual regeneration. Receive
him, O Lord, as thou have promised by thy well-beloved Son, saying, Ask, and ye
shall have; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you: So
give now unto us that ask; let us that seek find; open the gate unto us that
knock; that this Infant may enjoy the everlasting benediction of thy heavenly
washing, and may come to the eternal Kingdom which thou have promised, by
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall the People stand up, and the Priest shall say,

Hear the words of the Gospel, written by Saint Mark, in the Tenth Chapter, at
the Thirteenth Verse.

THey brought young children to Christ, that he should touch them; and his
disciples rebuked those that brought them. But when Jesus saw it, he was much
displeased, and said unto them, Suffer the little children to come unto me, and
forbid them not; for of such is the Kingdom of God. Verily I say unto you,
Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not
enter therein. And he took them up in his arms, put his hands upon them, and
blessed them.

After the Gospel is read, the Minister shall make this brief Exhortation upon
the words of the Gospel.

BEloved, ye hear in this Gospel the words of our Savior Christ, that he
commanded the children to be brought unto him; how he blamed those that would
have kept than from him; how he exhorts all men to follow their innocence. Ye
perceive how by his outward gesture and deed he declared his good will toward
them; for he embraced them in his arms, he laid his hands upon them, and
blessed them. Doubt ye not therefore, but earnestly believe, that he will
likewise favorably receive this present Infant, that he will embrace him with
the arms of his mercy, that he will give unto him the blessing of eternal life,
and make him partaker of his everlasting Kingdom. Wherefore we being thus
persuaded of the good will of our heavenly Father toward this Infant, declared
by his Son Jesus Christ, and nothing doubting but that he favorably allows
this charitable work of ours, in bringing this Infant to his holy Baptism, let
us faithfully and devoutly give thanks unto him, and say,

ALmighty and everlasting God, heavenly Father, we give thee humble thanks,
that thou have vouchsafed to call us to the Knowledge of thy grace and faith in
thee: Increase this knowledge, and confirm this faith in us evermore. Give thy
holy Spirit to this Infant, that he may be born again, and be made an heir of
everlasting Salvation, through our Lord Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns
with thee and the Holy Spirit, now and for ever. Amen.

Then shall Priest speak unto the Godfathers and Godmothers on this wife.

DEarly beloved, ye have brought this Child here to be baptized; ye have prayed
that our Lord Jesus Christ would vouchsafe to receive him, to release him of
his sins; to sanctify him with the Holy Ghost, to give him the Kingdom of
heaven, and everlasting life. Ye have heard also that our Lord Jesus Christ
has promised in his Gospel to grant all these things that ye have prayed for:
which promise he for his part will most surely keep and perform. Wherefore
after this promise made by Christ, this Infant must also faithfully for his
part, promise by you that are his Sureties, (until he come of age to take it
upon himself) that he will renounce the devil and all his works, and constantly
believe Gods holy word, and obediently keep his commandments.

I demand therefore,

Do thou in the name of this child renounce the devil and all his works, the
vain pomp and glory of the world, with all covetous desires of the same, and
the carnal desires of the flesh, so that thou will not follow nor be led by
them?

Answ. I renounce them all.


Minister. Do thou believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and
Earth?

And in Jesus Christ his only begotten Son our Lord? And that he was conceived
by the Holy Ghost; born of the Virgin Mary; that he suffered under Pontius
Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried; that he went down into hell, and also
did rise again the third day; that he ascended into Heaven, and sits at the
right hand of God the Father Almighty; and from thence shall come again at the
end of the world, to judge the quick and the dead?

And do thou believe in the Holy Ghost; the holy Catholic Church; the
Communion of Saints; the remission of sins; the resurrection of the flesh; and
everlasting life after death?


Answ. All this I steadfastly believe.


Minister. Will thou be baptized in this Faith?


Answ. That is my desire.


Minister. Will thou then obediently keep Gods holy will and commandments, and
walk in the same all the days of thy life?


Answ. I will.


Then shall the Priest say,

O Merciful God, grant that the old Adam in this Child may be so buried, that
the new man may be raised up in him. Amen.

Grant that all carnal affections may die in him, and that all things belonging
to the Spirit may live and grow in him. Amen.

Grant that he may have power and strength to have victory, and to triumph
against the devil, the world, and the flesh. Amen.

Grant that whosoever is here dedicated to thee by our Office and Ministry, may
also be endued with heavenly virtues, and everlastingly rewarded, through thy
mercy, O blessed Lord God, who do live and govern all things, world without
end. Amen.

ALmighty everliving God, whose most dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ for the
forgiveness of our sins, did shed out of his most precious side both water and
blood, and gave commandment to his disciples, that they should go teach all
Nations, and baptize them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost; Regard, we beseech thee, the supplications of thy Congregation;
sanctify this Water to the mystical wasting away of sin: and grant that this
Child now to be baptized therein, may receive the fullness of thy grace, and
ever remain in the number of thy faithful and elect children, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then the Priest shall take the Child into his hands, and shall say to the
Godfathers and Godmothers,

Name this Child.

And then naming it after them (if they shall certify him that the Child may
well endure it) he shall dip it in the Water discreetly and warily, saying,

N. I baptize thee In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. Amen.

But if they certify that the Child is weak, it shall suffice to pour Water
upon it saying the foresaid words,

N. I baptize thee In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. Amen.

Then the Priest shall say,

WE receive this Child into the congregation of Christ's flock, Here the Priest
shall make a cross upon the child's forehead.
and do sign him with the sign of the cross, in token that hereafter he shall
not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight
under his banner against sin, the world, and the devil; and to continue Christ's
faithful soldier and servant unto his lives end. Amen.

Then shall the Priest say,

SEeing now, dearly beloved brethren, that this Child is regenerate and grafted
into the body of Christ's Church, let us give thanks unto Almighty God for these
benefits, and with one accord make our prayers unto him, that this Child may
lead the rest of his life according to this beginning.

Then shall be said, all kneeling,

OUr Father which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, As it is Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Then shall the Priest say,

WE yield thee hearty thanks, most merciful Father, that it has pleased thee
to regenerate this Infant with thy holy Spirit, to receive him for thine own
Child by adoption, and to incorporate him into thy holy Church. And humbly we
beseech thee to grant, that he being dead unto sin, and living unto
righteousness, and being buried with Christ in his death, may crucify the old
man, and utterly abolish the whole body of sin, and that as he is made partaker
of the death of thy Son, he may also be partaker of his resurrection; so that
finally with the residue of thy holy Church, he may be an inheritour of thine
everlasting Kingdom, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then all standing up, the Priest shall say to the Godfathers and Godmothers
this Exhortation following.

Forasmuch as this Child has promised by you his Sureties, to renounce the
devil and all his works, to believe in God, and to serve him; ye must remember
that it is your parts and duties to see that this Infant be taught, so soon as
he shall be able to learn, what a solemn vow, promise, and profession he has
here made by you. And that he may know these things the better, ye shall call
upon him to hear Sermons, and chiefly ye shall provide that he may learn the
Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the ten Commandments in the vulgar tongue, and all
other things which a Christian ought to know and believe to his souls health;
and that this Child may be virtuously brought up to lead a godly and a
Christian life; remembering always that Baptism does represent unto us our
profession, which is, to follow the example of our Savior Christ, and to be
made like unto him; that as he died and rose again for us; so should we who are
baptized, die from sin, and rise again unto righteousness, continually
mortifying all our evil and corrupt affections, and daily proceeding in all
virtue and godliness of living.

Then shall he add, and say,

YE are to take care that this Child be brought to the Bishop to be confirmed
by him, so soon as he can say the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the ten
Commandments in the vulgar tongue, and be further instructed in the
Church-Catechism set forth for that purpose.

IT is certain by Gods Word, that Children which are baptized, dying before
they commit actual sin, are undoubtedly saved.

TO take away all scruple concerning the use of the sign of the Cross in
Baptism; the true Explication thereof, and the just Reasons for the retaining
of it, may be seen in the thirtieth Canon, first published in the year MDCIV.

The MINISTRATION of Private BAPTISM of CHILDREN in HOUSES.
THe Curates of every Parish shall often admonish the People that they defer
not the Baptism of their children longer then the first or second Sunday next
after their Birth, or other Holy Day falling between, unless upon a great and
reasonable cause, to be approved by the Curate.

And also they shall warn them, that without like great cause and necessity
they procure not their children to be Baptized at home in their houses. But
when need shall compel them so to do, then Baptism shall be administered on this
fashion.

First, let the Minister of the Parish (or in his absence, any other lawful
Minister that can be procured) with them that are present, call upon God, and
say the Lords Prayer, and so many of the Collects appointed to be said before
in the Form of Public Baptism, as the time and present exigence will suffer.
And then, the child being named by some one that is present, the Minister shall
pour Water upon it, saying these words;

N. I baptize thee In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. Amen.

Then all kneeling down, the Minister shall give thanks unto God, and say,

WE yield thee hearty thanks, most merciful Father, that it has pleased thee
to regenerate this Infant with thy holy Spirit; to receive him for thine own
child by adoption, and to incorporate him into thy holy Church. And we humbly
beseech thee to grant, that as he is now made partaker of the Death of thy Son,
so he may be also of his Resurrection: And that finally with the residue of thy
Saints he may inherit thine everlasting Kingdom, through the same thy Son Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

And let them not doubt, but that the child so Baptized is lawfully and
sufficiently Baptized, and ought not be Baptized again. Yet nevertheless, if
the child which is after this sort Baptized, do afterward live, it is expedient
that it be brought into the Church, to the intent that if the Minister of the
same Parish did himself Baptize that child, the Congregation may be certified
of the true form of Baptism, by him privately before used: In which case he
shall say thus,

I certify you, that according to the due and prescribed Order of the Church,
at such a time, and at such a place, before diverse witnesses I baptized this
child.

But if the child were baptized by any other lawful Minister; then the Minister
of the Parish where the child was born or christened, shall examine and try
whether the child be lawfully Baptized, or no. In which case, if those that
bring any child to the Church, do answer that the same child is already
baptized, then shall the Minister examine them further, saying;

BY whom was this child Baptized?

Who was present when this child was Baptized?

Because some things essential to this Sacrament may happen to be omitted
through fear or haste, in such times of extremity; therefore I demand further
of you,

With what matter was this child Baptized?

With what words was this child Baptized?

And if the Minister shall find by the Answers of such as bring the child, that
all things were done as they ought to be; then shall not be christen the child
again, but shall receive him as one of the flock of true Christian people,
saying thus,

I Certify you, that in this case all is well done, and according unto due
order, concerning the Baptizing of this child; who being born in original sin,
and in the wrath of God, is now by the laver of Regeneration in Baptism
received into the number of the children of God, and heirs of everlasting life:
For our Lord Jesus Christ does not deny his grace and mercy unto such Infants,
but most lovingly does call them unto him, as the holy Gospel does witness to
our comfort on this wise.

The Gospel. S. Mark 10.13.
THey brought young children to Christ, that he should touch them; and his
disciples rebuked those that brought them. But when Jesus saw it, he was much
displeased, and said unto them, Suffer the little children to come unto me, and
forbid them not; for of such is the Kingdom of God. Verily I say unto you,
Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not
enter therein. And he took them up in his arms, put his hands upon them, and
blessed them.

After the Gospel is read, the Minister shall make this brief Exhortation upon
the words of the Gospel.

BEloved, ye hear in this Gospel the words of our Savior Christ, that he
commanded the children to be brought unto him; how he blamed those that would
have kept them from him; how he exhorted all men to follow their innocence. Ye
perceive how by his outward gesture and deed he declared his good will toward
them; for he embraced them in his arms, he laid his hands upon them, and
blessed them. Doubt ye not therefore, but earnestly believe, that he has
likewise favorably received this present Infant, that he has embraced him
with the arms of his mercy, and (as he has promised in his holy Word) will
give unto him the the blessing of eternal life, and make him partaker of his
everlasting Kingdom. Wherefore we being thus persuaded of the good will of our
heavenly Father, declared by his Son Jesus Christ toward this Infant, let us
faithfully and devoutly give thanks unto him, and say the Prayer which the Lord
himself taught us.

OUr Father, which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen.

ALmighty and everlasting God, heavenly Father, we give thee humble thanks,
that thou have vouchsafed to call us to the knowledge of thy grace and faith in
thee; Increase this knowledge, and confirm this faith in us evermore. Give thy
holy Spirit to this Infant, that he being born again, and being made an heir of
everlasting Salvation, through our Lord Jesus Christ, may continue thy servant,
and attain thy promise, through the same our Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who
lives and reigns with thee and the holy Spirit, now and for ever. Amen.

Then shall the Priest demand the Name of the Child, which being by the
Godfathers and Godmothers pronounced, the Minister shall say,

Do thou in the name of this child renounce the devil and all his works, the
vain pomp and glory of this world, with all covetous desires of the same, and
the carnal desires of the flesh, so that thou will not follow nor be led by
them?

Answer. I renounce them all.


Minister. Do thou believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and
Earth?

And in Jesus Christ his only begotten Son our Lord? And that he was conceived
by the Holy Ghost; born of the Virgin Mary; that he suffered under Pontius
Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried; that he went down into hell, and also
did rise again the third day; that he ascended into Heaven, and sits at the
right hand of God the Father Almighty; and from thence shall come again at the
end of the world, to judge the quick and the dead?

And do thou believe in the Holy Ghost; the holy Catholic Church; the
Communion of Saints; the remission of sins; the resurrection of the flesh; and
everlasting life after death?


Answer. All this I steadfastly believe.


Minister. Will thou then obediently keep Gods holy will and commandments, and
walk in the same all the days of they life?


Answer. I will.


Then the Priest shall say,

WE receive this child into the congregation of Christ's flock, and do The
Priest shall make a cross upon the child's forehead.
sign him with the sign of the cross, in token that hereafter he shall not be
ashamed to confess the faith of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight under
his banner against sin, the world, and the devil; and to continue Christ's
faithful soldier and servant unto his lives end. Amen.

Then shall the Priest say,

SEeing now, dearly beloved brethren, that this Child is by Baptism regenerate
and grafted into the body of Christ's Church, let us give thanks to Almighty God
for these benefits, and with one accord make our prayers unto him that he may
lead the rest of his life according to this beginning.

Then shall the Priest say,

WE yield thee most hearty thanks, most merciful Father, that it has pleased
thee to regenerate this Infant with thy holy Spirit, to receive him for thine
own Child by adoption, and to incorporate him into thy holy Church. And humbly
we beseech thee to grant, that he being dead unto sin, and living unto
righteousness, and being buried with Christ in his Death, may crucify the old
man, and utterly abolish the whole body of sin, and that as he is made partaker
of the Death of thy Son, he may also be partaker of his Resurrection; so that
finally with the residue of thy holy Church, he may be an Inheritour of thine
everlasting Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then all standing up, the Minister shall make this Exhortation to the
Godfathers and Godmothers.

FOrasmuch as this child has promised by you his Sureties, to renounce the
devil and all his works, to believe in God, and to serve him; ye must remember
that it is your parts and duties to see that this Infant be taught, so soon as
he shall be able to learn what a solemn vow, promise and profession he has
made by you. And that he may know these things the better, ye shall call upon
him to hear Sermons, and chiefly ye shall provide that he may learn the Creed,
the Lords Prayer, and the Ten Commandments in the vulgar tongue, and all other
things which a Christian ought to know and believe to his souls health; and
that this child may be virtuously brought up to lead a Godly and a Christian
life; remembering always, that Baptism does represent unto us our profession,
which is to follow the example of our Savior Christ, and be made like unto
him; that as he died and rose again for us, so should we who are Baptized, die
from sin, and rise again unto righteousness, continually mortifying all our
evil and corrupt affections and daily proceeding in all virtue and godliness of
living.

But if they which bring the Infant to the Church do make such uncertain
answers to the Priests questions, as that it cannot appear that the child was
Baptized with Water, In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost (which are essential parts of Baptism) then let the Priest Baptize it in
the Form before appointed for Public Baptism of Infants; saving that at the
dipping of the child in the Font, he shall use this Form of words.

IF thou art not already Baptized, N. I Baptize thee In the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

The MINISTRATION of BAPTISM to such as are of riper years, and able to answer
for themselves.
WHen any such Persons as are of riper years are to be Baptiezd, timely notice
shall be given to the Bishop, or whom he shall appoint for that purpose, a Week
before at the least, by the Parents, or some other discreet Persons; that so
due care may be taken for their Examination, whether they be sufficiently
instructed in the Principles of the Christian Religion; and that they may be
exhorted to prepare themselves with Prayers and Fasting for the receiving of
this holy Sacrament.

And if they shall be found fit, then the Godfathers and Godmothers (the People
being assembled upon the Sunday or Holy Day appointed) shall be ready to
present them at the Font immediately after the second Lesson, either at Morning
or Evening Prayer, as the Curate in his discretion wall think fit.

And standing there, the Priest shall ask whether any of the Persons here
presented be Baptized, or no: If they shall answer, No: then shall the Priest
say thus,

DEarly beloved; forasmuch as all men are conceived and born in sin, (and that
which is born of the flesh is flesh,) and they that are in the flesh cannot
please God, but live in sin, committing many actual transgressions; and that
our Savior Christ, says, None can enter into the kingdom of God, except he be
regenerate and born anew of water and of the holy Ghost; I beseech you to call
upon God the Father, through our Lord Jesus Christ, that of his bounteous
goodness he will grant to these persons that which by nature they cannot have,
that they may be baptized with water and the holy Ghost, and received into
Christ's holy Church, and be made lively members of the same.

Then shall the Priest say,

Let us pray.

( And here all the Congregation shall kneel.)

ALmighty and everlasting God, who of thy great mercy did save Noah and his
family in the Ark from perishing by water, and also did safely lead the
children of Israel thy people through the Red sea, figuring thereby thy holy
Baptism; and by the Baptism of thy well-beloved Son Jesus Christ in the river
Jordan, did sanctify the element of water to the mystical washing away of
sin; We beseech thee for thine infinite mercies, that thou will mercifully look
upon these thy servants; wash them, and sanctify them with the Holy Ghost,
that they being delivered from thy wrath, may be received into the Ark of
Christ's Church; and being steadfast in faith, joyful through hope, and rooted in
charity, may so pass the waves of this troublesome world, that finally they may
come to the land of everlasting life, there to reign with thee world with end,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

ALmighty and immortal God, the aid of all that need, the helper of all that
flee to thee for succor, the life of them that believe, and the resurrection
of the dead; We call upon thee for these persons, that they coming to thy holy
Baptism, may receive remission of their sins by spiritual regeneration. Receive
them, O Lord, as thou have promised by thy well-beloved Son, saying, Ask, and
ye shall receive; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto
you; So give now unto us that ask; let us that seek, find; open the gate unto
us that knock; that these persons may enjoy the everlasting benediction of thy
heavenly washing, and may come to the eternal Kingdom which thou have promised
by Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall the People stand up, and the Priest shall say,

Hear the words of the Gospel written by Saint John, in the third Chapter,
beginning at the first Verse.

THere was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews. The
same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him, Rabbi, we know that thou art a
teacher come from God; for no man can do these miracles that thou do, except
God be with him. Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily I say unto
thee, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Nicodemus
says unto him, How can a man be born when he is old? Can he enter the second
time into his mothers womb, and be born? Jesus answered, Verily, verily I say
unto thee, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God. That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and that
which is born of the Spirit, is spirit. Marvel not that I said unto thee, Ye
must be born again. The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the
sound thereof; but can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes: so is
every one that is born of the Spirit.

After which he shall say this Exhortation following.

BEloved, ye hear in this Gospel the express words of our Savior Christ, that
except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. Whereby ye may perceive the great necessity of this Sacrament,
where it may be had. Likewise immediately before his Ascension into Heaven (as
we read in the last Chapter of Saint Marks Gospel,) he gave command to his
disciples, saying, Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every
creature. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved; but he that
believes not, shall be damned. Which also shows unto us the great benefit we
reap thereby. For which cause Saint Peter the Apostle, when upon his first
preaching of the Gospel many were pricked at the heart, and said to him and the
rest of the Apostles, Men, and brethren, what shall we do? replied and said
unto them, Repent and be baptized every one of you for the remission of sins,
and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the promise is to you and
your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God
shall call. And with many other words exhorted he them, saying, Save your
selves from this untoward generation. For (as the same Apostle testifies in
another place) even Baptism does also now save us, (not the putting away of the
filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God) by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ. Doubt ye not therefore, but earnestly believe
that he will favorable receive these present persons, truly repenting and
coming unto him by faith; that he will grant them remission of their sins, and
bestow upon them the Holy Ghost; that he will give them the blessing of eternal
life, and make them partakers of his everlasting Kingdom.

Wherefore we being thus persuaded of the good will of our heavenly Father
toward these persons, declared by his Son Jesus Christ, let us faithfully and
devoutly give thanks to him, and say,

ALmighty and everlasting God, heavenly Father, we give thee humble thanks, for
that thou have vouchsafed to call us to the knowledge of thy grace and faith in
thee; Increase this knowledge, and confirm this faith in us evermore: Give thy
holy Spirit to these persons, that they may be born again, and be made heirs of
everlasting salvation, through our Lord Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns
with thee and the holy Spirit, now and for ever. Amen.

Then the Priest shall speak to the Persons to be Baptized on this wise.

WEl-beloved, who are come hither desiring to receive holy Baptism, ye have
heard how the Congregation has prayed that our Lord Jesus Christ would
vouchsafe to receive you and bless you, to release you of your sins, to give
you the Kingdom of heaven and everlasting life. Ye have heard also that our
Lord Jesus Christ has promised in his holy Word to grant all those things that
we have prayed for; which promise he for his part will most surely keep and
perform.

Wherefore after this promise made by Christ, ye must also faithfully for your
part promise in the presence of these your Witnesses, and this whole
Congregation, that ye will renounce the devil and all his works, and constantly
believe Gods holy Word, and obediently keep his commandments.

Then shall the Priest demand of each of the Persons to be Baptized, severally,
these Questions following.

Question. Do thou renounce the devil and all his works, the vain pomp and
glory of the world, with all covetous desires of the same, and the carnal
desires of the flesh, so that thou will not follow, nor be led by them?


Answer. I renounce them all.


Question. Do thou Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and
Earth?

And in Jesus Christ his only begotten Son our Lord? And that he was conceived
by the Holy Ghost; born of the Virgin Mary; that he suffered under Pontius
Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried; that he went down into hell, and also
did rise again the third day; that he ascended into Heaven, and sits at the
right hand of God the Father Almighty; and from thence shall come again at the
end of the world, to judge the quick and the dead?

And do thou believe in the Holy Ghost; the holy Catholic Church; the
Communion of Saints; the remission of sins; the resurrection of the flesh; and
everlasting life after death?


Answer. All this I steadfastly believe.


Question. Will thou be baptized in this Faith?


Answer. That is my desire.


Question. Will thou then obediently keep Gods holy will and commandments, and
walk in the same all the days of thy life?


Answer. I will endeavor so to do, God being my helper.


Then shall the Priest say,

O Merciful God, grant that the old Adam in these Persons may be so buried,
that the new man be raised up in them. Amen.

Grant that all carnal affections may die in them, and that all things
belonging to the Spirit may live and grow in them. Amen.

Grant that they may have power and strength to have victory, and to triumph
against the devil, the world, and the flesh Amen.

Grant that they being here dedicated to thee by our Office and Ministry, may
also be endued with heavenly virtues, and everlastingly rewarded, through thy
mercy, O blessed Lord God, who do live and govern all things, world without
end. Amen.

ALmighty everliving God, whose most dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ, for the
forgiveness of our sins, did shed out of his most precious side both water and
blood, and give commandment to his disciples, that they should go teach all
Nations, and baptize them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost; Regard, we beseech thee, the supplications of this Congregation;
sanctify this Water to the mystical washing away of sin: and grant that the
persons now to be baptized therein, may receive the fullness of thy grace, and
ever remain in the number of thy faithful and elect children, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall the Priest take each person to be Baptized, by the right hand, and
placing him conveniently by the Font, according to his discretion, shall ask
the Godfathers and Godmothers the Name; and then shall dip him in the water, or
pour water upon him, saying,

N. I Baptize thee In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. Amen.

Then shall the Priest say,

WE receive this person into the congregation of Christ's flock, and Here the
Priest shall make a cross upon the persons forehead.
do sign him with the sign of the cross, in token that hereafter he shall not
be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight
under his banner against sin, the world, and the devil; and to continue Christ's
faithful soldier and servant unto his lives end. Amen.

Then shall the Priest say,

SEeing now, dearly beloved brethren, that these persons are regenerate and
grafted into the body of Christ's Church, let us give thanks unto Almighty God
for these benefits, and with one accord make our prayers unto him, that they
may lead the rest of their life according to this beginning.

Then shall be said the Lords Prayer, all kneeling,

OUr Father which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen.

WE yield thee humble thanks, O heavenly Father, that thou have vouchsafed to
call us to the knowledge of thy grace and faith in thee; Increase this
knowledge, and confirm this faith in us evermore. Give thy holy Spirit to these
persons, that being now born again, and made heirs of everlasting salvation
though our Lord Jesus Christ, they may continue thy servants, and attain thy
promises, through the same Lord Jesus Christ thy Son, who lives and reigns
with thee in the unity of the same holy Spirit everlastingly. Amen.

Then all standing up, the Priest shall use this Exhortation following;
speaking to the Godfathers and Godmothers first.

FOrasmuch as these persons have promised in your presence, to renounce the
devil and all his works, to believe in God, and to serve him; ye must remember
that it is your part and duty to put them in mind what a solemn vow, promise
and profession they have now made before this Congregation, and especially
before you their chosen Witnesses. And ye are also to call upon them to use all
diligence to be rightly instructed in Gods holy Word, that so they may grow in
grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, and live godly,
righteously, and soberly in this present world.

( And then speaking to the new Baptized Persons, he shall proceed, and say,)

ANd as for you, who have now by Baptism put on Christ, it is your part and
duty also, being made the Children of God, and of the light by faith in Jesus
Christ, to walk answerably to your Christian calling, and as becomes the
children of light: remembering always that Baptism represents unto us our
profession; which is, to follow the example of our Savior Christ, and to be
made like unto him; that as he died, and rose again for us; so should we who
are baptized, die from sin, and rise again unto righteousness, continually
mortifying all our evil and corrupt affections, and daily proceeding in all
virtue and godliness of living.

It is expedient that every Person thus Baptized should be confirmed by the
Bishop so soon after his Baptism as conveniently may be; that so he may be
admitted to the holy Communion.

If any Persons not Baptized in their infancy, shall be brought to be Baptized
before they come to years of discretion to answer for themselves; it may
suffice to use the Office for Public Baptism of Infants, or (in case of
extreme danger) the Office for Private Baptism, only changing the word [Infant]
for [Child or Person] as occasion requires.

A CATECHISM, that is to say, An Instruction to be learned of every Person,
before he be brought to be Confirmed by the Bishop.
Question. WHat is your Name?


Answer. N. or M.


Question. Who gave you this Name?


Answer. My Godfathers and Godmothers in my Baptism, wherein I was made a
member of Christ, the child of God, and an inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven.


Question. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then for you?


Answer. They did promise and vow three things in my Name. First, that I should
renounce the devil and all his works, the pomps and vanity of this wicked
world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh. Secondly, that I should believe
all the Articles of the Christian Faith. And thirdly, that I should keep Gods
holy will and commandments, and walk in the same all the days of my life.


Question. Do thou not think that thou art bound to believe, and to do, as
they have promised for thee?


Answer. Yes verily; and by Gods help so I will. And I heartily thank our
heavenly Father, that he has called me to this state of salvation, through
Jesus Christ our Savior. And I pray unto God to give me his grace, that I may
continue in the same unto my lives end.


Catechist. Rehearse the Articles of thy Belief.


Answer. I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth:

And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, Who was conceived by the Holy
Ghost, Born of the Virgin Mary, Suffered under Pontius Pilate, Was crucified,
dead and buried, He descended into hell, The third day he rose again from the
dead, He ascended into heaven, And sits at the right hand of God the Father
Almighty: From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

I believe in the Holy Ghost, The holy Catholic Church, The Communion of
Saints, The forgiveness of sins, The Resurrection of the body, And the life
everlasting. Amen.


Question. What do thou chiefly learn in these Articles of thy Belief?


Answer. First, I learn to believe in God the Father, who has made me, and all
the world.

Secondly, in God the Son, who has redeemed me, and all mankind.

Thirdly, in God the holy Ghost, who sanctifies me, and all the elect people
of God.


Question. You said that your Godfathers and Godmothers did promise for you,
that you should keep Gods Commandments. Tell me how many there be.


Answer. Ten.


Question. Which be they?


Answer. THe same which God spoke in the twentieth Chapter of Exodus, saying, I
am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the
house of bondage.

I. Thou shall have none other Gods but me.

II. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the water under
the earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them. For I the Lord
thy God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands in them that love me, and keep my Commandments.

III. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

IV. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath Day. Six days shall thou labor,
and do all that thou have to do; but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou, and thy son, and thy
daughter, thy manservant and thy maidservant, thy cattle and the stranger
that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and earth, the
sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day; wherefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it.

V. Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

VI. Thou shall do no murder.

VII. Thou shall not commit adultery.

VIII. Thou shall not steal.

IX. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

X. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor
any thing that is his.


Question. What do thou chiefly learn by these Commandments?


Answer, I learn two things: my duty toward God, and my duty toward my
Neighbor.


Question. What is thy duty toward God?


Answer. My duty toward God, is to believe in him, to fear him, and to love
him with all my heart, with all my mind, with all my soul, and with all my
strength; to worship him, to give him thanks, to put my whole trust in him, to
call upon him, to honor his holy Name and his Word; and to serve him truly all
the days of my life.


Question. What is thy duty toward thy Neighbor?


Answer. My duty toward my Neighbor, is to love him as my self, and to do to
all men, as I would they should do unto me. To love, honor, and succor my
father and mother. To honor and obey the King, and all that are put in
authority under him. To submit my self to all my governors, teachers,
spiritual pastors and masters. To order my self lowly and reverently to all my
betters. To hurt no body by word or deed. To be true and just in all my
dealing. To bear no malice nor hatred in my heart. To keep my hands from
picking and stealing, and my tongue from evil speaking, lying and slandering.
To keep my body in temperance, soberness, and chastity. Not to covet nor desire
other men's good; but to learn and labor truly to get mine own living, and to
do my duty in that state of life, unto which it shall please God to call me.


Catechist. My good child, know this, that thou art not able to do these things
of thy self, nor to walk in the Commandments of God, and to serve him, without
his special grace, which thou must learn at all times to call for by diligent
Prayer. Let me hear therefore if thou can say the Lords Prayer.


Answer. OUr Father, which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom
come. Thy will be done in earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily
bread. And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against
us. And lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen.


Question. What desire thou of God in this Prayer?


Answer. I desire my Lord God our heavenly Father, who is the giver of all
goodness, to send his grace unto me, and to all people, that we may worship
him, serve him, and obey him as we ought to do. And I pray unto God, that he
will send us all things that be needful both for our souls and bodies; and that
he will be merciful unto us, and forgive us our sins; and that it will please
him to save and defend us in all dangers ghostly and bodily; and that he will
keep us from all sin and wickedness, and from our ghostly enemy, and from
everlasting death. And this I trust he will do of his mercy and goodness,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore I say, Amen. So be it.


Question. HOw many Sacraments has Christ ordained in his Church?


Answer. Two only, as generally necessary to salvation, that is to say,
Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord.


Question. What meanest thou by this word Sacrament?


Answer. I mean an outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace,
given unto us, ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby we receive the
same, and a pledge to assure us thereof.


Question. How many parts are there in a Sacrament?


Answer. Two: the outward visible sign, and the inward spiritual grace.


Question. What is the outward visible sign or form in Baptism?


Answer. Water: wherein the person is baptized, In the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.


Question. What is the inward and spiritual grace?


Answer. A death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness: for being by
nature born in sin, and the children of wrath, we are hereby made the children
of grace.


Question. What is required of persons to be baptized?


Answer. Repentance, whereby they forsake sin; and faith whereby they
steadfastly believe the promises of God, made to them in that Sacrament.


Question. Why then are Infants baptized, when by reason of their tender age
they cannot perform them?


Answer. Because they promise them both by their Sureties: which promise, when
they come to age, themselves are bound to perform.


Question. Why was the Sacrament of the Lords Supper ordained?


Answer. For the continual remembrance of the sacrifice of the death of Christ,
and of the benefits which we receive thereby.


Question. What is the outward part or sign of the Lords Supper?


Answer. Bread and Wine, which the Lord has commanded to be received.


Question. What is the inward part or thing signified?


Answer. The body and blood of Christ which are verily and indeed taken and
received by the faithful in the Lords Supper,


Question. What are the benefits whereof we are partakers thereby?


Answer. The strengthening and refreshing of our souls by the body and blood of
Christ, as our bodies are by the bread and wine.


Question. What is required of them who come to the Lords Supper?


Answer. To examine themselves, whether they repent them truly of their former
sins, stedfasty purposing to lead a new life; have a lively faith in Gods mercy
through Christ, with a thankful remembrance of his death; and be in charity
with all men.


The Curate of every Parish shall diligently upon Sunday's and Holy Days, after
the second Lesson at Evening Prayer, openly in the Church instruct and examine
so many Children of his Parish sent unto him, as he shall think convenient, in
some part of this Catechism.

And all Fathers, Mothers, Masters and Dames, shall cause their Children,
Servants, and Prentices (which have not learned their Catechism) to come to the
Church at the time appointed, and obediently to hear, and be ordered by the
Curate, until such time as they have learned all that is here appointed for
them to learn.

So soon as Children are come to a competent age, and can say in their Mother
Tongue the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the Ten Commandments; and also can
answer to the other Questions of this short Catechism; They shall be brought to
the Bishop. And every one shall have a Godfather, or a Godmother, as a Witness
of their Confirmation.

And whenever the Bishop shall give knowledge for children, to be brought
unto him for their Confirmation, the Curate of every Parish shall either bring,
or send in Writing with his hand subscribed thereunto, the Names of all such
persons within his Parish, as he shall think fit to be presented to the Bishop
to be Confirmed. And, if the Bishop approve of them, he shall Confirm them in
manner following.

The ORDER of CONFIRMATION, or Laying on of Hands upon those that are Baptized
and come to years of Discretions.
Upon the day appointed, all that are to be then Confirmed, being placed, and
standing in order before the Bishop; he (or some other Minister appointed by
him) shall read this Preface following.

TO the end that Confirmation may be ministered to the more edifying of such as
shall receive it, the Church has thought good to order, That none hereafter
shall be Confirmed, but such as can say the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the
ten Commandments; and can also answer to such other Questions as in the short
Catechism are contained: which Order is very convenient to be observed, to the
end that children being now come to the years of discretion, and having learned
what their Godfathers and Godmothers promised for them in Baptism, they may
themselves with their own mouth and consent openly before the Church ratify
and confirm the same; and also promise, that by the grace of God they will
evermore endeavor themselves faithfully to observe such things as they by
their own confession have assented unto.

Then shall the Bishop say,

DO ye here in the presence of God and of this Congregation renew the solemn
promise and vow that was made in your name at your Baptism; ratifying and
confirming the same in your own persons, and acknowledging your selves bound to
believe and to do all those things which your Godfather and Godmothers then
undertook for you?

And every one shall audibly answer,

I do.

The Bishop. OUr help is in the Name of the Lord;


Answer. Who has made heaven and earth.


Bishop. Blessed be the Name of the Lord,


Answer. Henceforth world without end.


Bishop. Lord, hear our prayers.


Answer. And let our cry come unto thee.


Bishop. Let us pray.

ALmighty and everliving God, who have vouchsafed to regenerate these thy
servants by water and the Holy Ghost, and have given unto them forgiveness of
all their sins; Strengthen them, we beseech thee, O Lord, with the Holy Ghost
the Comforter, and daily increase in them thy manifold gifts of grace; the
spirit of wisdom and understanding; the spirit of counsel and ghostly strength;
the spirit of knowledge and true godliness; and fill them, O Lord, with the
spirit of thy holy fear, now and for ever. Amen.


Then all of them in order kneeling before the Bishop, he shall lay his Hand
upon the Head of every one severally, saying,

DEfend, O Lord, this thy child [or this thy thy servant] with thy heavenly
grace, that he may continue thine for ever: and daily increase in thy holy
Spirit more and more, until he come unto thy everlasting Kingdom. Amen.

Then shall the Bishop say,

The Lord be with you.

Answer. And with thy Spirit.


And (all Kneeling down) the Bishop shall add,

Let us pray.

OUr Father, which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen.

And this Collect.

ALmighty and everlasting God, who make us both to will and to do those
things that be good and acceptable unto thy divine Majesty; We make our humble
supplications unto thee for these thy servants upon whom (after the example of
thy holy Apostles) we have now laid our hands, to certify them (by this sign)
of thy favor and gracious goodness toward them. Let thy Fatherly hand, we
beseech thee, ever be over them; let thy holy Spirit ever be with them; and so
lead them in the knowledge and obedience of thy Word, that in the end they may
obtain everlasting life, through our Lord Jesus Christ, who with thee and the
Holy Ghost lives and reigns, ever one God, world without end. Amen.

O Almighty Lord, and everlasting God, vouchsafe we beseech thee, to direct,
sanctify and govern both our hearts and bodies in the ways of thy laws, and in
the works of thy commandments, that through thy most mighty protection, both
here and ever, we may be preserved in body and soul, through our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

Then the Bishop shall bless them, saying thus,

THe blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be upon
you, and remain with you for ever. Amen.

And there shall none be admitted to the holy Communion, until such time as he
be Confirmed, or be ready and desirous to be confirmed.

The Form of Solemnization of MATRIMONY.
FIrst the Banns of all that are to be married together, must be published in
the Church three several Sundays or Holy Days, in the time of Divine Service,
immediately before the Sentences for the Offertory; the Curate saying after the
accustomed manner,

I publish the Banns of Marriage between M. of -- and N. of -- If any of you
know cause or just impediment, why these two persons should not be joined
together in holy Matrimony, ye are to declare it: This is the First [ second or
third] time of Asking.

And if the Persons that are to be Married, dwell in diverse Parishes, the Banns
must be Asked in both Parishes; and the Curate of the one Parish shall not
Solemnize Matrimony betwixt them, without a Certificate of the Banns being
thrice Asked, from the Curate of the other Parish.

At the day and time appointed for Solemnization of Matrimony, the Persons to
be Married shall come into the body of the Church with their Friends and
Neighbors: And there standing together, the Man on the right Hand, and the
Woman on the left, the Priest shall say,

DEarly beloved, we are gathered together here in the sight of God, and in the
face of this Congregation, to join together this Man and this Woman in holy
Matrimony, which is an honorable Estate instituted of God in the time of man's
innocence, signifying unto us the mystical union that is betwixt Christ and his
Church; which holy Estate Christ adorned and beautified with his presence, and
first miracle that he wrought in Cana of Galilee, and is commended of Saint
Paul to be honorable among all men; and therefore is not by any to be
enterprised, nor taken in hand unadvisedly, lightly, or wantonly, to satisfy
men's carnal lusts and appetites, like brute beasts that have no understanding;
but reverently, discreetly, advisedly, soberly, and in the fear of God, duly
considering the causes for which Matrimony was ordained.

First, it was ordained for the procreation of Children, to be brought up in
the fear and nurture of the Lord, and to the praise of his holy Name.

Secondly, it was ordained for a remedy against sin, and to avoid fornication,
that such persons as have not the gift of continency, might marry, and keep
themselves undefiled members of Christ's body.

Thirdly, it was ordained for the mutual society, help and comfort that the one
ought to have of the other, both in prosperity and adversity: Into which holy
Estate these two persons present come now to be joined. Therefore if any man
can show any just cause why they may not lawfully be joined together, let him
now speak, or else hereafter for ever hold his peace.

And also speaking to the Persons that shall be Married, he shall say,

I Require and charge you both (as ye will answer at the dreadful day of
judgment, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed) that if either of
you know any impediment, why ye may not be lawfully joined together in
Matrimony, ye do now confess it. For be ye well assured, that so many as are
coupled together otherwise then Gods Word does allow, are not joined together
by God, neither is their Matrimony lawful.

At which day of Marriage, if any man do allege and declare any Impediment why
they may not be coupled together in Matrimony, by Gods Law, or the Laws of this
Realm, and will be bound, and sufficient Sureties with him, to the Parties, or
else put in a Caution (to the full value of such Charges as the Persons to be
Married do thereby sustain) to prove his Allegation: Then the Solemnization
must be deferred until such time as the truth be tried.

If no Impediment be alleged, then shall the Curate say unto the Man,

N. Will thou have this Woman to thy wedded Wife, to live together after Gods
ordinance, in the holy Estate of Matrimony? Will thou love her, comfort her,
honor and keep her in sickness and in health, and forsaking all other, keep
thee only unto her, so long as ye both shall live?

Then Man shall answer,

I will.

Then shall the Priest say unto the Woman,

N. Will thou have this Man to thy wedded Husband, to live together after Gods
ordinance, in the holy estate of Matrimony? Will thou obey him, serve him,
love, honor and keep him in sickness and in health, and forsaking all other,
keep thee only unto him, so long as ye both shall live?

The Woman shall answer,

I will.

Then shall the Minister say,

Who gives this Woman to be married to this Man?

Then shall they give their Troth to each other in this manner.

The Minister receiving the Woman at her Fathers or Friends Hands, shall cause
the Man with his right Hand to take the Woman by her right Hand, and to say
after him as follows.

I N. take thee N. to my wedded Wife, to have and to hold from this day
forward, for better for worse, for richer for poorer, in sickness and in
health, to love and to cherish, till death us do part, according to Gods holy
ordinance; and thereto I plight thee my Troth.

Then shall they loose their Hands, and the Woman with her right Hand taking
the Man by his right Hand, shall likewise say after the Minister;

I N. take thee N. to my wedded Husband, to have and to hold from this day
forward, for better for worse, for richer for poorer, in sickness and health,
to love, cherish, and to obey, till death us do part, according to Gods holy
ordinance; and thereto I give thee my Troth.

Then shall they again loose their Hands, the Man shall give unto the Woman a
Ring, laying the same upon the Book, with the accustomed Duty to the Priest and
Clerk. And the Priest taking the Ring, shall deliver it unto the Man, to put it
upon fourth Finger of the Woman's left Hand. And the Man holding the Ring there,
and taught by the Priest, shall say,

WIth this Ring I thee wed, with my body I thee worship, and with all my
worldly goods I thee endow: In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost. Amen.

Then the Man leaving the Ring upon the fourth Finger of the Woman's left Hand,
they shall both kneel down, and the Minister shall say,

Let us pray.

O Eternal God, creator and preserver of all mankind, giver of all spiritual
grace, the author of everlasting life; Send thy blessing upon these thy
servants, this Man and this Woman, whom we bless in thy Name; that as Isaac and
Rebecca lived faithfully together, so these Persons may surely perform and keep
the vow and covenant betwixt them made (whereof this Ring given and received is
a token and pledge) and may ever remain in perfect love and peace together and
live according to thy laws, though Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall the Priest join their right Hands together, and say,

Those whom God has joined together, let no man put asunder.

Then shall the Minister speak unto the people.

FOrasmuch as N. and N. have consented together in holy Wedlock, and have
witnessed the same before God and this company, and thereto have given and
pledged their Troth either to other, and have declared the same by giving and
receiving of a Ring, and by joining of Hands; I pronounce that they be Man and
Wife together, In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. Amen.

And the Minister shall add this blessing.

GOd the Father, God the Son, God Holy Ghost, bless, preserve and keep you; the
Lord mercifully with his favor look upon you, and so fill you with all
spiritual benediction and grace, that ye may so live together in this life,
that in the world to come ye may have life everlasting. Amen.

Then the Minister or Clerks going to the Lords Table, shall say or sing this
Psalm following.

Beati omnes. Psalm. 128.

BLessed are all they that fear the Lord: and walk in his way.

For thou shall eat the labor of thine hands: O well is thee, and happy shall
thou be.

Thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine: upon the walls of thy house.

Thy children like the olive-branches: round about thy table.

Lo, thus shall the man be blessed: that fears the Lord.

The Lord from out of Sion shall so bless thee: that thou shall see Jerusalem
in prosperity all thy life long;

Yea, that thou shall see thy childrens children: and peace upon Israel.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Or this Psalm.

Deus misereatur. Psalm. 67.

GOd be merciful unto us, and bless us: and show us the light of his
countenance, and be merciful unto us.

That thy way may be known upon earth: thy saving health among all nations.

Let the people praise thee, O God: yea, let all the people praise thee.

O let the nations rejoice and be glad: for thou shall judge the folk
righteously, and govern the nations upon earth.

Let the people praise thee, O God: let all the people praise thee.

Then shall the earth bring forth her increase: and God, even our own God,
shall give us his blessing.

God shall blese us: and all the ends of the world shall fear him.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

The Psalm ended, and the Man and the Woman kneeling before the Lords Table,
the Priest standing at the Table, and turning his Face toward them, shall say,

Lord, have mercy upon us.

Answer. Christ have mercy upon us.


Minister. Lord, have mercy upon us.


OUr Father which art in heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, As it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Minister. O Lord, save thy servant, and thy handmaid;


Answer. Who put their trust in thee.


Minister. O Lord, send them help from thy holy place.


Answer. And evermore defend them.


Minister. Be unto them a tower of strength,


Answer. From the face of their enemy.


Minister. O Lord hear our prayer.


Answer. And let our cry come unto thee.


Minister. O God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob, bless these thy
servants, and sow the seed of eternal life in their hearts, that whatsoever in
thy holy Word they shall profitably learn, they may indeed fulfill the same.
Look, O Lord, mercifully upon them from heaven, and bless them. And as thou
did send thy blessing upon Abraham and Sarah, to their great comfort; so
vouchsafe to send thy blessing upon these thy servants, that they obeying thy
will, and always being in safety under thy protection, may abide in thy love
unto their lives end, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


This Prayer next following shall be omitted, where the Woman is past
Childbearing.

O Merciful Lord and heavenly Father, By whose gracious gift mankind is
increased; We beseech thee assist with thy blessing these two persons, that
they may both be fruitful in procreation of Children, and also live together so
long in godly love and honesty, that they may see their children Christianly
and virtuously brought up to thy praise and honor, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

O God, who by thy mighty power have made all things of nothing, who also
(after other things set in order) did appoint that out of Man (created after
thine own image and similitude) Woman should take her beginning; and knitting
them together, did teach that it should never be lawful to put asunder those
whom thou by Matrimony had made one: O God, who have consecrated the state of
Matrimony to such an excellent Mystery, that in it is signified and represented
the spiritual marriage and unity betwixt Christ and his Church; Look mercifully
upon these thy servants, that both this Man may love his wife according to thy
Word, (as Christ did love his spouse the Church, who gave himself for it,
loving and cherishing it even as his own flesh) and also that this Woman may be
loving and amiable, faithful and obedient to her Husband, and in all quietness,
sobriety and peace, be a follower of holy and godly Matrons. O Lord, bless them
both, and grant them to inherit thy everlasting Kingdom, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

Then shall the Priest say,

ALmighty God, who at the beginning did create our first parents, Adam and Eve,
and did sanctify and join them together in Marriage; Pour upon you the riches
of his grace, sanctify and bless you, that ye may please him both in body and
soul, and live together in holy love unto your lives end. Amen.

After which, if there be no Sermon declaring the Duties of Man and Wife, the
Minister shall read as follows.

ALl ye that are married, or that intend to take the holy Estate of Matrimony
upon you, hear what the holy Scripture does say as touching the Duty of
Husbands toward their Wives, and Wives toward their Husbands.

Saint Paul in his Epistle to the Ephesians, the Fifth Chapter, does give this
commandment to all married Men, Husbands, love your Wives, even as Christ also
loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse
it with the washing of water, by the Word; that he might present it to himself
a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it
should be holy and without blemish. So ought men to love their wives as their
own bodies: He that loved his wife, loves himself. For no man ever yet hates
his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church:
For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. For this cause
shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall be joined unto his wife, and
they two shall be one flesh. This is a great mystery; but I speak concerning
Christ and the Church. Nevertheless, let every one of you in particular, so
love his wife, even as himself. Ephesians. 5.25.

Likewise the same Saint Paul writing to the Colossians, speaks thus to all
men that are married, Husbands, love your wives, and be not bitter against
them. Col. 3.19.

Hear also what Saint Peter the Apostle of Christ, who was himself a married a
man, says unto them that are married, Ye husbands, dwell with your wives
according to knowledge, giving honor unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel,
and as being heirs together of the grace of life, that your prayers be not
hindered. 1 S. Pet. 3.7.

Hitherto ye have heard the duty of the husband toward the wife. Now likewise,
ye wives, hear and learn your duties toward your husbands, even as it is
plainly set forth in holy Scripture.

Saint Paul in the aforenamed Epistle to the Ephesians, teaches you thus;
Wives, submit your selves unto your own husbands, as unto the Lord. For the
husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the Church: and
he is the Savior of the body. Therefore as the Church is subject unto Christ,
so let the wives be to their own husbands in every thing. And again he says,
Let the wife see that she reverence her husband. Ephesians. 5.22.

And in his Epistle to the Colossians, Saint Paul gives you this short lesson,
Wives, submit your selves unto your own husbands, as is it fit the Lord. Col.
3.18.

Saint Peter also does instruct you very well, thus saying, Ye wives, be in
subjection to your own husbands; that if any obey not the word, they also may
without the word be won by the conversation of the wives; while they behold
your chaste conversation coupled with fear. Whose adorning let it not be that
outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on
of apparel; but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not
corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the
sight of God of great price. For after this manner in the old time the holy
women also who trusted in God, adorned themselves, being in subjection unto
their own husbands; even as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him Lord; whose
daughters ye are as long as ye do well, and are not afraid with any amazement.
1 S. Pet. 3.1.

It is convenient that the new married Persons should receive the holy
Communion at the time of their Marriage, or at the first opportunity after
their Marriage.

The ORDER for the VISITATION of the SICK.
When any Person is sick, notice shall be given thereof to the Minister of the
Parish; who coming into the sick Persons House, shall say,

PEace be to this house, and to all that dwell in it.

When he comes into the sick man's presence, he shall say; kneeling down,

REmember not, Lord, our iniquities, nor the iniquities of our forefathers.
Spare us, good Lord, spare thy people, whom thou have redeemed with thy most
precious blood, and be not angry with us for ever.

Answer. Spare us, good Lord.


Then the Minister shall say,

Let us pray.

Lord, have mercy upon us.

Christ, have mercy upon us.

Lord, have mercy upon us.

OUr Father which art in Heaven; Hallowed be they Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Minister. O Lord, save thy servant;


Answer. Which puts his trust in thee.


Minister. Send him help from thy holy place,


Answer. And evermore mightily defend him.


Minister. Let the enemy have no advantage of him;


Answer. Nor the wicked approach to hurt him.


Minister. Be unto him, O Lord, a strong tower,


Answer. From the face of his enemy.


Minister. O Lord, hear our prayers.


Answer. And let our cry come unto thee.


Minister. O Lord, look down from heaven, behold, visit and relieve this thy
servant. Look upon him with the eyes of thy mercy, give him comfort and sure
confidence in thee, defend him from the danger of the enemy, and keep him in
perpetual peace and safety, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


HEar us, Almighty and most merciful God and Savior; extend thy accustomed
goodness to this thy servant, who is grieved with sickness. Sanctify, we
beseech thee, this thy Fatherly correction to him; that the sense of his
weakness may add strength to his faith, and seriousness to his repentance. That
if it shall be thy good pleasure to restore him to his former health, he may
lead the residue of his life in thy fear, and to thy glory: or else give him
grace so to take thy visitation, that after this painful life ended he may
dwell with thee in life everlasting, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall the Minister exhort the sick Person after this form, or other like.

DEarly beloved, know this, that Almighty God is the Lord of life and death,
and of all things to them pertaining, as youth, strength, health, age,
weakness, and sickness. Wherefore whatsoever your sickness is, know you
certainly that it is Gods visitation. And for what cause soever this sickness
is sent unto you, whether it be to try your patience for the example of others,
and that your faith may be found in the day of the Lord, laudable, glorious,
and honorable, to the increase of glory and endless felicity; or else it be
sent unto you to correct and amend in you whatsoever does offend the eyes of
your heavenly Father; know you certainly, that if you truly repent you of your
sins and bear your sickness patiently, trusting in Gods mercy, for his dear Son
Jesus Christ's sake, and render unto him humble thanks for his Fatherly
visitation, submitting your self wholly unto his will, it shall turn to your
profit, and help you forward in the right way that leads unto everlasting
life.

If the Person visited be very sick, then the Curate may end his Exhortation in
this place, or else proceed.

TAke therefore in good part the chastisement of the Lord: For (as Saint Paul
says in the twelfth Chapter to the Hebrews) whom the Lord loves he chastneth,
and scourges every son whom he receives. If ye endure chastning, God deals
with you as with sons; for what son is he whom the Father chastneth not? But if
ye be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards,
and not sons. Furthermore, we have had fathers of our flesh, which corrected
us, and we gave them reverence: shall we not much rather be in subjection unto
the Father of Spirits, and live? For they verily for a few days chastned us
after their own pleasure; but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of
his holiness. These words, good brother, are written in holy Scripture for our
comfort and instruction, that we should patiently, and with thanksgiving bear
our heavenly Fathers correction, whenever by any manner of adversity it shall
please his gracious goodness to visit us. And there should be no greater
comfort to Christian persons, then to be made like unto Christ, by suffering
patiently adversities, troubles, and sicknesses. For he himself went not up to
joy, but first he suffered pain; he entered not into his glory before he was
crucified. So truly our way to eternal joy, is to suffer here with Christ; and
our door to enter into eternal life, is gladly to die with Christ; that we may
rise again from death, and dwell with him in everlasting life. Now therefore
taking your sickness, which is thus profitable for you, patiently, I exhort you
in the Name of God, to remember the profession which you made unto God in your
Baptism. And for as much as after this life there is an account to be given
unto the righteous Judge, by whom all must be judged without respect of
persons; I require you to examine your self and your estate, both toward God
and man; so that accusing and condemning your self for your own fault, you may
find mercy at our heavenly Fathers hand for Christ's sake, and not be accused
and condemned in that fearful judgment. Therefore I shall rehearse to you the
Articles of our Faith, that you may know whether you do believe as a Christian
man should, or no.

Here the Minister shall rehearse the Articles of the Faith, saying thus,

Do thou believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth?

And in Jesus Christ his only begotten Son our Lord? And that he was conceived
by the Holy Ghost; born of the Virgin Mary; that he suffered under Pontius
Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried; that he went down into hell, and also
did rise again the third day; that he ascended into Heaven, and sits at the
right hand of God the Father Almighty; and from thence shall come again at the
end of the world, to judge the quick and the dead?

And do thou believe in the Holy Ghost; the holy Catholic Church; the
Communion of Saints; the remission of sins; the resurrection of the flesh; and
everlasting life after death?

The sick Person shall answer,

All this I steadfastly believe.

Then shall the Minister examine whether he repent him truly of his sins, and
be in charity with all the world; exhorting him to forgive from the bottom of
his heart all Persons that have offended him, and if he has offended any
other, to ask them forgiveness; and where he has done injury or wrong to any
man, that he make amends to the uttermost of his power. And if he has not
before disposed of his Goods, let him then be admonished to make his Will, and
to declare his Debts, what he owes, and what is owing unto him, for the better
discharging of his conscience, and the quietness of his Executors. But men
should often be put in remembrance to take order for the settling of their
temporal Estates, whilst they are in health.

These words before rehearsed, may be said before the Minister begin his
Prayer, as he shall see cause.

The Minister should not omit earnestly to move such sick Persons as are of
ability, to be liberal to the Poor.

Here shall the sick Person be moved to make a special confession of his sins,
if he feel his conscience troubled with any weighty matter. After which
confession, the Priest shall absolve him (if he humbly and heartily desire it)
after this sort.

OUr Lord Jesus Christ, who has left power to his Church to absolve all
sinners who truly repent and believe in him, of his great mercy forgive thee
thine offenses: And by his Authority committed to me, I absolve thee from all
thy sins, In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
Amen.

And then the Priest shall say the Collect following.

Let us pray.

O Most merciful God, who according to the multitude of thy mercies, do so
put away the sins of those who truly repent, that thou remembrest them no more;
Open thine eye of mercy upon this thy servant, who most earnestly desires
pardon and forgiveness. Renew in him (most loving Father) whatsoever has been
decayed by the fraud and malice of the devil, or by his own carnal will and
frailness; preserve and continue this sick member in the unity of the Church;
consider his contrition, accept his tears, assuage his pain, as shall seem to
thee most expedient for him. And forasmuch as he puts his full trust only in
thy mercy, impute not unto him his former sins; but strengthen him with thy
blessed Spirit; and when thou art pleased to take him hence, take him unto thy
favor, through the merits of thy most dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

Then shall the Minister say this Psalm. In te, Domine, speravi. Psalm. 71.

IN thee, O Lord, have I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion: but
rid me, and deliver me in thy righteousness; incline thine ear unto me, and
save me.

Be thou my strong hold, whereunto I may always resort: thou have promised to
help me, for thou art my house of defense, and my castle.

Deliver me, O my God, out of the hand of the ungodly: out of the hand of the
unrighteous and cruel man.

For thou, O Lord God, art the thing that I long for: thou art my hope, even
from my youth.

Through thee have I been holden up ever since I was born: thou art he that
took me out of my mothers womb; my praise shall always be of thee.

I am become as it were a monster unto many: but my sure trust is in thee.

O let my mouth be filled with thy praise: that I may sing of thy glory and
honor all the day long.

Cast me not away in the time of age: forsake me not when my strength fails
me.

For mine enemies speak against me, and they that lay wait for my soul, take
their counsel together, saying: God has forsaken him, persecute him, and take
him; for there is none to deliver him.

Go not far from me, O God: my God, have thee to help me.

Let them be confounded and perish, that are against my soul: let them be
covered with shame and dishonor, that seek to do me evil.

As for me, I will patiently abide always: and will praise thee more and more.

My mouth shall daily speak of thy righteousness and salvation: for I know no
end thereof.

I will go forth in the strength of the Lord God: and will make mention of thy
righteousness only.

Thou, O God, have taught me from my youth up until now: therefore will I tell
of thy wondrous works.

Forsake me not, O God, in mine old age, when I am gray headed: until I have
showed thy strength unto this generation, and thy power to all them that are
yet for to come.

Thy righteousness, O God, is very high, and great things are they that thou
have done: O God, who is like unto thee?

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Adding this.

O Savior of the world, who by thy cross and precious blood have redeemed us,
save us and help us, we humbly beseech thee, O Lord.

Then shall the Minister say,

THe Almighty Lord, who is a most strong tower to all them that put their trust
in him, to whom all things in heaven, in earth, and under the earth do bow and
obey, be now and evermore thy defense, and make thee know and feel, that there
is none other Name under heaven given to man, in whom, and through whom thou
may receive health and salvation, but only the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Amen.

And after that shall say,

UNto Gods gracious mercy and protection we commit thee. The Lord bless thee
and keep thee. The Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto
thee. The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace, both now
and evermore. Amen.

A Prayer for a sick Child.
O Almighty God and merciful Father, to whom alone belong the issues of life
and death; Look down from heaven, we humbly beseech thee, with the eyes of
mercy upon this Child now lying upon the bed of sickness: Visit him, O Lord,
with thy salvation; deliver him in thy good appointed time from his bodily
pain, and save his soul for thy mercies save. That if it shall be thy pleasure
to prolong his days here on earth, he may live to thee, and be an instrument of
thy glory, by serving thee faithfully, and doing good in his generation; or
else receive him into those heavenly habitations, where the souls of them that
sleep in the Lord Jesus, enjoy perpetual rest and felicity. Grant this, O Lord,
for thy mercies sake, in the same thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ, who lives and
reigns with thee and the Holy Ghost, ever one God, world without end. Amen.

A Prayer for a sick Person, when there appears small hope of Recovery.

O Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, our only help in time of need; We
fly unto thee for succor in behalf of this thy servant, here lying under thy
hand in great weakness of body. Look graciously upon him, O Lord; and the more
the outward man decays, strengthen him, we beseech thee, so much the more
continually with thy grace and holy Spirit in the inner man. Give him unfeigned
repentance for all the errors of his life past, and steadfast faith in thy Son
Jesus, that his sins may be done away by thy mercy, and his pardon sealed in
heaven, before he go hence, and be no more seen. We know, O Lord, that there is
no word impossible with thee; and that if thou will, thou can even yet raise
him up, and grant him a longer continuance amongst us. Yet, forasmuch as in all
appearance the time of his dissolution draws near, so fit and prepare him, we
beseech thee, against the hour of death, that after his departure hence in
peace and in thy favor, his soul may be received into thine everlasting
kingdom, through the merits and mediation of Jesus Christ thine only Son, our
Lord and Savior. Amen.

A commendatory Prayer for a sick Person at the point of departure.

O Almighty God, with whom do live the spirits of just men made perfect, after
they are delivered from their earthly prisons; We humbly commend the soul of
this thy servant, our dear brother, into thy hands, as into the hands of a
faithful Creator, and most merciful Savior; most humbly beseeching thee that
it may be precious in thy fight. Wash it, we pray thee, in the blood of that
immaculate Lamb that was slain to take away the sins of the world; that
whatsoever defilements it may have contracted in the midst of this miserable
and naughty world, through the lusts of the flesh, or the wiles of Satan, being
purged and done away, it may be presented pure and without spot before thee.
And teach us, who survive, in this and other like daily spectacles of
mortality, to see how frail and uncertain our own condition is, and so to
number our days, that we may seriously apply our hearts to that holy and
heavenly wisdom, whilst we live here, which may in the end bring us to life
everlasting, through the merits of Jesus Christ thine only Son our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for Persons troubled in Mind or in Conscience.

O Blessed Lord, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comforts, we beseech
thee look down in pity and compassion upon this thy afflicted servant. Thou
writest bitter things against him, and make him to possess his former
iniquities; thy wrath lies hard upon him, and his soul is full of trouble:
But, O merciful God, who have written thy holy Word for our learning, that we
through patience and comfort of thy holy Scriptures might have hope; give him a
right understanding of himself, and of thy threats and promises, that he may
neither cast away his confidence in thee, nor place it any where but in thee.
Give him strength against all his temptations, and heal all his distempers.
Break not the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax. Shut not up thy tender
mercies in displeasure; but make him to hear of joy and gladness, that the
bones which thou have broken may rejoice. Deliver him from fear of the enemy,
and lift up the light of thy countenance upon him, and give him peace, through
the merits and mediation of Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The COMMUNION of the SICK.
Forasmuch as all mortal Men be subject to many sudden Perils, Diseases and
Sicknesses, and ever uncertain what time they shall depart out of this life;
therefore to the intent they may be always in a readiness to die whenever it
shall please Almighty God to call them, the Curates shall diligently from time
to time (but especially in the time of Pestilence or other infectious Sickness)
exhort their Parishioners to the often receiving of the holy Communion of the
Body and Blood of our Savior Christ, when it shall be publicly Administered in
the Church; that so doing, they may in case of sudden visitation, have the less
cause to be disquieted for lack of the same. But if the sick Person be not able
to come to the Church, and yet is desirous to receive the Communion in his
House; then he must give timely notice to the Curate, signifying also how many
there are to Communicate with him (which shall be three, or two at the least)
and having a convenient place in the sick Man's House, with all things necessary
so prepared, that the Curate may reverently Minister, he shall there Celebrate
the holy Communion, beginning with the Collect, Epistle and Gospel here,
following.

The Collect.
ALmighty everliving God, maker of mankind, who do correct those whom thou
do love, and chastise every one whom thou do receive; We beseech thee to
have mercy upon this thy servant visited with thine hand, and to grant that he
may take his sickness patiently, and recover his bodily health (if it be thy
gracious will) and whenever his soul shall depart from the body, it may be
without spot presented unto thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Epistle. Heb. 12.5.
MY son, despise not thou the chastning of the Lord, nor faint when thou art
rebuked of him. For whom the Lord loves, he chastneth; and scourges every son
whom he receives.

The Gospel. S. John 5.24.
VErily, verily, I say unto you, He that hears my word, and believes on him
that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation; but
is passed from death unto life.

After which, the Priest shall proceed according to the Form before prescribed
for the holy Communion, beginning at these words [Ye that do truly, etc.]

At the time of the distribution of the holy Sacrament, the Priest shall first
receive the Communion himself, and after minister unto them that are appointed
to Communicate with the Sick, and last of all to the sick Person.

But if a man, either by reason of extremity of sickness, or for want of
warning in due time to the Curate, or for lack of company to receive with him,
or by any other just impediment, do not receive the Sacrament of Christ's Body
and Blood, the Curate shall instruct him, that if he do truly repent him of his
sins, and steadfastly believe that Jesus Christ has suffered death upon the
Cross for him, and shed his Blood for his Redemption, earnestly remembering the
benefits he has thereby, and giving him hearty thanks therefore, he does eat
and drink the Body, and Blood of our Savior Christ profitably to his souls
health, although he do not receive the Sacrament with his mouth.

When the sick person is visited, and receives the holy Communion all at one
time, then the Priest, for more expedition, shall cut off the Form of the
Visitation at the Psalm [In thee, O Lord, have I put my trust] and go straight
to the Communion.

In the time of the Plague, Sweat, or such other like contagious Times of
Sickness or Diseases, when none of the Parish or Neighbors can be gotten to
Communicate with the Sick in their Houses, for fear of the Infection, upon
special request of the Diseased, the Minister may only Communicate with him.

The ORDER for the BURIAL of the DEAD.
Here is to be noted, That the Office ensuing is not to be used for any that
die unbaptized, or excommunicate, or have laid violent hands upon themselves.

The Priest and Clerks meeting the Corpse at the entrance of the Churchyard,
and going before it, either into the Church, or toward the Grave, shall say or
sing,

I Am the resurrection and the life, faith the Lord: he that believes in me,
though he were dead, yet shall he live. And whosoever lives and believes in
me, shall never die. S. John 11.25, 26.

I Know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon
the earth. And though after my skin, worms destroy this body; yet in my flesh
shall I see God: whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and
not another. Job 19.25, 26, 27.

WE brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing
out. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the Name of the
Lord. 2 Timothy 6.7. Job 1.21.

After they are come into the Church, shall be read one or both of these Psalms
following.

Dixi, Custodiam. Psalm. 39.
I Said, I will take heed to my ways: that I offend not in my tongue.

I will keep my mouth as it were with a bridle: while the ungodly is in my
sight.

I held my tongue, and spoke nothing: I kept silence, yea, even from good
words; but it was pain and grief to me.

My heart was hot within me, and while I was thus musing, the fire kindled: and
at the last I spoke with my tongue.

Lord, Let me know my end, and the number of my days: that I may be certified
how long I have to live.

Behold, thou have made my days as it were a span long: and mine age is even as
nothing in respect of thee, and verily every man living is altogether vanity.

For man walks in a vain shadow, ana disquieteth himself in vain: he heapeth
up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them.

And now, Lord, what is my hope: truly my hope is even in thee.

Deliver me from all mine offenses: and make me not a rebuke unto the foolish.

I became dumb and opened not my mouth: for it was thy doing.

Take thy plague away from me: I am even consumed by means of thy heavy hand.

When thou with rebukes do chasten man for sin, thou make his beauty to
consume away, like as it were a moth fretting a garment: every man therefore is
but vanity.

Hear my prayer, O Lord, and with thine ears consider my calling: hold not thy
peace at my tears.

For I am a stranger with thee: and a sojourner as all my fathers were.

O spare me a little, that I may recover my strength: before I go hence, and be
no more seen.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Domine, refugium. Psalm. 90.
LOrd, thou have been our refuge: from one generation to another.

Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth and the world were
made: thou art God from everlasting, and world without end.

Thou turnest man to destruction: again thou say, Come again; ye children of
men.

For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday: seeing that is past as
a watch in the night.

As Soon as thou scatterest them, they are even as a sleep: and fade away
suddenly like the grass.

In the morning it is green, and grows up: but in the evening it is cut down,
dried up, and withered.

For we consume away in thy displeasure: and are afraid at thy wrathful
indignation.

Thou have set our misdeeds before thee: and our secret sins in the light of
thy countenance.

For when thou art angry, all our days are gone: we bring our years to an end,
as it were a tale that is told.

The days of our age are threescore years and ten, and though men be so strong
that they come to fourscore years: yet is their strength then but labor and
sorrow; so soon passes it away, and we are gone.

But who regards the power of thy wrath: for even thereafter as a man
fears, so is thy displeasure.

So teach us to number our days: that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

Turn thee again, O Lord at the last: and be gracious unto thy servants.

O satisfy us with thy mercy, and that soon: so shall we rejoice and be glad
all the days of our life.

Comfort us again, now after the time that thou have plagued us: and for the
years wherein we have suffered adversity.

Show thy servants thy work: and their children thy glory.

And the glorious Majesty of the Lord our God be upon us: prosper thou the work
of our hands upon us, O prosper thou our handiwork.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Then shall follow the Lesson taken out of the fifteenth Chapter of the former
Epistle of Saint Paul to the Corinthians.

1 Cor. 15.20.
NOw is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that
slept. For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the
dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. But
every man in his own order: Christ the first fruits; afterward they that are
Christ's, at his coming. Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up
the kingdom to God, even the Father; when he shall have put down all rule, and
all authority and power. For he must reign till he has put all enemies under
his feet. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death: For he has put all
things under his feet. But when he says all things are put under him, it is
manifest that he is excepted which did put all things under him. And when all
things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject
unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all. Else what
shall they do which are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not at all? why
are they then baptized for the dead? And why stand we in jeopardy every hour? I
protest by your rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily.
If after the manner of men I have fought with beast at Ephesus, what
advantageth it me, if the dead rise not? Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we
die. Be not deceived; evil communications corrupt good manners. Awake to
righteousness, and sin not; for some have not the knowledge of God. I speak
this to your shame. But some man will say, how are the dead raised up? And with
what body do they come? Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened
except it die. And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall
be but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain. But God
gives it a body, as it has pleased him, and to every seed his own body. All
flesh is not the same flesh, but there is one kind of flesh of men, another
flesh of beasts, another of fishes, and another of birds. There are also
celestial bodies, and bodies terrestrial; but the glory of the celestial is
one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another. There is one glory of the
sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; for one
star differs from another star in glory. So also is the resurrection of the
dead; It is sown in corruption; it is raised in incorruption: It is sown in
dishonor; it is raised in glory: It is sown in weakness; it is raised in
power: It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body. There is a
natural body, and there is a spiritual body. And so it is written, The first
man Adam was made a living soul, the last Adam was made a quickening Spirit.
Howbeit, that was not first which is spiritual; but that which is natural, and
afterward that which is spiritual. The first man is of the earth, earthy: the
second man is the Lord from heaven. As is the earthy, such are they that are
earthy: and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly. And as we
have born the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the
heavenly. Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the
kingdom of God; neither does corruption inherit incorruption. Behold, I show
you a mystery. We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed in a moment,
in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump; (for the trumpet shall sound,
and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed.) For this
corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality.
So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall
have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is
written, Death is swallowed up in victory. O Death, where is thy sting? O
grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin
is the law. But thanks be to God which gives us the victory, through our Lord
Jesus Christ. Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor
is not in vain in the Lord.

When they come to the Grave while the Corpse is made ready to be laid into the
Earth, the Priest shall say, or the Priest and Clerks shall sing,

MAn that is born of a woman, has but a short time to live, and is full of
misery. He comes up, and is cut down like a flower; he flees as it were a
shadow and never continues in one stay.

In the midst of life were are in death: of whom may we seek for succor, but
of thee, O Lord, who for our sins art justly displeased?

Yet, O Lord God most holy, O Lord most mighty, O holy and most merciful
Savior, deliver us not into the bitter pains of eternal death.

Thou know, Lord, the secrets of our hearts; shut not thy merciful ears to
our prayers; but spare us, Lord most holy, O God most mighty, O holy and
merciful Savior, thou most worthy Judge eternal, suffer us not at our last
hour for any pains of death to fall from thee.

Then while the earth shall be cast upon the Body by some standing by, the
Priest shall say,

FOrasmuch as it has pleased Almighty God of his great mercy to take unto
himself the soul of our dear brother here departed, we therefore commit his
body to the ground; earth to earth, ashes to ashes, dust to dust, in sure and
certain hope of the resurrection to eternal life, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall change our vile body, that it may be like unto his glorious
body, according to the mighty working, whereby he is able to subdue all things
to himself.

Then shall be said, or sung,

I Heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, Write; From henceforth blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord: even so says the Spirit; for they rest
from their labors. Rev. 14.13.

Then the Priest shall say,

Lord, have mercy upon us.

Christ, have mercy upon us.

Lord, have mercy upon us.

OUr Father which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Priest. ALmighty God, with whom do live the spirits of them that depart hence
in the Lord, and with whom the souls of the faithful, after they are delivered
from the burden of the flesh, are in joy and felicity; We give thee hearty
thanks, for that it has pleased thee to deliver this our brother out of the
miseries of this sinful world; beseeching thee that it may please thee of thy
gracious goodness, shortly to accomplish the number of thine elect, and to
hasten thy Kingdom, that we, with all those that are departed in the true faith
of thy holy Name, may have our perfect consummation and bliss, both in body and
soul, in thy eternal and everlasting glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


The Collect.
O Merciful God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the resurrection
and the life; in whom whosoever believes shall live, though he die; and
whosoever lives and believes in him, shall not die eternally; who also has
taught us (by his holy Apostle Saint Paul) not to be sorry, as men without
hope, for them that sleep in him; We meekly beseech thee, O Father, to raise us
from the death of sin unto the life of righteousness; that when we shall depart
this life, we may rest in him, as our hope is this our brother does, and that
at the general resurrection in the last day we may be found acceptable in thy
sight, and receive that blessing which thy well-beloved Son shall then
pronounce to all that love and fear thee, saying, Come, ye blessed children of
my Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the
world. Grant this, we beseech thee, O merciful Father, through Jesus Christ our
Mediator and Redeemer. Amen.

THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the followship of
the Holy Ghost, be with us all evermore. Amen.

The Thanksgiving of Women after CHILDBIRTH, Commonly called, The Churching of
Women.
The Woman at the usual time after her Delivery, shall come into the Church
decently apparelled, and there shall kneel down in some convenient place, as
has been accustomed, or as the Ordinary shall direct: And then the Priest
shall say unto her,

FOrasmuch as it has pleased Almighty God of his goodness to give you safe
deliverance, and has preserved you in the great danger of Childbirth, you
shall therefore give hearty thanks unto God, and say,

( Then shall the Priest say this Psalm)

Delexi, quoniam. Psalm. 116.
I Am well pleased: that the Lord has heard the voice of my prayer.

That he has inclined his ear unto me: therefore will I call upon him as long
as I live.

The snares of death compassed me round about: and the pains of hell gat hold
upon me.

I found trouble and heaviness, and I called upon the Name of the Lord: O Lord,
I beseech thee, deliver my soul.

Gracious is the Lord and righteous: yea, our God is merciful.

The Lord preserves the simple: I was in misery, and he helped me.

Turn again then unto thy rest, O my soul: for the Lord has rewarded thee.

And why? thou have delivered my soul from death: mine eyes from tears, and my
feet from falling.

I will walk before the Lord: in the land of the living.

I believed, and therefore will I speak, but I was sore troubled: I said in my
have, All men are liars.

What reward shall I give unto the Lord: for all the benefits that he has done
unto me?

I will receive the cup of salvation: and call upon the Name of the Lord.

I will pay my vows now in the presence of all his people: in the courts of the
Lords house, even in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. Praise the Lord.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Or this Psalm.

Nisi Dominus. Psalm. 127.
EXcept the Lord build the house: their labor is but lost that build it.

Except the Lord keep the city: the watchman waketh but in vain.

It is but lost labor that ye haste to rise up early, and so late take rest,
and eat the bread of carefulness: for so he gives his beloved sleep.

Lo, children and the fruit of the womb: are an heritage and gift that comes
of the Lord.

Like as the arrows in the hand of the giant: even so are the young children.

Happy is the man that has his quiver full of them: they shall not be ashamed
when they speak with their enemies in the gate.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Then the Priest shall say,

Let us Pray.

Lord, have mercy upon us.

Christ, have mercy upon us.

Lord, have mercy upon us.

OUr Father which art in heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, As it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. For thine is the
kingdom, And the power, and the glory, For ever and ever. Amen.

Minister. O Lord, save this woman thy servant;


Answer. Who puts her trust in thee.


Minister. Be thou to her a strong tower;


Answer. From the face of her enemy.


Minister. Lord, hear our prayer.


Answer. And let our cry come unto thee.


Minister. Let us pray.

O Almighty God, we give thee humble thanks for that thou have vouch safed to
deliver this woman thy servant from the great pain and peril of Childbirth;
Grant, we beseech thee, most merciful Father, that she through thy help may
both faithfully live, and walk according to thy will in this life present, and
also may be partaker of everlasting glory in the life to come, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.


The Woman that comes to give her Thanks, must offer accustomed Offerings; and
if there be a Communion, it is convenient that she receive the holy Communion.

A COMMINATION, or Denouncing of Gods Anger and Judgments against Sinners, with
certain Prayers to be used on the First day of Lent, and at other times, as the
Ordinary shall appoint.
After Morning Prayer, the Litany ended according to the accustomed manner, the
Priest shall in the Reading Pew or Pulpit* say,

BRethren, in the Primitive Church there was a godly Discipline, that at the
beginning of Lent, such Persons as stood convicted of notorious sin, were put
to open penance, and punished in this world, that their souls might be saved in
the day of the Lord, and that others admonished by their example, might be the
more afraid to offend.

Instead whereof (until the said Discipline may be restored again, which is
much to be wished) it is thought good, that at this time (in the presence of
you all) should be read the general Sentences of Gods cursing against
impenitent sinners, gathered out of the seven and twentieth Chapter of
Deuteronomy, and other places of Scripture; and that ye should answer to every
Sentence, Amen: To the intent that being admonished of the great indignation of
God against sinners, ye may the rather be moved to earnest and true repentance,
and may walk more warily in these dangerous days; fleeing from such vices, for
which ye affirm with your own mouths the curse of God to be due.

CUrsed is the man that makes any carved or molten image to worship it Deuteronomy.
27.15.

And the People shall answer and say, Amen.

Minister. Cursed is he that curses his father and mother. ver. 16.


Answer. Amen.


Minister. Cursed is he that removes his neighbors landmark. ver. 17.


Answer. Amen.


Minister. Cursed is he that makes the blind to go out of his way. ver. 18.


Answer. Amen.


Minister. Cursed is he that perverteth the judgment of the stranger, the
fatherless, and widow. ver. 19.


Answer. Amen.


Minister. Cursed is he that smites his neighbor secretly. ver. 24.


Answer. Amen.


Minister. Cursed is he that lies with his neighbors wife. Lev. 20.10.


Answer. Amen.


Minister. Cursed is he that takes reward to slay the innocent. Deuteronomy. 27.25.


Answer. Amen.


Minister. Cursed is he that puts his trust in man, and takes man for his
defense, and in his heart goes from the Lord. Jer. 17.5.


Answer. Amen.


Minister. Cursed are the unmerciful, fornicators, and adulterers, covetous
persons, idolaters, slanderers, drunkards, and extortioners. S. Matthew. 25.41. 1
Cor. 6.9, 10.


Answer. Amen.


Minister. NOw seeing that all they are accursed (as the prophet David bears
witness) who do err and go astray from the commandments of God, Psalm. cxix. 21.
let us (remembering the dreadful judgment hanging over our heads, and always
ready to fall upon us) return unto our Lord God with all contrition and
meekness of heart; bewailing and lamenting our sinful life, acknowledging and
confessing our offenses, and seeking to bring forth worthy fruits of penance.
S. Matthew. iij. 10.
For now is the ax put unto the root of the trees, so that every tree that
brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire. Hebr. x. 31.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God: Psalm. xj. 6.
He shall pour down rain upon the sinners, snares, fire and brimstone, storm
and tempest; this shall be their portion to drink. For lo, Isa. xxvj. 21.
the Lord is come out of his place to visit the wickedness of such as dwell
upon the earth. But who may abide the day of his coming? Mal. iij. 2.
Who shall be able to endure when he appears? His fan is in his hand, S.
Matthew. iij. 12.
and he will purge his floor, and gather his wheat into the barn, but he will
burn the chaff with unquenchable fire. 1 These. v. 2, 3.
The day of the Lord comes as a thief in the night: and when men shall say,
Peace, and all things are safe; then shall sudden destruction come upon them,
as sorrow comes upon a woman travailing with child, and they shall not escape.
Romans ij. 4, 5.
Then shall appear the wrath of God in the day of vengeance, which obstinate
sinners, through the stubbornness of their heart, have heaped unto themselves,
which despised the goodness, patience and long-sufferance of God, when he
called them continually to repentance. Prove. j. 28, 29, 30.
Then shall they call upon me (says the Lord) but I will not hear; they shall
seek me early, but they shall not find me; and that because they hated
knowledge, and received not the fear of the Lord, but abhorred my counsel, and
despised my correction. Then shall it be too late to knock when the door shall
be shut; S. Matthew. xxv. 10, 11, 12.
and too late to cry for mercy when it is the time of justice. O terrible voice
of most just judgment which shall be pronounced upon them, when it shall be
said unto them, S. Matthew. xxv. 41.
Go ye cursed into the fire everlasting, which is prepared for the devil and
his angels. 2 Cor. vj. 2.
Therefore, brethren, take we heed betime, S. John ix. 4.
while the day of salvation lasts; for the night comes when none can work:
S. John xij. 35, 36.
But let us, while we have the light, believe in the light, and walk as
children of the light, that we be not cast into utter darkness, S. Matthew. xxv.
30.
where is weeping and gnashing of teeth. Let us not abuse the goodness of God,
who calls us mercifully to amendment, and of his endless pity promises us
forgiveness of that which is past, if with a perfect and true heart we return
unto him. Isaiah j. 18.
For though our sins be as red as scarlet, they shall be made white as snow:
and though they be like purple, yet they shall be made white as wool. Ezekiel.
xviij. 30, 31, 32.
Turn ye (says the Lord) from all your wickedness, and your sin shall not be
your destruction. Cast away from you all your ungodliness that ye have done,
make you new hearts, and a new spirit: Wherefore will ye die, O ye house of
Israel, seeing that I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, says
the Lord God? Turn ye then, and ye shall live. 1 S. John ij. 1.
Although we have sinned, yet have we an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. Isaiah liij. 5.
For he was wounded for our offenses, and smitten for our wickedness. Let us
therefore return unto him, who is the merciful receiver of all true penitent
sinners; assuring our selves that he is ready to receive us, and most willing
to pardon us, if we come unto him, with faithful repentance; if we will submit
our selves unto him, and from henceforth walk in his ways; S. Matthew. xj. 29, 30.
if we will take his easy yoke, and light burden upon us, to follow him in
lowliness, patience and charity, and be ordered by the governance of his holy
Spirit; seeking always his glory, and serving him duly in our vocation with
thanksgiving. This if we do, Christ will deliver us from the curse of the law,
and from the extreme malediction which shall light upon them that shall be set
on the left hand; and he will set us on his right hand, S. Matthew. xxv. 33, 34.
and give us the gracious benediction of his Father, commanding us to take
possession of his glorious kingdom: unto which he vouchsafe to bring us all,
for his infinite mercy. Amen.


Then shall they all kneel upon their knees, and the Priest and Clerks kneeling
(in the place where they are accustomed to say the Litany) shall say this
Psalm, Miserere mei, Deus.

Miserere mei, Deus. Psalm. li.

HAve mercy upon, O God, after thy great goodness: according to the multitude
of thy mercies, do away mine offenses.

Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness: and cleanse me from my sin.

For I acknowledge my faults: and my sin is ever before me.

Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that thou
might be justified in thy saying, and clear when thou art judged.

Behold, I was shapen in wickedness: and in sin has my mother conceived me.

But lo, thou requirest truth in the inward parts: and shall make me to
understand wisdom secretly.

Thou shall purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean: thou shall wash me, and
I shall be whiter then snow.

Thou shall make me hear of joy and gladness: that the bones which thou have
broken, may rejoice.

Turn thy face from my sins: and put out all my misdeeds.

Make me a clean heart, O God: and renew a right spirit within me.

Cast me not away from thy presence: and take not thy holy Spirit from me.

O give me the comfort of thy help again: and stablish me with thy free Spirit.

Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked: and sinners shall be converted
unto thee.

Deliver me from bloud-guiltiness, O God, thou that art the God of my health:
and my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness.

Thou shall open my lips, O Lord: and my mouth shall show thy praise.

For thou desire no sacrifice, else would I give it thee: but thou delightest
not in burnt-offerings.

The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit: a broken and contrite heart, O God,
shall thou not despise.

O be favorable and gracious unto Sion: build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifice of righteousness, with the
burnt-offerings and oblations: then shall they offer young bullocks upon thine
altar.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

Lord, have mercy upon us.

Christ, have mercy upon us.

Lord, have mercy upon us.

OUr Father, which art in heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, As it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.

And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us.
And lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Minister. O Lord, save thy servants;


Answer. That put their trust in thee.


Minister. Send unto them help from above.


Answer. And evermore mightily defend them.


Minister. Help us, O God our Savior.


Answer. And for the glory of thy Name deliver us; be merciful to us sinners,
for thy Names sake.


Minister. O Lord, hear our prayer.


Answer. And let our cry come unto thee.


Minister. Let us pray.


O Lord, we beseech thee mercifully hear our prayers, and spare all those who
confess their sins unto thee, that they whose consciences by sin are accused,
by thy merciful pardon may be absolved, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Most mighty God, and merciful Father, who have compassion upon all men, and
hate nothing that thou have made, who would not the death of a sinner, but
that he should rather turn from his sin, and be saved; Mercifully forgive us
our trespasses; receive and comfort us, who are grieved and wearied with the
burden of our sins. Thy property is always to have mercy; to thee only it
appertains to forgive sins. Spare us therefore, good Lord, spare thy people
whom thou have redeemed; enter not into judgment with thy servants, who are
vile earth and miserable sinners; but so turn thine anger from us, who meekly
acknowledge our vileness, and truly repent us of our faults; and so make have
to help us in this world, that we may ever live with thee in the world to come,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall the People say this that follows, after the Minister.

TUrn thou us, O good Lord, and so shall we be turned. Be favorable, O Lord,
Be favorable to thy people, Who turn to thee in weeping, fasting, and praying.
For thou art a merciful God, Full of compassion, Long-suffering, and of great
pity. Thou sparest when we deserve punishment, And in thy wrath think upon
mercy. Spare thy people, good Lord, spare them, And let not thine heritage be
brought to confusion. Hear us, O Lord, for thy mercy is great, And after the
multitude of thy mercies look upon us, Through the merits and mediation of thy
blessed Son, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then the Minister alone shall say,

The Lord bless us, and keep us; the Lord lift up the light of his countenance
upon us, and give us peace now and for evermore. Amen.

THE Psalter or Psalms OF DAVID,
After the Translation of the GREAT BIBLE, Pointed as they are to be Sung or
Said in CHURCHES.
Morning Prayer.
Beatus vir, qui non abiit. Psalm. 1.
BLessed is the man that has not walked in the counsel of the ungodly, nor
stood in the way of sinners: and has not sat in the seat of the scornful. Day
i.


2 But his delight is in the law of the Lord: and in his law will he exercise
himself day and night.

3 And he shall be like a tree planted by the waterside: that will bring forth
his fruit in due season.

4 His leaf also shall not wither: and look whatsoever he does, it shall
prosper.

5 As for the ungodly, it is not so with them: but they are like the chaff
which the wind scatters away from the face of the earth.

6 Therefore the ungodly shall not be able to stand in the judgment: neither
the sinners in the congregation of the righteous.

7 But the Lord knows the way of the righteous: and the way of the ungodly
shall perish.

Quare fremuerunt gentes? Psalm. 2.
WHy do the heathen so furiously rage together: and why do the people imagine a
vain thing?

2 The kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers take counsel together:
against the Lord, and against his anointed.

3 Let us break their bonds asunder: and cast away their cords from us.

4 He that dwells in heaven, shall laugh them to scorn: the Lord shall have
them in derision.

5 Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath: and vex them in his sore
displeasure.

6 Yet have I set my king: upon my holy hill of Sion.

7 I will preach the law, whereof the Lord has said unto me: Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee.

8 Desire of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance: and
the utmost parts of the earth for thy possession.

9 Thou shall bruise them with a rod of iron: and break them in pieces like a
potters vessel.

10 Be wise now therefore, O ye kings: be learned, ye that are judges of the
earth.

11 Serve the Lord in fear: and rejoice unto him with reverence.

12 Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and so ye perish from the right way: if his
wrath be kindled (yea, but a little) blessed are all they that put their trust
in him.

Domine, quid multiplicati? Psalm. 3.
LOrd, how are they increased that trouble me: many are they that rise against
me.

2 Many one there be that say of my soul: There is no help for him in his God.

3 But thou, O Lord, art my defender: thou art my worship, and the lifter up of
my head.

4 I did call upon the Lord with my voice: and he heard me out of his holy hill.

5 I laid me down and slept, and rose up again: for the Lord sustained me.

6 I will not be afraid for ten thousands of the people: that have set
themselves against me round about.

7 Up Lord, and help me, O my God: for thou smitest all mine enemies upon the
cheek-bone; thou have broken the teeth of the ungodly.

8 Salvation belongs unto the Lord: and thy blessing is upon thy people.

Cum innocarem. Psalm. 4.
HEar me when I call, O God of my righteousness thou hash set me at liberty
when I was in trouble; have mercy upon me, and hearken unto my prayer.

2. O ye sons of men, how long will ye blaspheme mine honor: and have such
pleasure in vanity, and seek after leasing?

3 Know this also that the Lord has chosen to himself the man that is godly:
when I call upon the Lord, he will hear me.

4 Stand in awe, and sin not: commune with your own heart, and in your chamber,
and be still.

5 Offer the sacrifice of righteousness: and put your trust in the Lord.

6 There be many that say: Who will show us any good?

7 Lord, lift thou up: the light of thy countenance upon us.

8 Thou have put gladness in my heart: since the time that their corn and wine
and oil increased.

9 I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest: for it is thou, Lord, only
that make me dwell in safety.

Verba mea auribus. Psalm. 5.
POnder my words, O Lord: consider my meditation.

2 O hearken thou unto the voice of my calling, my King, and my God: for unto
thee will I make my prayer.

3 My voice shall thou hear betimes, O Lord: early in the morning will I direct
my prayer unto thee, and will look up.

4 For thou art the God that have no pleasure in wickedness: neither shall any
evil dwell with thee.

5 Such as be foolish shall not stand in thy fight: for thou hate all them
that work vanity.

6 Thou shall destroy them that speak leasing: the Lord will abhor both the
bloodthirsty and deceitful man.

7 But as for me, I will come into thine house, even upon the multitude of thy
mercy: and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy temple.

8 Lead me, O Lord, in thy righteousness, because of mine enemies: make thy way
plain before my face.

9 For there is no faithfulness his mouth: their inward parts are very
wickedness.

10 Their throat is an open sepulcher: they flatter with their tongue.

11 Destroy thou them, O God, let them perish through their own imaginations:
cast them out in the multitude of their ungodliness; for they have rebelled
against thee.

12 And let all them that put their trust in thee rejoice they shall ever be
giving of thanks, because thou defendest them; they that love thy Name, shall
be joyful in thee;

13 For thou, Lord, wilt give thy blessing unto the righteous: and with thy
favorable kindness will thou defend him as with a shield.

Evening Prayer.
Domine, ne. Psalm. 6.
O Lord, rebuke me not in thine indignation: neither chasten me in thy
displeasure.

2 Have mercy, upon me, O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord, heal me, for my bones
are vexed.

3 My soul also is sore troubled: but, Lord, how long will thou punish me?

4 Turn thee, O Lord, and deliver my soul: O save me for thy mercies sake.

5 For in death no man remembers thee: and who will give thee thanks in the
pit?

6 I am weary of my groaning, every night wash my bed: and water my couch with
my tears.

7 My beauty is gone for very trouble: and worn away because of all mine
enemies.

8 Away from me, all ye that work vanity: for the Lord has heard the voice of
my weeping.

9 The Lord has heard my petition: the Lord will receive my prayer.

10 All mine enemies shall be confounded, and sore vexed: they shall be turned
back, and put to shame suddenly.

Domine, Deus meus. Psalm. 7.
O Lord my God, in thee have I put my trust: save me from all them that
persecute me, and deliver me;

2 Lest he devour my soul like a lion, and tear it in pieces: while there is
none to help.

3 O Lord my God, if I have done any such thing: or if there be any wickedness
in my hands;

4 If I have rewarded evil unto him that dealt friendly with me: yea, I have
delivered him that without any cause is mine enemy;

5 Then let mine enemy persecute my soul, and take me: yea, let him tread my
life down upon the earth, and lay mine honor in the dust.

6 Stand up, O Lord, in thy wrath, and lift up thy self, because of the
indignation of mine enemies: arise up for me in the judgment that thou have
commanded.

7 And so shall the congregation of the people come about thee: for their sakes
therefore lift up thy self again.

8 The Lord shall judge the people; give sentence with me, O Lord: according to
my righteousness, and according to the innocence that is in me.

9 O let the wickedness of the ungodly come to end: but guide thou the just.

10 For the righteous God: tries the very hearts and reins.

11 My help comes of God: who preserves them that are true of heart.

12 God is a righteous judge, strong and patient: and God is provoked every day.

13 If a man will not turn, he will whet his sword: he has bent his bow, and
made it ready.

14 He has prepared for him the instruments of death: he ordains his arrows
against the persecutours.

15 Behold, he travaileth with mischief: he has conceived sorrow, and brought
forth ungodliness.

16 He has graven and dug up a pit: and is fallen himself into the
destruction that he made for other.

17 For his travail shall come upon his own head: and his wickedness shall fall
on his own pate.

18 I will give thanks unto the Lord, according to his righteousness: and I
will praise the Name of the Lord most High.

Domine, Dominus noster. Psalm. 8.
O Lord our Governor, how excellent is thy Name in all the world: thou that
have set thy glory above the heavens!

2 Out of the mouth of very babes and sucklings have thou ordained strength,
because of thine enemies: that thou might still the enemy and the avenger.

3 For I will consider thy heavens, even the works of thy fingers: the moon and
the stars which thou have ordained.

4 What is man, that thou art mindful of him: and the son of man, that thou
visitest him?

5 Thou made him lower then the angels: to crown him with glory and worship.

6 Thou make him to have dominion of the works of thy hands: and thou have
put all things in subjection under his feet;

7 All sheep and oxen: yea, and the beasts of the field;

8 The fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea: and whatsoever walks
through the paths of the seas.

9 O Lord our Governor: how excellent is thy Name in all the world!

Morning Prayer.
Confitebor tibi. Psalm. 9.
I Will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, with my whole heart: I will speak of all
thy mavelous works. DAY ii.


2 I will be glad and rejoice in thee: yea, my songs will I make of thy Name, O
thou most Highest.

3 While mine enemies are driven back: they shall fall and perish at thy
presence.

4 For thou have maintained my right, and my cause: thou art set in the throne
that judge right.

5 Thou have rebuked the heathen, and destroyed the ungodly: thou have put out
their name for ever and ever.

6 O thou enemy, destructions are come to a perpetual end: even as the cities
which thou have destroyed; their memorial is perished with them.

7 But the Lord shall endure for ever: he has also prepared his seat for
judgment.

8 For he shall judge the world in righteousness: and minister true judgment
unto the people.

9 The Lord also will be a defense for the oppressed: even a refuge in due time
of trouble.

10 And they that know thy Name, will put their trust in thee: for thou, Lord,
have never failed them that seek thee.

11 O praise the Lord which dwells in Sion: show the people of his doings.

12 For when he makes inquisition for blood, he remembers them: and
forgets not the complaint of the poor.

13 Have mercy upon me, O Lord, consider the trouble which I suffer of them
that hate me: thou that liftest me up from the gates of death.

14 That I may show all thy praises within the ports of the daughter of Sion: I
will rejoice in thy salvation.

15 The heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made: in the same net which
they hid privily, is their foot taken.

16 The Lord is known to execute judgment: the ungodly is trapped in the work
of his own hands.

17 The wicked shall be turned into hell: and all the people that forget God.

18 For the poor shall not always be forgotten: the patient abiding of the meek
shall not perish for ever.

19 Up Lord, and let not man have the upper hand: let the heathen be judged in
thy sight.

20 Put them in fear, O Lord: that the heathen may know themselves to be but
men.

Ut quid, Domine? Psalm. 10.
WHy stand thou so far off, O Lord: and hidest thy face in the needful time
of trouble?

2 The ungodly for his own lust does persecute the poor: let them be taken in
the crafty wiliness that they have imagined.

3 For the ungodly has made boast of his own hearts desire: and speaks good
of the covetous whom God abhors.

4 The ungodly is so proud, that he cares not for God: neither is God in all
his thoughts.

5 His ways are always grievous: thy judgments are far above out of his sight,
and therefore defieth he all his enemies.

6 For he has said in his heart, Tush, I shall never be cast down: there shall
no harm happen unto me.

7 His mouth is full of cursing, deceit and fraud: under his tongue is
ungodliness and vanity.

8 He sits lurking in the thievish corners of the streets: and privily in
his lurking dens does he murder the innocent; his eyes are set against the poor.

9 For he lies waiting secretly, even as a lion lurketh he in his den: that he
may ravish the poor.

10 He does ravish the poor: when he gets him into his net.

11 He falls down and humbles himself: that the congregation of the poor may
fall into the hands of his captains.

12 He has said in his heart, Tush, God has forgotten: he hides away his
face, and he will never see it.

13 Arise, O Lord God, and lift up thine hand: forget not the poor.

14 Wherefore should the wicked blaspheme God: while he does say in his heart,
Tush, thou God carest not for it.

15 Surely thou have seen it: for thou beholdest ungodliness and wrong.

16 That thou may take the matter into thy hand: the poor commits himself
unto thee; for thou art the helper of the friendless.

17 Break thou the power of the ungodly and malicious: take away his
ungodliness, and thou shall find none.

18 The Lord is King for ever and ever: and the heathen are perished out of the
land.

19 Lord, thou have heard the desire of the poor: thou preparest their heart,
and thine ear hearkeneth thereto.

20 To help the fatherless and poor unto their right: that the man of the earth
be no more exalted against them.

In Domino confido. Psalm. 11.
IN the Lord put I my trust: how say ye then to my soul, that she should flee
as a bird unto the hill?

2 For lo the ungodly bend their bow, and make ready their arrows within the
quiver: that they may privily shoot at them which are true of heart.

3 For the foundations will be cast down: and what has the righteous done?

4 The Lord is in his holy temple: the Lords seat is in heaven.

5 His eyes consider the poor: and his eyelids try the children of men.

6 The Lord allows the righteous: but the ungodly, and him that delights in
wickedness does his soul abhor.

7 Upon the ungodly he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, storm, and
tempest: this shall be their portion to drink.

8 For the righteous Lord loves righteousness: his countenance will behold the
thing that is just.

Evening Prayer.
Salvum me fac. Psalm. 12.
HElp me, Lord, for there is not one godly man left: for the faithful are
minished from among the children of men.

2 They talk of vanity every one with his neighbor: they do but flatter with
their lips, and dissemble in their double heart.

3 The Lord shall root out all deceitful lips: and the tongue that speaks
proud things.

4 Which have said, With our tongue will we prevail: we are they that ought to
speak, who is Lord over us?

5 Now for the comfortless troubles sake of the needy: and because of the deep
sighing of the poor;

6 I will up, says the Lord: and will help every one from him that swells
against him, and will set him at rest.

7 The words of the Lord are pure words: even as the silver, which from the
earth is tried, and purified seven times in the fire.

8 Thou shall keep them, O Lord: thou shall preserve him from this generation
for ever.

9 The ungodly walk on every side: when they are exalted, the children of men
are put to rebuke.

Usque quo, Domine? Psalm. 13.
HOw long will thou forget me, O Lord, for ever: how long will thou hide thy
face from me?

2 How long shall I seek counsel in my soul, and be so vexed in my heart: how
long shall mine enemies triumph over me?

3 Consider and hear me, O Lord my God: lighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in
death.

4 Lest mine enemy say, I have prevailed against him: for if I be cast down,
they that trouble me, will rejoice at it.

5 But my trust is in thy mercy: and my heart is joyful in thy salvation.

6 I will sing of the Lord, because he has dealt so lovingly with me: yea, I
will praise the Name of the Lord most Highest.

Dixit insipiens. Psalm. 14.
THe fool has said in his heart: There is no God.

2 They are corrupt, and become abominable in their doings: there is none that
does good, no not one.

3 The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men: to see if there
were any that would understand, and seek after God.

4 But they are all gone out of the way, they are altogether become abominable:
there is none that does good, no not one.

5 Their throat is an open sepulcher, with their tongues have they deceived:
the poison of asps is under their lips.

6 Their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness: their feet are swift to shed
blood.

7 Destruction and unhappiness is in their ways, and the way of peace have they
not known: there is no fear of God before their eyes.

8 Have they no knowledge, that they are all such workers of mischief: eating
up my people as it were bread, and call not upon the Lord? DAY iii.


9 There were they brought in great fear, even where no fear was: for God is in
the generation of the righteous.

10 As for you, ye have made a mock at the counsel of the poor: because puts
his trust in the Lord.

11 Who shall give salvation unto Israel out of Sion? When the Lord turns the
captivity of his people: then shall Jacob rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.

Morning Prayer.
Domine, quis babitabit? Psalm. 15.
LOrd, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle: or who shall rest upon thy holy hill?

2 Even he that leads an incorrupt life: and does the thing which is right,
and speaks the truth from his heart.

3 He that has used no deceit in his tongue, nor done evil to his neighbor:
and has not slandered his neighbor.

4 He that sets not by himself, but is lowly in his own eyes: and makes
much of them that fear the Lord.

5 He that swears unto his neighbor, and disappointeth him not: though it
were to his own hindrance.

6 He that has hot given his money upon usury: nor taken reward against the
innocent.

7 Whosoever does these things: shall never fall.

Conserva me, Domine. Psalm. 16.
PReserve me, O God: for in thee have I put my trust.

2 O my soul, thou have said unto the Lord: Thou art my God, my goods are
nothing unto thee.

3 All my delight is upon the saints that are in the earth: and upon such as
excel in virtue.

4 But they that run after another god: shall have great trouble.

5 Their drink offerings of blood will I not offer: neither make mention of
their names within my lips.

6 The Lord himself is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup: thou
shall maintain my lot.

7 The lot is fallen unto me in a fain ground: yea, I have a goodly heritage.

8 I will thank the Lord for giving me warning: my reins also chasten me in the
night-season.

9 I have set God always before me: for he is on my right hand, therefore, I
shall not fall.

10 Wherefore my heart was glad; and my glory rejoiced: my flesh also shall
rest in hope.

11 For why? thou shall not leave my soul in hell: neither shall thou suffer
thy holy One to see corruption.

12 Thou shall show me the path of life; in thy presence is the fullness of joy:
and at thy right hand there is pleasure for evermore.

Exaudi, Domine. Psalm. 17.
HEar the right, O Lord, consider my complaint: and hearken unto my prayer,
that goes not out of feigned lips.

2 Let my sentence come forth from thy presence: and let thine eyes look upon
the thing that is equal.

3 Thou have proved, and visited mine heart in the night-season; thou have
tried me, and shall find no wickedness in me: for I am utterly purposed that my
mouth shall not offend.

4 Because of men's works that are done against the words of thy lips: I have
kept me from the ways of the destroyer.

5 O hold thou up my goings in thy paths: that my footsteps slip not.

6 I have called upon thee, O God, for thou shall hear me: incline thine ear to
me, and hearken unto my words.

7 Show thy mavelous loving kindness, thou that art the Savior of them which
put their trust in thee: from such as resist thy right hand.

8 Keep me as the apple of an eye: hide me under the shadow of thy wings.

9 From the ungodly that trouble me: mine enemies compass me round about to
take away my soul.

10 They are enclosed in their own fat: and their mouth speaks proud things.

11 They lie waiting in our way on every side: turning their eyes down to the
ground.

12 Like as a lion that is greedy of his prey: and as it were a lions whelp,
lurking in secret places.

13 Up, Lord, disappoint him, and cast him down: deliver my soul from the
ungodly, which is a sword of thine.

14 From the men of thy hand, O Lord, from the men, I say and from the evil
world: which have their portion in this life, whose bellies thou fillest with
thy hid treasure.

15 They have children at their desire: and leave the rest of their substance
for their babes.

16 But as for me, I will behold thy presence in righteousness: and when I
awake up after thy likeness, I shall be satisfied with it.

Evening Prayer.
Diligam te, Domine. Psalm. 18.
I Will love thee, O Lord, my strength; the Lord is my stony rock, and my
defense: my Savior, my God, and my might, in whom I will trust, my buckler,
the horn also of my salvation, and my refuge.

2 I will call upon the Lord, which is worthy to be praised: so shall I be safe
from mine enemies.

3 The sorrows of death compassed me: and the over-flowings of ungodliness made
me afraid.

4 The pains of hell came about me: the snares of death overtook me.

5 In my trouble I will call upon the Lord: and complain unto my God.

6 So shall he hear my voice out of his holy temple: and my complaint shall
come before him, it shall enter even into his ears.

7 The earth trembled and quaked: the very foundations also of the hills shook,
and were removed, because he was wroth.

8 There went a smoke out in his presence: and a consuming fire out of his
mouth, so that coals were kindled at it.

9 He bowed the heavens also, and came down: and it was dark under his feet.

10 He rode upon the Cherubins, and did fly: he came flying upon the wings of
the wind.

11 He made darkness his secret place: his pavilion round about him with dark
water, and thick clouds to cover him.

12 At the brightness of his presence his clouds removed: hailstones and coals
of fire.

13 The Lord also thundered out of heaven, and the Highest gave his thunder:
hailstones, and coals of fire.

14 He sent out arrows, and scattered them: he cast forth lightnings, and
destroyed them.

15 The springs of waters were seen, and the foundations of the round world
were discovered at thy chiding, O Lord: at the blasting of the breath of thy
displeasure.

16 He shall send down from on high to fetch me: and shall take me out of many
waters.

17 He shall deliver me from my strongest enemy, and from them which hate me:
for they are too mighty for me.

18 They prevented me in the day of my trouble: but the Lord was my upholder.

19 He brought me forth also into a place of liberty: he brought me forth, even
because he had a favor unto me.

20 The Lord shall reward me after my righteous dealing: according to the
cleanness of my hands shall he recompense me.

21 Because I have kept the ways of the Lord: and have not forsaken my God, as
the wicked does.

22 For I have an eye unto all his laws: and will not cast out his commandments
from me.

23 I was also incorrupt before him: and eschewed mine own wickedness.

24 Therefore shall the Lord reward me after my righteous dealing: and
according unto the cleanness of my hands in his eyesight.

25 With the holy thou shall be holy: and with a perfect man thou shall be
perfect.

26 With the clean thou shall be clean: and with the froward thou shall learn
frowardness.

27 For thou shall save the people that are in adversity: and shall bring down
the high looks of the proud.

28 Thou also shall light my candle: the Lord my God shall make my darkness to
be light.

29 For in thee I shall discomfit an host of men: and with the help of my God I
shall leap over the wall.

30 The way of God is an undefiled way: the word of the Lord also is tried in
the fire; he is the defender of all them that put their trust in him.

31 For who is God, but the Lord: or who has any strength, except our God?

32 It is God that girdeth me with strength of war: and makes my way perfect.

33 He makes my feet like hearts feet: and sets me up on high.

34 He teaches mine hands to fight: and mine arms shall break even a bow of
steel.

35 Thou have given me the defense of thy salvation: thy right hand also shall
hold me up, and thy loving correction shall make me great.

36 Thou shall make room enough under me for to go: that my footsteps shall
not slide. DAY iv.


37 I will follow upon mine enemies, and overtake them: neither will I turn
again till I have destroyed them.

38 I will smite them, that they shall not be able to stand: but fall under my
feet.

39 Thou have girded me with strength unto the battle: thou shall throw down
mine enemies under me.

40 Thou have made mine enemies also to turn their backs upon me: and I shall
destroy them that hate me.

41 They shall cry, but there shall be none to help them: yea, even unto the
Lord shall they cry, but he shall not hear them.

42 I will beat them as small as the dust before the wind: I will cast them out
as the clay in the streets.

43 Thou shall deliver me from the strivings of the people: and thou shall make
me the head of the heathen.

44 A people whom I have not known: shall serve me.

45 As soon as they hear of me they shall obey me: but the strange children
shall dissemble with me.

46 The strange children shall fail: and be afraid out of their prisons.

47 The Lord lives, and blessed be my strong helper: and praised be the God of
my salvation.

48 Even the God that sees that I be avenged: and subdueth the people unto me.

49 It is he that delivers me from my cruel enemies, and sets me up above
mine adversaries: thou shall rid me from the wicked man.

50 For this cause will I give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the Gentiles:
and sing praises unto thy Name.

51 Great prosperity gives he unto his King: and shows loving kindness unto
David his Anointed, and unto his Seed for evermore.

Morning Prayer.
Coeli enarrant. Psalm. 19.
THe heavens declare the glory of God: and the firmament shows his handiwork.

2 One day tells another: and one night certifieth another.

3 There is neither speech nor language: but their voices are heard among them.

4 Their sound is gone out into all lands: and their words into the ends of the
world.

5 In them has he set a tabernacle for the Sun: which comes forth as a
bridegroom out of his chamber, and rejoices as a giant to run his course.

6 It goes forth from the uttermost part of the Heaven, and runs about unto
the end of it again: and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.

7 The law of the Lord is an undefiled law, converting the soul: the testimony
of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple.

8 The statutes of the Lord are right, and rejoice the heart: the commandment
of the Lord is pure, and gives light unto the eyes.

9 The fear of the Lord is clean, and endures for ever: the judgments of the
Lord are true, and righteous altogether.

10 More to be desired are they then gold, yea, then much fine gold: sweeter
also then honey, and the honeycomb.

11 Moreover by them is thy servant taught: and in keeping of them there is
great reward.

12 Who can tell how often he offends: O cleanse thou me from my secret faults.

13 Keep thy servant also from presumptuous sins, lest they get the dominion
over me: so shall I be undefiled, and innocent from the great offense.

14 Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart: be always
acceptable in thy sight.

15 O Lord: my strength and my redeemer.

Exaudiat te Dominus. Psalm. 20.
THe Lord hear thee in the day of trouble: the Name of the God of Jacob defend
thee.

2 Send thee help from the Sanctuary: and strengthen thee out of Sion.

3 Remember all thy offerings: and accept thy burnt-sacrifice.

4 Grant thee thy hearts desire: and fulfill all thy mind.

5 We will rejoice in thy salvation, and triumph in the Name of the Lord our
God: the Lord perform all thy petitions.

6 Now know I, that the Lord helps his Anointed, and will hear him from his
holy Heaven: even with the wholesome strength of his right hand.

7 Some put their trust in chariots, and some in horses: but we will remember
the Name of the Lord our God.

8 They are brought down, and fallen: but we are risen, and stand upright.

9 Save, Lord, and hear us, O King of Heaven: when we call upon thee.

Domine, in virtute tua. Psalm. 21.
THe King shall rejoice in thy strength, O Lord: exceeding glad shall he be of
thy salvation.

2 Thou have given him his hearts desire: and have not denied him the request
of his lips.

3 For thou shall prevent him with the blessings of goodness: and shall set a
crown of pure gold upon his head.

4 He asked life of thee, and thou gave him a long life: even for ever, and
ever.

5 His honor is great in thy salvation: glory, and great worship shall thou
lay upon him.

6 For thou shall give him everlasting felicity: and make him glad with the joy
of thy countenance.

7 And why? because the King puts his trust in the Lord: and in the mercy of
the most Highest he shall not miscarry.

8 All thine enemies shall feel thy hand: thy right hand shall find out them
that hate thee.

9 Thou shall make them like a fiery oven in time of thy wrath: the Lord shall
destroy them in his displeasure, and the fire shall consume them.

10 Their fruit shall thou root out of the earth: and their seed from among the
children of men.

11 For they intended mischief against thee: and imagined such a device as they
are not able to perform.

12 Therefore shall thou put them to flight: and the strings of thy bow shall
thou make ready against the face of them.

13 Be thou exalted, Lord, in thine own strength: so will we sing, and praise
thy power.

Evening Prayer.
Deus, Deus meus. Psalm. 22.
MY God, my God, look upon me, why have thou forsaken me: and art so far from
my health, and from the words of my complaint?

2 O my God, I cry in the daytime, but thou hear not: and in the
night-season also I take no rest.

3 And thou continuest holy: O thou worship of Israel.

4 Our fathers hoped in thee: they trusted in thee, and thou did deliver them.

5 They called upon thee, and were helped: they put their trust in thee, and
were not confounded.

6 But as for me, I am a worm, and no man: a very scorn of men, and the
outcast of the people.

7 All they that see me, laugh me to scorn: they shoot out their lips, and
shake their heads, saying,

8 He trusted in God, that he would deliver him: let him deliver him, if he
will have him.

9 But thou art he that took me out of my mothers womb: thou wast my hope when
I hanged yet upon my mothers breasts.

10 I have been left unto thee ever since I was born: thou art my God even from
my mothers womb.

11 O go not from me, for trouble is hard at hand: and there is none to help me.

12 Many oxen are come about me: fat bulls of Basan close me in on every side.

13 They gape upon me with their mouths: as it were a ramping, and a roaring
lion.

14 I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joint: my heart
also in the midst of my body is even like melting wax.

15 My strength is dried up like a potsherd, and my tongue cleaves to my gums:
and thou shall bring me into the dust of death.

16 For many dogs are come about me: and the council of the wicked lays siege
against me.

17 They pierced my hands, and my feet, I may tell all my bones: they stand
staring and looking upon me.

18 They part my garments among them: and cast lots upon my vesture.

19 But be not thou far from me, O Lord: thou art my succor, have thee to help
me.

20 Deliver my soul from the sword: my darling from the power of the dog.

21 Save me from the lions mouth: thou have heard me also from among the horns
of the unicorns.

22 I will declare thy Name unto my brethren: in the midst of the congregation
will I praise thee.

23 O praise the Lord, ye that fear him: magnify him, all ye of the seed of
Jacob, and fear him, all ye seed of Israel.

24 For he has not despised, nor abhorred the low estate of the poor: he has
not hid his face from him, but when he called unto him, he heard him.

25 My praise is of thee in the great congregation: my vows will perform in the
sight of them that fear him.

26 The poor shall eat, and be satisfied: they that seek after the Lord, shall
praise him; your heart shall live for ever.

27 All the ends of the world shall remember themselves, and be turned unto the
Lord: and all the kindreds of the nations shall worship before him.

28 For the kingdom is the Lords: and he is the Governor among the people.

29 All such as be fat upon earth: have eaten, and worshipped.

30 All they, that go down into the dust, shall kneel before him: and no man
has quickened his own soul.

31 My seed shall serve him: they, shall be counted unto the Lord for a
generation.

32 They shall come, and the heavens shall declare his righteousness: unto a
people that shall be born, whom the Lord has made.

Dominus regit me. Psalm. 23.
THe Lord is my shepherd: therefore can I lack nothing.

2 He shall feed me in a green pasture: and lead me forth beside the waters of
comfort.

3 He shall convert my soul: and bring me forth in the paths of righteousness
for his Names sake.

4 Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no
evil: for thou art with me, thy rod, and thy staff comfort me.

5 Thou shall prepare a table before me against them that trouble me: thou have
anointed my head with oil, and my cup shall be full.

6. But thy loving kindness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life:
and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.

Morning Prayer.
Domini est terra. Psalm. 24.
THe earth is the Lords, and all that therein is: the compass of the world, and
they that dwell therein. DAY v.


2 For he has founded it upon the seas: and prepared it upon the floods.

3 Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord: or who shall rise up in his holy
place?

4 Even he that has clean hands, and a pure heart: and that has not lift up
his mind unto vanity, nor sworn to deceive his neighbor.

5 He shall receive the blessing from the Lord: and righteousness from the God
of his salvation.

6 This is the generation of them that seek him: even of them that seek thy
face, O Jacob.

7 Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors: and
the King of glory shall come in.

8 Who is the King of glory: it is the Lord strong and mighty, even the Lord
mighty in battle.

9 Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors: and
the King of glory shall come in.

10 Who is the King of glory: even the Lord of hosts, he is the King of glory.

Ad te, Domine, levavi. Psalm. 25.
UNto thee, O Lord, will lift up my soul, my God, I have put my trust in thee:
O let me not be confounded, neither let mine enemies triumph over me.

2 For all they that hope in thee shall not be ashamed: but such as transgress
without a cause shall be put to confusion.

3 Show me thy ways, O Lord: and teach me thy paths.

4 Lead me forth in thy truth, and learn me: for thou art the God of my
salvation, in thee has been my hope all the day long.

5 Call to remembrance, O Lord, thy tender mercies: and thy loving kindnesses
which have been ever of old.

6 O remember not the sins and offenses of my youth: but according to thy mercy
think thou upon me, O Lord, for thy goodness.

7 Gracious and righteous is the Lord: therefore will he teach sinners in the
way.

8 Them that are meek, shall he guide in judgment: and such as are gentle, them
shall he learn his way.

9 All the paths of the Lord are mercy, and truth: unto such as keep his
covenant, and his testimonies.

10 For thy Names sake, O Lord: be merciful unto my sin, for it is great.

11 What man is he that fears the Lord: him shall he teach in the way that he
shall choose.

12 His soul shall dwell at ease: and his seed shall inherit the land.

13 The secret of the Lord is among them that fear him: and he will show them
his covenant.

14 Mine eyes are ever looking unto the Lord: for he shall pluck my feet out of
the net.

15 Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me: for I am desolate, and in misery.

16 The sorrows of my heart are enlarged: O bring thou me out of my troubles.

17 Look upon my adversity, and misery: and forgive me all my sin.

18 Consider mine enemies how many they are: and they bear a tyrannous hate
against me.

19 O keep my soul, and deliver me: let me not be confounded, for I have put my
trust in thee.

20 Let perfectness, and righteous dealing wait upon me: for my hope has been
in thee.

21 Deliver Israel, O God: out of all his troubles.

Judica me, Domine. Psalm. 26.
BE thou my Judge, O Lord, for I have walked innocently: my trust has been
also in the Lord, therefore shall I not fall.

2 Examine me, O Lord, and prove me: try out my reins, and my heart.

3 For thy loving kindness is ever before mine eyes: and I will walk in thy
truth.

4 I have not dwelt with vain persons: neither will I have fellowship with the
deceitful.

5 I have hated the congregation of the wicked: and will not sit among the
ungodly.

6 I will wash my hands in innocence, O Lord: and so will I go to thine altar;

7 That I may show the voice of thanksgiving: and tell of all thy wondrous
works.

8 Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house: and the place where thine
honor dwells.

9 O shut not up my soul with the sinners: nor my life with the bloodthirsty;

10 In whose hands is wickedness: and their right hand is full of gifts.

11 But as for me, I will walk innocently: O deliver me, and be merciful unto
me.

12 My foot stands right: I will praise the Lord in the congregations.

Evening Prayer.
Dominus illuminatio. Psalm. 27.
THe Lord is my light and my salvation; whom then shall I fear: the Lord is the
strength of my life; of whom then shall I be afraid?

2 When the wicked even mine enemies, and my foes came upon me to eat up my
flesh: they stumbled, and fell.

3 Though an host of men were laid against me, yet shall not my heart be
afraid: and though there rose up war against me, yet will I put my trust in him.

4 One thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will require: even that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the fair
beauty of the Lord, and to visit his temple.

5 For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his tabernacle: yea, in the
secret place of his dwelling shall he hide me, and set me up upon a rock of
stone.

6 And now shall he lift up mine head: above mine enemies round about me.

7 Therefore will I offer in his dwelling an oblation with great gladness: I
will sing, and speak praises unto the Lord.

8 Hearken unto my voice, O Lord, when I cry unto thee: have mercy upon me, and
hear me.

9 My heart has talked of thee, Seek ye my face: thy face, Lord, will I seek.

10 O hide not thou thy face from me: nor cast thy servant away in displeasure.

11 Thou have been my succor: leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my
salvation.

12 When my father and my mother forsake me: the Lord takes me up.

13 Teach me thy way, O Lord: and lead me in the right way, because of mine
enemies.

14 Deliver me not over into the will of mine adversaries: for there are false
witnesses risen up against me, and such as speak wrong.

15 I should utterly have fainted: but that I believe verily to see the
goodness of the Lord in the land of the living.

16 O tarry thou the Lords leisure: be strong, and he shall comfort thine
heart, and put thou thy trust in the Lord.

Ad te, Domine. Psalm. 28.
UNto thee will I cry, O Lord my strength: think no scorn of me, lest if thou
make as though thou hear not, I become like them that go down into the pit.

2 Hear the voice of my humble petitions, when I cry unto thee: when I hold up
my hands toward the mercy-seat of thy holy temple.

3 O pluck me not away, neither destroy me with the ungodly and wicked doers:
which speak friendly to their neighbors, but imagine mischief in their hearts.

4 Reward them according to their deeds: and according to the wickedness of
their own inventions.

5 Recompense them after the work of their hands: pay them that they have
deserved.

6 For they regard not in their mind the works of the Lord, nor the operation
of his hands: therefore shall he break them down, and not build them up.

7 Praised be the Lord: for he has heard the voice of my humble petitions.

8 The Lord is my strength, and my shield, my heart has trusted in him, and I
am helped: therefore my heart danceth for joy, and in my song will I praise him.

9 The Lord is my strength: and he is the wholesome defense of his Anointed.

10 O save thy people, and give thy blessing unto thine inheritance: feed them,
and set them up for ever.

Afferte Domino. Psalm. 29.
BRing unto the Lord, O ye mighty, bring young rams unto the Lord: ascribe unto
the Lord worship and strength.

2 Give the Lord the honor due unto his Name: worship the Lord with holy
worship

3 It is the Lord that commands the waters: it is the glorious God that
makes the thunder.

4 It is the Lord that rules the sea; the voice of the Lord is mighty in
operation: the voice of the Lord is a glorious voice.

5 The voice of the Lord breaks the Cedar-trees: yea, the Lord breaks the
Cedars of Libanus.

6 He makes them also to skip like a calf: Libanus also, and Sirion like a
young unicorn.

7 The voice of the Lord divides the flames of fire, the voice of the Lord
shakes the wilderness: yea, the Lord shakes the wilderness of Cades. DAY vi.


8 The voice of the Lord makes the hinds to bring forth young, and discovers
the thick bushes: in his temple does every man speak of his honor:

9 The Lord sits above the water-floud: and the Lord remains a King for
ever.

10 The Lord shall give strength unto his people: the Lord shall give his
people the blessing of peace.

Morning Prayer.
Exaltabo te, Domine. Psalm. 30.
I Will Magnify Thee, O Lord, for thou have set me up: and not made my foes to
triumph over me.

2 O Lord My God I cried, unto thee: and thou have healed me.

3 Thou, Lord, have brought my soul out of hell: thou have kept my life from
them that go down to the pit.

4 Sing praises unto the Lord, O ye saints of his: and give thanks unto him for
a remembrance of his holiness.

5 For his wrath endures but the twinkling of an eye, and in his pleasure is
life: heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning.

6 And in my prosperity I said, I shall never be removed: thou, Lord, of thy
goodness had made my hill so strong.

7 Thou did turn thy face from me: and I was troubled.

8 Then cried I unto thee, O Lord: and gat me to my Lord right humbly.

9 What profit is there in my blood: when I go down to the pit?

10 Shall the dust give thanks unto thee: or shall it declare thy truth?

11 Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me: Lord, be thou my helper.

12 Thou have turned my heaviness into joy: thou have put off my sackcloth, and
girded me with gladness.

13 Therefore shall every good man sing of thy praise without ceasing: O my
God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever.

In te, Domine, speravi. Psalm. 31.
IN thee, O Lord, have I put my trust: let me never be put to confusion,
deliver me in thy righteousness.

2 Bow down thine ear to me: make haste to deliver me.

3 And be thou my strong rock, and house of defense: that thou may save me.

4 For thou art my strong rock and my castle: be thou also my guide, and lead
me for thy Names sake.

5 Draw me out of the net that they have laid privily for me: for thou art my
strength.

6 Into thy hands I commend my spirit: for thou have redeemed me, O Lord, thou
God of truth.

7 I have hated them, that hold of superstitious vanities: and my trust has
been in the Lord.

8 I will be glad, and rejoice in thy mercy: for thou have considered my
trouble, and have known my soul in adversities.

9 Thou have not shut me up into the hand of the enemy: but have set my feet in
a large room.

10 Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am in trouble: and mine eye is consumed
for very heaviness; yea, my soul and my body.

11 For my life is waxen old with heaviness: and my years with mourning.

12 My strength fails me, because of mine iniquity: and my bones are consumed.

13 I became a reproof among all mine enemies, but especially among my
neighbors: and they of mine acquaintance were afraid of me, and they that did
see me without, conveyed themselves from me.

14 I am clean forgotten, as a dead man out of mind: I am become like a broken
vessel.

15 For I have heard the blasphemy of the multitude: and fear is on every side,
while they conspire together against me, and take their counsel to take away my
life.

16 But my hope has been in thee, O Lord: I have said, Thou art my God.

17 My time is in thy hand, deliver me from the hand of mine enemies: and from
them that persecute me.

18 Show thy servant the light of thy countenance: and save me for thy mercies
sake.

19 Let me not be confounded, O Lord, for I have called upon thee: let the
ungodly be put to confusion, and be put to silence in the grave.

20 Let the lying lips be put to silence: which cruelly, disdainfully, and
despitefully speak against the righteous.

21 O how plentiful is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear
thee: and that thou have prepared for them that put their trust in thee, even
before the sons of men!

22 Thou shall hide them privily by thine own presence from the provoking of
all men: thou shall keep them secretly in thy tabernacle from the strife of
tongues.

23 Thanks be to the Lord: for he has showed me mavelous great kindness in a
strong city.

24 And when I made have, I said: I am cast out of the sight of thine eyes.

25 Nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my prayer: when I cried unto thee.

26 O love the Lord all ye his saints: for the Lord preserves them that are
faithful, and plenteously rewards the proud doer.

27 Be strong, and he shall establish your heart: all ye that put your trust in
the Lord.

Evening Prayer.
Beati, quorum. Psalm. 32.
BLessed is he, whose unrighteousness is forgiven: and whose sin is covered.

2 Blessed is the man, unto whom the Lord imputes no sin: and in whose spirit
there is no guile.

3 For while I held my tongue: my bones consumed away through my daily
complaining.

4 For thy hand is heavy upon me day and night: and my moisture is like the
drought in summer.

5 I will acknowledge my sin unto thee: and mine unrighteousness have I not hid.

6 I said I will confess my sins unto the Lord: and so thou forgavest the
wickedness of my sin.

7 For this shall every one that is godly make his prayer unto thee, in a time
when thou may be found: but in the great water-flouds they shall not come
nigh him.

8 Thou art a place to hide me in, thou shall preserve me from trouble: thou
shall compass me about with songs of deliverance.

9 I will inform thee, and teach thee in the way wherein thou shall go: and I
will guide thee with mine eye.

10 Be ye not like to horse and mule, which have no understanding: whose mouths
must be held with bit and bridle, lest they fall upon thee.

11 Great plagues remain for the ungodly: but whosoever puts his trust in the
Lord, mercy embraces him on every side.

12 Be glad, O ye righteous, and rejoice in the Lord: and be joyful all ye that
are true of heart.

Exultate, justi. Psalm. 33.
Rejoice in the Lord, O ye righteous: for it becomes well the just to be
thankful.

2 Praise the Lord with harp: sing praises unto him with the lute, and
instrument of ten strings.

3 Sing unto the Lord a new song: sing praises lustily unto him with a good
courage.

4 For the word of the Lord is true: and all his works are faithful.

5 He loves righteousness and judgment: the earth is full of the goodness of
the Lord.

6 By the word of the Lord were the heavens made: and all the hosts of them by
the breath of his mouth.

7 He gathers the waters of the sea together as it were upon an heap: and
lays up the deep, as in a treasure-house.

8 Let all the earth fear the Lord: stand in awe of him, all ye that dwell in
the world;

9 For he spoke, and it was done: he commanded, and it stood fast.

10 The Lord brings the counsel of the heathen to naught: and makes the
devices of the people to be of none effect, and casts out the counsels of
princes.

11 The counsel of the Lord shall endure for ever: and the thoughts of his
heart from generation to generation.

12 Blessed are the people, whose God is the Lord Jehovah: and blessed are the
folk that he has chosen to him, to be his inheritance.

13 The Lord looked down from heaven, and beheld all the children of men: from
the habitation of his dwelling he considers all them that dwell on the earth.

14 He fashioneth all the hearts of them: and understands all their works.

15 There is no king that can be saved by the multitude of an host: neither is
any mighty man delivered by much strength.

16 A horse is counted but a vain thing to save a man neither shall he deliver
any man by his great strength.

17 Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him: and upon them that
put their trust in his mercy.

18 To deliver their soul from death: and to feed them in the time of dearth.

19 Our soul has patiently tarried for the Lord: for he is our help and our
shield.

20 For our heart shall rejoice in him: because we have hoped in his holy Name.

21 Let thy merciful kindness, O Lord, be upon us: like as we do put our trust
in thee.

Benedicam Domino. Psalm. 34.
I Will always give thanks unto the Lord: his praise shall ever be in my mouth.

2 My soul shall make her boast in the Lord: the humble shall hear thereof, and
be glad.

3 O praise the Lord with me: and let us magnify his Name together.

4 I sought the Lord, and he heard me: yea, he delivered me out of all my fear.

5 They had an eye unto him, and were lightened: and their faces were not
ashamed.

6 Lo, the poor cries, and the Lord hears him: yea, and saves him out of
all his troubles.

7 The Angel of the Lord, tarrieth round about them that fear him: and
delivers them.

8 O taste, and see, how gracious the Lord is: blessed is the man that trusts
in him.

9 O fear the Lord, yet that are his saints: for they that fear him, lack
nothing.

10 The lions do lack, and suffer hunger: but they who seek the Lord, shall
want no manner of thing that is good.

11 Come, ye children, and hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the
Lord.

12 What man is he that lusts to live: and would fain see good days?

13 Keep thy tongue from evil: and thy lips, that they speak no guile.

14 Eschew evil, and do good: seek peace, and ensue it.

15 The eyes of the Lord are over the righteous: and his ears are open unto
their prayers.

16 The countenance of the Lord is against them that do evil: to root out the
remembrance of them from the earth.

17 The righteous cry, and the Lord hears them: and delivers them out of
all their troubles. DAY vii.


18 The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite heart: and will save such
as be of an humble spirit.

19 Great are the troubles of the righteous: but the Lord delivers him out of
all.

20 He keeps all his bones: so that not one of them is broken.

21 But misfortune shall slay the ungodly: and they that hate the righteous
shall be desolate.

22 The Lord delivers the souls of his servants: and all they that put their
trust in him shall not be destitute.

Morning Prayer.
Judica me, Domine. Psalm. 35.
PLead thou my cause, O Lord, with them that strive with me: and fight thou
against them that fight against me.

2 Lay hand upon the shield and buckler: and stand up to help me.

3 Bring forth the spear, and stop the way against them that persecute me: say
unto my soul, I am thy salvation.

4 Let them be confounded, and put to shame, that seek after my soul: let them
be turned back, and brought to confusion, that imagine mischief for me.

5 Let them be as the dust before the wind: and the Angel of the Lord
scattering them.

6 Let their way be dark and slippery: and let the Angel of the Lord persecute
them.

7 For they have privily laid their net to destroy me without a cause: yea,
even without a cause have they made a pit for my soul.

8 Let a sudden destruction come upon him unawares, and his net that he has
laid privily, catch himself: that he may fall into his own mischief.

9 And, my soul, be joyful in the Lord: it shall rejoice in his salvation.

10 All my bones shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee, who deliverest the
poor from him that is too strong for him: yea, the poor, and him that is in
misery, from him that spoileth him?

11 False witnesses did rise up: they laid to my charge things that I knew not.

12 They rewarded me evil for good: to the great discomfort of my soul.

13 Nevertheless, when they were sick, I put on sackcloth; and humbled my soul
with fasting: and my prayer shall turn into mine own bosom.

14 I behaved my self, as though it had been my friend or my brother: I went
heavily as one that mourns for his mother.

15 But in mine adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together: yea,
the very abjects came together against me unawares, making mows at me, and
ceased not.

16 With the flatterers were busy mockers: who gnashed upon me with their
teeth.

17 Lord, how long will thou look upon this: O deliver my soul from the
calamities which they bring on me, and my darling from the lions.

18 So will I give thee thanks in the great congregation: I will praise thee
among much people.

19 O let not them that are mine enemies, triumph over me ungodly: neither let
them wink with their eyes, that hate me without a cause.

20 And why? their communing is not for peace: but they imagine deceitful words
against them that are quiet in the land.

21 They gaped upon me with their mouths, and said: Fie on thee, fie on thee,
we saw it with our eyes.

22 This thou have seen, O Lord: hold not thy tongue then, go not far from me,
O Lord.

23 Awake and stand up to judge my quarrel: avenge thou my cause, my God, and
my Lord.

24 Judge me, O Lord my God, according to thy righteousness: and let them not
triumph over me.

25 Let them not say in their hearts, There, there, so would we have it:
neither let them say, We have devoured him.

26 Let them be put to confusion and shame together, that rejoice at my
trouble: let them be clothed with rebuke and dishonor, that boast themselves
against me.

27 Let them be glad and rejoice, that favor my righteous dealing: yea, let
them say always, Blessed be the Lord, who has pleasure in the prosperity of his
servant.

28 And as for my tongue, it shall be talking of thy righteousness: and of thy
praise all the day long.

Dixit injustus. Psalm. 36.
MY heart shows me the wickedness of the ungodly: that there is no fear of
God before his eyes.

2 For he flattereth himself in his own sight: until his abominable sin be
found out.

3 The words of his mouth are unrighteous, and full of deceit: he has left off
to behave himself wisely, and to do good.

4 He imagines mischief upon his bed, and has set himself in no good way:
neither does he abhor any thing that is evil.

5 Thy mercy, O Lord, reaches unto the heavens: and thy faithfulness unto the
clouds.

6 Thy righteousness stands like the strong mountains: thy judgments are like
the great deep.

7 Thou, Lord, shall save both man and beast. How excellent is thy mercy, O
God: and the children of men shall put their trust under the shadow of thy
wings.

8 They shall be satisfied with the plenteousness of thy house: and thou shall
give them drink of thy pleasures, as out of the river.

9 For with thee is the well of life: and in thy light shall we see light.

10 O continue forth thy loving kindness unto them that know thee: and thy
righteousness unto them that are true of heart.

11 O let not the foot of pride come against me: and let not the hand of the
ungodly cast me down.

12 There are they fallen, all that work wickedness: they are cast down, and
shall not be able to stand.

Evening Prayer.
Noli aemulari. Psalm. 37.
FRet not thy self because of the ungodly: neither be thou envious against the
evil doers.

2 For they shall soon be cut down like the grass: and be withered even as the
green herb.

3 Put thou thy trust in the Lord, and be doing good: dwell in the land, and
verily thou shall be fed.

4 Delight thou in the Lord: and he shall give thee thy hearts desire.

5 Commit thy way unto the Lord, and put thy trust in him: and he shall bring
it to pass.

6 He shall make thy righteousness as clear as the light: and thy just dealing
as the noonday.

7 Hold thee still in the Lord, and abide patiently upon him: but grieve not
thy self at him whose way does prosper, against the man that does after evil
counsels.

8 Leave off from wrath, and let go displeasure: fret not thy self, else shall
thou be moved to do evil.

9 Wicked doers shall be rooted out: and they that patiently abide the Lord,
those shall inherit the land.

10 Yet a little while, and the ungodly shall be clean gone: thou shall look
after his place, and he shall be away.

11 But the meek-spirited shall possess the earth: and shall be refreshed in
the multitude of peace.

12 The ungodly seeks counsel against the just: and gnasheth upon him with
his teeth.

13 The Lord shall laugh him to scorn: for he has seen that his day is coming.

14 The ungodly have drawn out the sword, and have bent their bow: to cast down
the poor and needy, and to slay such as are of a right conversation.

15 Their sword shall go through their own heart: and their how shall be broken.

16 A small thing that the righteous has: is better then great riches of the
ungodly.

17 For the arms of the ungodly shall be broken: and the Lord upholdeth the
righteous.

18 The Lord knows the days of the godly: and their inheritance shall endure
for ever.

19 They shall not be confounded in the perilous time and in the days of dearth
they shall have enough.

20 As for the ungodly they shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall
consume as the fat of lambs: yea, even as the smoke shall they consume away.

21 The ungodly borrows, and pays not again: but the righteous is merciful
and liberal.

22 Such as are blessed of God, shall possess the land: and they that are
cursed of him shall be rooted out.

23 The Lord orders a good man's going: and makes his way acceptable to
himself.

24 Though he fall, he shall not be cast away: for the Lord upholdeth him with
his hand.

25 I have been young, and now am old: and yet saw I never the righteous
forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread.

26 The righteous is ever merciful, and lends: and his seed is blessed. DAY
viii.


27 Flee from evil, and do the thing that is good: and dwell for evermore.

28 For the Lord loves the thing that is right: he forsakes not his that be
godly, but they are preserved for ever.

29 The unrighteous shall be punished: as for the seed of the ungodly, it shall
be rooted out.

30 The righteous shall inherit the land: and dwell therein for ever.

31 The mouth of the righteous is exercised in wisdom: and his tongue will be
talking of judgment.

32 The law of his God is in his heart: and his goings shall not slide.

33 The ungodly sees the righteous: and seeks occasion to slay him.

34 The lord will not leave him in his hand: nor condemn him when he is judged.

35 Hope thou in the Lord, and keep his way, and he shall promote thee, that
thou shall possess the land: when the ungodly shall perish, thou shall see it.

36 I my self have seen the ungodly in great power: and flourishing like a
green bay tree.

37 I went by, and lo, he was gone: I sought him, but his place could no where
be found.

38 Keep innocence, and take heed unto the thing that is right: for that shall
bring a man peace at the last.

39 As for the transgressors, they shall perish together: and the end of the
ungodly is, They shall be rooted out at the last.

40 But the salvation of the righteous comes of the Lord: who is also their
strength in the time of trouble.

41 And the Lord shall stand by them, and save them: he shall deliver them from
the ungodly, and shall save them, because they put their trust in him.

Morning Prayer.
Domine, ne in furore. Psalm. 38.
PUt me not to rebuke, O Lord, in thine anger: neither chasten me in thy heavy
displeasure.

2 For thine arrows stick fast in me: and thy hand presses me sore.

3 There is no health in my flesh, because of thy displeasure: neither is there
any rest in my bones, by reason of my sin.

4 For my wickednesses are gone over my head: and are like a sore burden, too
heavy for me to bear.

5 My wounds stink, and are corrupt: through my foolishness.

6 I am brought into so great trouble and misery: that I go mourning all the
day long.

7 For my loins are filled with a sore disease: and there is no whole part in
my body.

8 I am feeble, and sore smitten: I have rored for the very disquietness of my
heart.

9 Lord, thou know all my desire: and my groaning is not hid from thee.

10 My heart pants, my strength has failed me: and the sight of mine eyes is
gone from me.

11 My lovers and my neighbors did stand looking upon my trouble: and my
kinsmen stood afar off.

12 They also that sought after my life, laid snares for me: and they that went
about to do me evil, talked of wickedness, and imagined deceit all the day long.

13 As for me, I was like a deaf man, and heard not: and as one that is dumb,
who does not open his mouth.

14 I became even as a man that hears not: and in whose mouth are no reproofs.

15 For in thee, O Lord, have I put my trust: thou shall answer for me, O Lord
my God.

16 I have required that they, even mine enemies, should not triumph over me:
for when my foot slipped, they rejoiced greatly against me.

17 And I, truly, am set in the plague: and my heaviness is ever in my sight.

18 For I will confess my wickedness: and be sorry for my sin.

19 But mine enemies live, and are mighty: and they that hate me wrongfully,
are many in number.

20 They also that reward evil for good, are against me: because I follow the
thing that good is.

21 Forsake me not, O Lord my God: be not thou far from me.

22 Haste thee to help me: O Lord God of my salvation.

Dixi, Custodiam. Psalm. 39.
I Said, I will take heed to my ways: that I offend not in my tongue.

2 I will keep my mouth as it were with a bridle: while the ungodly is in my
sight.

3 I held my tongue, and spoke nothing: I kept silence, yea, even from good
words; but it was paid and grief to me.

4 My heart was hot within me, and while I was thus musing, the fire kindled:
and at the last I spoke with my tongue.

5 Lord, let me know my end, and the number of my days: that I may be certified
how long I have to live.

6 Behold, thou have made my days as it were a span long: and mine age is even
as nothing in respect of thee, and verily every man living is altogether vanity.

7 For man walks in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain: he
heapeth up riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them.

8 And now, Lord, what is my hope: truly my hope is even in thee.

9 Deliver me from all mine offenses: and make me not a rebuke unto the foolish.

10 I became dumb, and opened not my mouth: for is was thy doing.

11 Take thy plague away from me: I am even consumed by the means of thy heavy
hand.

12 When thou with rebukes do chasten man for sin, thou make his beauty to
consume away, like as it were a moth fretting a garment: every man therefore is
but vanity.

13 Hear my prayer, O Lord, and with thine ears consider my calling: hold not
thy peace at my tears.

14 For I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner: as all my fathers were.

15 O spare me a little, that I may recover my strength: before I go hence, and
be no more seen.

Expectans expectavi. Psalm. 40.
I Waited patiently for the Lord: and he inclined unto me, and heard my calling.

2 He brought me also out of the horrible pit, out of the mire and clay: and
set my feet upon the rock, and ordered my goings.

3 And he has put a new song in my mouth: even a thanksgiving unto our God.

4 Many shall see it, and fear: and shall put their trust in the Lord.

5 Blessed is the man that set his hope in the Lord: and turned not unto the
proud, and to such as go about with lies.

6 O Lord my God, great are the wondrous works which thou have done, like as be
also thy thoughts, which are to usward: and yet there is no man that orders
them unto thee.

7 If I should declare them, and speak of them: they should be mo then I am
able to express.

8 Sacrifice, and meat offering thou would not: but mine ears have thou
opened.

9 Burnt-offerings, and sacrifice for sin have thou not required: then said I,
Lo, I come.

10 In the volume of the book it is written of me, that I should fulfill thy
will, O my God: I am content to do it, yea, thy law is within my heart.

11 I have declared thy righteousness in the great congregation: lo, I will not
refrain my lips, O Lord, and that thou know.

12 I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart: my talk has been of thy
truth, and of thy salvation.

13 I have not kept back thy loving mercy and truth: from the great
congregation.

14 Withdraw not thou thy mercy from me, O Lord: let thy loving kindness, and
thy truth always preserve me.

15 For innumerable troubles are come about me, my sins have taken such hold
upon me, that I am not able to look up: yea, they are mo in number then the
hairs of my head, and my heart has failed me.

16 O Lord, let it be thy pleasure to deliver me: make haste, O Lord, to help
me.

17 Let them be ashamed and confounded together that seek after my soul to
destroy it: let them be driven backward, and put to rebuke, that wish me evil.

18 Let them be desolate and rewarded with shame: that say unto me, Fie upon
thee, fie upon thee.

19 Let all those that seek thee, be joyful and glad in thee: and let such as
love thy salvation say always, The Lord be praised.

20 As for me, I am poor and needy: but the Lord cares for me.

21 Thou art my helper and redeemer: make no long tarrying, O my God.

Evening Prayer.
Beatus, qui intelligit. Psalm. 41.
BLessed is he that considers the poor and needy: the Lord shall deliver him
in the time of trouble.

2 The Lord preserve him, and keep him alive, that he may be blessed upon
earth: and deliver not thou him into the will of his enemies.

3 The Lord comfort him when he lies sick upon his bed: make thou all his bed
in his sickness.

4 I said, Lord, be merciful unto me: heal my soul, for I have sinned against
thee.

5 Mine enemies speak evil of me: When shall he die, and his name perish?

6 And if he come to see me, he speaks vanity: and his heart conceives
falsehood within himself, and when he comes forth he tells it.

7 All mine enemies whisper together against me: even against me do they
imagine this evil.

8 Let the sentence of guiltiness proceed against him: and now that he lies,
let him rise up no more.

9 Yea, even mine own familiar friend, whom I trusted: who did also eat of my
bread, has laid great wait for me.

10 But be thou merciful unto me, O Lord: raise thou me up again, and I shall
reward them.

11 By this I know thou favourest me: that mine enemy does not triumph against
me.

12 And when I am in my health, thou upholdest me: and shall set me before thy
face for ever.

13 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel: world without end. Amen.

Quemadmodum. Psalm. 42.
LIke as the heart desires the waterbrooks: so longs my soul after thee, o
God.

2 My soul is athirst for God, yea, even for the living God: When shall I come
to appear before the Presence of God?

3 My tears have been my meat day and night: while they daily say unto me,
Where is now thy God?

4 Now when I think thereupon, I pour out my heart by my self: for I went with
the multitude, and brought them forth into the house of God;

5 In the voice of praise and thanksgiving: among such as keep holy day.

6 Why art thou so full of heaviness, O my soul: and why art thou so disquieted
within me?

7 Put thy trust in God: for I will yet give him thanks for the help of his
countenance.

8 My God, my soul is vexed within me: therefore will I remember thee
concerning the land of Jordan, and the little hill of Hermon.

9 One deep calls another, because of the noise of the water-pipes: all thy
waves and storms are gone over me.

10 The Lord has granted his loving kindness on the daytime: and in the
night-season did I sing of him, and made my prayer unto the God of my life.

11 I will say unto the God of my strength, Why have thou forgotten me: why go
I thus heavily, while the enemy oppresses me?

12 My bones are smitten asunder as with a sword: while mine enemies that
trouble me cast me in the teeth;

13 Namely, while they say daily unto me: Where is now thy God?

14 Why art thou so vexed, O my soul: and why art thou so disquieted within me?

15 O put thy trust in God: for I will yet thank him, which is the help of my
countenance, and my God.

Judica me, Deus. Psalm. 43.
GIve sentence with me, O God, and defend my cause against the ungodly people:
O deliver me from the deceitful and wicked man.

2 For thou art the God of my strength, why have thou put me from thee: and why
go I so heavily, while the enemy oppresses me?

3 O send out thy light and thy truth, that they may lead me: and bring me unto
thy holy hill, and to thy dwelling.

4 And that I may go unto the altar of God, even unto the God of my joy and
gladness: and upon the harp will I give thanks unto thee, O God, my God.

5 Why art thou so heavy, O my soul: and why art thou so disquieted within me?

6 O put thy trust in God: for I will yet give him thanks, which is the help of
my countenance, and my God.

Morning Prayer.
Deus, auribus. Psalm. 44.
WE have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us: what thou have
done in their time of old. DAY ix.


2 How thou have driven out the heathen with thy hand, and planted them in: how
thou have destroyed the nations, and cast them out.

3 For they gat not the land in possession through their own sword: neither was
it their own arm that helped them.

4 But thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance: because
thou had a favor unto them.

5 Thou art my King, O God: send help unto Jacob.

6 Through thee will we overthrow our enemies: and in thy name will we tread
them under that rise up against us.

7 For I will not trust in my bow: it is not my sword that shall help me.

8 But it is thou that savest us from our enemies: and put them to
confusion that hate us.

9 We make our boast of God all day long: and will praise thy Name for ever.

10 But now thou art far off, and put us to confusion: and go not forth
with our armies.

11 Thou make us to turn our backs upon our enemies: so that they, which hate
us, spoil our goods.

12 Thou let us be eaten up like sheep: and have scattered us among the
heathen.

13 Thou sellest thy people for naught: and take no money for them.

14 Thou make us to be rebuked of our neighbors: to be laughed to scorn, and
had in derision of them that are round about us.

15 Thou make us to be a byword among the heathen: and that the people shake
their heads at us.

16 My confusion is daily before me: and the shame of my face has covered me;

17 For the voice of the slanderer and blasphemer: for the enemy and avenger.

18 And though all this be come upon us, yet do we not forget thee: nor behave
our selves frowardly in thy covenant.

19 Our heart is not turned back: neither our steps gone out of thy way;

20 No, not when thou have smitten us into the place of dragons: and covered us
with the shadow of death.

21 If we have forgotten the Name of our God, and holden up our hands to any
strange god: shall not God search it out? for he knows the very secrets of
the heart.

22 For thy sake also we are killed all the day long: and are counted as sheep
appointed to be slain.

23 Up, Lord, why sleep thou: awake, and be not absent from us for ever.

24 Wherefore hidest: thou thy face: and forgettest our misery and trouble?

25 For our soul is brought low, even unto the dust: our belly cleaves unto
the ground.

26 Arise, and help us: and deliver us for thy mercies sake.

Eructavit cor meum. Psalm 45.
MY heart is inditing of a good matter: I speak of the things which I have made
unto the King.

2 My tongue is the pen: of a ready writer.

3 Thou art fairer then the children of men: full of grace are thy lips,
because God has blessed thee for ever.

4 Gird thee with thy sword upon thy thigh, O thou most mighty: according to
thy worship and renown.

5 Good luck have thou with thine honor: ride on, because of the word of
truth, of meekness and righteousness, and thy right hand shall teach thee
terrible things.

6 Thy arrows are very sharp, and the people shall be subdued unto thee: even
in the midst among the kings enemies.

7 Thy seat, O God, endures for ever: the scepter of thy kingdom is a right
scepter.

8 Thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity: wherefore God, even thy
God, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.

9 All thy garments smell of myrrh, aloes, and cassia: out of the ivory
palaces, whereby they have made thee glad.

10 Kings daughters were among thy honorable women: upon thy right hand did
stand the Queen in a vesture of gold, wrought about with diverse colors.

11 Hearken, O daughter, and consider, incline thine ear: forget also thine own
people, and thy fathers house.

12 So shall the King have pleasure in thy beauty: for he is thy Lord God, and
worship thou him.

13 And the daughter of Tire shall be there with a gift: like as the rich also
among the people shall make their supplication before thee.

14 The Kings daughter is all glorious within: her clothing is of wrought gold.

15 She shall be brought unto the King in raiment of needle work: the virgins
that be her fellows shall bear her company, and shall be brought unto thee.

16 With joy and gladness shall they be brought: and shall enter into the Kings
palace.

17 In stead of thy fathers thou shall have children: whom thou may make
princes in all lands.

18 I will remember thy Name from one generation to another: therefore shall
the people give thanks unto thee, world without end.

Deus noster refugium. Psalm. 46.
GOd is our hope and strength: a very present help in trouble.

2 Therefore will we not fear though the earth be moved: and though the hills
be carried into the midst of the sea.

3 Though the waters thereof rage and swell: and though the mountains shake at
the tempest of the same.

4 The rivers of the flood thereof shall make glad the city of God: the holy
place of the tabernacle of the most Highest.

5 God is in the midst of her, therefore shall she not be removed: God shall
help her, and that right early.

6 The heathen make much ado, and the kingdoms are moved: but God has showed
his voice, and the earth shall melt away.

7 The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Jacob is our refuge.

8 O come hither, and behold the works of the Lord: what destruction he has
brought upon the earth.

9 He makes wars to cease in all the world: he breaks the bow, and knappeth
the spear in sunder, and burns the chariots in the fire.

10 Be still then, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the heathen,
and I will be exalted in the earth.

11 The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Jacob is our refuge.

Evening Prayer.
Omnes gentes, plaudite. Psalm. 47.
O Clap your hands together, all ye people: O sing unto God with the voice of
melody.

2 For the Lord is high, and to be feared: he is the great King upon all the
earth.

3 He shall subdue the people under us: and the nations under our feet.

4. He shall choose out an heritage for us: even the worship of Jacob whom he
loved.

5 God is gone up with a merry noise: and the Lord with the sound of the trump.

6 O sing praises, sing praises unto our God: O sing praises, sing praises unto
our King.

7 For God is the King of all the earth: sing ye praises with understanding.

8 God reigns over the heathen: God sits upon his holy seat.

9 The princes of the people are joined unto the people of the God of Abraham:
for God which is very high exalted, does defend the earth, as it were with a
shield.

Magnus Dominus. Psalm. 48.
GReat is the Lord, and highly to be praised: in the city of our God, even upon
his holy hill.

2 The hill of Sion is a fair place, and the joy of the whole earth: upon the
north-side lies the city of the great King; God is well known in her palaces
as a sure refuge.

3 For lo, the kings of the earth: are gathered, and gone by together.

4 They marvelled to see such things: they were astonished and suddenly cast
down.

5 Fear came there upon them, and sorrow: as upon a woman in her travail.

6 Thou shall break the ships of the sea: through the east wind.

7 Like as we have heard, so have we seen in the city of the Lord of hosts; in
the city of our God: God upholdeth the same for ever.

8 We wait for thy loving kindness, O God: in the midst of thy temple.

9 O God, according to thy Name, so is thy praise unto the worlds end: thy
right hand is full of righteousness.

10 Let the mount Sion rejoice, and the daughter of Juda be glad: because of
thy judgments.

11 Walk about Sion, and go round about her: and tell the towers thereof.

12 Mark well her bulwarks, set up her houses: that ye may tell them that come
after.

13 For this God is our God for ever, and ever: he shall be our guide unto
death.

Audite haec, omnes. Psalm. 49.
O Hear ye this, all ye people: ponder it with your ears, all ye that dwell in
the world.

2 High, and low, rich, and poor: one with another.

3 My mouth shall speak of wisdom: and my heart shall muse of understanding.

4 I will incline mine ear to the parable: and show my dark speech upon the
harp.

5 Wherefore should I fear in the days of wickedness: and when the wickedness
of my heels compasses me round about?

6 There be some that put their trust in their goods: and boast themselves in
the multitude of their riches.

7 But no man may deliver his brother: nor make agreement unto God for him;

8 For it cost more to redeem their souls: so that he must let that alone for
ever;

9 Yea, though he live long: and see not the grave.

10 For he sees that wise men also die, and perish together: as well as the
ignorant and foolish, and leave their riches for other.

11 And yet they think that their houses shall continue for ever: and that
their dwelling-places shall endure from one generation to another, and call the
lands after their own names.

12 Nevertheless, man will not abide in honor: seeing he may be compared unto
the beasts that perish; this is the way of them.

13 This is their foolishness: and their posterity praise their saying.

14 They lie in the hell like sheep, death gnaweth upon them, and the righteous
shall have domination over them in the morning: their beauty shall consume in
the sepulcher out of their dwelling.

15 But God has delivered my soul from the place of hell: for he shall receive
me.

16 Be not thou afraid, though one be made rich: or if the glory of his house
be increased; DAY x.


17 For he shall carry nothing away with him when he dies: neither shall his
pomp follow him.

18 For while he lived he counted himself an happy man: and so long as thou
do well unto thy self, men will speak good of thee.

19 He shall follow the generation of his fathers: and shall never see light.

20 Man being in honor has no understanding: but is compared unto the beasts
that perish.

Morning Prayer.
Deus deorum. Psalm. 1.
THE Lord, even the most mighty God has spoken: and called the world, from the
rising up of the sun, unto the going down thereof.

2 Out of Sion has God appeared: in perfect beauty.

3 Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence: there shall go before him a
consuming fire, and a mighty tempest shall be stirred up round about him.

4 He shall call the heaven from above: and the earth, that he may judge his
people.

5 Gather my saints together unto me: those that have made a covenant with me
with sacrifice.

6 And the heavens shall declare his righteousness: for God is Judge himself.

7 Hear, O my people, and I will speak: I my self will testify against thee, O
Israel; for I am God, even thy God.

8 I will not reprove thee because of thy sacrifices, or for thy
burnt-offerings: because they were not always before me.

9 I will take no bullock out of thine house: nor he-goat out of thy folds.

10 For all the beasts of the forest are mine: and so are the cattle upon a
thousand hills.

11 I know all the fowls upon the mountains: and the wild beasts of the field
are in my sight.

12 If I be hungry, I will not tell thee: for the whole world is mine, and all
that is therein.

13 Think thou that I will eat bulls flesh: and drink the blood of goats?

14 Offer unto God thanksgiving: and pay thy vows unto the most Highest.

15 And call upon me in the time of trouble: so will I hear thee, and thou
shall praise me.

16 But unto the ungodly said God: Why do thou preach my laws, and take my
covenant in thy mouth;

17 Whereas thou hate to be reformed: and have cast my words behind thee?

18 When thou saw a thief, thou consentedst unto him: and have been partaker
with the adulterers.

19 Thou have let thy mouth speak wickedness: and with thy tongue thou have set
forth deceit.

20 Thou satest, and spakest against thy brother: yea, and have slandered thine
own mothers son.

21 These things have thou done, and I held my tongue, and thou thoughtest
wickedly that I am even such a one as thy self: but I will reprove thee, and
set before thee the things that thou have done.

22 O Consider this, ye that forget God: lest I pluck you away, and there be
none to deliver you.

23 Whosoever offers me thanks and praise, he honors me: and to him that
orders his conversation right, will I show the salvation of God.

Miserere mei, Deus. Psalm. 51.
HAve mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness: according to the
multitude of thy mercies, do away mine offenses.

2 Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness: and cleanse me from my sin.

3 For I knowledge my faults: and my sin is ever before me.

4 Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that thou
might be justified in thy saying, and clear, when thou art judged.

5 Behold, I was shapen in wickedness: and in sin has my mother conceived me.

6 But lo, thou requirest truth in the inward parts: and shall make me to
understand wisdom secretly.

7 Thou shall purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean: thou shall wash me,
and I shall be whiter then snow.

8 Thou shall make me hear of joy and gladness: that the bones which thou have
broken, may rejoice.

9 Turn thy face from my sins: and put out all misdeeds.

10 Make me a clean heart, O God: and renew a right spirit within me.

11 Cast me not away from thy presence: and take not thy holy Spirit from me.

12 O give me the comfort of thy help again: and stablish me with thy free
Spirit.

13 Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked: and sinners shall be converted
unto thee.

14 Deliver me from bloud-guiltiness, O God, thou that art the God of my
health: and my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness.

15 Thou shall open my lips, O Lord: and my mouth shall show thy praise.

16 For thou desire no sacrifice, else would I give it thee: but thou
delightest not in burnt-offerings.

17 The sacrifice of God is a troubled spirit: a broken and contrite heart, O
God, shall thou not despise.

18 O be favorable and gracious unto Sion: build thou the walls of Jerusalem.

19 Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifice of righteousness, with the
burnt-offerings and oblations: then shall they offer young bullocks upon thine
altar.

Quid gloriaris? Psalm. 52.
WHy boastest thou thy self, thou tyrant: that thou can do mischief;

2 Whereas the goodness of God: endures yet daily?

3 Thy tongue imagines wickedness: and with lies thou cuttest like a sharp
rasour.

4 Thou have loved unrighteousness more then goodness: and to talk of lies,
more then righteousness.

5 Thou have loved to speak all words that may do hurt: O thou false tongue.

6 Therefore shall God destroy thee for ever: he shall take thee, and pluck
thee out of thy dwelling, and root thee out of the land of the living.

7 The righteous also shall see this, and fear: and shall laugh him to scorn.

8 Lo, this is the man that took not God for his strength: but trusted unto the
multitude of his riches, and strengthened himself in his wickedness.

9 As for me, I am like a green olive tree in the house of God: my trust is in
the tender mercy of God for ever and ever.

10 I will always give thanks unto thee for that thou have done: and I will
hope in thy Name, for thy saints like it well.

Evening Prayer.
Dixit insipiens. Psalm. 53.
THE foolish body has said in his heart: There is no God.

2 Corrupt are they, and become abominable in their wickedness: there is none
that does good.

3 God looked down from heaven upon the children of men: to see if there were
any that would understand, and seek after God.

4 But they are all gone out of the way, they are altogether become abominable:
there is also none that does good, no not one.

5 Are not they without understanding, that work wickedness: eating up my
people as if they would eat bread? they have not called upon God.

6 They were afraid where no fear was: for God has broken the bones of him
that besieged thee; thou have put them to confusion, because God has despised
them.

7 Oh that the salvation were given unto Israel out of Sion: Oh that the Lord
would deliver his people out of captivity!

8 Then should Jacob rejoice: and Israel should be right glad.

Deus, in nomine. Psalm. 54.
SAve me, O God, for thy Names sake: and avenge me in thy strength.

2 Hear my prayer, O God: and hearken unto the words of my mouth.

3 For strangers are risen up against me: and tyrants, which have not God
before their eyes, seek after my soul.

4 Behold, God is my helper: the Lord is with them that uphold my soul.

5 He shall reward evil unto mine enemies: destroy thou them in thy truth.

6 An offering of a free heart will I give thee, and praise thy Name, O Lord:
because it is so comfortable.

7 For he has delivered me out of all my trouble: and mine eye has seen his
desire upon mine enemies.

Ex^udi, Deus. Psalm. 55.
HEar my prayer, O God: and hide not thy self from my petition.

2 Take heed unto me, and hear me: how I mourn in my prayer, and am vexed.

3 The enemy cries so, and the ungodly comes on so fast: for they are minded
to do me some mischief, so maliciously are they set against me.

4 My heart is disquieted within me: and the fear of death is fallen upon me.

5 Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me: and an horrible dread has
overwhelmed me.

6 And I said, O that I had wings like a dove: for then would I flee away and
be at rest.

7 Lo, then would I get me away far off: and remain in the wilderness.

8 I would make haste to escape: because of the stormy wind and tempest.

9 Destroy their tongues, O Lord, and divide them: for I have spied
unrighteousness, and strife in the city.

10 Day and night they go about within the walls thereof: mischief also, and
sorrow are in the midst of it.

11 Wickedness is therein: deceit and guile go not out of their streets.

12 For it is not an open enemy that has done me this dishonor: for then I
could have born it.

13 Neither was it mine adversary that did magnify himself against me: for
then peradventure I would have hid my self from him.

14 But it was even thou, my companion: my guide, and mine own familiar friend.

15 We took sweet counsel together: and walked in the house of God as friends.

16 Let death come hastily upon them, and let them go down quick into hell: for
wickedness is in their dwellings, and among them.

17 As for me, I will call upon God: and the Lord shall save me.

18 In the evening and morning, and at noonday will I pray, and that
instantly: and he shall hear my voice.

19 It is he that has delivered my soul in peace, from the battle that was
against me: for there were many with me.

20 Yea, even God that endures for ever, shall hear me, and bring them down:
for they will not turn, nor fear God.

21 He laid his hands upon such as be at peace with him: and he brake his
covenant.

22 The words of his mouth were softer then butter, having war in his heart:
his words were smoother then oil, and yet be they very swords.

23 O cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall nourish thee: and shall not
suffer the righteous to fall for ever. DAY xi.


24 And as for them: thou, O God, shall bring them into the pit of destruction.

25 The bloodthirsty, and deceitful men shall not live out half their days:
nevertheless, my trust shall be in thee, O Lord.

Morning Prayer.
Miserere mei, Deus. Psalm. 56.
BE merciful unto me, O God, for man goes about to devour me: he is daily
fighting, and troubling me.

2 Mine enemies are daily in hand to swallow me up: for they be many that fight
against me, O thou most Highest.

3 Nevertheless, though I am sometime afraid: yet put I my trust in thee.

4 I will praise God, because of his word: I have put my trust in God, and will
not fear what flesh can do unto me.

5 They daily mistake my words: all that they imagine, is to do me evil.

6 They hold all together, and keep themselves close: and mark my steps, when
they lay wait for my soul.

7 Shall they escape for their wickedness: thou, O God, in thy displeasure
shall cast them down.

8 Thou tellest my flittings, put my tears into thy bottle: are not these
things noted in thy book?

9 Whenever I call upon thee, then shall mine enemies be put to flight: this
I know; for God is on my side.

10 In Gods word will I rejoice: in the Lords word will I comfort me.

11 Yea, in God have I put my trust: I will not be afraid what man can do unto
me.

12 Unto thee, O God, will I pay my vows: unto thee will I give thanks.

13 For thou have delivered my soul from death, and my feet from falling: that
I may walk before God in the light of the living.

Miserere mei, Deus. Psalm. 57.
BE merciful unto me, O God, be merciful unto me, for my soul trusts in thee:
and under the shadow of thy wings shall be my refuge, until this tyranny be
over-past.

2 I will call unto the most high God: even unto the God, that shall perform
the cause, which I have in hand.

3 He shall send from heaven: and save me from the reproof of him that would
eat me up.

4 God shall send forth his mercy and truth: my soul is among lions.

5 And I lie even among the children of men, that are set on fire: whose teeth
are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword.

6 Set up thy self, O God, above the heavens: and thy glory above all the earth.

7 They have laid a net for my feet, and pressed down my soul: they have dug
a pit before me, and are fallen into the midst of it themselves.

8 My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed: I will sing, and give praise.

9 Awake up, my glory; awake, lute and harp: I my self will awake right early.

10 I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the people: and I will sing
unto thee among the nations.

11 For the greatness of thy mercy reaches unto the heavens: and thy truth
unto the clouds.

12 Set up thy self, O God, above the heavens: and thy glory above all the
earth.

Si vere utique. Psalm. 58.
ARe your minds set upon righteousness, O ye congregation: and do ye judge the
thing that is right, O ye sons of men?

2 Yea, ye imagine mischief in your heart upon the earth: and your hands deal
with wickedness.

3 The ungodly are froward, even from their mothers womb: as soon as they are
born, they go astray, and speak lies.

4 They are as venomous as the poison of a serpent: even like the deaf adder,
that stops her ears;

5 Which refuses to hear the voice of the charmer: charm he never so wisely.

6 Break their teeth, O God, in their mouths, smite the jaw-bones of the lions,
O Lord: let them fall away like water that runs apace, and when they shoot
their arrows, let them be rooted out.

7 Let them consume away like a snail, and be like the untimely fruit of a
woman: and let them not see the sun.

8 Or ever your pots be made hot with thorns: so let indignation vex him, even
as a thing that is raw.

9 The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance: he shall wash his
footsteps in the blood of the ungodly.

10 So that a man shall say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous:
doubtless there is a God that judges the earth.

Evening Prayer.
Eripe me de inimicis. Psalm. 59.
DEliver me from mine enemies, O God: defend me from them that rise up against
me.

2 O deliver me from the wicked doers: and save me from the bloodthirsty men.

3 For lo, they lie waiting for my soul: the mighty men are gathered against me
without any offense or fault of me, O Lord.

4 They run and prepare themselves without my fault: arise thou therefore to
help me, and behold.

5 Stand up, O Lord God of hosts, thou God of Israel, to visit all the heathen:
and be not merciful unto them that offend of malicious wickedness.

6 They go to and fro in the evening: they grin like a dog, and run about
through the city.

7 Behold, they speak with their mouth, and swords are in their lips: for who
does hear?

8 But thou, O Lord, shall have them in derision: and thou shall laugh all the
heathen to scorn.

9 My strength will I ascribe unto thee: for thou art the God of my refuge.

10 God shows me his goodness plenteously: and God shall let me see my desire
upon mine enemies.

11 Slay than not, lest my people forget it: but scatter them abroad among the
people, and put them down, O Lord our defense.

12 For the sin of their mouth, and for the words of their lips they shall be
taken in their pride: and why? their preaching is of cursing and lies.

13 Consume them in thy wrath, consume them, that they may perish: and know
that it is God that rules in Jacob, and unto the ends of the world.

14 And in the evening they will return: grin like a dog, and will go about the
city.

15 They will run here and there for meat: and grudge if they be not satisfied.

16 As for me, I will sing of thy power, and will praise thy mercy betimes in
the morning: for thou have been my defense and refuge in the day of my trouble.

17 Unto thee, O my strength, will I sing: for thou, O God, art my refuge, and
my merciful God.

Deus, repulisti nos. Psalm. 60.
O God, thou have cast us out, and scattered us abroad: thou have also been
displeased, O turn thee unto us again.

2 Thou have moved the land and divided it: heal the sores thereof, for it
shakes.

3 Thou have showed thy people heavy things: thou have given us a drink of
deadly wine.

4 Thou have given a token for such as fear thee: that they may triumph because
of the truth.

5 Therefore were thy beloved delivered: help me with thy right hand, and hear
me.

6 God has spoken in his holiness, I will rejoice and divide Sichem: and mete
out the valley of Succoth.

7 Gilead is mine, and Manasses is mine: Ephraim also is the strength of my
head; Juda is my lawgiver,

8 Moab is my washpot, over Edom will I cast out my shoe: Philistia be thou
glad of me.

9 Who will lead me into the strong city: who will bring me into Edom?

10 Have not thou cast us out, O God: Wilt not thou, O God, go out with our
hosts?

11 O be thou our help in trouble: for vain is the help of man.

12 Through God will we do great acts: for it is he that shall tread down our
enemies.

Exaudi, Deus. Psalm. 61.
HEar my crying, O God: give ear unto my prayer.

2 From the ends of the earth will I call upon thee: when my heart is in
heaviness.

3 O set me up upon the rock that is higher then I: for thou have been my hope,
and a strong tower for me against the enemy.

4 I will dwell in thy tabernacle for ever: and my trust shall be under the
covering of thy wings.

5 For thou, O Lord, have heard my desires: and have given an heritage unto
those that fear thy Name.

6 Thou shall grant the King a long life: that his years may endure throughout
all generations.

7 He shall dwell before God for ever: O prepare thy loving mercy and
faithfulness, that they may preserve him.

8 So will I always sing praise unto thy Name: that I may daily perform my vows.

Morning Prayer.
Nonne Deo. Psalm. 62.
MY soul truly waits still upon God: for of him comes my salvation. DAY xii.


2 He verily is my strength and my salvation: he is my defense, so that I shall
not greatly fall.

3 How long will ye imagine mischief against every man: ye shall be slain all
the sort of you; yea, as a tottering wall shall ye be, and like a broken hedge.

4 Their device is only how to put him out whom God will exalt: their delight
is in lies, they give good words with their mouth, but curse with their heart.

5 Nevertheless, my soul, wait thou still upon God: for my hope is in him.

6 He truly is my strength and my salvation: he is my defense, so that I shall
not fall.

7 In God is my health and my glory: the rock of my might, and in God is my
trust.

8 O put your trust in him always, ye people: pour out your hearts before him,
for God is our hope.

9 As for the children of men, they are but vanity: the children of men are
deceitful upon the weights, they are altogether lighter then vanity it self.

10 O trust not in wrong and robbery, give not your selves unto vanity: if
riches increase, set not your heart upon them.

11 God spoke once, and twice I have also heard the same: That power belongs
unto God;

12 And that thou Lord art merciful: for thou rewardest every man according to
his work.

Deus, Deus meus. Psalm. 63.
O God, thou art my God: early will I seek thee.

2 My soul thirsts for thee, my flesh also longs after thee: in a barren
and dry land where no water is.

3 Thus have I looked for thee in holiness: that I might behold thy power and
glory.

4 For thy loving kindness is better then the life it self: my lips shall
praise thee.

5 As long as I live will I magnify thee on this manner: and lift up my hands
in thy Name.

6 My soul shall be satisfied even as it were with marrow and fatness: when my
mouth praises thee with joyful lips.

7 Have I not remembered thee in my bed: and thought upon thee when I was waking?

8 Because thou have been my helper: therefore under the shadow of thy wings
will I rejoice.

9 My soul hangs upon thee: thy right hand has upholden me.

10 These also that seek the hurt of my soul: they shall go under the earth.

11 Let them fall upon the edge of the sword: that they may be a portion for
foxes.

12 But the King shall rejoice in God; all they also that swear by him, shall
be commended: for the mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped.

Exaudi, Deus. Psalm. 64.
HEar my voice, O God, in my prayer: preserve my life from fear of the enemy.

2 Hide me from the gathering together of the froward: and from the
insurrection of wicked doers.

3 Who have whet their tongue like a sword: and shoot out their arrows, even
bitter words.

4 That they may privily shoot at him that is perfect: suddenly do they hit
him, and fear not.

5 They encourage themselves in mischief: and commune among themselves, how
they may lay snares, and say that no man shall see them.

6 They imagine wickedness, and practice it: that they keep secret among
themselves, every man in the deep of his heart.

7 But God shall suddenly shoot at them with a swift arrow: that they shall be
wounded.

8 Yea, their own tongues shall make them fall: insomuch that whosoever sees them
shall laugh them to scorn.

9 And all men that see it, shall say, This has God done: for they shall
perceive that it is his work.

10 The righteous shall rejoice in the Lord, and put his trust in him: and all
they that are true of heart, shall be glad.

Evening Prayer.
Te decet hymnus. Psalm. 65.
THou, O God, art praised in Sion: and unto thee shall the vow be performed in
Jerusalem.

2 Thou that hear the prayer: unto thee shall all flesh come.

3 My misdeeds prevail against me: O be thou merciful unto our sins.

4 Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and receivest unto thee: he shall
dwell in thy court, and shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thy house,
even of thy holy temple.

5 Thou shall show us wonderful things in thy righteousness, O God of our
salvation: thou that art the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of them
that remain in the broad sea.

6 Who in his strength sets fast the mountains: and is girded about with
power.

7 Who stilleth the raging of the sea: and the noise of his waves, and the
madness of the people.

8 They also that dwell in the uttermost parts of the earth, shall be afraid at
thy tokens: thou that make the outgoings of the morning and evening to
praise thee.

9 Thou visitest the earth, and blessest it: thou make it very plenteous.

10 The river of God is full of water: thou preparest their corn, for so thou
providest for the earth.

11 Thou waterest her furrows, thou sendest rain into the little valleys
thereof: thou make it soft with the drops of rain, and blessest the increase
of it.

12 Thou crownest the year with thy goodness: and thy clouds drop fatness.

13 They shall drop upon the dwellings of the wilderness: and the little hills
shall rejoice on every side.

14 The folds shall be full of sheep: the valleys also shall stand so thick
with corn, that they shall laugh and sing.

Jubilate Deo. Psalm. 66.
O Be joyful in God, all ye lands: sing praises unto the honor of his Name,
make his praise to be glorious.

2 Say unto God, O how wonderful art thou in thy works: through the greatness
of thy power shall thine enemies be found liars unto thee.

3 For all the world shall worship thee: sing of thee, and praise thy Name.

4 O come hither, and behold the works of God: how wonderful he is in his doing
toward the children of men.

5 He turned the sea into dry land: so that they went through the water on
foot; there did we rejoice thereof.

6 He rules with his power for ever, his eyes behold the people: and such as
will not believe, shall not be able to exalt themselves.

7 O praise our God, ye people: and make the voice of his praise to be heard;

8 Who holds our soul in life: and suffers not our feet to slip.

9 For thou, O God, have proved us: thou also have tried us, like as silver is
tried. DAY xiii.


10 Thou broughest us into the snare: and laidst trouble upon our loins.

11 Thou sufferedst men to ride over our heads: we went through fire and water,
and thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place.

12 I will go into thine house with burnt-offerings: and will pay thee my vows,
which I promised with my lips, and ^pake with my mouth, when I was in trouble.

13 I will offer unto thee fat burnt-sacrifices, with the incense of rams: I
will offer bullocks and goats.

14 O come hither, and hearken, all ye that fear God: and I will tell you what
he has done for my soul.

15 I called unto him with my mouth: and gave him praises with my tongue.

16 If I incline unto wickedness with mine heart: the Lord will not hear me.

17 But God has heard me: and considered the voice of my prayer.

18 Praised be God, who has not cast out my prayer: nor turned his mercy from
me.

Deus misereatur. Psalm. 67.
GOd be merciful unto us, and bless us: and show us the light of his
countenance, and be merciful unto us;

2 That thy way may be known upon earth: thy saving health among all nations.

3 Let the people praise thee, O God: yea, let all the people praise thee.

4 O let the nations rejoice, and be glad: for thou shall judge the folk
righteously, and govern the nations upon earth.

5 Let the people praise thee, O God: let all the people praise thee.

6 Then shall the earth bring forth her increase: and God, even our own God,
shall give us his blessing.

7 God shall bless us: and all the ends of the world shall fear him.

Morning Prayer.
Exurgat Deus. Psalm. 68.
LEt God arise, and let his enemies be scattered: let them also that hate him,
flee before him.

2 Like as the smoke vanishes, so shall thou drive them away: and like as wax
melts at the fire, so let the ungodly perish at the presence of God.

3 But let the righteous be glad, and rejoice before God: let them also be
merry and joyful.

4 O sing unto God, and sing praises unto his Name: magnify him that rides
upon the heavens, as it were upon an horse; praise him in his Name, yea, and
rejoice before him.

5 He is a father of the fatherless, and defends the cause of the widows:
even God in his holy habitation.

6 He is the God that makes men to be of one mind in an house, and brings
the prisoners out of captivity: but lets the runagates continue in
scarceness.

7 O God, when thou wentest forth before the people: when thou wentest through
the wilderness,

8 The earth shook, and the heavens dropped at the presence of God: even as
Sinai also was moved at the presence of God, who is the God of Israel.

9 Thou, O God, sentest a gracious rain upon thine inheritance: and refreshedst
it when it was weary.

10 Thy congregation shall dwell therein: for thou, O God, have of thy goodness
prepared for the poor.

11 The Lord gave the word: great was the company of the preachers.

12 Kings with their armies did flee, and were discomfited: and they of the
household divided the spoil.

13 Though ye have lien among the pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a dove:
that is covered with silver wings, and her feathers like gold.

14 When the Almighty scattered kings for their sake: then were they as white
as snow in Salmon.

15 As the hill of Basan, so is Gods hill: even an high hill, as the hill of
Basan.

16 Why hop ye so, ye high hills? this is Gods hill, in the which it pleases
him to dwell: yea, the Lord will abide in it for ever.

17 The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels: and the
Lord is among them, as in the holy place of Sinai.

18 Thou art gone up on high, thou have led captivity captive, and received
gifts for men: yea, even for thine enemies, that the Lord God might dwell among
them.

19 Praised be the Lord daily: even the God who helps us, and pours his
benefits upon us.

20 He is our God, even the God of whom comes salvation: God is the Lord, by
whom we escape death.

21 God shall wound the head of his enemies: and the hairy scalp of such a one
as goes on still in his wickedness.

22 The Lord has said, I will bring my people again, as I did from Basan: mine
own will I bring again, as I did sometime from the deep of the sea.

23 That thy foot may be dipped in the blood of thine enemies: and that the
tongue of thy dogs may be red through the same.

24 It is well seen, O God, how thou go: how thou my God and King go in
the sanctuary.

25 The singers go before, the minstrels follow after: in the midst are the
damsels playing with the timbrels.

26 Give thanks, O Israel, unto God the Lord in the congregations: from the
ground of the heart.

27 There is little Benjamin their ruler, and the princes of Juda their
counsel: the princes of Zabulon, and the princes of Nephthali.

28 Thy God has sent forth strength for thee: stablish the thing, O God, that
thou have wrought in us,

29 For thy temples sake at Jerusalem: so shall kings bring presents unto thee.

30 When the company of the spear-men and multitude of the mighty are scattered
abroad among the beasts of the people, so that they humbly bring pieces of
silver: and when he has scattered the people that delight in war,

31 Then shall the princes come out of Egypt: the Morians land shall soon
stretch out her hands unto God.

32 Sing unto God, O ye kingdoms of the earth: O sing praises unto the Lord,

33 Who sits in the heavens over all from the beginning: lo, he does send
out his voice, yea, and that a mighty voice.

34 Ascribe ye the power to God over Israel: his worship and strength is in the
clouds.

35 O God, wonderful art thou in thy holy places: even the God of Israel; he
will give strength and power unto his people; blessed be God.

Evening Prayer.
Salvum me fac. Psalm. 69.
SAve me, O God: for the waters are come in, even unto my soul.

2 I stick fast in the deep mire, where no ground is: I am come into deep
waters, so that the floods run over me.

3 I am weary of crying, my throat is dry: my sight fails me for waiting so
long upon my God.

4 They, that hate me without a cause, are more then the hairs of my head: they
that are mine enemies, and would destroy me guiltless, are mighty.

5 I paid them the things that I never took: God, thou know my simpleness,
and my faults are not hid from thee.

6 Let not them that trust thee, O Lord God of hosts, be ashamed for my cause:
let not those that seek thee, be confounded through me, O Lord God of Israel.

7 And why? for thy sake have I suffered reproof: shame has covered my face.

8 I am become a stranger unto my brethren: even an alien unto my mothers
children.

9 For the zeal of thine house has even eaten me: and the rebukes of them that
rebuked thee, are fallen upon me.

10 I wept and chastened my self with fasting: and that was turned to my
reproof.

11 I put on sackcloth also: and they jested upon me.

12 They that sit in the gate, speak against me: and the drunkards make songs
upon me.

13 But, Lord, I make my prayer unto thee: in an acceptable time.

14 Hear me, O God, in the multitude of thy mercy: even in the truth of thy
salvation.

15 Take me out of the mire, that I sink not: O let me be delivered from them
that hate me, and out of the deep waters.

16 Let not the water-floud drown me, neither let the deep swallow me up: and
let not the pit shut her mouth upon me.

17 Hear me, O Lord, for thy loving kindness is comfortable: turn thee unto me
according to the multitude of thy mercies.

18 And hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble: O haste thee
and hear me.

19 Draw nigh unto my soul and save it: O deliver me because of mine enemies.

20 Thou have known my reproof, my shame, and my dishonor: mine adversaries
are all in thy sight.

21 Thy rebuke has broken my heart, I am full of heaviness: I looked for some
to have pity on me, but there was no man, neither found I any to comfort me.

22 They gave me gall to eat: and when I was thirsty, they gave me vinegar to
drink.

23 Let their table be made a snare to take themselves withal: and let the
things that should have been for their wealth, be unto them an occasion of
falling.

24 Let their eyes be blinded that they see not: and ever bow thou down their
backs.

25 Pour out thine indignation upon them: and let thy wrathful displeasure take
hold of them.

26 Let their habitation be void: and no man to dwell in their tents.

27 For they persecute him whom thou have smitten: and they talk how they may
vex them whom thou have wounded.

28 Let them fall from one wickedness to another: and not come into thy
righteousness.

29 Let them be wiped out of the book of the living: and not be written among
the righteous.

30 As for me, when I am poor and in heaviness: thy help, O God, shall lift me
up.

31 I will praise the name of God with a song: and magnify it with
thanksgiving.

32 This also shall please the Lord: better then a bullock that has horns and
hoofs.

33 The humble shall consider this and be glad: seek ye after God, and your
soul shall live.

34 For the Lord hears the poor: and despises not his prisoners.

35 Let heaven and earth praise him: the sea and all that moves therein.

36 For God will save Sion, and build the cities of Juda: that men may dwell
there, and have it in possession.

37 The posterity also of his servants shall inherit it: and they that love his
name shall dwell therein.

Deus in adjutorium. Psalm. 70.
HAste thee, O God, to deliver me: make haste to help me, O Lord.

2 Let them be ashamed and confounded, that seek after my soul: let them be
turned backward and put to confusion, that wish me evil.

3 Let them for their reward be soon brought to shame: that cry over me, There,
there.

4 But let all those that seek thee, be joyful and glad in thee: and let all
such as delight in thy salvation, say always, The Lord be praised.

5 As for me, I am poor and in misery: haste thee unto me, O God.

6 Thou art my helper and my Redeemer: O Lord, make no long tarrying.

Morning Prayer.
In te, Domine, speravi. Psalm. 71.
IN thee, O Lord, have I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion: but
rid me, and deliver me in thy righteousness; incline thine ear unto me, and
save me. DAY xiv.


2 Be thou my strong hold, whereunto I may always resort: thou have promised to
help me, for thou art my house of defense and my castle.

3 Deliver me, O my God, out of the hand of the ungodly: out of the hand of the
unrighteous and cruel man.

4 For thou, O Lord God, art the thing that I long for: thou art my hope, even
from my youth.

5 Through thee have I been holden up ever since I was born: thou art he that
took me out of my mothers womb, my praise shall be always of thee.

6 I am become as it were a monster unto many: but my sure trust is in thee.

7 O let my mouth be filled with thy praise: that I may sing of thy glory and
honor all the day long.

8 Cast me not away in the time of age: forsake me not when my strength fails
me.

9 For mine enemies speak against me, and they that lay wait for my soul, take
their counsel together, saying: God has forsaken him, persecute him and take
him, for there is none to deliver him.

10 Go not far from me, O God: my God, haste thee to help me.

11 Let them be confounded and perish, that are against my soul: let them be
covered with shame and dishonor, that seek to do me evil.

12 As for me, I will patiently abide always: and will praise thee more and more.

13 My mouth shall daily speak of thy righteousness and salvation: for I know
no end thereof.

14 I will go forth in die strength of the Lord God: and will make mention of
thy righteousness only.

15 Thou, O God, have taught me from my youth up until now: therefore will I
tell of thy wondrous works.

16 Forsake me not, O God, in mine old age, when I am grayheaded: until I have
showed thy strength unto this generation, and thy power to all them that are
yet for to come.

17 Thy righteousness, O God, is very high: and great things are they that thou
have done; O God, who is like unto thee?

18 O what great troubles and adversities have thou showed me! and yet did
thou turn and refresh me: yea, and broughtest me from the deep of the earth
again.

19 Thou have brought me to great honor: and comforted me on every side.

20 Therefore will I praise thee and thy faithfulness, O God, playing upon an
instrument of music: unto thee will I sing upon the harp, O thou holy one of
Israel.

21 My lips will be fain when I sing unto thee: and so will my soul whom thou
have delivered.

22 My tongue also shall talk of thy righteousness all the day long: for they
are confounded and brought unto shame, that seek to do me evil.

Deus, Judicium. Psalm. 72.
GIve the King thy judgments, O God: and thy righteousness unto the Kings son.

2 Then shall he judge thy people according unto right: and defend the poor.

3 The mountains also shall bring peace: and the little hills righteousness
unto the people.

4 He shall keep the simple folk by their right: defend the children of the
poor, and punish the wrong-doer.

5 They shall fear thee as long as the sun and moon endures: from one
generation to another.

6 He shall come down like the rain into a fleece of wool: even as the drops
that water the earth.

7 In his time shall the righteous flourish: yea, and abundance of peace, so
long as the moon endures.

8 His dominion shall be also from the one sea to the other: and from the flood
unto the worlds end.

9 They, that dwell in the wilderness, shall kneel before him: his enemies
shall lick the dust.

10 The kings of Tharsis, and of the isles shall give presents: the kings of
Arabia and Saba shall bring gifts.

11 All kings shall fall down before him: all nations shall do him service.

12 For he shall deliver the poor when he cries: the needy also, and him that
has no helper.

13 He shall be favorable to the simple and needy: and shall preserve the
souls of the poor.

14 He shall deliver their souls from falsehood and wrong: and dear shall their
blood be in his sight.

15 He shall live, and unto him shall be given of the gold of Arabia: prayer
shall be made ever unto him, and daily shall he be praised.

16 There shall be an heap of corn in the earth, high upon the hills: his fruit
shall shake like Libanus, and shall be green in the city like grass upon the
earth.

17 His name shall endure for ever, his name shall remain under the sun among
the posterities: which shall be blessed through him, and all the heathen shall
praise him.

18 Blessed be the Lord God, even the God of Israel: which only does wondrous
things;

19 And blessed be the Name of his Majesty for ever: and all the earth shall be
filled with his Majesty. Amen, Amen.

Evening Prayer.
Quam bonus Israel Psalm. 73.
TRuly God is loving unto Israel: even unto such as are of a clean heart.

2 Nevertheless, my feet were almost gone: my treadings had well-nigh slipped

3 And why? I was grieved at the wicked: I do also see the ungodly in such
prosperity.

4 For they are in no peril of death: but are lusty and strong.

5 They come in no misfortune like other folk: neither are they plagued like
other men.

6 And this is the cause that they are so holden with pride: and overwhelmed
with cruelty.

7 Their eyes swell with fatness: and they do even what they lust.

8 They corrupt other, and speak of wicked blasphemy: their talking is against
the most High.

9 For they stretch forth their mouth unto the heaven: and their tongue goes
through the world.

10 Therefore fall the people unto them: and thereout suck they no small
advantage.

11 Tush, say they, how should God perceive it: is there knowledge in the most
High?

12 Lo, these are the ungodly, these prosper in the world, and these have
riches in possession: and I said, Then have I cleansed my heart in vain, and
washed mine hands in innocence.

13 All the day long have I been punished: and chastned every morning.

14 Yea, and I had almost said even as they: but lo, then I should have
condemned the generation of thy children.

15 Then thought I to understand this: but it was too hard for me,

16 Until I went into the sanctuary of God: then understood I the end of these
men;

17 Namely, how thou do set them in slippery places: and castest them down,
and destroyest them.

18 Oh how suddenly do they consume: perish and come to a fearful end!

19 Yea, even like as a dream when one awaketh: so shall thou make their image
to vanish out of the city.

20 Thus my heart was grieved: and it went even through my reins.

21 So foolish was I, and ignorant: even as it were a beast before thee.

22 Nevertheless, I am always by thee: for thou have holden me by my right hand.

23 Thou shall guide me with thy counsel: and after that receive me with glory.

24 Whom have I in heaven but thee: and there is none upon earth that I desire
in comparison of thee.

25 My flesh and my heart fails: but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever.

26 For lo, they that forsake thee, shall perish: thou have destroyed all them
that commit fornication against thee.

27 But it is good for me to hold me fast by God, to put my trust in the Lord
God: and to speak of all thy works in the gates of the daughter of Sion.

Ut quid, Deus? Psalm. 74.
O God, wherefore art thou absent from us so long: why is thy wrath so hot
against the sheep of thy pasture?

2 O think upon thy congregation: whom thou have purchased, and redeemed of old.

3 Think upon the tribe of thine inheritance: and mount Sion, wherein thou have
dwelt.

4 Lift up thy feet, that thou may utterly destroy every enemy: which has
done evil in thy sanctuary.

5 Thine adversaries rore in the midst of thy congregations: and set up their
banners for tokens.

6 He that hewed timber before out of the thick trees: was known to brinng to an
excellent work.

7 But now they break down all the carved work thereof: with axes and hammers.

8 They have set fire upon thy holy places: and have defiled the dewlling place
of thy Name, even unto the ground.

9 Yea, they said in their hearts, Let us make havoc of them altogether: thus
have they burnt up all the houses of God in the land.

10 We see not our tokens, there is not one prophet more: no, not one is there
among us that understands any more. DAY xv.


11 O God, how long shall the adversary do this dishonor: how long shall the
enemy blaspheme thy Name, for ever?

12 Why withdrawest thou thy hand: why pluckest thou not thy right hand out of
thy bosom to consume the enemy?

13 For God is my King of old: the help that is done upon earth, he does it
himself.

14 Thou did divide the sea through thy power: thou brakest the heads of the
dragons in the waters.

15 Thou smotest the heads of Leviathan in pieces: and gave him to be meat
for the people in the wilderness.

16 Thou broughtest out fountains, and waters out of the hard rocks: thou
driedst up mighty waters.

17 The day is thine, and the night is thine: thou have prepared the light and
the sun.

18 Thou have set all the borders of the earth: thou have made summer and
winter.

19 Remember this, O Lord, how the enemy has rebuked: and how the foolish
people has blasphemed thy Name.

20 O deliver not the soul of thy turtle-dove unto the multitude of the
enemies: and forget not the congregation of the poor for ever.

21 Look upon the covenant: for all the earth is full of darkness and cruel
habitations.

22 O let not the simple go away ashamed: but let the poor and needy give
praise unto thy Name.

23 Arise, O God, maintain thine own cause: remember how the foolish man
blasphemeth thee daily.

24 Forget not the voice of thine enemies: the presumption of them that hate
thee, increases ever more and more.

Morning Prayer.
Confitebimur tibi. Psalm. 75.
UNto thee, O God, do we give thanks: yea, unto thee do we give thanks.

2 Thy Name also is so nigh and that do thy wondrous works declare.

3 When I receive the congregation: I shall judge according unto right.

4 The earth is weak, and all the inhabiters thereof: I bear up the pillars of
it.

5 I said unto the fools, Deal not so madly: and to the ungodly, Set not up
your horn.

6 Set not up your horn on high: and speak not with a stiff neck.

7 For promotion comes neither from the east, nor from the west: nor yet from
the south.

8 And why? God is the judge: he puts down one, and sets up another.

9 For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the wine is red: it is full
mixed, and he pours out of the same.

10 As for the dregs thereof: all the ungodly of the earth shall drink them,
and suck them out.

11 But I will talk of the God of Jacob: and praise him for ever.

12 All the horns of the ungodly also will I break: and the horns of the
righteous shall be exalted.

Notus in Judaea. Psalm. 76.
IN Jury is God known: his Name is great in Israel.

2 At Salem is his tabernacle: and his dwelling in Sion.

3 There brake he the arrows of the bow: the shield, the sword and the battle.

4 Thou art of more honor and might: then the hills of the robbers.

5 The proud are robbed, they have slept their sleep: and all the men whose
hands were mighty, have found nothing.

6 At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob: both the chariot and horse are fallen.

7 Thou, even thou art to be feared: and who may stand in thy sight when thou
art angry?

8 Thou did cause thy judgment to be heard from heaven: the earth trembled,
and was still,

9 When God arose to judgment: and to help all the meek upon earth.

10 The fierceness of man shall turn to thy praise: and the fierceness of them
shall thou refrain.

11 Promise unto the Lord your God, and keep it, all ye that are round about
him: bring presents unto him that ought to be feared.

12 He shall refrain the spirit of princes: and is wonderful among the kings of
the earth.

Voce mea ad Dominum. Psalm. 77.
I Will cry unto God with my voice: even unto God will I cry with my voice, and
he shall hearken unto me.

2 In the time of my trouble I sought the Lord; my sore ran and ceased not in
the night-season; my soul refused comfort.

3 When I am in heaviness, I will think upon God: when my heart is vexed, I
will complain.

4 Thou hold mine eyes waking: I am so feeble that I cannot speak.

5 I have considered the days of old: and the years that are past.

6 I call to remembrance my song: and in the night I commune with mine own
heart, and search out my spirits.

7 Will the Lord absent himself for ever: and will he be no more entreated?

8 Is his mercy clean gone for ever: and is his promise come utterly to an end
for evermore?

9 Has God forgotten to be gracious: and will he shut up his loving kindness
in displeasure?

10 And I said, It is mine own infirmity: but I will remember the years of the
right hand of the most Highest.

11 I will remember the works of the Lord: and call to mind thy wonders of old
time.

12 I will think also of all thy works: and my talking shall be of thy doings.

13 Thy way, O God, is holy: who is so great a God as our God?

14 Thou art the God that does wonders: and have declared thy power among the
people.

15 Thou have mightily delivered thy people: even the sons of Jacob and Joseph.

16 The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee, and were afraid: the
depths also were troubled.

17 The clouds poured out water, the air thundered: and thine arrows went abroad.

18 The voice of thy thunder was heard round about: the lightnings shone upon
the ground, the earth was moved and shook withal.

19 Thy way is in the sea, and thy paths in the great waters: and thy footsteps
are not known.

20 Thou leddest thy people like sheep: by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

Evening Prayer.
Attendite, popule. Psalm. 78.
HEar my law, O my people: incline your ears unto the words of my mouth.

2 I will open my mouth in a parable: I will declare hand sentences of old;

3 Which we have heard and known: and such as our fathers have told us;

4 That we should not hide them from the children of the generations to come:
but to show the honor of the Lord, his mighty and wonderful works that he has
done.

5 He made a covenant with Jacob, and gave Israel a law: which he commanded our
forefathers to teach their children;

6 That their posterity might know it: and the children which were yet unborn;

7 To the intent, that when they came up: they might show their children the
same;

8 That they might put their trust in God: and not to forget the works of God,
but to keep his commandments;

9 And not to be as their forefathers, a faithless and stubborn generation: a
generation that set not their heart aright, and whose spirit cleaves not
steadfastly unto God;

10 Like as the children of Ephraim: who being harnessed and carrying bows,
turned themselves back in the day of battle.

11 They kept not the covenant of God: and would not walk in his law;

12 But forgot what he had done: and the wonderful works that he had showed for
them.

13 Mavelous things did he in the sight of our forefathers, in the land of
Egypt: even in the field of Zoan.

14 He divided the sea, and let them go through: he made the waters to stand on
an heap.

15 In the daytime also he led them with a cloud: and all the night through
with a light of fire.

16 He clave the hard rocks in the wilderness: and gave them drink thereof, as
it had been out of the great depth.

17 He brought waters out of the stony rock: so that it gushed out like the
rivers.

18 Yet for all this they sinned more against him: and provoked the most
Highest in the wilderness.

19 They tempted God in their hearts: and required meat for their lust.

20 They spoke against God also, saying: Shall God prepare a table in the
wilderness?

21 He smote the stony rock indeed, that the water gushed out, and the streams
flowed withal: but can he give bread also, or provide flesh for his people?

22 When the Lord heard this, he was wroth: so the fire was kindled in Jacob,
and there came up heavy displeasure against Israel;

23 Because: they believed not in God: and put not their trust in his help.

24 So he commanded the clouds above: and opened the doors of heaven.

25 He rained down Manna also upon them for to eat: and gave them food from
heaven.

26 So man did eat angels food: for he sent them meat enough.

27 He caused the east wind to blow under heaven: and through his power he
brought in the south-west-wind.

28 He rained flesh upon them as thick as dust: and feathered fowls like as the
sand of the sea.

29 He let it fall among their tents: even round about their habitation.

30 So they did eat, and were well filled, for he gave them their own desire:
they were not disappointed of their lust.

31 But while the meat was yet in their mouths, the heavy wrath of God came
upon them, and slew the wealthiest of them: yea, and smote down the chosen men
that were in Israel.

32 But for all this they sinned yet more: and believed not his wondrous works.

33 Therefore their days did he consume in vanity: and their years in trouble.

34 When he slew them, they sought him: and turned them early, and enquired
after God.

35 And they remembered that God was their strength: and that the high God was
their Redeemer.

36 Nevertheless, they did but flatter him with their mouth: and dissemble with
him in their tongue.

37 For their heart was not whole with him: neither continued they steadfast in
his covenant.

38 But he was so merciful, that he forgave their misdeeds: and destroyed them
not.

39 Yea, many a time turned he his wrath away: and would not suffer his whole
displeasure to arise.

40 For he considered that they were but flesh: and that they were even a wind:
that passes away, and comes not again.

41 Many a time did they provoke him in the wilderness: and grieved him in the
desert.

42 They turned back and tempted God: and moved the holy One in Israel.

43 They thought not of his hand: and of the day when he delivered them from
the hand of the enemy;

44 How he had wrought his miracles in Egypt: and his wonders in the field of
Zoan.

45 He turned their waters into blood: so that they might not drink of the
rivers.

46 He sent lice among them, and devoured them up: and frogs to destroy them.

47 He gave their fruit unto the caterpillar: and the labor unto the
grasshopper.

48 He destroyed their vines with hailstones: and their mulberry-trees with
the frost.

49 He smote their cattle also with hailstones: and their flocks with hot
thunderbolts.

50 He cast upon them the furiousness of his wrath, anger, displeasure and
trouble: and sent evil angels among them.

51 He made a way to his indignation, and spared not their soul from death; but
gave their life over to the pestilence.

52 And smote all the firstborn in Egypt: the most principal and mightiest in
the dwellings of Ham.

53 But as for his own people, he led them forth like sheep: and carried them
in the wilderness like a flock.

54 He brought them out safely, that they should not fear: and overwhelmed
their enemies with the sea.

55 And brought them within the borders of his sanctuary: even to his mountain
which he purchased with his right hand.

56 He cast out the heathen also before them: caused their land to be divided
among them for an heritage, and made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their
tents.

57 So they tempted and displeased the most high God: and kept not his
testimonies;

58 But turned their backs, and fell away like their forefathers: starting a
side like a broken bow.

59 For they grieved him with their hill-altars: and provoked him to
displeasure with their images.

60 When God heard this, he was wroth: and took sore displeasure at Israel;

61 So that he forsook the tabernacle in Silo: even the tent that he had
pitched among men.

62 He delivered their power into captivity: and their beauty into the enemies
hand.

63 He gave his people over also unto the sword: and was wroth with his
inheritance.

64 The fire consumed their young men: and their maidens were not given to
marriage.

65 Their priests were slain with the sword: and there were no widows to make
lamentation. DAY xvi.


66 So the Lord awaked as one out of sleep: and like a giant refreshed with
wine.

67 He smote his enemies in the hinder parts: and put them to a perpetual shame.

68 He refused the tabernacle of Joseph: and chose not the tribe of Ephraim;

69 But chose the tribe of Juda: even the hill of Sion which he loved.

70 And there he built his temple on high: and laid the foundation of it like
the ground which he has made continually.

71 He chose David also his servant: and took him away from the sheep-folds.

72 As he was following the ews great with young ones he took him: that he
might feed Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance.

73 So he fed them with a faithful and true heart: and ruled them prudently
with all his power.

Morning Prayer.
Deus, venerunt. Psalm. 79.
O God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance: thy holy temple have they
defiled, and made Jerusalem an heap of stones.

2 The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the fowls of
the air: and the flesh of thy saints unto the beasts of the land.

3 Their blood have they shed like water on every side of Jerusalem: and there
was no man to bury them.

4 we are become an open shame to our enemies: a very scorn and derision unto
them that are round about us.

5 Lord, how long will thou be angry: shall thy jealousy burn like fire for
ever?

6 Pour out thine indignation upon the heathen that have not known thee: and
upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy Name.

7 For they have devoured Jacob: and laid waste his dewlling place.

8 O remember not our old sins, but have mercy upon us, and that soon: for we
are come to great misery.

9 Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy Name: O deliver us,
and be merciful unto our sins for thy Names sake.

10 Wherefore do the heathen say: Where is now their God?

11 O let the vengeance of thy servants blood that is shed: he openly showed
upon the heathen in our fight.

12 O let the sorrowful sighing of the prisoners come before thee: according to
the greatness of thy power, preserve thou those that are appointed to die.

13 And for the blasphemy wherewith our neighbors have blasphemed thee: reward
thou them, O Lord, sevenfold into their bosom.

14 So we that are thy people and sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks
for ever: and will always be showing forth thy praise from generation to
generation.

Qui regis Israel. Psalm. 80.
HEar, O thou shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a sheep: show
thy self also, thou that fittest upon the Cherubims.

2 Before Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasses: stir up thy strength, and come, and
help us.

3 Turn us again, O God: show the light of thy countenance, and we shall be
whole.

4 O Lord God of hosts: how long will thou be angry with thy people that
prays?

5 Thou feedest them with the bread of tears: and give them plenteousness of
tears to drink.

6 Thou have made us a very strife unto our neighbors: and our enemies laugh
us to scorn.

7 Turn us again, thou God of hosts: show the light of thy countenance, and we
shall be whole.

8 Thou have brought a vine out of Egypt: thou have cast out the heathen and
planted it.

9 Thou made room for it: and when it had taken root, it filled the land.

10 The hills where covered with the shadow of it: and the boughs thereof were
like the goodly cedar-trees.

11 She stretched out her branches unto the sea: and her boughs unto the river.

12 Why have thou then broken down her hedge: that all they that go by pluck
off her grapes?

13 The wild boar out of the wood does root it up: and the wild beasts of the
field devour it.

14 Turn thee again, thou God of hosts, look down from heaven: behold, and
visit this vine;

15 And the place of the vineyard that thy right hand has planted: and the
branch that thou made so strong for thy self.

16 It is burnt with fire and cut down: and they shall perish at the rebuke of
thy countenance.

17 Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand: and upon the son of man,
whom thou made so strong for thine own self.

18 And so will not we go back from thee: O let us live, and we shall call upon
thy Name.

19 Turn us again, O Lord God of hosts: show the light of thy countenance, and
we shall be whole.

Exultate Deo. Psalm. 81.
SIng we merrily unto God Our strength: make a cheerful noise unto the God of
Jacob.

2 Take the psalm, bring hither the tabret: the merry harp with the lute.

3 Blow up the trumpet in the new mood: even in the time appointed, and upon
our solemn feast day.

4 For this was made a statute for Israel: and a law of the God of Jacob.

5 This he ordained in Joseph for a testimony: when he came out of the land of
Egypt, and had heard a strange language.

6 I eased his shoulder from the burden: and his hands were delivered from
making the pots.

7 Thou calledst upon me in troubles, and I delivered thee: and heard thee what
time as the storm fell upon thee.

8 I proved thee also: at the waters of strife.

9 Hear, O my people, and I will assure thee, O Israel: if thou will hearken
unto me,

10 There shall no strange god be in thee: neither shall thou worship any other
god.

11 I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt: open thy
mouth wide, and I shall fill it.

12 But my people would not hear my voice: and Israel would not obey me.

13 So I gave them up unto their own hearts lusts: and let them follow their
own imaginations.

14 O that my people would have hearkened unto me: for if Israel had walked in
my ways,

15 I should soon have put down their enemies: and turned my hand against their
adversaries.

16 The haters of the Lord should have been found liars: but their time should
have endured for ever.

17 He should have fed them also with the finest wheat flour: and with honey
out of the stony rock should I have satisfied thee.

Evening Prayer.
Deus stetit Psalm. 82.
GOd stands in the congregation of princes: he is a judge among gods.

2 How long will ye give wrong judgment: and accept the persons of the ungodly?

3 Defend the poor and fatherless: see that such as are in need and necessity
have right.

4 Deliver the outcast and poor: save them from the hand of the ungodly.

5 They will not be learned nor understand, but walk on still in darkness: all
the foundations of the earth are out of course.

6 I have said, Ye are gods: and ye are all the children of the most Highest.

7 But ye shall die like men: and fall like one of the princes.

8 Arise, O God, and judge thou the earth: for thou shall take all heathen to
thine inheritance.

Deus, quis similis? Psalm. 83.
HOld not thy tongue, O God, keep not still silence: refrain not thy self, O
God.

2 For lo, thine enemies make a murmuring: and they that hate thee have lift up
their head.

3 They have imagined craftily against thy people: and taken counsel against
thy secret ones.

4 They have said, Come, and let us root them out, that they be no more a
people: and that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.

5 For they have cast their heads together with one consent: and are
confederate against thee;

6 The tabernacles of the Edomites and the Ismaelites: the Moabites and
Hagarens;

7 Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalech: the Philistines, with them that dwell at Tire.

8 Assure also is joined with them: and have helped the children of Lot.

9 But do thou to them as unto the Madianites: unto Sisera, and unto Jabin at
the brook of Kison;

10 Who perished at Endor: and became as the dung of the earth.

11 Make them and their princes like Oreb and Zeb: yea, make all their princes
like as Zeba and Salmana;

12 Who say, Let us take to our selves: the houses of God in possession.

13 O my God, make them like unto a wheel: and as the stubble before the wind;

14 Like as the fire that burns up the wood: and as the flame that consumes
the mountains.

15 Persecute them even so with thy tempest: and make them afraid with thy
storm.

16 Make their faces ashamed, O Lord: that they may seek thy Name.

17 Let them be confounded and vexed ever more and more: let them be put to
shame and perish.

18 And they shall know that thou whose Name is Jehovah: art only the most
Highest over all the earth.

Quam dilecta! Psalm. 84.
O How amiable are thy dwellings: thou Lord of hosts!

2 My soul has a desire and longing to enter into the courts of the Lord: my
heart and my flesh rejoice in the living God.

3 Yea, the sparrow has found her an house, and the swallow a nest, where she
may lay her young: even thy altars, O Lord of hosts, my King and my God.

4 Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they will be always praising thee.

5 Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee: in whose heart are thy ways.

6 Who going through the vale of misery, use it for a well: and the pools are
filled with water.

7 They will go from strength to strength: and unto the God of gods appears
every one of them in Sion.

8 O Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer: hearken O God of Jacob.

9 Behold, O God our defender: and look upon the face of thine anointed.

10 For one day in thy courts: is better then a thousand.

11 I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God: then to dwell in the
tents of ungodliness.

12 For the Lord God is a light and defense: the Lord will give grace and
worship, and no good thing shall he withhold from them that live a godly life.

13 O Lord God of hosts: blessed is the man that puts his trust in thee.

Benedixisti, Domine. Psalm. 85.
LOrd, thou art become gracious unto thy land: thou have turned away the
captivity of Jacob.

2 Thou have forgiven the offense of thy people: and covered all their sins.

3 Thou have taken away all thy displeasure: and turned thy self from thy
wrathful indignation. DAY xvii.


4 Turn us then, O God our Savior: and let thine anger cease from us.

5 Will thou be displeased at us for ever: and will thou stretch out thy wrath
from one generation to another?

6 Will thou not turn again and quicken us: that thy people may rejoice in thee?

7 Show us thy mercy, O Lord: and grant us thy salvation.

8 I will hearken what the Lord God will say concerning me: for he shall speak
peace unto his people, and to his saints, that they turn not again.

9 For his salvation is nigh them that fear him: that glory may dwell in our
land.

10 Mercy and truth are met together: righteousness and peace have kissed each
other.

11 Truth shall flourish out of the earth: and righteousness has looked down
from heaven.

12 Yea, the Lord shall show loving kindness: and our land shall give her
increase.

13 Righteousness shall go before him: and he shall direct his going in the way.

Morning Prayer.
Inclina, Domine. Psalm. 86.
BOW down thine ear, O Lord, and hear me: for I am poor and in misery.

2 Preserve thou my soul, for I am holy: my God, save thy servant that puts
his trust in thee.

3 Be merciful unto me, O Lord: for I will call daily upon thee.

4 Comfort the soul of thy servant: for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.

5 For thou, Lord, art good and gracious: and of great mercy unto all them that
call upon thee.

6 Give ear, Lord, unto my prayer: and ponder the voice of my humble desires.

7 In the time of my trouble I will call upon thee: for thou hear me.

8 Among the Gods there is none like unto thee, O Lord: there is not one that
can do as thou do.

9 All nations whom thou have made, shall come and worship thee, O Lord: and
shall glorify thy Name.

10 For thou art great, and do wondrous things: thou art God alone.

11 Teach me thy way, O Lord, and I will walk in thy truth: O knit my heart
unto thee, that I may fear thy Name.

12 I will thank thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart: and will praise thy
Name for evermore.

13 For great is thy mercy toward me: and thou have delivered my soul from the
nethermost hell.

14 O God, the proud are risen against me: and the congregations of naughty men
have sought after my soul, and have not set thee before their eyes.

15 But thou, O Lord God, art full of compassion and mercy: long-suffering,
plenteous in goodness and truth.

16 O turn thee then unto me, and have mercy upon me: give thy strength unto
thy servant, and help the son of thine handmaid.

17 Show some token upon me for good, that they who hate me may see it and be
ashamed: because thou, Lord, have helped me, and comforted me.

Fundamenta ejus. Psalm. 87.
HEr foundations are upon the holy hills: the Lord loves the gates of Sion
more then all the dwellings of Jacob.

2 Very excellent things are spoken of thee: thou city of God.

3 I will think upon Rahab and Babylon: with them that know me.

4 Behold ye the Philistines also: and they of Tire, with the Morians, lo,
there was he born.

5 And of Sion it shall be reported, that he was born in her: and the most High
shall stablish her.

6 The Lord shall rehearse it when he writes up the people: that he was born
there.

7 The singers also and trumpeters shall he rehearse: all my fresh springs
shall be in thee.

Domine Deus. Psalm. 88.
O Lord God of my salvation, I have cried day and night before thee: O let my
prayer enter into thy presence, incline thine ear unto my calling.

2 For my soul is full of trouble: and my life draws nigh unto hell.

3 I am counted as one of them that go down into the pit: and I have been even
as a man that has no strength.

4 Free among the dead, like unto them that are wounded, and lie in the grave:
who are out of remembrance, and are cut away from thy hand.

5 Thou have laid me in the lowest pit: in a place of darkness and in the deep.

6 Thine indignation lies hard upon me: and thou have vexed me with all thy
storms.

7 Thou have put away mine acquaintance far from me: and made me to be abhorred
of them.

8 I am so fast in prison: that I cannot get forth.

9 My sight fails for very trouble: Lord, I have called daily upon thee, I
have stretched forth my hands unto thee.

10 Do thou show wonders among the dead: or shall the dead rise up again, and
praise thee?

11 Shall thy loving kindness be showed in the grave: or thy faithfulness in
destruction?

12 Shall thy wondrous works be known in the dark: and thy righteousness in the
land where all things are forgotten?

13 Unto thee have I cried, O Lord: and early shall my prayer come before thee.

14 Lord, why abhorrest thou my soul: and hidest thou thy face from me?

15 I am in misery, and like unto him that is at the point to die: even from my
youth up thy terrors have I suffered with a troubled mind.

16 Thy wrathful displeasure goes over me: and the fear of thee has undone me.

17 They came round about me daily like water: and compassed me together on
every side.

18 My lovers and friends have thou put away from me: and hid mine acquaintance
out of my sight.

Evening Prayer.
Misericondias Domini. Psalm. 89.
MY song shall be always of the loving kindness of the Lord: with my mouth will
I ever be showing thy truth from one generation to another.

2 For I have said, Mercy shall be set up for ever: thy truth shall thou
stablish in the heavens.

3 I have made a covenant with my chosen: I have sworn unto David my servant,

4 Thy seed will I stablish for ever: and set up thy throne from one generation
to another.

5 O Lord, the very heavaens shall praise thy wondrous works: and thy truth in
the congregation of the saints.

6 For who is he among the clouds: that shall be compared unto the Lord?

7 And what is he among the gods: that shall be like unto the Lord?

8 God is very greatly to be feared in the council of the saints: and to be had
in reverence of all them that are round about him.

9 O Lord God of hosts, who is like unto thee: thy truth, most mighty Lord, is
on every side.

10 Thou rulest the raging of the sea: thou stillest the waves thereof when
they arise.

11 Thou have subdued Egypt and destroyed it: thou have scattered thine enemies
abroad with thy mighty arm.

12 The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine: thou have laid the
foundation of the round world, and all that therein is.

13 Thou have made the north and the south: Tabor and Hermon shall rejoice in
thy Name.

14 Thou have a mighty arm: strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand.

15 Righteousness and equity are the habitation of thy seat: mercy and truth
shall go before thy face.

16 Blessed is the people, O Lord, that can rejoice in thee: they shall walk in
the light of thy countenance.

17 Their delight shall be daily in thy Name: and in thy righteousness shall
they make their boast.

18 For thou art the glory of their strength: and in thy loving kindness thou
shall lift up our horns.

19 For the Lord is our defense: the holy One of Israel is our King.

20 Thou spakest sometime in visions unto thy saints, and said: I have laid
help upon one that is mighty, I have exalted one chosen out of the people.

21 I have found David my servant: with my holy oil have I anointed him.

23 The enemy shall not be able to do him violence: the son of wickedness shall
not hurt him.

24 I will smite down his foes before his face: and plague them that hate him.

25 My truth also and my mercy shall be with him: and in my Name shall his horn
be exalted.

26 I will set his dominion also in the sea: and his right hand in the floods.

27 He shall call me, Thou art my Father: my God, and my strong salvation.

28 And I will make him my firstborn: higher then the kings of the earth.

29 My mercy will I keep for him for evermore: and my covenant shall stand fast
with him.

30 His seed also will I make to endure for ever: and his throne as the days of
heaven.

31 But if his children forsake my law: and walk not in my judgments;

32 If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments: I will visit their
offenses with the rod, and their sin with scourges.

33 Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him: nor
suffer my truth to fail.

34 My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my
lips: I have sworn once by my holiness, that I will not fail David.

35 His seed shall endure for ever: and his seat is like as the sun before me.

36 He shall stand fast for evermore as the moon: and as the faithful witness
in heaven.

37 But thou have abhorred and forsaken thine Anointed: and art displeased at
him.

38 Thou have broken the covenant of thy servant: and cast his crown to the
ground.

39 Thou have overthrown all his hedges: and broken down his strong holds.

40 All they that go by spoil him: and he is become a reproach to his neighbors.

41 Thou have set up the right hand of his enemies: and made all his
adversaries to rejoice.

42 Thou have taken away me edge of his sword: and give him not victory in
the battle.

43 Thou have put out his glory: and cast his throne down to the ground.

44 The days of his youth have thou shortened: and covered him with dishonor.

45 Lord how long will thou hide thy self, for ever: and shall thy wrath burn
like fire?

46 O remember how short my time is: wherefore have thou made all men for
naught?

47 What man is he that lives, and shall not see death: and shall he deliver
his soul from the hand of hell? DAY xviii.


48 Lord, where are thy old loving kindnesses: which thou swarest unto David in
thy truth?

49 Remember, Lord, the rebuke that thy servants have: and how I do bear in my
bosom the rebukes of many people;

50 Wherewith thine enemies have blasphemed thee, and slandered the footsteps
of thine Anointed: praised be the Lord for evermore. Amen, and Amen.

Morning Prayer.
Domine, refugium. Psalm. 90.
LOrd, thou have been our refuge: from one generation to another.

2 Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever the earth and the world
were made: thou art God from everlasting, and world without end.

3 Thou turnest man to destruction: again thou say, Come again, ye children
of men.

4 For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday: seeing that is past
as a watch in the night.

5 As Soon as thou scatterest them, they are even as a sleep: and fade away
suddenly like the grass.

6 In the morning it is green, and grows up: but in the evening it is cut
down, dried up, and withered.

7 For we consume away in thy displeasure: and are afraid at thy wrathful
indignation.

8 Thou have set our misdeeds before thee: and our secret sins in the light of
thy countenance.

9 For when thou art angry, all our days are gone: we bring our years to an
end, as it were a tale that is told.

10 The days of our age are threescore years and ten, and though men be so
strong that they come to fourscore years: yet is their strength then but labor
and sorrow; so soon passes it away, and we are gone.

11 But who regards the power of thy wrath: for even thereafter as a man
fears, so is thy displeasure.

12 So teach us to number our days: that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.

13 Turn thee again, O Lord, at the last: and be gracious unto thy servants.

14 O satisfy us with thy mercy, and that soon: so shall we rejoice and be
glad all the days of our life.

15 Comfort us again after the time that thou have plagued us: and for the
years wherein we have suffered adversity.

16 Show thy servants thy work: and their children thy glory.

17 And thy glorious Majesty of the Lord our God be upon us: prosper thou the
work of our hands upon us, O prosper thou our handiwork.

Qui habitat. Psalm. 91.
Whosoever dwells under the defense of the most High: shall abide under the
shadow of the Almighty.

2 I will say unto the Lord, Thou art my hope, and my strong hold: my God, in
him will I trust.

3 For he shall deliver thee from the snare of the hunter: and from the noisome
pestilence.

4 He shall defend thee under his wings, and thou shall be safe under his
feathers: his faithfulness and truth shall be thy shield and buckler.

5 Thou shall not be afraid for any terror by night: nor for the arrow that
flies by day;

6 For the pestilence that walks in darkness: nor for the sickness that
destroys in the noonday.

7 A thousand shall fall beside thee, and ten thousand at thy right hand: but
it shall not come nigh thee.

8 Yea, with thine eyes shall thou behold: and see the reward of the ungodly.

9 For thou, Lord, art my hope: thou have set thine house of defense very high.

10 There shall no evil happen unto thee: neither shall any plague come nigh
thy dwelling.

11 For he shall give his angels charge over thee: to keep thee in all thy ways.

12 They shall bear thee in their hands: that thou hurt not thy foot against a
stone.

13 Thou shall go upon the lion and adder: the young lion and the dragon shall
thou tread under thy feet.

14 Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will
set him up, because he has known my Name.

15 He shall call upon me, and I will hear him: yea, I am with him in trouble;
I will deliver him, and bring him to honor.

16 With long life will I satisfy him: and show him my salvation.

Bonum est confiteri. Psalm. 92.
IT is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord: and to sing praises unto thy
Name, O most Highest;

2 To tell of thy loving kindness early in the morning: and of thy truth in the
night-season;

3 Upon an instrument of ten strings, and upon the lute: upon a loud
instrument, and upon the harp.

4 For thou, Lord, have made me glad through thy works: and I will rejoice in
giving praise for the operation of thy hands.

5 O Lord, how glorious are thy works: thy thoughts are very deep.

6 An unwise man does not well consider this: and a fool does not understand it.

7 When the ungodly are green as the grass, and when all the workers of
wickedness do flourish: then shall they be destroyed for ever; but thou, Lord,
art the most Highest for evermore.

8 For lo, thine enemies, O Lord, lo thine enemies shall perish: and all the
workers of wickedness shall be destroyed.

9 But mine horn shall be exalted like the horn of an unicorn: for I am
anointed with fresh oil.

10 Mine eye also shall see his lust of mine enemies: and mine ear shall hear
his desire of the wicked that arise up against me.

11 The righteous shall flourish like a palm tree: and shall spread abroad like
a cedar in Libanus.

12 Such as be planted in the house of the Lord: shall flourish in the courts
of the house of our God.

13 They also shall bring forth more frouit in their age: and shall be fat and
well liking.

14 That they may show how true the Lord my strength is: and that there is no
unrighteousness in him.

Evening Prayer.
Dominus regnavit. Psalm. 93.
THe Lord is King, and has put on glorious apparel: the Lord has put on his
apparel, and girded himself with strength.

2 He has made the round world so sure: that it cannot be moved.

3 Ever since the world began has thy seat been prepared: thou art from
everlasting.

4 The floods are risen, O Lord, the floods have lift up their voice: the
floods lift up their waves.

5 The waves of the sea are mighty, and rage horribly: but yet the Lord, who
dwells on high is mightier.

6 Thy testimonies, O Lord, are very sure: holiness becomes thine house for
ever.

Deus ultionum. Psalm. 94.
O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongs: thou God, to whom vengeance
belongs, show thy self.

2 Arise, thou judge of the world: and reward the proud after their deserving.

3 Lord, how long shall the ungodly: how long shall the ungodly triumph?

4 How long shall all wicked doers speak so disdainfully: and make such proud
boasting?

5 They smite down thy people, O Lord: and trouble thine heritage.

6 They murder the widow, and the stranger: and put the fatherless to death.

7 And yet they say, Tush, the Lord shall not see: neither shall the God of
Jacob regard it.

8 Take heed, ye unwise among the people: O ye fools, when will ye understand?

9 He that planted the ear, shall he not hear: or he that made the eye, shall
he not see?

10 Or he that nurtureth the heathen: it is he that teaches man knowledge,
shall not he punish?

11 The Lord knows the thoughts of man: that they are but vain.

12 Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest O Lord: and teach him in thy law.

13 That thou may give him patience in time of adversity: until the pit be
dug up for the ungodly.

14 For the Lord will not fail his people: neither will he forsake his
inheritance;

15 Until righteousness turn again unto judgment: all such as are true in heart
shall follow it.

16 Who will rise up with me against the wicked: or who will take my part
against the evil doers?

17 If the Lord had not helped me: it had not failed but my soul had been put
to silence.

18 But when I said, My foot has slipped: thy mercy, O Lord, held me up.

19 In the multitude of the sorrows that I had in my heart: thy comforts have
refreshed my soul.

20 Will thou have any thing to do with the stool of wickedness: which
imagines mischief as a law?

21 They gather them together against the soul of the righteous: and condemn
the innocent blood.

22 But the Lord is my refuge: and my God is the strength of my confidence. DAY
xix.


23 He shall recompense them their wickedness, and destroy them in their own
malice: yea, the Lord our God shall destroy them.

Morning Prayer.
Venite, exultemus. Psalm. 95.
O Come, let us sing unto the Lord: let us heartily rejoice in the strength of
our salvation.

2 Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving: and show our selves glad
in him with psalms.

3 For the Lord is a great God: and a great King above all gods.

4. In his hand are all the corners of the earth: and the strength of the hills
is his also.

5 The sea is his, and he made it: and his hands prepared the dry land.

6 O come, let us worship, and fall down: and kneel before the Lord our Maker.

7 For he is the Lord our God: and we are the people of his pasture, and the
sheep of his hand.

8 To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: as in the
provocation, and as in the day of temptation in the wilderness;

9 When your fathers tempted me: proved me, and saw my works.

10 Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and said: It is a
people that do err in their hearts, for they have not known my ways;

11 Unto whom I swear in my wrath: that they should not enter into my rest.

Cantate Domino. Psalm. 96.
O Sing unto the Lord a new song: sing unto the Lord, all the whole earth.

2 Sing unto the Lord, and praise his Name: be telling of his salvation from
day to day.

3 Declare his honor unto the heathen: and his wonders unto all people.

4 For the Lord is great, and cannot worthily be praised: he is more to be
feared then all gods.

5 As for all the gods of the heathen, they are but idols: but it is the Lord
that made the heavens.

6 Glory and worship are before him: power and honor are in his sanctuary.

7 Ascribe unto the Lord, O ye kindreds of the people: ascribe unto the Lord
worship and power.

8 Ascribe unto the Lord the honor due unto his Name: bring presents, and come
into his courts.

9 O worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness: let the whole earth stand in
awe of him.

10 Tell it out among the heathen, that the Lord is King: and that it is he who
has made the round world so fast that it cannot be moved, and how that he
shall judge the people righteously.

11 Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad: let the sea make a
noise, and all that therein is.

12 Let the field be joyful, and all that is in it: then shall all the trees of
the wood rejoice before the Lord.

13 For he comes, for he comes to judge the earth: and with righteousness to
judge the world, and the people with his truth.

Dominus regnavit. Psalm. 97.
THe Lord is King, the earth may be glad thereof: yea, the multitude of the
isles may be glad thereof.

2 Clouds and darkness are round about him: righteousness and judgment are the
habitation of his seat.

3 There shall go a fire before him: and burn up his enemies on every side.

4 His lightnings gave shine unto the world: the earth saw it, and was afraid.

5 The hills melted like wax at the presence of the Lord: at the presence of
the Lord of the whole earth.

6 The heavens have declared his righteousness: and all the people have seen
his glory.

7 Confounded be all they that worship carved images, and that delight in vain
gods: worship him, all ye gods.

8 Sion heard of it, and rejoiced: and the daughters of Juda were glad, because
of thy judgments, O Lord.

9 For thou, Lord, art higher then all that are in the earth: thou art exalted
far above all gods.

10 O ye that love the Lord, see that ye hate the thing which is evil: the Lord
preserves the souls of his saints; he shall deliver them from the hand of the
ungodly.

11 There is sprung up a light for the righteous: and joyful gladness for such
as are true-hearted.

12 Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous: and give thanks for a remembrance of his
holiness.

Evening Prayer.
Cantate Domino. Psalm. 98.
O Sing unto the Lord a new song: for he has done mavelous things.

2 With his own right hand, and with his holy arm: has he gotten himself the
victory.

3 The Lord declared his salvation: his righteousness has he openly showed in
the sight of the heathen.

4 He has remembered his mercy and truth toward the house of Israel: and all
the ends of the world have seen the salvation of our God.

5 Show your selves joyful unto the Lord, all ye lands: sing, rejoice and give
thanks.

6 Praise the Lord upon the harp: sing to the harp with a psalm of thanksgiving.

7 With trumpets also and shawms: O show your selves joyful before the Lord the
King.

8 Let the sea make a noise, and all that therein is: the round world, and they
that dwell therein.

9 Let the floods clap their hands, and let the hills be joyful together before
the Lord: for he is come to judge the earth.

10 With righteousness shall he judge the world: and the people with equity.

Dominus regnavit. Psalm. 99.
THe Lord is King, be the people never so unpatient: he sits between the
Cherubims, be the earth never so unquiet.

2 The Lord is great in Sion: and high above all people.

3 They shall give thanks unto thy Name: which is great, wonderful, and holy.

4 The kings power loves judgment, thou have prepared equity: thou have
executed judgment, and righteousness in Jacob.

5 O magnify the Lord our God: and fall down before his footstool, for he is
holy.

6 Moses and Aaron among his priest, and Samuel among such as call upon his
Name: these called upon the Lord, and he heard them.

7 He spoke unto them out of the cloudy pillar: for they kept his testimonies,
and the law that he gave them.

8 Thou heardest them, O Lord our God: thou forgavest them, O God, and
punishedst their own inventions.

9 O magnify the Lord our God, and worship him upon his holy hill: for the
Lord our God is holy.

Jubilate Deo. Psalm. 100.
O Be joyful in the Lord, all ye lands: serve the Lord with gladness, and come
before his presence with a song. DAY xx.


2 Be ye sure, that the Lord he is God; it is he that has made us, and not we
our selves: we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.

3 O go your way into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with
praise: be thankful unto him, and speak good of his Name.

4 For the Lord is gracious, his mercy is everlasting: and his truth endures
from generation to generation.

Misericordiam and judicium. Psalm. 101.
MY song shall be of mercy and judgment: unto thee, O Lord, will I sing.

2 O let me have understanding: in the way of godliness.

3 When will thou come unto me: I will walk in my house with a perfect heart.

4 I will take no wicked thing in hand; I hate the sins of unfaithfulness:
there shall no such cleave unto me.

5 A froward heart shall depart from me: I will not know a wicked person.

6 Whosoever privily slandereth his neighbor: him will I destroy.

7 Whosoever has also a proud look and high stomach: I will not suffer him.

8 Mine eyes look upon such as are faithful in the land: that they may dwell
with me.

9 Whosoever leads a godly life: he shall be my servent.

10 There shall1 no deceitful person dwell in my house: he that tells lies,
shall not tarry in my sight.

11 I shall soon destroy all the ungodly that are in the land: that I may root
out all wicked doers from the city of the Lord.

Morning Prayer.
Domine, exaudi. Psalm. 102.
HEar my prayer, O Lord: and let my crying come unto thee.

2 Hide not thy face from me in the time of my trouble: incline thine ears unto
me when I call; O hear me, and that right soon.

3 For any days are consumed away like smoke: and my bones are burnt up as it
were a firebrand.

4 My heart is smitten down, and withered like grass: so that I forget to eat
my bread.

5 For the voice of my groaning: my bones will scarce cleave to my flesh.

6 I am become like a pelican in the wilderness: and like an owl that is in the
desert.

7 I have watched, and am even as it were a sparrow: that sits alone upon
the housetop.

8 Mine enemies revile me all the day long: and they that are mad upon me, are
sworn together against me.

9 For I have eaten ashes as it were bread: and mingled my drink with weeping;

10 And that because of thine indignation and wrath: for thou have taken me up,
and cast me down.

11 My days are gone like a shadow: and I am withered like grass.

12 But thou, O Lord, shall endure for ever: and thy remembrance throughout all
generations.

13 Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Sion: for it is time that thou have
mercy upon her, yea, the time is come.

14 And why? thy servants think upon her stones: and it pitieth them to see her
in the dust.

15 The heathen shall fear thy Name, O Lord: and all the kings of the earth thy
Majesty;

16 When the Lord shall build up Sion: and when his glory shall appear;

17 When he turns him unto the prayer of the poor destitute: and despises
not their desire.

18 This shall be written for those that come after: and the people which shall
be born shall praise the Lord.

19 For he has looked down from his sanctuary: out of the heaven did the Lord
behold the earth;

20 That he might hear the mournings of such as are in captivity. and deliver
the children appointed unto death;

21 That they may declare the Name of the Lord in Sion: and his worship at
Jerusalem;

22 When the people are gathered together: and the kingdoms also to serve the
Lord.

23 He brought down my strength in my journey: and shortened my days.

24 But I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of mine age: as for thy
years, they endure throughout all generations.

25 Thou, Lord, in the beginning have laid the foundation of the earth: and the
heavens are the work of thy hands.

26 They shall perish, but thou shall endure: they all shall wax old as does a
garment,

27 And as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed: but
thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail.

28 The children of thy servants shall continue: and their seed shall stand
fast in thy sight.

Benedic, anima mea. Psalm. 103.
PRaise the Lord, O my soul: and all that is within me praise his holy Name.

2 Praise the Lord O my soul: and forget not all his benefits;

3 Who forgiveth all thy sin: and heals all thine infirmities;

4 Who saves thy life from destruction: and crowns thee with mercy and
loving kindness;

5 Who satisfies thy mouth with good things: making thee young and lusty as an
eagle.

6 The Lord executes righteousness and judgment: for all them that are
oppressed with wrong.

7 He showed his ways unto Moses: his works unto the children of Israel.

8 The Lord is full of compassion and mercy: long-suffering and of great
goodness.

9 He will not always be chiding: neither keeps he his anger for ever.

10 He has not dealt with us after our sins: nor rewarded us according to our
wickednesses.

11 For look how high the heaven is in comparison of the earth: so great is his
mercy also toward them that fear him.

12 Look how wide also the east is from the west: so far has he set our sins
from us.

13 Yea, like as a father pitieth his own children: even so is the Lord
merciful unto them that fear him.

14 For he knows whereof we are made: he remembers that we are but dust.

15 The days of man are but as grass: for he flourishes as a flower of the
field.

16 For as soon as the wind goes over it, it is gone: and the place thereof
shall know it no more.

17 But the merciful goodness of the Lord endures for ever and ever upon them
that fear him: and his righteousness upon childrens children;

18 Even upon such as keep his covenant: and think upon his commandments to do
them.

19 The Lord has prepared his seat in heaven: and his kingdom rules over all.

20 O praise the Lord, ye angels of his, ye that excel in strength: ye that
fulfill his commandment, and hearken unto the voice of his words.

21 O praise the Lord, all ye his hosts: ye servants of his that do his
pleasure.

22 O speak good of the Lord, all ye works of his, in all places of his
dominion: praise thou the Lord, O my soul.

Evening Prayer.
Benedic, anima mea. Psalm. 104.
PRaise the Lord, O my soul: O Lord my God, thou art become exceeding glorious,
thou art clothed with majesty and honor.

2 Thou deckest thy self with light as it were with a garment: and spreadest
out the heavens like a curtain.

3 Who lays the beams of his chambers in the waters: and makes the clouds
his chariot, and walks upon the wings of the wind.

4 He makes his Angels spirits: and his ministers a flaming fire.

5 He laid the foundations of the earth: that it never should move at any time.

6 Thou coveredst it with the deep like as with a garment: the waters stand in
the hills.

7 At thy rebuke they flee: at the voice of thy thunder they are afraid.

8 They go up as high as the hills, and down to the valleys beneath: even unto
the place which thou have appointed for them.

9 Thou have set them their bounds which they shall not pass: neither turn
again to cover the earth.

10 He sends the springs into the rivers: which run among the hills.

11 All beasts of the field drink thereof: and the wild asses quench their
thirst.

12 Beside them shall the fowls of the air have their habitation: and sing
among the branches.

13 He waters the hills from above: the earth is filled with the fruit of thy
works.

14 He brings forth grass for the cattle: and green herb for the service of
men.

15 That he may bring food out of the earth, and wine that makes glad the
heart of man: and oil to make him a cheerful countenance, and bread to
strengthen man's heart.

16 The trees of the Lord also are full of sap: even the cedars of Libanus
which he has planted.

17 Wherein the birds make their nests: and the fir-trees are a dwelling for
the stork.

18 The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats: and so are the stony rocks
for the conies.

19 He appointed the moon for certain seasons: and the sun knows his going
down.

20 Thou make darkness that it may be night: wherein all the beasts of the
forest do move.

21 The lions roaring after their prey: do seek their meat from God.

22 The sun arises, and they get them away together: and lay them down in
their dens.

23 Man goes forth to his work, and to his labor: until the evening.

24 O Lord, how manifold are thy works: in wisdom have thou made them all, the
earth is full of thy riches.

25 So is the great and wide sea also: wherein are things creeping innumerable,
both small and great beasts.

26 There go the ships, and there is that Leviathan: whom thou have made to
take his pastime therein.

27 These wait all upon thee: that thou may give them meat in due season.

28 When thou give it them, they gather it: and when thou openest thy hand,
they are filled with good.

29 When thou hidest thy face, they are troubled: when thou take away their
breath, they die, and are turned again to their dust.

30 When thou let thy breath go forth, they shall be made: and thou shall
renew the face of the earth.

31 The glorious Majesty of the Lord shall endure for ever: the Lord shall
rejoice in his works.

32 The earth shall tremble at the look of him: if he do but touch the hills,
they shall smoke.

33 I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live: I will praise my God while I
have my being.

34 And so shall my words please him: my joy shall be in the Lord.

35 As for sinners they shall be consumed out of the earth, and the ungodly
shall come to an end: praise thou the Lord, O my soul, praise the Lord.

Morning Prayer.
Confitemini Domino. Psalm. 105.
O Give thanks unto the Lord, and call upon his Name: tell the people what
things he has done. DAY xxi.


2 O let your songs be of him, and praise him: and let your talking be of all
his wondrous works.

3 Rejoice in his holy Name: let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord.

4 Seek the Lord and his strength: seek his face evermore.

5 Remember the mavelous works that he has done: his wonders and the
judgments of his mouth;

6 O ye seed of Abraham his servant: ye children of Jacob his chosen.

7 He is the Lord our God: his judgments are in all the world.

8 He has been always mindful of his covenant and promise: that he made to a
thousand generations;

9 Even the covenant that he made with Abraham: and the oath that he swear unto
Isaac;

10 And appointed the same unto Jacob for a law: and to Israel for an
everlasting testament,

11 Saying, Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan: the lot of your
inheritance.

12 When there were yet but a few of them: and they strangers in the land;

13 What time as they went from one nation to another: from one kingdom to
another pople;

14 He suffered no man to do them wrong: but reproved even kings for their
sakes.

15 Touch not mine Anointed: and do my prophets no harm.

16 Moreover, he called for a dearth upon the land: and destroyed all the
provision of bread.

17 But he had sent a man before them: even Joseph, who was sold to be a
bond-servant;

18 Whose feet they hurt in the stocks: the iron entered into his soul;

19 Until the time came that his cause was known: the word of the Lord tried
him.

20 The king sent, and delivered him: the prince of the people let him go free.

21 He made him lord also of his house: and ruler of all his substance;

22 That he might inform his princes after his will: and teach his senators
wisdom.

23 Israel also came into Egypt: and Jacob was a stranger in the land of Ham.

24 And he increased his people exceedingly: and made them stronger then their
enemies;

25 Whose heart turned so, that they hated his people: and dealt untruly with
his servants.

26 Then sent he Moses his servant: and Aaron whom he had chosen.

27 And these showed his tokens among them and wonders in the land of Ham.

28 He sent darkness, and it was dark: and they were not obedient unto his word.

29 He turned their waters into blood: and slew their fish.

30 Their land brought forth frogs: yea, even in their kings chambers.

31 He spoke the word, and there came all manner of flies: and lice in all
their quarters.

32 He gave them hailstones for rain: and flames of fire in their land.

33 He smote their vines also and fig trees: and destroyed the trees that were
in their coasts.

34 He spoke the word, and the grasshoppers came, and caterpillars innumerable:
and did eat up all the grass in their land, and devoured the fruit of their
ground.

35 He smote all the firstborn in their land: even the chief of all their
strength.

36 He brought them forth also with silver and gold: there was not one feeble
person among their tribes.

37 Egypt was glad at their departing: for they were afraid of them.

38 He spread out a cloud to be a covering: and fire to give light in the
night-season.

39 At their desire he brought quails: and he filled them with the bread of
heaven.

40 He opened the rock of stone, and the waters flowed out: so that rivers ran
in the dry places.

41 For why? he remembered his holy promise: and Abraham his servant.

42 And he brought forth his people with joy: and his chosen with gladness;

43 And gave them the lands of the heathen: and they took the labors of the
people in possession;

44 That they might keep his statutes: and observe his laws.

Evening Prayer.
Confitemini Domino. Psalm. 106.
O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: and his mercy endures for
ever.

2 Who can express the noble acts of the Lord: or show forth all his praise?

3 Blessed are they that always keep judgment: and do righteousness.

4 Remember me, O Lord, according to the favor that thou bear unto thy
people: O visit me with thy salvation.

5 That I may see the felicity of thy chosen: and rejoice in the gladness of
thy people, and give thanks with thine inheritance.

6 We have sinned with our fathers: we have done amiss, and dealt wickedly.

7 Our fathers regarded not thy wonders in Egypt, neither kept they thy great
goodness in remembrance: but were disobedient at the sea, even at the Red sea.

8 Nevertheless, he helped them for his Names sake: that he might make his
power to be known.

9 He rebuked the Red sea also, and it was dried up: so he led them through the
deep, as through a wilderness.

10 And he saved them from the adversaries hand: and delivered them from the
hand of the enemy.

11 As for those that troubled them, the waters overwhelmed them: there was not
one of them left.

12 Then believed they his words: and sang praise unto him.

13 But within a while they forgot his works: and would not abide his counsel.

14 But lust came upon them in the wilderness: and they tempted God in the
desert.

15 And he gave them their desire: and sent leanness withal into their soul.

16 They angered Moses also in the tents: and Aaron the saint of the Lord.

17 So the earth opened, and swallowed up Dathan: and covered the congregation
of Abiram.

18 And the fire was kindled in their company: the flame burnt up the ungodly.

19 They made a calf in Horeb: and worshipped the molten image.

20 Thus they turned their glory: into the similitude of a calf that eats hay.

21 And they forgot God their Savior: who had done so great things in Egypt;

22 Wondrous works in the land of Ham: and fearful things by the Red sea.

23 So he said he would have destroyed them, had not Moses his chosen stood
before him in the gap: to turn away his wrathful indignation, left he should
destroy them.

24 Yea, they thought scorn of that pleasant land: and gave no credence unto
his word.

25 But murmured in their tents: and hearkened not unto the voice of the Lord.

26 Then lift he up his hand against them: to overthrow them in the wilderness;

27 To cast out their seed among the nations: and to scatter them in the lands.

28 They joined themselves unto Baal-peor: and ate the offerings of the dead.

29 Thus they provoked him to anger with their own inventions: and the plague
was great among them.

30 Then stood up Phinees and prayed: and so the plague ceased.

31 And that was counted unto him for righteousness: among all posterities for
evermore.

32 They angered him also at the waters of strife: so that he punished Moses for
their sakes;

33 Because they provoked his spirit: so that he spoke unadvisedly with his
lips.

34 Neither destroyed they the heathen: as the Lord commanded them;

35 But were mingled among the heathen: and learned their works.

36 Insomuch that they worshipped their idols, which turned to their own decay:
yea, they offered their sons and their daughters unto devils,

37 And shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and of their
daughters: whom they offered unto the idols of Canaan, and the land was defiled
with blood.

38 Thus were they stained with their own works: and went a whoring with their
own inventions.

39 Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people: insomuch
that he abhorred his own inheritance.

40 And he gave them over into the hand of the heathen: and they that hated
them, were lords over them.

41 Their enemies oppressed them: and had them in subjection.

42 Many a time did he deliver them: but they rebelled against him with their
own inventions, and were brought down in their wickedness. DAY xxii.


43 Nevertheless, when he saw their adversity: he heard their complaint.

44 He thought upon his covenant, and pitied them, according unto the multitude
of his mercies: yea, he made all those that led them away captive to pity them.

45 Deliver us, O Lord our God, and gather us from among the heathen: that we
may give thanks unto thy holy Name, and make our boast of thy praise.

46 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting, and world without end:
and let all the people say, Amen.

Morning Prayer.
Confitemini Domino. Psalm. 107.
O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: and his mercy endures for
ever.

2 Let them give thanks whom the Lord has redeemed: and delivered from the
hand of the enemy;

3 And gathered them out of the lands, from the east, and from the west: from
the north, and from the south.

4 They went astray in the wilderness out of the way: and found no city to
dwell in;

5 Hungry and thirsty: their soul fainted in them.

6 So they cried unto the Lord in their trouble: and he delivered them from
their distress.

7 He led them forth by the right way: that they might go to the city where
they dwelt.

8 O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness: and declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men!

9 For he satisfies the empty soul: and fills the hungry soul with goodness;

10 Such as sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death: being fast bound in
misery and iron.

11 Because they rebelled against the words of the Lord: and lightly regarded
the counsel of the most Highest;

12 He also brought down their heart through heaviness: they fell down, and
there was none to help them.

13 So when they cried unto the Lord in their trouble: he delivered them out of
their distress.

14 For he brought them out of darkness, and out of the shadow of death: and
brake their bonds in sunder.

15 O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness: and declare
the wonders that he does for the children of men!

16 For he has broken the gates of brass: and smitten the bars of iron in
sunder.

17 Foolish men are plagued for their offense: and because of their wickedness.

18 Their soul abhorred all manner of meat: and they were even hard at deaths
door.

19 So when they cried unto the Lord in their trouble: he delivered them out of
their distress.

20 He sent his word, and healed them: and they were saved from their
destruction.

21 O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness: and declare
the wonders that he does for the children of men!

22 That they would offer unto him the sacrifice of thanksgiving: and tell out
his works with gladness!

23 They that go down to the sea in ships: and occupy their business in great
waters,

24 These men see the works of the Lord: and his wonders in the deep.

25 For at his word the stormy wind arises: which lifts up the waves thereof.

26 They are carried up to the heaven, and down again to the deep: their soul
melts away because of the trouble.

27 They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man: and are at their wits
end.

28 So when they cry unto the Lord in their trouble: he delivers them out of
their distress.

29 For he makes the storm to cease: so that the waves thereof are still.

30 Then are they glad, because they are at rest: and so he brings them unto
the haven where they would be.

31 O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness: and declare
the wonders that he does for the children of men!

32 That they would exalt him also in the congregation of the people: and
praise him in the seat of the elders!

33 Who turns the floods into a wilderness: and dries up the water-springs.

34 A fruitful land makes he barren: for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein.

35 Again he makes the wilderness a standing water: and water-springs of a dry
ground.

36 And there he sets the hungry: that they may build them a city to dwell
in.

37 That they may sow their land, and plant vineyards: to yield them fruits of
increase.

38 He blesses them, so that they multiply exceedingly: and suffers not
their cattle to decrease.

39 And again, when they are minished and brought low: through oppression,
through any plague or trouble;

40 Though he suffer them to be evil entreated through tyrants: and let them
wander out of the way in the wilderness;

41 Yet helps he the poor out of misery: and makes him households like a
flock of sheep.

42 The righteous will consider this and rejoice: and the mouth of all
wickedness shall be stopped.

43 Whosoever is wise will ponder these things: and they shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord.

Evening Prayer.
Paratum cor meum. Psalm. 108.
O God, my heart is ready, my heart is ready: I will sing and give praise with
the best member that I have.

2 Awake, thou lute and harp: I my self will awake right early.

3 I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, among the people: I will sing praises
unto thee among the nations.

4 For thy mercy is greater then the heavens: and thy truth reaches unto the
clouds.

5 Set up thy self, O God, above the heavens: and thy glory above all the earth.

6 That thy beloved may be delivered: let thy right hand save them, and hear
thou me.

7 God has spoken in his holiness: I will rejoice therefore, and divide
Sichem, and mete out the valley of Succoth.

8 Gilead is mine, and Manasses is mine: Ephraim also is the strength of my
head.

9 Juda is my lawgiver, Moab is my wash-pot: over Edom will I cast out my
shoe; upon Philistia will I triumph.

10 Who will lead me into the strong city: and who will bring me into Edom?

11 Have not thou forsaken us, O God: and wilt not thou, O God, go forth with
our hosts?

12 O help us against the enemy: for vain is the help of man.

13 Through God we shall do great acts: and it is he that shall tread down our
enemies.

Deus laudum. Psalm. 109.
HOld not thy tongue, O God of my praise: for the mouth of the ungodly, yea,
the mouth of the deceitful is opened upon me.

2 And they have spoken against me with false tongues: they compassed me about
also with words of hatred, and fought against me without a cause.

3 For the love that I had unto them, lo, they take now my contrary part: but I
give my self unto prayer.

4 Thus have they rewarded me evil for good: and hatred for my good will.

5 Set thou an ungodly man to be ruler over him: and let Satan stand at his
right hand.

6 When sentence is given upon him, let him be condemned: and let his prayer be
turned into sin.

7 Let his days be few: and let another take his office.

8 Let his children be fatherless: and his wife a widow.

9 Let his children be vagabonds, and beg their bread: let them seek it also
out of desolate places.

10 Let the extortioner consume all that he has: and let the stranger spoil
his labor.

11 Let there be no man to pity him: nor to have compassion upon his fatherless
children.

12 Let his posterity be destroyed: and in the next generation let his name be
clean put out.

13 Let the wickedness of his fathers be had in remembrance in the sight of the
Lord: and let not the sin of his mother be done away.

14 Let them always be before the Lord: that he may root out the memorial of
them from off the earth;

15 And that, because his mind was not to do good: but persecuted the poor
helpless man, that he might slay him that was vexed at the heart.

16 His delight was in cursing, and it shall happen unto him: he loved not
blessing, therefore shall it be far from him.

17 He clothed himself with cursing, like as with a raiment: and it shall come
into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones.

18 Let it be unto him as the cloak that he has upon him: and as the girdle
that he is always girded withal.

19 Let it thus happen from the Lord unto mine enemies: and to those that speak
evil against my soul. DAY xxiii.


20 But deal thou with me, O Lord God, according unto thy Name: for sweet is
thy mercy.

21 O deliver me, for I am helpless and poor: and my heart is wounded within me.

22 I go hence like the shadow that departs: and am driven away as the
grasshopper.

23 My knees are weak through fasting: my flesh is dried up for want of fatness.

24 I became also a reproach unto them: they that looked upon me, shaked their
heads.

25 Help me, O Lord my God: O save me according to thy mercy.

26 And they shall know, how that this is thy hand: and that thou, Lord, have
done it.

27 Though they curse, yet bless thou: and let them be confounded that rise up
against me; but let thy servant rejoice.

28 Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame: and let them cover themselves
with their own confusion as with a cloak.

29 As for me, I will give great thanks unto the Lord with my mouth: and praise
him among the multitude.

30 For he shall stand at the right hand of the poor: to save his soul from
unrighteous judges.

Morning Prayer.
Dixit Dominus. Psalm. 110.
THE Lord said unto my Lord: Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine
enemies thy footstool.

2 The Lord shall send the rod of thy power out of Sion: be thou ruler, even in
the midst among thine enemies.

3 In the day of thy power shall the people offer thee free-will-offerings with
an holy worship: the dew of thy birth is of the womb of the morning.

4 The Lord swear, and will not repent: Thou art a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedech.

5 The Lord upon thy right hand: shall wound even kings in the day of his wrath.

6 He shall judge among the heathen; he shall fill the places with the dead
bodies: and smite in sunder the heads over diverse countries.

7 He shall drink of the brook in the way: therefore shall he lift up his head.

Confitebor tibi. Psalm. 111.
I Will give thanks unto the Lord with my whole heart: secretly among the
faithful, and in the congregation.

2 The works of the Lord are great: sought out of all them that have pleasure
therein.

3 His work is worthy to be praised and had in honor: and his righteousness
endures for ever.

4 The merciful and gracious Lord has so done his mavelous works: that they
ought to be had in remembrance.

5 He has given meat unto them that fear him: he shall ever be mindful of his
covenant.

6 He has showed his people the power of his works: that he may give them the
heritage of the heathen.

7 The works of his hands are verity and judgment: all his commandments are
true.

8 They stand fast for ever and ever: and are done in truth and equity.

9 He sent redemption unto his people: he has commanded his covenant for ever;
holy and reverend is his Name.

10 The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom: a good understanding have
all they that do thereafter; the praise of it endures for ever.

Beatus vir. Psalm. 112.
BLessed is the man that fears the Lord: he has great delight in his
commandments.

2 His seed shall be mighty upon earth: the generation of the faithful shall be
blessed.

3 Riches and plenteousness shall be in his house: and his righteousness
endures for ever.

4 Unto the godly there arises up light in the darkness: he is merciful,
loving, and righteous.

5 A good man is merciful, and lends: and will guide his words with
discretion.

6 For he shall never be moved: and the righteous shall be had in everlasting
remembrance.

7 He will not be afraid of any evil tidings: for his heart stands fast, and
believes in the Lord.

8 His heart is stablished, and will not shrink: until he see his desire upon
his enemies.

9 He has dispersed abroad, and given to the poor: and his righteousness
remains for ever; his horn shall be exalted with honor.

10 The ungodly shall see it, and it shall grieve him: he shall gnash with his
teeth, and consume away; the desire of the ungodly shall perish.

Laudate, pueri. Psalm. 113.
PRaise the Lord, ye servants: O praise the Name of the Lord.

2 Blessed be the Name of the Lord: from this time forth for evermore.

3 The Lords Name is praised: from the rising up of the sun, unto the going
down of the same.

4 The Lord is high above all heathen: and his glory above the heavens.

5 Who is like unto the Lord our God, that has his dwelling so high: and yet
humbles himself to behold the things that are in heaven and earth?

6 He takes up the simple out of the dust: and lifts the poor out of the
mire,

7 That he may set him with the princes: even with the princes of his people.

8 He makes the barren woman to keep house: and to be a joyful mother of
children.

Evening Prayer.
In exitu Israel. Psalm. 114.
WHen Israel came out of Egypt: and the house of Jacob from among the strange
people,

2 Juda was his sanctuary: and Israel his dominion.

3 The sea saw that and fled: Jordan was driven back.

4 The mountains skipped like rams: and the little hills like young sheep.

5 What aileth thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest: and thou Jordan that thou
wast driven back?

6 Ye mountains that ye skipped like rams: and ye little hills like young sheep?

7 Tremble thou earth at the presence of the Lord: at the presence of the God
of Jacob.

8 Who turned the hard rock into a standing water: and the flint-stone into a
springing well.

Non nobis, Domine. Psalm. 115.
NOt unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give the praise: for thy
loving mercy, and for thy truths sake.

2 Wherefore shall the heathen say: Where is now their God?

3 As for our God, he is in heaven: he has done whatsoever pleased him.

4 Their idols are silver and gold: even the work of men's hands. DAY xxiv.


5 They have mouths and speak not: eyes have they and see not.

6 They have ears and hear not: noses have they and smell not.

7 They have hands and handle not, feet have they and walk not: neither speak
they through their throat.

8 They that make them are like unto them: and so are all such as put their
trust in them.

9 But thou house of Israel, trust thou in the Lord: he is their succor and
defense.

10 Ye house of Aaron, put your trust in the Lord: he is their helper and
defender.

11 Ye that fear the Lord, put your trust in the Lord: he is their helper and
defender.

12 The Lord has been mindful of us, and he shall bless us: even he shall
bless the house of Israel, he shall bless the house of Aaron.

13 He shall bless them that fear the Lord: both small and great.

14 The Lord shall increase you more and more: you and your children.

15 Ye are the blessed of the Lord: who made heaven and earth.

16 All the whole heavens are the Lords: the earth has he given to the
children of men.

17 The dead praise not thee, O Lord: neither all they that go down into
silence.

18 But we will praise the Lord: from this time forth for evermore. Praise the
Lord.

Morning Prayer.
Dilexi, quoniam. Psalm. 116.
I Am well pleased: that the Lord has heard the voice of my prayer.

2 That he has inclined is ear unto me: therefore will I call upon him as long
as I live.

3 The snares of death compassed me round about: and the pains of hell gat hold
upon me.

4 I shall find trouble and heaviness, and I will call upon the Name of the
Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee, deliver my soul.

5 Gracious is the Lord and righteous: yea, our God is merciful.

6 The Lord preserves the simple: I was in misery, and he helped me

7 Turn again then unto thy rest, O my soul: for the Lord has rewarded thee.

8 And why? thou have delivered my soul from death: mine eyes from tears, and
my feet from falling.

9 I will walk before the Lord: in the land of the living.

10 I believed, and therefore will I speak, but I was sore troubled: I said in
my haste, All men are liars.

11 What reward shall I give unto the Lord: for all the benefits that he has
done unto me?

12 I will receive the cup of salvation: and call upon the Name of the Lord.

13 I will pay my vows now in the presence of all his people: right dear in the
sight of the Lord is the death of his saints.

14 Behold, O Lord, how that I am thy servant: I am thy servant, and the son of
thine handmaid, thou have broken my bonds in sunder.

15 I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving: and will call upon the
Name of the Lord.

16 I will pay my vows unto the Lord, in the sight of all his people: in the
courts of the Lords house, even in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. Praise the
Lord.

Laudate Dominum. Psalm. 117.
O Praise the Lord, all ye heathen: praise him all ye nations.

2 For his merciful kindness is ever more and more toward us: and the truth of
the Lord endures for ever. Praise the Lord.

Confitemini Domino. Psalm. 118.
O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: because his mercy endures
for ever.

2 Let Israel now confess, that he is gracious: and that his mercy endures for
ever.

3 Let the house of Aaron now confess: that his mercy endures for ever.

4 Yea, let them now that fear the Lord, confess: that his mercy endures for
ever.

5 I called upon the Lord in trouble: and the Lord heard me at large.

6 The Lord is on my side: I will not fear what man does unto me.

7 The Lord takes my part with them that help me: therefore shall I see my
desire upon mine enemies.

8 It is better to trust in the Lord: then to put any confidence in man.

9 It is better to trust in the Lord: then to put any confidence in princes.

10 All nations compassed me round about: but in the Name of the Lord will I
destroy them.

11 They kept me in on every side, they kept me in, I say, on every side: but
in the Name of the Lord will I destroy them.

12 They came about me like bees, and are extinct even as the fire among the
thorns: for in the Name of the Lord I will destroy them.

13 Thou have thrust sore at me that I might fall: but the Lord was my help.

14 The Lord is my strength and my song: and is become my salvation.

15 The voice of joy and health is in the dwellings of the righteous: the right
hand of the Lord brings mighty things to pass.

16 The right hand of the Lord has the preeminence: the right hand of the Lord
brings mighty things to pass.

17 I shall not die, but live: and declare the works of the Lord.

18 The Lord has chastened and corrected me: but he has not given me over
unto death.

19 Open me the gates of righteousness: that I may go into them, and give
thanks unto the Lord.

20 This is the gate of the Lord: the righteous shall enter into it.

21 I will thank thee, for thou have heard me: and art become my salvation.

22 The same stone which the builders refused: is become the head-stone in the
corner.

23 This is the Lords doing: and it is mavelous in our eyes.

24 This is the day which the Lord has made: we will rejoice and be glad in it.

25 Help me now, O Lord: O Lord, send us now prosperity.

26 Blessed be he that comes in the Name of the Lord: we have wished you good
luck, ye that are of the house of the Lord.

27 God is the Lord, who has showed us light: bind the sacrifice with cords,
yea, even unto the horns of the altar.

28 Thou art my God, and I will thank thee: thou art my God, and I will praise
thee.

29 O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: and his mercy endures for
ever.

Evening Prayer.
Beati immaculati. Psalm. 119.
BLessed are those that are undefiled in the way: and walk in the law of the
Lord.

2 Blessed are they that keep his testimonies: and seek him with their whole
heart.

3 For they who do no wickedness: walk in his ways.

4 Thou have charged: that we shall diligently keep thy commandments.

5 O that my ways were made so direct: that I might keep thy statutes!

6 So shall I not be confounded: while I have respect unto all thy commandments.

7 I will thank thee with an unfeigned heart: when I shall have learned the
judgments of thy righteousness.

8 I will keep thy ceremonies: O forsake me not utterly.

In que corriget?
WHerewithal shall a young man cleanse his way: even by ruling himself after
thy word.

2 With my whole heart have I sought thee: O let me not go wrong out of thy
commandments.

3 Thy words have I hid within my heart: that I should not sin against thee.

4 Blessed art thou, O Lord: O teach me thy statutes.

5 With my lips have I been telling: of all the judgments of thy mouth.

6 I have had as great delight in the way of thy testimonies: as in all manner
of riches.

7 I will talk of thy commandments: and have respect unto thy ways.

8 My delight shall be in thy statutes: and I will not forget thy word.

Retribue servo tuo.
O Do well unto thy servant: that I may live and keep the word.

2 Open thou mine eyes: that I may see the wondrous things of thy law.

3 I am a stranger upon earth: O hide not thy commandments from me.

4 My soul breaks out for the very fervent desire: that it has always unto
thy judgments.

5 Thou have rebuked the proud: and cursed are they that do err from thy
commandments.

6 O turn from me shame and rebuke: for I have kept thy testimonies. DAY xxv.


7 Princes also did sit and speak against me: but thy servant is occupied in
thy statutes.

8 For thy testimonies are my delight: and my counselors.

Adhaesit pavimento.
MY soul cleaves to the dust: O quicken thou me according to thy word.

2 I have knowledged my ways, and thou heardest me: O teach me thy statutes.

3 Make me to understand the way of thy commandments: and so shall I talk of
thy wondrous works.

4 My soul melts away for very heaviness: comfort thou me according unto thy
word.

5 Take from me the way of lying: and cause thou me to make much of thy law.

6 I have chosen the way of truth: and thy judgments have I laid before me.

7 I have stuck unto thy testimonies: O Lord confound me not.

8 I will run the way of thy commandments: when thou have set my heart at
liberty.

Morning Prayer.
Legem pone.
TEach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes: and I shall keep it unto the end.

2 Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law: yea, I shall keep it with
my whole heart.

3 Make me to go in the path of thy commandments: for therein is my desire.

4 Incline my heart unto thy testimonies: and not to covetousness.

5 O turn away mine eyes, lest they behold vanity: and quicken thou me in thy
way.

6 O stablish thy word in thy servant: that I may fear thee.

7 Take away the rebuke that I am afraid of: for thy judgments are good.

8 Behold, my delight is in thy commandments: O quicken me in thy righteousness.

Et veni at super me.
LEt thy loving mercy come also unto me, O Lord: even thy salvation, according
unto thy word.

2 So shall I make answer unto my blasphemers: for my trust is in thy word.

3 O take not the word of thy truth utterly out of my mouth: for my hope is in
thy judgments.

4 So shall I always keep thy law: yea, for ever and ever.

5 And I will walk at liberty: for I seek thy commandments.

6 I will speak of thy testimonies also, even before kings: and will not be
ashamed.

7 And my delight shall be in thy commandments: which I have loved.

8 My hands also will I lift up unto thy commandments, which I have loved: and
my study shall be in thy statutes.

Memor esto servi tui.
O Think upon thy servant, as concerning thy word: wherein thou have caused me
to put my trust.

2 The same is my comfort in my trouble: for thy word has quickened me.

3 The proud have had me exceedingly in derision: yet have I not shrinked from
thy law.

4 For I remembered thine everlasting judgments, O Lord: and received comfort.

5 I am horribly afraid: for the ungodly that forsake thy law.

6 Thy statutes have been my songs: in the house of my pilgrimage.

7 I have thought upon thy Name, O Lord, in the night-season: and have kept thy
law.

8 This I had: because I kept thy commandments.

Portio mea, Domine.
THou art my portion, O Lord: I have promised to keep thy law.

2 I made my humble petition in thy presence with my whole heart: O be merciful
unto me according to thy word.

3 I called mine own ways to remembrance: and turned my feet unto thy
testimonies.

4. I made haste and prolonged not the time: to keep thy commandments.

5 The congregations of the ungodly have robbed me: but I have not forgotten
thy law.

6 At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee: because of thy righteous
judgments.

7 I am a companion of all them that fear thee: and keep thy commandments.

8 The earth, O Lord, is full of thy mercy: O teach me thy statutes.

Banitatem fecisti.
O Lord, thou have dealt graciously with thy servant: according unto thy word.

2 O learn me true understanding and knowledge: for I have believed thy
commandments.

3 Before I was troubled, I went wrong: but now have I kept thy word.

4 Thou art good and gracious: O teach me thy statutes.

5 The proud have imagined a lie against me: but I will keep thy commandments
with my whole heart.

6 Their heart is as fat as brawn: but my delight has been in thy law.

7 It is good for me that I have been in trouble: that I may learn thy statutes.

8 The law of thy mouth is dearer unto me: then thousands of gold and silver.

Evening Prayer.
Manus tuae fecerunt me.
THY hands have made me and fashioned me: O give me understanding, that I may
learn thy commandments.

2 They that fear thee will be glad when they see me: because I have put my
trust in thy word.

3 I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right: and that thou of very
faithfulness have caused me to be troubled.

4 O let thy merciful kindness be my comfort: according to thy word unto thy
servant.

5 O let thy loving mercies come unto me, that I may live: for thy law is my
delight.

6 Let the proud be confounded, for they go wickedly about to destroy me: but I
will be occupied in thy commandments.

7 Let such as fear thee, and have known thy testimonies: be turned unto me.

8 O let my heart be sound in thy statutes: that I be not ashamed.

Defecit anima mea.
MY soul has longed for thy salvation: and I have a good hope because of thy
word.

2 Mine eyes long sore for thy word: saying, O when will thou comfort me?

3 For I am become like a bottle in the smoke: yet do I not forget thy statutes.

4 How many are the days of thy servant: when will thou be avenged of them that
persecute me?

5 The proud have dug pits for me: which are not after thy law.

6 All thy commandments are true: they persecute me falsely, O be thou my help.

7 They had almost made an end of me upon earth: but I forsook not thy
commandments.

8 O quicken me after thy loving kindness: and so shall I keep the testimonies
of thy mouth.

In aeternum, Domine.
O Lord, thy word: endures for ever in heaven.

2 Thy truth also remains from one generation to another: thou have laid the
foundation of the earth, and it abides.

3 They continue this day according to thine ordinance: for all things serve
thee.

4 If my delight had not been in thy law: I should have perished in my trouble.

5 I will never forget thy commandments: for with them thou have quickened me.

6 I am thine, O save me: for I have sought thy commandments.

7 The ungodly laid wait for me, to destroy me: but I will consider thy
testimonies.

8 I see that all things come to an end: but thy commandment is exceeding broad.

Quomodo dilexi!
LOrd, what love have I unto thy law: all the day long is my study in it.

2 Thou through thy commandments have made me wiser then mine enemies: for they
are ever with me.

3 I have more understanding then my teachers: for thy testimonies are my study.

4 I am wiser then the aged: because I keep thy commandments.

5 I have refrained my feet from every evil way: that I may keep thy word.

6 I have not shrunk from thy judgments: for thou teach me.

7 O how sweet are thy words unto my throat: yea, sweeter then honey unto my
mouth.

8 Through thy commandments I get understanding: therefore I hate all evil ways.

Morning Prayer.
Lucerna pedibus meis.
THy word is a lantern unto my feet: and a light unto my paths. DAY xxvi.


2 I have sworn and am steadfastly purposed: to keep thy righteous judgments.

3 I am troubled above measure: quicken me, O Lord, according to thy word.

4 Let the free-will-offerings of my mouth please thee, O Lord: and teach me
thy judgments.

5 My soul is always in my hand: yet do I not forget thy law.

6 The ungodly have laid a snare for me: but yet I swerved not from thy
commandments.

7 Thy testimonies have I claimed as mine heritage for ever: and why? they are
the very joy of my heart.

8 I have applied my heart to fulfill thy statutes always: even unto the end.

Iniquos odio habui.
I Hate them that imagine evil things: but thy law do I love.

2 Thou art my defense and shield: and my trust is in thy word.

3 Away from me, ye wicked: I will keep the commandments of my God.

4 O stablish me according to thy word, that I may live: and let me not be
disappointed of my hope.

5 Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe: yea, my delight shall be ever in thy
statutes.

6 Thou have trodden down all them that depart from thy statutes: for they
imagine but deceit.

7 Thou put away all the ungodly of the earth like dross: therefore I love
thy testimonies.

8 My flesh trembles for fear of thee: and I am afraid of thy judgments.

Feci judicium.
I Deal with the thing that is lawful and right: O give me not over unto mine
oppressors.

2 Make thou thy servant to delight in that which is good: that the proud do me
no wrong.

3 Mine eyes are wasted away with looking for thy health: and for the word of
thy righteousness.

4 O deal with thy servant according unto thy loving mercy: and teach me thy
statutes.

5 I am thy servant, O grant me understanding: that I may know thy testimonies.

6 It is time for thee, Lord, to lay to thine hand: for they have destroyed thy
law.

7 For I love thy commandments: above gold and precious stone.

8 Therefore hold I straight all thy commandments: and all false ways I utterly
abhor.

Mirabilia.
THy testimonies are wonderful: therefore does my soul keep them.

2 When thy word goes forth: it gives light and understanding unto the simple.

3 I opened my mouth, and drew in my breath: for my delight was in thy
commandments.

4 O look thou upon me, and be merciful unto me: as thou usest to do unto those
that love thy Name.

5 Order my steps in thy word: and so shall no wickedness have dominion over me.

6 O deliver me from the wrongful dealings of men: and so shall I keep thy
commandments.

7 Show the light of thy countenance upon thy servant: and teach me thy
statutes.

8 Mine eyes gush out with water: because men keep not thy law

Justus es, Domine.
RIghteous art thou, O Lord: and true is thy judgment.

2 The testimonies that thou have commanded: are exceeding righteous and true.

3 My zeal has even consumed me: because mine enemies have forgotten thy words.

4. Thy word is tried to the uttermost: and thy servant loves it.

5 I am small, and of no reputation: yet do I not forget thy commandments.

6 Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness: and thy law is the truth.

7 Trouble and heaviness have taken hold upon me: yet is my delight in thy
commandments.

8 The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting: O grant me
understanding, and I shall live.

Evening Prayer.
Clamavi in toto cor de meo.
I Call with my whole heart: hear me, O Lord, I will keep thy statutes.

2 Yea, even unto thee do I call: help me, and I shall keep thy testimonies.

3 Early in the morning do I cry unto thee: for in thy word is my trust.

4 Mine eyes prevent the night-watches: that I might be occupied in thy words.

5 Hear my voice, O Lord, according unto thy loving kindness: quicken me
according as thou art wont.

6 They draw nigh that of malice persecute me: and are far from thy law.

7 Be thou nigh at hand, O Lord: for all thy commandments are true.

8 As concerning thy testimonies, I have known long since: that thou have
grounded them for ever.

Vide humilitatem.
O Consider mine adversity, and deliver me: for I do not forget thy law.

2 Avenge thou my cause, and deliver me: quicken me according to thy word.

3 Health is far from the ungodly: for they regard not thy statutes.

4 Great is thy mercy, O Lord: quicken me as thou art wont.

5 Many there are that trouble me, and persecute me: yet do I not swerve from
thy testimonies.

6 It grieveth me when I see the transgressors: because they keep not thy law.

7 Consider, O Lord, how I love thy commandments: O quicken me according to thy
loving kindness.

8 Thy word is true from everlasting: all the judgments of thy righteousness
endure for evermore.

Principes persecuti sunt.
PRinces have persecuted me without a cause: but my heart stands in awe of
thy word.

2 I am as glad of thy word: as one that finds great spoils.

3 As for lies, I hate and abhor them: but thy law do I love.

4 Seven times a day do I praise thee: because of thy righteous judgments.

5 Great is the peace that they have who love thy law: and they are not
offended at it.

6 Lord, I have looked for thy saving health: and done after thy commandments.

7 My soul has kept thy testimonies: and loved them exceedingly.

8 I have kept thy commandments and testimonies: for all my ways are before
thee.

Appropinquet deprecatio.
LEt my complaint come before thee, O Lord: give me understanding according to
thy word. DAY xxvii.


2 Let my supplication come before thee: deliver me according to thy word.

3 My lips shall speak of thy praise: when thou have taught me thy statutes.

4 Yea, my tongue shall sing of thy word: for all thy commandments are
righteous.

5 Let thine hand help me: for I have chosen thy commandments.

6 I have longed for thy saving health, O Lord: and in thy law is my delight.

7 O let my soul live, and it shall praise thee: and thy judgments shall help
me.

8 I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost: O seek thy servant, for I do
not forget thy commandments.

Morning Prayer.
Ad Dominum. Psalm. 120.
WHen I was in trouble, I called upon the Lord: and he heard me.

2 Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips: and from a deceitful tongue.

3 What reward shall be given or done unto thee, thou false tongue: even mighty
and sharp arrows, with hot burning coals.

4 Woe is me, that I am constrained to dwell with Mesech: and to have my
habitation among the tents of Kedar.

5 My soul has long dwelt among them: that are enemies unto peace.

6 I labor for peace, but when I speak unto them thereof: they make them ready
to battle.

Levavi oculos. Psalm. 121.
I Will lift up mine eyes unto the hills: from whence comes my help.

2 My help comes even from the Lord: who has made heaven and earth.

3 He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: and he that keeps thee will not
sleep.

4 Behold, he that keeps Israel: shall neither slumber nor sleep.

5 The Lord himself is thy keeper: the Lord is thy defense upon thy right hand;

6 So that the sun shall not burn thee by day: neither the moon by night.

7 The Lord shall preserve thee from all evil: yea, it is even he that shall
keep thy soul.

8 The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in: from this time
forth for ever more.

Laetatus sum. Psalm. 122.
I Was glad when they said unto me: We will go into the house of the Lord.

2 Our feet shall stand in thy gates: O Jerusalem.

3 Jerusalem is built as a city: that is at unity in it self.

4 For thither the tribes go up, even the tribes of the Lord: to testify unto
Israel, to give thanks unto the Name of the Lord.

5 For there is the seat of judgment: even the seat of the house of David.

6 O pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee.

7 Peace be within thy walls: and plenteousness within thy palaces.

8 For my brethren and companions sakes: I will wish thee prosperity.

9 Yea, because of the house of the Lord our God: I will seek to do thee good.

At te levavi oculos meos. Psalm. 123.
UNto thee lift I up mine eyes: O thou that dwell in the heavens.

2 Behold, even as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters,
and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress: even so our eyes
wait upon the Lord our God, until he have mercy upon us.

3 Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us: for we are utterly despised.

4 Our soul is filled with the scornful reproof of the wealthy: and with the
despitefulness of the proud.

Nisi quia Dominus. Psalm. 124.
IF the Lord himself had not been on our side, now may Israel say: if the Lord
himself had not been on our side, when men rose up against us;

2 They had swallowed us up quick: when they were so wrathfully displeased at
us.

3 Yea, the waters had drowned us: and the stream had gone over our soul.

4 The deep waters of the proud: had gone even over our soul.

5 But praised be the Lord: who has not given us over for a prey unto their
teeth.

6 Our soul is escaped even as a bird out of the snare of the fowler: the snare
is broken, and we are delivered.

7 Our help stands in the Name of the Lord: who has made heaven and earth.

Qui confidunt. Psalm. 125.
THey that put their trust in the Lord, shall be even as the mount Sion: which
may not be removed, but stands fast for ever.

2 The hills stand about Jerusalem: even so stands the Lord round about his
people, from this time forth for evermore.

3 For the rod of the ungodly comes not into the lot of the righteous: lest
the righteous put their hand unto wickedness.

4 Do well, O Lord: unto those that are good and true of heart.

5 As for such as turn back unto their own wickedness: the Lord shall lead them
forth with the evil doers, but peace shall be upon Israel.

Evening Prayer.
In convertendo. Psalm. 126.
WHen the Lord turned again the captivity of Sion: then were we like unto them
that dream.

2 Then was our mouth filled with laughter: and our tongue with joy.

3 Then said they among the heathen: The Lord has done great things for them.

4 Yea, the Lord has done great things for us already: whereof we rejoice.

5 Turn our captivity, O Lord: as the rivers in the south.

6 They that sow in tears: shall reap in joy.

7 He that now goes on his way weeping, and bears forth good seed: shall
doubtless come again with joy, and bring his sheaves with him.

Nisi Dominus. Psalm. 127.
EXcept the Lord build the house: their labor is but lost that build it.

2 Except the Lord keep the city: the watchman waketh but in vain.

3 It is but lost labor that ye haste to rise up early, and so late take rest,
and eat the bread of carefulness: for so he gives his beloved sleep.

4 Lo, children and the fruit of the womb: are an heritage and gift that comes
of the Lord.

5 Like as the arrows in the hand of the giant: even so are the young children.

6 Happy is the man that has his quiver full of them: they shall not be
ashamed when they speak with their enemies in the gate.

Beati omnes. Psalm. 128.
BLessed are all they that fear the Lord: and walk in his ways.

2 For thou shall eat the labors of thine hands: O well is thee, and happy
shall thou be.

3 Thy wife shall be as the fruitful vine: upon the walls of thine house.

4 Thy children like the olive-branches: round about thy table.

5 Lo, thus shall the man be blessed: that fears the Lord.

6 The Lord from out of Sion shall so bless thee: that thou shall see Jerusalem
in prosperity all thy life long.

7 Yea, that thou shall see thy childrens children: and peace upon Israel.

Saepe expugnaverunt. Psalm. 129.
MAny a time have they fought against me from my youth up: may Israel now say.

2 Yea, many a time have they vexed me from my youth up: but they have not
prevailed against me.

3 The plowers plowed upon my back: and made long furrows.

4 But the righteous Lord: has hewn the snares of the ungodly in pieces.

5 Let them be confounded and turned backward: as many as have evil will at
Sion.

6 Let them be even as the grass growing upon the house-tops: which, withers
before it be plucked up.

7 Whereof the mower fills not his hand: neither he, that binds up the
sheaves, his bosom.

8 So that they who go by say not so much as, The Lord prosper you: we wish you
good luck in the Name of the Lord.

De profundis. Psalm. 130.

OUt of the deep have I called unto thee, O Lord: Lord, hear my voice.

2 O let thine ears consider well: the voice of my complaint.

3 If thou, Lord, wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss: O Lord, who may
abide it?

4 For there is mercy with thee: therefore shall thou be feared.

5 I look for the Lord, my soul does wait for him: in his word is my trust. DAY
xxviii.


6 My soul flees unto the Lord: before the morning watch, I say, before the
morning watch.

7 O Israel, trust in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy: and with him
is plenteous redemption.

8 And he shall redeem Israel: from all his sins.

Domine, non est. Psalm. 131.

LOrd, I am not high-minded: I have no proud looks.

2 I do not exercise my self in great matters: which are too high for me.

3 But I refrain my soul, and keep it low, like as a child that is weaned from
his mother: yea, my soul is even as a weaned child.

4 O Israel, trust in the Lord: from this time forth for evermore.

Morning Prayer.
Memento, Domine. Psalm. 132.
LOrd, remember David: and all his trouble.

2 How he swear unto the Lord: and vowed a vow unto the Almighty God of Jacob;

3 I will not come within the tabernacle of mine house: nor climb up into my
bed;

4 I will not suffer mine eyes to sleep, nor mine eyelids to slumber: neither
the temples of my head to take any rest,

5 Until I find out a place for the temple of the Lord: an habitation for the
mighty God of Jacob.

6 Lo, we heard of the same at Ephrata: and found it in the wood.

7 We will go into his tabernacle: and fall low on our knees before his
footstool.

8 Arise, O Lord, into thy resting place: thou, and the ark of thy strength.

9 Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness: and let thy saints sing with
joyfulness.

10 For thy servant David's sake: turn not away the presence of thine Anointed.

11 The Lord has made a faithful oath unto David: and he shall not shrink from
it;

12 Of the fruit of thy body: shall I set upon thy seat.

13 If thy children will keep my covenant, and my testimonies that I shall
learn them: their children also shall fit upon thy seat for evermore.

14 For the Lord has chosen Sion to be an habitation for himself: he has
longed for her.

15 This shall my rest for ever: here will I dwell, for I have a delight
therein.

16 I will bless her victuals with increase: and will satisfy her poor with
bread.

17 I will deck her priests with health: and her saints shall rejoice and sing.

18 There shall I make the horn of David to flourish: I have ordained a lantern
for mine Anointed.

19 As for his enemies, I shall clothe them with shame: but upon himself shall
his crown flourish.

Ecce, quam bonum. Psalm. 133.
BEhold, how good and joyful a thing it is: brethren to dwell together in unity.

2 It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down unto the
beard: even unto Aarons beard, and went down to the skirts of his clothing.

3 Like as the dew of Hermon: which fell upon the hill of Sion.

4 For there the Lord promised his blessing: and life for evermore.

Ecce nunc. Psalm. 134.
BEhold now, praise the Lord: all ye servants of the Lord;

2 Ye that by night stand in the house of the Lord: even in the courts of the
house of our God.

3 Lift up your hands in the sanctuary: and praise the Lord.

4 The Lord that made heaven and earth: give thee blessing out of Sion.

Laudate Nomen. Psalm. 135.
O Praise the Lord, laud ye the Name of the Lord: praise it, O ye servants of
the Lord;

2 Ye that stand in the house of the Lord: in the courts of the house of our
God.

3 O praise the Lord, for the Lord is gracious: O sing praises unto his Name,
for it is lovely.

4 For why? the Lord has chosen Jacob unto himself: and Israel for his own
possession.

5 For I know that the Lord is great: and that our Lord is above all gods.

6 Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven, and in earth: and in the
sea, and in all deep places.

7 He brings forth the clouds from the ends of the world: and sends forth
lightnings with the rain, bringing the winds out of his treasures.

8 He smote the firstborn of Egypt: both of man and beast.

9 He has sent tokens and wonders into the midst of thee, O thou land of
Egypt: upon Pharaoh and all his servants.

10 He smote diverse nations: and slew mighty kings;

11 Sehon king of the Amorites, and Og the king of Basan: and all the kingdoms
of Canaan;

12 And gave their land to be an heritage: even an heritage unto Israel his
people.

13 Thy Name, O Lord, endures for ever: so does thy memorial, O Lord, from one
generation to another.

14 For the Lord will avenge his people: and be gracious unto his servants.

15 As for the images of the heathen, they are but silver and gold: the work of
men's hands.

16 They have mouths, and speak not: eyes have they, but they see not.

17 They have ears, and yet they hear not: neither is there any breath in their
mouths.

18 They that make them are like unto them: and so are all they that put their
trust in them.

19 Praise the Lord, ye house of Israel: praise the Lord ye house of Aaron.

20 Praise the Lord, ye house of Levi: ye that fear the Lord, praise the Lord.

21 Praised be the Lord out of Sion: who dwells at Jerusalem.

Evening Prayer.
Confitemini. Psalm. 136.
O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: and his mercy endures for
ever.

2 O give thanks unto the God of all gods: for his mercy endures for ever.

3 O thank the Lord of all lords: for his mercy enduceth for ever.

4 Who only does great Wonders: for his mercy endures for ever.

5 Who by his excellent wisdom made the heavens: for his mercy endures for
ever.

6 Who laid out the earth above the waters: for his mercy endures for ever.

7 Who has made great lights: for his mercy endures for ever.

8 The sun to rule the day: for his mercy endures for ever;

9 The moon and the stars to govern the night: for his mercy endures for ever.

10 Who smote Egypt with their firstborn: for his mercy endures for ever;

11 And brought out Israel from among them: for his mercy endures for ever;

12 With a mighty hand and stretched-out arm: for his mercy endures for ever.

13 Who divided the Red sea in two parts: for his mercy endures for ever;

14 And made Israel to go through the midst of it: for his mercy endures for
ever.

15 But as for Pharaoh and his host, he overthrew them in the Red sea: for his
mercy endures for ever.

16 Who led his people through the wilderness: for his mercy endures for ever.

17 Who smote great kings: for his mercy endures for ever;

18 Yea, and slew mighty kings: for his mercy endures for ever;

19 Sehon king of the Amorites: for his mercy endures for ever;

20 And Og the king of Basan: for his mercy endures for ever;

21 And gave away their land for an heritage: for his mercy endures for ever;

22 Even for an heritage unto Israel his servant: for his mercy endures for
ever.

23 Who remembered us when we were in trouble: for his mercy endures for ever;

24 And has delivered us from our enemies: for his mercy endures for ever.

25 Who gives food to all flesh: for his mercy endures for ever.

26 O give thanks unto the God of heaven: for his mercy endures for ever.

27 O give thanks unto the Lord of lords: for his mercy endures for ever.

Super flumina. Psalm. 137.
BY the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept: when we remembered thee, O Sion.

2 As for our harps, we hanged them up: upon the trees that are therein.

3 For they that led us away captive, required of us then a song and melody in
our heaviness: Sing us one of the songs of Sion. DAY xxix.


4 How shall we sing the Lords song: in a strange land?

5 If I forget thee, O Jerusalem: let my right hand forget her cunning.

6 If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth:
yea, if I prefer not Jerusalem in my mirth.

7 Remember the children of Edom, O Lord, in the day of Jerusalem: how they
said, Down with it, down with it, even to the ground.

8 O daughter of Babylon, wasted with misery: yea, happy shall he be that
rewards thee as thou have served us.

9 Blessed shall he be that takes thy children: and throws them against the
stones.

Confitebor tibi Psalm. 138.
I Will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, with my whole heart: even before the
gods will I sing praise unto thee.

2 I will worship toward thy holy temple, and praise thy Name, because of thy
loving kindness and truth: for thou have magnified thy Name, and thy word above
all things.

3 When I called upon thee, thou heardest me: and enduedst my soul with much
strength.

4 All the kings of the earth shall praise thee, O Lord: for they have heard
the words of thy mouth.

5 Yea, they shall sing in the ways of the Lord: that great is the glory of the
Lord.

6 For though the Lord be high, yet has he respect unto the lowly: as for the
proud, he beholds them afar off.

7 Though I walk in the midst of trouble, yet shall thou refresh me: thou shall
stretch forth thy hand upon the furiousness of mine enemies, and thy right hand
shall save me.

8 The Lord shall make good his loving kindness toward me: yea, thy mercy, O
Lord, endures for ever; despise not then the works of thine own hands.

Morning Prayer.
Domine, probasti. Psalm. 139.
O Lord, thou have searched me out, and known me: thou know my down-sitting,
and mine up-rising thou understandest my thoughts long before.

2 Thou art about my path, and about my bed: and spiest out all my ways.

3 For lo, there is not a word in my tongue: but thou, O Lord, know it
altogether.

4 Thou have fashioned me behind and before: and laid thine hand upon me.

5 Such knowledge is too wonderful and excellent for me: I cannot attain unto
it.

6 Whither shall I go then from thy Spirit: or whither shall I go then from thy
presence?

7 If I climb up into heaven, thou art there: if I go down to hell, thou art
there also.

8 If I take the wings of the morning: and remain in the uttermost parts of the
sea;

9 Even there also shall thy hand lead me: and thy right hand shall hold me.

10 If I say, Peradventure the darkness shall cover me: then shall my night be
turned today.

11 Yea, the darkness is no darkness with thee, but the night is as clear as
the day: the darkness and light to thee are both alike.

12 For my reins are thine: thou have covered me in my mothers womb.

13 I will give thanks unto thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made:
mavelous are thy works, and that my soul knows right well.

14 My bones are not hid from thee: though I be made secretly, and fashioned
beneath in the earth.

15 Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being unperfect: and in thy book were
all my members written;

16 Which day by day were fashioned: when as yet there was none of them.

17 How dear are thy counsels unto me, O God: O how great is the sum of them!

18 If I tell them, they are mo in number then the sand: when I wake up I am
present with thee.

19 Will thou not slay the wicked, O God: depart from me ye bloodthirsty men.

20 For they speak unrighteously against thee: and thine enemies take thy Name
in vain.

21 Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee: and am not I grieved with those
that rise up against thee?

22 Yea, I hate them right sore: even as though they were mine enemies.

23 Try me, O God, and seek the ground of my heart: prove me, and examine my
thoughts.

24 Look well if there be any way of wickedness in me: and lead me in the way
everlasting.

Eripe me, Domine. Psalm. 140.
DEliver me, O Lord, from the evil man: and preserve me from the wicked man.

2 Who imagine mischief in their hearts: and stir up strife all the day long.

3 They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent: adders poison is under
their lips.

4 Keep me, O Lord, from the hands of the ungodly: preserve me from the wicked
men, who are purposed to overthrow my goings.

5 The proud have laid a snare for me, and spread a net abroad with cords: yea,
and set traps in my way.

6 I said unto the Lord, Thou art my God: hear the voice of my prayers, O Lord.

7 O Lord God, thou strength of my health: thou have covered my head in the day
of battle.

8 Let not the ungodly have his desire, O Lord: let not his mischievous
imagination prosper, left they be too proud.

9 Let the mischief of their own lips fall upon the head of them: that compass
me about.

10 Let hot burning coals fall upon them: let them be cast into the fire, and
into the pit, that they never rise up again.

11 A man full of words shall not prosper upon the earth: evil shall hunt the
wicked person to overthrow him.

12 Sure I am that the Lord will avenge the poor: and maintain the cause of the
helpless.

13 The righteous also shall give thanks unto thy Name: and the just shall
continue in thy sight.

Domine, clamavi. Psalm. 141.
LOrd, I call upon thee, haste thee unto me: and consider my voice when I cry
unto thee.

2 Let my prayer be set forth in thy sight as the incense: and let the lifting
up of my hands be an evening-sacrifice.

3 Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth: and keep the door of my lips.

4 O let not mine heart be inclined to any evil thing: let me not be occupied
in ungodly works, with the men that work wickedness, lest I eat of such things
as please them.

5 Let the righteous rather smite me friendly: and reprove me.

6 But let not their precious balms break my head: yea, I will pray yet against
their wickedness.

7 Let their judges be overthrown in stony places: that they may hear my words,
for they are sweet.

8 Our bones lie scattered before the pit: like as when one breaks and heweth
wood upon the earth.

9 But mine eyes look unto thee, O Lord God: in thee is my trust, O cast not
out my soul.

10 Keep me from the snare that they have laid for me: and from the traps of
the wicked doers.

11 Let the ungodly fall into their own nets together: and let me ever escape
them.

Evening Prayer.
Voce mea ad Dominum. Psalm. 142.
I Cried unto the Lord with my voice: yea, even unto the Lord did I make my
supplication.

2 I poured out my complaints before him: and showed him of my trouble.

3 When my spirit was in heaviness, thou knew my path: in the way wherein I
walked have they privily laid a snare for me.

4 I looked also upon my right hand: and saw there was no man that would know
me.

5 I had no place to flee unto: and no man cared for my soul.

6 I cried unto thee, O Lord, and said: Thou art my hope and my portion in the
land of the living.

7 Consider my complaint: for I am brought very low.

8 O deliver me from my persecutors: for they are too strong for me.

9 Bring my soul out of prison, that I may give thanks unto thy Name: which
thing if thou will grant me, then shall the righteous resort unto my company.

Domine, exaudi. Psalm. 143.

HEar my prayer, O Lord, and consider my desire: hearken unto me for thy truth
and righteousness sake.

2 And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified.

3 For the enemy has persecuted my soul, he has smitten my life down to the
ground: he has laid me in the darkness, as the men that have been long dead.

4 Therefore is my spirit vexed within me: and my heart within me is desolate.

5 Yet do I remember the time past, I muse upon all thy works: yea, I exercise
my self in the works of thy hands.

6 I stretch forth my hands unto thee: my soul gaspeth unto thee as a thirsty
land.

7 Hear me, O Lord, and that soon, for my spirit waxes faint: hide not thy
face from me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit. DAY xxx.


8 O let me hear thy loving kindness betimes in the morning, for in thee is my
trust: show thou me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my soul unto
thee.

9 Deliver me, O Lord, from mine enemies: for I flee unto thee to hide me.

10 Teach me to do the thing that pleases thee, for thou art my God: let thy
loving Spirit lead me forth into the land of righteousness.

11 Quicken me, O Lord, for thy Names sake: and for thy righteousness sake
bring my soul out of trouble.

12 And of thy goodness slay mine enemies: and destroy all them that vex my
soul, for I am thy servant.

Morning Prayer.
Benedictus Dominus. Psalm. 144.
BLessed be the Lord my strength: who teaches my hands to war, and my fingers
to fight;

2 My hope and my fortress, my castle and deliverer, my defender in whom I
trust: who subdueth my people that is under me.

3 Lord, what is man, that thou have such respect unto him: or the son of man,
that thou so regardest him?

4 Man is like a thing of naught: his time passes away like a shadow.

5 Bow thy heavens, O Lord, and come down: touch the mountains, and they shall
smoke.

6 Cast forth thy lightning and tear them: shoot out thine arrows and consume
them.

7 Send down thine hand from above: deliver me, and take me out of the great
waters, from the hand of strange children;

8 Whose mouth talks of vanity: and their right hand is a right hand of
wickedness.

9 I will sing a new song unto thee, O God: and sing praises unto thee upon a
ten-stringed lute.

10 Thou have given victory unto kings: and have delivered David thy servant
from the peril of the sword.

11 Save me, and deliver me from the hand of strange children: whose mouth
talks of vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of iniquity.

12 That our sons may grow up as the young plants: and that our daughters may
be as the polished corners of the temple.

13 That our garners may be full and plenteous with all manner of store: that
our sheep may bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our streets.

14 That our oxen may be strong to labor, that there be no decay: no leading
into captivity, and no complaining in our streets.

15 Happy are the people that are in such a case: yea, blessed are the people
who have the Lord for their God.

Exaltabo te, Deus. Psalm. 145.
I Will magnify thee, O God, my King: and I will praise thy Name for ever and
ever.

2 Every day will I give thanks unto thee: and praise thy Name for ever and
ever.

3 Great is the Lord, and mavelous, worthy to be praised: there is no end of
his greatness.

4 One generation shall praise thy works unto another: and declare thy power.

5 As for me, I will be talking of thy worship: thy glory, thy praise, and
wondrous works;

6 So that men shall speak of the might of thy mavelous acts: and I will also
tell of thy greatness.

7 The memorial of thine abundant kindness shall be showed: and men shall sing
of thy righteousness.

8 The Lord is gracious and merciful: long-suffering, and of great goodness.

9 The Lord is loving unto every man: and his mercy is over all his works.

10 All thy works praise thee, O Lord: and thy saints give thanks unto thee.

11 They show the glory of thy kingdom: and talk of thy power;

12 That thy power, thy glory, and mightiness of thy kingdom: might be known
unto men.

13 Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom: and thy dominion endures throughout
all ages.

14 The Lord upholdeth all such as fall: and lifts up all those that are down.

15 The eyes of all wait upon thee, O Lord: and thou give them their meat in
due season.

16 Thou openest thine hand: and fillest all things living with plenteousness.

17 The Lord is righteous in all his ways and holy in all his works.

18 The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him: yea, all such as call
upon him faithfully.

19 He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him: he also will hear their
cry, and will help them.

20 The Lord preserves all them that love him: but scatters abroad all the
ungodly.

21 My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord: and let all flesh give thanks
unto his holy Name forever and ever.

Lauda, anima mea. Psalm. 146.
PRaise the Lord, O my soul; while I live will I praise the Lord: yea, as long
as I have any being, I will sing praises unto my God.

2 O put not your trust in princes, nor in any child of man: for there is no
help in them.

3 For when the breath of man goes forth, he shall turn again to his earth:
and then all his thoughts perish.

4 Blessed is he that has the God of Jacob for his help: and whose hope is in
the Lord his God.

5 Who made heaven and earth, the sea and all that therein is: who keeps his
promise for ever.

6 Who helps them to right that suffer wrong: who feeds the hungry.

7 The Lord loses men out of prison: the Lord gives sight to the blind.

8 The Lord helps them that are fallen: the Lord cares for the righteous.

9 The Lord cares for the strangers, he defends the fatherless and widow: as
for the way of the ungodly, he turns it upside down.

10 The Lord thy God, O Sion, shall be King for evermore: and throughout all
generations.

Evening Prayer.
Laudate Dominum. Psalm. 147.
O Praise the Lord, for it is a good thing to sing praises unto our God: yea, a
joyful and pleasant thing it is to he thankful.

2 The Lord does build up Jerusalem: and gather together the outcasts of
Israel.

3 He heals those that are broken in heart: and gives medicine to heal their
sickness.

4 He tells the number of the stars: and calls them all by their names.

5 Great is our Lord, and great is his power: yea, and his wisdom is infinite.

6 The Lord sets up the meek: and brings the ungodly down to the ground.

7 O sing unto the Lord with thanksgiving: sing praises upon the harp unto our
God.

8 Who covers the heaven with clouds, and prepares rain for the earth: and
makes the grass to grow upon the mountains, and herb for the use of men.

9 Who gives fodder unto the cattle: and feeds the young ravens that call
upon him.

10 He has no pleasure in the strength of an horse: neither delights he in
any man's legs.

11 But the Lords delight is in them that fear him: and put their trust in his
mercy.

12 Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem: praise thy God, O Sion.

13 For he has made fast the bars of thy gates: and has blessed thy children
within thee.

14 He makes peace in thy borders: and fills thee with the flour of wheat.

15 He sends forth his commandment upon earth: and his word runs very
swiftly.

16 He gives snow like wool: and scatters the hoar-frost like ashes.

17 He casts forth his ice like morsels: who is able to abide his frost?

18 He sends out his word, and melts them: he blows with his wind, and
the waters flow.

19 He shows his word unto Jacob: his statutes and ordinances unto Israel.

20 He has not dealt so with any nation: neither have the heathen knowledge of
his laws.

Laudate Dominum. Psalm. 148.
O Praise the Lord of heaven: praise him in height.

2 Praise him, all ye angels of his: praise him, all his host.

3 Praise him, sun and moon: praise him, all ye stars and light.

4 Praise him, all ye heavens: and ye waters, that are above the heavens.

5 Let them praise the Name of the Lord: for he spoke the word, and they were
made, he commanded, and they were created.

6 He has made them fast for ever and ever: he has given them a law which
shall not be broken.

7 Praise Lord upon earth: ye dragons and all deeps;

8 Fire and hail, snow and vapors: wind and storm, fulfilling his word;

9 Mountains and all hills: fruitful trees and all cedars;

10 Beasts and all cattle: worms and feathered fowls;

11 Kings of the earth and all people: princes and all judges of the world;

12 Young men and maidens, old men and children, praise the Name of the Lord:
for his Name only is excellent, and his praise above heaven and earth.

13 He shall exalt the horn of his people, all his saints shall praise him:
even the children of Israel, even the people that serves him.

Cantate Domino. Psalm. 149.
O Sing unto the Lord a new song: let the congregation of saints praise him.

2 Let Israel rejoice in him that made him: and let the children of Sion be
joyful in their King.

3 Let them praise his Name in the dance: let them sing praises unto him with
tabret and harp.

4 For the Lord has pleasure in his people: and helps the meek-hearted.

5 Let the saints be joyful with glory: let them rejoice in their beds.

6 Let the praises of God be in their mouth: and a two-edged sword in their
hands;

7 To be avenged of the heathen: and to rebuke the people;

8 To bind their kings in chains: and their nobles with links of iron.

9 That they may be avenged of them, as it is written: Such honor have all his
saints.

Laudate Dominum. Psalm. 150.
O Praise God in his holiness: praise him in the firmament of his power.

2 Praise him in his noble acts: praise him according to his excellent
greatness.

3 Praise him in the sound of the trumpet: praise him upon the lute and harp.

4 Praise him in the cymbals and dances: praise him upon the strings and pipe.

5 Praise him upon the well-tuned cymbals: praise him upon the the loud cymbals.

6 Let every thing that has breath: praise the Lord.

Forms of Prayer to be used at SEA.
The Morning and Evening Service to be used daily at Sea, shall be the same
which is appointed in the Book of Common Prayer.

These two following Prayers are to be also used in His Majesty's Navy every
day.

O Eternal Lord God, who alone spreadest out the heavens, and rulest the raging
of the sea; who have compassed the waters with bounds until day and night come
to an end; Be pleased to receive into thy Almighty and most gracious protection
the persons of us thy servants, and the Fleet in which we serve. Preserve us
from the dangers of the Sea, and from the violence of the enemy, that we may be
a safeguard unto our most gracious Sovereign Lord King WILLIAM and his
Kingdoms, and a security for such as pass on the Seas upon their lawful
occasions; that the Inhabitants of our Island may in peace and quietness serve
thee our God, and that we may return in safety to enjoy the blessings of the
land, with the fruits of our labors; and with a thankful remembrance of thy
mercies to praise and glorify thy Holy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

The Collect.
PRevent us, O Lord, in all our doings with thy most gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help; that in all our works begun, continued, and
ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy Name, and finally by thy mercy obtain
everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Prayers to be used in Storms at Sea.
O Most powerful and glorious Lord God, at whose command the winds blow and
lift up the waves of the Sea, and who stillest the rage thereof; We thy
creatures, but miserable sinners, do in this our great distress cry unto thee
for help: save, Lord, or else we perish. We confess when we have been safe, and
seen all things quiet about us, we have forgot thee our God, and refused to
hearken to the still voice of thy Word, and to obey thy commandments: But now
we see how terrible thou art in all thy works of wonder, the great God to be
feared above all: and therefore we adore thy divine Majesty, acknowledging thy
power, and imploring thy goodness. Help, Lord, and save us for thy mercies sake
in Jesus Christ thy Son our Lord. Amen.

Or this.

O Most glorious and gracious Lord God, who dwell in heaven, but beholdest
all things below; Look down, we beseech thee, and hear us, calling out of the
depth of misery, and out of the jaws of this death which is ready now to
swallow us up: Save, Lord, or else we perish. The living, the living shall
praise thee. O send thy word of command to rebuke the raging winds, and the
roaring sea, that we being delivered from this distress, may live to serve thee,
and to glorify thy Name all the days of our life. Hear, Lord, and save us for
the infinite merits of our blessed Savior thy Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

The prayer to be said before a fight at Sea against any Enemy.
O Most powerful and glorious Lord God, the Lord of hosts, that rulest and
command all things; Thou sit in the Throne; judging right; and therefore
we make our Address to thy divine Majesty in this our necessity, that thou
would take the cause into thine own hand, and judge between us and our
enemies. Stir up thy strength, O Lord, and come and help us; for thou give
not always the battle to the strong, but can save by many or by few. O let not
our sins now cry against us for vengeance, but hear us thy poor servants
begging mercy, and imploring thy help, and that thou would be a defense unto
us against the face of the enemy. Make it appear that thou art our Savior and
mighty Deliverer, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Short Prayers for single Persons, that cannot meet to join in Prayer with
others, by reason of the Fight or Storm.
General Prayers.
LOrd, be merciful to us sinners, and save us, for thy mercies sake.

Thou art the great God, that have made and rulest all things: O deliver us for
thy Names sake.

Thou art the great God to be feared above all: O save us, that we may praise
thee.

Special Prayers with respect to the Enemy.
THou O Lord, art just and powerful; O defend our cause against the face of the
Enemy.

O God, thou art a strong tower of defense to all that flee unto thee: O save
us from the violence of the Enemy.

O Lord of hosts, fight for us, that we may glorify thee.

O suffer us not to sink under the weight of our sins, or the violence of the
enemy.

O Lord, arise, help us, and deliver us for thy Names sake.

Short Prayers in respect of a Storm.
THou, O Lord, that stillest the raging of the sea, hear, hear us, and save us,
that we perish not.

O blessed Savior, that did save thy disciples ready to perish in a Storm,
hear us, and save us, we beseech thee.

Lord, have mercy upon us.

Christ, have mercy upon us.

Lord, have mercy upon us.

O Lord, hear us.

O Christ, hear us.

God the Father, God the Son, God the holy Ghost, have mercy upon us, save us
now and evermore.

OUr Father which art in heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, As it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation: But deliver us from evil; For thine is the
kingdom, the power, and the glory, For ever and ever. Amen.

When there shall be imminent danger, as many as can be spared from necessary
service in the Ship, shall be called together, and make an humble Confession of
their sins to God: In which every one ought seriously to reflect upon those
particular sins of which his conscience shall accuse him: Saying as follows,

The confession.
ALmighty God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Maker of all things, Judge of
all men; We acknowledge and bewail our manifold sins and wickedness, Which we
from time to time most grievously have committed, By thought, word, and deed,
Against thy divine Majesty, Provoking most justly thy wrath and indignation
against us. We do earnestly repent, And be heartily sorry for these our
misdoings; The remembrance of them is grievous unto us, The burden of them is
intolerable. Have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us, most merciful Father; For
thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ sake, Forgive us all that is past, And grant,
that we may ever hereafter Serve and please thee In newness of life, To the
honor and glory of thy Name, Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall the Priest, if there be any in the Ship, Pronounce this Absolution.
ALmighty God, our heavenly Father, who of his great mercy has promised
forgiveness of sins to all them which with hearty repentance and true faith
turn unto him; Have mercy upon you, pardon and deliver you from all your sins;
confirm and strengthen you in all goodness, and bring you to everlasting life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Thanksgiving after a Storm.
Jubilate Deo. Psalm. 66.
O Be joyful in God, all ye lands: sing praises unto the honor of his Name,
make his praise to be glorious.

Say unto God, O how wonderful art thou in thy works: through the greatness of
thy power shall thine enemies be found liars unto thee.

For all the world shall worship thee: sing of thee, and praise thy Name.

O come hither, and behold the works of God: how wonderful he is in his doing
toward the children of men.

He turned the sea into dry land: so that they went through the water on foot;
there did we rejoice thereof.

He rules with his power for ever, his eyes behold the people: and such as
will not believe, shall not be able to exalt themselves.

O praise our God, ye people: and make the voice of his praise to be heard;

Who holds our soul in life: and suffers not our feet to slip.

For thou, O God, have proved us: thou also have tried us, like as silver is
tried.

Thou broughtest us into the snare: and laidst trouble upon our loins.

Thou sufferedst men to ride over our heads: we went through fire and water,
and thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place.

I will go into thy house with burnt-offerings: and will pay thee my vows which
I promised with my lips, and spoke with my mouth when I was in trouble.

I will offer unto thee fat burnt-sacrifices, with the incense of rams: I will
offer bullocks and goats.

O come hither and hearken, all ye that fear God: and I will tell you what he
has done for my soul.

I called unto him with my mouth: and gave him praises with my tongue.

If I incline unto wickedness with my heart: the Lord will not hear me.

But God has heard me: and considered the voice of my prayer.

Praised be God, who has not cast out my prayer: nor turned his mercy from me.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Confitemini Domino. Psalm. 107.
O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: and his mercy endures for
ever.

Let them give thanks whom the Lord has redeemed: and delivered from the hand
of the enemy;

And gathered them out of the lands, from the east and from the west: from the
north and from the south.

They went astray in the wilderness out of the way: and found no city to dwell
in;

Hungry and thirsty: their soul fainted in them.

So they cried unto the Lord in their trouble: and he delivered them from their
distress.

He led them forth by the right way: that they might go to the city where they
dwelt.

O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness: and declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men!

For he satisfies the empty soul: and fills the hungry soul with goodness.

Such as fit in darkness, and in the shadow of death: being fast bound in
misery and iron;

Because they rebelled against the words of the Lord: and lightly regarded the
counsel of most Highest;

He also brought down their heart through heaviness: they fell down, and there
was none to help them up.

So when they cried unto the Lord in their trouble: he delivered them out of
their distress.

For he brought them out of darkness, and out of the shadow of death: and brake
their bonds in sunder.

O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness: and declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men!

For he has broken the gates of brass: and smitten the bars of iron in sunder.

Foolish men are plagued for their offense: and because of their wickedness.

Their soul abhorred all manner of meat: and they were even hard at deaths door.

So when they cried unto the Lord in their trouble: he delivered them out of
their distress.

He sent his word and healed them: and they were saved from their destruction.

O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness: and declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men!

That they would offer unto him the sacrifice of thanksgiving: and tell out his
works with gladness!

They that go down to the sea in ships: and occupy their business in great
waters;

These men see the works of the Lord: and his wonders in the deep.

For at his word the stormy wind arises: which lifts up the waves thereof.

They are carried up to the heaven, and down again to the deep: their soul
melts away because of the trouble.

They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man: and are at their wits
end.

So when they cry unto the Lord in their trouble: he delivers them out of
their distress.

For he makes the storm to cease: so that the waves thereof are still.

Then are they glad, because they are at rest: and so he brings them unto the
haven where they would be.

O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness: and declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men!

That they would exalt him also in the congregation of the people: and praise
him in the seat of the elders!

Who turns the floods into a wilderness: and dries up the water-springs.

A fruitful land makes he barren: for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein.

Again, he makes the wilderness a standing water: and water-springs of a dry
ground.

And there he sets the hungry: that they may build them a city to dwell in;

That they may sow their land, and plant vineyards: to yield them fruits of
increase.

He blesses them, so that they multiply exceedingly: and suffers not their
cattle to decrease.

And again, when they are minished and brought low: through oppression, through
any plague or trouble;

Though he suffer them to be evil-entreated through tyrants: and let them
wander out of the way in the wilderness;

Yet helps he the poor out of misery: and makes him households like a flock
of sheep.

The righteous will consider this, and rejoice: and the mouth of all wickedness
shall be ^pped.

Whosoever is wise, will ponder these things: and they shall understand the loving
kindness of the Lord.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Collects of Thanksgiving.
O Most blessed and glorious Lord God, who art of infinite goodness and mercy;
We thy poor creatures, whom thou have made and preserved, holding our souls in
life, and now rescuing us out of the jaws of death, humbly present our selves
again before thy Divine Majesty, to offer a sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, for that thou heardest us when we called in our trouble, and
did not cast out our prayer, which we made before thee in our great distress;
even when we gave all for lost, our Ship, our Goods, our Lives, then did thou
mercifully look upon us, and wonderfully command a deliverance; for which, we
now being in safety, do give all praise and glory to thy holy Name, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Or this.

O Most mighty and gracious good God, thy mercy is over all thy works, but in
special manner has been extended toward us, whom thou have so powerfully and
wonderfully defended. Thou have showed us terrible things, and wonders in the
deep, that we might see how powerful and gracious a God thou art; how able and
ready to help them that trust in thee. Thou have showed us how both Winds and
Seas obey thy command, that we may learn even from them, hereafter to obey thy
voice, and to do thy will. We therefore bless and glorify thy Name for this
thy mercy in saving us, when we were ready to perish. And we beseech thee, make
us as truly sensible now of thy mercy, as we were then of the danger: And give
us hearts always ready to express our thankfulness, not only by words but also
by our lives, in being more obedient to thy holy commandments. Continue, we
beseech thee, this thy goodness to us, that we, whom thou have saved, may serve
thee in holiness and righteousness, all the days of our life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord and Savior. Amen.

A Hymn of Praise and Thanksgiving after a dangerous Tempest.
O Come, let us give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: and his mercy
endures for ever.

Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised; let the redeemed of the Lord say
so: whom he has delivered from the merciless rage of the sea.

The Lord is gracious and full of compassion: slow to anger, and of great mercy.

He has not dealt with us according to our sins: neither rewarded us according
to our iniquities.

But as the heaven is high above the earth: so great has been his mercy
toward us.

We found trouble and heaviness: we were even at deaths door;

The waters of the sea had well nigh covered us: the proud waters had well nigh
gone over our soul;

The sea rored: and the stormy wind lifted up the waves thereof;

We were carried up as it were to heaven, and then down again into the deep:
our soul melted within us, because of trouble;

Then cried we unto thee, O Lord: and thou did deliver us out of our distress.

Blessed be thy Name, who did not despise the prayer of thy servants: but
did hear our cry, and have saved us.

Thou did send forth thy commandment: and the windy storm ceased, and was
turned into a calm.

O let us therefore praise the Lord for his goodness: and declare the wonders
that he has done, and still does for the children of men.

Praised be the Lord daily: even the Lord that helps us, and pours his
benefits upon us.

He is our God, even the God of whom comes salvation: God is the Lord, by whom
we have escaped death.

Thou, Lord, have made us glad through the operation of thy hands: and we will
triumph in thy praise.

Blessed be the Lord God: even the Lord God, who only does wondrous things;

And blessed be the Name of his Majesty for ever: and let every one of us say,
Amen, Amen.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

2 Cor. 13.14.
THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the Holy Ghost, be with us all now and for evermore. Amen.

After Victory or Deliverance from an Enemy.
A Psalm or Hymn of Praise and thanksgiving after Victory.

IF the Lord had not been on our side, now may we say: if the Lord himself had
not been on our side, when men rose up against us;

They had swallowed us up quick: when they were so wrathfully displeased at us.

Yea, the waters had drowned us, and the stream had gone over our soul: the
deep waters of the proud had gone over our soul.

But praised be the Lord: who has not given us over as a prey unto them.

The Lord has wrought: a mighty salvation for us.

We gat not this by our own sword, neither was it our own arm that saved us:
but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because
thou had a favor unto us.

The Lord has appeared for us: the Lord has covered our heads, and made us to
stand in the day of battle.

The Lord has appeared for us: the Lord has overthrown our enemies, and
dashed in pieces those that rose up against us;

Therefore not unto us, O Lord, not unto us: but unto thy Name be given the
glory.

The Lord has done great things for us: the Lord has done great things for
us, for which we rejoice.

Our help stands in the Name of the Lord: who has made heaven and earth.

Blessed be the Name of the Lord: from this time forth for evermore.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

After this Hymn may be sung the Te Deum.

Then this Collect.

O Almighty God, the Sovereign Commander of all the world, in whose hand is
power and might which none is able to withstand; We bless and magnify thy
great and glorious Name for this happy Victory, the whole glory whereof we do
ascribe to thee, who art the only giver of Victory. And we beseech thee, give
us grace to improve this great mercy to thy glory, the advancement of thy
Gospel, the honor of our Sovereigns, and as much as in us lies, to the good
of all mankind. And, we beseech thee, give us such a sense of this great mercy,
as may engage us to a true thankfulness, such as may appear in our lives by an
humble, holy, and obedient walking before thee all our days, through Jesus
Christ our Lord: To whom with thee and the holy Spirit, as for all thy mercies,
so in particular for this Victory and deliverance, be all glory and honor
world without end. Amen.

2 Cor. 13.14.
THe grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the Holy Ghost, be with us all evermore. Amen.

At the Burial of their Dead at Sea.
THe Office in the Common Prayer Book may be used; Only in stead of these words

[We therefore commit his Body to the Ground, Earth to Earth, etc.] say, We
therefore commit his Body to the Deep, to be turned into corruption, looking
for the resurrection of the Body, (when the Sea shall give up her Dead,) and
the life of the world to come, through our Lord Jesus Christ; who at his coming
shall change our vile Body, that it may be like his glorious Body, according to
the mighty working, whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself.

THE Form and Manner OF Making, Ordaining and Consecrating OF Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons, According to the Order of the Church of England.
THE PREFACE.
IT is evident unto all men diligently reading holy Scripture and Ancient
Authors, that from the Apostles time there have been these Orders of Ministers
in Christ's Church; Bishops, Priests and Deacons. Which Offices were evermore
had in such Reverend estimation, that no man might presume to execute any of
them, except he were first Called, Tried, Examined, and Known to have such
Qualities as are requisite for the same; and also by public Prayer, with
Imposition of Hands, were approved and admitted thereunto by lawful Authority.
And therefore, to the intent that these Orders may be continued, and reverently
used and esteemed in the Church of England; No man shall be accounted or taken
to be a lawful Bishop, Priest, or Deacon in the Church of England, or suffered
to execute any of the said Functions, except he be Called, Tried, Examined and
Admitted thereunto, according to the Form hereafter following, or has had
formerly Episcopal Consecration or Ordination.

And none shall be Admitted a Deacon, except he be Twenty three years of age,
unless he have a Faculty. And every man which is to be Admitted a Priest, shall
be full Four and twenty years old. And every man which is to be Ordained or
Consecrated Bishop, shall be fully Thirty years of age.

And the Bishop knowing either by himself, or by sufficient testimony, any
Person to be a Man of virtuous Conversation, and without Crime, and after
Examination and Trial, finding him learned in the Latin Tongue, and
sufficiently Instructed in holy Scripture, may at the times appointed in the
Canon, or else upon urgent occasion, on some other Sunday or Holy Day, in the
face of the Church, Admit him a Deacon, in such Manner and Form as hereafter
follows.

THE Form and Manner of Making of Deacons.
WHen the day appointed by the Bishop is come, after Morning Prayer is ended,
there shall be a Sermon or Exhortation, declaring the Duty and Office of such
as come to be admitted Deacons; how necessary that Order is in the Church of
Christ; and also how the People ought to esteem them in their Office.

First the Archdeacon, or his Deputy, shall present unto the Bishop (sitting
in his Chair near to the holy Table) such as desire to be Ordained Deacons;
(each of them being decently habited) saying these words,

REverend Father in God, I present unto you these persons present to be
admitted Deacons.

The Bishop.

TAke heed that the persons whom ye present unto us, be apt and meet, for their
learning and godly conversation, to exercise their Ministry duly, to the honor
of God, and the edifying of his Church.

The Archdeacon shall answer,

I Have enquired of them, and also examined them, and think them so to be.

Then the Bishop shall say unto the People,

BRethren, if there be any of you who knows any Impediment or notable Crime
in any of these persons presented to be Ordered Deacons, for the which he ought
not to be admitted to that Office, let him come forth in the Name of God, and
show what the Crime or Impediment is.

And if any great Crime or Impediment be objected, the Bishop shall surcease
from Ordering that Person until such time as the Party accused shall be found
clear of that Crime.

Then the Bishop (commending such as shall be found meet to be Ordered, to the
Prayers of the Congregation) shall, with the Clergy and People present, sing or
say the Litany, with the Prayers as follows.

The Litany and Suffrages.

O God the Father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Father of heaven: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son, Redeemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Son, Redeemer of the world: have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father, and the Son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father, and the Son: have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O holy, blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God: have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

Remember not, Lord, our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers,
neither take thou vengeance of our sins: spare us, good Lord, spare thy people
whom thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us
for ever.

Spare us, good-Lord.

From all evil and mischief; from sin, from the crafts and assaults of the
devil, fron thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation,

Good Lord, deliver us.

From all blindness of heart; from pride vainglory and hypocrisy; from envy
hatred and malice, and all uncharitableness,

Good Lord, deliver us,

From fornication, and all other deadly sin; and from all the deceits of the
world the flesh, and the devil;

Good Lord, deliver us.

From lightning and tempest; from plague, pestilence and famine; from battle,
and murder, and from sudden death.

Good Lord, deliver us.

From all sedition privy conspiracy, and rebellion; from all false doctrine,
heresy, and schism, from hardness of heart, and contempt of thy Word and
Commandment,

Good Lord, deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy Incarnation; by thy holy Nativity and Circumcision;
by thy Baptism, Fasting, and Temptation,

Good Lord, deliver us.

By thine Agony and bloody Sweat; by thy Cross and Passion; by thy precious
Death, and Burial; by thy glorious Resurrection and Ascension; and by the
coming of the holy Ghost,

Good Lord, deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation; in all time of our wealth; in the hour of
death, and in the day of judgment,

Good Lord, deliver us.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us, O Lord God, and that it may please thee
to rule and govern thy holy Church universal in the right way;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of
thee, in righteousness and holiness of life, thy servant WILLIAM our most
gracious King and Governor;

That it may please thee to rule his heart in thy faith, fear and love, and
that he may evermore have affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honor and glory;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to be his defender and keeper, giving him the victory
over all his enemies;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and preserve CATHERINE the Queen Dowager, Her
Royal Highness the Princess ANNE of Denmark and all the Royal Family;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to illuminate all Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, with
true knowledge and understanding of thy Word, and that both by their preaching
and living they may set it forth and show it accordingly;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless these thy servants now to be admitted to the
Order of Deacons [or Priests,] and to pour thy grace upon them; that they may
duly execute their Office, to the edifying of thy Church, and the glory of thy
holy Name;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to endue the Lords of the Council, and all the
Nobility, with grace, wisdom and understanding;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace
to execute justice, and to maintain truth;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bless and keep all thy people;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all Nations, unity, peace, and concord;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy commandments;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give to all thy people increase of grace, to hear
meekly thy word, and to receive it with pure affection and to bring forth the
fruits of the Spirit;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth all such as have erred
and are deceived;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort, and
help the weak-hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat down
Satan under our feet;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to succor, help, and comfort all that are in danger,
necessity, and tribulation;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travel by land or by water, all
women laboring of child, all sick persons and young children, and to show thy
pity upon all prisoners and captives;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to defend and provide for the fatherless children and
widows, and all that are desolate and oppressed;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of
the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That it may please thee to give us true repentance, to forgive us all our
sins, negligences and ignorances, and to endue us with the grace of thy holy
Spirit, to amend our lives according to thy holy Word;

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God: we beseech thee to hear us.

O Lamb of God: that take away the sins of the world;

Grant us thy peace.

O Lamb of God: that take away the sins of the world;

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ, hear us.

O Christ, hear us.

Lord, have mercy upon us.

Lord, have mercy upon us.

Christ, have mercy upon us.

Christ, have mercy upon us.

Lord, have mercy upon us.

Lord, have mercy upon us.

Then shall the Priest, and the People with him, say the Lords Prayer.

OUr Father, which art in Heaven; Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in Earth, As it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; But deliver us from evil. Amen.

Priest. O Lord, deal not with us after our sins.


Answer. Neither reward us after our iniquities.


Priest. Let us pray.


O God merciful Father, that despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor
the desire of such as be sorrowful; Mercifully assist our prayers that we make
before thee in all our troubles and adversities, whenever they oppress us;
and graciously hear us, that those evils which the craft and subtilty of the
devil or man works against us, be brought to naught, and by the providence of
thy goodness they may be dispersed, that we thy servants, being hurt by no
persecutions, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord, arise, help us, and deliver us for thy Names sake.

O God, we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us the
noble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before them.

O Lord, arise, help us, and deliver us, for thine Honor.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;

Answer. As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without
end. Amen.


From our enemies defend us, O Christ.

Graciously look upon our afflictions.

Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts.

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.

O Son of David, have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us, O Christ.

Graciously hear us, O Christ, graciously hear us, O Lord Christ.

Priest. O Lord, let thy mercy be showed upon us.


Answer. As we do put our trust in thee.


WE humbly beseech thee, O Father, mercifully to look upon our infirmities; and
for the glory of thy Name turn from us all those evils that we most righteously
have deserved; and grant, that in all our troubles we may put our whole trust
and confidence in thy mercy, and evermore serve thee in holiness and pureness
of living, to thy honor and glory, through, our only Mediator and Advocate,
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall be sung or said the Service for the Communion, with the Collect,
Epistle, and Gospel, as follows.

The Collect.
ALmighty God, who by thy divine providence have appointed diverse Orders of
Ministers in thy Church, and did inspire thine Apostles to choose into the
Order of Deacons the first Martyr Saint Stephen, with others; Mercifully behold
these thy servants now called to the like Office and Administration. Replenish
them so with the truth of thy Doctrine, and adorn them with innocence of life,
that both by word and good example they may faithfully serve thee in this
Office, to the glory of thy Name, and the edification of thy Church, through
the merits of our Savior Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns with thee and
the Holy Ghost, now and for ever. Amen.

The Epistle. 1 Timothy 3.8.
LIkewise must the Deacons be grave, not double-tongued, not given to much
wine, not greedy of filthy lucre, holding the mystery of the faith in a pure
conscience. And let these also first be proved, then let them use the Office of
a Deacon, being found blameless. Even so must their wives be grave, not
slanderers, sober, faithful in all things. Let the Deacons be the husbands of
one wife, ruling their children, and their own houses well. For they that have
used the Office of a Deacon well, purchase to themselves a good degree, and
great boldness in the faith which is in Christ Jesus.

Or else this out of the Sixth of the Acts of the Apostles. Acts 6.2.

THen the twelve called the multitude of the disciples unto them, and said, It
is not reason that we should leave the word of God, and serve tables.
Wherefore, brethren, look ye out among you seven men of honest report, full of
the Holy Ghost and wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business. But we will
give our selves continually to prayer, and to the ministry of the word. And
the saying pleased the whole multitude. And they chose Stephen, a man full of
of faith and of the Holy Ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and
Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas, a proselyte of Antioch: Whom they set before
the Apostles; and when they had prayed, they laid their hands on them. And the
word of God increased, and the number of the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem
greatly, and a great company of the Priests were obedient to the faith.

And before the Gospel, the Bishop, sitting in his Chair, shall cause the Oath
of the Kings Supremacy, and against the Power and Authority of all foreign
Potentates, to be ministered unto every of them that are to be Ordered.

The Oath of the Kings Sovereignty.
I A. B. do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, That the Kings
Highness is the only supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highnesses Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
things or Causes, as Temporal: And that no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State, or Potentate, has or ought to have, any Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiority, Preeminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this
Realm. And therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all foreign
Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities, and Authorities; and do promise, That
from henceforth I shall bear Faith and true Allegiance to the Kings Highness,
His Heirs and lawful Successors, and to my power shall assist and defend all
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preeminences, and Authorities granted or belonging
to the Kings Highness, His Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm; So help me God, and the Contents of this Book.

Then shall the Bishop examine every one of them that are to be Ordered, in the
presence of the People, after this manner following.

DO you trust that you are inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost, to take upon you
this Office and Ministration, to serve God for the promoting of his glory, and
the edifying of his People?


Answer. I trust so.


The Bishop. DO you think that you are truly called according to the will of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the due Order of this Realm, to the Ministry of the
Church?


Answer. I think so.


The Bishop. DO you unfeignedly believe all the Canonical Scriptures of the Old
and New Testament?


Answer. I do believe them.


The Bishop. WIll you diligently read the same unto the People assembled in the
Church where you shall be appointed to serve?


Answer. I will


The Bishop. IT appertains to the Office of a Deacon, in the Church where he
shall be appointed to serve, to assist the Priest in Divine Service, and
specially when he ministers the holy Communion, and to help him in the
distribution thereof, and to read holy Scriptures and Homilies in the Church,
and to instruct the Youth in the Catechism; in the absence of the Priest to
Baptize Infants, and to Preach, if he be admitted thereto by the Bishop. And
furthermore, it is his Office, where provision is so made, to search for the
sick, poor and impotent people of the Parish, to intimate their estates, names,
and places where they dwell unto the Curate, that by his exhortation they may
be relieved with the alms of the Parishioners or others. Will you do this
gladly and willingly?


Answer. I will so do by the help of God.


The Bishop. WIll you apply all your diligence to frame and fashion your own
lives, and the lives of your Families, according to the doctrine of Christ, and
to make both your selves and them, as much as in you lies, wholesome examples of
the flock of Christ?


Answer. I will so do the Lord being my helper.


The Bishop. WIll you reverently obey your Ordinary, and other chief Ministers
of the Church, and them to whom the charge and government over you is
committed, following with a glad mind and will their godly admonitions?


Answer. I will endeavor my self, the Lord being my helper.


Then the Bishop laying his Hands severally upon the Head of every one of them,
humbly kneeling before him, shall say,

TAke thou authority to execute the Office of a Deacon in the Church of God
committed unto thee; In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost. Amen.

Then shall the Bishop deliver to every one of them the New Testament, saying,

TAke thou authority to read the Gospel in the Church of God, and to preach the
same, if thou be thereto licensed by the Bishop himself.

Then one of them appointed by the Bishop shall read

The Gospel. S. Luke 12.35.
LEt your loins be girded about, and your lights burning; and ye your selves
like unto men that wait for their Lord, when he will return from the wedding;
that when he comes and knocks, they may open unto him immediately. Blessed
are those servants, whom the Lord when he comes, shall find watching. Verily I
say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them to sit down to meat,
and will come forth and serve them. And if he shall come in the second watch,
or come in the third watch, and find them so, blessed are those servants.

Then shall the Bishop proceed in the Communion, and all that are Ordered,
shall tarry and receive the holy Communion the same day with the Bishop.

The Communion ended, after the last Collect, and immediately before the
Benediction, shall be said these Collects following.

ALmighty God, giver of all good things, who of thy great goodness have
vouchsafed to accept and take these thy servants unto the Office of Deacons in
thy Church; Make them, we beseech thee, O Lord, to be modest, humble, and
constant in their Ministration, to have a ready will to observe all spiritual
Discipline; that they having always the testimony of a good conscience, and
continuing ever stable and strong in thy Son Christ, may so well behave
themselves in this inferior Office, that they may be found worthy to be called
unto the higher Ministries in thy Church, through the same thy Son our Savior
Jesus Christ; to whom be glory and honor world without end. Amen.

PRevent us, O Lord, in all our doings with thy most gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help; that in all our works begun, continued, and
ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy Name, and finally by thy mercy obtain
everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THe peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds
in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. And the
blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, be amongst
you, and remain with you always. Amen.

ANd here it must be declared unto the Deacon, that he must continue in that
Office of a Deacon the space of a whole year (except for reasonable causes it
shall otherwise seem good unto the Bishop) to the intent he may be perfect, and
well expert in the things appertaining to the Ecclesiastical Administration. In
executing whereof, if he be found faithful and diligent, he may be admitted by
his Diocesan to the Order of Priesthood, at the times appointed in the Canon;
or else on urgent occasion, upon some other Sunday, or Holy Day, in the face of
the Church, in such manner and form as hereafter follows.

THE Form and Manner of Ordering of Priests.
WHen the day appointed by the Bishop is come, after Morning Prayer is ended,
there shall be a Sermon or Exhortation, declaring the Duty and Office of such
as come to be admitted Priests; how necessary that Order is in the Church of
Christ; and also how the People ought to esteem them in their Office.

First the Archdeacon, or in his absence, one appointed in his stead, shall
present unto the Bishop (sitting in his Chair near to the holy Table) all them
that shall receive the Order of Priesthood that day (each of them being
decently habited) and say,

REverend Father in God, I present unto you these persons present to be
admitted to the Order of Priesthood.

The Bishop.

TAke heed that the persons whom ye present unto us, be apt and meet, for their
learning and godly conversation, to exercise their Ministry duly, to the honor
of God, and the edifying of his Church.

The Archdeacon shall answer,

I Have enquired of them, and also examined them, and think them so to be.

Then the Bishop shall say unto the People,

GOod people, these are they whom we purpose, God willing, to receive this day
unto the holy Office of Priesthood: For after due examination we find not to
the contrary, but that they be lawfully called to their Function and Ministry,
and that they be persons meet for the same. But yet if there be any of you who
knows any Impediment or notable Crime in any of them, for the which he ought
not to be received into this holy Ministry, let him come forth in the Name of
God, and show what the Crime or Impediment is.

And if any great Crime or Impediment be objected, the Bishop shall surcease
from Ordering that Person until such time as the Party accused shall be found
clear of that Crime.

Then the Bishop (commending such as shall be found meet to be Ordered, to the
Prayers of the Congregation) shall, with the Clergy and People present, sing or
say the Litany, with the Prayers as is before appointed in the Form of Ordering
Deacons; save only that in the proper Suffrage there added, the word [Deacons]
shall be omitted, and the word [Priests] inserted in stead of it.

Then shall be sung or said the Service for the Communion; with the Collect,
Epistle, and Gospel, as follows.

The Collect.
ALmighty God, giver of all good things, who by thy holy Spirit have appointed
diverse Orders of Ministers in the Church; Mercifully behold these thy servants
now called to the Office of Priesthood, and replenish them so with the truth of
thy doctrine, and adorn them with innocence of life, that both by word and good
example they may faithfully serve thee in this Office, to the glory of thy
Name, and the edification of thy Church, through the merits of our Savior
Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns with thee and the Holy Ghost, world
without end. Amen.

The Epistle. Ephesians. 4.7.
UNto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of
Christ. Wherefore he says, When he ascended up on high, he led captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men. (Now that he ascended, what is it, but that
he also descended first into the lower parts of the earth? He that descended,
is the same also that ascended up far above all heavens, that he might fill all
things.) And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists,
and some Pastors, and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work
of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ; till we all come in
the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect
man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

After this shall be read for the Gospel part of the Ninth Chapter of S.
Matthew, as follows.

S. Matthew. 9.36.
WHen Jesus saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion on them, because
they fainted, and were scattered abroad as sheep having no shepherd. Then says
he unto his disciples, The harvest truly is plenteous, but the laborers are
few. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will send forth
laborers into his harvest.

Or else this that follows out of the Tenth Chapter of Saint John.

S. John 10.1.
VErily verily I say unto you, He that enters not by the door into the
sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber.
But he that enters in by the door, is the shepherd of the sheep. To him the
porter opens, and the sheep hear is voice; and he calls his own sheep by
name, and leads them out. And when he puts forth his own sheep, he goes
before them, and the sheep follow him; for they know his voice. And a stranger
will they not follow, but will flee from him; for they know not the voice of
strangers. This parable spoke Jesus unto them, but they understood not what
things they were which he spoke unto them. Then said Jesus unto them again,
Verily verily I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep. All that ever came
before me, are thieves and robbers; but the sheep did not hear them. I am the
door, by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out,
and find pasture. The thief comes not but for to steal, and to kill, and to
destroy: I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more
abundantly. I am the good Shepherd: the good Shepherd gives his life for the
sheep. But he that is an hireling, and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep
are not, sees the wolf coming, and leaves the sheep, and flees; and the wolf
catches them, and scatters the sheep. The hireling flees because he is an
hireling, and cares not for the sheep. I am the good Shepherd, and know my
sheep, and am known of mine. As the Father knows me, even so know I the
Father; and I lay down my life for the sheep. And other sheep I have which are
not of this fold: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and
there shall be one fold, and one Shepherd.

Then the Bishop sitting in his Chair, shall minister unto every one of them
the Oath concerning the Kings Supremacy, as it is before set forth in the Form
for the Ordering of Deacons.

And that done, he shall say unto them as hereafter follows.

YOu have heard, brethren, as well in your private examination, as in the
exhortation which was now made to you, and in the holy Lessons taken out of the
Gospel, and the Writings of the Apostles, of what dignity, and of how great
importance this Office is, whereunto ye are called. And now again we exhort you
in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you have in remembrance into how
high a Dignity, and to how weighty an Office and Charge ye are called: That is
to say, to be Messengers, Watchmen, and Stewards of the Lord; to teach and to
premonish, to feed and provide for the Lords family; to seek for Christ's sheep
that are dispersed abroad, and for his children who are in the midst of this
naughty world, that they may be saved through Christ for ever.

Have always therefore printed in your remembrance, how great a treasure is
committed to your charge. For they are the sheep of Christ, which he bought
with his death, and for whom he shed his blood. The Church and Congregation
whom you must serve, is his Spouse, and his Body. And if it shall happen the
same Church, or any member thereof, to take any hurt or hindrance by reason of
your negligence, ye know the greatness of the fault, and also the horrible
punishment that will ensue. Wherefore consider with your selves the end of your
Ministry toward the children of God, toward the Spouse and Body of Christ;
and see that you never cease your labor, your care and diligence, until you
have done all that lies in you, according to your bounden duty, to bring all
such as are, or shall be committed to your charge, unto that agreement in the
faith and knowledge of God, and to that ripeness and perfectness of age in
Christ, that there be no place left among you, either for error in Religion,
or for viciousness in Life.

Forasmuch then as your Office is both of so great excellency, and of so great
difficulty, ye see with how great care and study ye ought to apply your selves,
as well that ye may show your selves dutiful and thankful unto that Lord who
has placed you in so high a Dignity; as also to beware, that neither you your
selves offend, nor be occasion that others offend. Howbeit ye cannot have a
mind and will thereto of your selves; for that will and ability is given of God
alone: Therefore ye ought, and have need to pray earnestly for his holy Spirit.
And seeing that you cannot by any other means compass the doing of so weighty a
work, pertaining to the salvation of man, but with doctrine and exhortation
taken out of the holy Scriptures, and with a life agreeable to the same;
consider how studious, ye ought to be in reading and learning the Scriptures,
and in framing the manners, both of your selves, and of them that specially
pertain unto you, according to the rule of the same Scriptures: And for this
self same cause, how ye ought to forsake and set aside (as much as you may) all
worldly cares and studies.

We have good hope that you have well weighed and pondered these things with
your selves long before this time; and that you have clearly determined, by
Gods grace, to give your selves wholly to this Office, whereunto it has
pleased God to call you: So that as much as lies in you, you will apply your
selves wholly to this one thing, and draw all your cares and studies this way;
and that you will continually pray to God the Father, by the mediation of our
only Savior Jesus Christ, for the heavenly assistance of the Holy Ghost; that
by daily reading and weighing of the Scriptures, ye may wax riper and stronger
in your Ministry, and that ye may so endeavor your selves from time to time,
to sanctify the lives of you and yours, and to fashion them after the rule and
Doctrine of Christ, that ye may be wholesome and godly examples, and patterns for
the people to follow.

And now that this present Congregation of Christ, here assembled, may also
understand your minds and wills in these things, and that this your promise may
the more move you, to do your duties; ye shall answer plainly to these things,
which we in the Name of God, and of his Church, shall demand of you touching
the same.

DO you think in your heart that you be truly called, according to the will of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Order of this Church of England, to the Order
and Ministry of Priesthood?

Answer. I think it.

The Bishop. ARe you persuaded that the holy Scriptures contain sufficiently
all Doctrine required of necessity for eternal salvation through faith in Jesus
Christ? And are you determined out of the said Scriptures to instruct the
people committed to your charge, and to teach nothing (as required of necessity
to eternal salvation) but that which you shall be persuaded may be concluded
and proved by the Scripture?


Answer. I am so persuaded, and have so determined by Gods grace.


The Bishop. WIll you then give your faithful diligence always so to minister
the Doctrine and Sacraments, and the Discipline of Christ, as the Lord has
commanded, and as this Church and Realm has received the same, according to
the Commandments of God; so that you may teach the people committed to your
Care and Charge, with all diligence to keep and observe the same?


Answer. I will so do by the help of the Lord.


The Bishop. WIll you be ready with all faithful diligence to banish and drive
away all erroneous and strange Doctrines, contrary to Gods Word; and to use
both public and private monitions and exhortations, as well to the fick as to
the whole, within your Cures, as need shall require, and occasion shall be
given?


Answer. I will, the Lord being my helper.


The Bishop. Will you be diligent in prayers, and in reading of the holy
Scriptures, and in such Studies as help to the knowledge Of the same, laying
aside the study of the world and the flesh?


Answer. I will endeavor my self so to do, the Lord being my helper.


The Bishop. WIll you be diligent to frame and fashion your own selves, and
your Families, according to the Doctrine of Christ, and to make both your
selves and them, as much as in you lies, wholesome examples and patterns to the
flock of Christ?


Answer. I will apply my self thereto, the Lord being my helper.


The Bishop. WIll you maintain and set forwards, as much as lies in you,
quietness, peace, and love among all Christian people, and especially among
them that are or shall be committed to your charge?


Answer. I will so do, the Lord being my helper.


The Bishop. WIll you reverently obey your Ordinary, and other chief Ministers,
unto whom is committed the charge and government over you; following with a
glad mind and will their godly admonitions, and submitting your selves to their
godly judgments?


Answer. I will so do, the Lord being my helper.


Then shall the Bishop standing up, say,

ALmighty God, who has given you this will to do all these things, Grant also
unto you strength and power to perform the same; that he may accomplish his
work which he has begun in you, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

After this the Congregation shall be desired, secretly in their Prayers, to
make their humble supplications to God for all these things: For the which
Prayers there shall be silence kept for a space.

After which shall be sung or said by the Bishop (the persons to be Ordained
Priests all kneeling Veni, Creator Spiritus; the Bishop beginning, and the
Priests and others that are present, answering by Verses, as follows.

COme, Holy Ghost, our souls inspire,
And lighten with celestial fire.
Thou the anointing Spirit art,
Who do thy sevenfold gifts impart.
Thy blessed Unction from above,
Is comfort, life, and fire of love.
Enable with perpetual light
The dullness of our blinded sight.
Anoint and cheer our soiled face
With the abundance of thy grace.
Keep far our foes, give peace at home:
Where thou art guide, no ill can come.
Teach us to know the Father, Son,
And thee, of both to be but one.
That through the ages all along,
This may be our endless song;
Praise to thy eternal merit,
Father, Son, and holy Spirit.
Or this.

COme, Holy Ghost, eternal God, proceeding from above,
Both from the Father, and the Son, the God of peace and love.
Visit our minds, into our hearts thy heavenly grace inspire,
That truth and godliness we may pursue with full desire.
Thou art the very Comforter in grief and all distress:
The heavenly gift of God most high, no tongue can it express.
The fountain and the living spring of joy celestial:
The fire so bright, the love so sweet, the Unction spiritual.
Thou in thy gifts art manifold, by them Christ's Church does stand:
In faithful hearts thou writ'st thy law, the finger of Gods hand.
According to thy promise, Lord, thou give speech with grace,
That through thy help Gods praises may resound in every place.
O Holy Ghost, into our minds send down thy heavenly light;
Kindle our hearts with fervent zeal, to serve God day and night.
Our weakness strengthen and confirm (for, Lord, thou know us frail)
That neither devil, world, nor flesh against us may prevail.
Put back our enemies far from us, and help us to obtain
Peace in our hearts with God and man, (the best, the truest gain;)
And grant that thou being, O Lord, our leader and our guide,
We may escape the snares of sin, and never from thee slide.
Such measures of thy powerful grace, grant, Lord, to us, we pray,
That thou may be our Comforter at the last dreadful day.
Of strife and of dissension dissolve, O Lord, the bands,
And knit the knots of peace and love throughout all Christian Lands.
Grant us thy grace that we may know the Father of all might,
That we of his beloved Son may gain the blissful sight,
And that we may with perfect faith ever acknowledge thee,
The Spirit of Father, and of Son, One God in Persons three.
To God the Father, laud and praise, and to his blessed Son,
And to the holy Spirit of grace, Coequal three in one.
And pray we that our only Lord would please his Spirit to send
On all that shall profess his Name, from hence to the worlds end.
Amen.
That done, the Bishop shall pray in this wise, and say, Let us pray.

ALmighty God and heavenly Father, who of thine infinite love and goodness
toward us, have given to us thy only and most dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ
to be our Redeemer, and the Author of everlasting life; who after he had made
perfect our Redemption by his death, and was ascended into heaven, sent abroad
into the world his Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Doctors, and Pastors, by
whose labor and ministry he gathered together a great flock in all the parts
of the world, to set forth the eternal praise of thy holy Name: For these so
great benefits of thy eternal goodness, and for that thou have vouchsafed to
call these thy servants here present, to the same Office and Ministry appointed
for the salvation of mankind, we render unto thee most hearty thanks, we praise
and worship thee; and we humbly beseech thee by the same thy blessed Son, to
grant unto all which either here or elsewhere call upon thy holy Name, that we
may continue to show our selves thankful unto thee for these and all other thy
benefits, and that we may daily increase and go forwards in the knowledge and
faith of thee and thy Son, by the holy Spirit. So that as well by these thy
Ministers, as by them over whom they shall be appointed thy Ministers, thy holy
Name may before ever glorified, and thy blessed Kingdom enlarged, through the
same thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who lives and reigns with thee in the
unity of the same holy Spirit, world without end. Amen.

When this prayer is done, the Bishop, with the Priests present, shall lay
their hands severally upon the head of every one that receives the Order of
Priesthood; the Receivers humbly kneeling upon their knees, and the Bishop
saying,

REceive the Holy Ghost for the Office and work of a Priest in the Church of
God, now committed unto thee by the Imposition of our Hands. Whose sins thou
do forgive, they are forgiven; and whose sins thou do retain, they are
retained. And be thou a faithful Dispenser of the Word of God, and of his holy
Sacraments; In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
Amen.

Then the Bishop shall deliver to every one of them, kneeling, the Bible into
his hand, saying,

TAke thou Authority to Preach the Word of God, and to Minister the holy
Sacraments in the Congregation, where thou shall be lawfully appointed
thereunto.

When this is done, the Nicene Creed shall be sung or said, and the Bishop
shall after that go on in the Service of the Communion, which all they that
receive Orders, shall take together, and remain in the same place where hands
were laid upon them, until such time as they have received the Communion.

The Communion being done, after the last Collect, and immediately before the
Benediction, shall be said these Collects.

MOst merciful Father, we beseech thee to send upon these thy servants, thy
heavenly blessing, that they may be clothed with righteousness, and that thy
Word spoken by their mouths, may have such success, that it may never be spoken
in vain. Grant also that we may have grace to hear and receive what they shall
deliver out of thy most holy Word, or agreeable to the same, as the means of
our salvation; that in all our words and deeds we may seek thy glory, and the
increase of thy Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

PRevent us, O Lord, in all our doings with thy most gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help, that in all our works begun, continued, and
ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy Name, and finally by thy mercy obtain
everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THe peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds
in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. And the
blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, be amongst
you, and remain with you always. Amen.

ANd if on the same day the Order of Deacons be given to some, and the Order of
Priesthood to others; The Deacons shall be first Presented, and then the
Priests: and it shall suffice that the Litany be once said for both. The
Collects shall both be used; first, that for Deacons, then that for Priests.
The Epistle shall be Ephesians. iv. 7. to 14. as before in this Office. Immediately
after which, they that are to be made Deacons, shall take the Oath of
Supremacy, be Examined and Ordained, as is above prescribed. Then one of them
having read the Gospel (which shall be either out of S. Matthew. ix. 36. as
before in this Office; or else S. Luke xii. 35 to 39 as before in the Form for
the Ordering of Deacons) they that are to be made Priests shall likewise take
the Oath of Supremacy, be Examined and Ordained, as is in this Office before
appointed.

The Form of Ordaining or Consecrating of an ARCHBISHOP, or BISHOP; Which is
always to be performed upon some Sunday, or Holy Day.

When all things are duly prepared in the Church, and set in Order; after
Morning Prayer is ended, the Archbishop (or some other Bishop appointed) shall
begin the Communion-Service; in which this shall be

The Collect.
ALmighty God, who by thy Son Jesus Christ did give to thy holy Apostles many
excellent gifts, and did charge them to feed thy flock; Give grace, we
beseech thee, to all Bishops, the Pastors of thy Church, that they may
diligently Preach thy Word, and duly Administer the godly Discipline thereof;
and grant to the people, that they may obediently follow the same, that all may
receive the crown of everlasting glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

And another Bishop shall read

The Epistle. 1 Timothy 3.1.
THis is a true saying, If a man desire the Office of a Bishop, he desires a
good work. A Bishop then must be blameless, the husband of one wife, vigilant,
sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality, apt to teach, not given to
wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre; but patient, not a brawler, not
covetous; one that rules well his own house, having his children in subjection
with all gravity; (For if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall
he take care of the Church of God?) not a novice, lest being lifted up with
pride, he fall into the condemnation of the devil. Moreover, he must have a
good report of them which are without, lest he fall into reproach, and the
snare of the devil.

Or this, for the Epistle. Acts 20.17.
FRom Miletus Paul sent to Ephesus, and called the elders of the Church. And
when they were come to him, he said unto them, Ye know from the first day that
I came into Asia, after what manner I have been with you at all seasons,
serving the Lord with all humility of mind, and with many tears and temptations
which befell me by the lying in wait of the Jews: And how I kept back nothing
that was profitable unto you, but have showed you, and have taught you
publicly, and from house to house, testifying both to the Jews, and also to
the Greeks, repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. And
now behold, I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things
that shall befall me there; save that the Holy Ghost witnesses in every city,
saying, That bonds and afflictions abide me. But none of these things move me,
neither count I my life dear unto my self, so that I might finish my course
with joy, and the Ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify
the Gospel of the grace of God. And now behold, I know that ye all among whom I
have gone preaching the kingdom of God, shall see my face no more. Wherefore I
take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men. For I
have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God. Take heed
therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock over the which the Holy Ghost
has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased
with his own blood. For I know this, that after my departing, shall grievous
wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall
men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them.
Therefore watch, and remember, that by the space of three years I ceased not to
warn every one night and day with tears. And now, brethren, I commend you to
God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give
you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified. I have coveted no man's
silver, or gold, or apparel, yea, you your selves know, that these hands have
ministered unto my necessities, and to them that were with me. I have showed you
all things, how that so laboring ye ought to support the weak, and to remember
the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more blessed to give then to
receive.

Then another Bishop shall read

The Gospel. S. John 21.15.
JEsus says to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jonas, love thou me more then
these? He says unto him, Yea, Lord, thou know that I love thee. He says
unto him, Feed my lambs. He says to him again the second time, Simon, son of
Jonas, love thou me? He says unto him, Yea, Lord, thou know that I love
thee. He says unto him, Feed my sheep. He says unto him the third time,
Simon, son of Jonas, love thou me? Peter was grieved because he said unto him
the third time, Love thou me? And he said unto him, Lord, thou know all
things; thou know that I love thee. Jesus says unto him, Feed my sheep.

Or this. S. John 20.19.

THe same day at evening, being the first day of the week, when the doors were
shut, where the disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and
stood in the midst, and says unto them, Peace be unto you. And when he had so
said, he showed unto them his hands and his side. Then were the disciples glad
when they saw the Lord. Then said Jesus to them again, Peace be unto you: As my
Father has sent me, even so send I you. And when he had said this, he breathed
on them, and says unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost. Whose soever sins ye
remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are
retained.

Or this. S. Matthew. 28.19.

JEsus came and spoke unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in heaven
and in earth. Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: And lo I am with you always,
even unto the end of the world.

After the Gospel, and the Nicene Creed, and the Sermon are ended, the Elected
Bishop (vested with his Rotchet) shall be presented by two Bishops unto the
Archbishop of that Province (or to some other Bishop appointed by lawful
Commission) the Archbishop sitting in his Chair near the holy Table, and the
Bishops that present him, saying,

MOst Reverend Father in God, we present unto you this godly and well-learned
Man, to be Ordained and Consecrated Bishop.

Then shall the Archbishop demand the Kings Mandate for the Consecration, and
cause it to be read. And the Oath touching the acknowledgment of the Kings
Supremacy shall be ministered to the Persons Elected, as it is set down before
in the Form for the Ordering of Deacons. And then shall also be ministered unto
them the Oath of due Obedience to the Archbishop, as follows.

The Oath of due Obedience to the Archbishop.
IN the Name of God. Amen. I N. chosen Bishop of the Church and See of N. do
profess and promise all due reverence and obedience to the Archbishop, and to
the Metropolitical Church of N. and to their Successors; So help me God,
through Jesus Christ.

This Oath shall not be made at the Consecration of an Archbishop.

Then the Archbishop shall move the Congregation present to pray, saying thus
to them,

BRethren, it is written in the Gospel of S. Luke, That our Savior Christ
continued the whole night in Prayer, before he did choose and send forth his
twelve Apostles. It is written also in the Acts of the Apostles, That the
Disciples who were at Antioch, did fast and pray before they laid hands on Paul
and Barnabas, and sent them forth. Let us therefore, following the example of
our Savior Christ and his Apostles, first fall to prayer, before we admit and
send forth this Person presented unto us, to the work whereunto we trust the
Holy Ghost has called him.

And then shall be said the Litany, as before, in the Form of Ordering Deacons:
save only that after this place, That it may please thee to illuminate all
Bishops, etc. the proper Suffrage there following shall be omitted, and this
inserted in stead of it;

THat it may please thee to bless this our Brother Elected, and to send thy
grace upon him, that he may duly execute the Office whereunto he is called, to
the edifying of thy Church, and to the honor, praise, and glory of thy Name.

Answer. We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

Then shall be said this Prayer following.

ALmighty God, giver of all good things, who by thy holy Spirit have appointed
diverse Orders of Ministers in thy Church; Mercifully behold this thy servant
now called to the Work and Ministry of a Bishop, and replenish him so with the
truth of thy Doctrine, and adorn him with innocence of life, that both by word
and deed he may faithfully serve thee in this Office, to the glory of thy Name,
and the edifying and well governing of thy Church, through the merits of our
Savior Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns with thee and the Holy Ghost,
world without end. Amen.

Then the Archbishop, sitting in his Chair, shall say to him that is to be
Consecrated.

Brother, forasmuch as the holy Scripture, and the ancient Canons command, that
We should not be hasty in laying on Hands, and admitting any Person to
Government in the Church of Christ, which he has purchased with no less price
then the effusion of his own blood; before I admit you to this Administration,
I will examine you in certain Articles, to the end that the Congregation
present may have a trial, and bear witness how you be minded to behave your
self in the Church of God.

ARe you persuaded that you be truly called to this Ministration, according to
the will of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Order of this Realm?

Answer. I am so persuaded.

The Archbishop. ARe you persuaded that the holy Scriptures contain
sufficiently all Doctrine required of necessity to eternal salvation through
faith in Jesus Christ? And are you determined out of the same holy Scriptures
to instruct the people committed to your charge; and to teach or maintain
nothing, as required of necessity to eternal salvation, but that which you
shall be persuaded may be concluded and proved by the same?


Answer. I am so persuaded, and determined by Gods grace.


The Archbishop. WIll you then faithfully exercise your self in the same holy
Scriptures, and call upon God by prayer, for the true understanding of the
same; so as ye may be able by them to teach and exhort with wholesome Doctrine,
and to withstand and convince the gainsayers?


Answer. I will so do by the help of God.


The Archbishop. ARe you ready with all faithful diligence to banish and drive
away all erroneous and strange Doctrine, contrary to Gods Word; and both
privately and openly to call upon, and encourage others to the same?


Answer. I am ready, the Lord being my helper.


The Archbishop. WIll ye deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, that you may show your
self in all things an example of good works unto others, that the adversary may
be ashamed, having nothing to say against you?


Answer. I will so do, the Lord being my helper.


The Archbishops. WIll you maintain and set forward, as much as shall lie in
you, quietness, love, and peace among all men; and such as be unquiet,
disobedient, and criminous within your Diocese, correct and punish, according
to such authority as you have by Gods Word, and as to you shall be committed by
the Ordinance of this Realm?


Answer. I will so do by the help of God.


The Archbishop. WIll you be faithful in Ordaining, Sending, or Laying Hands
upon others?


Answer. I will so be by the help of God.


The Archbishop. WIll you show your self gentle, and be merciful for Christ's
sake to poor and needy people, and to all strangers destitute of help?


Answer. I will so show my self, by Gods help.


Then the Archbishop standing up, shall say,

ALmighty God, our heavenly Father, who has given you a good will to do all
these things, grant also unto you strength and power to perform the same; that
he accomplishing in you the good work which he has begun, you may be found
perfect and irreprehensible at the latter day, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Then shall the Bishop Elect put on the rest of the Episcopal Habit, and
kneeling down [Veni, Creator Spiritus] shall be sung or said over him, the
Archbishop beginning, and the Bishops, with others that are present, answering
by Verses, as follows.

COme, Holy Ghost, our souls inspire,
And lighten with celestial fire.
Thou the anointing Spirit art,
Who do thy sevenfold gifts impart.
Thy blessed Unction from above,
Is comfort, life, and fire of love.
Enable with perpetual light
The dullness of our blinded sight.
Anoint and cheer our soiled face
With the abundance of thy grace.
Keep far our foes, give peace at home:
Where thou art guide, no ill can come.
Teach us to know the Father, Son,
And thee, of both to be but one.
That through the ages all along,
This may be our endless song;
Praise to thy eternal merit,
Father, Son, and holy Spirit.
Or this.

COme, Holy Ghost, eternal God, proceeding from above,
Both from the Father, and the Son, the God of peace and love.
Visit our minds, into our hearts thy heavenly grace inspire,
That truth and godliness we may pursue with full desire.
Thou art the very Comforter in grief and all distress:
The heavenly gift of God most high, no tongue can it express.
The fountain and the living spring of joy celestial:
The fire so bright, the love so sweet, the Unction spiritual.
Thou in thy gifts art manifold, by them Christ's Church does stand:
In faithful hearts thou writ'st thy law, the finger of Gods hand.
According to thy promise, Lord, thou give speech with grace,
That through thy help Gods praises may resound in every place.
O Holy Ghost, into our minds send down thy heavenly light;
Kindle our hearts with servent zeal, to serve God day and night.
Our Weakness strengthen and confirm (for, Lord, thou know us frail)
That neither devil, world, nor flesh against us may prevail.
Put back our enemies far from us, and help us to obtain
Peace in our hearts with God and man, (the best, the truest gain;)
And grant that thou being, O Lord, our leader and our guide,
We may escape the snares of sin, and never from thee slide.
Such measures of thy powerful grace, grant, Lord, to us, we pray,
That thou may be our Comforter at the last dreadful day.
Of strife and of dissension dissolve, O Lord, the bands,
And knit the knots of peace and love throughout all Christian Lands.
Grant us thy grace that we may know the Father of all might,
That we of his beloved Son may gain the blissful sight,
And that we may with perfect faith ever acknowledge thee,
The Spirit of Father, and of Son, One God in Persons three.
To God the Father, laud and praise, and to his blessed Son,
And to the holy Spirit of grace, Coequal three in one.
And pray we that our only Lord would please his Spirit to send
On all that shall profess his Name, from hence to the worlds end.
Amen.
That ended, the Archbishop shall say,

Lord, hear our prayer.

Answer. And let our cry come unto thee.

Archbishop. Let us pray.

ALmighty God, and most merciful Father, who of thine infinite goodness have
given thy only and dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ, to be our Redeemer, and the
author of everlasting life; who after that he had made perfect our Redemption
by his death, and was ascended into heaven, poured down abundantly his gifts
upon men, making some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors
and Doctors, to the edifying and making perfect his Church; Grant, we beseech
thee, to this thy Servant such grace, that he may evermore be ready to spread
abroad thy Gospel, the glad tidings of reconciliation with thee, and use the
Authority given him, not to destruction, but to salvation; not to hurt, but to
help; so that as a wise and faithful servant, giving to thy Family their
portion in due season, he may at last be received into everlasting joy, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, who with thee and the Holy Ghost lives and reigns one
God, world without end. Amen.

Then the Archbishop and Bishops present, shall lay their Hands upon the Head
of the Elected Bishop, kneeling before them upon his Knees, the Archbishop
saying,

REceive the Holy Ghost, for the Office and Work of a Bishop in the Church of
God, now committed unto thee by the Imposition of our Hands; In the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen. And remember that thou
stir up the grace of God which is given thee by this Imposition of our Hands:
For God has not given us the spirit of fear, but of power, and love, and
soberness.

Then the Archbishop shall deliver him the Bible, saying,

GIve heed unto reading, Exhortation, and Doctrine. Think upon the things
contained in this Book. Be diligent in them that the increase coming thereby
may be manifest unto all men. Take heed unto thy self, and to Doctrine, and be
diligent in doing them: for by so doing thou shall both save thy self, and them
that hear thee. Be to the flock of Christ a shepherd, not a wolf; feed them,
devour them not. Hold up the weak, heal the sick, bind up the broken, bring
again the outcasts, seek the lost. Be so merciful, that you be not too remiss;
so minister Discipline, that you forget not mercy: that when the chief Shepherd
shall appear, you may receive the never-fading crown of glory, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then the Archbishop shall proceed in the Communion-Service; with whom the new
Consecrated Bishop (with others) shall also Communicate.

And for the last Collect, immediately before the Benediction, shall be said
these Prayers.

MOst merciful Father, we beseech thee to send down upon this thy Servant thy
heavenly blessing, and so endue him with thy holy Spirit, that he Preaching thy
Word, may not only be earnest to reprove, beseech and rebuke with all patience
and doctrine; but also may be to such as believe, a wholesome example in word, in
conversation, in love, in faith, in chastity, and in purity; that faithfully
fulfilling his course, at the latter day he may receive the crown of
righteousness laid up by the Lord the righteous Judge, who lives and reigns
one God with the Father and the Holy Ghost, world without end. Amen.

PRevent us, O Lord, in all our doings with thy most gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help; that in all our works begun, continued, and
ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy Name, and finally by thy mercy obtain
everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THe peace of God which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds
in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. And the
blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost be amongst
you, and remain with you always. Amen.

Marie R.

OUR Will and Pleasure is, That these Three Forms of Prayer and Service made
for the Fifth of November, the Thirtieth of January, and the Twenty ninth of
May, be forthwith Printed, and Published, and for the future annexed to the
Book of Common Prayer and Liturgy of the Church of England, to be used yearly
on the said days, in all Cathedral and Collegiate Churches and Chapels, in all
Chapels of Colleges and Halls within both Our Universities, and of Our
Colleges of Eaton and Winchester, and in all Parish-Churches and Chapels
within Our Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon
Tweed.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Sixth day of October, 1692. in the Fourth
year of Our Reign. By Her Majesty's Command. Nottingham.

A Form of Prayer with Thanksgiving, To be used yearly upon the Fifth day of
November; for the happy deliverance of King JAMES I. and the Three Estates of
the Realm, from the most Traitorous and Bloody intended Massacre by Gunpowder:
And also for the happy Arrival of His present Majesty on this Day for the
Deliverance of our Church and Nation.
The Service shall be the same with the usual Office for holydays in all
things; Except where it is hereafter otherwise appointed.

If this Day shall happen to be on Sunday, only the Collect proper for that
Sunday, shall be added to this Office in its place.

Morning Prayer shall begin with these Sentences.

THE Lord is full of compassion and mercy: long-suffering, and of great
goodness. Psalm. 103.8.

He will not always be chiding: neither keeps he his anger for ever. Verse 9.

He has not dealt with us after our sins: nor rewarded us according to our
wickednesses. Verse. 10.

Instead of Venite exultremus, shall this hymn following be used, one Verse by
the Priest, and another by the Clerk and People.

O Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious: and his mercy endures for
ever. Psalm. 107.1.

Let them give thanks whom the Lord has redeemed: and delivered from the hand
of the enemy, verse. 2.

Many a time have they fought against me from my youth up: may Israel now say.
Psalm. 129.1.

Yea, many a time have they vexed me from my youth up: but they have not
prevailed against me. verse. 2.

They have privily laid their net to destroy me without a cause: yea, even
without a cause have they made a pit for my soul. Psalm. 35.7.

They have laid a net for my feet, and pressed down my soul: they have dug a
pit before me; and are fallen into the midst of it themselves. Psalm. 57 7.

Great is our Lord, and great is his power: yea, and his wisdom is infinite.
Ps. 147.5.

The Lord sets up the meek: and brings the ungodly down to the ground.
verse. 6.

Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand: and upon the son of man whom
thou made so strong for thine own self. Psalm. 80.17.

And so will not me go back from thee: O let us live, and we shall call upon
thy name. ver. 18.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Proper Psalms. Lxiv, Cxxiv, Cxxv.

Proper Lessons. The First, 2 Samuel XXII. Te Denm. The second, Acts XXIII.
Jubilate.


In the Suffrages after the Creed, these shall be inserted and used for the
King.

Priest. O Lord, save the King;


People. Who puts his trust in thee.


Priest. Send him help from thy holy place.


People. And evermore mightily defend him.


Priest. Let his enemies have no advantage against him.


People. Let not the wicked approach to hurt him.


Instead of the first Collect at Morning Prayer, shall these two be used.

ALmighty God, who have in all ages showed thy Power and Mercy in the
miraculous and gracious deliverances of thy Church, and in the protection of
righteous and religious Kings and States, professing thy holy and eternal
truth, from the wicked Conspiracies, and malicious Practices of all the enemies
thereof; We yield thee our unfeigned thanks and praise, for the wonderful and
mighty deliverance of our late gracious Sovereign King James the First, the
Queen, the Prince, and all the Royal Branches, with the Nobility, Clergy and
Commons of this Realm, then assembled in Parliament, by Popish Treachery
appointed as sheep to the slaughter, in a most barbarous and savage manner,
beyond the examples of former ages. From this unnatural Conspiracy, not our
merit, but thy mercy; not our foresight, but thy providence delivered us: And
therefore not unto us, O Lord, not unto us; but unto thy Name be ascribed all
honor and glory in all Churches of the saints, from generation to generation,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

ACcept also, most gracious God, of our unfeigned thanks for filling our hearts
again with joy and gladness, after the time that thou have afflicted us, and
putting a new song into our mouths, by bringing his Majesty, who now reigns
over us, upon this Day, for the deliverance of our Church and Nation from
Popish Tyranny and Arbitrary power. We adore the wisdom and justice of thy
providence, which so timely interposed in our extreme danger, and disappointed
all the designs of our enemies. We beseech thee, give us such a lively and
lasting sense of what thou did then, and have, since that, time done for us,
that we may not grow secure and careless in our obedience, by presuming upon
thy great and undeserved goddness; but that it may lead us to repentance, and
move us to be the more diligent and zealous in all the duties of our Religion
which thou have in a mavelous manner preserved to us. Let truth and justice,
brotherly kindness and charity, devotion and piety, concord and unity, with all
other virtues, so flourish among us, that they may be the Stability of our
Times, and make this Church a Praise in the Earth. All which we humbly beg for
the sake of our blessed Lord and Savior. Amen.

In the end of the Litany (which shall always this Day he used) after the
Collect [We humbly beseech thee, O Father, etc] shall this be said which
follows.

ALmighty God and heavenly Father, who of thy gracious providence, and tender
mercy toward us, did prevent the malice and imaginations of our enemies, by
discovering and confounding their horrible and wicked enterprise, plotted and
intended this Day to be executed against the King, and the whole State of this
Realm, for the Subversion of the Government, and Religion established among us;
and did likewise upon this Day wonderfully conduct thy servant our present
King, and bring him safely into this Kingdom, to preserve us from the late
Attempts of our Enemies, to bereave us of our Religion and Laws: We most humbly
praise and magnify thy most glorious Name, for thy unspeakable goodness
toward us expressed in both these Acts of thy mercy. We confess it has been of
thy mercy alone, that we are not consumed: for our sins have cried to Heaven
against us; and our iniquities justly called for vengeance upon us. But thou
have not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us after our iniquities;
nor given us over, as we deserved, to be a prey to our Enemies, but have in
mercy delivered us from their malice, and preserved us from death and
destruction. Let the consideration of this thy repeated goodness, O Lord, work
in us true repentance, that iniquity may not be our ruin. And increase in us
more and more a lively faith and love, fruitful in all holy obedience, that
thou may still continue thy favor with the light of thy Gospel to us and
our posterity for evermore; and that for thy dear Sons sake Jesus Christ our
only Mediator and Advocate. Amen.

Instead of the Prayer [In time of War and Tumults] shall be used this Prayer
following.

O Lord, who did this day discover the snares of death that were laid for us,
and did wonderfully deliver us from the same; Be thou still our mighty
Protector, and scatter our Enemies that delight in blond. Infatuate and defeat
their Counsels, abate their Pride, assuage their Malice, and confound their
Devices. Strengthen the hands of our gracious Sovereign King WILLIAM, and all
that are put in Authority under him, with Judgment and Justice, to cut off all
such workers of iniquity, as turn Religion into Rebellion, and Faith into
Faction; that they may never prevail against us, or triumph in the ruin of thy
Church among us: But that our gracious Sovereign and his Realms being preserved
in thy true Religion, and by thy merciful goodness protected in the same, we
may all duly serve thee, and give thee thanks in thy holy Congregation, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

In the Communion-Service, instead of the Collect for the day, shall this which
follows be used.

ETernal God, and our most mighty Protector, we thy unworthy servants do
humbly present our selves before thy Majesty, acknowledging thy Power, Wisdom
and Goodness in Preserving the King, and the Three Estates of this Realm
assembled in Parliament, from the Destruction this Day intended against them.
Make us, we beseech thee, truly thankful for this, and for all other thy great
Mercies toward us; particularly for making this Day again memorable, by a
fresh Instance of thy Loving Kindness toward us. We bless thee for giving his
Majesty, that now is, a safe Arrival here, and for making all Opposition fall
before him, till he became our King and Governor. Continue, we beseech thee,
to Protect and Defend him, and all the Royal Family, from all Treasons and
Conspiracies; Preserve them in thy Faith, Fear and Love; Prosper his Reign with
long Happiness here on Earth; and Crown him with everlasting Glory hereafter,
through Jesus Christ our Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

The Epistle. Romans 13.1.
LEt every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For there is no power but of
God: the powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the
power, resists the ordinance of God: and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves damnation. For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the
evil. Will thou then not be afraid of the power? do that which is good, and
thou shall have praise of the same: For he is the minister of God to thee for
good. But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he bears not the
sword in vain: for he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon
him that does evil. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath,
but also for conscience sake. For, for this cause pay you tribute also: for
they are Gods ministers, attending continually upon this very thing. Render
therefore to all their dues; tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom
custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor.

The Gospel. S. Luke. 9.51.
ANd it came to pass, when the time was come that he should be received up, he
steadfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem, and sent messengers before his
face: and they went and entered into a village of the Samaritans, to make ready
for him. And they did not receive him, because his face was as though he would
go to Jerusalem. And when his disciples James and John saw this, they said,
Lord, will thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume
them, even as Elias did? But he turned and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not
what manner of spirit ye are of. For the Son of man is not come to destroy men's
lives, but to save them. And they went to another village.

After the Creed, if there be no Sermon, shall be read one of the six Homilies
against Rebellion.

This Sentence is to be read at the Offertory.

WHatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this
is the law and the prophets. S. Matthew. 7.12.

After the Prayer for the Church Militant, this following Prayer is to be used.

O God, whose Name is excellent in all the Earth, and thy Glory above the
Heavens; who, on this day, did miraculously preserve our Church and State
from the secret contrivance and hellish malice of Popish Conspirators; and on
this day also did begin to give us a mighty Deliverance from the open Tyranny
and Oppression of the same Cruel and Bloodthirsty Enemies: we bless and adore
thy glorious Majesty, as for the former, so for this thy late mavelous Loving
kindness to our Church and Nation, in the Preservation of our Religion and
Liberties. And we humbly pray, that the devout Sense of this thy repeated
Mercy, may renew and increase in us a Spirit of Love and Thankfulness to thee
its only Author; a Spirit of peaceable Submission and Obedience to our gracious
Sovereign, whom thou made the blessed Instrument of it; and a Spirit of
fervent zeal for our holy Religion, which now again thou have so wonderfully
Rescued and Established a Blessing to us, and our Posterity. And this we beg
for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

A Form of Prayer with Fasting to be used Yearly upon the Thirtieth of January,
being the Day of the Martyrdom of the Blessed King CHARLES the First: To
Implore the Mercy of God, That neither the Guilt of that Sacred and Innocent
Blood, nor those other Sins, by which God was provoked to deliver up both us,
and our King into the hands of cruel and unreasonable Men, may at any time
hereafter be visited upon us, or our Posterity.

If this day shall happen to be Sunday, this Form of Prayer shall be used, and
the Fast kept the next Day following. And upon the Lords Day next before the
Day to be kept, at Morning Prayer immediately after the Nicene Creed, Notice
shall be given for the due observation of the said Day.

The Service on the Day shall be the same with the usual Office for Holy days
in all things: Except where it is in this Office otherwise appointed.

The Order for Morning Prayer.
He that Ministers shall begin with one or more of these Sentences.

TO the Lord our God belong Mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled
against him: neither have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in
his laws, which he set before us. Dan. 9.9, 10.

Correct us, O Lord, but with judgment, not in thine anger: lest thou bring us
to nothing. Jer. 10.24.

Enter not into judgment with thy servants, O Lord: for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified. Psalm. 143.2.

Instead of Venite exultemus, the Hymn following shall be said or sung; one
Verse by the Priest, another by the Clerk and People.

RIghteous art thou, O Lord: and just are they judgments. Psalm. 119.137.

Thou art just, O Lord, in all that is brought upon us: for thou hust done
right, but we have done wickedly. Neh. 9.33.

Nevertheless my feet were almost gone: my treadings had well nigh slipped. Ps.
73.2.

For why? I was grieved at the wicked: I did also see the ungodly in such
prosperity. ver. 3.

The people stood up, and the rulers took counsel together: against the Lord,
and against his anointed. Psalm. 2.2.

They cast their heads together with one consent: and were confederate against
him. Ps 83.5

He heard the blasphemy of the multitude, and fear was on every side: while
they conspired together against him, to take away his life. Psalm. 31.15.

They spoke against him with false tongues, and compast him about with words of
hatred: and fought against him without a cause. Psalm. 109.2.

Yea, his own familiar friends whom he trusted: they that eat of his bread,
laid great wait for him. Psalm. 41.9.

They rewarded him evil for good: to the great discomfort of his soul. Psalm.
35.12.

They took their counsel together, saying, God has forsaken him: persecute
him, and take him, for there is none to deliver him. Psalm. 71.9.

The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord was taken in their pits:
of whom we said Under his shadow we shall be safe. Lam. 4.20.

The adversary and the enemy entered into the gates of Jerusalem: saying, When
shall the die, and his name perish? verse 12. Psalm. 41.5.

Let the sentence of guiltiness proceed against him: and now that he lies, let
him rise up no more. verse 8.

False witnesses also did rise up against him: they laid to his charge things,
that he knew not Psalm. 35.11.

For the sins of the people, and the iniquities of the priests: they shed the
blood of the just in the midst of Jerusalem. Lam. 4.13.

O my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine honor,
be not thou united: for in their anger they slew a man. Genesis 49.6.

Even the man of thy right hand: the Son of man, whom thou had made so strong
for thine own self. Psalm. 80.17.

In the sight of the unwise he seemed to die: and his departure was taken for
misery. Wisdom 3.2.

They fools counted his life madness, and his end to be without honor: But he
is in peace. Wisd. 5.4.3.3.

For though he was punished in the sight of men: yet was his hopeful of
immortality, Wisd. 3.4.

How is he numbered with the children of God: and his lot is among the saints!
Wisd. 5.5.

But, O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongs: be favorable and gracious unto
Sion. Psalm. 94.1. Psalm. 51.18.

Be merciful, O Lord, unto thy people, whom thou have redeemed: and lay not
innocent blood to charge. Deuteronomy. 21.8.

O shut not up our souls with sinners: nor our lives with the bloodthirsty.
Ps. 26.9.

Deliver us from bloud-guiltiness, O God, thou that art the God of our
salvation: and our tongues shall sing of thy righteousness. Psalm. 51.14.

For thou art the God, that have no pleasure in wickedness: neither shall any
evil dwell with thee. Psalm. 5.4.

Thou will destroy them that speak leasing: the Lord abhors both the
bloodthirsty, and deceitful man. verse 6.

O how suddenly do they consume: perish, and come to a fearful end! Ps. 73.18.

Yea, even like as a dream, when one awaketh: so did thou make their image to
vanish out of the city. verse 19.

Great and mavelous are thy works, O Lord God Almighty: just, and true are
thy ways, O King of saints! Apoc. 15.3.

Righteous art thou, O Lord: and just are thy judgments! Psalm. 119.137.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the Holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end.
Amen.

Proper Psalms. IX, X, XI.

Proper Lessons. The First. 2 Samuel I. The Second. S. Matthew. XXVII.


Instead of the first Collect at Morning Prayer, shall these two, which next
follows, be used.

O Most mighty God, terrible in thy judgments, and wonderful in thy doings
toward the children of men; who in thy heavy displeasure did suffer the life
of our late gracious Sovereign King Charles the First to be (as) this day taken
away by the hands of cruel and bloody men: We thy sinful creatures here
assembled before thee, do, in the behalf of all the people of this land, humbly
confess, that they were the crying fins if this Nation, which brought down this
heavy judgment upon us. But, O gracious God, when thou make inquisition for
blood, lay not the guilt of this innocent blood (the shedding whereof nothing
but the blood of thy Son can expiate) lay it not to the charge of the people of
this land; nor let it ever be required of us, or our posterity. Be merciful, O
Lord, be merciful unto thy people, whom thou have redeemed; and be not angry
with us for ever: But pardon us for thy mercies sake, through the merits of thy
Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

BLessed Lord, in whose fight the death of thy saints is precious; We magnify
thy Name for thine abundant grace bestowed on our late martyred Sovereign; by
which he was enabled so cheerfully to follow the steps of his blessed Master
and Savior, in a constant meek suffering of all barbarous indignities, and at
last resisting unto blood; and even then according to the same pattern, praying
for his murderers. Let his memory, O Lord, be ever blessed among us; that we
may follow the example of his courage and constancy, his meekness, and
patience, and great charity. And grant, that this our land may be freed from
the vengeance of his righteous blood, and thy mercy glorified in the
forgiveness of our sins; and all for Jesus Christ his sake our only Mediator
and Advocate. Amen.

In the end of the Litany (which shall always on this day be used) immediately
after the Collect, [We humbly beseech thee, O Father, etc.] the three Collects
next following are to be read.

O Lord, we beseech thee mercifully hear our prayers, and spare all those who
confess their sins unto thee, that they whose consciences by sin are accused,
by thy merciful pardon may be absolved, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Most mighty God, and merciful Father, who have compassion upon all men, and
hate nothing that thou have made, who would not the death of a sinner, but
that he should rather turn from his sin and be saved; Mercifully forgive us our
trespasses; receive and comfort us, who are grieved and wearied with the burden
of our sins. Thy property is always to have mercy; to thee only it appertains
to forgive sins. Spare us therefore, good Lord, spare thy people, whom thou
have redeemed; enter not into judgment with thy servants, who are vile earth
and miserable sinners; but so turn thine anger from us, who meekly acknowledge
our vileness, and truly repent us of our faults; and so make haste to help us
in this world, that we may ever live with thee in the world to come, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

TUrn thou us, O good Lord, and so shall we be turned. Be favorable, O Lord,
Be favorable to thy people, Who turn to thee in weeping, fasting, and praying.
For thou art a merciful God, Full of Compassion, Long-suffering, and of great
pity. Thou sparest, when we deserve punishment, And in thy wrath think upon
mercy. Spare thy people, good Lord, spare them, and let not thine heritage be
brought to confusion. Hear us, O Lord, for thy mercy is great, And after the
multitude of thy mercies look upon us, Through the merits and mediation of thy
blessed Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

In the Communion-Service after the Prayer for the King [Almighty God whose
kingdom is everlasting, etc.] instead of the Collect for the day, shall these
two be used.

O most mighty God, etc. Blessed Lord, in whose sight, etc.
As in the Morning Prayer.

The Epistle. 1 S. Pet. 2.13.
SUbmit your felyes to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake; whether it be
to the King as supreme; or unto governors, as unto them that are sent by him,
for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. For
so is the will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance
of foolish men: As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, but as the servants of God. Honor all men. Love the
brotherhood. Fear God Honor the King. Servants be subject to your masters with
all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward. For what is
thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffering
wrongfully. For what glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults, ye
shall take it patiently? but if when ye do well, and suffer for it, ye take it
patiently; this is acceptable with God. For even hereunto were ye called;
because Christ also suffer for us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow
his steps; who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 21.33.
THere was a certain householder which planted a vineyard, and hedged it round
about, and dug a wine press in it, and built a tower, and let it out to
husbandmen, and went into a far country. And when the time of the fruit drew
near, he sent his servants to the husbandmen, that they might receive the
fruits of it. And the husbandmen took his servants, and beat one, and killed
another, and stoned another. Again, he sent other servants, mo then the first:
and they did unto them likewise. But last of all he sent unto them his son,
saying, They will reverence my son. But when the husbandmen saw the son they
said among themselves, This is the heir, come, let us kill him, and let us
seize on his inheritance. And they caught him, and cast him out of the
vineyard, and slew him. When the Lord therefore of the vineyard comes, what
will he do unto those husbandmen? They say unto him, He will miserably destroy
those wicked men, and will let out his vineyard unto other husbandmen which
shall render him the fruits in their seasons.

After the Nicene Creed, shall be read instead of the Sermon for that day, The
first and Second parts of the Homily against Disobedience, and wilful Rebellion
set forth by Authority; Or the Minister who Officiates, shall preach a Sermon
of his own composing upon the same Argument.

In the Offertory shall this Sentence be read.

Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, even so do unto them; for
this is the law and the prophets. S. Matthew. 7.12.

After the Prayer [For the whole state of Christ's Church, etc.] these two
Collects following shall be used.

O Lord, our heavenly Father, who did not punish us, as our sins have
deserved, but have in the midst of judgment remembered mercy; We acknowledge it
thine especial favor, that though for our many and great provocations, thou
did suffer thine anointed blessed King Charles the First (as) this day to
fall into the hands of violent and bloodthirsty men, and barbarously to be
murdered by them; yet thou did not leave us for ever, as sheep without a
shepherd, but by thy gracious providence did miraculously preserve the
undoubted heir of his Crowns, our then gracious Sovereign King Charles the
Second from his bloody enemies, hiding him under the shadow of thy wings, until
their tyranny was overpast; and did bring him back in thy good appointed
time, to fit upon the throne of his Father; and, together with the Royal
Family, did restore to us our ancient Government in Church and State. For
these thy great and unspeakable mercies, we render to thee our most humble
thanks from the bottom of our hearts; beseeching thee, still to continue thy
gracious protection over the whole Royal Family, and to grant to our gracious
Sovereign, King William a long and a happy Reign over us: So we that are thy
people, will give thee thanks ever, and will always be showing forth thy praise
from generation to generation, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. Amen.

ANd grant, O Lord, we beseech thee, that the course of this world may be so
peaceably ordered by thy governance, that thy Church may joyfully serve thee in
all godly quietness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Order for Evening Prayer.
The Hymn appointed to be used at Morning Prayer instead of Venite, exultemus,
shall here also be used before the proper Psalms.

Proper Psalms. LXXXIX, XCIV, LXXXV.

Proper Lessons. The First, Jer. 12. or Dan. 9. to v. 22. The second, Heb.
11.32; and 12. to v. 7.


Instead of the first Collect at Evening Prayer, shall these two which next
follow be used.

O Blessed Lord God, who by thy wisdom not only guidest, and orderest all
things most suitably to thine own justice; but also performest thy pleasure in
such a manner, that we cannot but acknowledge thee to be righteous in all thy
ways, and holy in all thy works: We thy sinful people do here fall down before
thee, confessing that thy judgments were right, in permitting cruel men, sons
of Belial, as this day, to imbrue their hands in the blood of thine Anointed;
we having drawn down the same upon our selves, by the great and long
provocations of our sins against thee. For which we do therefore here humble
our selves before thee; imploring thy mercy for the pardon of them all; and
that thou would deliver this Nation from bloud-guiltiness, (that of this day
especially) and turn from us and our posterity all those judgments which we by
our sins have deserved: Grant this for the all-sufficient merits of thy Son our
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

BLessed God, just and powerful, who did permit thy dear Servant, our late
dread Sovereign King Charles the First, to be, as upon this day, given up to
the violent outrages of wicked men, to be despitefully used, and at last
murdered by them: Though we cannot reflect upon so foul an act, but with
horror and astonishment; yet do we most gratefully commemorate the glories of
thy grace which then shined forth in thine Anointed; whom thou were pleased
even at the hour of death to endue with an eminent measure of exemplary
patience, meekness, and charity, before the face of his cruel enemies. And
albeit thou did suffer them to proceed to such an height of violence, as to
kill him, and to take possession of his Throne; yet did thou in great mercy
preserve his Son, whose right it was, and at length by a wonderful providence
bring him back, and set him thereon, to restore thy true Religion, and to
settle peace amongst us: For which we glorify thy Name, through Jesus Christ
our blessed Savior. Amen.

Immediately after the Collect [Lighten our darkness, etc.] shall these three
next following be used.

O Lord, we beseech thee, etc. O most mighty God and merciful Father, etc. Turn
thou us, O good Lord, and so, etc.
As before at Morning Prayer.

Immediately before the Prayer of St. Chrysostom, shall this Collect, which
next follweth, be used.

ALmighty and everlasting God, whose righteousness is like the strong mountains
and thy judgments like the great deep; and who by that barbarous murder, as
upon this day committed upon the Sacred Person of thine Anointed, have taught
us, that neither the greatest of Kings, nor the best of men are more secure
from violence then from natural death; Teach us also hereby so to number our
days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom. And grant that neither the
splendor of any thing that is great, nor the conceit of any thing that is good
in us, may any ways withdraw our eyes from looking upon our selves as sinful
dust and ashes; but that according to the example of this thy blessed Martyr,
we may press forward toward the prize of the high calling that is before us, in
faith and patience, humility and meekness, mortification and self-denial,
charity and constant perseverance unto the end; And all this for thy Son our
Lord Jesus Christ his sake: To whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honor
and glory, world without end. Amen.

A Form of Prayer with Thanksgiving to Almighty God, For having put an end to
the Great Rebellion by the Restitution of the King and Royal Family, and the
Restoration of the Government after many Years Interruption: Which unspeakable
Mercies were wonderfully completed upon the Twenty ninth of May, in the year
1660. And in Memory thereof that Day in every Year is by Act of Parliament
appointed to be for ever kept holy.
THE Act of Parliament made in the in, the Twelfth, and confirmed in the
Thirteenth Year of king Charles the Second, for the observation of the Twenty
ninth day of May yearly, as a Day of public Thanksgiving, is to be read
publicly in all Churches at Morning Prayer, immediately after the Nicene Creed
on the Lords Day next before every such Twenty ninth of May, and notice to be
given for the due observation of the said Day.

The Service shall be the same with the usual Office for Holy Days; except
where it is in this Office otherwise appointed.

If this day shall happen to be Ascension-day, or Whitsunday, the Collects of
this Office are to be added to the Office of those Festivals in their proper
places; And if Monday or Tuesday in Whitsun-Week or Trinity Sunday, the proper
Psalms here appointed for this Day, instead of those of ordinary course, shall
be also used and the Collects added, as before; and in all these cases the rest
of this Office shall be omitted: But if it shall happen to be any other Sunday,
this whole Office shall be used, as it follows, entirely. And what Festival
soever shall happen to fall upon this solemn Day of Thanksgiving, the following
Hymn appointed instead of Venite, exultemus, shall be constantly used.

Morning Prayer shall begin with these Sentences.

TO the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled
against him: neither have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk in
his laws, which he set before us. Dan. 9.9, 10.

It is of the Lords mercies that we were not consumed: because his compassions
fail not Lam. 3.22.

Instead of Venite, exultemus, shall be said or sung this Hymn following; one
Verse by the Priest, and another by the Clerk and People.

MY song shall be always of the loving kindness of the Lord: with my mouth will
I ever be showing forth his truth from one generation to another. Ps. 89.1.

The merciful and gracious Lord has so done his mavelous works: that they
ought to be had in remembrance. Psalm. 111.4.

Who can express the noble acts of the Lord: or show forth all his praise? Ps.
106.2.

The works of the Lord are great: sought out of all them that have pleasure
therein Ps. 111.2.

The Lord sets up the meek: and brings the ungodly down to the ground. Ps.
147.6.

The Lord executes righteousness and judgment: for all them that are oppressed
with wrong. Psalm. 103.6.

For he will not always be chiding: neither keeps he his anger for ever
verse. 9.

He has not dealt with us after our sins: nor rewarded us according to our
wickdness. verse. 10.

For look how high the heaven is in comparison of the earth: so great is his
mercy toward them that fear him. Psalm. 103.11.

Yea, like as a father pitieth his own children: even so is the Lord merciful
unto them that fear him. verse 13.

Thou O God have proved us: thou also have tried us! even as silver is tried.
Ps. 66.9.

Thou sufferedst men to ride over our heads, we went through fire and water:
but thou have brought us out into a wealthy place. verse 11.

Oh, how great troubles and adversities have thou showed us: and yet did thou
turn and refresh us: yea, and broughtest us from the deep of the earth again.
Ps. 71.18.

Thou did remember us in our low estate, and redeemed us from our enemies:
for thy mercy endures for ever. Ps. 136.23, 24.

Lord, thou art become gracious unto thy land: thou have turned away the
captivity of Jacob. Psalm. 85.1.

God has showed us his goodness plenteously* and God has let us see our
desire upon our enemies. Psalm. 59.10.

They are brought down and fallen: but we are risen and stand upright. Ps. 20.8.

There are they fallen, all that work wickedness: they are cast down, and shall
not be able to stand. Psalm. 36.12.

The Lord has been mindful of us, and he shall bless us: even he shall bless
the house of Israel, he shall bless the house of Aaron. Psalm. 115.12.

He shall bless them that fear the Lord: both small and great. verse 13.

O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness: and declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men. Psalm. 107.21.

That they would offer unto him the sacrifice of thanksgiving: and tell out his
works with gladness. verse. 22.

And not hide them from the children of the generations to come: but show the
honor of the Lord, his mighty and wonderful works that he has done. Ps. 78.4.

That our posterity may also know them, and the children that are yet unborn:
and not be as their forefathers, a faithless and stubborn generation. Psalm.
78.6, 9.

Give thanks, O Israel, unto God the Lord, in the congregations: from the
ground of the heart. Psalm. 68.26.

Praised be the Lord daily: even the God who helps us, and pours his
benefits upon us. v. 19.

O let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end: but establish thou the
righteous. Psalm. 7.9.

Let all those that seek thee, be joyful and glad in thee: and let all such as
love thy salvation, say always, The Lord be praised. Psalm. 40.19.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son: and to the holy Ghost;

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be: world without end. Amen.

Proper Psalms. CXXIV. CXXVI. CXXIX. CXVIII.

Proper Lessons. The First, 2 Samuel 19. to ver. 9. or Number. 15. Te Deum.

Proper Lessons. The Second, the Epistle of Saint Jude. Jubilate Deo.

The Suffrages next after the Creed shall stand thus.

Priest. O Lord, show thy mercy upon us


Answer And grant us thy salvation.


Priest O Lord, save the King;


Answer Who puts his trust in thee.


Priest Send him help from thy holy place.


Answer. And evermore mightily defend him.


Priest. Let his enemies have no advantage against him.


Answer. Let not the wicked approach to hurt him.


Priest. Endue thy Ministers with righteousness.


Answer. And make thy chosen people joyful.


Priest. Give peace in our time, O Lord.


Answer. Because there is none other that fights for us, but only thou, O God.


Priest. Be unto us, O Lord, a strong Tower.


Answer. From the face of our enemies.


Priest. O Lord, hear our prayer.


Answer. And let our cry come unto thee.


Instead of the first Collect at Morning Prayer, shall these two which follow
be used.

O Almighty God, who art a strong Tower of defense unto thy servants against
the face of their enemies; We yield thee praise and thanks, for the wonderful
deliverance of these Three Kingdoms from The GREAT REBELLION, and all the
Miseries and Oppressions consequent thereupon, under which they had so long
groaned. We acknowledge it thy Goodness, that we were not utterly delivered
over as a prey unto them. Beseeching thee still to continue such thy mercies
toward us, that all the world may know, that thou art our Savior and mighty
Deliverer, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord God of our Salvation, who have been exceedingly gracious unto this
land, and by thy miraculous providence did deliver us out of our miserable
confusions, by restoring to us, and to his own just and undoubted Rights, our
then most gracious Sovereign Lord thy Servant King Charles the Second,
(notwithstanding all the power and malice of his enemies) and by placing him in
the Throne of thi^ Kingdom; thereby restoring also unto us the public and free
profession of thy true Religion and Worship, together with our former peace and
prosperity, to the great comfort and joy of our hearts: We are here now before
thee, with all due thankfulness, to acknowledge thine unspeakable goodness
herein, as upon this day, showed unto us, and to offer up our sacrifice of
praise for the same, unto thy great and glorious Name; humbly beseeching thee
to accept this our unfeigned though unworthy Oblation of our selves: vowing all
holy obedience in thought word and work unto thy Divine Majesty; and promising
in thee and for thee all loyal and dutiful allegiance to thine Anointed Servant
now set over us, and to his Heirs after him: Whom we beseech thee to bless with
all increase of Grace, Honor and Happiness in this world, and to crown him
with Immortality and Glory in the world to come, for Jesus Christ his sake, our
only Lord and Savior. Amen.

In the end of the Litany (which shall always this Day be used) after the
Collect [We humbly beseech thee, O Father, etc.] shall this be said which next
follows.

ALmighty God, who have in all ages shwed forth thy Power and Mercy in the
miraculous and gracious deliverances of thy Church, and in the protection of
righteous and religious Kings and States, professing thy holy and eternal
truth, from the malicious Conspiracies, and wicked Practices of all their
enemies: We yield unto thee from the very bottom of our hearts unfeigned thanks
and praise, as for thy many great and public mercies, so especially for that
signal and wonderful deliverance by thy wise and good providence, as upon this
day, completed and vouchsafed to our then most gracious Sovereign King Charles
the Second, and all the Royal Family: And in them and with them to this whole
Church and State, and all Orders and Degrees of men in both, from the unnatural
Rebellion, Usurpation and Tyranny of ungodly and cruel men, and from the sad
Confusions and Ruin thereupon ensuing. From all these, O gracious, and
merciful Lord God, not our merit, but thy mercy; not our foresight, but thy
providence; Not our own arm, but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light
of thy countenance did rescue and deliver us; even because thou had a favor
unto us. And therefore not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name be
ascribed all Honor, Glory and Praise, with most humble and hearty thanks, in
all Churches of the Saints: Even so, blessed be the Lord our God, who alone
does wondrous things; and blessed be the Name of his Majesty for ever, through
Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. Amen.

In the Communion-Service immediately before the reading of the Epistle shall
these two Collects be used, instead of the Collect for the King, and the
Collect of the day.

O Almighty God, who art a strong tower of defense unto thy servants against
the face of their enemies; We yield thee praise and thanks for the wonderful
deliverance of these three Kingdoms from THE GREAT REBELLION, and all the
miseries and oppressions consequent thereupon, under which they had so long
groaned. We acknowledge it thy goodness that we were not utterly delivered over
as a prey unto them: beseeching thee still to continue such thy mercies toward
us; that all the world may know, that thou art our Savior and mighty
Deliverer, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord God of our Salvation, who have been exceedingly gracious unto this
land, and by thy miraculous Providence did deliver us out of our miserable
Confusions, by restoring to us, and to his own just and undoubted Rights, our
then most gracious Sovereign Lord, thy Servant King Charles the Second,
(notwithstanding all the power and malice of his enemies) and by placing him in
the Throne of this Kingdom; thereby restoring also unto us the public and free
profession of thy true Religion and Worship, together with our former peace and
prosperity, to the great comfort and joy of our hearts: We are here now before
thee, with all due thankfulness to acknowledge thine unspeakable goodness
herein, as upon this day, showed unto us, and to offer up our sacrifice of
praise for the same, unto thy great and glorious Name; humbly beseeching thee
to accept this our unfeigned, though unworthy Oblation of our selves: Vowing
all holy Obedience in thought, word, and work, unto thy Divine Majesty; and
promising in thee and for thee all loyal and dutiful Allegiance to thine
Anointed Servant now set over us to his Heirs after him: Whom we beseech thee
to bless with all increase of grace, honor and happiness in this world, and to
crown him with Immortality and Glory in the world to come, for Jesus Christ his
sake, our only Lord and Savior. Amen.

The Epistle. 1 S. Pet. 2.11.
DEarly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly
lusts, which war against the soul; having your conversation honest among the
Gentiles: that whereas they speak against you as evildoers, they may by your
good works which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation.
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake: whether it be
to the king, as supreme; or unto governors, as unto them that are sent by him
for the punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them that do well. For
so is the will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance
of foolish men: as free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, but as the servants of God. Honor all men. Love the
brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the king.

The Gospel. S. Matthew. 22.16.
ANd they sent out unto him their disciples, with the Herodians, saying,
Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God in truth,
neither carest thou for any man: for thou regardest not the person of men. Tell
us therefore, What think thou? Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar, or
not? But Jesus perceived their wickedness, and said, Why tempt ye me, ye
hypocrites? Show me the tribute-money. And they brought unto him a penny. And he
says unto them, Whose is this image and superscription? They say unto him,
Cesars. Then says he unto them, Render therefore, unto Caesar, the things which
are Cesars: and unto God, the things that are Gods. When they had heard these
words, they marvelled, and left him, and went their way.

In the Offertory shall this Sentence be read.

Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
heaven; but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven. S. Math.
7.21.

After the Prayer [For the whole state of Christ's Church, etc.] this collect
following shall be used.

ALmighty God and heavenly Father, who of thine infinite and unspeakable
goodness toward us did in a most extraordinary and wonderful manner
disappoint and overthrow the wicked Designs of those traitorous, heady and
high-minded men, who under the pretense of Religion, and thy most holy Name,
had contrived, and well nigh effected the utter destruction of this Church and
Kingdom: As we do this day most heartily and devoutly adore and magnify thy
glorious Name for this thine infinite gracious goodness already vouchsafed to
us; so we most humbly beseech thee to continue thy grace and favor toward us,
hiding and covering us under the shadow of thy wings, that no such dismal
calamity may ever again fall upon us. To this end send forth thy light and thy
truth, for the discovery of these depths of Satan, this mystery of iniquity.
Infatuate and defeat all the secret counsels of the ungodly. Abate their pride,
assuage their malice, and confound their devices. Strengthen the hands of our
gracious Sovereign King William, and all that are put in authority under him,
with judgment and justice, to cut off all such workers of iniquity as turn
Religion into Rebellion, and Faith into Faction; that they may never again
prevail against us, nor triumph in the ruin of the Monarchy and thy Church
among us. Protect and defend our Sovereign Lord the King, with the whole Royal
Family, from all Treasons and Conspiracies. Be unto him an helmet of Salvation,
and a strong tower of defense against the face of all his enemies. As for those
that are implacable, clothe them with shame and confusion, but upon himself and
his posterity let the Crown for ever flourish. So we that are thy people and
the sheep of thy pasture shall give thee thanks for ever, and will always be
showing forth thy praise from generation to generation, through Jesus Christ
our only Savior and Redeemer; to whom with thee, O Father, and God the Holy
Ghost, be glory in the Church throughout all ages, world without end. Amen.

FINIS.

