THE LIFE Of the Renowned Peter D'Aubusson, Grand Master of RHODES.

Containing Those Two Remarkable Sieges of Rhodes by Mahomet the Great, and
Solomon the Magnificent, being lately added to complete the Story adorned with
the choicest Occurrences in the Turkish Empire at that Time.

LONDON, Printed for Geo. Wells, and Sam. Cair, Booksellers in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1679.

To the READER.
MEN of Active Spirits, and designing Fame and honor hereafter, can no where
better benefit themselves then by reading the lives of such Persons as have
trod the same steps before them. For in the lives of great Personages they find
those Examples of Conduct which they are either to follow or avoid. Since that
by celebrating the deeds of good men, they that come after are incited to
deserve well of mankind. To this purpose the Author of this short story chose
to revive the memory of Peter D'Aubusson, Grand Master of Rhodes, a Person for
courage and piety not inferior to any of his time.

For the truth of what he writes, He informs ye where he had it; from an
ancient Manuscript written by William Caoursin, Chancellor of the Order, who
wrote nothing but what he was an eyewitness off. As also from several other
original Papers which he found in Malta it self. Nor did he refuse the help of
Khodgia Afendy, a Turk, who living at the same time, wrote a Relation of the
Siege with a great deal of Justice to the high merits of the Grand Master.

Thus then the vigorous fury of Mahomet, the zealous and fortunate resistance
of D'Aubusson, the misfortunes of Zizim, a pleasing yet melancholy variety,
though inseparable from the story, being the Subjects of this Relation, it is
something probable that they that seek either for instruction or divertisement,
cannot fail of their expectation. However it is wholly left to them, to be
either severe or Candid Judges, as they find most Reason.

The loss of Rhodes is added not only to complete the story, but to revive the
renown of the Great and Famous Villerius, who sustained the whole power of the
manificent, Solomon till his Pride was quite tired out. Insomuch that had not
Treachery within, put a fatal period to the flourishing Estate of Rhodes,
Solomon might have waited long enough upon Palermos for the conquest of that
City. In short they that read to the end of these few Pages, will find variety
sufficient for so small a volume, and a recital of such actions as rather
deserved the Grandeur of a Heroic Poem, then the ordinary dress of Prose.

THE HISTORY OF Peter D'Aubusson, Great Master of RHODES.
PEter D'Aubusson, whose History I have undertaken to write, was by providence
chosen out among the French about two hundred years since, to set bounds to the
Conquests of the Infidels. And He it was that saved Rome from the destiny of
Constantinople, defending Rhodes against all the force of Mahomet the second,
Emperor of the Turks.

He was the Son of Reginald D'Aubusson, Lord of Monteil-au-Viconte in March,
and Margaret of Comborn, both of the most Ancient and Illustrious Houses in the
Kingdom. He received from nature* together with a Noble Birth, a strong and
proportionable body, fit for great undertakings; a quick wit, and virtuous
inclinations.

As he was born valiant, and that the fiery constitution of his body, could not
away with an idle life, he took upon him the profession of Arms, so soon as he
was of Age to handle a sword.

The Truce which had been concluded between France and England, by the address
of Cardinal Saint Croix, Legate to Pope Eugenius the fourth, and the Peace
which followed, obliged him to seek for Employment and Honor in Germany.

The Emperor Sigismund had potent enemies both at home and abroad. The
Hussites made war against him in Bohemia; and though they seemed inclinable to
a submission after the bloody Battle of Pragne, where they lost above twenty
thousand men, yet Rebellion was all they had in their thoughts. They were also
so much the more to be feared, by how much they were highly enraged at their
defeat, and that rage redoubled in some measure the zeal which served for the
pretense of their Revolt.

But the greatest mischief was in Hungary, where the Turks made horrible
havocks. Sigismund, who was at that time taken up with the affairs of the
Council of Basle, not being able to oppose himself against the Torrent which
threatened to overflow all Germany, sent away with all speed, Albert Duke of
Austria his Son-inlaw, to repel the Barbarians.

Aubusson by chance, or rather by a particular Providence of Heaven, got a
Command in this Army. For providence having designed him to a Profession and a
Trust that concerned the Defense of Christendom, so ordered it, that he should
perform his first feats of Arms against the enemies thereof.

The Prince marched with all the have he could, and though far inferior in
number, he no sooner discovered the Ottoman Army, but he fell on with out any
farther deliberation. The beginning of the Combat favored the Imperialists.
They overturned at first whatever Resistance opposed them, and made a very
great slaughter. Aubusson, who felt his courage kindled upon sight of the
Infidels, flew a great many with his own hand, and fought, always in the
foremost Ranks. But when the Victory seemd to have been assuredly on Alberts
side, the Turkish Cavalry surrounded that of the Christians, and fell upon them
so impetuously, that they made them give way, and broke them upon the first
charge. The disorder was not long. Aubusson rallied all the Troops about him,
and renewed the fight under the conduct of a Hungarian, whose name is not
recorded in Histories, though his valor deserves to live eternally in the
memory of men.

This brave person, remarkable for his tall size of body, and his undaunted
Air, together with Aubusson, sustained, almost without other Assistance, all
the whole power of the Enemy; and with his battle-axe in his hand, after he had
beat down several, made his way through the rest. Which Action so Resolute, as
it terrified the Turks, so it reincourag'd the Christians. All Alberts Troops
followed this new Leader, who seemd to be sent to them from Heaven; and as if
they had at the same time been inspired with fresh Vigor, they charged the
Barbarians so rudely, that eighteen thousand lay dead upon the place, the rest
thought of nothing but Flight.

While the Arms of Sigismund had this happy success in Hungary, his affairs
prosper'd no less in other places. The Hussites, weak'nd by their Losses, and
either terrified by the Threats, or gained by the Promises of Emperor, at
length returned to their duty, The Treaty of Prague put an end to all the
Troubles of Bohemia, and upon a sudden the Imperial Authority was
reestablished.

All things being thus calmed, and Albert having disbanded his Troops, Aubusson
attended the Nobility that went to the Emperor's Court. There he was received
as one that contributed highly to the Victory in Hungary; and that which was
related to Sigismund touching the Valor of the young French Gentleman, engaged
that Prince to give him public marks of his esteem and acknowledgment. But
Aubusson not only attracted the praises and favors of the Emperor, by his
first exploits in War: for he also gained his good will and kindness by his
carriage near his person, and the care which he took to please him.

Sigismund was endu'd with all the noble Qualities of a great Prince. Besides
that he was valiant, wise, religious; he loved Learning in particular, and had
a great value for learned men, whom he preferred upon all occasions, before
persons that had nothing to recommend them but their Birth. He was himself
learned, perfectly well read in History. He understood and spoke the Latin
tongue, as he made it appear at the Council of Constance, by the testimony of
Gerson Chancellor of the University of Paris, who was present there, and was
charmed with the last speech of that Prince. For that reason he could not
endure ignorance in his Courtiers; and would say sometimes, that he was ashamed
of the Electors, who had not the least tincture of Learning.

Though Aubusson were endu'd with a Martial soul, and that the love of war
overswayd his Inclinations, yet had he a disposition and a Genious for
Learning. He had a quick and piercing wit; a happy memory, and a solid
judgment. So that it was no difficult thing for him to conform himself to the
humor of the Emperor, having in a short time fitted himself for all manner of
addresses. After he had studied the languages as much as was requisite for a
Soldier to know; he applied himself to the understanding of all the noble
sciences. He learnt the Mapps, the Mathematics, and above all the rest, that
part with concerns the Art of war. But History was his Principal study; He
made a kind of business and Exercise of it, reading more to instruct then
divert himself. For he was not contented to charge his memory with great names,
and strange Accidents, as many do that read; but he still made Judicious
reflections upon what he read; proposing to himself, as examples to follow, the
actions of men Illustrious. Above all things, he examined the lives of great
men, and making advantage of their Vices, as well as of their Virtues, he
became a Master to himself for the governing his own Manners.

Whatever love he had for reading, and what ever pleasure he took in it, yet he
studied the world more then books: and above all the world, and all books, the
Emperor. As he had a free access to his person, and was with him every day, he
was able to observe nere at hand his Maxims, his words his actions, and all
his behavior. But among all the Virtues of Sigismund he was taken with none
more then his Zeal for the Christian Faith; of which he showed so many real
marks, not only in the Councils which he upheld by his authority and presence,
but also by the wars which he undertook against the Infidels.

Thus the Court, which is usually the corrupter of youth, was to Aubusson a
school of wisdom and virtue. Where, besides the love which it taught him to
have for learning, and to make a sound judgment of things, he acquired
Integrity, and became a man of Virtue and Repute.

With such noble Inclinations as these, he might easily pretend to great
employments in a Court where Justice was done to merit. And certainly he had
attained thereto, as much a stranger as he was, had not his Fortunes been
overturnd by the Death of the Emperor.

Albert Duke of Austria, who succeeded Sigismund, had not for Aubusson those
kind thoughts as his predecessors. Whether it were that he did not naturally
love the French, or whether the Favors of the deceased Emperor provoked his
hatred of a stranger

Aubusson quickly percev'd that the Emperor had got a new Master, and that the
best course that he could take was to be gone. But though that Consideration
might not have prevailed with him to quit Germany, yet his duty would have
obliged to return to France.

The Treaty at Arras for the accommodation between the two Kings* of England
and France not taking effect, as it was hoped, the War broke out again between
the two Kings: So that there happ'nd diverse sieges, and diverse fights, with
more heat and animosity then ever. The English made great spoil in the
Provinces of which they were not Masters; and the French divided among
themselves, committed as great violences every where; so that what between a
Foreign and a Civil War joined together, the whole Kingdom was full of
confusion and horror.

This was the stare of the Affairs of France when Sigismund di'd, and that
Aubusson forsook Germany to come and serve his own Country. John D'Aubusson
Lord of Born, his Cousin-German, and Chamberlain to Charles the seventh,
brought him to Court. So soon as he came there, his proper person, his
sparkling countenance, his noble Air attracted the eyes of all upon him; but
his prudent and honest carriage, his wit, his politeness, his pleasant
conversation gained almost the hearts of every one.

In regard he was of the County of March, and younger Son of the Vicounts of
that County, the Count of March, Governor of the Dolphin, showed him great
respect, and did him the honor to be his Patron. This Relation which Aubusson
had to the Count, gave him opportunity often to wait upon the Dolphin, who was
almost of Age. He obtained his love, being so happy as to share in the
exercises and divertisements of the Prince. He had also the good fortune to
please Charles the seventh, who saw in him at first sight something that was
great and not common. But it was not long ere (...) showed by his actions, that
what we conceived of him, was not without good ground. He signalized himself in
a high measure at Montereau Faut-yone, whither he attended the Dolphin, who
commanded at the Siege. The King who had been himself a witness of the valor
of Aubusson, when he carried the City by Assault, making his entry a little
while after into Paris, commanded his attendance upon him to Court, with the
chief of his Nobility. This Entry was one of the most magnificent that ever was
made: And it may be truly said to be the first day that Charles began to
reascend his Throne. Several Cities followed the example of the Capital; and
those that stood out were for the most part reduced by force. Aubusson every
where gave signal marks of his Courage; but upon one occasion he made it
apparent that a young Warrior might be as well prudent as cunning.

At what time the power of the English abated in the Kingdom, that of the fair
Agnes increased at Court. As she was wonderfully charming, and one that
understood better then any woman of her sex, how to govern her Lovers, she
obtained in a short while an absolute Dominion over the King. But according to
the custom of women, whose credit arises from their Beauty, she made but an ill
use of the Kings Favors. The Dolphin, who was not naturally very docible,
could not endure a haughty and imperious woman, who had but little respect for
him. On the other side, the great Authority of Charles of Anjou, Brother to the
King of Sicily offended him extremely. He took it ill, that a Prince, for whom
he had no kindness, should have so great a share in the confidence of his
Father. So that the Favorite was no less a trouble to him then the Mistress.

But that which vexed him most of all, was, that after the taking of Montereau,
where he fought so well against the English, that in Courtship they applauded
him for it before the King, he had but a bad reception from his Father, instead
of the thanks which he expected. For the King perceiving that this first Essay
had puffed up the mind of his son, he returned* him under the Discipline of his
Government, and removed him also from the Court. Whether he were jealous of a
valor that made such a noise in the world; or whether, understanding the bad
disposition of the Dolphin, he thought this first success of his might
transport him too far, if he did not take care to curb him.

The Dolphin dissembled his dissatisfaction for some time; but a young Prince
once provoked* whose passions are violent, and who never wants bad counsel, is
soon aweary of counterfeiting. And therefore to revenge himself like the Son of
a King, he went and put himself at the head of the Rebellious Nobility.

The Count of March, to whom the revolt of his disciple was no small
dishonor, omitted nothing that might reduce him to his duty. Besides what he
did himself, he made use of the management of Aubusson, whom the Prince loved,
and who had found a means to preserve his favor without confederating in the
revolt. Certain it is that the Dolphin was of a jealous, and ticklish
disposition, not easy to manage; and one of those who are of that head strong
and obstinate humor, that they are seldom to be recovered, when they have once
fixed upon their party. But Aubusson knew him very well, and understood which
way to take him. For he had those sweet and insinuating charms, which are not
incompatible with a fierce and fiery Disposition. But above all, he had a
natural Eloquence, that always wrought it is Effect, and which persuades so much
the more, by how much it is the less distrusted. So that he had not much to do
to make the Prince list'n to reason. He so dexterously managed his passions,
and mollify'd him in such sort by degrees, that when the Count of Eu, came
afterward to treat with him on the Kings behalf, he found him altogether
inclined to lay down his Arms, and beg pardon.

The King was so satisfied with Aubussons address upon this occasion, that he
employed him in other Negotiations of concernment. In all which he so behaved
himself, that Charles the fifth highly applauded the sharpness of his wit.
Insomuch that one day, speaking of Aubusson, he said, it was a hard matter to
find so much fire and so much prudence both together.

After the Princes were come to an accommodation, the War grew very warm
between the French and English, and much blood was shed on both sides. But the
truces that were afterward made, changed the whole face of affairs. France
began to breath a more quiet Air; and the pleasures which afterward succeeded
the Toils of war, had perhaps effeminated the hearts of the soldiers; if
their Marches into Lorrain and Germany had not found them work.

Rene of Anjou, King of Sicily and Duke of Lorrain, requested aid of Charles
King of France, his Brother in Law, against some places in the Country of
Messin, that would not acknowledge his Jurisdiction. Charles presently appears
before Nancy with a great Army; of which one part went briskly to beseige Mets.
The City defended it self with great courage and obstinacy. Upon which the
Dolphin, with whom the tediousness of the seige did not agree, found a fair
occasion to satisfy his boiling and ambitious Humor.

The Emperor Frederick the third, dissatisfied with the Swisses, who pretended
to have nothing to do with the House of Astria, and who under that pretense
affected a kind of Independencie, not much differing from a Revolt; invited
France by the mediation of Sigismund, Duke of Austria, to come and defend the
Rights of the Empire. There needed no more encouragement for the Dolphin, who
had espoused the Sister of the Duchess of Austria, to enter Alsacia with an
Army. Aubusson was one of the young Lords that attended him, and one who had
the greatest share in the defeat of the Swisses near Basle: But the Duke having
reduced some places, and cast a terror upon others, marched back again sooner
then was expected. Either because the Emperor, unwilling to draw upon himself
ill will, for being the occasion of the war, in some measure disowned it; or
because the German Lord, who had conducted the French Army into Switzerland,
and was to have been their guide through all the narrow and difficult streights
of the Mountains, being slain, there was no safety in proceeding farther.

In the mean time the Affair of Mets being brought to an accommodation,
advantageous for the Beseigers, and honorable for the Beseiged; the
Ambassadors of the German Princes, whom the Dolphins march had alarmed, came to
demand a confirmation of the ancient Alliances between France and Germany.
Their demands were granted them; and as there is a time when the Spirit of
Peace is predominant, the truce was prolonged for five years between France and
England. The Court in such a quiet calm began to think of nothing but
divertisement: and the Marriage of Margaret, Daughter of the King of Sicilie,
with Henry King of England, occasioned such extraordinary rejoycings, that they
had almost forgot their last troubles. Never was a more beautiful Court, nor a
more numerous, then that of Nancy: For not to speak of the several Princes and
Princesses that were of lesser dignity, there were two Kings, and three Queens
beside. The Earl of Suffolk, who was sent to fetch the new Queen of England,
had with him the flower of the English Nobility. Several days were also spent
in magnificent Tournaments, where the King of France, and the King of Sicily ran
together.

But Aubusson soon grew weary of that which employed others so much to their
delight. Besides that he naturally loved war, he had Principles of Piety which
did not correspond with a lazy and voluptuous life. On the other side, the
victories of John Hunniades, and George Castriote, which they had obtained
against Amurat, inspired him with a new zeal for Religion: and the Cruelties
which the Turks exercised against the Christians at the Battle of Varna,
awakn'd in him the hatred which he had conceived against the Enemies of Jesus
Christ.

He could not but with great grief of mind understand the report which ran at
that time, that Vladislaus King of Poland, and Cardinal Cesarini, the Popes
Legate had been flead alive by those Barbarians. But it was joyful news to him,
that the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, had obtained several advantages
against the Saracens; and that the Sultan of Egypt, had a little before raised
his seige from before Rhodes. In the midst of these thoughts, he took a
resolution to fight against the Infidels, and to the end he might be
indispensably engaged thereto, he framed a design at the same time to embrace
the military order of St. John of Jerusalem. Heaven, that inspired him with
these high thoughts, gave him the power to execute them with speed. He departed
for Rhodes, not all the Charms of the Court being able to detain him.

The multitude of French Gentlemen that daily thronged to Rhodes to be made
Knights, had obliged the Grand-master to make an Order that none would be
received, until the Treasury, exhausted by the late Wars, were somewhat
replenished. Nevertheless Aubusson was admitted; whether it were that they saw
in his person somewhat extraordinary that spoke in his behalf, or that it were
a peculiar favor, in respect to Lewis D'Aubusson his Uncle, one of the most
famous Knights of Rhodes, and known in History by the name of the Commander of
Charroux: Or whether it were that the Grand-master were inspired to exceed his
own Rules in favor of a Person, who was afterward to be the support of the
Order.

Our new Knight had no great difficulty to undergo the usual Examinations,
though at that time they were much more strict than afterward. For all things
that render a Family Illustrious, were to be found with advantage in his: For
as to the antiquity of it, the original of the House of Aubusson, is unknown
and uncertain, as of most Families in the world. But that which may be
certainly averred is this; that in the time of Charlemaine, the Ancestors of
Pierre D'Aubusson were very famous in France. For the Kings of the second race
having settled Counts to govern every Province, and these Lords always
choosing the greatest Lords of their Province for their Lieutenants, Jeffrey,
first Count of March, chose his Lieutenant out of the House of Aubusson, about
the year 860. This Lieutenant to the Lord, whose name we know not, was called
Vicount D'Aubusson from the name of the principal Place which he possessed.

Turpin, who was elected Bishop of Limoges in the year 898, and whom Aymar of
Chabanois extolls no less for the splendour of his Birth, then for the holiness
of his Life, was the Son of the first Vicount of Aubusson, and Brother of
Reginald the first, who was Vicount under his Father, under. Sulpicius the
second, Earl of March, Son of Jefferey.

The dignity of Vicount remained above four hundred years in that Family of
Aubusson, successively from Father to Son, till that Raymund the first having
no Children, sold it to Hugues Earl of March, to the prejudice of his Brother
Ranulphus D'Aubusson, who continued the Posterity.

Piety and Liberality, which in those times highly distinguished the great
Lords from those of mean extraction, were hereditary virtues in this Family.
For, not to speak any thing of Bishop Turpin, so magnificent in all that
concerned the worship of the Altar; the Vicounts D'Aubusson, were always very
Religious, and gave considerable Donations to several Churches and Abbeys.

These Lords and their Descendants signalized themselves upon several
Occasions, where the interest of France was concerned Witness Guy D'Aubusson,
who performed so many noble Acts, in the War with the English under Charles the
fifth, who having received many wounds in the defense of his Castle of Monteil,
was taken Prisoner with his Wife and Children by the Enemy. Witness also John
D'Aubusson, Lord of Borne, Anthony D'Aubusson, Lord of Villeneare, and Anthony
D'Aubusson Lord of Monteil, who made their fidelity and their zeal for the
service of Charles the seventh appear; whose Chamberlaines they were at such a
time when all the Kings Officers were Peers of high quality.

Lastly, that which infinitely advances the House of Aubusson, and perhaps
distinguishes it from all others, is this, that being so ancient, it was never
mixed, but has still in the same County preserved the same Estate: so that
Francis D'Aubusson, Duke and Peer, Marshal of France, and Colonel of the
French Guards, possesses at this day the Signiory of Fueillade, which has been
time out of mind in the possession of the Vicounts D'Aubusson his Ancestors.

But to return to our History, Aubusson was no sooner arrived at Rhodes, but he
understood that there was a peace going to be made with Amurat, and that it was
almost concluded by the Sultan of Egypt. In regard he had an extreme passion to
fight with the enemies of Christ, this news was not overwelcome to him, only he
was in hopes that it would soon be brok'n.

In the mean time he set himself to study the duty of a true Knight. Presently
he understood that the Knights of Rhodes were to join together in Valor and
Piety: that a cowardly Knight, or a Libertine, was something monstrous: that
for them to live according to the intent of their Calling, there was a
necessity for them exactly to follow the maxims of the Gospel, and that they
were not to draw their Swords, but in the defense of the Church, or for the
relief of the Faithful: that for that reason they wore their Cross upon their
Habit, and that their Impresse was, For the Faith. He oft'n revolved in his
mind the virtues and the exploits of those ancient Knights that first made
themselves Masters of Rhodes, and afterward so courageously withstood Ottoman
the first King of the Turks.

But notwithstanding the peace, because it did not hinder the roving of Turkish
Pirates, he several times put forth to Sea, and so well acquitted himself upon
all occasions that presented, that he obtained the commandery of Salins, in the
first years of his service.

John de Lustic, who at that time governed the Order of St. John of Jerusalem,
and who was the first to whom the public vogue gave the title of Grand-master,
soon conceived a high Opinion of Monsieur D'Aubusson, as well as James de
Milli, who was Grand Prior of Auvergne, and who succeeded John de Lustic in the
charge of Grand-master.

The affairs of Rhodes were calm enough, when the death of Amurath, or rather
the ambition of Mahomet his successor, raised strange troubles over all
Christendom.

Mahomet the second is so often mentioned in the story, that I am to write,
that it will not be amiss to describe him before I go any farther. He was one
of those extraordinary personages, who are not only endowed with great Virtues,
and great Vices; but one also freight with qualities altogether opposite. Never
was there a Prince more wise, or more led away; more valiant, nor more
effeminate, more a Master, nor more a Slave to his passions then he. Though he
had a Countenance somewhat wild, and something of terrible in his eyes, he
could put on a mild and engaging Air when he pleased. His Serraglio followed
him every where; and he gave himself up to his pleasures in the midst of the
toils of war; but he was melancholy and cruel in the height of his pleasures,
killing sometimes with his own hand his Favorites and his Mistresses in the
heat of his debauchery; so soon he altered from love to choler and fury. He
also committed these cruelties sometimes in cold blood, more out of Policy then
transportation. And it is reported of him, that when he reproached the
Soldiers for effeminacie, and slackness in discipline; certain among them
taking the boldness to hit him in the teeth with a young Grecian whom he
passionately loved, he caused her to be brought forth, and to be by them beheld
at leisure; whereupon when the Soldiers dazzled with her beauty, agreed that
the Emperors passion was not without good reason; Mahomet immediately striking
off her dead with his Scimitar, laid her head at their feet, to let them
understand, that Pleasure was not his Master, and that whatever proneness he
had to it, he loved nothing beyond his duty.

He was brought up by his Mother in the principles of Christianity, and
instructed by Maximus, Patriarch of the Greeks. However, he only made
profession of the Mohammedan Religion, or ratherhe had no Religion at all;
laughing at his Prophet, and regarding less the Alcaron then the Gospel. He
freely confessed that the Christian Law was an admirable Law: but he so much
abhorred the Christians, that when he met with one, he was always wont to wash
his hands and mouth, as if the very sight of a Christian had defiled him.

He thought all things lawful to obtain his ends: and never kept his word, but
when it stood with the conveniencie of his affairs. For he pretended that he
owed no respect to any one, and treated all men like slaves, not considering
that he owed to himself the fulfilling of the word which he had given to
others, and that the laws of fidelity oblige the Masters as well as the Slaves.
Yet was he just to his Subjects, and administered justice equally to all his
people. He thought much, spoke little, neglected nothing, informed himself of
all things, and disguised himself often to see what passed in his Serraglio,
and in his Army. He understood several Languages, and several Sciences, amongst
the rest Astrology, which he studied very much. He was a lover of learned men,
and excellent Artists of any Nation whatever. Magnificent toward the one and
the other. Observing no moderation in reward, no more then he did in
punishment. Indefatigable he was in war, a contemner of danger, resolute in bad
fortune, insolent or moderate in prosperity, as occasion required: cunning to
conceal his enterprises, and discover those of his enemies: Artificial in his
management, making use of the vilest means to compass his ends: but ambitious
to excess: accounting all his conquests as nothing, and still every day
proposing new to himself. So predominant was the love of honor in him, and
Alexander the great so much his model, that he read his life continually, which
he caused on purpose to be translated into Arabic, and he did him the honor to
imitate him even in his vices.

When Mahomet had taken possession of the Ottoman Empire, after the death of
Amurath his Father, he was presently for an universal Monarchy, and first he
undertook to subdue the Empire of the Greeks. He began his military expeditions
with the seige of the Capital, notwithstanding the peace which he had made with
Constantine Paleologus, Emperor of Constantinople; or rather it was under the
protection of a peace solemnly sworn, that the Barbarian turned his arms upon
that side.

In regard Constantine had made no provision against an attempt which he did
not mistrust, and for that the succor which he received from the King of
Arragon* the Pope, and the Republic of Venice came too late, he could not
sustain the force of so great an Army; so that the City was carried by assault
by the Infidels, notwithstanding the resistance of the Christians. Never was
seen a more tragical spectacle, than that which was then beheld. They made a
most horrible slaughter every where; nothing escaped the fury of the Soldiers.
Women and Virgins of quality were publicly defiled; and afterward inhumanly
massacred. The Images and relics of the Saints were cut to pieces. The
Resemblances of Christ thrown to the dogs; and the great Crucifix dragged about
the streets, with most dreadful acclamations and imprecations. Constantine
rather chose to dye in the defense of his Crown and faith, then to fall alive
into the hands of the Barbarians. His head was carried upon a Lance round about
the City; and that there might not any footstep remain of the family of the
Paleologi, Mahomet caused the Princes and Princesses of the Blood Royal to be
slain in the midst of a magnificent Banquet, whereat he treated the Principal
Officers of his Army.

The taking of Constantinople cast a terror upon all the East, and obliged the
Despote of Servia, the King of Cyprus, and the Emperor of Trebizond, to sue
for the friendship of the Turk. Which they could not obtain, but upon paying a
certain Tribute, as the Islands of Scio, and Meteline did. The Knights of
Rhodes would not stoop to any such dishonorable condition; and though Mahomets
Ambassador threatened the Knights with all that could be expected from a Potent
and Victorious Prince, if they refused to pay him 2000. Duccats a year, the
Grand-Master answered with a generous Christianity, That the Order of Rhodes
acknowledged none but the Apostolic See, which knew not what it was to pay
Tribute: and that for his part he was resolved rather to dye a thousand deaths,
then to suffer in his time, that the Government which he had received free,
should become tributary; and that if Mahomet made war against the faith of
Treaties, he hoped that God, who is the revenger of injuries and impieties,
would defend his own Worship against all the Ottoman Power.

In regard the Knights were fearful least so fierce an Answer might provoke
Mahomet, they made it their business to provide against so formidable an enemy.
But because the Society was then poor, and not able to maintain a long war of
it self, they thought it their best way to engage the Christian Princes to
their side, especially the King of France, upon whom they looked upon as the
best friend of their Order. The Commander D'Aubusson was chosen for this
Embassage out of all the Commanders of the French Nation. Not only because he
had a particular knowledge and dexterity in managing affairs, but because he
was known to the Court of France.

He departed from Rhodes at the time that James de Milli succeeded John de
Lustic, Grand-Master of the Order, and arrived in France, a little after the
Cardinal d'Avignon, whom the Pope had sent thither, to encite the French
against the Turk. The Ambassador of Rhodes was entertained after an
extraordinary manner, either because the Court had a great esteem for him, or
because they had a design to keep him in delay. He saw through the gentleness
and caresses which he received, which way the Court stood affected toward the
Holy-war. The King would not undertake it by any means, whether he thought his
Kingdom too much exhausted to defray the expense of a war that might prove of a
long continuance; or whether he minded nothing but his Repose, after his past
toiles, or that the Charms of the fair Agnes had cooled his zeal which he
formerly had for the interest of the Church; or whether it were that he would
not submit to the inclinations of his Son, who was retired malcontent, to
Philip Duke of Burgundy, the most zealous of all the Christian Princes, and
one that had declared himself so much an enemy of the Turk, that he solemnly
swore to make war upon them.

The Cardinal Legate who was a Frenchman, and very understanding ing in
affairs, applied himself wholly to effect this Negotiation. After many
Conferences in vain with the public Ministers, he treated at last in
particular with the King, not being able to obtain any thing. Calistus being
advertised of the Kings disposition, writ to him very sharp Letters; threatening
him at length with the Thunderbolts of Rome, and the Malediction of Heaven, if
he refused the holy League. Those Letters wrought no effect, if they did not
make it worse. The King was incensed at the Popes threats, and not persuaded by
his reasons. In such a ticklish conjuncture, there appeared no probability of
hopes for the Commander D'Aubusson. However he ceased not to act: and in regard
that besides the character of an Ambassador he had other good qualities, which
made him esteemed by the King and his Ministers, he was heard more favorably
then the Legate.

He represented at first that Christendom was never in more eminent danger, and
that there was nothing which we had not to fear, if the Progress of the
Infidels were not quickly stopped; that Mahomet since the taking of
Constantinople aimed at nothing but Rome; that he was fallen into Hungaria, to
enter into Germany, with a purpose to make his way that way into Italy. That it
was one of his maxims, that as there is but one God in Heaven, so there could
not be but one Monarch upon Earth: That he had been constrained to raise his*
siege before Belgrade, because he had not taken the right course, and for that
he had been wounded himself, but that his misfortune had no way disincourag'd
him; that he was one of those great men that make the best advantage of their
errors and misfortunes; or rather that he was like the fiercer sort of Beasts,
who when they have received a wound and feel their blood begin to flow, are
never more furious till then. That since his ill success in Hungary, he had
drawn to his side the Sultan of Egypt, the Caraman and the Tartar, and that he
would return with fresh forces to the siege of the Belgrade; and that his
Generals who had taken almost all the Isles in the Archipelago, would soon
power their fury upon Rhodes. In short that those two Ramparts of Christendom
being forced, not any of the Dominions of the Christian Princes could be safe,
either by Sea or Land.

Aubusson, afterward represented to the King, that being the eldest Son the
Church, he could not forsake their interest without dishonor to himself. That
as for the transportment of the Pope, it was but a transportment of zeal, and
that his good intentions deserved the pardon of a few sharp expressions. He
added at length, that because there were in Rhodes more Knights of the French,
then of any other Nations in the world the Monarch of France could not in
justice dispense with succouring the Island, at a time when it lay only in his
power to do it. That Alphonsus King of Aragon, so wise and so brave before he
came into Italy, was not only effeminated by the delights of Naples, but
embroiled with Pope Calixtus; who though a native of Arragon, had refused to
give him the investiture of the Kingdom of Sicily, and to assure the succession
to Ferdinand his natural son. That Henry King of Castile, as poor spirited, and
more vicious then his Father, had business at home and abroad; and that his
Rebellious subjects found him as much work, as the Moors of Granada his
Neighbors and Enemies. Thas* Henry of England was not Master at home, and that
the Duke of York who had usurped the Government, minded nothing but to sustain
himself against his Rivals. That the Emperor Frederick lived an idle life,
minding neither his own honor, nor the safety of Christendom. That besides, the
war grew hot between the Empire and Hungary, and that Ladislaus at the same
time was to make head against the Emperor and the Turk. That civil dissentions
turmoyl'd all Italy, and that the Kingdoms of Sweedland and Danemark were full
of troubles, Christiern had been set up in the place of Charles, whose
irregularities and crimes had rendered him unworthy of the Crown. That Alphonso
King of Portugal, quiet enough at home, wanted not a good will, but that all he
could do was but very little, if a Prince more potent then himself did not
assist him. That thus France being the only Kingdom in Europe that enjoyed a
true peace; it was only from France that they could expect relief sufficient to
ruin the designs of the Port, and for that reason parhaps it was that Heaven
had freed it from the power of the English.

All these reasons propounded after a smart and insinuating manner, made a deep
impression upon Charles's thoughts. That Prince who was so averse before to the
Holy-war, began to desire it, and awaking from the profound sleep wherein his
pleasures had lulled him, he only followed the motions of his Piety and
Courage. He gave liberty to Cardinal D'Avignon to leavy a tenth upon the
Clergy, to defray the expense of the war; he entered into a League against
Mahomet with Hungary, and that there might be no question of his faithful
inclinations, he confirmed the League by the marriage of Magdalene of France
his Daughter with King' Ladislaus. As for the Knights, he promised them all
assistance, and immediately caused sixty thousand Crowns in Gold to be paid to
the Ambassador of Rhodes.

Aubusson laid out that money for provisions of war, according to the orders he
received, and freighted away Ships laden with Canon, Arms, Powder and Lead.
Then he departed himself, after he had collected most of the money, which was
due to the Order in several parts of Europe.

The success of the Embassy, and the Letter which he presented to the
Grand-Master from the King of France, made him to be acceptably received by the
Knights and all the people. The Letter was very generous and very obliging. For
the King after he had only spok'n a word or two touching the gratifying of
their desires, and excused himself for not having done more at the present
juncture, frankly engaged himself to give them farther assistance, and assured
them of his friendship, in very civil and affectionate language, which Kings
were not wont to make use of.

But whatever obligation the Order had to Charles the seventh, the Spanish
Knights could not forbear to deal very rudely with the French Knights at a
general Chapter, held a little after the return of the Ambassador, and which
was no less famous for the attempts of Hostile Nations or enemies of France,
then for the number of famous Commanders that were present.

So soon as the Chapter war opened, the Knight de Linian, Procurator of the
Spanish tongue, stood up, and said aloud, that they ought not to proceed any
farther, without decreeing one Article which he ought to propose, and which was
very important, the public tranquillity. To which purpose, he required, that
all the dignities of the Order should be equal, and that there should be no
distinction of Languages, nor of precedence, nor in any other marks of Honor.
He was seconded in his proposal, by the Knight de Rivalta, Procurator of the
Italian tongue, and the Procurators all England and Germany. But the French,
who had always matched before other Nations, opposed with all their might the
Proposal of Linian, and above all the Commander D'Aubusson, who held a
considerable degree in the Assembly, by virtue of his title of Constable of
Rhodes, and Procurator of the Grand-Master.

The zeal which he had for the Honor of his Country, made him speak louder and
more earnest then the rest. To show how unjust the Proposition of the Spaniards
was, he declared in few words, that the French being the first Founders of the
Order of St. John of Jerusalem, deserved such honor as should distinguish them
from other Languages that were associated with them, and which they had
adopted: That those particular honors being the recompense of their virtue, it
would be injustice to deprive them of them. That their Predecessors had
peaceably enjoyed them, without being ever molested or opposed: That antiquity
of Possession was a good Title for precedencie: And that in a well regulated
Constitution all Innovations were of dangerous consequence: After all, that it
was not a time then to dispute of such matters, and that they would incur the
malediction of the Church, according to the Popes Brief touching the
celebration of the Chapter, if they discoursed of any other matters, then what
concerned the general good of Christendom.

The Spaniards and their accomplices often interrupted Aubusson, and
endeavored to carry by force, what they could not obtain by justice. But
finding at length that the French party was the strongest, and that they were
not all hearkn'd to, they flung out of the Assembly, and afterward departed
the Town, notwithstanding the prohibition of the Grand-Master: so that this
Affair, which, as the Spaniards pretended so much imported the public
tranquillity, was but a trick to divide and break up the Assembly.

But the Commander D'Aubusson had another occasion to stand up for the honor
of France while he defended his own. The news being brought to the Grand-Master
that Mahomet was equipping out a great Fleet, and that the Turks might attacque
the Island of Rhodes, the Knight Villemarin a Spaniard, and a person of merit,
but ambitious, and naturally turbulent, proposed in Council with much heat,
that he might immediately give order for all things necessary for the defense
of the City, and made a large recital of what was needful, with all the marks
of a sedulous care. Aubusson who was Castellaine of the City, and who besides
that, exercised the Command of Captain General in the absence of the Marshal of
the Order, fearing least Villamarin, whose haughty and daring humor he knew,
should usurp the charge of Captain General, answered him sternly, that there
was no want of power; that he might set himself at rest for that; and that he
had nothing to do to intrude himself upon those duties that did not belong to
him: That it was the Captain General who was to take care for the security of
the City: That that employment anciently belonged to the Auvergnon Tongue, and
that the Spanish Language bad nothing to do with it.

Villemarin made a semblance of submitting to his reasons, and gave no reply at
that time, either to conceal his design, or to give himself time to consider
what he had to do. But the next day, having consulted the Knights of his own
Nation, which were returned to Rhodes, whose behavior the Grand-Master had
also pardoned, he appeared at the head of them in Council, and with an affected
Air of modesty, said, that the Spanish Language did not pretend to the charge
of Captain General; but that he, and all the rest of the Nation desired that
they might have the opportunity to perform their duties to the utmost of their
power, as well as the French. Aubusson, who saw that this manner of proceeding,
was only a mere fetch, and that the Spaniards, under pretense of demanding the
exercise of their duty, had a design upon the Command it self, replied with
more sternness and vigor then before, that the charge of Captain General was
annexed to the dignity of Marshal of the Order; that only belonged to the
Auvergnian Language, of whom the Marshal was the chief, to do the duties of it;
and that Spain had nothing to do to meddle with France as to that particular.
The Council adjudg'd that Villemarin's wariness was without any ground; and the
Affair was decreed in favor of the French, to the disgrace of the Spaniards,
who in vain protested against all that was done, in regard that their Protests
could not be Registered.

Notwithstanding the advantage which France had in these Contests, that
hindered not, but that Peter Raymund Zacosta, a Castillian, was chosen
Grand-Master, in the room of James de Milli, who died at that time; the
Spaniards were also divided into two Languages, the one Arragonian, the other
Castillian; in favor of the latter of which, there was a new Dignity created
under the of Chancellor of the Order. Yet neither the credit which the
Spaniards had with the new Grand-Master, nor the animosities which they had
conceived against the French could hinder, but that the Commander Aubusson had
always his share in the management of Affairs, and was highly honored by the
Chapter General which was held at Rome.

To understand this part of the History, it is convenient to relate the reason
which obliged the Grand-Master to pass into Italy, with the principal Knights,
at a time when it was thought that they ought not to have been absent.

The Negotiation of the Ambassador which Mahomet sent to Rome, to treat of
peace, or rather to lull the Knights asleep while his Arms were employed in
other places, having not taken effect, the Grand-Master thought it convenient
to lay up a bank for the War, and began to levy the Tax which had been imposed
upon all the Estates of the Order.

The most part of the absent Commanders, who lead lives irregular enough, and
for whom great Revenues were not large enough to maintain their luxury, refused
to pay that which was their due. However, to excuse themselves in some measure,
they cried out that the Tax was too high, that Zacosta sought only to ruin
them, and enrich himself; and that his Government grew every day more and more
tyrannical. They also did him ill offices to the Princes which they found
inclined to hear them. The Italians and French did all they could to animate
against him the Duke of Venice and the King of Naples; but the Spaniards
rendered him altogether odious to the King of Arragon, already provoked for
that the Council of Rhodes had taken from an Arragonois the Commandery, of
Emposta, to put Zacosta in his room. That Prince, who was one of the Greatest
of his time, and who wanted not for credit at Rome, informed the Pope of all,
and advised him to send for the Grand Master, and to examine how he had carried
himself. The Pope believed the King of Arragon, but to save in some measure the
honor of the party accused, he ordered the General Chapter, which should have
been held at Rhodes, to be held at Rome, where the affairs of the Order might
be better consulted then in any other place. Zacosta, who was ignorant of the
evil designs of his enemies, blindly obeys the Orders of the Pope, and his
innocence seemed to afford him strength to undergo the toil of a Voyage in the
extremity of old age.

In this famous Assembly it was, wherein Paul the second presided in Person,
that the Commander D'Aubusson was highly preferred. For besides that at the
opening of the Chapter, he was chosen for one of the Procurators of the
Treasury, he was one of the sixteen Knights that were afterward elected, and
who according to the Statutes of the Order, had a joint power to look after the
most important affairs.

But his principal business was to justify the innocence of the Grand Master
Zacosta; to which purpose he plied Cardinal Vrsini and the Archbishop of
Milan, who were brought into the Chapter by the Popes order, being persons in
whom the Pope had a great confidence. After he had well informed them of the
loose life of the Knights who refused to pay the Tax, he easily made them
understand, that the Complaints which they made against the Grand Master had no
other foundation then the dissoluteness of his Enemies. But to remove out of
the Popes thoughts all apprehensions of any tyrannical Government exercised by
the Grand Master, he engaged several of the most sober and prudent Knights to
give testimony to the Pope of the conduct and management of Zacosta.

The Pope was ashamed that he so easily believed the accusers of Zacosta; and
to make him some kind of public satisfaction, he caressed him, and showed him
more then ordinary favors before all the world. But as his Holiness had been
informed by Cardinal Vrsini and the Archbishop of Milan of the debauchery of
the disobedient Knights, he consulted with the Grand Master how to reduce them
to their duty. He also made a speech in Latin to the Knights that were
assembled upon the obligation that lay upon them all together, to lead a life
not only virtuous and regular, but holy and irreproachable. The zeal of the
Pope raised up that of the Chapter. They seriously fell to consider what way to
take to remedy the disorders that were crept into the Order, and made Laws for
the Reformation of Manners, which after they had been examined by the sixteen
Knights, and some of the Cardinals, were approved and confirmed by the Pope
himself.

Aubusson was extremely rejoiced that he had not labored in vain; but he had
not the satisfaction to see the Grand Master himself put the Laws in execution;
Zacosta died as soon as the Assembly was broke up. The Pope was so much the
more aggrieved at it, because he looked upon himself to be in some sort the
cause of his death; for it was the general report that this journey to Rome had
shortened the days of that venerable old man. He was buried with a magnificence
extraordinary in the Church of St. Peter, before the Chapel of St. Gregory.
The Marble that was laid over him, sufficiently testifies him to have been
illustrious in piety, in charity, and in wisdom; and his Epitaph might have
served him for an Apology, had he had any need of it after his death.

Baptista Vrsini, Prior of Rome, was elected Grand Master, before the Knights
were separated. He departed for Rhodes presently after his election, upon
information that his presence was absolutely necessary there. When he came
there he found the Treasury wasted, the Fortifications decayed, good part of
the Ammunition spent, and all the Inhabitants of the Island alarmed at Mahomets
preparations. The Barbarian puffed up with his former Conquests, advanced every
day like a surious Torrent that finds no resistance, or which becomes more
impetuous and rapid by the resistance which it meets with. The death of the
generous Scanderbeg made him more insolent then ever; insomuch, that when he
heard the news, he said, that he would now be soon Master of Christendom, since
she had lost her Sword and Buckler.

The first step which the Grand Master made to remedy these disorders, was to
recall all the Knights which the journey to Rome had scattered, or which the
pleasures of Italy, or the affairs of the Order hindered from returning.

The Commander Aubusson, who was recalled by name, came to Rhodes at the same
time that two Galleys were preparing to succor the Island of Negropont, into
which Mahomet was entered by land with an Army of two hundred thousand men, by
the help of wooden Bridges built upon great Barks in the Straight of Saint
Mark, while Basha Mahomet, his Favorite, assailed it by Sea with a Navy of two
hundred Sail.

The impatience which Aubusson had to fight the Infidels, made him eager for
employment upon this occasion. The Grand Master had already named the Knight
Cardona to command the Galleys; so that all he could do for Aubusson, was to
give him the Command of a Troop of stout men, that were ordered to be the
Companions of Cardona's Fortune. When the Galleys were ready, they set sail,
and joined with the Venetian Fleet, which the Republic sent to the relief of
Negropont. The Fleet appeared in view of the Isle when the Barbarians were
ready for the assault; and Mahomet, who saw them coming, was not a little
troubled. But all that preparation came to nothing, and the Knights were forced
to lie still, and behold the City taken before their faces, through the
cowardice or imprudence of the Venetians, who having the Wind and Tide
favorable, instead of making use of the opportunity, stopped short, and fell to
consultation, when it was time to act.

The Grand Signior was so enraged at the succor which the Order had given to
the Venetians, and the incursions which they had made into diverse parts of
Turkey, during his being busied in Negropont, that without any farther
deliberation he declared War against them. A Herald published the Declaration
by sound of Trumpet; and Mahomets rage went so far, that he vowed in a furious
passion that he would kill the Grand Master with his own hands, and cut to
pieces all the Knights that fell into his power.

After a War so solemnly and outragiously declared, there was nothing thought
upon in Rhodes but to make preparations to withstand the fury of Mahomet. They
began with a general Assembly so soon as the Galleys were returned; and
Aubusson was in this Chapter one of the sixteen Knights who governed every
thing, as he had been in that of Rome. He was also one of the Administrators of
the Treasury, which were elected extraordinarily; for as there was little order
in the Treasury, and for that the Chapter of Rome had very much exhausted it,
they thought it convenient to trust the management thereof to six Knights of
known integrity and ability, giving them an absolute and independent power as
to what concerned the public stock, without obliging them to give any account
to the Grand Master, or the Council.

But besides those advantages which Aubusson had common with the rest of the
Knights, he was also honored in particular with a new dignity. The Auvergnian
language represented to the Council, that in regard they had a great number of
Knights that faithfully served the Order, and few dignities that depended upon
the Council, they demanded for a recompense of their service, that they might
have bestowed upon them some particular jurisdiction, as other languages had,
that were less ancient and less numerous. The request seemed but reasonable, so
that the Chapter in favor of them made a new Capital Jurisdiction; they gave
them authority to assign a Commandery for the revenue of the Charge, and
declared at the same time, that the Baily whom they should elect, should enjoy
his Commandery in the same manner as other Bailies; that is to say, that he
should enjoy all the prerogatives and pre eminencies that are appropriated to
Capital Jurisdictions and Commanderies. They annexed the Commandery of Luteil
to the new Bailywick, and after that Aubusson was elected Baily, as he that was
adjudg'd fittest for the dignity.

The first time that Aubusson took his place in Council as Baily, he spoke for
Charlotte de Lusignan Queen of Cyprus. For that unfortunate Princess, whom the
Rebellion of her Subjects had reduced almost to utmost extremity, could find no
Sanctuary but Rhodes, after the ruin of her affairs. There she stayed for some
time, and was entertained at the expenses of the Order.

But in regard her ill fortune had not broken her courage, she resolved upon a
journey to Rome, to desire aid of the Pope against her rebellious Subjects, or
at least to oblige him to thunder out against them the Anathema's of the
Church. And that which made her absolutely determine upon that course, was the
convenience of the French Galleys then in the Port of Rhodes, which were
suddenly to set sail for Naples. But in regard she was very poor, and had not
wherewithal to defray the expenses of her journey, she desired those Knights
who seemed to have most compassion and kindness for her, to speak to the Grand
Master to supply her with what was necessary to carry her into Italy.

The Baily Aubusson was very much troubled for the misfortunes of the Queen,
and espoused her interest. He wished with all his heart, that the condition of
the affairs of Rhodes would have permitted the Knights to have restored her to
her Throne, nor were there any dangers to which he would not have exposed
himself to serve her. But because there was no likelihood of undertaking any
thing abroad, while the Order was in so much danger at home; he only
represented, that since the Knights of St. John were not in a condition to
restore a Queen dispoil'd of her Kingdom, that had put her self under their
protection, that they would at least relieve a Queen in necessity, who did as
it were crave their Alms. That it was true, that the Treasury was not over
rich, and that Money was a precious thing in case of a Siege, but that there
were certain occasions, wherein decency, generosity, charity and justice were
to prevail above ordinary prudence; and that after all was done, that the
Springs of Providence were inexhaustible, and that Heaven was never wont to
fail them that inconvenienc'd themselves to relieve the miserable. He spoke
with so much earnestness, and with such a lively and encouraging Air, that the
Council ordered, notwithstanding the opposition of the Knights, either wanting
generosity, or over-prudent, that the Queen of Cyprus should be plentifully
furnished with all things necessary for her Voyage.

The Baily D'Aubusson was ordered himself, as one of the Managers of the
Treasury, to give her what Money he should think fit; and he so well acquitted
himself, that the Queen had no occasion to complain.

But to return to the preparations for War, though the Venetian found the Turk
employment sufficient in Dalmatia; and that the Alliance which the Venetians
had made with Vssumcassan King of Persia, after the taking of Negropont, had
somewhat discomposed the designs of Mahomet, however the Knights were careful
to stand upon their Guard; and because the Walls were either ruined or weak in
some places, they labored continually in the repair of them, giving to Baily
Aubusson the charge of looking after the Fortifications of the City. He had
applied himself in his youth to that Military Science, wherein betimes he
became so expert that the most able Ingineers could teach him nothing. He was
not content only to repair the breaches, but he added something new to the
ancient Works. He caused the Moats to be made wider and broader; but because it
was noised about, that Mahomet was preparing his Galleys against the Knights of
St. John, and that the Turkish Army which had raised their Siege from before
Scutari, might well come to Rhodes, the Council thought it necessary for fear
of being surpised, to plant their Cannon round the Walls of the City; which
was also entrusted to Aubusson's care, who brought out all the great Guns and
planted them upon the Walls and Ramparts, wherever occasion required.

He was then Grand Prior of Auvergne, having succeeded a little before to the
Chevalier Cottet, who died about that time; and surrendered his Bailywick to
the Knight de Rillac.

But while they were thus preparing to receive the Ottoman Army, the Grand
Master Baptista Vrsini died also; the loss of whom might have ruined Rhodes,
had it not been repaired with advantage. For in short, it was Aubusson himself
whom the Knights assembled chose for Grand Master, Anno 1476. Never was
Election more regular, nor with less disturbance then that. It was made
according to all the forms which the Statute prescribes; and the sixteen
Electors whom the Assembly chose out of the whole number of Languages, to elect
whom they should think most capable of the supreme power, gave their suffrages
with one consent for Peter D'Aubusson Grand Prior of Auvergne.

At the name of Aubusson, the whole Assembly with redoubled shouts and
acclamations testified their unparalled joy. He only was sorry when he heard
himself named, and at first he refused a Command of which he did not think
himself worthy. But I know not by what inward motive, which afterward
prevailed, he was forced to accept it, almost against his own will. Yet could
he not refrain from tears, when according to the custom, he was carried in his
Seat to the Great Altar upon the Shoulders of the principal Commanders. There
it was that confessing his weakness to sustain so great a burden, he received
the submissions of the Knights, after he had solemnly sworn upon the
Evangelists to observe the Statutes of the Order.

The news of this Election was no sooner spread over the Island, but the people
made Bonfires, and testified all the signs of public joy. This caused every
body to hope for a happy Government; neither was Mahomet so much feared, when
they understood that the Grand Prior of Auvergne had the Authority in his hands.

THE HISTORY OF Peter D'Aubusson, Grand Master of RHODES. Book Second.
SO soon as the Grand Master was acknowledged in Rhodes, his first care was to
render to Pope Sixtus the Fourth that Obedience which is due from the Chief of
an Order wholly devoted to the Sacred See.

To that purpose he held a Council the next day after his Election, and
nominated the Prior of Lombardy, together with the Prior of Rome, for that
Embassy.

Then he applied all his thoughts to the Government of a Dominion of which he
had taken possession. And not to loose time, he began at the very first to act
as Grand Master.

Though the Ottoman Army were as yet far enough from Rhodes, nevertheless the
Island was not a little infested by the incursions of the Barbarians. The
Pirates, who landed day and night in several parts, pillaged the Cities, burnt
the Houses massacred and carried away many of the Christians.

The Grand Master thought it convenient to put a stop to these disorders that
so sensibly afflicted him, and for that purpose to build upon the Coast at such
and such distances, several Forts and Towers to hinder the landing of the
Pirates. But because this design required a great sum of Money, and that these
Pyracies had very much exhausted the Grand Masters Revenue, he ordained for the
raising those works, that all those Knights who obtained Commanderies by favor
only, should pay the value of the first years Revenue to the Order, so soon as
they received their Commissions, without which payment the Donation should be
void.

The Grand Master also took in hand again, and went on with all those works
which were discontinu'd by the death of the Grand Master. More especially he
forwarded the new Wall of the Arsenal, and took upon himself the charge of
looking after it. But in regard it was of high importance to look after the
security of the Port, he ordered the Grand Prior of St. Gilles to provide a
Chain to shut it up. He also at the same time gave order to the Chevalier
Raymond, who commanded in the Castle of St. Peter, to widen the Mote so far for
the Sea to fill it, that the Brigantines of the Castle might ride there secure
from Enemies and Tempests.

The Castle St. Peter, which we shall have often an occasion to mention, was a
strong place, situated in Cana, between two Arms of the Sea, which formed a
Peninsula, built upon the ruins of the ancient City Halicarnassus, near the
place where was formerly the Sepulcher of Mausolus, so famous for the love and
grief of Artemisia. The Order of St. John is beholding for that Fortress to the
prudence and valor of one of the French Grand Masters. For Philibert of
Nailac, Grand Master of Rhodes, desirous to make his best advantage of the
consternation of the Infidels, after the Battle wherein Tamerlain had taken
Bajazet Prisoner, fitted out the Galleys of the Order, and sailed directly for
Caria with the choicest Knights of the Order. He took a Castle there from the
Turks, the situation whereof seemed to him to be of so much advantage, that he
built in the same place another almost impregnable, which he called the Castle
of St. Peter. This place it was which in the midst of the Turks Dominions
served as a Sanctuary for the poor Christian Slaves that can get away from
their Masters. And here it was, if we may believe the Writers of that age, that
certain Dogs, of a particular breed, who by a strange instinct of nature,
watched all the night long; and would fly upon the Turks, and fawn upon the
Christians, as if they had known the one from the other.

Among all the Knights which the Grand Master employed according to the variety
of occurrences, and which were always nearest his person, there was not one in
whom he put more confidence then in Charles de Montholon. He was a person of a
very good judgment, and one that bare the character of being fierce in fight,
temperate in counsel, and one that had a genius capable of every thing. This
Knight acquitted himself of several Trusts that were put upon him for the
defense of the City; and he it was that had the charge of fortifying St.
Nicholas Fort.

While the Grand Master issued out his orders, and labored himself to have all
things in readiness to sustain a Siege. Antonio Loredano, General of the
Venetian Fleet in the Island of Cyprus, understanding that Riccio de Marino, a
Cipriot by birth, and a person born for intrigue, and one of the most zealous
Servitors of Charlote de Lusignan, negotiated at Rhodes to the prejudice of
Katharine Carnara, he sent an Ambassador to complain in the name of the Duke of
Venice, for that the Knights did entertain those that were Rebels to the
Republic.

It is impossible to understand the grounds of that Embassy, nor the answer of
the Grand Master, without being informed beforehand of the Claims of those two
Princesses to the Kingdom of Cyprus, and wherefore the Republic took
Katharine's part, and opposed Charlota.

John de Lusignan King of Cyprus, one of the weakest and most effeminate
Princes that ever swayed a Scepter, had only one natural Son, who was named
James de Lusignan, when he espoused his Second Wife Helena, of the House of the
Paleologi, and Daughter of the Despote of Moria. By this second Wife he had a
Daughter named Charlote, who was married to John of Portugal, Duke of
Conimbria. This Prince, who had both wit and courage, being at the Court of
Cyprus, easily wound himself into the management of affairs, and deprived the
Queen of all that authority which the weakness of the King had permitted her to
use.

The Queens Nurse, who governed all things before the marriage of the Princess
Charlota, and was afterward in little esteem, revenged the Queen's and her own
disgrace, by poisoning the Duke of Conimbria. She had a Son whom she
passionately loved, and whom during her grandeur, she had made a kind of
absolute Minister of State. The death of the Prince restored to the Mother and
the Son the authority which they had lost. But as persons of mean Birth usually
forget themselves, when raised above themselves, the insolence of the one and
the other was so excessive, that they used the Duchess most contemptuously.

Charlota deeply resented both the death of her Husband, and the scorns put
upon her when she was a Widow. She complained to her Brother James de Lusignan,
and her Complaints were not in vain; for this natural Son of the King, equally
cruel and ambitious, killed with his own hand the Nurses Son, not so much to
satisfy his Sister, as to govern in his room, and to open to himself by that
means a way to the Throne. The Queen, who tenderly loved her Nurse, could not
be brought to pardon James whom she mortally hated besides; so that to avoid
the anger of a Woman, a Queen, and a Mother-in-Law, he was forced to conceal
himself in the Venetian Consuls House, and at length to quit the Kingdom.

In the mean while the Duchess of Conimbria, who was in the flower of her age,
and in the full splendour of her beauty, was remarried with Lewis Son to the
Duke of Savoy. Soon after this marriage the King and the Queen died. The King
by his Will declared Charlota his only Heir. But the natural Son, whom ambition
blinded, had no regard either to the Laws of Nature, or the last words of a
dying Prince. He made War upon his Sister and his Brother-in-Law, by the
assistance of the Sultan of Egypt, who rather chose to have a Grecian Prince
his Tributary, then any other. Marc Cornaro, a Gentleman of Venice, who lived
at Nicossa, and was very rich, did not a little help the Bastard to make
himself Master of the Isle, and usurp the Crown. The Usurper therefore, to
acknowledge his services, and to fix the Venetians at the same time to his
interests, espoused Katharine the Daughter of Carnaro, after the Commonwealth
had adopted her. But this new Dominion was too unjust to endure long or happy.
The Uncles of Katharine, who shared in the Government, poisoned the King of
Cyprus, with a design to reign themselves. And it was in favor of his Widow
that Michael Salamon came to Rhodes on the behalf of General Loredano, who was
gone to Cyprus to restore Katharine to the possession of her Kingdom.

The Venetian Ambassadors delivered a Letter to the Grand Master from the Duke
of Venice full of reproaching and menacing Language. Afterward he himself
declared with much haughtiness, that since the Commonwealth had adopted
Katharine Cornara, that it was an injury done to the Venetians, to favor
Rebels that caball'd against a Daughter of St. Mark, and their lawful Queen.

So proud and surly an Embassy, no way pleased the Grand Master; however he
thought it not convenient to provoke the Venetians by too severe an answer, at
a time when the order had their hands full. Nor could he stoop to qualify them
with an answer too much beneath himself. And therefore he answered with a
Gentility and sowreness mixed both together, that the Knights of St. John
neither meddl'd with the differences in the Kingdom of Cyprus, nor would they
suffer any Traitors in Rhodes; but that the Island being a free Island, they
denied admittance to no Christians who desired to live among them like
Christians.

Salamon, was not satisfied with the Grand Masters answer; and Loredano less.
He thought his own presence would do more then his Ambassador; for which reason
he hastens away to Rhodes. When his Galleys entered the Port, the Master sent
four of the Grand Crosses to congratulate his arrival, and to present him with
all sorts of fresh Victuals; but being informed of the occasion of his coming,
he sent to tell him plainly, that he could make him no other answer, then what
he had already given him. That concise Declaration, caused the General to
understand that his Voyage was lost: so that without considering any farther
with himself, or so much as setting foot ashore, he returned with all the
choler that could inspire a fierce and daring person, for having taken so much
pains so little to the purpose.

The haughtiness of the Venetians was not the only cause of the ill success of
their Embassy. The kindness which the Grand Master had for Charlota de
Lusignan, had a deep share therein. Though the Knights of St. John, had never
openly declared for Katherine Cornara, nor were willing to contest with the
Venetians, about their affair: certain it is, that in their hearts they were
all for Charlota de Lusignan; whether it were that they were satisfied in the
Justice of her cause; or that the compassion which they took upon her
misfortunes, caused them to embrace her interests; or whether it were, that the
most of them were taken with the Charms of her beauty. They had seen her
several times at Rhodes, she was as yet young enough; for her misfortunes had
not defaced her beauty, nor deprived her of her natural gayity of humor. She
spoke very pleasingly, and readily, according to the natural Genius of the
Greeks; she dressed her self after the French mode, and her disposition, her air,
and manners plainly showed her to be of Royal Extraction.

The Grand Master had always admired in the person of Charlota, besides the
graces of her body and mind, a prudence that exceeded age, and a constancy
above all her sex. But the chiefest motive was, that she had put her self under
the protection of the Knights; and for that she had already received all the
assisting kindnesses that she could in reason expect. Her acknowledgment also
obliged them to show her new marks of their esteem and affection. For she
publicly declared that she had been more obliged to the Knights of Rhodes,
then to all her nearest Relations: and because the Commonwealth had adopted her
Enemy, she was wont pleasently to say, that if Katharine Cornara, were the
Daughter of St. Mark of Venice, Charlota de Lusignan was the Daughter of St.
John of Jerusalem.

But perhaps the great esteem they had for Lewis of Savoy, her husband
contributed more then any other reason, to make the Grand Master and Knights
favorable to her interests. They were all persuaded that the order of St. John
were beholding for their preservation to the house of Savoy: and it was a
common opinion among them, that Amadeus the fifth, surnamed the Great, coming
to the relief of Rhodes, and having constrained Ottoman to raise his Seige,
took for his impress these four Letters; F. E. R. T. that is, Fortitudo ejus
Rhodum tenuit, his Fortitude kept Rhodes. And that in his arms he changed the
Eagle of Savoy into the Cross of the Order, to let all the World know his
devotion to the service of the Knights, immortalizing the memory of an action
that had been so serviceable to them. Nevertheless the whole Story is but a
Fable without foundation or probability. For the devise, Lewis of Savoy, Baron
de Vaud, who died in the year 1301, stamped it upon his money, ten years before
the Seige of Rhodes. And in the Cathedral Church of Agosta, upon the Sepulcher
of Thomas de Savoy, the second of that name, there is still to be seen, a Dog
lying at his feet, with this word engraven upon his collar, FERT, in Gotthick
Letters, without any points, or separation of Letters. As for the Cross, the
predecessors of Amadeus the fifth, carried it instead of the Eagle, either as
Earls of Piemont, the Arms whereof were the Eagle. Or in imitation of Amadeus
the third, Earl of Savoy, who took the Cross upon him in the year 1147, and
kept it at his return from Palestine, as a testimony of his expedition beyond
the Seas. Amadeus the great also wore it himself in the year 1304. when he
appeared at the Treaty which he made with Stephen Coligny, Lord of Andelot. But
though the Story of Amadeus be false in all the circumstances, it passed for
Current at Rhodes, as well as in other places. And therefore it is no wonder,
if the Grand Master led by the Popular error respected Amadeus in Lewis,
Charlota's Husband, beyond either Katharina Cornara, or the Venetians.

The Proposal which the sub-Basha of Pizzonne Governor of Lycia made to the
Grand Master was heard more favorably then that of the Duke of Venice. There
were at that time several Knights, and many subjects of the order, Slaves to
the Turks. These Barbarians, in whom sometimes covetousness serves as a
Counterpoise to cruelty, had a desire to get Money, and the Sub-Basha sent to
Rhodes, a Merchant called Cachim Brahim, to traffic for the delivery of the
Slaves. The Grand Master who stood in need of Men, and sought nothing more then
the liberty of so many unfortunate Persons, was soon persuaded to treat with
the Turkish Merchant; and he agreed also according to the Sub-Basha's command,
that there should be a Truce for a Month between the Order and the Turks, that
they might treat without interruption.

During this Negotiation, there happened one thing very remarkable: one of the
Turks that belonged to Cochim Brahim, one day offered his service to the Grand
Master, to bring him an account from Constantinople of the designs and
readiness of the Ottoman Army; of which they had no certain news for a good
while* He promised to make all possible have, and after he had confirmed his
words by most terrible Oaths, he said that he could not resist that inward
Motion that compelled him to serve the Knights, against his Law and his Prince.
Though the Grand Master did not much rely upon the faith of a person who had
all the looks of a Traitor, yet he thought it not convenient to refuse an
offer, which if it failed, could do no harm. So without confiding in the Turk,
or making any semblance to defy him, he gave him a pasport for his return; and
out of hopes that God would be pleased to overthrow the designs of Mahomet, by
the means of a Mohammedan, he suffered the voluntary spy to go wherever the
Spirit which he spoke of, conducted him.

But if Heaven on the one side seem favorable to the Order of St. John, on the
other side, it seemed no less incensed against it. For a prodigious Tempest
arose all of a sudden, when the Sky seemed to be very serene. The Rain in an
instant made an Inundation over all the Country; and the wind threw down
several houses in the City; among the rest, the Archbishops Palace. That which
was most deplorable, was, that the violence of the Storm shook the old Wall of
the City, and overturned a good part of the new. Had the Enemy then come,
Rhodes had been lost; so far had he been from finding resistance there, that he
had only come to view the Image of a City taken and sacked. The public
Consternation made the mischief more lamentable. The People that are presently
alarmed by any thing that appears extraordinary, took such a horrible Tempest,
as a certain presage of their ruin: and the greatness of the danger had
certainly cast them into a general despair, had not the constancy of the Grand
Master supported them.

Scarce was the Tempest over, when a Contest which the Greeks and Latins had,
about I cannot tell what point of Doctrine, raised a Popular Tumult. Of a
single despute, by degrees they made a real quarrel, which came to blows. And
as in quarrels about Religion, every one is apt to call his particular
transportment a piece of merit, their Animosity and fury one against another
waxed so hot, that several had been killed upon the place, had not the Grand
Master made use of all his policy and authority to appease the Tumult. He did
not content himself to make both parties lay down their Arms; and to punish the
most culpable, to keep the rest within the bounds of their duty; but he
resolved to pull up the Root of the Sedition; and because the difference was
about Religion, he engaged the Archbishop of Rhodes, and the Metropolitan of
the Greeks to make a Reconciliation.

A pacification being thus made, and the walls of the City being almost
repaired; he made a visitation through the Island, to view himself, and to give
order for the Fortification of those places that had need of defense. Having
spent a whole month in this Visitation, at his return he found the Greek Spy,
who informed him that the Infidels made very great preparations, that their
Fleet was to set sale with the first Wind from the straight of Gallipoll, and
that it was certainly confirmed at Constantinople, that the great Turk would
set upon the Knights of St. John.

The Grand Master well know that it was one of the maxims of the Turkish
policy to give out false reports, the better to conceal the true design. That
it was their custom to keep an Enemy in suspense for several years, to the end
he might exhaust himself with continual and needless preparations; that they
came upon their Enemies, when they were weary of expecting them, and thought no
more of them. But on the other side he was not ignorant that they did not
always observe the same rules, nor the same method in War; but that it was one
of their Stratagems to divulge the expedition which they intended, that people
should not believe it; or that it was designed at a distance, and in the mean
time to use all diligence imaginable to prevent the resistance and provision of
the Enemy. And therefore he thought it the securest way to neglect nothing, and
to provide against a siege, as if the intelligence of the Spy had been
unquestionable.

After he had taken upon him the charge of Captain General of Rhodes, which the
Council besought him to accept, he chose out for the defense of the City four
Captains of assistance, as they were then called, and assigned to every one
their duty and their Post. Besides the Knights which he had already sent to
Lango, he sent with the Title of Captain of assistance the Knight Grimaldi with
the same Commission for the Castle of St. Peter, which the Lieutenant of the
Baily of Germany was to visit by his order.

In the mean time Intelligence came that the Fleet of the Barbarians had set
sail out of the Straight to the number of two hundred Galleys, that they were
then at the Island of Scio, and would soon be at Rhodes. This News made the
Grand Master give order, that all the Country people should retire into the
Forts, and that no person should stir forth, till the Light Horse appointed for
the Guard of the Island, had visited the Coasts, and and all places where the
Turks could lie in Ambuscado. He ordered also that all Strangers and Vagabonds
that were in Rhodes should be all enrolled; and that the Knight Friqueroly
should command them. That all Vessels that were in port should be stayed, and
that they should be furnished with all things necessary for their subsistence.

He sent at the same time a Brigantine to Scio to observe the Enemies Fleet,
and he understood that the Infidels had in vain attempted the taking of
Stalimene, where they had put all to fire and Sword; that from thence they
sailed to Scio, where they had had no better success, but had made the same
havoc: that from thence they were fallen into Lango. From whence, after they
had wasted the whole Country, they were gone to Patmos, with a design upon the
Castle of St. Peter, and thence to return to Rhodes: but understanding that the
grand Master had put those Forts into a good condition, they had steered
another course, and after they had committed some spoil at Naxi, they were
returned at length to Constantinople.

This Intelligence somewhat enlivened the Rhodians, however it did nothing
slak'n the Industry and Vigilance of the Grand Master. He knew the tricks of
the Infidels, and it was one of his Maxims, that it was equally dangerous to
be lulled asleep upon good news; as to be alarmed at bad. Moreover, he was
advertised by his Spies, that the Turk was absolutely resolved to besiege
Rhodes; that that expedition was deferred till the next year, and that Mahomet
would command in Person. How untrue soever this intelligence might be, the
Grand Master made his best advantage of it.

As the hope of relief inspires both consolation and courage during a Siege, he
ordered the Knight Cardona, Baily of Marjorca, who was gone into Catalonia and
Arragon, to put in execution the orders of the last Chapter touching the new
Taxes, to levy men, and to buy all sorts of Ammunition and provisions, to send
them away with all speed, and to agree with the Masters, so that they should be
obliged to enter the Port, though the City should be besieged.

But because that many of the Knights were abroad, and that the Council was
resolved to hold a General Chapter to provide for the present necessities, the
Grand Master wrote to all the Priors a Circularory Letter, the Original whereof
is still preserved among the Records of Malta; wherein he laid before them the
great necessity of their assembling altogether, the near approach of the Enemy,
his power, the goodness of his Soldiers, and his determined resolution to ruin
the Order of St. John. Then he besought them to lay those things to heart, and
consider the dangers that environed them, and that it concerned their safety
and their honor, not to prefer the pleasures of this world before the defense
of all Christendom.

After he had sent away this Letter, he represented very earnestly to the
Council, that for the preservation of the people of Rhodes, it was necessary to
repair, and regularly to fortify the Castle of Caravia, which fell to ruin. He
gave them to understand that the Country where this Castle was built, wanted
Inhabitants, because the Country people were forced to retire to the most
remote places; and that it would in time be quite dispeopl'd, though that part
were the most pleasant and fertile of all. He added that that Country was not
to be quitted nor left desert, but that the whole Island would suffer very
much; and that to avoid those Inconveniences, he thought it very necessary to
reinforce that place, so that it might be defended, and serve as a Retreat for
the Country people like the other Fortresses. The proposal of the Grand Master
was approved by all the Council, and for the more speedy putting it in
execution, it was resolved at the same time, that a years revenue of the Office
of the Grand Mastery, vacant by the death of the Grand Master, Baptista Vrsini,
which was put into the Treasury, should be employed upon that necessary use.

And in regard the last Chapter had ordered the making new Walls and Bastions
about the Castle of Rhodes, the Grand Master caused some of the Money that came
from France to be paid out for that purpose.

Lewis the Eleventh, who succeeded his Father Charles the Seventh, and who when
he was only Dolphin, had honored the Grand Master with his particular favors,
forgot him not when he came to the Crown. He was informed in general of the
condition of the affairs of the Levant by the Knight D'Ambrose, who was sent to
receive the Money in the Priories of France and Champaign, which was due to the
Order. But he was fully informed by the Chevalier Blanchfort, who came a little
while after to present to his Majesty a Leopard, and two Falcons of a rare
breed. The affection which he bore to the Grand Master, made him take those
courses for the relief of the Knights, which perhaps he would not have done
through any motion of zeal. That Prince requested of Pope Sixtus the Fourth, a
Jubilee for all those persons in his Kingdom that would assist the Rhodians. He
obtained that which he demanded, provided that all the Money that should be
collected from the charity of the faithful, should be employed for no other use
then for the defense of Rhodes; nor can it be said how much this Jubilee
advantaged the Order.

The affairs of Rhodes being thus settled at home, he began to rekindle the
feud which was between Turks and Saracens; and having brok'n with the one, he
omitted nothing, with the Pope's permission, to league himself with the other.
His management was so successful, that the Saracens themselves furthered it as
much as in them lay. The Sultan of Egypt, who fearing the Arms of Mahomet, sent
to Rhodes his Favorite Dovan Diodar, to renew the Peace with the Knights.
After some conferences between the Saracens and the Grand Master, the
Ratification was made: and the principal Articles of the Treaty were, that the
Order should not set forth any Ships or Vessels to annoy either by Land or Sea
the Subjects of the Sultan. That they should not permit them to join or assist
with Soldiers, Pilots, or Guides, any foreign Rovers against the Soldan's
interest. On the other side, that the Sultan should attempt nothing to the
prejudice of the Knights: and that if they were assailed by their enemies, the
Sultan should be obliged to assist and defend them. That the Vessels of the
Order sailing through the Soldan's Dominions for the Holy Land, should pay no
duties, and that they should be under his protection as friends. Lastly, that
when the Christian Slaves at Cairo should be freed by their Masters, they
should have liberty to return home; and that for those other Christian Slaves
that were not affranchiz'd, they should be exchanged for such other Moors that
were Slaves, giving a Moor for a Christian.

In regard the King of Tunis seemed less inclined to an Accommodation then the
Sultan, either out of his barbarous haughtiness that made him despise the
friendship of the Christians, or out of just resentment of the injuries which
the Moorish Merchants pretended to have received from the Knights, the Grand
Master did not think it any derogation from his dignity; to make the first
proposal for the interest of the Faith. The Knight Lamant had therefore order
to go to Tunis, who understood so well how to govern the African Prince, that a
Peace was concluded in a few days. There was a Truce agreed upon for one and
thirty years between the Moors and the Knights. And the Articles little
different from those made with the Sultan, were sent to Rhodes for the Grand
Master to sign. But there was this one Article particular, that the Knights,
when they pleased, might have liberty to buy within the Territories of the King
of Tunis, thirty thousand Comb of Wheat without paying duty, whatever
prohibition to the contrary, or whatever scarcity were in the Country.

The Grand Master sent back, with the Treaty signed, Jerome Barbo, one of the
most prudent men in Rhodes to reside in Tunis* as Consul, for the Knights, or
rather to observe the carriage and actions of the Moors, under pretense of
looking after the trade of the Rhodians.

The joy which the people had upon these new Alliances, was soon disturbed by a
general famine in the City and Island, occasioned by the loss of certain
Barques laden with Corn, that were bound for Rhodes, of which some were cast
away, others taken by the Pirates. But when their misery was at the height, and
that they began to despair of any remedy, by reason that the Sea raged in that
manner, that no Vessels durst stir out, a Caravel was driven into the Port by
stress of weather, laden with Corn. A relief so unexpected seemed to be a kind
of miracle. But because that the Corn which the Caravel brought was not
sufficient, the Grand Master gave order to the Captain of the Castle of St.
Peter, to give Passports to all Merchants that would bring Corn to Rhodes. So
that many Turkish Merchants more regarding their Profit then their Religion,
laid hold upon the opportunity to dispose of their Grain, and brought to Rhodes
so great a quantity of Corn, that all the Granaries were soon filled. Thus the
Grand Master saved the lives of his people by the means of their enemies, and
that famine which threatened the desolation of the whole Island, did but only
serve to create a greater plenty.

While these things passed at Rhodes, reports ran at Constantinople that
Mahomet was not seriously bent upon the enterprise against Rhodes; whether it
were that he was afraid of any ill success, and was loath to hazard any thing
after so many happy Expeditions, or whether he had any other Conquests in his
designs. But some of his Favorites mortal enemies of the Knights of St. John,
pressed him to lay aside all other designs, and to go on with that of the Siege
of Rhodes.

There were about him two famous Renegado's, who had raised their fortunes by
the same ways, and resembled one another very much in wickedness, though their
Character were different; the one was called Demetrius, a Negropontine; though
he were one of the most wicked wretches in the world, he had all the Air of a
virtuous man; and never Greek knew how to conceal such a vast store of
perfidiousness under the outward appearances of truth and justice. He had a
subtle wit, supple and pliant, every way fit for Negotiation and Intreague. He
was also very skilful in War, and resolute upon occasion: after the taking of
Negropont, he went to live at Rhodes, and from thence to Constantinople, where
having taken the Turbant, he so insinuated himself into the great ones of the
Court, and gained by degrees the favor of Mahomet, by giving him an account of
the situation and force of the Island. The other Renegado was of Rhodes also,
and was called Meligale: This was a man without conscience or honor, stout and
bold, but violent and rash; accustomed from his youth to all sorts of Crimes,
and boasting in infamous actions. Having spent his Estate in debauchery, and
finding himself deep in debt, he could find no other way to recruit himself
then by renouncing his Religion, and betraying his Country. Before he went to
the Court of Mahomet, he had more exactly then Demetrius, observed all the
Fortifications of Rhodes, and had made a Platform of them, with an Inventory
of the Artillery, and all the Munitions of the place. By that means he got
access to Basha Misach Paleologue, and insinuate himself into the favor of
Mahomet.

These two Villains, who were acquainted an Rhodes, entered into (...) strict
Friendship, and consulted together the destruction of the order of St. John of
Jerusalem. The confidence that Mahomet reposed in then gave them the boldness
to declare themselves. However, they did not do it at first; they discoursed
him several times with the Island of Rhodes, laying before his eyes the beauty
of the Country, the temperature of the Air, and the convenience of the Harbor.
After which they represented to him sometimes by word of mouth, and sometimes
by the information, which they had given of the Grandees of the Court, that the
Knights had usurped so fair an Island from the Mussel-men that enjoyed it
before, when Foulk de Velaret, a French man, and Master of the Hospital of St.
John of Jerusalem settled himself there, that nothing could be more proper for
the Ottoman Emperors, then a place that might facilitate the Conquest of Egypt
and Syria; and lastly, that the Enterprise was no less easy then honorable.
They told him that there was but little provision, and but few Soldiers in
Rhodes; and showing him the Platform of the City, they gave him to understand
that the Walls of the Castle were old and ruinous; that the Jews quarter was
the most weak, and that when he had won St. Nicholas Tower, it would be easy to
gain the rest. They added also that Rhodes being the passage to Italy, he was
not to despise the Favors of Fortune that offered him the Conquest of Rome as
well as of Constantinople; besides that, it did not become him to suffer a
Captain of a Troop of Vagabond Knights, to refuse to do him that homage which
Kings themselves were forced to stoop to.

Now as Princes have their ears open to Councils that flatter their ambition,
Mahomet easily harken'd to the instigations of Demetrius and Meligate. However,
being wise, and knowing that precipitate rashness is the ruin of many great
undertakings, he thought it convenient to consult his chief Ministers before he
resolved upon any thing: Who being of a contrary opinion to that of the
Renegado's, did all they could to divert him from the expedition against
Rhodes. They represented to him, how that the City was newly fortified; that
Soldiers and Ammunition were brought in every day; That the Grand Master was
an extraordinary person, too courageous to yield, and too vigilant to be
surpised. They put Mahomet in mind, that though the forces of the Knights were
not comparable to his, yet he could never take the least Castle from them, with
all the Armies which he had sent against them; and that it behooved him to
consider the future by what had passed; besides that upon the least Motion
which he should make that way, all Europe and Asia would take Arms in favor of
the Rhodians. That the Grand Master had renewed an alliance with the Sultan of
Egypt; and that without any great difficulty, he would be able to make the
King of Persia his friend. That the Pope labored to unite the Princes of
Christendom against the Ottoman Empire; that all these Enemies united in a
league together, would not fail to assault him in several places together, and
make such a diversion of his own Forces, that in some place or other they would
certainly recover to his loss. They added moreover, that there were other
Islands to take before Rhodes. They showed him besides, that the Conquest of
Rhodes would be no addition to his renown; that he might conquer new Empires,
but never regain lost honor, which he hazarded all at once in a dangerous
expedition, where he had nothing to win, but where he had so much to lose. At
length they concluded all, that the safest way was by negotiation, and
accommodation to engage the Knights to pay him some yearly tribute; and
thereupon they advised him to send an Ambassador to the Grand Master to propose
him Peace upon those conditions. But that they might not offend the Grand
Signior in case of refusal, they were of opinion that the Embassy should be
sent in the name of Zizim his Son, and Selebi his Nephew, telling him also that
such a way of proceeding could not but take effect; or at least that during the
negotiation, the Knights would not be so strict upon their guards; so that
under the pretense of treaty, he might surprise the Castle of St. Peter, and
facilitate thereby the enterprise upon Rhodes, whenever he should determine to
undertake it.

Whatever inclinations Mahomet might have to follow the counsel of the
Renegado's, he stuck to the advice of his Ministers; and it may be said, that
at that time he made his ambition give way to his prudence. They made choice of
Demetrius for the chief in the Embassy. That wicked man was easily satisfied
that his opinion was not followed, partly for the confidence which they reposed
in him, and partly out of the hopes which he had, that his counsel might
afterward be resumed into consideration, if the negotiation which he had taken
upon him, did not produce any good effect. He was entrusted with a Letter to
the Grand Master, written in Greek, and signed in Turkish by the two Princes.
The Contents whereof are as follows, conformable to the Original Copy.

TO THE Thrice Generous, and Thrice Famous Prince, Peter D'Aubusson, Grand
Master of Rhodes; or, Thrice Honored Father and Lord.
INtegrity and Valor have so many Charms to allure the love of men, of
whatsoever Nation or Religion, that it is no wonder if the Princes of the Blood
Royal of the Ottomans, and of the Sect of the Prophet Mahomet, have no mean
thoughts of friendship for you and your Order. We are obliged thereto, and in
some measure forced to it, by the Renown which your Heroic Virtues have
acquired over all the East. Yet some there are who have endeavored to render
you obnoxious to our Thrice Illustrious Emperor. And some of his Favorites
continually exasperate him to turn his Victorious Arms against you, to abolish
the Christian Name in your destruction. But we far from inspiring him with any
such thoughts, have used all our endeavors to avert his formidable Thunder from
your Dominions: and we have been so succesful therein, that his Highness
refuses not to heark'n to Peace, willing to receive you into the number of his
Allies. Of which we were desirous to give you information by Demetrius our
Ambassador, to whom you may give credit. If you will but list'n to the
Propositions which he shall make you on our behalf, as we conjure you to do, we
are ready to be our selves the Mediators, and the chief Promoters of your
quiet. In expectation of your answer, we pray the All-powerful Creator of
Heaven and Earth to preserve you in a flourishing condition. From the City of
Patara, the 9th of February, in the year of the Birth of your Prophet Jesus,
1478.

Your Sons, and good Friend, ZEM SCELBEI, Son of the Invincible Emperor
Mahomet, and Che-Le-Bi, Sultan Sangiach of Mandachia.


Though this Letter were but only a snare which the Sultan laid for the Grand
Master, it was sincere on the Princes side that were put upon the affair. For
they had both of them a natural affection for the Knights of Rhodes, and
something of an inclination to the Christian Religion; particularly Zizim, who
was endu'd with much Generosity, and a Regularity in his conditions.

After Demetrius had presented the Letter to the Grand Master, he declared to
him that he did not demand but only a slight Tribute for the sole conditions of
the Peace; and then craftily insinuated that the Proposals of the Princes were
too civil to be denied by the generosity of the Knights. That the friendship of
the Invincible Mahomet was above the value of a slight homage. That it highly
concerned the Christians to act prudently with a Conqueror who made all the
Earth to tremble, and who vouchsafed to be their friend.

These fair words wrought little effect; for besides that the Grand Master was
informed by his Spies, that they had a mind to surprise them, he conjectured of
himself at the motives of the Embassy by the Person of the Ambassador; who was
not unknown to him. The very name of Renegado gave him a suspicion. He looked
upon Demetrius as a Traitor, whom it behooved him to beware of, and not as a
person with whom he could negotiate securely. So that the affair miscarried at
first, where Mahomet thought he had done for the best. Of so great importance
it is for the success of Negotiations and Embassies to employ persons of
Integrity and honor; or at least such as have the reputation of being so.

Nevertheless the Grand Master dissembled his distrust, and judging how
advantageous a suspension of Arms would be, till such time as all the warlike
Provision which he expected every day were arrived, together with the Knights
which had been summoned, he did not utterly reject Propositions of Demetrius,
neither did he absolutely accept it: and whatever Artifice the cunning Fox
could use to draw from him a precise answer, all his reply was, that the
Knights of Rhodes could not treat with Mahomet without the permision of the
Pope; that questionless his Holiness would not oppose the peace, provided that
his Master would harken to those Conditions which had formerly been concluded
with Amurath, that is to say, without any mention of Tribute. That in
expectation of the Popes answer, it would do well, if so it pleased the Ottoman
Princes, that there should be a Cessation of Arms, and liberty of Commerce
between the Christians and the Turks.

The Renegado, who well understood how nice the Knights were in point of
Tribute, and thought of nothing more then a positive refusal at first,
contented himself that he had set the business a foot. And the better to bring
it to a happy conclusion, promised of his own accord, in the names of Zizim and
Shelebi what the Grand Master had desired, and departed very well satisfied.*
that he was not flatly denied.

The Grand Master wrote a very civil Letter to the two Princes; he thanked them
for their kind endeavors, and highly applauded their good intentions; but he
declared at the same time, without so much as mentioning the Tribute, that he
could not come to any conclusion, till he knew the Popes resolution, and how
the Christian Princes stood affected to it, who made the affairs of Rhodes
their own business.

Demetrius had no sooner given an account of his Negotiation, but the Princes
sent him back, with order not to speak a word more of the Tribute, and to
demand only some small present, to cover with a specious Title that submission
which Mahomet exacted from the Knights. But their answer was still the same
that they could make no engagement, till they had heard news from Rome. All
that they could farther say, was, that those Presents which were exacted
yearly, did very much resemble presents, and that the Knights of Rhodes were
not overforward to make any kind of Presents to the Grand Signior.

Demetrius understood well enough what they meant. However he was yet in hopes
that the Grand Master might at length be brought to relent, and to engage him
thereto by his Interest, he promised him again a suspention of Arms, with
liberty of Trade. Nevertheless the Grand Master did not fail to prepare for
War, as if their had not been so much as any discourse of peace; and that
Mahomet should not be informed of any thing, he ordered that no Vessel should
stir out of the Port. He soon perceived that the Infidels were not very curious
in observing Truces: and the advice which was brought him that the Turkish
Brigantines had taken certain Vessels belonging to the Order, near the Islands
of Calamo and Episcopia, confirmed him more and more in the thoughts which he
had, that all this Treaty was but an Artifice; and he rather believed that the
Turks were so much the more ready to beseige Rome, by how much they seemed to
be farthest from any such design. So that he renewed all the Orders which he
had given out for the security of the City; he also sent to Naples the Knight
D'Albalat of Aragon to buy Corn, and besides that, as he was resolved that the
Barbarians should not carry by famine what they could not win by force, he sent
into Egypt and Syria for plenty of all sorts of Provisions.

In the mean time the Knights arrived at Rhodes from all parts of Christendom.
And in regard the assembly which was to be held the first of May, was put off
by the Popes Bull, and deferred to the 28th of October, by an order of Council
they appeared almost all at a time.

The Grand Master, at the opening the Assembly, made a speech that made no
small Impression upon their Spirits. After the usual ceremonies and
Formalities, the sixteen who were elected for the Government of all things,
laid new Taxes upon all the Commanderies, and earnestly desired the Grand
Master to take upon him the administration of the Revenue. Though he had other
weighty business enough to do, and that this alone was sufficient to take up a
man's whole time, he readily accepted it; but the easiness wherewith he
acquitted himself of a charge so burdensome, obliged the Knights to qualify
the hardness of the Labor by the entire confidence which they manifestly let
him see they had in him. They gave him full power to employ to what uses, and
after what manner he should think good, all the money that should be brought
into the Treasury. They also ordered that all the Ammunition and Warlike
provisions should be put into his hands, to distribute as he should see cause.
Moreover that he should have power to create the Receiver General of Avignon,
and all the other Receivers, by one Warrant alone signed by his hand: that
without having regard to the priority of Languages, nor the antiquity of the
Knights, he might make the Castellane of Rhodes, the Judges and Baily of
Commerce, the Captain of the Castle St. Peter, and all the Captains of the
Galleys. That he might also choose the Captains of the three Towers, and the
Gates of the City; that in case the Grand Commandery of Cyprus, the Bayliage of
Lango, and the Office of Procurator General at the Court at Rome came to be
vacant during his administration, it should be free for him to dispose thereof
at his pleasure. But to the end he might not be thwarted in the exercise of his
charge, they forbid the Bailiffs, the Priors, and all the rest of the Knights
to meddle in any manner whatsoever with the treasury. They also gave him the
liberty to retain next his person, or to send to what place he pleased, seven
of the Grand Crosses which they named, and to choose others by his own
particular authority, if any one happen to miscarry. Lastly, because the
revenue of the Grand Master* was very much impaired, because of their
extraordinary expenses for the Fortifications of the Island, or for the aid of
the Subjects of the Order, they permitted him to keep in his hands, during his
life, three of those Commanderies which he had the privilege to dispose of
himself, as Grand Master.

Hardly were the affairs of the Chapter at an end, when news was brought, that
the Infidels had shown themselves before the Castle of St. Peter, under
pretense of parlying upon an accommodation, but in truth to surprise the
Garrison. The Grand Master wrote further to the Gcvernour of the Castle, and
commanded him, by virtue of the holy obedience, to have no commerce with them,
and to treat with them as if there were no truce in being. Neither was he
satisfied in giving him his Orders, and advertizing him of the Ambuscades of
the enemies; he also sent him a considerable reinforcement of Knights and
Soldiers, which forced the enemy to retire.

But that the Order might no be in want of Money, when there was more occasion
for it then ever, the Grand Master, according to the absolute authority which
he had in the management of the Treasury, established the Knight D'Erland his
Lieutenant in the Priories of St. Giles's and Toulouse, with ample power to
change the Receivers and the Treasurers; to be urgent with bad Paymasters, and
to punish them if there were occasion; and to do his utmost to raise what large
sums he could. He dispatched away the Knight Chialli for the same cause, into
the Priories of France, Aquitain, and Champaign, after he had honored him with
the dignity of Knight Hospitaller of the Order, which he had taken from the
Knight de Molay, for not appearing at Rhodes according to the time prefixed in
the Bull. He more severely handled also other Knights, who being obliged to
have made their appearance at the Assembly, had contemned his Orders, and
instead of hastening to the defense of the Island, loyter'd at home, either
plunged in the pleasures of an effeminate life, or taken up with the affairs of
the world. For after he had declared them disobedient and Rebels, he took away
from them their habit, and cut them off from the body of the Order.

Now, though Mahomet got no advantage by all his devices, however he continued
his undermining practices; imagining, according to the principles of his
policy, that men were so much the more to affect credit and reputation, by how
much the more those persons, with whom he treated, had a distrust; and that
there are such moments wherein the wisest are surpised, when a man knows how
to maintain a cheat long enough.

Therefore in some measure to repair the fault which he had committed, in
making choice of a suspected person, he sent a Turk of merit to Rhodes; and to
take off all suspicion, he resolved to appear, and own the negotiation himself.
The Ambassador did all that lay in his power to persuade the Rhodians to
believe that the Grand Signior sincerely dedesir'd a Peace; and he declared in
full Council, that he came as well on the Grand Signior's behalf, as on the
part of Zizim, to conclude it in the most amicable manner that might be. He
delivered himself worthy and nobly, and far from that insolent and disdainful
air with which the Turks are wont to treat the Christians, with whom they
negotiate; there appeared neither pride nor haughtiness in his behavior. But
all this affected carriage, whereby the Ambassador of the Ottoman Court
pretended to dispel the suspicions of the Grand Master, did but augment them.
He conjectured that such an extraordinary show of sincerity was but a mask of
more fine and subtle deception; that there was no more credit to be given to
the words of the unknown person, then to the Greek Renegado: For which reason
he gave the second Ambassador no other answer then he had given the former. But
because that he who intends to defend himself from a concealed enemy, is not by
any means to make his discovery public; and for that there are certain
decencies to be observed with Illustrious enemies, how perfidious soever they
be; The Grand Master would not permit the Turkish Ambassador to have the least
glimpse of his intentions, but sent a Knight along with him, to let Mahomet
understand that the Order was ready to make Peace with him upon the ancient
conditions, but that he could not submit to the payment of any duty. Mahomet
extremely resented a refusal so plain and so haughty, but he had so much power
over himself as to disguise it. And therefore instead of manifesting his
displeasure against the Ambassador of Rhodes, he showed him all the marks of
his favor; and the better to make good his Politics, he added rich Presents
to his flattering words.

Yet all this did not dazzle the eyes of the Grand Master: and therefore
considering what he had done, he thought it but reasonable to put himself in a
posture to expect the utmost of extremities, believing it would not be long ere
the Grand Signior's fury would break out.

Mahomet indeed set forth from Constantinople with a Puissant Army. But instead
of turning toward Rhodes, he marched toward Scutari, whether it were out of an
intention to amuse the Knights, making them believe that he had no thoughts
upon them; or whether he had a design to affright them, and at the same time to
punish the Venetians for their obstinate resistance. The City was besieged
three years by the Turk; and it may be said, that never place was more
vigorously attacqu'd, nor more generously defended. The Assailants gave several
Onsets at several times; and if we may believe the Writers of that time, they
threw so many Arrows and Javelins into the Ciries, that the besieged had enough
to make up the breaches of the Walls, and for necessary firing when their wood
was spent. And that which was more strange, they were nothing dismayed by the
cruelties of Mahomet, who caused three hundred Prisoners to be cut in two in
view of the Town. The only want of Victuals and Soldiers constrained them to
surrender. And the reducing of Scutari was one of the Articles of Peace which
the Turks made with the Commonwealth of Venice.

The Grand Master after that made no question but that all the fury of the
Ottoman power would fall upon him. But because the affair of Rhodes was the
common cause of the Church, and that without the assistance of the Christian
Princes, it was not possible to hold out against the Barbarians any long time,
he dispatched away three Knights of singular worth to the principal Courts of
Europe.

And because it was of high importance in case of a Siege, that some of the
Knights should continue abroad to solicit the Succor of the Princes, and to
manage the other affairs of the Order, the Grand Master ordered the Knight
Piozzasco, whom he had established his Lieutenant, when he sent him to Sixtus
the fourth, and who had always been resident in the Court of Rome. He commanded
the Knight Blanchefort, his Nephew, whom he sent to Lewis the eleventh to stay
in France with the Knights de Bridiers, and de Da^vois, who accompanied him in
his Embassy. And having thus settled his affairs, he resolved to put himself
into a posture to receive the Barbarians, fully believing that the Turkish Army
would suddenly appear before Rhodes. Nor was his conjecture false. Mahomet put
off his Vizor; and as before his ambition gave way to his prudence, now his
prudence gave way to his choler and despite. He could no longer endure that a
small Republic should brave him in the very bosom of his Empire, and the
haughtiness of the Knights augmented his so far, as to make him fall into
transports of rage, which would not permit him to listen to the reasons of his
wisest Ministers. He believed none but Demetrius and Meligale: those two
Renegado's obtained the sole disposal of his thoughts; and according to the
custom of interested Courtiers, who flatter the passion of the Prince to
satisfy their own; they so vehemently incensed him against the Rhodians, and
the Order of St. John, that he resolved to lay siege to Rhodes.

The better to six and settle so important an enterprise, he held a secret
Council, to which he called the most expert Engineers of all his Armies; but
the person he most confided in, was George Frapam, a German, who was profoundly
skilled in the art of War, and who after he had lived some years in the Island
of Scio, went to Constantinople, where being married, he had access to the
Grand Signior, who loved men of Parts. He had formerly been at Rhodes, and had
taken an exact platform of the City. Upon this platform, as that which was
adjudg'd the most regular of all the rest, he began to lay his contrivances for
the management of the siege. Mahomet, who was resolved not to go in person,
whether for fear of hazarding his Renown, or else not caring to honor the
Knights by fighting against them himself, declared his Basha, Misach
Paleologus, General of his Army. This was his principal Favorite, and the most
Illustrious Basha of the whole Empire. He was a Greek of the Imperial House of
the Paleologi, born a Christian, and bred up in Christianism. He forsook his
Religion to save his life at the taking of Constantinople, when the Conqueror
put to death all that fell into his hands of the Family or Blood of the Emperor
Constantine. Having abjured his Faith, it was no hard thing for him to obtain
the highest Commands in the Ottoman Court. His wit, his courage and deportment,
were answerable to his birth. He had by degrees habituated himself to the
customs of the Turks; yet not altogether forgetting the fashions of the Greeks;
so that in him the rudeness of the one, and the politeness of the other, seemed
to be both joined together. When he had gained the favor of the Grand Signior,
he accompanied him in all his military Expeditions, and always shared both in
his designs and Conquests. So that in time he acquired great experience in War;
and it was the general opinion of Turkey, that next to Mahomet, there was none
more fit to undertake the Conduct of a difficult enterprise then Basha
Paleologus.

In the mean while, for fear the Grand Master should have advice of what past
at Constantinople, Mahomet set guards upon all the Passes, and commanded his
Governors to stop all Posts, and to open all Letters. He ordered also a great
number of Infantry to fall down through Asia the less. But that it should not
be thought that he intended a siege, while he prepares the great Ships which
were to carry the extraordinary pieces of Cannon; he sent forth out of the
Straight a hundred and fifty light Ships with ordinary Artillery, giving it
our at the same time, that the whole design of the Ottoman Court, was to
pillage the Sea Coasts and Islands of the Christians.

Basha Paleologus stayed not till the great Fleet was ready; he went abroad the
first Vessels that set sail; and to conceal his design from the Turks
themselves, he steered a course different from that of Rhodes. Mahomet was
pleased that Demetrius and Meligale should bear the Basha Company together with
the German Engineer, from whom he promised himself great matters.

All these precautions of Mahomet and the Basha, could not prevent but that the
defigns of the Ottoman Court were discovered at Rhodes, the Grand Master being
informed of every thing by his Spies which he kept in the Ottoman Court.
However the News did not come much before the Galleys that set out first began
to appear. For they showed themselves within sight of the Island upon the
fourth day of December in the year 1479. and came to an Anchor before the Fort
of Fano. The General of the Turks, who would not be idle, in expectation of the
rest of his Forces, immediately landed the Cavalry which he had brought with
him; and ordered his Avaunt Curriers to harrass the Country, and burn the
Villages.

The Knight Rodolphus of Wertemberg, Baily of Brandenburgh, whom the Grand
Master had assigned to sustain the first efforts of the Enemy, did not suffer
the Spahi's punctually to execute the Orders of their General; for he charged
them at the head of the Light Horse which he commanded, and after he had slain
several of them, forced the rest to betake them to their Ships.

This Repulse constrained the Basha to retire; but it was only to attacque
Felo, one of the Islands which the Knights possessed in the Archipelago. The
Turks battered the Fort without ceasing for eight days together, and several
times they scaled the Walls, but all to no purpose; for the Knights, the
Soldiers, and the Country men that defended the place, made so stout a
resistance, that the Enemy raised his Siege with no small loss and disgrace.
Whereupon the Grand Master did not only commend in full council the valor of
the Garrison, but also sent considerable rewards to those that had most
courageously behaved themselves, proportionable to their condition and merit.

These first Exploits encouraged the Christians, though they did discourage the
Infidels. Nor did Misach Paleologus lay so much to heart the misfortune of his
Arms, as the death of Meligale. That Renegado, whom the Basha reserved for
great occasions, was struck with a prodigious disease upon the Sea, which
carried him off in a few days. His body was all over nothing but corruption;
and besides the insupportable stench of his Corpse, the Worms which eat him
alive, rendered him a miserable spectacle to all the world; the sight of which
was dreadful to behold. After he had endured the utmost extremities of Torment,
and in vain implored relief from Heaven, he died blaspheming God, and cursing
men, almost in view of Rhodes. Paying that punishment which his Country exacted
from him by a most Tragical end.

In the mean time the Turkish Fleet passed the Straight of Gallipoli, and the
Forces that came by Land, rendevouz'd in Lycia, as they were appointed. There
the report ran that Mahomet was suddenly dead, and that the Soldiers which
marched from all parts, were only to prevent such Commotions and Insurrections
as are wont to happen upon the death of the Emperor. A Greek Spy, who was
discovered at Rhodes, and the Prisoners that were taken and sent thither by the
Knights of the Fort of Fano, confessed all they knew. By other means also the
Grand Master understood that the Enemies Fleet drew nearer and nearer, and
being one that was accustomed to false reports, he believed nothing less then
the death of Mahomet; and as for that of Meligale, he looked upon it as an
example of Divine Justice, and a pledge of Victory.

However he omitted not to take all the caution that Humane prudence could
require. And therefore considering that the Churches of St. Mary and St.
Anthony, that stood without the City, and very near the Walls, might serve for
shelter for the Infidels, and annoy the Town; he caused them to be pulled down.
He ordered that the Inhabitants who had Gardens and Houses about the City,
should cut down all the Trees that did not bear Fruit, and that they should
bring into Rhodes as much of the Wood as they could. He commanded them also to
cut down all the Barley and Oats that were grown up, that the Enemy might want
sorrage for their Horses, and also all the Wheat, and to spoil the Grass and
green Plants. After which having chosen for Captains of the Successors, the
Hospitaller, the Admiral, the Chancellor and Treasurer of the Order; he gave
instructions to the Knights of the several Languages what they should severally
act* exhorting them in a few words to acquit themselves faithfully of their
duties. Behold, said he, Brave Knights, an oppertunity at length for ye all to
show what ye are. We have provisions of all sorts in abundance, and though our
forces are not so numerous as those of the Enemy, they are both valianter and
better disciplined. Italy, France, Germany, all Christendom will send us
relief, and we'are assured of Victory, provided we do our duty. Jesus Christ as
our Captain in the War, he will not forsake them that fight for his names sake;
And it will only belong to you, when you have caused the Infidels to raise
their Siege, to drive them out of Constantinople, with the assistance of the
Christian Princes.

But because the Grand Master was fully persuaded, that in affairs the best
ordered are not always successful, unless favored and prosper'd by God
himself: he caused public prayers to be made to Heaven, and sent for an Image
of the Virgin. It was that which the Rhodians worshipped upon Mount Palermus,
and which after Solomon had taken Rhodes was carried to Malta, where it still
remains in the Church of St. John the Baptist. What the fatal Image of Minerva
was to the people of Troy, that was the Image of the Virgin to the people of
Rhodes; who believed they had nothing to fear while she was in the midst of
them.

In the mean while the Sentinel that stood upon the top of St. Stevens Mount,
gave a Signal, to advertize that the Enemies Fleet appeared. The Grand Master
hasted to the Mountain to satisfy his own eyes, carrying along with him men
expert in Sea affairs, who were all of one opinion, by the course which the
Fleet steered, that they were bound to join with the Basha, who stayed for them
in the Port of Fesco; there to embarque all his Forces. Nor were they deceived.
For the Soldiers being embarked with all speed, the Ottoman Fleet composed of
a hundred and sixty Sail, steered directly along the Coast of Lycia, with a
fair Gale: at length it appeared before Rhodes again the 23d of May in the year
1480. Then to see the excellent order of the Barbarians, to hear the joyful
shouts of the Barbarians, the sound of the Fifes, the noise of the Trumpets; it
seemed* as if they had been Triumphant Victorers making their entry into a
conquered City.

THE HISTORY OF Peter D'Aubusson, Grand Master of RHODES. Book Third.
THE City of Rhodes so famous in Antiquity for Art and Science, there
cherished, and for the birth of so many famous men, is seated by the Seaside
upon the descent of a little Hill, which rises insensibly, in a pleasant plain,
in the North part of the Island, that bears its name. It is crowned with
several little Hillocks full of clear Springs; and which in the time of the
Grand Master, whose story I write, were all shaded with Orange, Pomegranate
Trees, and others of the same nature. It was then well built, immured with a
double Wall, fortified with several Towers, that were encompassed every one
with a kind of Ravelin or Bastion. A great Rampart sustained these Walls
within, and a large and deep Moat environed them without. But toward the South,
and on that side where the Jews inhabited in the low Town, the Towers were
something more distant one from another; for which reason that side was so much
the weaker.

The Quarter where the Knights lived, which was called the Mansions, of the
Languages, which was a kind of City by it self, was the stronger not only for
its situation, but also for the situation which art had added to it. For
besides that the Sea washed it upon the North and East, it was defended by two
Bulwarks, nine Towers, and by a particular Fortification that extended it self
to the Sea. A very thick Wall, and flanked with good Towers, separated it from
the low Town, which the people and inhabitants possessed. The Palace of the
Grand Master that run along the Mansions of the Knight upon the West side, was
better fortified then the rest, having three or four distinct enclosures.

The Port that was the chief defense of the whole City, looked toward the East,
and somewhat toward the North. It was made by two Moles, that stretching
themselves from the Walls of the City, and almost meeting one another, left no
more room but for one Gally at a time to enter. The entry was guarded by two
strong Towers, seated upon two Rocks, upon which formerly stood the famous
Colossus of Brass, which was accounted one of the seven wonders of the World.

Two little Bosoms of Sea did as it were adorn the Port upon the North and
South sides, and a Mole that it self above three hundred paces into the Sea,
at the end whereof stood the Tower of St. Nicholas, which closed the bosom that
lay upon the North.

If we may believe the old Arabic Chronicles, intermixed with many fables, this
Fort was anciently built by an Arabian Prince, called by the name of Muhavias,
a great Soldier, and Son of Abi Safian. This Prince, from Governor of Egypt
and Syria, coming to be Caleph nine and thirty years after Mahomet, was no
sooner seated upon the Arabian Throne, but he resolved to conquer all the Roman
Empire; and his first design was to attaque Constantinople by Sea and Land. But
he was advised to go first to Rhodes, which the exploits of the Romans made
every day more famous then other, among all the Nations of the World. For the
bringing of which enterprise to pass, having besieged the City, he built a
Tower just by the Port, upon the Rocks that ran very far into the Sea. And
those fabulous Stories relate that he built this Tower so high, that the top of
it touched the Heavens, and the foundations reached to the center of the Earth.

The truth is, that after the Venetians had raised the siege of Rhodes, in the
year 1464, the Grand Master, Zacosta, considering of what great advantage a
Fort built upon those Rocks would be for the defense of the City, began that
very year to build the Tower of St. Nicholas, and that Philip, Duke of
Burgundy, gave twelve thousand Crowns in Gold to finish it; which engaged the
Knights to set the Arms of the Duke of Burgundy, and the Provinces under his
subjection, upon the Tower.

This was the condition of the City of Rhodes, when it was besieged by the Army
of Mahomet. The Fleet came to an Anchor just against St. Steven's Mount; and
mauger all that the Knights could do to hinder their landing, the Turks got
footing, and lodged themselves immediately upon the Mount, and in the
neighboring plains: At the same time they brought ashore all their Artillery
also, and their Engines of War. The Basha had in his Army, which consisted at
least of a hundred thousand men, all the best Squadrons of Anatolia, the
choice of the Spahi's and Janissaries, above four thousand Volunteers, several
Beys of Romania and other Governments; and lastly, several Companies composed
of the Veteran Bands that had followed Mahomet in all his military Expeditions.

No sooner were they encamped, but a Troop of Volunteers came briskly up to the
walls of the City, to brave the Rhodians; whether the first heat with which
they landed were not yet allaid, or whether they thought that some bold and
irregular action could do no harm at the beginning of the Siege. But their
precipitation cost them dear; for a party of the Knights fallying out upon
them, charged them so vigorously, that after they had flain a great number of
them, they put the rest to flight. The Knights were no sooner re-enter'd, but
the Barbarians returned in better order, and far more numerous, to observe the
condition of the Town. The Renegado, Demetrius, was in the head of them; in
whom the Basha most confided, since the death of Meligale. Thereupon the
Knights made a second sally, commanded by Antony D'Aubusson, Vicount of
Monteil, the Grand Master's Brother.

He arrived at Rhodes but some days before, with an Equipage and a Train
answerable to his Quality. He came to Rhodes not only with an intention to go
to Jerusalem, and to visit the holy Sepulcher, according to the custom of those
times; but also to assist the Grand Master, his Brother, and to serve the
Church, finding himself in a Siege with which the Knights were menaced every
moment. He was a person of great Honor and Generosity, very skilful in the art
of War, and one that profoundly understood the world. He was made Captain
General of the Rhodians upon his arrival, the Heads of the Council, who knew
his worth, making choice of him with one consent. He had brought along with him
several Gentlemen of March, that were his Tenants, or else his Friends; not to
speak of other Soldiers that accompanied him, of which the chief were Lewis of
Chaon, of one of the most noble Houses of Anjou, William Gomare of Xaintonge,
Matthew Brangelier of Perigord, Claudian Colombe of Bourdeaux, Charles le Roy
of Dijon, and Lewis Sanguin of Paris.

The Vicount of Monteil staid not till the enemy came up to him, but marched to
them with his Sword in his hand, and charged them vigorously with his Troop.
The Turks sustained the first charge without stirring, and Demetrius encouraged
them so by his words, and his example, that they at length made the Christians
give ground. They had perhaps put them to disorder, if the Vicount of Montel
had not impetuously spurred his Horse upon the chief of the Barbarians, who
seemed to him to be the most resolved and courageous. The Knights followed the
Vicount, and behaved themselves so valiantly, that the enemies were presently
cut to pieces, mauger all the resistance they made. Demetrius defended himself
with all the courage that honor and fury could inspire into him. But his Horse
being killed under him, he was himself thrown to the ground, and trampled over
by the Horses. Insomuch, that he who had abjured the Faith, and conspired the
destruction of Rhodes, advanced the design of the Infidels no more than his
friend Meligalus; over whom he had only this advantage, to dye with his Arms in
his hands, and signalizing his valor; a death too noble for a Renegado and a
Traitor.

The Rhodians in this encounter only lost the Knight de Murat, of the Auvernian
Language, and one of the bravest persons of the Order. He was encompast by a
Body of Spahi's* being in the pursuit of some that ran away, and run through in
a thousand places, while he was disarming Demetrius. The Turks put his head
upon the end of a Lance, and to comfort themselves for their misfortune,
carried it into their Camp with most hideous yellings, and shouts of derision.
The body was recovered out of their hands by Knights, and the Grand Master
caused him to be enterr'd with all the pomp and honor that so renowned an
action deserved.

These first attempts not having succeeded with the Infidels, the Dutch
Engineer advised the battering of St. Nicholas Tower, believing that if they
could master that, the City would soon surrender; or at least, that they should
thereby hinder any Vessel from getting into the Port. The Basha believed the
Engineer, and the Turks carried three great pieces of Artillery into the
Gardens adjoining to St. Anthony's Church, which commanded the Tower. They
presently cut down the trees, and after they had placed their Gabions to secure
themselves, they shot without ceasing.

The Grand Master immediately raised a Counter Battery with three pieces, in
the Garden of the Auvernian lodgings. Now, in regard the noise of the Cannon,
that never lay still all day long, alarmed the inhabitants, he walked his
rounds about the City, accompanied by the principal Knights, confirming the
courage of the people by his presence. He also visited all the Posts the same
night, encouraging the Soldiers, and exhorting them to fight courageously for
the Faith.

No sooner the day began to peep, but the German Engineer appeared upon the
brink of the City Moat, humbly desiring the Guards to open the Gates for him;
but the Soldiers had certainly shot him, had not some of the more prudent
Knights prevented them. Thereupon, by the command of the Grand Master, he was
set in, and conducted to the Castle. He was a person of a very good presence,
and tall in stature; he had a crafty wit, quite contrary to the character of
his Nation; bold enough, and one that knew how to use his tongue. He was known
at Rhodes* and was accounted one of the most skilful Artists of his time. Being
examined what reason had brought him thither, he answered, that he came to
defend Rhodes. That he could no longer endure the reproaches of his own
conscience, for having employed his art against the faithful; that preferring
his Salvation before his Fortune, he did absolutely renounce the advancement
which he might expect among the Turks; that he should be happy to dye in the
defense of the Faith. That he desired nothing else of God; but that he durst
not hope for a favor, of which he was so unworthy. The Grand Master commended
his zeal, without manifesting the least mistrust; and having exhorted him to
persist in his good resolutions, he examined him concerning the Army of the
Turks.

The German, the more bold, because he thought himself unsuspected, spoke with
an air and a countenance that showed nothing of a Traitor, that the Turkish
Army was above a hundred thousand men effective, besides the Forces that were
coming to join with them; that the Turks, besides their ordinary Cannon, had
some prodigious pieces, above eighteen foot long, that carried bullers of three
foot in diameter. That they were resolved to perish all, rather then think of
raising the Siege, which was the only thing that grieved him. He spoke with so
much confidence, that many believed what he said, to be real. The Grand Master,
that he might venture nothing, yet make use of the opportunity which Fortune
had put into his hands, thought he might make use of the Engineer, though he
were resolved not to trust him. To that purpose he commanded the Knights, who
had the charge of the Artillery, to consult him in every thing, and not to
raise any battery without him. And to prevent his return to the Turks Camp, or
from keeping any correspondence with them, he ordered six of the stoutest
Soldiers in the City always to attend him, to whom he gave private
instructions to keep him always in sight, and never to leave him alone all at a
time.

Though the Grand Master had sent to Rome the Knight Cardona, when the Infidels
first appeared before the Isle; however he failed not to send again, so soon as
they were landed, He sent also to the King of France and to the other Christian
Princes. But because the Letter which he had sent to the absent Priors, had not
taken that full effect which he desired; he dispatched away another, wherein,
after he had given an account of the beginning of the Siege to the Knights that
were not yet returned; he declared to them also that having put all his trust
in God, he feared neither the force nor cunning of the Barbarians; yet that he
hoped that persons of their worth and renown, would not fail to come to the
relief of the Order at such a time of necessity as this. He added also, that
notwithstanding the Siege, the Port should be always open to the Vessels of the
Christians.

In the mean while, Misach Paleologus having well considered the situation and
the outside of the Town, and being of Opinion* with the Engineer, that all
would follow the Tower of St. Nicholas, he caused his biggest Pieces to be
planted where they had raised the first Battery; and in a small time they made
above three hundred Shot. The Tower was shaken to the very Foundations* and
battered in several places. The great Wall upon the West side fell almost all
down, and falling, made a most dreadful noise* so that the noise and shouts of
joy among the Barbarians, caused a terrible fear in the City; but they were
soon encouraged by the Exhortations of Antony Fradin, of the Order of St.
Francis, a man eloquent and Apostolic, who run up and down with a Crucifix in
his hand performing the same good Offices at Rhodes* which John Capestran did
at Belgrade.

The Tower could not stand, considering the condition to which the Canon had
reduced it, and yet there was a necessity of preserving it, or hazarding the
loss of all. Thereupon the Grand Master resolved to choose the Flower of the
Knights and Soldiers to reinforce the Garrison. And having represented to them
of what importance it was, not to abandon that post, he sent them thither under
the command of Fabritius Caretta an Italian, conjuring them to remember that
they had in their hands the Destiny of Rhodes. He also went thither in a Barque
himself, to see what work the Cannons had made, and finding that the ruins of
the Wall had made a kind of Bastion round about the remaining part, so that
their Batteries could do no more harm, he made an enclosure of great Beams
mortais'd one within another, and nailed together, to strengthen the compass of
the Wall and the Dtich it self, which was hollowed out of the Rock: and seeing
that some part of the Wall was fallen within the Fort, he caused the Ruins to
be carried away for the convenience of the Garrison. Then because the little
Golph that washed the West side of the Mole was sometimes so low that it might
be waded, he set all hands at work to prevent the Infidels from making their
approaches that way. To that end they laid Planks at the bottom of the Water
all stuck with Iron Spiks; and then there was a good strong Guard placed upon
the out Wall on that side of the City; in the Trenches also lay a stout
squadron of French and Spanish Knights, to relieve the Garrison in the Tower,
upon occasion.

The Grand Master spent all the night a Horse back, and in Arms, stirring
continually to keep his men in Breath. The Knights and Soldiers kept their
Posts all night, without stirring, but still upon the watch, and ready to fight
the Enemy. The Grand Master was also very careful to plant several pieces of
Canon all along the Walls of the City that lookked toward the Mole of the
Tower, to sink the Turkish Galleys that should ride there to favor the
assault, He also provided several fire Ships to burn the Enemies Galleys while
they made the attacque. And in regard all was to be hazarded to save a post,
upon which depended the safety of the City, he put himself into the Tower,
together with his Brother the Viscount of Monteile.

All these Cautions were but little enough; for day no sooner appeared, but the
Turkish Galleys weighed from before Mount St. Stevens, and steered directly to
the Tower with a fresh gale, with a loud noise of Trumpets and Drums. No sooner
were they come near the Rocks of the Fort, but the Barbarians leapt a shore,
and while the Galleys played from the Sea, they ran to the assault, with a fury
that looked more like desperateness, then courage. At the same time, they
within discharged all their Cannon from the Walls upon the Galleys, and the
Musketeers from the Mole gave the Infidels so smart a Volley, that they killed
most of them upon the place; the rest more furious for the slaughter of the
others, and reinforced with fresh supplies, in spite of all the shot from the
City, fell boldly to the Scalado. They that defended the Tower, encouraged by
the presence of the Grand Master, and the necessity of vanquishing or
perishing, sustained the assault with a resolution that astonished the
Assailants. Never was there perhaps an attacque more obstinate, nor a more
stout defense. The Turks that fought almost in the air, tumbled every foot from
the top of the Rocks either dead or wounded, but their rooms were soon filled
up; so that it seemed as if they had been still the same people, and that their
blows took no effect. Alexis of Tarsus, one of the most valiant of the Turks,
was careful to supply the assault with fresh men. He commanded that day in the
place of the Basha, who was detained sick in the Camp; and his undauntedness
gave so much courage to the Turks, that they fought all wounded and bloody as
they had been savage-beasts, enraged at the sight of their blood, and no way
concerned at the fear of death.

The Butcheries of the Barbarians rather redoubled then abated the courage of
the Knights; who fought like men that had nothing to be good husbands of, but
rather sought to kill, then to defend themselves. The Grand Master, who
performed all the offices of a good Captain, and a private Soldier, had his
headpiece struck'n from his head with a stone. But in regard he was neither
wounded nor stunned with the blow, he took a Hat instead of a Helmet, and
continued in the heat of the fight with his wonted tranquillity; however, he was
hit by several Arrows that pierced his Armor in several places.

These accidents caused the Knights to be very solicitous for their Captain.
And the Commander, Carretta, seeing many people fall about the Grand Master,
besought him earnestly to retire. To whom the Grand Master smiling, replied,
You have more to hope for, then I to fear. You will one day reap the fruit of
my pains, added he, by a kind of Prophetical Spirit; as it were foretelling the
Commander, that Heaven had desired him to be one day Grand Master of Rhodes.

The Vicount of Monteil shared with his Brother in the travel, and the danger;
The artificial Fires, and Cannon-shot that flew continually from the Town, and
the perpetual showers of Musquet-bullets, Arrows, and Stones, wrought a most
wonderful effect. On the other side, the Fireships set fire to several
Galleys, and the Arillery of the Garrison so ill entreated the Galleys that
defended themselves from the Fireships, that the enemies, after they had in a
short time lost above seven hundred of theirs, were constrained to give way.
Now, as it is usual to run from one extremity to another, and that nothing is
weaker then a Plunatick, when the fit is over; these men, valiant even to
sury, and who boasted to out brave death, betook themselves to their heels with
so much haste, that the most part were drowned flying.

So soon as the Turkish Galleys were rejoined to the rest of the Fleet that lay
before St. Steven's Mount, and that the Tower of St. Nicholas was in no more
danger, the Grand Master entered the City, together with Knights, who had
assisted him to drive out the enemy. All the people received him as their
Preserver, with a thousand acclamations, and thronged after him to the Church
of St. John Baptist, whither he went to return thanks to God for the Victory he
had gained: not questioning but that so much happy success was an effect of
divine protection.

The vexation of the Basha for the ill success of his first enterprise, did not
take from him the hope of succeeding in a second. He was persuaded, that by
attacquing the City in the weakest part, he should easily repair the loss which
he had sustained. To which purpose he caused eight great pieces of Cannon to be
planted against the Jews Wall, and threw up several Brest-works for the
security of the Infidels. He also lodged certain pieces of Cannon upon the
point of land that enclosed one of the little Golphs; raising that battery to
destroy the Mills that were built all along the Mole, and thunder down the
Tower of the Port directly opposite to that point of land.

The Grand Master slept not at all. He knew that the Jews Wall could not long
resist the Turks Cannons, how thick or strong soever it were; and that the only
way to save the place, was to entrench himself behind the Wall. For which
reason he caused several houses to be pulled down, and a deep Moat to be made,
large enough to put a stop to the Infidels, in case they should come to assault
the Breaches they should make. He also built up behind the Moat a thick
brick-wall with a good Terrass of Earth to sustain it. They labored night and
day to perfect these works; and the Grand Master himself at the head of the
Laborers, was as active as any of the rest, to carry Stones and Lime to
advance the work by his presence. Rich and Poor, Men, Women, Maids and
Religious people, forgetting condition or sex wrought as common Laborers; the
very Children did what lay in their power, doing more then the weakness of
their age seemed to permit; apparently incited by something supernatural to the
defense of Religion, and their Country.

These new Fortifications were hardly finished, when the Turks began their new
Batteries. The Bullets that flew continually, and were of an extraordinary
bigness, astonished the Engineers of the City, insomuch that the German
Engineer confessed that he never saw any thing like them before. The Sea shore
resounded with most dreadful roarings of the Cannon, the noise whereof was
heard above forty Leagues from the Island. But the effect was more terrible
then the noise; for besides that those Guns caused a kind of Earthquake when
they went off, the Batteries beat down all the Wall, and made most dreadful
breaches.

Besides the Mortar pieces, which the Enemy had planted round the City, threw
up into the Air Stones of a vast bigness, which falling upon the Tiles of the
Houses, made their entrance in, and killed all that stood in their way; and the
horrible Ruin which they made caused a sad confusion in the City. The
Inhabitants who could be no where safe, neither in their Houses nor in the
Streets, bogan to cry out and mutter of surrendering; at what time the Grand
Master bethought himself of an expedient which stifled the sedition in its
infancy, and saved the lives of an infinite company of people. He ordered that
the Women, Children, and persons that were of no use, should all retire into
the space which was between the Houses and the Ramparts upon the West side, all
which spase he covered with a most substantial roof, composed of good Rafters
joined together, and able to resist the weight of much bigger Stones. The Turks
who knew not that the Citizens had quitted their houses, directed their Engines
against those places which they thought most inhabited; so that at last those
murdrous showers took little effect. The Soldiers and the Knights received but
little harm, whose Posts were like Bulworks; no more then from the Artillery
which the Turks played from a rising ground that did but little command the City.

The Basha who thought to have reduced the City by the discharge of his great
pieces, finding that the besieged spoke not a word of Capitulation, yet not
willing to hazard the Assault, took a strange resolution to put an end to the
Seige. He considered that the person of the Grand Master was the main obstacle
that hindered his taking the Town, and that the Knights would never surrender,
so long as they had such a valiant and expert Commander, so that he thought the
best and safest way was to make sure of him. This design of his he communicated
to two Renegado's, who coming to the Turks Camp at the beginning of the Siege;
had abjured the Christian faith, and made a show of much zeal for the Mahumetan
Sect. The one was a Dalmatian, the other of Albania. They had both of them
acquaintance in Rhodes; and the Albanese, who was a crafty and intelligent
person, was very well known to one of the Secretaries to the Grand Master, an
Italian, whose name was Philelpho. The Renegado's themselves immediately
offered to do the business, either by stab or poison. Though the Execution were
both difficult and dangerous; but a wicked man may do any thing when he fears
nothing.

At the time when the two Assassinates were preparing to leave the Camp, Aly
Basha arrived there from Constantinople. Mahomet, who began to be disturbed at
the Siege, had sent him expressly to advertize Paleologus, that he would come
himself with a reinsorcement of a hundred thousand men, and fifteen hundred
Cannon of a prodigious bigness. Whether the advice were true or false the
Infidels received it as an Oracle which assured them of the victory. For the
very name of Mahomet filled the Camp with joy, and inspired new heat into the
Soldiers. This produced an effect quite contrary in the City. The Renegado's
who got into the City one after another, that they might not seem to have any
acquaintance one with another, were received as persons ransomed out of
Captivity; having given out that they unfortunately fell into the hands of the
Barbarians in the second Sally. At their first admittance they reported, that
Mahomet was coming with a formidable Army, and that all was lost, if they did
not come to a Capitulation, before his arrival. Some of the Italian Knights who
guarded the post on that side, and questionless were not the bravest of their
Nation, were affrighted at the news. Some Spanish Knights also who took the
Alarm upon the same noise joining with the Italians, caball'd together, and
had private Conferences in the night time, the result whereof was that since
they could not save Rhodes, they should at least save the honor of the
Rhodians, by making an advantageous Composition. The Italians who were the
Captains of the Cabal, discovered their design to Philelpho, in whom the Grand
Master reposed a great trust; and after they had made him of their party, they
engaged him to represent to the Grand Master, the necessity of yiedling to save
the Island from the utmost miseries of War.

Philelphus was a person of Hononour and Sincerity, but one that loved his
Nation, and had too great an esteem for his Contrymen, to think them guilty
of any treachery. And therefore believing that the Italians meant well, and
that acting with the Spaniards, they could not take any wrong or injurious
courses, he not only undertook to speak, but acquitted himself of his promise.

So soon as the Grand Master understood by his Secretary what had past, he sent
for the most factious before him,; and dissembling at first his indignation, he
told them in somewhat bitter language, that if they so much feared Mahomet,
they should do well to get out of the way: that he gave them free liberty to be
gone; and that they should have Galleys for their convenience. But then again,
changing his tone, with a stern countenance, But if you will stay with us,
added he, never mention composition, and be assured, that if you continue your
Cabals, I will hang ye up every Mothers Son.

These words pronounced with so much authority, were like a thunder-stroke to
the guilty. They acknowledged their fault, and seemed so ashamed and sorry for
it, that the Grand Master thought them severely enough punished; and thus
mixing mildness with severity, and contented with their submissive penitence,
he pardoned them upon the spot. But the Knights, whom the goodness of the Grand
Master had absolutely confounded, adjudging themselves unworthy of pardon after
so unworthy an action, besought him not to pardon their fault till they had
washed it away with the blood of their enemies, and their own.

All this while the two Traitors laid their plots, and sought all means to
execute their design; the Albanoise, who knew that Philelphus, who was no more
entrusted with the knowledge of affairs, since the Cabal of the Italians, failed
not to insinuate to him, that he had now nothing more to hope for in Rhodes;
that credit with great men once lost, was seldom regained. That usually they to
whom they had imparted their secrets, became hateful when once suspected: that
the hatred of those who could revenge themselves, unpunished, is always to be
feared; and that the safest way, was, to suffer himself to be forestalled.

There needed no more to a person so quick-witted as Philelpho, to divine what
was aimed at: He had always looked upon the Albanese as a fellow of no Religion
or conscience, and this unexpected return did but augment the bad opinion which
he had conceived of him. For which reason, he made no question but that this
wicked wretch had been gained by the Infidels, and that he was returned to
Rhodes out of a design to do some mischief: However, the better to inform
himself, he made semblance of giving ear to his arguments, and withal, hinted
to him that he would be very ready to prevent his enemies, provided he might be
well seconded. The Assassinate catching at this bait, frankly disclosed
himself; he declared the whole business to Philelpho, and having showed him the
Basha's Letter to hasten the execution, he promised him as much as could tempt
the ambition or interest of a man.

How great a dread soever Philelpho had of so horrible a crime, he consented to
it in outward appearance. But so soon as he had taken his leave of him, he went
and gave the Grand Master an account of what he had understood. Immediately the
Albanese was seized upon, who was already applauding himself for the success of
his enterprise. He denied all at first with that boldness and, confidence which
is usual with Criminals. But soon after he confessed all, touched either with
remorse of conscience, or forced by the violence* of his torments. The
Dalmatian, who was introduced into the Grand Master's Palace by another means,
and who had already corrupted one of the Officers of his Kitchen, was at the
same time apprehended upon the confession of the Albanese. They were both
executed at a time, and by the people cut in pieces, in abomination of the
crime. Thus the Conspiracy fell upon the head of the Conspirators, by a secret
conduct of Divine Justice, which oftentimes makes use of the same means to
destroy the guilty, which they take to ensnare the innocent. Philelpho was
received into the favor of the Grand Master, and found by experience, that
Fidelity contributes more then Treason, to the advancement of men.

Paleologus understanding the ill success of his plot, laid aside all other
thoughts, but of carrying by force what he could not win by treachery. To that
purpose he began to raise a platform, upon that side where the besieged had
made their intrenchments. But so soon as the Grand Master discovered what the
Basha intended, he commanded fifty men of the French and Italian Languages to
fight the Laborers, and overturn the work in the nightime. The party
commanded descended into the Moat through the casemates so privately in the
night, and gained the upperground so privately with their ladders, that the
Turks never perceived them till they were just upon them. Which put the
Infidels into such disorder, that they presently fled; the most part saving
themselves by flight. The mutinous Italians, who were of the number of the
fifty, and sought nothing more then to repair their honor, were the most
forward to pursue them that fled; of which they killed ten with their own
hands, and returning, demolished the work, and nailed their Cannon.

The Basha was surpised at so resolute an action: and being informed that they
were the French and Italians who had performed it, he could not forbear saying,
that he had to do with people that inherited the courage of Caesar and
Charlemain. So much does true valor charm even enemies themselves, how
barbarous soever.

The Grand Master did not think it enough to applaud the Victors, but gave them
rewards: And to testify to the Italians, that he had no more ill thoughts of
them; he expressed himself publicly, that they were persons of Honor, and had
kept their word.

The bad success which the Turks had upon this encounter, made them give over
all thoughts of attacquing the City upon the Italian Post: And therefore they
resumed their old design, and bent all their force against the Tower of St.
Nicholas. Not only because that being almost ruined they thought it might be
the more easily taken, but because they imagine that there lay the decision of
the Victory.

To that effect, the General of the Barbarians undertook to build a
Woodd'n-Bridg that would hold six men a breast, which should reach from the
Church of St. Antony to the foot of the Tower. They wrought without ceasing in
the presence of the Basha, who assisted at the work himself. So soon as the
Bridge was finished, a Turk having in the night secretly fastened an Anchor to
the Rock of the Tower it self with a chain of Iron, thrust a Cable through the
ring of the Anchor, to which the end of the Bridge was linked; so, by drawing
the Cable by strength of arm, the Bridge, by degrees, might be haled to the very
point of the Mole of St. Nicholas.

But the cunning of the Turks could not deceive the vigilance of the Rhodians.
An English Marener, whose name was Roger, a bold and daring fellow, who
discovered what had past, threw himself into the Sea, when the Turk was
retired; and when he had cunningly unfasten'd the Anchor, he left the chain
upon the Rock, as if it had still held: for which, the Grand Master immediately
gave him two hundred Crowns in Gold. When the Turks began to draw the Cable,
to move the Bridge forward, they soon perceived that their stratagem was
discovered, and that the Rhodians were more subtle then they, though they were
not altogether disheartened. For Paleologus, who managed the enterprise
himself, and had a wit fertile for invention, sent for a great number of Barques
to bear the Bridge upon the water, and to transport it insensibly to the Mole,
as the Barques moved forwards. In the mean time he ordered, as well to attaque
the Tower, as batter the Vessels that lay in the Port, thirty Galleys, besides
several light Vessels, wherein he had put the choicest men in his Army, and who
were to begin the assault, while the Soldiers landed.

The Grand Master omitted nothing that lay in his power. He set a thousand
Pioneers at work, who labored day and night in cutting the Rock, to make the
Moat wider, and deeper. After he had reinforced the Garrison with such Forces
as the Escalle had brought from Verona at the beginning of the Siege, he posted
at the foot of the Mole a Squadron of Spanish and German Knights, to be
succored from thence as occasion required. But as he had reason to suspect
lest one part of the enemy should attacque the City, while the other assaulted
St. Nicholas's Fort, and that the Jews Wall would be the place, where their
Cannon had already made several breaches; he sent thither a good number of
Soldiers under the Conduct of the Knights de Northolon, with order, not to
sally without express command. After that he prescribed to every one his
particular duty in the Fort, yet doing nothing without mature deliberation and
counsel. For he heard advice with calmness, and a quick apprehension, being
persuaded that the most judicious do not see every thing, and that the wisest
often mistake, when too much wedded to their own judgment.

That courtesy and affability which he showed to all the World, allowed not
only to the Knights, but also to the meanest Soldiers the liberty of speaking
their thoughts upon all occasions that presented themselves. He took delight to
hear them, and sometimes he found in the discourse of a simple Soldier such
expedients and stratagems which perhaps he might not have thought of. Yet with
all this lenity he was severe enough, when it behooved him so to be. For two
Soldiers of the Garrison of the Fort, having resolved to run away to the
Turks, threw a great quantity of Arms and Ammunition into the Sea. They were
taken in the act, and ashamed of themselves when they were discovered. They
also craved pardon of the Grand Master, and threw themselves at his feet, very
penitent for what they had done. But notwithstanding all their prayers and
entreaties, and all their penitence, he caused them to be hanged out at the
windows of the Tower, and their bodies to be cast into the Sea.

The enemy was so much perplexed that he had attacqu'd the Tower in the open
day, that he resolved not to attacque it any more but by night. They also made
their approaches very silently, contrary to their customs. But having gained
the Mole, and being landed, they presently opened their throats. The choice
party of the Turks assailed the Tower where it was most ruined, making a most
hideous noise, which was followed with the sound of Trumpets and other Warlike
Instruments.

The Christians, who were all upon their Guards, and expected their enemies
with an undaunted resolution, vigorously sustained the Shock. They fought on
both sides with an equal ardor, without any other light, then that of the
Granado's and Firepots, that flew continually from side to side; so that there
was a great slaughter in a short time.

In the mean time the Galleys being come up close to the Rock, and the Wood'n
bridge being fixed to the point of the Rock, by the assistance of the Barks, a
multitude almost innumerable of the Turks gave the assault on that sight where
the Gross of the Wall was fallen down. The discharges that were made so thick
upon them, brake their first effort, and threw headlong a good number of them
that were already got up. The rest were repulsed by the Knights that defended
that part; and there it was to be seen, how sometimes valor might prevail
against number. The Grand Master who was every where, encouraged the Knights,
and confidently assured them of victory provided they themselves would but do
their best to overcome.

While the heat of the Combat increased, the Batteries which the Grand Master
had planted against the bridge* took that effect as was expected. For the Bridge
was cut in pieces at the same time when a reinforcement of Soldiers was upon
it; who all perished miserably, being neither to be relieved by the Barks, nor
able to save themselves by swimming, under a Shower of Stones and Arrows that
followed the discharges of the Artillery.

The Enemies Galleys ceased not to batter the Tower of St. Nicholas, and to
tire the Knights. But they resumed new vigor when they perceived that the
Bridge was broken, and that the Assailents could no longer be that way relieved,
and that which more increased their resolution was, that the Artillery of the
Tower had sunk four Galleys with several Ships of War; and that the Fireships
sent against the rest, had dismayed and disordered the whole Fleet.

This However did not hinder the Infidels from being obstinate in their
assault; for despair sometimes instead of abating, raises courage. Both sides
fell on again without remorse, and the Combat which had already dilasted three
hours, began again with more violence then ever. The day which soon after
appeared did but serve to irretate the Combatants, while it discovered the
Massacre in the Night. The sight of so many Bodies stretched upon the Earth, or
floting upon the Sea, with the ruins of the Bridge and Galleys incited the
Infidels to repair their Honor, and the Christians to maintain their
advantages. Both sides performed as much as men of Bravery could act upon such
occasions; the loss was great upon the Turks side, and their most considerable
Commanders lay dead upon the place; among the rest, Mahomets Son-in-law, a
young Prince, very valiant and very dear to the Grand Signior. He stood a long
time firm upon the ruins of the Tower, and killed severalKnights with his own
hand, fortifying himself with heaps of dead bodies. But having received several
wounds, he fell as he was making a blow with his Scimitar, and expired in a
moment after. The death of Ibrahim allayed the heat of the Barbarians; they
gave ground, mauger all the resolution of their Geneneral, who exhorted them to
revenge the death of the Grand Signior, and with his own hand killed some of
those that recoiled. But the Knights repelled, and forced them at length to
retire. This dishonorable retreat put Paleologus into a profound fit of
sadness. When he was returned to his Camp, he shut him self up, and there kept
himself three whole days together without giving audience to any person; either
to conceal his grief, or to meditate at leisure what farther course to take.

Now in regard the Turks had lost above two thousand five hundred men in these
assaults; because the dead bodies, which either covered the Earth, or else were
washed upon the Shore by the Sea, were enough to corrupt the Air, the Grand
Master caused all the shore to be cleans'd, with a particular care of his own
Soldiers. And after he had caused the Bodies to be enterr'd with all the
honor that the present state of affairs would permit. He himself looked after
the dressing of the Wounded; he visited them every foot, and distributed among
them with his own hands the rich spoils of the slain. And indeed the lying
still of the Enemy, while their General locked himself up, gave the Grand
Master leisure to attend these particular duties of a Great Commander.

At length the Basha appeared abroad, and forgetting in some measure the
dishonor which had occasioned his recess, he resumed his usual heat and fury.
However he laid aside all thonghts of attempting any thing upon St. Nicholas
Tower, which now he began to think impregnable, bending his whole design to
reduce the City, by dividing the Forces of the besieged, believing he should
accomplish his work, by assayling it in several quarters at once. He persuaded
himself, that when the Walls should be ruined in other places, as they were in
the Jews quarter, and the Italian Post, that by a general assault, he should
not fail to enter the place; and that the besieged would be constrained to
surrender, when they were no longer able to resist. Moreover he made no
question, but that the German Engineer, upon whom he still depended, would at
length find a way to serve him, wherein lay the chiefest of his hopes.

Thereupon by his order, the best Pieces of Artillery were planted round about
the City; and while they thundered upon the Walls, the Turks, animated by the
presence of their General, on the one side set themselves to undermine their
way through the Earth, to make themselves Trenches covered with Planks and
Bavins to bring their men securely into the Moat. Then they raised Plat-forms,
supported with Hurdles and Boughs of Trees and pallisado'd round, upon which
they planted Culverins and other small shot equal with the VValls and Bastions
of the City, which fire without ceasing.

But in regard they designed to give the assault principally upon the Jews
Wall, where the Batteries had done most mischief, after they got into the Moat
by such passages as they had min'd under ground, they endeavored, by means of
the noise and smoke which hindered the besieged from hearing or seeing them, to
fill up the Moat with the Rubbish which the Cannon had loosened from the Wall,
which being thrown together by hazard, made a kind of a slope ascent. In this
they labored with so much vigor and success, that notwithstanding all the
firing from the City, that in a short time the Moat was filled up almost as
high as the Ravelin or Bastion of the Jews, so that they might easily get up to
the Wall.

The Grand Master, who husbanded his men against the Assault, finding that the
principal Batteries of the City did little good, and that the Enemies advanced
every day without receiving any great damage, caused an extraordinary Engine
to play, which was made to cast Stones of great weight at a great distance*
which Engine was called the Tribute, because it was made in the time that
Mahomet demanded a Tribute from the Knights. This Engine placed just opposite
to the Turks place of working wrought wonderful effects. For the huge pieces of
Marble which it threw with an unspeakable violence, not only cruish'd to pieces
the Workmen upon the Terrasses, but in several places broke into their Mines,
and their covered Trenches, so that an infinite number of Turks were stifled in
the Earth, and buried in the Ruins of their own works.

The Rhodians shouted every time the Engine played, and when they saw the Stones
fly, they cried, that was Mahomet's Tribute. The Grand Master took the
cheerfulness of his Soldiers, for a good Omen. And though he were not a little
troubled at the last advance of the Enemy, yet by his familiarity with the
Soldiery, he engaged them to cleanse the Moat which the Turk had filled up,
and to mine a way under the Walls to get in, that they might not expose
themselves to the Shot of the Enemy.

The Soldiers in that good humor cheerfully obeyed the Grand Master; they
min'd a hole into the Moat, and by degrees drew in all the Stones into the
City, together with the other Rubbish that had filled up the Moat; the Grand
Master being present all this while to encourage the Laborers. And finding
that part of the Jews Walls where the Enemies Cannon had played hottest, was
ready to fall, he terrass'd it with all speed, and raised a new Wall to support
the Earth which was not well settled.

To this part the Grand Master ordered great Fats of Flint Stones, and old
pieces of Iron, Sacks of Sulphur, and Powder, Caldrons of boiling Oil, and
whatever was proper to stop the fury of the Turks when they gave the assault.
But besides all this, he was desirous to know of the German Engineer, what
other Invention he could think of to repel the Enemy, or what new work was to
be raised should they force the Defenses which were already raised. The German
seemed surpised to hear himself asked so many questions, and coldly answered,
that he would consider of it, and that for the security of the place, it was
requisite he should make use of all the Secrets of his Art. But as he was
already suspected, and for that a Battery which he had already raised in the
presence of the Grand Master, had taken no effect, suspicions began to arise
that he did not act Cordially. But that which more increased those mistrusts
was, that, the Turks used several designs to discredit him in the City. They
shot in Arrows with Letters fixed to them, where* in they wrote that the German
Engineer was a person not to be trusted* that he was a Villain, full of ill
designs, believing that the hatred which they testified against him would make
him the more credited by the Rhodians.

The Grand Master not questioning but that the advice was as true, as the
intention of the Turks was that it should be accounted false, delivered him up
to the hands of Justice. At length, as conscience often urges Criminals to
speak against themselves, he confessed all; he declared that he came not into
Rhodes, but to endeavor how he might deliver the Town up to the Infidels; that
he came, by the express order of Mahomet, to observe the condition and estate
of the City, and to return to him with a full account thereof, in case the
Turkish Army should be forced to raise the Siego: He added, that this had not
been the first City which he had betrayed in this manner, and that his
conscience accused him for the murder of an infinite number of Christians.
These confessions were enough for his condemnation, without any other evidence,
so that he was hanged in the public Market place of the City. This execution
was soon spread in the Camp of the Turks; for the Grand Master informed them
himself by Arrows shot over the Wall, after their example. Which he did, the
rather to let them understand how ill success their Spies had at Rhodes, and
that he had followed the Turks advice.

It is not to be believed how extremely the Basha was afflicted for the death
of this Traitor. He had almost no other hopes left but in him since his last
misfortune; for he was half assured, that the intreagues of a wit so crasty as
his, could not fail him at last. However, he would not suffer himself to be
altogether disheartened, though before he resolved upon a general assault, he
was resolved to try the most gentle means he could.

To this purpose, after he had shot in several Letters into the City,
aggravating, and extolling the power of the Ottoman Empire; he advertised the
people, that the Grand Signior intended no ill to the Rhodians; that he had
only made the War to deliver them from an unjust and tyrannical Government;
that being Greeks, they ought naturally to obey the Emperor of the Rhodians,
and that they would never be at quiet so long as they continued enemies to the
Ottoman Court. He promised them, if they would surrender, not only their lives
and liberties, but also all sorts of Immunities and Honors. At length he
declared to them, that if they refused such advantageous proffers, they must
expect to be all put to the Sword. That the Invincible Mahomet was resolved to
drain his Empire of all its Forces, to take Rhodes; that he was marching
thither with all speed; and that there would be no capitulations thought of
when his Highness arrived.

This Letter wrought no impression upon their resolutions. The wiser sort
laughed at them; the meanest capacities took them only for pieces of craft and
falsity. They all contemned and scorned the change which he proposed; and so
far they were from dreaming of a submission to the Grand Signior, that they
made new protestations of fidelity to the Grand Master: So that nothing more
contributed to retain the Prince in their obedience, and to redouble their
affection to their lawful Prince, then the subtilty which was used to corrupt
and gain them to a revolt.

The Basha finding no effect of his Letters, to which they would not so much as
vouchsafe an answer, took another way to obtain an answer. A runagate Greek
presented himself that night, by his order, before the Walls of the City; and
calling to the Sentinels with a loud voice, he told the Knights that appeared,
that the General of the Ottoman Army was desirous to send an Ambassador to the
Ottoman Army, provided he might have the liberty to go and come with safety.
Answer was returned to the Renegado, that the law of Nations was inviolably
observed at Rhodes* that the Ambassadors had no reason to fear any thing, and
that he might come to the Jews Moat; and that he should find in the Bulwark of
the Tower, a Knight, that should return him an answer in the name of the Grand
Master.

An ancient Bey, whose name was Solomon, appeared the next morning just against
the Bulwark. He was a prudent man, and besides his experience, had excellent
natural parts. After he had civilly saluted the Knight, who was deputed by the
Grand Master to give him audience, he began to tell him, that the Basha,
Paleologus, wondered, that being so much straightened, and not receiving any
relief, they should still so obstinately defend themselves. He added, that for
his part, he wondered that persons so wise as they, should so pertinaciously
seek their own ruin. That they ought to remember Constantinople, Trebisond,
Negropont, Metelin, and others, far stronger places then Rhodes, which could
not hold out against Mahomet* that Prudence ought to regulate Valor: and that
it was a folly to pretend to resist the Conqueror of two Empires, twelve
Kingdoms, and three hundred Cities. True it was, that it was an honor for him
to defend his Country; but that it was better for him to preserve it entire,
by submitting to the stranger, then to ruin himself out of a blind and
unadvised ingenuity; and therefore it was but common prudence for him to agree
with Mahomet: That his Favorite, Misach Paleologus, offered to manage the
accommodation himself, and so to order it, that they should have no reason to
complain; and lastly, that it was the only means to save their Reputation and
Estates. He concluded his Harang in a lively and persuasive manner, conjuring
him to have pity upon the people, and not to be the causes of the massacre of
so many poor creatures, the dishonor of their Daughters and Wives, and the
succage of the whole Island.

The Grand Master being informed of Solyman's propositions, did no less wonder
at the Basha's Ambassador, then the Basha wondered at their refistance. That
they could not apprehend that he had any compassion or tenderness for them,
which he endeavored to destroy by all means imaginable. That Peace was not
treated on with sword and poison; and that the treasons discovered, made them
suspicious of new ones: That they very well remembered that Trebisond,
Constantinople, Negropont, and so many other Towns, could not resist the power
of Mahomet; but they remembered as well, that he was a Conqueror that seldom
kept his word; and that contrary to the public Faith given, he had put to
death David Commenius, with all his children, not to speak of the Princes of
Bosnia and Metelin.

The Knight, who spoke in the name of the Grand Master, added haughtily, that
the Sultan of Egypt and Babylon, no less potent then the Emperor of the Turks,
had often attempted Rhodes, without getting any thing but shame; that the
Rhodians hoped that their entrenchments would prove the tombs of the Ottoman
Army; and that they would rather perish in the ruins of their own Country
then, then deliver it up to the enemies of the Christian Faith. And lastly,
that neither the threats nor promises of Mahomet were sufficient to force them
to any thing which might either be against their profession, or blast their
honor. After this, the Knight added, that when the Army of the Infidels was
returned to Constantinople, the Emperor might send an Ambassador to Rhodes, and
that then the Grand Master would consider what was most honorable and
advantageous for the Order; but that so long as such an Army remained about the
City, he could not heark'n to Peace. That the Ottoman Trroops might do like
declared Enemies, but that for his part, he hoped by the assistance of Heaven
to let his General know that the Knights of Rhodes were not so soon conquered
as other Nations.

This generous and haughty answer quite disappointed all the Basha's designs.
Shame, Honor, Despair, Fury raised in his Soul those Opposite motions, as
almost put him besides himself. Fury at length got the upper hand, and the
Barbarian abandoning himself to all the thoughts that rage could inspire, after
he had excited his Soldiers to punish the pride of those that braved the
sovereign power of the Ottomans, he commanded all the Engines to be set at
work, and that they should batter the City night and day without ceasing. Never
were orders better executed; for the Turks enlivened by the fury of the Basha,
and transported at the same time with a desire of Victory and revenge, in a
small time made above three thousand five hundred Shot, which brought the
Towers and Walls almost down to the Ground. Yet neither did this affright the
Rhodians. For the Grand Master went up and down to hearten the Inhabitants and
encourage the Soldiers. His confidence in God increased his natural Constancy,
and spread in his Countenance a serene Air, which proved a happy success.

When he thought the Enemy was ready to give the assault, he placed at the most
dangerous place, strong Squadrons of Cavalry, under the most skilful Commanders
which he chose himself. He retained near his own person, the French Gentlemen
who had followed the Count of Monteil to Rhodes; and placed himself with them
near the Jews quarter; from whence he might relieve all parts as need required.
But because he reposed all his hopes in the protection of Heaven, he first went
and prostrated himself at the feet of the Altars recommending to God the safety
of Rhodes, and commanding prayers to be continually said in all the Churches of
the City.

In the mean time the Basha encouraged by the Havoc which his Artillery had
made, after he had flattered his men with their Martial virtue, and had
persuaded them that they had nothing more now to take then Ruins without
defense, he openly declared to them that they should freely have the pillage of
the Town. He commanded them to put all to the Sword, except the young Infants,
whom he permitted them to preserve either for their own benefit, or the Grand
Signiors Militia. He ordained also that all the men that should escape the
Sword of the Mussel men, should be empal'd, to which purpose he set upright a
thousand Stakes in the Field.

The Turks revived anew by this apparent facility of the enterprise, and the
hope of plunder, with impatience expected the hour of assault with their Arms
in their hands, and Chains about their wastes, to bind those that they should
not kill. Nor could the Basha hardly retain them one day more, that he shot
continually at the Town to level the Fortifications of the Besieged.

At length the 27th of July, he gave the signal just at break of day, by the
shooting of a Mortar piece. Immediately the Ottoman Army ran furiously on,
invoking the name of their false Prophet, and assailed the City on every side
with most dreadful shouts and yells, that made all the Sea-shoar, and all the
Hills to ring again. Nevertheless the main onset was given to the Jews Wall,
where the Ruins, which had filled up the Ditch again, made the way easy. Then
an innumerable multitude mounted the Walls, and fell on with that fury, that
the Christians who kept the Walls, were quite overlaid with number, and almost
all slain. The Turks puffed up with this success, drove back the rest, and set up
seven of their colors upon the walls, before the Christians could get up upon
a slope, made with the Ruins of the Wall on their side. The Knights and
Soldiers that first ascended fell upon the Turks with such a fury that they
forced them to retire. But the Turks being presently reinforced, both parties
disputed a long time for the Wall; they on both sides with great heat and
courage. But when the Combat grew hot, and that the victory seemed to incline
to the Infidels, the Count of Monteil came into the assistance of the
Christians; but notwithstanding all the effects of their valor, they could not
drive back their Enemies, whom the presence of the Basha made undaunted, and
not being able to withstand so great a number as fell upon them.

In the mean time the report which was spread that the Enemy had carried the
Jews Quarter, struck terror and confusion every where. But so soon as the Grand
Master saw this beginning of a Rout, with a half pike in his hand, he mounted
the Wall, having already killed some that were got down, and considering that
the loss of all depended upon this post, he resolved to hazard all, or regain
it. The old Commanders and young Knights that were near to his person, mounted
after; at what time the Grand Master breaking into a thick Battalion of the
Turks, with an astonishing fury, charged them so rudely, that they were soon
cleared off.

No sooner was it known to what danger the Grand Master had exposed himself,
but the Burgesses of the Town ran with all speed to disingage him, or to dye
with him. The women also who were for the most part habited in men's apparel,
appeared upon the Ramparts to terrify the Assailants, followed their husbands,
and pouring down scalding Oil, Flints, and old Iron upon the Turks; while
others were so hardy as to throw Wild fire, and others to take up the Arms of
the Slain, and fight in their steads they did very good service. On the other
side the Archers which the Grand Master had placed in such parts of the Wall
which the Cannon had a little spared; shot continually upon those that came
with fresh recruits.

The Barbarians fell in great heaps every where, yet dearly selling their
lives, but more especially making a great slaughter about the Grand Master. But
the present Image of death redoubled his zeal, and no way diminished his
valor. Let us dye, my dear Brethren, said he, rather then retire, it is for the
faith, it is for heaven that we fight, our death shall be honored among men,
and precious in the sight of God. His example, and his words, so encouraged the
Soldiers, that mauger* the obstinate resistance of the enemy, they regained
the Field, and made themselves absolute Masters of it, after a dispute of two
hours. The Knight de Montholon, being the first that tore up the Ottoman
Banners, and flung them to the ground.

As much affrighted as the Barbarians seemed, and as much wearied as they were
indeed, shame or honor caused them to return to the Charge; and the Basha drew
out a Body of old Janissaries to second the assault. Now, in regard the Grand
Master was known by his gilded Arms, and the throng of remarkable persons that
environed him; the Basha commanded that they should pick him out particularly.
These fresh men threw themselves, like beasts of prey, upon the Christians; and
having forced their, way through the Pikes and Swords, were making directly to
the Grand Master, if the Vicount of Monteil, who saw them coming, had not put a
stop to them; who flew upon them with the most valiant of the Auvernian Post:
In the mean time ten or twelve of the boldest of the Turks joining with those
that were at handy-strokes with the Grand Master, they laid at him with several
blows; so that his arms being broken, he received five wounds: however, he
fought still very valiantly. But the Knights perceiving he was wounded, fell on
so furiously, that the enemy first began to give ground; and lastly, to betake
them to their heels.

As for the Turks who were got upon the Posts of the other Languages, where
they found equal resistance; so soon as they saw the Jews Wall forsaken, they
quitted their attaques, and fled in the greatest disorder in the World: except
three hundred of the stoutest, who staid upon the Walls, and being no longer
able to defend themselves, fell half dead into the City, where they were
massacred by the people.

At the same time the Rhodians issued out after them in throngs, and pursued
them to their very Camp, making a most fatal slaughter among them. The Turks
also killed one another to make room for themselves; so much they dreaded to
fall into the hands of the Christians. The Basha did all he could by threats
and promises to stay their flight: their fear would not let them take notice of
either, and he was at length constrained to fly to the shore, that he might be
near his Galleys.

Khodgia Afendy, who has wrote in the Turkish Language the Siege of Rhodes,
attributes the rout of the Infidels to the avarice of their General: For he
says, that the Soldiers, more covetous of booty then blood, being ready to
enter the Town, and preparing themselves to plunder, where they hoped to find
great riches; the Basha, to preserve the whole for himself, caused proclamation
to be made, that the treasure of Rhodes was the demeans of the Ottoman Court,
and that the generous Mussulmen were to seek nothing more in fight then the
honor of serving the Emperor; however, he would not sail to recompense those
that should do their duty* as he would punish those that should take the least
rag. The Historian adds, that this Proclamation so cooled the courage of the
Soldiers, that they thought of nothing after that, but how to save their
lives. But we may easily conjecture, by the examination of his words, that he
does not speak truth according to the manner of the Turks, who make no scruple
of lying, when it is either to excuse and cover the cowardice, or dishonor of
their Nation. For it has been the custom of the Ottoman Emperors, and their
Basha's, always to abandon such Towns as were taken by assault to the plunder
of the Soldiers: So that it is not likely that Paleologus, who used all the
means he could, to make himself Master of the place; and who was naturally
magnificent, should of a sudden take to a course so contrary to his design and
humor.

In the mean time the Grand Master, who felt himself very much weakened by his
wounds, returned into the City all bloody; after whom followed the victorious
Knights with the Imperial Standard, which they had taken from before the
Pavilion of the Basha: but the condition of their Prince put them into such a
consternation, that they could not rejoice for their Victory. One of his wounds
was accounted mortal, and the second day they began to despair of his life.

So soon as the Basha had recovered the Seashore with the remains of his Army,
he never stood to consult whether he should raise the Siege or no. Whatever
confidence he had had till then, in the fortune of Mahomet and his own, he
despaired to take the place after so many vain assults; and understanding that
he had lost above nine thousand men slain outright, and above fifteen thousand
wounded, which were not in the fight; he took care of nothing more then how to
save the rest by retiring.

While the Turks were embarquing their Engines of War, and all their Baggage,
there appeared two great Ships, which Ferdinand, King of Spain, had sent to the
relief of Rhodes. Paleologus, who saw them making to the Port with full sail,
considering what a shame it would be to let them enter the Port, shot at them
with such pieces of Artillery, as were not embarked; not being able to assault
them with his Galleys, because the winds were contrary. The shot brought one of
the Masts of one of the Ships by the board, but did the other no harm. But the
wind changeing, and the Sea growing rough of a sudden, they both came to an
Anch or just against the Port, till the tempest forced them to make all the
sail they could to get in. The Ship, whose Mast was broken, was the more
fortunate, and steered so well, that she got in. The other being carried off by
storm, fell back into the road; so that she was the next day very near the
Infidels Fleet. The Basha, unwilling to let go a prize that he thought in his
hands, sent out twenty Galleys to seize her; and commanded the Captain of the
Galleys to go himself. The Christians prepare themselves for fight. The twenty
Galleys surround the Vessel, and thunder upon her on every side; and by an
incredible kindness of divine protection, did them much more mischief then she
received herself. However, some that were best manned fetched her up by the
strength of their oars; and having grappl'd her, a whole throng of Barbarians
endeavored to enter upon all her quarters. But the Spaniards and Italians kept
their ground with so much resolution, that after a bloody Fight of three hours,
the Turks were constrained to give way: and the death of the General of the
Galleys so abated their courage, that they wholly forsook the Vessel.

Then it was, that Misach Paleologus, being out of all hope, and fearing all
the worst of fortune, gave order to weigh Anchor, and be gone. And that which
hasted his departure, was, that he understood by his Spies, that the Christians
expected a very considerable relief, and that the Vessels of Ferdinand were but
the forerunners of the Christian Prince's Fleet. So that the Ottoman Fleet put
out to Sea the 18th of August, and steered toward the Port of Fisco; where
having set the Army a shore* they continued their course toward Constantinople.

The Victorious Ship entered the Port of Rhodes almost at the same that the
Ottoman Fleet set sail. And now it is no difficult thing to apprehend the joy
of the Rhodians, to see themselves so well delivered, after a siege of sixty
days. The whole Port resounded with shouts of gladness: and the noise of the
Bells, mixed with that of the Trumpets, made a pleasing harmony, which
proclaimed the raising of the Siege to all the people of the Island. But that
which most contributes to the public rejoicing, was, that the Grand Master
began to recover; whether the Surgeons were deceived in their judgments, or
that the wound, which they deemed to be mortal, were not so indeed; or whether
there were something divine and miraculous in the cure. However, in that
languishing estate, wherein as yet he continued, he commanded solemn
Processions to be made for three days; and that Masses should be said in all
the Churches of the City, for the souls of the Knights and Soldiers that had
been slain during the Siege.

So soon as he was cured of his wounds, and that he had strength enough to
walk, he went himself to return thanks to God at the feet of the Altars. And
because he was persuaded that the protection of the Virgin had saved Rhodes, he
made a Vow to build a magnificent Church, by the name of St. Mary's of the
Victory, near the Jews Wall, where the Turks were put to the rout. Nor did he
delay the execution of his vows; for being somewhat better settled in his
health, he caused himself to be carried to the place, and ordered the
foundations to be laid in his presence. They labored might and main at this
great work, so soon as the fortifications of the Town were repaired. And
because the Victory was won upon the day wherein the Greeks solemnize the
Festival of St. Pantaleon, the Grand Master built a sumptuous Chapel for the
exercise of the Grecian Ceremonies, in honor of that holy Martyr; to the end
that the Latins and the Greeks, celebrating at the same time the holy
Mysteries, they might return thanks both together, in both Churches, for so
renowned a Victory.

Nor was his devotion enclosed within the Walls of Rhodes. He founded a
perpetual Mass every week at the great Altar of St. John of Jerusalem; to
preserve until the end of time, the memory of so happy a success, and in some
measure to make an immortal acknowledgment thereof, in the same place where the
Order of St. John had its first Institution.

But because, that having implored the aid of St. John Baptist, when he fally'd
to the Combat, he found in his Soldiers, and in himself, a new courage, which
could not spring but from above; he resolved to build a Church in Italy, in
Honor of the happy Precursor, whose body Julian the Apostate caused to be
burnt, and whose precious ashes lie in the Cathedral Church of St. Lawrence at
Genoa.

This Structure time brought to perfection; and it was built near to the
Chapel, where those holy Relics are exposed to the veneration of the people.
To which, that he might do the greater Honor, he also built a Convent near to
the said Chapel, for twelve religious persons of the Order, to sing Divine
Service, to say Masses for the propagation of the Faith, for the Benefactors of
the Order, and the Souls of the Grand Masters deceased: to which end he
employed the Revenue of several Commanderies, and his own, according to the
power which he had received from the Sea of Rome.

He wrote at the same time to the Princes of Christendom, to give them advice
of the Victory, and to engage them to send him relief, in case the Turks should
make any new attempts, and that the Knights should be constrained to hold out
another Siege. But because that Ferdinand's Ships had brought him a Brief from
Sixtus, which Brief contained such expressions, as testified how much the Pope
did interest himself in the affairs of Rhodes, he sent to Rome the Prior of
Capua, and the Commander of Aliaga, with the Title of Ambassadors
Extraordinary. He charged them also in their way, to wait upon the King of
Naples, and to tell him how much the Knights were obliged to him for his aid.
That in his own particular, he highly acknowledged his Favor; and as long as
he lived, should seek all occasions to testify his gratitude. Nor was the Grand
Master thus contented to declare his obligations to Ferdinand; he also gave
substantial marks of it to Lewis Palafox, a Gentleman of Aragon, and Captain of
the Ship, which had so valiantly defended the Tower of St. Nicholas, and the
Jews Wall. For besides that, he presented him with a Diamond of a very great
price; and made his natural Son a Knight, as being a young Gentleman of great
hopes and merit. He permitted him to carry in chief, above the Arms of his
Family, the Arms of the Order, as an authentic proof of the Services which he
and his had done, during the Siege.

He also granted other considerable Favors both to the Knights and Soldiers,
which had most signalized themselves: And because the Country was utterly laid
wast; and for that the miseries of the people were not ended with the War, he
caused Corn to be distributed to the Islanders in great plenty; and discharged
them for several years of all sorts of Taxes.

THE HISTORY OF Peter D'Aubusson, Grand Master of RHODES. Book Fourth.
THE Ottoman Fleet carried the news of their own misfortune home themselves to
Constantinople. And Mahomet was as deeply sensible of this misfortune, as a
wise and ambitious Prince possibly could be, who had not prosper'd in an
honorable Enterprise, which he undertook not but upon great consideration.
Though he were a great Master of himself, and one that could dissemble his
particular anguish of mind; yet upon the sight of the principal Captains of the
Army, and in that transportment, he was about to have put them all to death.
The Basha, Misach Paleogo, his favorite, presumed to tell him with that
freedom which his favor allowed him, that they had nothing to accuse him
either for his conduct or his courage; and that the Mussul-men had done as much
as men could do. He was glad to tell him withal, that the Knights of Rhodes
were men of an extraordinary valor; and that there appeared in the Air a
bright-shining Troop, whose blows neither the Turks could shun, nor abide their
looks. But all these reasons gave the Grand Signior no satisfaction. He drove
his Favorite out of his sight, and was so far from giving him the Vest of
Honor, which he was wont to bestow upon his Generals and Visiers, at their
returns from military Expeditions, that he commanded him to retire to the
Sangiacatship of Gallipoli. Nor indeed had Mahomet any other way to cheer up
himself for this misfortune, but by believing that the conquest of Rhodes was
reserved to him alone, and that it belonged only to him to tame the Knights,
and their Grand Master.

They were soon informed at Rhodes of the preparations which were made at
Constantinople for a new Expedition; nor was the Grand Master idle in preparing
to receive them.

But while the Rhodians were repairing the defenses of their City, there
happened extraordinary accidents which changed the whole course of their
proceedings. A little while after the Fleet of the Turks was departed, there
was heard over the whole Isle a kind of subterraneal noise, like to that of
thunder that begins to grumble in a cloud. This was a prognostication of those
Earthquakes with which the Island was terrified for many months. The most firm
foundations of the City were shak'n by the first shogs, and almost over-turn'd
by the second shakings, which happened one after another; and which many times
did not give over, but only to begin again with greater force.

The half of the Fort of St. Nicholas rumbl'd down one night, and the ruins of
the Tower overwhelmed most part of the Soldiers in the Tower. As the
exhalation that caused these motions grew to be more and more enraged by the
attempts which it made to get loose out of the caverns wherein it was enclosed,
the Earth quake increased every day. The Earth reared it self up, and violently
bounded forward in some places; it cleft and opened in others. Nothing but
ruin and abysses appeared every where; nothing was heard but the cries of
affrighted people, that run up and down to save themselves, and yet no where
sound security. In short, it seemed that the Island of Rhodes, which some
believed was produced out of the Sea, to make the Earth tremble; was now just
ready to perish by the same accident for which it was created.

To add to their affliction, these tremblings of the Earth were accompanied
with such prodigious and impetuous showers of rain, as if a second deluge had
been come to overflow the World. Besides all this, the Sea swelled ten foot
high; and having surpast its bounds, overrun the ^^ty with such an impetuosity
and noise, as if it came to swallow it up. The Rhodians believed themselves
lost, when they beheld how the very Elements conspired their ruin, at a time
as they were threatened again with the whole force of the Turks. Nay, the Grand
Master himself would have had much ado perhaps to have sustained himself with
his natural constancy, had not his confidence in God fortified him against so
many calamities. Upon this Christian confidence it was, that he was often heard
to say, like Moses and David. The God of Battle is our fortress; when I walk in
the amidst of the shadow of death, I will fear none ill; because, thou Lord,
art with me.

He exhorted all the people to take heart, but all his exhortations signified
little; for the people sensible of what they felt, abandoned themselves to
those impressions which such sort of calamities produce. And that which
increased the public consternation, was, that about that time Mahomet was set
out of Constantinople at the head of three hundred thousand men, resolved to
conquer Italy or Egypt, so soon as he had conquered Rhodes. He crossed the
Thracian Bosphorus, and took his way for Bithynia; with a design to cross all
Asia the less, and to come to the Port of Lycia before the Knights should know
of his march. But Heaven is pleased sometimes at one blow to bring down the
pride of the Grandees of the Earth. This proud Prince, who thought upon nothing
but new conquests, was taken away by a violent Cholick in the amidst of his
Army, near to Nicomedia. He was three and fifty years old; so vigorous, that he
endured all the travels and labors of War without any detriment to his health;
the anguish that perplexed him for raising the Seige of Rhodes did not a little
contribute to his death. He always appeared melancholy after that misfortune;
and upon the very naming the word Grand Master, he fell into such dull fits as
made him insupportable to himself. William Caoursin, who lived at that time,
and was Vice Chancellor of Rhodes, makes him to dye after a very strange
manner. For he reports in his memoires, that Mahomet passing thorough a Forest
of Bithynia, a young Man clad in white, of a shape something more then Human,
presented himself before him, with a visage burning with anger, and a flaming
Sword in his hand, who after he had beheld him with a fiery and menacing eye,
Most impious among men, said he, I will run thee thorough with this Sword. At
which words Mahomet fell trembling from his Horse, as if he had been struck
with a Thunderbolt. That at the same time he suffered most bitter torments,
which caused him to cry out most dreadfully, and that soon after he died,
blaspheming the name of Jesus, and cursing the Rhodians. Whether the Apparition
were true or no, certain it is, that this Enemy of the Cross died the same day
that the Church celebrates the festival of the finding the Holy Cross, and that
as he was expiring, he several times uttered the word Rhodes, and commanded in
the extremity of his pangs, that this Inscription should be written over his
Tomb. My design was to have taken Rhodes and subdued Italy.

The death of the Ottoman Emperor was the safety of Christendom, and
particularly of the Rhodian Territories. So that when the Grand Master heard
the news, he gave thanks in public to Heaven, that the Order was delivered
from so powerful an adversary.

But that which more increased the joy of the Knights was this, that the City
of Otrantum was retaken from the Turks in Puglia, so soon as the death of
Mahomet was known Achmat Basha, one of the greatest men of the Empire, had made
himself Master of this City the year before; and had left a strong Garrison
therein, and settled it in a condition not to be assaulted. The taking of
Otrantum made all Italy shake. And the vigorous holding out of the Turks
against the Neapolitans that besieged it, began to make Rome sensible of her
danger; but when the besieged understood the death of the Grand Signior, their
courages failed them, and they surrendered to the Duke of Calabria, Son to the
King of Naples, not staying for the succor of five and twenty thousand men
which Achmat was bringing himself. These Tidings were acceptable to the Church;
and then it was that the Rhodians began to take breath after such a series of
misfortunes. The Earth grew steady, and the Sea retired, so that they had the
liberty to repair all the ruins of the City. But as the corruption of manners
usually proceeds from the disorders of War, the Grand Master undertook a
reformation of the Knights and people. To that end he made severe Laws against
those vices that wound Christian Piety, and civil society, upon which account
he forbad all manner of unlawful Games. These Laws were publicly proclaimed,
and what was thought almost incredible, as readily obeyed; but a Sovereign
finds no great trouble to make his Subjects obey him when he commands nothing
but what he practices himself.

While all things were calm at Rhodes; the two parties that strove to succeed
in the Ottoman Empire, put all Turkey into a confusion. Mahomet at his death
left two Sons behind him, Bajazet and Zi-zim, for Mustapha their elder brother
was put to death by the command of his Father, That young Sultan, who who was
both stout and valiant, and had not long before won a very signal victory from
Vssum Cassan King of Persia, coming to the Ottoman Court about the particular
affairs of his government of Amasia, fell so deeply in love with the wife of
Achmat, that famous Basha that took Otrantum, that one day in the hight of his
passion, he offered her violence as she was going into the Bath. Achmat
complained to Mahomet, and tore his Turbant and his Vest, to express his grief.
What is that you complain of, haughtily answered the Grand Signior to the
Basha, My Son has done nothing but abused the Wife of one of my Slaves. However
to give Achmat satisfaction, he gave immediate order that Mustapha should be
strangled, at the same time acting the part of a cruel Father and a just King.

Thus Bajazet and Zizim remained the only Heirs of the Crown. The first
governed Paphlagonia, and resided not far from the Black Sea. The Second had
the Government of Liconia, in Asia the less, so that they were both at a great
distance from their father when he died. They had ever been kept a sunder the
one from the other, and had never seen one another but once, out of a piece of
policy of Mahomet, for fear least jealousy should divide themselves, or a
strickt amity unite them both against him. They were of a different Character,
and dispositions resembling in nothing but the passion which they had to reign.
Bajazet, to whom the Turks gave the name of Lightning or Thunder, by no means
made his Title good, as being of a spirit altogether poor and mean, and one
that minded nothing less then War. Zizim, whose name signifies love, on the
contrary had a lively Wit, a noble Soul, and was most generously inclined. He
was not so handsome as Bajazet; but there appeared in his Person, and in his
Countenance, such a mixture of Grandeur, sweetness, and haughtiness mixed
together, that surpassed beauty it self. He delighted extremely in hunting, and
all Military exercises. And yet he had no less a love for learning then he had
for Arms. He understood Languages, among the rest the Greek and Italian; he
spent some part of his time in reading of Histories; and he was then writing
the Story of his Fathers Life, when the news came to him of his death. He was
very zealous for the Mahumetan Religion, yet not with that headstrong passion,
but that he had a great kindness for the Knights of Rhodes, whom his Father
mortally hated, Besides all that, he had a particular affection for the Grand
Master, from the very time that the first overtures of peace were made, and he
had always a design to make as strict a league with him as the law of the
Mussel-men would permit. And indeed there is such a coherence between the Story
of the Grand Master and Zizim, that I cannot forbear to relate what happne'd to
the two Brothers, before the Knights did interest themselves altogether in the
quarrel.

So soon as Bajazet and Zizim understood of the death of the Emperor. They both
of them minded nothing else but how to get into possession of the Empire. But
before they took the Field, the partakers of each side at Constantinople, had
taken Arms, and declared some for the One, and some for the Other. The heads of
each party made out the best they could the right of both Princes. They that
took Bajazets part, cried out that nature spoke in his behalf, for that being
the eldest, he could not in justice be deprived of the Crown. The Friends of
Zizim pretended that a lazy slothful Prince as Bajazet, that gave not his mind
to business, but led a dissolute life, did not deserve to succeed to the great
Mahomet. They maintained that Zizim being endowed from Heaven with all the
qualities that made a Prince worthy of an Empire, ought to be preferred in the
succession to his Father. And as to the right of Eldership they added, that
Bajazet indeed was born before Zizim; but that for that very reason he had no
right to the Imperial Crown. For, said they, the first is only the Son of
Bajazet, the other is the Son of the Emperor. Bajazet was born while Amurath
lived, and before Bajazet bare the Scepter. But Zizim came into the World, when
his Father was in possession of all the Turkish dominions, and after he had
conquered the Empire of the Greeks; so that it might be truly said, that this
young Prince was born upon the Throne; and that Nature, as well as Fortune, had
designed him for the Empire.

Both parties thus heated, fell at length from disputes to blows, the people
taking part according as they were seduced and inveagl'd by the Janissaries and
Basha's; insomuch that they plundered one part of the Palace, and the Imperial
Treasure, and one of the Grandees of the Court was slain in a popular
insurrection, wherein there was much blood spilt.

While this was the condition of affairs at Constantinople, and that the two
Princes were preparing to make good their claims by force of Arms, the Grand
Master thought it very convenient to take the advantage of Mahomet's death, and
of the division of the Princes, and to make an attempt upon the Island of
Meteline. It was then one of the richest Islands in the Archipelago, and the
most commodious for Knights, being seated directly against the mouth of the
Straight of Gallipoli. The broyls of Turkey made the enterprise easy. For there
was no likelihood of any relief by Sea from the Infidels, when their Forces
were all employed in a Domestic War. These considerations encouraged the Grand
Master to make ready with all speed the Ships of the Order, and to spare for
nothing that might procure the success of such an important design. The
Commander de Jales, who at that time kept cruzing the Archipelago with two
Galleys, had order to attend the Fleet. When it was ready, it set Sail under
the Conduct of the Commander de Carmandin, Baily of Lango. But sickness
happening in the Fleet, unseasonable weather, and contrary winds disappointed a
design, the success whereof seemed to be infallible. But that which the Grand
Master contrived to revenge himself upon the Sultan of Egypt, better succeeded.
For that same treacherous Prince having no regard to the Peace, according to
the custom and genius of the Mahumetans, had sent certain Pirates to take the
Vessels, and plunder the Ships belonging to the Order, as if open War had been
declared. Thereupon the Grand Master ordered his Galleys to cruize along the
coasts of Syria and Egypt, and to make all the havoc they could upon a
faithless Barbarian. Which was so effectually performed, that Caerbei, the
Sultan, soon repented him of his perjury.

In the mean while Bajazet's party grew strong. For while the two Sultans were
upon their march to dispute for the Crown by force of Arms, Achmat, who
returned to Constantinople when the Turks had forsaken Otrantum, and who was a
person of great authority in the Empire, absolutely declared for Bajazet;
whether it were that he was convinced of the justice of his cause, or that he
hoped to have the Government in his own hands, under a weak Prince. As he was a
man prudent and bold, equally skilled in Politics as War; after he had partly
threatened, partly caressed the more factious sort, he appeased the Sedition by
setting upon the Throne one of Bajazett's Sons, of about thirteen years of age,
whose name was Sultan Corcut, and proclaiming Emperor the Father of the young
Prince. Bajazett, who had already taken shipping, soon came to Constantinople
by the black Sea. Achmat received him at the head of the Basha's and Janissaries
that he had gained, who having all of them saluted him Emperor, they conducted
him to the Imperial Palace, surrounded with the shouts and acclamations of the
people, who acknowledged him the lawful Heir of Mahomet.

Zizim's Adherents were vexed to the very hearts to see his enemy upon the
Throne; but the absolute power that Achmat had gained, forced them to dissemble
their resentment, and to comply with the advancement of Bajazett. However, they
held private Caballs together, and invited the young Sultan to make all the
haste he could. Zizim, who had not the convenience of the Sea, but was to march
through Bithynia, did not understand till he was upon the road, of the
Coronation of his Brother. This unwelcome news did nothing abate the courage of
the young Prince. He believed the people, whose inclinations are prone to
change, and often contrary to themselves, would turn of his side, so soon as he
should appear at Constantinople; and he believed it so much the more, because
that Bajazet had been always less beloved then he. With these hopes he marched
in all haste toward Prusia, the ancient residence of the Ottoman Emperors, and
made himself Master of the City, with those few Troops which he had brought
with him out of Lycaonia. This first success seemed to promise more. And
therefore, that he might not be wanting to his own good fortune, he labors, by
means of his friends, to draw to his party the Lords and Grandees of the Port;
and to regain the affection of the Janissaries, got what Money he could
together, and reinforced his Army from day to day.

Bajazet, in whom desire of rule had augmented both his wit and his courage,
spared for nothing on his side, to stop the progress of the Sultan his Brother.
And fearing lest Zizim should make himself Master of all Asia, he sent Achmat
against him with a numerous Army, and made up of the old Soldiers of the Army.
The Basha, who desired nothing more then to finish what he had begun, makes all
possible haste, and encamps not far from Prusia, in a woody plain, resolved to
carry the place, and to get the Prince into his power, who was the only
obstacle to the repose of the new Emperor.

Zizim, who had not time to fortify the City, and wanted provisions to hold out
a Siege, rather chose to take the field, then to be shut up in a weak and
unprovided place. Thereupon out he marches at the head of his Cavalry; and
having discovered Achmat's Troops, which he did not think so nigh at hand, he
resolved to give Battle immediately. Thus resolving to venture all for a Crown,
he marches directly toward the enemy, telling his Soldiers that there was no
other way but either to conquer, or dye. Achmat stood him with a wonderful
resolution; and after he had born the fury of the first shock, he charged him
so rudely, that the Asiaticks were soon put to the rout. The most part of them
were raw Soldiers, ill disciplined, effeminate, and more accustomed to repose
and luxury, then to the noise of arms and labor. The Prince returned to the
charge with some of the choice of his Army, but they perished almost all by his
side, and he himself had either been slain, or taken, had not night come on.
Thereupon, favored by the darkness, he got into the next wood, hoping to rally
his Troops, and to bring them on again the next day. But understanding that the
most part of his people were either prisoners, or slain, he took a sudden
resolution to fly for succor to the Sultan of Egypt, the King of Cilicia, and
the Grand Master of Rhodes. To this purpose, with only forty Horse, marching
day and night through unknown places, at length he got into Syria. Being come
to Jerusalem, he went to visit the Temple of Solomon, to which the Mahumetans
give a particular veneration; and there prostrated at the foot of the Altar, he
besought the Divine Majesty to favor his just designs; after which, continuing
his journey through the Deserts of Arabia, he came to Caire.

Cairbey received Zizim, not as a Fugitive, and despoyl'd Prince, but as a
great King, the Son of a most famous Conqueror, and of the most Puissant
Emperor that ever the Turks had. When he understood that the Prince was at
hand, he sent before the most considerable Emirs and Mamalukes of his Court.
And at the same time he went to receive him at the Gate of his Palace, contrary
to the custom of the Soldans; not were there any sort of honors or caresses
with which he did not entertain him. Zizim, so much the better pleased with his
entertainment, by how much the more he looked upon the lowness of his
condition, made his returns to the civilities of the Surgeon, as showed his
acknowledgment, but testified nothing of weakness, or want of courage. After he
had declared to him the reason of his coming, he told him withal, that he
applied himself to him, as to the most zealous observer of the Mahumetan Law.
He conjured him by the Temple of Solomon, and the Sepulcher of the Prophet
Mahomet, which were both in his Dominions, to assist an unfortunate person with
his counsels and his forces, against the violences of a barbarous Brother, who
had deprived him of the Crown, and also sought to take away his life. The
Sultan, moved by the discourse of Zizim, made him all manner of offers. But as
Cairbey was a Politic Prince, who would not easily engage in dangerous
affairs, being rather a lover of quiet and repose, he promised him first to
labor an accommodation with Bajazet; and to keep his word, he dispatched away
an Emir to Constantinople. The Embassy was no way pleasing to Zizim, who well
knew that such kind of differences were not to be determined but by force. But
the posture of his affairs, and the consideration of his wife and children that
came after him to Caire, enforced him to dissemble. And the better to conceal
his passion, he desired to go to Mecca, to worship the Sepulcher of Mahomet,
though perhaps more out of discontent than devotion.

Hardly was the Ottoman Prince returned, but news came from Constantinople.
Bajazet, who in all things followed the counsel of Achmat, accepted the
mediation of Cairbey, not so much to reconcile himself with his Brother, as to
amuse him, and ruin him, under the pretense of accommodation. The Sultan
overjoyed to see himself the Arbitrator of so great a quarrel, went about to
persuade Zizim that a part of the Empire was better then nothing; and upon that
score he offered him for his share a Province in Asia. The Sultan was much
displeased at his Proposition, and could not forbear from manifesting how high
an injury it was to his pride. By this he found that mediation did but only
make him lose time; and therefore not finding Cairbey very readily disposed to
succor him, he resolved to implore the assistance of other Princes, at what
time he received an Embassy from the Grand Caraman.

This Monarch, whom Mahomet had despoyl'd of the Kingdom of Cilicia, now called
Caramania, thought he had now a favorable opportunity to recover the Kingdoms
which he had lost; and made no question but that by declaring himself against
Bajazet, he should oblige Zizim, should he contribute to put him in possession
of the Empire, to restore him his own. Upon this consideration he raised
Forces, and requested succor from all his friends. The Grand Master, to whom
he particularly addressed himself, sent him five Galleys laden with Soldiers
and Artillery; who were readily willing to go, when the Counsel understood that
it was done for the interest of Zizim, who had been always kind to the Knights,
and the Vessels of the Order. In short, when Caraman had raised his Army, he
sent for Sultan Zizim to come and join with him. The proposition of the King of
Caramania was much more acceptable to the Prince, then that of the Sultan; but
that which chiefly made him determine to leave Caire, was, that several Basha's
ill satisfied with the new Government, had by particular expresses assured him
of their fidelity and services. However, as much displeased as he was in
himself with Cairbey, he would not break with a Prince from whom he had
received so-much kindness; and who was able to do him as much prejudice. So
that as a mark of the confidence he reposed in him, he left his wife and
children with him.

The great desire which Zizim had to obtain the Crown, which, as he pretended,
belonged to him, and of which he thought himself more worthy than Bajazet, made
him hasten with all speed to Mount Taurus, where the Grand Caraman expected
him; and the reason which that expelled King had to hate the Turks, made Zizim
believe that he should find in him an assured and faithful friend. After they
had sworn to each other an inviolable Amity, the two Princes marched together
over vast Plains, and encamped with their Forces near to Lavanda, a City of
Cappadocia; Achmat, who had wintered in Lycaonia, near Iconium, advanced with
his Army upon the first report of the Confederacy of Caraman and Zizim; on the
other side also Bajazet, whom the desire of ruining his Brother, made more bold
and valiant every day then other, set forth from Constantinople at the head of
a hundred thousand men, and joined with Achmat, who had at least as many.

Whatever resolutions the two Princes had taken, they began to be afraid of so
great a force; and Caraman, who knew his Troops to be far weaker then those of
the Turks, gave Zizim to understand that it would be but mere rashness to give
Battle. He also endeavored to persuade him that it was the part of prudence to
retire. But the young Prince could not so resolve; either honor or despair
caused him to make a proposal to Bajazet, that they might terminate their
differences by a single combat in the sight of both Armies. Bajazet, who was
not stout enough, and who was in too prosperous a condition to accept such a
challenge, proposed to Zizim another way of accommodation, and offered him any
such Province as he should like upon the Frontiers of Turkey, with two hundred
thousand Crowns in Gold every year, and a Court becoming the Ottoman
magnificence.

Had those offers been as sincere, as they were made in craft, they would not
have contented Zizim, whose ambition was not to be satisfied but with a Crown.
He rejected them with disdain. But knowing that Achmat did but only seek to
ensnare him, that he might get his person into his power, while he kept him in
play with fair words, he at length was persuaded to retreat. The advice which
he had of their close pursuit, advised him to save himself through Forests and
Deserts in the most difficult Streights of Mount Taurus. The Caraman followed
him presently after with his Forces very much tired. Zizim had formerly secured
himself in this place from the persecution of an enemy that was not his
Brother; but judging well, that a Brother so unnatural as his would never be at
rest, till he had established his Throne by the death of him that had the only
right to pretend to it; after he had made several reflections upon the present,
and the future, he resolved to seek the Alliance and protection of the Grand
Master, whose generosity he was well acquainted with, and who was also a friend
of the Grand Caraman. To that purpose he wrote to Rhodes by one of his most
faithful servants; but that Messenger was taken by the Turks, who possessed all
the passes of the Country, and carried to Bajazet, who put him immediately to
death.

When Zizim understood that, and that Achmat sought for him in all places, he
left Mount Taurus, and took the way of Lycia toward the Sea with the Grand
Caraman, who was himself his guide. Who, no sooner were they got clear of the
Streights of the Mountain, but their Troops who were posted there, and were
preparing to follow them, were surrounded, and cut in pieces by Achmat. These
new misfortunes put the young Prince upon sending to the Grand Master two
prudent and faithful persons, the one of which was named Duan, and the other
Solomon. And there happened to be at that time a Galiot of the Order, that
carried the Ambassadors of Zizim to Rhodes.

Duan and Solomon fully informed the Grand Master of the adventures of their
Prince. And afterward they told him that it belonged to none but the most
Illustrious Knights of the World to protect an oppressed Innocent; and that it
was less an honor to humble the proud, then to assist the miserable. That
Zizim required neither money nor men, being resolved to submit a while to his
bad fortune; that he did not covet to rule, but only sought an Asylum, where he
might live in safety and quiet. They added, that in his youth he had had a
manifest affection for the Order of St. John of Jerusalem, and that he hoped
that the Mahumetan Law wherein he had been bred, would not hinder them from
taking pity upon a young Prince exposed to the most cruel persecution that ever
was. To conclude, they told him that nothing would render the Knights of Rhodes
more formidable to Bajazett, then their having his Brother in their power; nor
more considerable either in Europe or in Asia, then to be Master of the Destiny
of a Prince, who was Mahomet's Heir.

These reasons were too sound not to move the Grand Master, who understood
besides how profitable such an accident would be to all Christendom. It was
therefore resolved in Council to entertain Zizim, and the grand Vessel of the
Treasury was forthwith commanded together with a Galley, a Caravel, and other
Vessels to go and fetch him. They also made ready at the same time a safe
Conduct, after the same form which the Ambassador desired. The Grand Master
made choice of Don Alvare of Zuinga, Prior of Castile, for so honorable a
Command, and gave him his Orders how he should behave himself toward the Prince.

Bajazett on the other side finding by a Letter intercepted, and by the advices
which he had, that Zizim had bent his course toward the Coast of Lycia, to pass
from thence by Sea to Rhodes, sent after him a body of Horse, with orders to
take him dead or alive. Zizim, who had intelligence thereof, presently retired
to the Sea side, where the great Caraman had prepared a Ship ready, in case the
Prince should be pursued. The Spahi's however made so must haste, that they
missed him but a moment; they appeared at the very time when he was but just
got into the Barque; and he was no sooner put off from the shore, but taking a
Bow in sight of his Brothers soldiers, he let fly an Arrow, to the point
whereof was fastened a Letter, the Contents of which were as follow.

King ZIZIM,
To King Bajazett his cruel Brother.
IF I commit a crime in flying for Refuge to the Christians, especially to the
Knights of Rhodes, the mortal enemies of our Illustrious Family, it is thou who
art the only cause of it, both before God and Men. Thou art not only content to
have deprived me of the Empire, contrary to all Laws, Divine and Humane; thou
enforcest me to seek an ignominious sanctuary to save my life. Had Mahomet
foreseen that thou would one day have in such a manner disgraced the honor
of the Name of Mussulman, and the Ottoman Race, he would have been thy
executioner himself. But I hope that Heaven will revenge me of thy Tyranny; and
it is my prayer to our great Prophet, to hasten the punishment which thou
deservest.


When the Horsemen saw that the Bark was out of their reach, they returned,
enraged that they had missed their prey, and carried the Letter to Bajazett.
The Barbarian could not refrain from tears when he read it: And it is reported
that he was seized with a terror when he had considered it, and fell into a
deep fit of malancholly. So great a power have the conceptions of Nature and
Religion, at certain times, upon minds, the most cruel and impious. In the mean
time, Zizim, who had heard no tidings of his Ambassadors, not knowing what
course to steer, nor were to land in safety, wandered at the mercy of the waves
and winds along the Coast of Lycia, at what time he discovered certain Vessels,
that with all the sail they could, seemed to make toward him. Now, as it is
natural to the unfortunate to be afraid of every thing, the Prince imagined
them to be either Pirates, or such as had a design upon his life, being in
pursuit of him by his Brothers order, upon which he commanded the Pilot to gain
the first landing-place: But the event proved to him that he had had a false
alarm. For they whom he took for Pirates and Enemies, were the Ships of Rhodes
that were sent to seek him out.

When the Vessels were within sight of Lycia, Don Alvarez, according to his
Instructions, sent Zizim's Ambassadors, and a Knight along with him to give
notice of his Arrival. No sooner were they landed, but perceiving a Bark not
far from the place where they went ashore, they found there Zizim himself, whom
they thought to have been at the Court of the Grand Caraman. The Ambassadors
gave him an account of the favorable Inclinations of the Grand Master, and the
Knight told him that Don Alvare, a kinsman of the Kings of Castile, Captain
General of the Armies of the Order, and the Grand Masters Lieutenant, was come
on purpose to conduct him safely to Rhodes. The Prince, who found something
that was very acceptable in so strange an Adventure, and who perhaps out of
pride, would not at first confess his flight and his fear to an unknown person,
smartly replied, that not questioning the generosity of the Grand Master, he
thought it convenient rather to come and expect him upon the Coast, then to put
him to the trouble of searching after him. After which the Knight returning to
the Brigantine, and coming up with the Vessels at Sea, Don Alvarez made to the
Prince himself, to salute him in his own Galley. He presented him the Grand
Masters safe conduct and Letter, and then carried him into the great Ship with
a loud noise of Trumpets, and the Thunder of the Canon.

The Prior of Castile was one of those Spaniards, who being rarely bred,
perfectly understood the world, being no less polite then dextrous in his
behavior; and therefore he faild not to pay Zizim all those respects and
offices which were due to an unfortunate and afflicted Prince. For though ill
fortune had not abated the courage of the young Sultan, it had however somewhat
increased his natural melancholy. The Procedure of Don Alvare affected Zizim in
such a manner, that he testified at first how sensible he was of his kind
offices, and gentle services. Generous Knight, said he, in loosing a Throne, I
have not lost those thoughts which Nature bequeaths to the most barbarous. And
if fortune do not altogether destine me to misery, you shall find that I was
not born ungrateful. But I see your generosity is altogether pure, and that in
treating an Unfortunate so worthily, you only seek the honor of doing good.
Yet I cannot wonder enough, added he, that so much civility should be shown to
the Son of the most implacable enemy Your Order ever had, and I must confess,
that therein I admire your ingenuity.

Great Prince, Replied the Knight, Reason commands that we should give honor
to persons of high birth, and real merit, whatever their condition be; and they
are but mean souls, that rather follow the Fortunes, then the persons of Kings.
You are forced to fly ill entreated by your subjects, and deprived of your
Dominious, but you are still a King, you are still Sultan Zizim. We receive you
as a Prince, whose virtue and misfortune render him worthy the esteem of
Christians, and not as an enemy. Nor are you to wonder that the Grand Master
entertains in this manner the Son of an Emperor, who mortally hated us.
Mahomet your Father did all he could to ruin us: we have done all we could to
withstand his triumphant Arms, and by the mercy of God we obtained a signal
Victory against him, the remembrance of which After-Ages will preserve. The
Knights of Rhodes know how to vanquish those that assail them; but they know
how to relieve with humanity those that cast themselves into their Protection;
nor are there any Injuries which they do not forget, when their enemies are no
longer able to do them harm.

The Answer of Don Alvares convinced Zizim of the generosity of the Knights,
and entirely gained his confidence.

The Grand Master had commanded that he should be treated like the Son of an
Emperor and a King. To which purpose the Officers that first served him at his
Table, made an Essay of the meat, according to the custom of the Courts of
Europe. Zizim seemed to be surpised, because that Ceremony is not in fashion
among the Turks: but it was told him it was the usual practice at the Tables of
the European Princes, and that it was an Assurance against poison. Oh! said he,
I am not afraid of being poisoned by such generous Knights as you; I have put
my life and fortune into your hands, and I hold my self secure. Besides, I had
rather you should treat me as a friend, then a Prince. Concluding those words,
he took something out of every dish of which no Essay had been made, and
putting all the meat into one plate, he began to eat, to let the Knights know
how much he confided in them. After that he began to be more gay and pleasant,
while the good entertainment that he received had almost made him forget his
past misfortunes.

Nevertheless, when the Ships were under sail, and that the Coasts of Lycia
began to disappear, he then began to be apprehensive that nothing could be more
worthy of composition then a fugitive and wandering King, driven to seek an
Asylum in the territories of strangers, and of enemies. So that the sad
thoughts which seized him all of a sudden, caused him to be profoundly sad for
some hours; so that all his courage was but little enough to bring him to his
former humor.

For the mean while the Ship kept on their course, and they had so fortunate a
passage, that they came in a small time within view of Rhodes. Don Alvarez
speeded before in a Brigantine, to give the Grand Master notice of the Prince's
arrival. All things were already ordered for his Entry; and among the rest of
the preparations, there was a bridge of wood, which reached from the gate of
the Port, above ten paces into the Sea, to the very place where the Ship that
carried Zizim was to lie.

The most ancient Commanders which the Grand Master sent before to meet the
Prince, received him with all the respect which was due to the Son of their
Emperor Mahomet. So that while the Artillery played from all parts, he passed
over the Bridge which was covered with cloth of Gold, in the midst of the
Acclamations of the people, whom curiosity had drawn to the shore. From whence,
after he had mounted a Spanish Courser, richly harnessed, he rode forward to
the Great Piazza, with the sound of fifes and Trumpets, conducted by Don
Alvarez, who did him the Office of a Squire. The Streets were all strewn with
herbs and flowers, and an infinite number of people filled the plat-forms and
windows. Zizim, entering into the City, was smitten with the beauty which
appeared there very rich in habit, as well to see as to be seen, and with a
loud voice he spoke it, that it was not for nothing that the Rhodian women were
accounted the fairest of all Asia.

At the same time that the Ship which carried Zizim entered the Port, the Grand
Master marched out of the Castle with a pompous train, and in very good order.
He was attended by a troop of young Knights, very richly habited, and mounted
upon horses of high price. The Officers of the Order followed them; every one
wearing about their necks a Chain of Gold, going two and two, with countenances
wherein there was both haughtiness and modesty mixed together. The Grand Master
appeared at last, apparelled in Tissue of Gold, embroidered with precious
stones, mounted upon a Neopolitan Steed, whose harness was all embroidered with
Gold and Silver. The Squires and Pages that followed him, were no less
remarkable for the splendor of their habits and furniture, then for their
goodly presences, and dexterity in the management of their Horses. But there
appeared an Air so noble, and something so majestic in the person of the Grand
Master, that he was easily distinguished from the rest of the company. A great
body of Horse closed up the Rear of the Retinue.

The Grand Master stopped before the Church of St. Sebastian, and put his men
in order in the Piaz, expecting the approach of the Sultan. So soon as Zizim
perceived the Grand Master, who was showed him by Don Alvarez, though he were
remarkable enough in many other respects, he saluted him according to the
manner of the Turks, by putting his finger three times upon his mouth. The
Grand Master on his part making a low obeisance, advanced toward him, and
making a second bow, gave him a very civil complement in Italian, which was
answered by the Prince with a good grace, and in expressions full of good
sense. After that they gave their hands each to other, and having repeated some
few more words of friendship and kindness, they marched together to the French
Lodgings which were prepared for the Prince The Grand Master, when they began
to set forward, gave him the upper hand, but Zizim, making some reflections upon
it, would not permit it at first. I am your Captive, said he, and it becomes
not a Captive to take the place of honor. Sir, answered the Grand Master,
Captives of your condition, preserve their dignity in all places, and I would
to God you had as much power in Constantinople as you have in Rhodes.

As to the rest, Zizim appeared neither merry nor sad, during the whole
Calvacade. He carried the look of a person, who had the proof both at one time
of good and bad fortune; or like one that believed himself worthy of the
honors which were done him. He seemed however to be highly pleased with the
behavior of the Knights; and when he alighted from his Horse, he embraced the
Grand Master with a very tender affection, calling him several times his
Protector and Father. That day, and for some days following, they had several
particular discourses upon the present condition of Affairs; but all that time
abstained from particular conferences. However, there was nothing omitted for
the divertisement of the young Sultan, so that there was nothing to be seen at
Rhodes but Hunting-matches, Running at the Ring, Shows, and magnificent Feasts.
But all these divertisements did not complete the repose of the Prince's mind.
For though he were not afraid of the Knights, he could not think himself in
safety in a place full of Greeks, and so near the Turks; and what was more the
proceedings of the Port, daily increased his disquiet and his fears.

At the beginning of those divisions which turmoil'd the Ottoman Empire, after
the death of Mahomet, Bajazett was afraid that it would not go well with his
affairs, so long as he was not in friendship with the Grand Master* however he
could not condescend to demand peace himself. There to save his reputation, he
dealt in private with the Sub-Basha* De Pizzona, who was come over to his
Party, and was Governor of Lycia. The Sub-Basha sent an Ambassador to Rhodes,
with instructions not to speak of Bajazett, but only to manage a truce between
the people of Lycia and the Rhodians, believing that a Peace would easily
follow a Truce. But the Embassy not having that success which was expected,
Bajazett made use of Achmat to carry on his design. The Basha, as jealous of
the honor of the Sultan, as the Governor of Lycia, wrote, as from his Supreme
a very yielding Letter to engage the Grand Master to an accommodation, and
entrusted Lasim Brahim for his Agent* with the Letter. The Grand Master thought
himself obliged to hear the Propositions of Achmat, as well for the love of his
people, who stood in need of rest after the toils of so long a war, as for the
honor of the Order, to whom a Treaty could not be but advantageous, that
mentioned nothing of Tribute.

The Reception of Zizim, made Bajazet impatient of a conclusion of peace. Upon
which Achmat urged it more and more by his Minister Lasim Brahim. He offered
also that the Grand Signior should sign whatever the Knights desired, and for a
pledge of his real intentions, he restored all the Vessels of the Order which
had been taken since the Truce by the Pirates of Lycia.

All these condescentions of the Port, so different from the Ottoman
Haughtiness, more then ever alarmed Prince Zizim. He imagined with himself,
that his Brother was not so desirous of peace, but only that he might have an
occasion to destroy him; and that when Trade should be free between the
Rhodians and Turks, he should be in daily fear of either being stabbed or
poisoned: and that the runagate Greeks so accustomed to treachery and murder,
would omit nothing to serve Bajazett to good purpose. In the midst of these
thoughts he resolved to seek a Sanctuary elsewhere, to preserve himself from a
violent death, to which purpose he opened his mind to the Grand Master, in whom
he put an entire confidence. The Grand Master found that Zizim offered nothing
but reason; yet because the affair was of great impotance, he resolved to have
the advice of his Council, before he gave the Prince a positive answer. Among
them, Opinions were different, while some affirmed that it was for the interest
and honor of the Order to keep the Prince; that Bajazett durst not refuse the
Knights any thing, or make any attempt upon them, while Zizim remained at
Rhodes; that when he was out of their power, they could expect nothing but a
cruel war, or a very disadvantageous peace. That by all the rules of prudence
they were to lay hold upon so fair an occasion; or at least before the retreat
of the Sultan, they were to make an honorable agreement with the Port. As for
the safety of the Prince, they might easily secure it, by affording him a
sufficient Guard, there being very few Assassinates that would atattempt the
persons of great men, at the hazard of their own lives.

The more disinterested, and the wiser sort were of a contrary judgment, that a
removal was the only way to preserve Sultan Zizim from the misfortunes that
threatened him: that war did no way secure him, that after a refusal of Peace
with the Turks, they had no way to secure him from poison or assassination,
while treason enters every where, and the fidelity of servants and guards is
not proof against any large sum of money. That while Bajazet sought to get him
into his power by all the ways imaginable, they could neither surrender him
without betraying their faith given, nor keep him without drawing upon
themselves the indignation of the Sultan.

Zizim, who saw that his affairs would spin out too much time, unless he
determined something speedily, and well enough understood the danger of delay,
pressed the Grand Master to give him his liberty to be gone, and conjured him
to permit him that he might go to the King of France, as being the person most
capable to protect him against the Tyranny of his Brother. For besides that he
guessed at the French Humor, by the behavior of the Grand Master, he had
heard frequent discourses of their generosity; nor did he question but that the
successors of Clovis and Charlemaigne, whose famous deeds he had read, would
take delight in restoring a Prince to his Throne.

The Grand Master could not withstand neither the reasons, nor the powerful
instances of Zizim. He approved his determination touching his retreat into
France. But that which made him approve it the more, was that he thought that
Zizim ran no hazard in a Country which produced no Monsters, and where poison
was unknown. So that the safety of a poor Prince who had thrown himself into
the Arms of the Knights, made the Grand Master in some measure forget his own
Interests, and those of his people; for not troubling himself about the ill
consequences that so hasty a Retreat might draw after it, he gave all orders
necessary for the Voyage into France. He redoubled at the same time his
civilties to the Sultan, and the eeve before his departure made him a most
magnicent Feast. Zizim admired more then once the variety and dressing of the
meat, and the order of the service, confessing that the magnificence of the
Ottoman Emperors had nothing so sumptuous. During the feast there was a noble
consort of music, and among the rest of the Musicians an English man, who sung
rarely, and played upon a certain unusual Instrument composed of four Pipes
joined together, charming all the company, except the Prince, whose ears were
not accustomed to such sweet music. Whereupon the Grand Master who perceived
it, and sat alone at the Table with him, sent for a Turkish Slave, whom he
thought would better please him.

This Slave, singing a Turkish Air, and playing upon I know not what sort of
Instrument, making faces, and using ridiculous postures, delighted Zizim so
well, that he caused him to laugh heartily. He eat plentifully and as strict as
he was in the observation of his Law, he drank wine sometimes mixed with
Aromatic juices, and sometimes neat without any composition. The Feast was in
the Grand Master's Palace, where they sat upon two Chairs with a Table before
them, after the fashion of Europe; but that posture was uneasy to the Sultan,
who was wont to eat cross-legg'd, so that he cast his eyes up and down to see
if no body observed his disturbance.

But after all these lesser observations, Zizim was extraordinarily satisfied
with the marks of friendship which he received from the Grand Master during his
stay at Rhodes; he returned him thanks several times; and as a testimony of his
gratitude, he caused three Authentic Acts to be forthwith made ready, which he
put into the Grand Master's hands. The first was an absolute power for him to
conclude a Peace with the Port, as he should see good. The second was a kind of
a Manifesto for the discharge of the Knights, by which the Prince declared that
he had earnestly desired to go out of Rhodes, and to be conducted into France:
which is alone enough to justify the Grand Master, whom some ill-meaning, or
ill-inform'd people have blamed for letting the Prince go. The third Act was a
perpetual confederation of the Prince with the Order, in case he should ever
come to be restored to the Dominions and Territories of his Ancestors. This
last Act is so much for the honor of the Grand Master, and so highly manifests
the acknowledgment of Zizim, that I thought it might not be troublesome to the
Reader to see it.

Let all the world know that King Zizim, of the Race of the Ottomans, Son of
the invincible Mahomet* King of Kings, and Sovereign Emperor of Greece and
Asia, is infinitely beholding to the thrice generous, and thrice illustrious,
the Lord Peter D'Aubusson, Grand Master of Rhodes. Let all the world also know
that for the kind Offices he has shown me in the most perilous adventures of
my life, and to testify my acknowledgment as far as the present condition of
my fortune will give me leave, I promise solemnly to God and our Great Prophet,
that if I ever recover either absolutely or in part, the Imperial Crown of my
Father, I promise, I say, and swear to hold a perpetual friendship, and
inviolable peace with the Grand Master and his successors according to the
Articles following.

In the first place I engage my self, my children, and the children of my
children to have an eternal kindness for the order of St. John of Jerusalem, so
that neither I, nor my children shall do them any injury either by Sea or Land.
That we will be so far from stopping the Vessels or disturbing the commerce of
the Merchants of Rhodes, or of any other Islands appertaining to the Order, that
our ports shall be free to them in all the Provinces under our obedience, as if
they themselves were our subjects; or rather we will entertain them as our
friends, permitting them to buy, sell, or transport what Merchandise they
please, without paying any custom, or duty.

Besides this, I consent that the Grand Master shall every year take out of my
Territories three hundred Christians of both sexes, and at what age he pleases,
to put into the Islands of the order, or to do with them what he thinks best.
And in some measure to make satisfaction for the expenses which the Grand
Master has bin at, and every day so liberally allows for my sake, I oblige my
self to pay in ready money a hundred and fifty thousand Crowns in Gold. Lastly I
promise upon oath to restore him all the Isles, all the Lands, and all the
Fortresses which the Ottoman Emperors have taken from the order. And for a
testimony that this is my will, I have signed with my hand, and sealed with my
seal this present Act given at Rhodes in the palace of the French Apartiment
the fifth of the month Regeb, the year of the Hegira, 887.

The 31. Of August in the Year of grace, 1482.

The third of September which was the day that the Prince took shipping, he was
attended to the Sea with the same Pomp, and the same ceremony, with which he
was received. He took his leave of the principal Knights, after a most obliging
manner, wherein there appeared nothing of Barbarism. He also laid aside all his
haughtiness, when he gave the Grand Master his last farewell: For it is reported
that he threw himself at his feet, and kissed his hand with a profound respect.
The Grand Master tenderly embraced him, and wept for some time over him either
through compassion, or through some secret dictate that he should never see him
again. The Knight de Blanchefort, who was returned to Rhodes since the raising
of the seige, and the Knight de Rochechenard had order to conduct the Sultan
into France, not to mention the Knights who were named to accompany him, and to
serve him as a convoy; but they entered all together with Zizim into the great
ship of the order, and set sail the same day with a favorable wind.

The Grand Master, who had already given advice to the Pope of the arrival of
the Ottoman Prince, gave him also notice of his departure by this opportunity,
and sent him word in particular, that Zizim of his own accord had made choice
of France for the security of his life: that he had good ground for his fears;
in regard that for the forty days that he had stayed in Rhodes he was
certainly enformd that the Grand signiour had used all his endeavors either to
take or murder him.

The departure of the Prince did not work that ill effect which some were
afraid of. For though Bajazet was soon informed of what had passed, yet he
desired peace with the same earnestness as before; because he always looked upon
the Grand Master as the Arbiter of the Sultan his Brothers fortune. So that the
Ambassadors that departed for Constantinople the next day after Prince Zizim
was gone, were honorably received by the Grand Signiour, and the peace had bin
presently concluded, had not the pride of Achmat put a stop to it.

This Basha, equally proud and cuning, who in his letters had given a blank
paper to the Grand Master, could not endure that the first proposition which
the Ambassadors made should be that no mention should be made of Tribute. He
brake forth upon that subject with a haughtiness, which made him almost forget
the respect to the sacred Persons of the Ministers of Sovereign Princes. The
Knight Guy de Mont Amaud, who was one of the Ambassadors, and who in his
instructions had express order to bear up briskly against the Basha, took him
up short, and spoke to him with that sharpness, that had absolutely broke off
the Negotiation, if Misach Paleologus, who was at the conference, had not
allayed their passions. After the death of Mahomet he was returned to the port,
and had gained the favor of Bajazet, by espousing his Interest. He, well
acquainted with the humor of the Knights, and having proved to his cost, the
constancy of the Grand Master, knew it was in vain for Achmat to contend so
obstinately upon the point of tribute, and told him his reasons briefly, though
in the Turkish language, that the Ambassadors might not understand him.

The Knight Leonard Duprat, who was the other Ambassador, and understood
Turkish, understanding the Basha's discourse, and repeating it in French to the
Knight de Mont Amaud, was the occasion, that both standing stiffly to their
principles, Achmats heat began to cool, so that of himself he began to give way
to their demands. Bajazet promised not only to live in good amity with the
Knights of Rhodes, but not to trouble the rest of the Christians. The Grand
Master undertook for his part, to keep Zizim always in the power of the
Knigths, and to endeavor all he could that the Sultan should not fall into the
hands of any Prince either Christian or Infidel. Upon this the peace was
concluded according to the Articles which the Ambassadors proposed; and it may
be said that never was any Accommodation made with the Port, either more
honorable or more profitable to Christendom. That which was most remarkable
and extraordinary was that Bajazet engaged himself, either through weakness or
Policy, to pay the Grand Master a kind of Tribute. To this purpose he sent to
Rhodes Cagritaim, his principal favorite* and the two Knights bestirrd
themselves so well, that they carried him along with them upon their return.
Cagritaim declared in full council, that the Port would pay to the order thirty
five thousand Ducats, money of Venice, for the subsistence of Zizim, and
besides that, the Grand Signiour would pay every year to the Grand Master in
particular ten thousand Ducats, to make him amends in some measure for the
excessive charges he had bin at in the last war.

Achmat, who was the proudest person in the world, and one that mortally hated
the Christians, especially the Grand Master and the Knights, could not brook
this condesciention in the Grand Signor: He accused him of lowness of Spirit,
and cowardice; he murmured in public, and made sharp scoffs upon it. Bajazet,
who for some time before began to grow jealous of the Basha, as of a person
that did not love any thing more then war; and was therefore likely to take
Zizims part, took these murmuors and rebukes for the symptoms of a revolt: And
believed that only the death of such a dangerous enemy could break his designs.
True it is that he owd to him for the Crown; but usually great benefits are
looked upon as crimes: and weak Princes often find their safety in the
destruction of those that raised them, and are able to pull them down again.

So soon as the peace was concluded between the Knights and the Turks, the
Grand Signiour put to death this famous Basha at a Magnificent feast, where
were all the grandees of the Port, and where Bajazet was present himself. The
discourse of the table falling upon the Peace, and Zizim, Bajazet to provoke
Achmat, and to engage him to speak something to be laid hold on, publicly
declared that he would lessen the Soldiers pay, and deprive the Grandees of
the port of their emploiments that were not loyal to their lawful Prince. The
Basha, who well understood that those words concerned him, presently took fire,
and went so high in the heat of the debauchery, as to tell the Grand Signor
that it was but an ill way to establish a throne to provoke the Soldiery; and
that the Ottom in Monarcks were not assured of their Empires, so long as they
had Brothers alive. He had no sooner spoke the words, but a mute instructed
before gave him six stabs with a poignard. Others say that after the feast was
over, Bajazet who loved wine, kept Achmat to drink with him alone, under
pretense of friendship, and that seeing him half drunk he commanded two
Eunuchs to strangle him. However, it were Cagritaim succeeded at the Port in
his place, though he had neither the merit nor experience; but he knew
perfectly how to humor Bajazet, who only minded ^ase.

In the mean while, the Grand Master, who made little account of the friendship
of the Infidels, of whose perfidiousness he had a thousand times experienced;
and for that the person of Zizim seem very proper for him to make use of in
case of a rupture, he applied himself wholly to make a league between the
Christian Princes against the common enemy. He wrought several Letters to them,
he sent them particular Agents to let them understand that there was never a
fairer opportunity to ruin the Ottoman Empire, or at least to weak'n it very
much; that Zizim at the head of a croisade world do as much as many Armies
together, that the death of Achmat had deprived the Turks of the most able
Minister, and the most valiant Captain, that perhaps they ever had. That the
Grand Caraman, and other Princes of Asia expected only when Europe would move,
to declare themselves; and in short, that all the present conjunctures renderd
that enterprise easy, which was so difficult of it self. But I know not by
what fatality, if it were not rather the Incomprehensible disposal of
providence, the Christian world, was not at all inclined to take advantage of
the opportunity which Heaven it self seemed to put into their hands. All Italy
was then divided. The King of Naples, the Duke of Milan, and the Florentines
were in arms against the Pope and the common wealth of Venice. France was
notess in trouble after the death of Lewis the 11th. The party of malcontents
stirred up by the Duke of Orleans who pretended to the regency, and by the
Count of Angoulism his cousin, had excited troubles over all the Kingdom.
Besides the French desired quiet at home, only that they might be at leisure
for the conquest Naples. And young Charles the 8th. Who naturally loved honor,
made that the aim of all his ambition. The war of the Moors made work enough in
Spain. And the bad correspondence which daily increased between the Emperor
Frederick, and Matthias Corvin, King of Hungary prevented them from uniting
together against the Turk, so that all the designs of the Grand Master vanished
in smoke, and with all his zeal he had only the grief to effect nothing.

But if the Christian Princes were not in a condition to make use of the person
of Zizim for the common good of Christendom, they were no less disappointed in
making advantage of him for their particular Interests. How importunate soever
the most part of them were to have him, the Grand Master would never give his
consent, and his orders were so well observed in that particular, that the
order of St. John was always the Mistress of him. Zizim being arrived in
France, the King received him but coldly, either because that France would by
no means embroil themselves with the Port, just before the expedition against
Naples, or else because they feared that an honorable reception, was an
engagement too high in the entertaining a Turkish Prince, so that he stayed but
a very little while at Court, the Knights conducting him to the commander of
Bourgneus, this was a place upon the confines of Poicton and March, pleasently
situated, where the Grand Priers of Auvergne kept their Residence.

The Knight Blanchefort, with whom the Grand Master had particularly entrusted
the person of Zizim, took care that the Prince should not be presently
displeased. He gave him all the honor that his birth deserved, and showed him
all the sports and pastimes that the Country could afford. But notwithstanding
all these civilities, the Knight Blanchefort omitted not to have an eye upon
the Prince, and to keep a strong guard about him, to hinder those that sought
for him from getting him into their hands either by cunning or force. But as
the love of liberty is more natural to Princes then to other men, Zizim soon
perceived that he was watched too narrowly. That reflection made him suspect the
diligences of the Knights, and caused him to think that he was rather kept as a
prisoner then a Prince. He testified his displeasure at it, which caused those
reports that ran about the world in prejudice of the Grand Master's honor.
They gave out that it was a violation of the public faith to retain Zizim in
prison against his will. That the Knights had sold his liberty to the Ottoman
Port for forty thousand Ducats a year; and that it was therefore no wonder they
had such a strict eye over him. That such a prisoner was a treasure for them,
and that their insatiable avarice made them foget the more holy duties of civil
society.

They that thus discoursed either through jealousy, or else judging by outward
appearances, did not consider that at a time when all Europe was in an uproar,
there was nothing more to be done for the good of Christendom, nor for the
safety of Zizim, then what the Grand Master did* And had they been well
informed of all the snares that the Grand Signiour laid for Zizim, they would
then have changed their Opinion, and found that the Knights that so guarded him
were the true defenders of his life, and of his liberty.

Nor had Zizim reason to complain of the conduct of the Grand Master as well in
reference to him* self, as the Ottoman Port; for in desiring a safe conduct of
him, he expressly declared that he intended to follow his counsel and orders in
every thing, so that by the consent of Zizims Imbassadours the safe conduct was
dispatched upon that condition, as the Grand Master observed in a Letter which
he wrote to Pope sextus the 4th. Besides the Sultan had given the Grand Master
a sufficient liberty to treat with the Grand Master as he pleased himself, and
it was by virtue of that liberty that the Grand Master had concerned Zizim in
the treaty of peace.

As for the thirty thousand Ducats, certain it is, that the money was spent in
maintenance of Zizim. By which the Grand Master was so far from getting any
profit, that he made an addition to it out of his own revenue. Which may be
easily thought to be true, considering with what royal magnificence the Ottoman
Prince was always entertained* not to mention the infinite expenses of
receiving and sending Ambassadors.

But Zizim's discontent lasted not long. For the Knights made him soon to
understand that the Guard that was upon him, was against his Enemies, and not
him. Thus being quitted of his suspicions, and persuaded more then ever of the
friendship of the Grand Master, he complained no more but of his bad fortune
that had reduced him to a country and solitary life.

Now the peace between the order and the Fort having opened a freedom to trade,
several Turkish Vesselss came to Rhodes. And most of the Turks that Landed,
were so taken with the beauty of the Rhodian women, that they spared for
nothing to satisfy their desires. This glister of Gold grew such a temptation,
that several of the Rhodians without regard to the Christian law, or their own,
yielded themselves to the Mahometans. But the Grand Master abhorring such a
shameful prostitution, and to stop the torrent of such a scandal, condemned the
Christian women that were convicted of such a crime as lying with a Turk, a
Moore, or a Jew, to be burnt alive, and he ordered the punishment to extend to
the very procurers of that infamous familiarity.

Some while after the Grand Master made a regulation upon Sultan Zizim's
account. For considering how much it concerned the honor of the order, and the
General Interest of Christendom, that his person should not be exposed to the
Assassinates of Bajazet, he orderd that the Knight de Blanchefort should take
as many Knights as he pleased for the Guard of Zizim commanding strictly those
that were named to obey him without any more to do; declaring withal that such
as should be bound to attend upon Zizim, should enjoy all the prerogatives of
Residence, and precedence, as if they had stayed at Rhodes.

THE HISTORY OF Peter D'Aubusson, Grand Master of RHODES. Book Fifth.
WHILST Zizim had a private and obscure life in France, one Bajazett almost
unknown till then appeared in the world, resolved to take advantage of the
divisions of the two Ottoman Brothers. He was their Uncle, being the Brother of
Mahomet and Son of Amurath. After the loss of Constantinople, he was taken by
the Christians in his Infant years, and carried to Rome in the Pontificat of
Nicholas the fifth, who took care himself of his Education. The Instructions
which he received were not altogether unpofitable: For he renounced the law of
his false Prophet and became a Christian. He applied himself afterward to the
study of humane Learning; and as he wanted not wit, he perfectly attained the
Latin Language. But Nicholas the Fifth being dead, he left Italy, to travel
into Germany. There he was well received; and the Germans looked upon him as a
person that might be useful to them in their Wars against the Turks. After he
had stayed sometime in the Emperor Fredericks Court, he went into Hungary, and
there settled himself not dreaming to raise his fortune any higher, for the
example of the brave and virtuous Matthias made so little impression upon him,
that he only minded his repose and pleasure in the Court altogether Warlike,
and altogether Christian.

But the Quarrel between Bajazet and Zizim which made such a noise over all
Asia and Europe, awak'nd him out of that dream wherein he lay, and roused his
ambition by causing him to remember his birth. The flight of Zizim begat in him
a desire to make war against Bajazet. He revolved in his mind, that having but
one enemy to deal with, he might without fear dispute for the Empire, but at
the same time he thought there was no way for him to compass his design, but by
the assistance of the Knights of Rhodes. And he had a belief that infallibly he
should attain his ends, provided he could engage the Grand Master to his side.
To this purpose he wrote to him a long Letter in Latin. Wherein he first
declared himself the only heir to the Ottoman Crown, as lawful Son of Amurath,
pretending that Mahomet was but his bastard; then he spoke of his great feats
of arms, like a true Knight errant; and because the Christian world might not
be so well informed, he referred the Grand Master to the Turks for a clearer
understanding of things. But the Turks knew him not so well as the Christians*
for he was carried away so young from Constantinople, that it was impossible
for him to have done any thing remarkable in Turkey. At last he highly extold
the services he could do for Christendom, and the information he could give the
Grand Master touching several important secrets of affairs, advising him not to
let slip so fair an opportunity, and earnestly desiring his speedy answer. The
letter was written with his own hand; but as if he had the management of all
the business in the world, he concluded that it was writ in haste.

They were not convinced at Rhodes of Bajazett of Hungaries reasons. That
Braggadochio style wherewith he thought to win the assistance of the Knights,
was in part* the reason why they refused it him. On the other side, the Grand
Master who had a tender love for Zizim, and was loath to embroil himself with
the Port, took no care to listen to the Propositions of an Adventurer, of whom
he had no knowledge, and to who he had no engagement; so that this new Actor
soon returned to that obscurity wherein he had always lived, and which he so
much the rather deserved* because he had sought too late to quit it.

The Grand Signior took it the most kindly in the world, that he had behaved
himself in that manner, and as a mark of his acknowledgment he began from that
time to pay him the forty thousand Ducats which he had promised him. The first
payment was made by Vssambei, one of the Principal Officers of the Port. He was
sent expressly to Rhodes, with order nevertheless to go for France, under
pretense to thank Charles the Eighth, for receiving Zizim into his Territories,
but indeed to learn certain intelligence of his Brother. However; Bajazett
fearing lest Vssambei should find some obstacle in his Embassy, conjured the
Grand Master that he should give him letters of recommendation for France. But
the Grand Master did not think it enough to write to the King. He was resolved
that the Hospitalier of the Order should accompany the Turkish Ambassador, to
be his Guide, and to introduce him into the Court. And indeed Vssambei was
better received than Zizim had been; for the complements of Bajazett highly
pleased the French.

In the mean time the war of Terrara raised many combustions in Italy, and was
meditating to have brought the Infidels into Italy. For Hercules D'Este became
so proud through the Alliance of Ferdinand King of Naples, who had given him
his Daughter Elenor in Marriage, that he loftily scorned the friendship of the
Venetians, which the Dukes his predecessors had always highly sought for. He
came to that degree of contempt, that he usurped their Lands, abused their
subjects, not considering the kindnesses which he had received from the
Republic, when after the death of his elder Brother, the Son of his other
Brother took up Arms to have deprived him of his Dominions. The Venetians could
not brook the loftiness nor ingratitude of the Duke of Terrara. They raised
puissant Armies against him, and leagued themselves again with the Pope, who
was displeased with the King of Naples, both because that Prince had retained
in his service about four hundred Turks of the Garrison of Otranto, and because
he took little care in his Kingdom of the duties of the Holy See.

Ferdinand sent Alphonso Duke of Calabria to the succor of Hercules his
Son-in-law, of whom the Common wealth had got great advantages. Alphonso had
already passed the Mark of Ancona, and was advancing with his forces toward the
Terraras's, when the Colonna's and Cavelli, who were risen up against the Pope,
invited him to join with them in the Compagna of Rome. Robert Malateste, who
commanded the Army of the Republic, was soon at his heels, gave him battle,
and absolutely defeated him. Which Victory filled the Venetians full of hopes,
and undertakings, but while they ransacked the Ferraresi, and were going to
make themselves Masters of Ferrara, the Pope of a sudden abandons them,
whether he were gained by the submissions of Ferdinand, or whether he were
jealous of the Progress of the Republic. However it were, Sixtus agrees with
the Father and Son in Law; He also threatened the Venetians with the
indignation and Anathema's of the Church, if they continued the war of Ferrara.

The Republic incensed at so strange a proceeding; and foreseeing that this
change would cause a great disorder in affairs, implored the aid of the Turk
to sustain themselves, and to revenge the injury done them. Bajazet who was
unwilling to displease the Venetians, forgot that he had promised not to
disturb the Christians; or rather violated his word in that respect, and
prepares a considerable Fleet to invade Italy. The news presently spread it
self over all Europe. At Rome the alarm was taken, as if the enemy had been
already at the Gates; and the Pope foreseeing the danger of the Church, if the
Turks should enter Italy during the discords of the Christian Princes, and knew
himself to be guilty of the discontent of the Republic, made it his whole
business to divert the storm. The King of Naples, whom the danger more nerely
concerned, followed the Popes steps, and by common consent had recourse to the
Grand Master, to whom they both wrote, and sent to him the Knight Carraffa.

But never was Embassy more to less purpose; for the care of the Grand Master
had prevented the requests of Ferdinand and the Pope. He understanding sooner
then they, the preparations that were made at Constantinople, and likewise
knowing the private motives to that Engagement, labored incessantly to divert
the storm before it began to break forth. The Public good, and the particular
Interest of the Church excited his diligence to keep the common enemy out of
Italy: And his obligations to the King of Naples made him more Solicitous to
omit nothing that might preserve the Kingdom of his Benefactour and friend from
the invasion of the Barbarians. Therefore not to loose time, he dispatched away
to the Grand Signior a Rhodian, whose name was Mosco Perpiano; a man it is true
of low birth, but of an exalted genius, and capable of great affairs; and
besides that, very proper to negotiate with the Turks, as being one who had
lived long in Turkey, and perfectly understood their humor and language. And
this was he that treated with the Sub-Basha of Pizzona about the truce, and
first discovered the cunning of Achmats Letters.

Mosco, after he had made known to the Grand Signiour, with whom he had a
private audience, the Interest of his Highness to live in friendship with the
Grand Master gave him to understand by degrees, that the Venetians were about
to engage him in a bad design. To that intent, ne represented to him that this
great preparation was the ready way to bring upon him all the forces of Europe.
That the most divided of the Christian Princes would not sail to reunite for
the defense of their Religion and Crowns. That France who gloried in assisting
the Popes and the Holy See, would infallibly join with Italy upon such an
occasion, and lay aside for a time their pretenses to Naples. That whatever
care the Knights could take, that they should not make use of the person of
Zizim against the Ottoman Empire, it would not be any longer in their power to
keep him. That the King of France would force him out of their hands in spite
of all their strength, and put him at the head of an Army, and then nothing was
more to be feared then a Popular rising at Constantinople, which might happen
to be attended with a total revolution. Mosco added according to his
Instructions, that the Grand Master being of that account as he was among the
Christian Princes, he could not possibly prevent his being engaged in the
Quarrel, how great so ever his desire might be to keep a good Correspondence
with the Court. That if the preparations which the Turks made against Italy
should infringe the accommodation which had been made upon Zizim's score, he
had no reason to blame the Knights, who are ready punctually to observe all the
articles of the treaty. Mosco then gave the Grand Signiour to understand that
Rhodes was not in a condition to fear him, the ruins being repaird, and new
fortifications daily added by the Grand Master.

This discourse of the Rhodian took singular effect. Bajazet was so moved at
it, that he stood a good while without making any answer, casting frightful
looks here and there, which showed the agitation and disturbance of his mind.
At length roused out of a deep contemplation, and looking somewhat more
calmely, he told Mosco, that in respect to the Grand Master, whom he honored
as his Father, he had abandoned the design which he had in hand. Then calling
for Basha Misach Paleologus, and two other of his Ministers, he declared that
he would not send his Fleet into the Mediterranean Sea, and commanded them at
the same time to surcease all their preparations for war wherein they labored
with an excessive earnestness. And that he might testify more of his
freindship, and do him more honor, he wrote him a very obliging Letter, which
he delivered to Mosco, the copy whereof follows.

Bajazet King of Asia, Emperor of the Turks.
To the thrice happy Prince. Peter D'Aubusson, Grand Master of RHODES.
WE have understood from the mouth of your Ambassador, what it is you request
at our hands. In truth you desire great things, and which are of extreme
consequence to our Empire* For a considerable Fleet is not to be set forth
without great expense; nor is such an enterprise to be quitted without some
kind of disgrace. But however, as I refer my self wholly to your Counsel, and
for that I can refuse you nothing, for your sake, I forget all my advantages. I
surcease any further preparations, and engage to you upon my word, that my Navy
shall not stir forth of the Streights of Gallipoly. I do this willingly, out of
the desire I have, that you should always be my friend, as you ought to be,
since that for your sake I renounce both my interest and my honor. From
Constantinople the fifth of the month of Rabi el Evel in the year of the
Hegira, 889.

April 13. in the year of grace, 1484.

Mosco returned to Rhodes almost at the same time that the Knight Caraffa
arrived there. That new Ambassador of the Pope, and the King of of Naples was
surpised to see that with all his haste he was come too late. So that finding
his work done, he returned as he came, at least that he might be the first that
should bring the tidings, carrying along with him to the Pope and King
Ferdinand, the Copy of the Letter of the Grand Signior. A resolution so sudden,
and so happy, extremely rejoiced all Italy, and the Pope was so satisfied with
the Grand Master, that speaking of him to the Knight Quendal, Procurator of the
Order at Rome, he called him several times, The Buckler of the Church, and The
Preserver of Christendom.

Nevertheless, the Christian Princes, whose Dominions were neighboring upon
the Turk, did not yet think themselves safe, fearing that Bajazet would not
long keep his word. For that reason Matthias King of Hungary, Ferdinand King of
Castile, Arragon and Sicily, made it all their most earnest suit to the Grand
Master to have Zizim in their power. He would by no means grant them their
request; but he promised them that so long as he had the Sultan at his
disposition, he would keep the Grand Signior from enterprizing any thing upon
their Dominions.

Bajazet looked upon this Refusal for a signal piece of service, and thought
himself so obliged to the Grand Master, that he resolved to make him a
considerable present as a mark of his Gratitude. But not finding any thing of
value enough to his mind amidst all the wealth of his Empire, he understood by
some of his Renegado Confidents, that he could not make a more pleasing or
acceptable present to the Grand Master, then the hand of St. John Baptist,
which was then in his Father Mahomet's Treasury.

The Grand Signior overjoyed at such a discovery, caused the hand to be
immediately sent for, together with the shrine wherein it was kept, and causing
it to be put into a Cypress box lined within with Crimson Velvet, and set
without with an infinite number of precious stones, he sent it by one of his
favorites, called Cariaty Bey, with a Civil Letter, the Inscription whereof
was thus.

Bajazet King of Asia, and Emperor of the Turks, to the thrice wise, and thrice
illustrious Peter D'Aubusson, Grand Master of Rhodes, thrice generous Prince,
and Father of a most glorious Empire.

This hand was said to be the right hand of John the Baptist, which was learnt
out upon this occasion, if the Vice Chancellor Caoursin may be believed.

It was an ancient Tradition confirmed by the Histories of the Greeks, that St.
Luke the Evangelist having embraced the Christian Faith, the love which he had
conceived for St. John Baptist, inspired him secretly to take up his body
buried in the City of Sebastia, between Eli and Abdias. To this purpose he went
thither with some of St. John's Disciples, who were then living; but
considering that they should hardly be able to carry the body away without
being known and stopped, he cut off the hand that baptized Christ, as the most
noble part of the whole body, and carried it to Antioch, where he kept it all
the while he stayed there. But going to preach in Bithinia, he left the Relick
with some of his most trusty friends still at Antiochia, where it was publicly
adored for the space of three hundred years, till Julian the Apostate attempted
to abolish the worship and memory of Martyrs, burning what remained of them.
Particularly, he caused this hand to be thrown into the fire; but the piety of
particular persons saved it from the fury of the Pagans at that time.

In the time of Justinian the Emperor, to honor the Consecration of Santa
Sophia, the head of St. John was by the Emperor's command fetched from Edessa,
and the hand from Antioch; though he returned them again after the Consecration
was over. But in the time of Constantine Porphyrogenites, an Emperor that was
mighty devout, and had a huge fancy for this Relick, one Job, a Deacon of
Antioch stole this hand to present to the Emperor, who put it in the Church of
St. John, of the Stone, where it remained till the time of Mahomet the second,
who remanded it into the Imperial Treasure with other Relics and rich shrines,
out of which Bajazet took it to present to the Grand Master, who laid it up
with great ceremony at Rhodes.

These Marks of affection which the Ottoman Emperor showed to the Grand
Master, opened the eyes of the Sultan of Egypt. That Barbarian had violated the
Peace without any pretense, as we have said; and his perfidiousness carried him
so far, as to stop the Rhodians, who traffick'd under the public faith at
Alexandria, and in other places of his Dominions. But now he began to alter his
behavior, when he saw the good correspondence which was between the Port and
the Order of St. John. The fear he had, lest the Knights should take a fresh
revenge, made him before hand in appeasing them. To that end he sent an
Ambassador to Rhodes with rich presents, and a very civil Letter, wherein he
blamed his past proceedings, and accused the folly he had committed. Duan Aga,
for that was the Embassadour's name, did the best he could to enhance the value
of his Master's presents and excuses. He promised solemnly an inviolable
fidelity, and offered all sorts of Pledges for performance. Whatever resentment
the Grand Master had of the Injuries of Cairbei, he said nothing then: for
though he made little account of his promises, and judged of the future by what
was past, he thought it not amiss to make his advantage of the present; and
that which made him determine it the rather was, because he had intelligence,
that Bajazet notwithstanding all his public and specious demonstrations of
Amity, had an inveterate enmity against the Order, not only because it
protected his Brother Zizim, but also because he had obliged him to quit his
design upon Italy. So that the little reliance which the Grand Master had upon
the Turkish Faith, made him renew a peace with one that was openly perjured.

Now because the advice which they daily received at Rhodes of the ill
intentions of Bajazet were every day confirmed, the Grand Master thought it
necessary to precaution himself against whatever might happen. He sent Barks
into Sicily and the Kingdom of Naples for Corn; he also made use of the seeming
friendship of the Grand Signior, to fetch all sorts of grain out of the most
fertile Countries of Turkey, before the Ottoman Court had laid aside its Vizor,
and had openly brok'n with the Order, he gave command at the same time to lade
the great Ship of the Treasury, then upon the Coasts of Provence, with
ammunition and soldiers, and that a great Vessel of Ragusa, then in the Port
of Rhodes, should sail to Samos for wood proper to build the Ships and Engines
of War. As for the fortifications, besides that he made all the ditches wider
and larger; he raised new works toward the Sea, and among the rest a Ravelin
that extended from the Tower of Naylac, to the Bulwark of France.

But while the Knights prepared for War in the midst of a profound Peace,
Sixtus the fourth died in the heat of the troubles of Rome, which the Colonna's
and Vrsini had divided into two Factions.

The Cardinal of Santa Cecilia, a Genoese, and of the house of Cybo, but
originally of Rhodes, as being the place where his Father was born, succeeded
Sixtus in the Government of the Church, by the name of Innocent the Eighth. He
was no sooner elected, but he wrote to the Grand Master in such terms as showed
a particular esteem for his person. Among other things he exhorted him to
maintain generously the interest of the holy See, to show himself an example to
Christian Princes, and at last assured him of his favor. The Order, said the
Pope in his Brief, of which you are the Chief, is more dear to me then ever;
and if God favor our designs, you shall always find me ready to oblige you in
whatever concerns yours, or the honor of the Order.

The Grand Master received this Letter like a true Son of the Church; and
presently sent his Ambassadors to Rome to tender his obedience to the new Pope.
Edward de Carmandin, Bailey of Lango, and Will* Caoursin, Vice Chancellor of
the Order were the chief of the Embassy; who made their entry into Rome, with
an extraordinary Pomp, and five days after had audience of the Pope, in the
presence of all the Princes, Ambassadors and a great number of prelates.
Caouersin, in that renowned assembly made a speech full of piety and eloquence.
He first acknowledged the authority of the holy See, and Innocent for the Vicar
of Christ, and Peter's successor. Then in particular he declared the Grand
Master's joy for the election of his Holiness, and the hopes which the Rhodians
had to see Christnanism flourish under the pontificat of a Pope so zealous for
the Christian faith. After that he recounted the victories which the Knights
had obtained against the infidels, particularly in the last siege of Rhodes.
And lastly he offered his Holiness the service of the Knigths, assuring him
that they should esteem themselves happy to spend their blood to the last drop
in the defense of the Holy See.

The Pope returned an answer himself to Caoursin's speech. Wherein after he had
in general terms extold the valor and zeal of the Knights, he dilated upon the
merits of the Grand Master, and confessed that the Church was infinitely
obliged to him. The next week the Ambassadors had a particular conference with
the Pope, at what time they presented to him a precious stone of an
extraordinary figure and color, several exquisite perfumes, and a rich Vase
full of pure Indian Balsom. But the Pope who desired nothing more then to
restore peace to Italy, and who seared nothing more then an invasion of the
Infidels, turned his discourse upon Zizim, and told the Ambassadors that for
the good of Christendom it seemd very necessary that he should be brought to
Rome, or to some other City of the Ecclesiastic estate.

The Ambassadors not having any commission in that particular, they could
return no answer, only that they would signify his Holiness's pleasure to the
Grand Master. However they received several favors before their departure, and
had the honor to carry his Canopy upon the purification of the Virgin, with
the Ambassadors of Naples, Milan, and Florence. But as a particular grace to
the Order, he granted to the Prior of the Church of Rhodes a power to remit all
sins which are reserved to the Holy See, to alter vows, to absolve from oaths,
from Irregularity and Simony. He gave them liberty also to have a portative
Altar to say Mass either by Sea or Land, as also before day, and in places
forbidden by Ecclesiastical censure.

In the mean time the King of Naples, who after the death of Sixtus, was
terribly afraid lest the Venetians should molest his dominions, and that the
Turk should come to revenge their quarrel, desired more earnestly then ever to
have Zizim in his possession. To which purpose he wrote new Letters to Rhodes,
which he delivered to the Ambassadors who passed through Naples in their
return home.

But while Innocent and Ferdinand demanded Zizim from the Grand Master, the
Soldau of Egypt urged the same request. Caerbei had in relligence that the
Great Turk was about to enter Caramania with a powerful Army to punish Caraman.
So that he was afraid lest the Turks should soon after carry their arms into
Syria; and he knew no other expedient to stop Bajazet, then to oppose Zizim
against him. But the arrival of the Baily of Lango, and the Vice Chancellor of
the order drew him out of that perplexity whereinto the Ambassador from Egypt
had plunged him; for when he understood the Popes Intentions, as to what
concerned Zizim, he gave the Soldan's Ambassador to understand that the
Sovereign Priest of Christendom having a design to send for the Ottoman Prince
to Rome, the Knights could not dispose of his person not determine any thing
without the consent of the Holy See, to which the order of St. John was
particularly subject. In the same manner he excused himself to King Ferdinand,
accompanying his excuse with many civilities, not being willing to displease a
Prince whom he could not gratisy, yet desired to serve. But in regard he knew
the Pope was not able with his forces alone to undertake any considerable
enterprise; and believing withal, that should he send Zizim into the
Ecclesiastical state, he should put an obstacle to the Holy league through the
jealousies which the Christian Princes would be subjest to apprehend, he
represented to his Holiness withal the earnestness and respect that might be,
that he could not let go Zizim without exposing Christendom to manifest
misfortunes. That such a change would give suspicion to Bajazet, and enforce
him perhaps to put to Sea, and land in Italy. He added also that the Invasion
of the Infidels was very much to be feared, before all Europe was first united
against them. However that he would submit the affair to his Holiness whose
prudence and justice he very well understood.

It was about this time that the Grand Master did a very eminent piece of
service for the Genoeses in protecting for them the Island of Scio, which was
under their subjection, by the gift of Andronicus Paleologus, after they had
restored him to his throne. For Francis de Medicis scourd all the Levant Seas
with a well armed Galliot, and had taken considerable prizes from the Turks
near the Island of Scio. The parties concerned complained to the Cady of Tire,
who was a person of great credit in the Ottoman Port, and orderd their business
so well, either by presents or false testimonies, that the Mahomet Judge
condemned the people of the Island to make good all the losses which the Turks
had sustained, as if the Islanders had shared with the Galliot, because the
Captain had taken in fresh provisions in the Island. The Grand Signior also
confirms the Cadi's sentence. But to chastize the Island the more severely,
which at Constantinople was accounted a Receptacle for Theives and Pirates, he
laid upon them a most enormous tax, and threatened the Islanders with ruin, if
they did not speedily pay it down. The inhabitants resolved to justify
themselves at the Port, and to represent humbly to the Grand Signior their
inability to pay such great sums. But the Barbarian would hearken neither to
their reasons not their prayers, and commanded his Vassels to go and sack Scio.

The Islanders had bin lost without hope, if the wisest of the Company had not
adviz'd them to have recourse to the Grand Master. There upon they earnestly
besought him to be their protector at such a time of calamity wherein only his
authority could save them.

The Grand Master hated, too much, injustice and violence, to suffer the
oppression of a poor people that were altogether Innocent, and were not in a
condition to defend themselves. Thereupon he wrote to the Port, and did it so
effectually, that Bajazet cancelled the Judgment, and remitted the Tax which
himself had imposed.

Cardinal Paul Fregosa, Duke of Genoa immediately returned thanks to the Grand
Master in a very civil Letter. But the Lords Monesi, who were the chief in
Scio, and happened to be at Genoa at the same time, deputed Signior Lanfranco
Patera, a person of quality and merit to carry him a testimony of their
Gratitude. It was a Basin and Eure of Gold of exquisite workmanship, on which
these Latin words were graven.

Dominorum Chii Reverendissimo Petro D'Aubusson, MAGNO MAGISTRO RHODI, DE SE
OPTIME MERITO DONVM. Much about the same time the Grand Master received
Intelligence of the death of Charlota de Lusignan Queen of Cyprus and Armenia.
This unfortunate Princess was constrained to quit Rhodes, and travel to Rome,
as I have already said in the beginning of this History. Pope Sixus the fourth
received her magnificently, and undertook her interest very zealously; so that
he persuaded the chief of the Island more then once to acknowledge her for their
Sovereign Queen. The Letters from his Holiness were read publicly at Nicosia
before the Church of Santa Sophia, and made so deep an Impression upon their
spirits, that the people took Arms, ran in throngs to the Palace, and
massacr'd the Uncles of Katherine Cornara, who were accused to have poisoned
James of Lusignan her husband. But the Venetians by whose authority Katherine
reigned, or rather who ruled under the name of Katherine, appeased the sedition
and quickly mastered it.

Charlota seeing that all the solicitations of the Pope, produced no good for
her, went to Lewis her husband in Piemont. The Lord of Montjeu, whom the Duke
of Burgundy sent Ambassador to Venice, gave a visit to Lewis and Charlota at
Montcalier, where they lived, and promised them according to the Instructions
he had received from his Master, to represent their rights to the Senate. But
all his Remonstrances proving ineffectual, the Princess returned to Rome, and
there settled herself after the death of Lewis, who piously ended his days in a
kind of solitude, whither he was retired. She superviv'd him some years, and
during her widowhood she gave the Kingdom of Cyprus to Charles Duke of Savoy
her Nephew, to whom it otherwise belonged by the articles of marriage between
Charlota and Lewis. This Donation was solemnly made to the procuratours of
Charles, of the number of which was the Admiral of Rhodes; and by virtue of
this Act it is, that the Dukes of Savoy take upon them the Title of Kings, and
pretend to the Kingdom of Cyprus.

The news of her death sensibly greiv'd the Grand Master, who had always looked
upon her as one of the most accomplished Princesses of the world,

In the mean time the Emperor of the Turks, having raised a numerous Army, and
made himself Master almost without any trouble of those Provinces that were
left the Grand Caraman, he turned his Arms against Syria and Egypt, incensed at
the Sultan, for that he had with disdain denied him the wife and children of
Zizim. For how false soever he were in other respects, he was faithful in that,
out of I know not what fantastic piece of honesty; which shows us that men are
sometimes contrary to themselves, and that the wicked, like mad men, have their
lucid Intervals.

Now, though the preparations all over Turkey seemed only to bend against the
Dominions of Cairbei, yet the King of Hungary took the Alarm. And as thunder
when at first it begins to grumble in the clouds, seems to threaten most they
that hear it nearest; this Prince probably thought the Tempest would fall upon
him, if he took not care in time to divert it. Yet as great a Soldier, and as
a Potent as Matthias was, he thought that the Grand Master would be a necessary
assistance to him; for which purpose he sent to him Pauli de Rhetas, his
Secretary and his favorite.

Rhetas declared at the first Audience which he had at Rhodes, that the King of
Hungary was resolved to make War against the Turks, and in prosecution thereof,
neither to spare his treasure, nor his life; and therefore desired to join his
Arms with those of the Knights of St. John, but above all to follow the
Counsels of the Grand Master in an enterprise of so much hazard and difficulty.
The Hungarian Ambassador likewise added, that his Master had private
correspondence with the Grandees of the Port, that several Basha's had resolved
to forsake Bajazet's Party, so soon as Zizim should appear upon the Confines of
Hungary, and at the head of the Hungarian Troops. That the interest of
Christendom required that he should send the Ottoman Prince in all haste; and
that it was a favor which a King illustrious for his piety and his valor
requested from the most generous Knights in the world.

The Proposal of Rhetas seemed rational to the Grand Master and his Council.
But there are certain nice conjunctures wherein the wifest of men cannot follow
sometimes neither the common Rules of Prudence, not their own particular
Judgments. Though to all outward appearances, and upon a serious consideration
of the bottom of things, it had been but reason to have trusted Zizim with the
King of Hungary; yet the engagement which obliged the Grand Master to keep the
Prince by virtue of the Treaty of Peace made with the Port, according to the
Prince's own desire, and the fear of offending his Holiness, were the cause
that the Hungarian Ambassador could obtain no other answer then a handsome
denial. However, the Grand Master wrote to the King: and after he had insisted
a while in particular upon the Advantage which Christendom might receive from
the person of Zizim, in case that Bajazet should make any attempt against the
Treaty, he told him that it being impossible for any War to be carried on
against the Turk, without a firm league between the Christian Princes, it
belonged to the common Pastor of the Church to assemble them together.

That such sort of enterprises seldom prosper'd, unless upheld by the Authority
of the Church; and lastly, that if the Ottoman Prince were to leave France, he
could be no where better then at Rome, where he would be in the view of all
Christendom* neither too far off, nor too near the Estates of the Grand Signior.

The Conquest which Bajazet, had made of Caria, and of other Provinces of the
Grand Caraman, made the Sultan to believe that after he had refused to Bajazet
the Wife and Children of Zizim, that he was certainly to expect the Turkish
Army at his own doors. And therefore whatever strength the Cairbie had, he
thought himself but weak without the assistance of the Knights of St. John of
Jerusalem. For that reason, to engage them to his Interests he dispatched to
Rhodes, Riccio de Marini, a Gentleman of Cyprus, and the same person who
formerly came to serve Queen Charlotta against the Republic of Venice. Marini
had Instructions to declare to the Knights that the advantages which they had
gained in so many encounters against the Turks, put the Sultan in hopes of a
happy success, provided they would embrace his quarrel, and that he should
think himself invincible, if he could but have Prince Zizim at the head of his
Troops.

The Grand Master sensible of the generous proceeding of Cairbei toward Zizim,
almost forgot the ill usage which the Rhodians had received at his hands; and
therefore he very civilly testified to his Ambassador, that he was very much
troubled that the present condition of the Rhodian Affairs would not permit him
to assist Egypt. That the Knights of Rhodes had made a peace with the Turks,
and that they always religiously observed the faith of Treaties. But in regard
the Grand Master desired nothing more then to see two potent enemies of
Christianity destroy one another, he added that since the refusal of Zizim's
Wife, and Children, was the only cause of Bajazet's anger, it was his advice
that the Sultan should go on* with the War, not doubting but that Heaven would
favor so just a Cause* as his. As for Zizim whom the Sultan requested, he told
the Emdassadour at length, that he could conclude nothing without advice from
Rome. But that he would write to the Pope, and signify to him that the Sultan
had provoked Bajazet to make War upon him only for detaining and preserving the
Wise and Children of Zizim; unwilling to sacrifice to his Brothers fury what
Zizim had most dear in the world.

The Grand Master's answer satisfied the Egyptians, and raised their courages,
which the defeat of the Grand Caraman, their neighbor, had almost dejected.
For the Ottoman Army consisting of a hundred thousand men, being got by several
ways into Caramania, and having quartered themselves between Pyramus, the Sar
and Cidnus near the old Castle of Adena, and the ruins of the ancient City of
Tarsus, the Egyptian forces, that were not above fifty thousand strong,
presented themselves in view of the Turks upon the banks of Pyramus, after they
had crossed with an extraordinary swiftness the famous streights that separate
Syria from Caramania. The Soldiers that composed the Egyptian Army, were
called Corcassian Mamalucks, all Christians that had renounced their Religion,
or else never professed any, being ravished from their Mothers breasts, and
bred up in war from their Infancy. The Eunuch Basha, General of the Turkish
Army, gave them no time to rest, but attacqu'd them with fifty thousand Horse
before they had time to understand the Ground. It was in one of those plains
that extend to the Mountain Aman, and where Alexander defeated Darius, that the
Captain of the Spahi's having passed the Pyramus over the Bridge of Adena, went
on to assail the Mamalukes. Wearied as they were, they bore with an
extraordinary vigor the first brunt, and fell on with such fury, that the
Assailants were forced to defend themselves. After an obstinate fight which
Night parted, the Mamalukes remained Masters of the Field. Above thirty
thousand Turks were slain upon the place, the rest saved themselves in the
Mountains, or else retired to the Castle of Adena, which they had fortified a
little before, though it were taken soon after by the Victors.

But that which made this victory more complete was, that the same day, ten
Galleys which Achmat Basha, the Grand Signiours Son in Law, and Admiral at Sea,
had sent from the rest of the fleet to wast the Coast of Syria, were overtaken
by a furious tempest, and dashed against the Rocks. This misfortune constrained
Achmat to return to Constantinople with the rest of the fleet. Passing through
the Channel of Rhodes, in view of the City, not content to salute the Knights
by discharging all his great Guns, he resolved to show their Captain a
particular Kindness. For having set up a magnificent Pavilion in one of the
fairest of his Galleys, adorned with a great number of rich Pendants and
Banners, he sent a young Turk his Favorite, called Osman, to visit the Grand
Master on his behalf. The Gally entered the Port with the sound of Trumpets and
Drums, mixed with the joyful acclamations of the Turks that attended Osman.
They were all richly habited, nor had they the faces of men that made a
shameful retreat. When the young Turk came into the Grand Masters presence, he
saluted him after the Mussulman fashion, and presented him a Letter wherein the
Basha made him a thousand protestations of friendship and service. Afterward
having presented him with several stuffs of great value, and several rare
pieces of workmanship, he told him with a good grace, that such a small present
was not worth the famous Prince of the Rhodians. The Grand Master would not be
behind either in civility or liberality toward the Barbarians; for besides the
Caresses and the entertainment which he gave to Osman, he sent one of his most
Illustrious Commanders with all sort of refreshments for the fleet, and rich
presents for himself.

Scarce was Osman, who stayed not above 3 hour in Rhodes, joined with the
fleet, but the Grand Master had Intelligence of their defeat, of which he heard
not a word from them; the spies which he had in most parts of Caramania, and
even in the Castle of* Adena it self, giving him an exact account hereof.
Besides that the Sultan himself, well satisfied with the advantage he had won
with his own forces, failed not in honor of his dignity, to give him a
relation himself, as the person who had foretold his success. But this
prospority did not blind Cairbey, who knew it was not enough to vanquish,
unless he made advantage of his victory. To this purpose he thought that an
Embassy to the Pope might produce good effects, and he communicated his
thoughts to the Grand Master, not daring to enterprise such a thing without his
counsel, nor hoping to obtain his desires without his intercession.

In the mean while the Pope, who made it his business to unite the Christian
Princes against the Turk, was every day extraordinarily pressing for the
removal of Zizim, and he began to talk somewhat like a Commander. For how mild
and moderate soever Innocent might be in his particular conduct, he was jealous
of his authority, and would make himself to be obeyed, when he acted for the
public good. The Grand Master, who knew what obedience he and the rest of the
Knights owed to the Pope, as head of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem, was
not desirous to stay for an express command. He therefore gave Zizim to
understand the intentions of his holiness and finding the Princes inclination,
he resolved at length to consent to what he could not handsomely avoid.

Besides that policy required that he should gratify his Holiness, other
reasons persuaded him to take that course. For the blow that the Turks had
received, had put Constantinople into an uproar, and weak'nd the Ottoman
Empire. Bajazet was not in a condition to enterprise any thing against the
Christians, being in continual fear of the Mahometans* after the Soldan's
victory. He was in hopes that the Christian Princes would open their eyes upon
such a fortunate conjuncture, and that they would league themselves against the
common enemy, when they saw Sultan Zizim in the hands of the common Father of
the faithful; besides that Innocent had good intentions, and only designed to
have Zizim in Italy, not pretending to have him at his disposal. Zizim also
himself began to be aweary of solitude, and designed to charge his residence.

All these considerations engaged him to send to Rome the Baily of the Morea,
and the Vice Chancellor of the Order* with an ample procuration as to this
affair. The Ambassadors being arrived, and having had audience of the Pope
consented to the removal of Zizim, provided the King of France did not oppose
it, and that the Knights of Rhodes might always attend him. Charles the 8th,
who stood in need of the Pope for the Conquest of Naples, readily consented to
his Holiness desire, who wrote very urgent Letters to him for that purpose. And
the Pope easily granted what the Knights requested, being persuaded of the good
Intentions of the Grand Master, and only as he did, aiming at the public
benefit.

Thus the Commander Blanchefort, in his absence elected Marshal of the Order,
and Grand Prior of Auvergne, brought away Zizim from the commandery of
Burgneuf, according to the Letters directed to him from the Grand Master. The
Prince was conducted by land to Marseilles, where the Great Ship of the Order
attended him. By the way, he testified more then once, that he was very glad he
was going to Rome, after six years stay in France, and he requested the Knights
not to forsake him. The voyage was not very fortunate; for never did the Sea of
Genoa rage more, as if the winds had endcavour'd to drive Zizim back from the
coasts of Italy. Nevertheless, maugre the storm, he arrived at Civita Vecchia,
the sixth of March. 1489.

Leonard Cybo, the Popes Kinsman, was come to receive the Prince, and he
acquitted himself very well of his commission: Putting into the hands of the
grand Prior Blanchefort the Castle of the Town, which was appointed for the
lodging of Zizim, in order to the promise which the Pope had made to the
Rhodian Ambassadors.

The Pope was very joyful for the arrival of the Turkish Prince, which inspired
him with new thoughts of kindness for the Grand Master, that appeared publicly
three days after; for the Pope honored him with a Cardinals Cap in a new
promotion upon the ninth of March. He gave him the Title of St. Adrian* and to
render his purple more Illustrious, he added to it by his express Bulls the
Title of Legate General of the holy See in Asia.

The Cardinal D'Augers, venerable for his Age, and for his virtue as well as
for his Purple, and in whom fortune shows that a low extraction sometimes serves
to exalt great Merit, went to meet Zizim twelve miles out of Rome* with Prince
Francis Cybo the Son of Innocent, who had bin married before he entr'd into
holy Orders, and Son in law to the famous Laurence de Medici. They saluted the
Prince in the name of the Pope* and in such terms, as testified no less
affection for his person, then respect to his birth, and taking upon him
themselves to be his guide, they brought him straight to Rome.

Dominico Doria, Captain of the Popes Guards* stayed for him on horsback
without the City, accompanied by a great number of considerable persons without
the City, near the Gate of St. Sebastian; that being the Gate through which the
Prince made his entry. The Turks who served him, and all his other Domestics
marched first; the Cardinals Gentlemen next to them* followed by all the Roman
Nobility, that never were more lively, nor betten mounted. Then appeared Doria
at the head of his light horse, followed by the Knights of Rhodes, after whom
rode the Ambassadors of the several Princes, all but of France who with Prince
Francis Cybo, the Grand Prior Blanchefort, and the Senator of Rome immediately
preceded Zizim. He rode alone, mounted upon a stately horse, which he managed
with a comely Grace. He was clad, as usually the Turkish Emperors are upon
solemn days. His countenance was haughty and majestic, which being tempered
with a sweet melancholy, attracted all at once respect, compassion and love.
His Holiness steward followed behind with an innumerable company of Prelates
that belong to the Popes house. And in this order they came to the Vatican.

The Cardinal of Angers, who had taken his leave with in two miles of the Town
upon pretense of going to advertise the Pope of his approach, but indeed
because he would not be one of the Cavalcade, either because of his dignity or
his age, met him at the Gate of the place, and conducted him to the apartiment
of Pope Clement, where the Grand Master Raymund Zacosta held a General Chapter
of the Order under the Pontificate of Paul the 2d.

The day following the Grand Prior de Blanchefort, and the Ambassadors of
France, conducted him to his audience of the Pope in a full consistory. They
had advertised him that it was the custom to kiss the feet of his Holiness, and
the greatest Kings in the World thought it no dishonor to condescend so far.
But he had much ado to stoop to that condescension; and some say that all he
could be brought to, was to bow to kiss the Popes hand. He saluted the
Cardinals after a manner that was neither humble nor disdainful, but as became
a person of so high an extraction. Though he were born eloquent, and at other
times spoke very fluently, yet he only spoke four or five words very briskly,
and those in Turkish, whether it were that the luster of so famous an assembly
dazeld him, or whether he thought it below the Majesty of an Ottoman Prince to
make a long discourse. George Jaxi a Rhodian his interpreter declared, that he
only said, he was extremely glad to see Rome.

Innocent, whose head was full of high designs, and who aimed at no less then
to free the Orient from the Tyranny of the Infidels, promised to himself a most
happy success, at the sight of Sultan Zizim, and believed that the Son of
Mahomet was sent him from Heaven to be serviceable to him; for that purpose the
Embassy also which he received at the same* time from the Sultan of Egypt,
strengthened his hopes. For Cairbei, at the persuasion of the Grand Master did
homage to the Holy See, and engaging to enter into the Holy League, promised to
set forth the most puissant Army that ever marched out of Egypt.

His Holiness was so sensible of these high services of the Grand Master, that
to manifest to all the world how much he was satisfied, and to bestow upon him
in particular the solid marks of his favor, he granted him an axtraordinary
privilege, so much the more considerable, because he parted from his own right
in granting it.

The Popes in possession were to provide for several benefices of the Order of
Rhodes and they claimed that right by the authority which they have in general
over all Religious Orders, and in particular over that of St. John of
Jerusalem. This right did Innocent renounce by a consistorial Bull signed by
all the Cardinals, depriving the Sea of ever conferring any commandery of the
Order, though the benefice should happen to be vacant in the Court of Rome, and
declaring withal by the same Bull, that the disposal of all commanderies
absolutely belonged to the Grand Master, without being comprised under such
benefices as the Popes had reserved, or might hereafter reserve.

He also granted to the Grand Master the power absolutely to dispose of the
benefices and military Revenus of the Holy Sepulcher, and St. Lazarus, uniting
those Orders again to that of St. John of Jerusalem by an express Bull, wherein
his Holiness himself made a particular Elogium upon the Grand Master and the
Knights.

The Grand Master who now began to entitle himself Cardinal, Grand Master, was
exstremely sensible of all these favors which he never requested, and believed
to be above his merit, accompting as nothing what he had done, and daily
accusing himself that he had not fulfilled the duties of his calling and his
trust. He solemnly received the Cap in the Church of St. John Baptist upon St.
Peter and Paul's day; and he was at the same time proclaimed Universal Legate of
the Sea in Asia.

These favors and new dignities put the Grand Master upon new cares and
assiduities. And in regard the revenues of the Order were very much increased
by the addition of the Orders of the Holy Sepulcher and St. Lazarus, he applied
himself presently to the settlement of the treasury; and he made very wise laws
for the good government of the public revenue, as may be seen in the Book of
the statutes of the Order. He made other laws touching elections and Sentences,
which are observed to this day, full of prudence and Justice.

But the peaceable state of affairs, together with new accessions of wealth and
plenty, gave the Master opportunity to rebuild the ruined Churches, and among
others that of St. Anthony, which was the burying place for the Knights, and
which he himself had caused to be pulled down for the safety of the City. It
was built in another place much more magnificent then before.

Some years ere that he had founded a Chapel under the Name of the Holy
Virgin, in the Church of Monteil-au Viconte, the place of his birth; but
understanding that the building remained unfinished, he assigned a certain
stock of money to go on with the work, and perfect it. He also founded several
others in the Island of Rhodes, and one in the Church of Mount Palermus, to
increase the devotion of the people*

But these were not the principal Employments of the Cardinal Grand Master; for
when he saw himself clothed with the Purple Robe, he thought himself more than
ever obliged to serve the Holy See, as he had suddenly several important
occasions to do.

It is impossible to imagine what was the extreme surprise and disconsolation
of Bajazet, when he understood, that his Brother was at Rome. He had understood
before, that such a design was in hand; and because there was nothing that he
feared more, to fend off that blow, he made great offers to Charles the 8th.
Besides that he promised him all the Relics that his Father had found in
Constantinople, and in other Cities of Europe and Asia, he engaged to send him
all his Forces for the recovery of the Holy Land, which was under the Dominion
of the Sultan of Egypt, and to pay him whatever he demanded for the
maintenance of Zizim. But these propositions took no effect; for Zizim was not
in France when the Ambassodors arrived.

The Grand Seignior's vexation redoubled, when he understood what Confederacies
the Pope and the Sultan had made together. He loudly complained of the Conduct
of the Grand Master; and by an express Ambassador, he bloodily reproached, even
to threaten him, that he would never observe any Laws of Civility with men,
that did not keep their word. As fierce as the Grand Master was, he did not
always give way to his Passion; for when affairs required moderation, there was
no person more tractable, nor more condescending than he. Therefore to appease
Bajazet at a time* when it was not for the good of Christendom to exasperate
him, he gave him to understand* That the removal of Zizim did not at all injure
the Treaty of Peace, the Tenor of which was, in respect of the Sultan, That the
Knights should be answerable for his Person, and should do their utmost, that
he should not fall into the hands of any Prince. He assured him, that Zizim was
in Italy, under the Guard of the Knights of Rhodes, as he was in France, and
that no Prince could call himself Master of his Person. He added also, That the
change of his Residence was by the absolute order of those whom the Knights
were bound to obey. Besides, that this change, if rightly considered, had
nothing in it but what was advantageous to the Port: That Charles the Eighth, a
Person of great designs, might have taken Zizim out of the Commanderie of
Bourgneuf, whenever he had had occasion to make use of him; whereas being in
the Pope's power, he could make no advantage of him. In regard that not having
a power sufficient of himself, it was absolutely necessary for him to join with
other Princes, if he intended to carry a War out of Italy. That an Union was a
difficult affair, and such a one as required long time* as being oftentimes
crossed by the jealousies of Princes; and at this time impossible, because of
their divisions.

The Grand Master declared moreover, That Bajazet had nothing to fear, while he
kept himself quiet; but the least motion against Italy would awake all the
Princes of Christendom, and enforce them to an Union against him. That now the
best course he could take, was, to manage his business in Italy, to break the
Correspondencies of the Sultan. That an Ambassador of the Port would be well
received at Rome, and that he was only there to seek for the success of his
affairs.

The Grand Seignior, who was not then in a condition to be revenged for the
breach of word, which he pretended, and found probability enough in the Grand
Master's Reasons, never stood long to consider what he had to do: He resolved
to be quiet, and to follow the counsel which had been given him touching an
Embassy to Rome. But that he might know more exactly what he had to say to the
Pope, and after what manner he should proceed, sent another Ambassador to the
Grand Master. This Negotiation continued several months, in which time there
were nothing but continual Voyages from Constantinople to Rhodes. The Grand
Master however put no confidence in these Embassies, but expected a Rupture, so
soon as Bajazet should have an opportunity to display his secret hatred against
the Knights; and therefore that the Pope might have time to make a League
between the Christian Princes, he spun out affairs as much as he could, either
by creating difficulties, which perplexed the Grand Seignior, or by giving
ambiguous Answers, which were unsatisfactory.

While things thus passed between the Knights and the Turks, one of the Popes
Legates had like to have spoiled all by his imprudence. Philip de Canova, whom
the Pope sent to the Sultan, being arrived at Caire, publicly declared very
idly, and without any ground, That the Knights of Rhodes had no power in the
affair of Zizim. He spoke this so openly, and upon so many occasions, that the
report thereof came to the Port. This news cooled the Grand Seignior as to any
further Negotiation with Rhodes, now growing jealous that the Knights did but
abuse him; and it had come to an open War, had not the Grand Master dexterously
reconciled what the Legate had spoiled: He declared so loudly the contrary, and
by the Popes Letters themselves so well over-turn'd the falsity that Canova had
averred, that, in a short time, he regained the former confidence which Bajazet
had in him. The Negotiation was renewed, and it was on both sides agreed, that
the Grand Prior Blanchefort, who was come to Rhodes, to be present at the
General Chapter, and was to return to Zizim, should conduct the Ambassador of
the Port, that was to go to Rome.

An act so dextrous, and so successful, soon made a noise over Europe, and very
much advanced the Reputation of the Grand Master; He was the discourse of all
the Courts of Europe, and his name was so famous in that of Castile, that a
young Lady of eminent Quality, having forsaken the World, admiring what she had
heard of the prudence and virtue of Cardinal D'Aubusson, resolved to found a
Nunnery according to his Model of the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem: To
which purpose, she requested leave of the Cardinal; who overjoyed to see such
pious and virtuous inclinations in a young Lady, readily condescended.
Thereupon the Lady* whose name was Isabella di Leon, descended from one of the
most antlent Families in Andalousia, founded a House of Religious Virgins, of
the Order of St. John of Jerusalem; and the Founder was named Princess by the
Grand Master, the Nuns are to be all of Noble Race, and to be approved as the
Knights are* and they are particularly to pray for the Knights, and, as much as
in them lies, to forward the ruin of Mahumetism, and the exaltation of the
Faith. Isabella Fernandes founded also another House of Nuns in Evora, a City
of Portugal, in the time of Villerius, Grand Master.

But to return to Bajazet, Chamisbuerch his Capigi Basha, his Ambassador to the
Pope, arrived at Rome, and was presented to his Holiness by the Grand Prior
Blanchefort, who accompanied him to the City. The Grand Master, when he
counseled the Embassy, advised the Grand Seignior to make a Present to the
Pope, and above all things to send him the Head of the Lance that pierced the
side of Christ, which Mahumet laid up in in his Treasury among the rich Spoils
which he found in the Churches of Constantinople. The Relick was suspected at
first, but upon the testimony of the Grand Master, the Infidels were believed,
who testified, that he had had it from very credible persons, that the
Venetians had offered Mahomet 15000 Crowns in Gold to retrieve it out of his
hands, after the taking of Constantinople.

But in regard it was the intention of the Grand Seignior wholly to gain the
Pope, he added to his Present very obliging Letters, wherein, after he had
given him an account of an Expedition which he had made against the Rebels of
Macedonia, he swore an inviolable friendship with him, and besought him, that
his Brother Zizim might always remain under the Guard of the Knights of Rhodes,
according to the Articles he had made with them.

These submissions of Bajazet very much pleased the Pope, and were no small
honor to the Grand Master: He had a thousand Applauses in Italy, and received
the Complements of all the Christian Princes. But an unhappy accident did not
long permit him quietly to enjoy this Honor; for a young Gentleman, of a good
House, who was then in the service of the Knight Puis, Bailiff of the Morea,
and Captain of the Castle of St. Peter, stealing away from his Masters House,
and having renounced his Religion in Turkey, the Peace was just upon the point
of being broken between the Christians and the Turks.

For the Bailiff of the Morea, touched to the quick at what had befallen his
Page, took a strange resolution to recover him; he Sallies out of the Castle
with some Soldiers, and entering into Lycia, he takes, by way of Reprisal, two
young Turks, Sons of the most considerable person in the Country,
notwithstanding the resistance made by their Father, whom he slew with his own
hand. So violent an act seemed to the Barbarians a visible breach of the Peace.
They take Arms* and march directly to the Castle of St. Peter, whether the
Bailiff of the Morea was retired with his Prey. The Sultan Zalabi, the Grand
Seignior's Son, and Governor of Lycia, sent an Agent to Rhodes, to complain of
the Attempt made by the Knights of the Castle of St. Peter. The Bayliff's act
was neither prudent nor just, so that the Grand Master could not but, with
sorrow, very much resent it: and he had not stuck a moment to have delivered
both the Children back again, but that one of them testified an inclination to
turn Christian. But the young Turk declaring, that he was resolved to continue
a Mussulman, and hated the very thought of Christianity, the Governor of Lycia
was satisfied with the restoration of the two Prisoners.

Thus was the Tranquillity of the Province re-setled, nor had the Subjects any
thing more to fear, but only the Rapines of certain Pirates that infested their
Coasts; the, most famous was Don Diego Ordonna, a Spaniard by Nation, a person
bold and daring, of a savage humor, and a bestial valor, more barbarous than
the Infidels, cruising all Coasts with an Armed Caravel, and acknowledging no
Right but Force, nor any God but Interest. He had taken a little before certain
Merchants Vessels within sight of Rhodes; and his power at Sea was grown so
formidable, that the Ships of the Order durst hardly venture out of the Port.

The Grand Master could not brook the Insolences and Robberies of this
Castilian Pirate. And knowing that Ferdinand and Isabel, who were then subduing
the Moors, did not allow a Castilian Pirate to be so vexatious to the
Christians; he sent against him the Knight Raymond Thivian with his Galley, and
another Man of War with a Crew of stout Knights; who coming up with this
Pirate, pli'd him so warmly, that he was constrained to yield, after a vigorous
resistance: he was brought to Rhodes chained hand and foot, and afterward
broken alive upon the Wheel; his Goods* that were Confiscated to the Grand
Master, were, by his order, distributed to the Merchants that he robbed.

The Island of Lango was, about this time afflicted with several calamities
together; a horrible and sudden Earthquake, that lasted for several days, threw
down most part of the houses in the Country of Naranga; and what was more
lamentable, this calamity happened in a time, that a dreadful Contagion
overspread the Island. It is not to be imagined how much the Grand Master was
afflicted for the miseries of these poor people, nor how great his cares were
for their relief. He sent two great Vessels, laden with all necessaries, for
their support, and caused the Lake of Naranga to be speedily cleansed, and the
Tide to be let into it, to carry away the noisome Vapors that might corrupt
the air. And so well his pains succeeded, that the Contagion ceased so soon as
the Lake was cleansed.

But these employments at home, did not make the Grand Master forget his
affairs abroad: He continually solicited the Pope to pacify Italy; and he
besought him still to conclude, with all the speed that might be, a League
between the Christian Princes. But all these solicitations and prayers took no
effect. Innocent died of a sudden, and all those hopes that all good men had
conceived died with him. The advancement of Roderic Borgia, by the name of
Alexander the Sixth, little availed to comfort the Grand Master for the loss
which the Church had received. The humor of the new Pope promised little good
to Christendom; for there was little good to be expected from a person, who had
purchased the Suffrages of the Cardinals to enjoy a place, of which he knew
himself unworthy. He had been Protector of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem
while he was Cardinal, and by a Brief which he sent to the Grand Master, he
declared, That the Knights of Rhodes should still be in his most favorable
thoughts. But the Effects were no way answerable to his words. Alexander first
showed his Pontifical Authority, by taking into his own possession the Person
of Prince Zizim, contrary to the Agreement made between Innocent and the
Knights. He shut up the Sultan the Castle of St. Angelo, and dismissing the
Knights who had always been about him, put him into the possession of his
Nephews, of which one was a Knight of Rhodes. His pretense was, that a life so
precious as that of the Prince, would be less exposed to the Ambuscado's of his
Enemies in a strong place; and that one Knight of Rhodes being near him* the
rest were needless in a place that did defend it self: and these Excuses he
sent by an Express to the Grand Master. But the true motive that induced the
Pope to this act, was, because that understanding the King of France was
preparing for an Expedition into Italy, he would have wherewithal to cross or
promote his designs, as he should judge most proper for his Interests. For
Charles the VIII. did not only intend the Conquest of Naples; for Fame every
where reported, that he was resolved to have carried his Arms into Greece.
Whether this design were only in thought, or actually intended, I will not
dispute; but certain it is, that he communicated it to the Grand Prior
Blanchefort, whom the Affairs of the Order enforced to travel out of Italy into
France; and he testified several times the earnest desire he had to see the
Grand Master, that he might consult with him about a Voyage beyond the Seas.

Zizim was extremely displeased to see himself in the hands of Alexander, and
under the Guard of his Nephews, being always accustomed to the Knights who had
accompanied him both in France and Italy. As they had always great respect for
him, and, in serving him, had always sought to make his condition more
pleasant; he loved them tenderly, and could not choose but shed tears when he
took his leave of them. He did for them all that lay in the power of his
Fortune; he wrote to the Grand Master in their behalf, representing to him the
value of their services, and assuring him, that what ever favors he bestowed
upon them, he would put upon his own account, as done to himself. He besought
him likewise not to abandon an unfortunate person, who owed his life to him,
and from whom he could only hope for a change of his condition.

In the mean while, Charles the 8th. passed the Mountains at the head of all
the Gallantry and Stoutness in his Kingdom; and having crossed, like a Victor,
the half of Italy, he marched on, and presented himself before Rome. The Pope,
of whom he only demanded passage through his Country, was afraid lest, under
that pretense, he should make himself Master of the City; but the presence of
so great an Army would not permit him to listen to his fear, he granted what he
could not refuse. And though the King, by a public Manifesto, declared, that
he only came to Rome to accomplish a Vow that he had made, and that he only
went to Naples in his way to Constantinople, yet he gave no credit to his words.

For Alexander, who had no kindness at all for the French, and had disobliged
them upon several occasions, easily imagined, according to his Principles, that
they would not lose so fair an opportunity to revenge themselves. But as he had
a nimble craft, he sought always to give them satisfaction, and condescended to
whatever they desired. He gave the young Conqueror the Investiture of both
Sicilies, and Crowned him Emperor of Constantinople. Besides that, he
delivered into his hands Sultan Zizim, whom the King had chiefly requested, out
of a design to pursue his Conquests into the East, after he had mastered
Naples. The Ottoman Prince was surrendered to the French by a solemn Act, and
with a public Ceremony, where Alexander and Charles were present. He saluted
Charles after such a manner, as neither bespake him a Barbarian nor a Prisoner.
After he had kissed his Shoulder and his Hand, with a lofty Air, he told the
King, That he hoped the French would, in his person, consider the Ottoman Race;
and added, that when they should cross over into Greece, he should find a way
to acknowledge their Civilities. Charles was ravished with admiration of the
Great Soul which he saw in the Sultan, and treated him with so much Courtesy
and Generosity, that Zizim testified his joy for being fallen into the hands of
so generous a Monarch.

They departed from Rome for Naples both together; but the poor Prince, who
prepared himself to assist the Enterprise of the French, and who was in hopes
to raise his own Fortune by following theirs, felt himself struck by the way
with an unknown distemper, that carried him off in a few days. His death
surpised all men, and there was great enquiry made into the cause. They that
were of the Popes's party reported, that he gave himself too much over to his
Pleasures the first days of his liberty, and that he killed himself with excess
of Debauchery. Others say* that the Venetians corrupted with money by the
Turks, and alarmed at the French Expedition, had secretly given him poison. But
most accuse the Pope to have delivered him poisoned to Charles the 8th. to the
end that France should get no advantage by him; and the report ran, that
Alexander received Reynald. Annal. Ecclesiae, An. 1495.
a good sum of money to perform that wicked act. Thus ended the life of Zizim,
an unfortunate Prince, and yet more illustrious by his Misfortunes then by his
Birth. Some think he died a Christian, and that he was Baptized at Rome before
the death of Innocent the 8th. But those Authors, who have spoken most of this
Prince, say nothing of his Conversion; which makes me believe, that, to
aggravate his misfortunes, he died a Mahumetan.

THE HISTORY OF Peter D'Aubusson, Grand Master of RHODES. Book Sixth.
THe Grand Master, who took very heavily the news of Zizim's Captivity, could
not receive the news of his death without indignation and horror; and he found
himself laden with all the grief that a man could have, for the death of a
person so extremely dear to him. But when the Interest of Christianity
intermixed with that tenderness, all his Fortitude was little enough to support
him from being wholly deprest by an accident so Tragical. He adored the
profound wisdom of God, that would not suffer the Christians to reap any
advantage from the person of the Ottoman Prince, and permitted them, who had
most interest to preserve him, to be his destroyers. But he admired as well the
conduct of Providence, that would not give the Infidel liberty to gain any
benefit by his death; but to unhinge all their designs, gave Victory to the
Triumphant Arms of France in Italy.

Ferdinand King of Naples being dead of an Apoplexy, after Matthias Corvin,
King of Hungary, and Pope Innocent the Eighth, who both died of the same
disease; Alfonso, a wicked Prince, hated by the Nobility and People, succeeded
his Father; but terrified by the rapid march of the French, and fearing besides
the dire effects of public Rage, he left his Crown to his Son Ferdinand, and
retired into Sicily. The new King also followed the example of Alfonso; and
after he had awhile disputed with the French the Avenues of the Kingdom,
abandoned it quite; so that the King of France made himself Master of the
Capital Cities without striking one stroke. All Turkey trembled at the progress
of the French Army, and the terror was so great at Constantinople, that the
Priests of the Mahumetan Religion publicly cried out, That the Turkish Empire
was lost without redemption.

Now before the Forces, appointed for the Expedition of Italy set out of
France, Charles the 8th. had sent to Rhodes the Grand Prior Blanchefort, to
desire the Grand Master to meet him at Rome. He also dispatched away to him the
Commander of Angers with very urgent Letters, so soon as he had crossed the
Mountains. More then this, as he earnestly desired this Enterview, though
whether to be truly instructed as to the design he had upon the Levant, or to
dazzle the World, that it should not be known which way he bended, is uncertain;
he desired the Pope to write to the Grand Master, and wrote to him also with
his own hand. And indeed his Letter was the most civil and engaging in the
world: For after that he had declared, that he could not live without his
counsel, nor enterprise any thing upon the Levant but under his Conduct, he
conjured him to hasten his Voyage, for the reasons which he had declared to the
Grand Prior Blanchefort his Nephew, to whom he had opened his mind as to a
Knight of great prudence, and of absolute experience.

This Letter coming to Rhodes before the Grand Prior, whom stress of weather
had beaten off from the Island, the Grand Master, who believed such flattering
expressions could not be sincere; and who saw but small foundations for a
design that France made such a stir about, returned for answer to the King,
That he could not but highly applaud his Majesty's Zeal; That it was too much
honor for him to fight under his Banners, or to contribute any thing to the
Glory of his Atchievments. But in regard the Grand Prior Blanchefort had order
to declare to him the whole secrets of the Affair, he daily expected to obey
his Majesty's Orders.

The King* out of his impatience to see the Grand Master in Italy* wrote him a
second Letter so soon as he was entered Naples. He also desired Cardinal
Briconnet, and Cardinal de Garce, who accompanied him, and to whom the Pope had
given Caps at his instance, to write both of them to the same effect. The first
only exhorted him in general terms, not to deny that which was requested of him
with so much ardenoy. The second, who had more zeal, went more home to the
business, and after he had given him an account of all that had passed in the
Kingdom of Naples, desired him that he would condescend to be a Tutor to a
young Conqueror, who was wholly intent upon the delivery of Greece, and whose
hopes depended upon the Counsels of a Captain so experienced, and so formidable
to the Enemies of the Faith. He added, That in that little time that so
glorious an Enterprise was delayed, the opportunity was in danger to be lost.
That it was to be feared, lest the debaucheries that usually attend upon great
Conquests, might corrupt the Courages of the French Soldiers; That the sins of
Victors might draw upon them the malediction of Heaven; That the Enemies of
France sowed jealousies in the minds of the Princes of Italy, to engage them to
cross the designs of Charles; and that all preparations were making to form a
League against him. That several, under the pretense of the good of his
Kingdom, advised him to return into France, before he entered upon the Holy
War. The Cardinal at last concluded, That the sole presence of the Grand Master
was enough to stay the King, and to ascertain the Expedition into the Levant.

But the Letters of the Cardinals did not work that effect which they expected.
The Grand Master was confirmed by their own reasons, that the Expedition which
they projected against the Turks, was not an Enterprise that had any solid
ground: he was a little distrustful of the inconstancy of the French, and the
Youth of the Conqueror. Besides, he understood, that the League against France
was almost come to a period, and that the Pope, the the Venetians, the Emperor,
and the King of Spain had all entered into it. He had also news at the same
time, that the Turks, enraged at the death of Zizim, were setting forth a
considerable Fleet, and that the Tempest threatened the Islands of the Order,
with whom they had now no more occasion to deal so warily. So that his Voyage
into Italy appearing useless, and his presence being necessary in the East, he
thought it sufficient to congratulate Charles the 8th. for his Conquest of
Naples, and to flatter him with that of Constantinople; assuring him, that a
Prince so valiant and so fortunate as he, had need of no other Conductors then
his own Courage and Fortune to bring the greatest Enterprises to pass: That the
Knights were overjoyed to see him so advantagiously seated for a Beyond Sea
Invasion: and concluding his Letter, That he had not yet heard from the Grand
Prior Blanchefort, whom he either thought to be cast away, or taken by the
Pirates.

The event showed, that the Grand Master had no such reason to be hasty in his
Voyage. For Charles the 8th. himself speedily on a sudden leaves Naples, and
bends his march for France. Whether it were, that that restlesness which is
natural to the French caused him to quit what he had Conquered, or whether all
Europe Leagued against him, occasioned his retreat. However, there was no
discourse after that, either of any Expedition Beyond Sea, or of any Conquest
of Constantinople.

At the time that Charles absolutely laid aside all thoughts of the Holy War,
Maximilian began to plot it in his mind, either out of a real Zeal, or an
Envious Emulation to reproach the French in some sort, that they had not done
what they boasted to do against the Turk. However, he did not think it
convenient to do any thing without advising with the Grand Master: To which
purpose he sent unto him Ralph of Wittenbergh, Knight of Rhodes, and Grand
Prior of Germany. This new Ambassador declared at a public Audience* That
Maximilian having resolved to turn all the Force of the Empire against the
common Enemy, he durst not venture to proceed, till he had consulted
beforehand the Cardinal Grand Master, the Oracle of the Christian Princes, the
Terror of the Infidels, and Glory of the East: That he desired private Ties of
Union, and an entire correspondence with him, to the end he might follow his
directions in all things, which he desired him not to refuse to those that
requested them sincerely.

The Grand Master made answer publicly, That he was highly obliged to the
Emperor for his Reliance and Esteem; but that he did not deserve those
splendid Titles with which his Imperial Majesty had honored him; and that
though the Order had signalized themselves against the Infidels for some years
since, those happy Successes were to be attributed to the valor of the
Knights, and the Protection of Heaven. After which, in a discourse in private
with the Ambassador, he laid open to him all the insight which he had into the
Holy War, what Enterprises were to be undertaken against the Turk either by Sea
or Land, and which were the most probable ways to succeed.

The wrongs and damages which the Turks at that time did to the Vessels of the
Order, did not a little help to heat the Grand Master, and cause him to close
with the designs of the Emperor. Several Infidels that inhabited the Coasts of
Lycia, nearest to Rhodes, put to Sea every day, and pretending themselves to be
Pirates, pillaged the Isles of the Order; they also made inrodes into Caria, and
braved the Knights even to the very Gates of the Castle of St. Peter. The Grand
Master sends out certain Vessels against these pretended Pirates, of which, some
were taken, and punished to the utmost of their deserts. But these disorders
continuing, he writes to the Port, to know whether the Grand Seignior
authorized these violences or no. The Pirates intercept the Letters, and kill
the Bearers. The Grand Master being advertised thereof, sought a more sure way
to write to Bajazet, and did it with all the fierceness that a just resentment
could inspire him with. Now though Bajazet were, as we said before, exasperated
in his heart against the Knights, and had little value for them since the death
of his Brother; yet he was still unwilling to display his fury: So that he
ordered the Beglerbei of Anatolia severely to punish the Criminals. He also
sent to Rhodes a Prudent and Intelligent Person, to examine the Losses which
the Rhodians had sustained, and to assure them, in the name of his Highness,
that all should be restored with Interest.

While the Grand Seignior labored in this manner to satisfy the Grand Master,
some of the Rhodians, interrested in the Goods which the Pirates had taken,
secretly set forth some Vessels, and exercised several acts of Hostility upon
the Coast of Lycia, pillaging Villages, taking Ships, and carrying away the
very persons of the Turks. When the Grand Master was informed of it, he would
not stay till the Beglerbei complained; he caused the chief in the Enterprise
to be Arrested; and having discovered that the Knights had a share, he named
Commissioners to examine the matter, resolved to proceed against the guilty
with all the rigor of the Statutes, which possitively forbid the Knights to
set forth any Vessels of War without express leave.

Thus was the Grand Master perplexed at home; abroad he was as ill satisfied
with the Church of Rome; For Alexander became more proud then ever by the
retreat of the French Army, had no regard to the Privileges which his
Predecessor had granted to the Order of St. John of Jerusalem, touching the
Collation of Benefices.

Francis Bossolx, a Catalonian by birth, one of the most Ancient and most
Illustrious Knights of his Language, had conferred upon him by the Grand Master
the Priory of Catalonia. The Pope not considering either the Age, or the Merit
of the Knight, conferred the same Priorate, with the Commendary of Navelles,
upon Lewis Borgia his Nephew. So unjust an act estranged all their hearts from
the Pope, and occasioned much trouble at Rhodes. It was therefore resolved in
Counsel to complain thereof in all the Courts of Christendom, and particularly
to that of Spain. To which purpose Commissioners were named, and the Grand
Prior of Portugal, the Bailiff of Negropont, the Commendator Villel, and the
Knight de Gotor, in Quality of Extraordinary Ambassadors. The Grand Master
wrote to Ferdinand a long Letter, wherein after he had set forth how much
scandal and disorder the injustice of Alexander had caused in the Order, he
besought his Majesty to espouse their Interests, and to mediate vigorously for
them to the Pope.

Ferdinand, who was not ignorant of the Services which the Grand Master had
done the Holy See, found his complaints so just, that he presently put the
Knight de Bostolx in possession of the Priory of Catalogne. He assured the
Ambassadors also, that while he lived, no other Knights of Rhodes, but such as
were appointed and endowed by the Grand Master, should enjoy the Revenues of
his Order within his Dominions. He also wrote to the Pope at the same time, and
very earnestly represented to him, That the courses he took steered directly to
the ruin of the Order, wholly devoted to the Holy See. That the Zeal of the
Knights was not altogether so pure and Angelical, but that they had an eye upon
Temporal Recompenses, while they fought against the common Enemy of the Faith;
and that both their Zeal and Courage too would cool, when they beheld the Price
of their Labors and their Sweat in the hands of Strangers and unknown Persons:
So that if his Holiness did not preserve their Privileges, it might be feared,
that the Rampart of Christendom might be exposed to the fury of the Infidels.

Alexander submitted to the Reasons, or at least to the Authority of the King
of Castile. He revoked the Collation which he had made in favor of his Nephew;
and the Grand Master gave the Commenderie of Wovelles, with that of Baioles to
Don Ferrand of Arragon, of the Royal Family, and very dear to the King of
Castile, having before that created him a Knight.

In the mean time intelligence came, that the Turks were building great Ships,
and every where made great Preparations for War. Thereupon the Grand Master
sent an Ambassador to Constantinople, in show, to Congratulate the Grand
Signior upon his recovery from sickness, but really to penetrate into the
design of those new Preparations. Bajazet kept his design very secret: but the
public rumor of the Port was, that those Preparations were intended against
Egypt, and was a report probable enough.

Cairbei had been dead some months before, and the youngest of his Sons was
advanced to the Throne by the subtilty of a Circassian Mamaluke, who did what
he pleased at Caire, and pretended to govern during the Minority of the Infant.
But an absolute Authority in one particular Subject is always suspected and
odious. The principal Nobility of the Court would not endure the new
Government; so that instead of doing Homage to the new Sovereign, they revolted
from him, and made Confederacies with the Turks to deprive him of his Crown.
The Grand Master was informed of the rumor of the Court, but he believed it so
much the less, the more the Grand Signior's Ministers desired it should be
believed. He kept himself upon his Guard, and gave order for every thing. He
engaged in the Service of the Order all Strangers Ships that used the Levant
Seas. He hired Companies of Spanish Infantry out of Sicily, from whence he also
sent for Corn in abundance. The Grand Prior Blanchefort, after a dangerous
Voyage, at length arriving safe, had order to go for France to make his
Complements, and to desire aid of the Successor to Charles the VIII. who was
dead of an Apoplexy, a disease fatal to great men in that Age. Thereupon Lewis
the XII. who had a great esteem for the Grand Master, kindly received the Grand
Prior, and ordered two and twenty great Ships to be made ready for the service
of the Knights.

At that time, the Grand Master understanding, that Henry the VIII. King of
England, laid out for the fairest Turkey Carpets that were to be got, presented
him with some that were very rare. Henry became sensible of the Civilities of
the Grand Master, and, in acknowledgment, sent him several excellent Pieces of
Artillery, with some Horses of an extraordinary Mettle and Color. Ladislaus
King of Hungary, who, of all the Princes of Europe, was most liable to be a
Prey to the Barbarians, offered the Knights of St. John two Provinces of his
Dominions, to engage them all together to his Interests. But the Grand Master
was not of that humor to despoil a Prince, to protect him; he refused the
offers of Ladislaus, but promised him all manner of assistance.

Blanchefort was no sooner returned to Rhodes, but the Armada of the Turks
passed through the Straits of Gallipoly; the Course they steered at first
caused a great fear, that the Storm threatened the Order of St. John; but soon
after it was seen to fall upon the Republic of Venice. The Turks pretended,
that they had suffered great wrongs in Romania, and the Morea. Besides that,
the Proveditor Prioly having met a Turkish Vessel alone near Meteline, and
perceiving that the Ship, in stead of Loring Sail, fired at them with all her
Artillery, fought and sunk her. Now though the Act of Prioli was regular,
however, it incensed the Grand Signior, who loved the Captain of the Ship; for
which reason he resolved a War against them: nevertheless he did not at all
declare his resentment. For Zancari, whom the Senate sent to discover the
inclinations of the Port, received a thousand Caresses from Bajazet. Nay, the
Barbarian desired to renew his Alliance with the Republic; but he caused the
Articles of the new Treaty to be written in Latin, to the end he might break
it when he pleased, according to the Principles of the Mahumetan Law, which
suffers them not to have any regard to their words in Contracts, that are not
written in their own Language.

At the same time that the Ottoman Fleet sailed out of the Straight, the Grand
Signior entered into Romania with a powerful Army, having imprisoned before all
the Venetians that were at Constantinople. One part of the Turkish Cavalry was
divided from the rest, and sent to harass the Countries of Zara and Dalmatia.
General Grimani, who lay at Modon with the Fleet of the Republic, had implored
the assistance of the Grand Master upon the first noise of the War. But he more
urgently requested his aid, when he saw the Turks double the Point of the
Morea. Justiniani, who commanded in Candy, joined his requests with those of
Grimani; and both of them sent to Rhodes certain Letters from the Duke
Barbarigo.

The Grand Master looked on the attempt of the Turks upon the Venetians, as a
violation of the Treaty of Peace made with the Order, by reason they were
obliged not to molest the Christians: so that he made no scruple to succor the
Venetians in the present Conjuncture. But because he would not make too great a
noise, he only sent them the Spanish Infantry that was come from Sicily, and
some other Foreign Troops. The Republic also at the same time sent to the King
of France, to obtain of his Majesty the Vessels designed for the assistance of
Rhodes. Who thereupon being then in League with the Pope and the Venetians
against the Duke of Milan, gave order to his Admiral to sail away for Greece,
to observe the countenances of the Turks; and in case that Rhodes were in no
danger, to join with the Venetian Fleet.

The noise of War inflamed some of the Knights, and, amongst others, the Grand
Prior Blanchefort, whom the affairs of the Order detained in France during the
Siege of Rhodes: And therefore to satisfy the extreme desire he had to meet
with the Infidels, he desired leave to go and serve the Venetians. The Grand
Master, who, before he broke with the Turk, was desirous to see the success of
the War with Venice, hesitated at first upon the proposal of his Nephew; but
the business being deliberated in Council, it was ordered, that the Grand Prior
should have his liberty, but that he should not take along with him above
thirty Knights at most. So that Blanchefort came to Modon at the same time that
the French Ships arrived there. As for the Venetian Fleet, they had not so many
Vessels as the Turks, But they had better men, and Ships more fit for fight.
The Turks therefore avoided meeting with the Christians, minding only to
husband themselves for some greater Enterprise. But the Adventurers of Rhodes
desiring nothing more then a Battle, pressed Grimani not to lose the
opportunity. And indeed they might have sought, found, and vanquished the
Infidels, had not the over-prudence of the Venetians rendered the heat of the
French unprofitable. But the Ottoman Fleet consisted of 260 Sail, a number that
astonished Grimani; so that instead of engaging, he did nothing but follow them
aloof off. Thereupon the Grand Prior, and the French Admiral, who had a full
resolution to have signalized themselves, disgusted at the conduct of the
General, quitted him with a generous disdain.

The Infidels emboldened by the Cowardice of the Venetians, and by the retreat
of the French, fiercely skirted along the Coasts of Morca, and entered into the
Gulf of Lepanto, whether Bajazet was come with his Army. The City was taken
almost in sight of Grimani, who had not the courage to relieve it. This
untoward news very much troubled the Grand Master: but the Pestilence that
increased in Rhodes much more afflicted him. He made excellent Orders to stop
the Torrent of the Contagion; and to the end the Barbarians might not attempt
any thing at a time so seasonable for them, he kept in pay four Galleys, which
his Nephew brought along with him from Provence; and having re-inforc'd them
with Knights and Soldiers, he commanded them to cruise about the Islands;
wherein he did two good acts at one time: for he preserved the Islands from
Pirates, and empti'd the City of a great number of People, which might have been
swept away by the Pestilence.

Lewis the XII. who made himself Master of the Duchy of Milan, while the Turks
took Lepanto, and who had a design to re-conquer the Kingdom of Naples, out of
which the French had been driven, thought himself obliged to assist the
Venetians in the low Ebb of their Affairs: but he was persuaded he could not do
it, unless he acted by consent with the Grand Master. For that reason he sent
to him two Heralds at Arms, who carried a Letter also to the Port, to the end
that by his means they might travel safely through Turkey, and have a favorable
Audience. So soon as the Heralds came to Rhodes, the Grand Master, who had made
no open Breach with the Turks, wrote to Constantinople for Letters of safe
Conduct. To which Bajazet did not only freely consent, but gave order to the
Basha's of Lycia to go and meet the Heralds of France, and convoy them to the
Port.

Esarcho Centurino, a man of good judgment, and one of the principal
Inhabitants of Rhodes, departed along with them, carrying a Letter of Credence,
to beseech the Grand Signior not to detain the Heralds long, and to make some
small Complement to his Highness as to the War which he made against the
Venetians. Now though the Letters from Lewis were very haughty, and threatened
the Ottoman Empire with the Force of France, if he did not cease to molest the
Venetians, and restore all that had been taken from them. Bajazet* nevertheless
received them very well; nor did he send them back without good Words, and
magnificent Presents.

As the King of France had sent two Heralds by the way of Rhodes, the Grand
Signior, by the same way also, sent to the King of France two Grandees of the
Port, of which, the one was called Sivanbeii, and the other Musibeii, to excuse
himself likewise to the Grand Master. In some sort he endeavored, in a large
Letter, to lay the blame upon the Venetians, and gave the reasons that moved
him to declare War against them. He pretended, that the Venetians had violated
the Faith of Treaties, and the Right of Nations, exercising all manner of
violences upon the Turks; of which, to the end he might be believed, he gave a
long List. And the more to defame the Venetians, he added, that the most
Illustrious King of France knew well enough what wrongs they had done the
French, when being only Duke of Orleans, he accompanied Charles the 8th. to
the Conquest of Naples, when they proffered him ten Ducats for every Soldier
to invade Italy; alleging, that if they did not stop the progress of the
French Arms, they would at length assail the Ottoman Empire. All this the Grand
Seignior wrote to justify himself; but mentioned not a word how Lodowic
Sforza, finding the King of France in League with the Venetians against him,
had invited the Ottoman Arms against them; aggravating to the Port, that Lewis
the XII. would certainly put in execution, what Charles the VIII. designed, for
the Conquest of Milan and Naples.

In the mean time, a Ship of Rhodes being bound from thence to the Coast of
Egypt, was attacked by a Turkish Gallion near to Alexandria. The Knights who
were in the Ship defended themselves stoutly, and had reduced the Turk to the
last extremity; but when the Ship was just upon the point of yielding, another
Vessel, well armed, came to her relief; so that the Knights were forced to quit
her. They made for Alexandria, and putting up the Soldan's Colors, entered the
Port. But the Admiral of Alexandria, a perfidious Brute, without any regard
either to the Peace and Laws of Nations, made the Knights Prisoners, and sent
them to Caire, with all the Christians that were in the Ship.

The Grand Master conjectured, by the attempt of the Gallion, that the Turks
had no intentions any longer to keep fair with the Order. However, he
complained to the Sultan of the Admirals behavior, and that in high terms too,
as of a violence insupportable. The Sultan understanding, that such sharp
complaints were as good as threats, and that he that made them would be as good
as his word, disowned the Admiral, and released the Prisoners.

But the Grand Signior's proceedings were far different. For all his Civilities
to the Grand Master, and his Embassy to the Court of France, did not hinder
the Infidels from continuing the War against the Venetians, nor from invading
Italy. Twelve thousand Spahi's entered into Friuli, through uncouth and
difficult passages; and putting all to Fire and Sword, carried away above 20000
Christians into Slavery. The Pope, who minded nothing but the advancement of
his Family, till then had only been a Spectator of the War; but now he began
to think himself concerned, when he saw the Enemy at his Gates. And besides
that his own Interest engaged him to act, he thought himself obliged in Honor
to wipe off those reproaches, which the death of Zizim had thrown upon him, and
to repair, by some notable action, what had been irregular in his Government.
Thereupon he undertook, with all the heat imaginable, to unite the Christian
Princes, that he might put a stop to the incursions of the Barbarians.

Nor was his diligence unsuccessful. The Kings of Castile, Portugal, and
Hungary declared themselves first of all. Maximilian, whom the Wars of Guelders
and Switzerland had diverted from the Turkish War, entered into this Holy League
with Louis the 12th. when their differences about Milan were ended, by the
Marriage of the King's Daughter with the Emperor's Son.

The Grand Master convinced more then ever of the Infidelity of the Grand
Signior, and not believing himself obliged to have any more respect for them,
who had no more for him, Leagued himself with the Croisado'd Princes. And now
Forces are raising all over Europe; Ships making ready* Money gathering
together in all places; and the bloody Crosses that fell from Heaven in
Germany, which Maximilian himself saw, seemed to portend a happy success. The
Turks take the Alarm at these Prepartions and Prodigies; though that which most
affrighted them was the choice that was made of the Generalissimo of the League.

Alexander, who, among his wicked qualities, had some good ones, and who had a
very ready wit, bethought himself, that to bring about so important an
Expedition, nothing could be more available then the choice of an Experienced
Captain, and such a one as should be acceptable to all the Princes. He cast his
eye upon the Grand Master D'Aubusson, and proposed him in a full Consistory,
after he had made him a large Encomium. All the Cardinals applauded the Popes
Proposition. However, Alexander, before he made the Choice public, resolved to
try the Inclination of the Grand Master. To this end he wrote to him in a very
obliging style, nevertheless with a chargeable condition in his Brief, that the
Order, during the time that the Grand Master should continue General, should
keep out at Sea four Galleys, and four Barks, well appointed, for the Service
of the League.

The Grand Master, who loved to act at his own liberty, pondered upon the
Condition; and it may be his modesty had made use of this pretense, to rid
himself of an Employment, which he thought above him, if the Council had not
advised him to accept of the Condition at any rate whatever, and that the
Letters of several Cardinals his Friends had not at length brought him to an
absolute determination. Thereupon he wrote to his Holiness, That with all
acknowledgment and humble bashfulness he was willing to take upon him the
Charge, with which he was pleased to honor him: And he sent a very ample
Procuration, as to this Affair, to the Commander of Avignon, then
Vice-Procurator-General of the Order in the Court of Rome.

The Pope, not doubting but that his Proposal would be as acceptable to the
Princes, as it was to the Cardinals, gave them advice of his choice, so soon as
he had received the Grand Master's Answer. All the Courts of Christendom
applauded so wise a Choice; and this one Action did Alexander so much honor,
that his Reputation was much repaired thereby. Thereupon before all the
Ambassadors of the Confederate Princes, he publicly declared the Grand Master
D'Aubusson, Captain General of the Croisado.

After which, his Holiness, by a Solemn Brief, filled with his Praises, gave
him information of it. The Purport of the Brief was, That the Princes had
approved the Choice which he had made of his Person; That they were very
readily disposed to obey him; and that his Experience, Valor, and Piety, gave
them confident hopes of Victory. The Pope added, That he was resolved to go to
the War himself, notwithstanding his Age, resolved to partake with the Grand
Master in all the Labors of a Christian Warfare, and to lay down his life, if
occasion should be, to render the Expedition successful. He sent word* That
there were 15 Galleys, which he had expressly caused to be made ready; and that
the Bishop of Tivoly had orders to send them away, so soon as they were fitted
out. He also wrote him word, that he had given notice to the Princes by their
Ambassadors, that his intention was, that they and all their Forces should
render to him the same Honor, and the same Obedience, as to the Head of the
Church. Exhorting him him at length to defend the Faith upon this occasion,
with the same Courage and Virtue, with which alone he had defended it, when he
forced Mahomet to raise his Siege from before Rhodes.

Lewis the XII. would not stay to acknowledge him till he was publicly
proclaimed at Rome; but so soon as he understood the Pope's intentions, he
wrote to the Grand Master, That being willing to contribute to the Successes of
so noble an Expedition, notwithstanding the Affairs he had in Italy, he was
setting forth a Navy Royal, and that knowing his Prudence and long Experience
in the Wars against the Turk, he had ordered his Admiral, Philip de Cleves
Ruvesteine, to follow his Counsels in all things, and to Act by his
Instructions.

The Praises and Applauses which the Pope and the King of France gave him, did
but re-double the zeal and diligence of the Grand Master: So that being now
acknowledged the Captain of such a famous Enterprise, his whole study was, how
to bring it to good issue. The Summer being now past, and no Princes Fleet
appearing; or if they had appeared, the Season being now past for any
considerable Action, his first consideration was to settle a Bank for the
payment of such Forces as should arrive, that they might not think of returning
for want of Money. For he knew well, that only Money could keep Soldiers
together idle in the Levant. To this purpose he sent to the Pope and the King
of France intelligent Knights, to let them understand, that without that
precaution, there was nothing to be done against the Turk. That if the
Soldiers of the League came not forthwith, they would not be in a condition
for action the next Season; and that, if being once arrived, they should return
for want of subsistence, the common Enemy would take advantage of their
Retreat. He let them further know, That while the Forces of the Confederate
Princes attacked the Turk by Sea, it was necessary that the King of Hungary
should assail him by Land to make a diversion.

But in regard the safety of Christendom, in some measure, depended upon the
safety of Rhodes, he was of opinion, that the Ships belonging to the Order
should not distance themselves any farther then Cape Malio. He also thought it
necessary, that the Fleet of the Confederate Princes should not come to Rhodes,
to spare them the labor of returning back to the Morea, and Rhodes the
inconvenience of being eaten out by so many people. Upon which consideration it
was resolved to send before to Ravestein, to desire him to stay at Cape St.
Angelo, there to attend till the Master came himself to bring them into some
good Harbor.

Ravestein was already entered into the Archepelago, and steered directly to the
Island of Metelin, to signalize himself immediately by some notable action. But
in regard he hated Dependency, and was covetous of all the Honor to himself,
so far was he from following the Orders of the Grand Master, that not
vouchsafing to follow his Counsel, he only sent to invite him to come and join
with him. However, though this seemed a very disobliging act of Ravestein, yet
the Grand Master more resented the ill-timing of the Enterprise, then the
ill-behaviour of Ravestein, knowing well it was contrary to the King's
Pleasure, and that the wills of Princes are usually ill obeyed, when those that
are employed take upon them to follow their own inclinations. And indeed this
Bad beginning of the League, created an ill opinion of the Event. Nor did the
slowness of the Pope less trouble him, then the forwardness of the French. The
fifteen Galleys that were to appear with the first, were not to be heard of;
neither was there any news of the Bishop of Tivoli, who had order to conduct
them.

How zealous soever the Grand Master was to advance the Affairs of the
Croisade, he could not determine with himself to join with the French before
the arrival of the Pope's Fleet. He considered, that having no Instructions
from his Holiness touching the Duties of his Office, it behooved him not to
begin the Exercise of it. He considered also, that in difficulties which might
happen, the other Captains would be subject to dispute his power, when they
found the Galleys of his Holiness absent. To avoid all these inconveniences, he
pressed the Pope to keep his word, representing to him with an extraordinary
respect and zeal mixed together, that his Holiness being the Chief, and Soul of
the Enterprise, there was nothing to be done without him. That the Fleets of
the Christian Princes would come in vain into the Levant, if he did not appear
in the head of them. That as for his part, he desired only to acquit himself
of the Charge wherewith he had been pleased to honor him, as having all his
lifetime only sought a fair opportunity to ruin the Mahumetan Puissance.

Ravestein, who had unadvisedly engaged himself in the Siege of Metelin, and
began to see his fault, endeavored all he could to re-fix himself in the good
opinion of the Grand Master, and to oblige him to come to his relief: He sent
to him by the Knight de Gavaston, who was come to him on the behalf of the
Order, that the Venetians having drawn him to Meteline before the arrival of
the Knight, he could not avoid besieging the City. That at first he had raised
a Battery, which had no success, as being planted against the strongest part of
the Wall; but that having changed his Battery, the Canon wrought wonders; but
that he could not determine with himself to make a general Onset without him;
believing withal, that the Event of the Storm would not prove successful,
unless the Knights of Rhodes had their share. That the Venetians had thirty
Galleys before Meteline, not counting his. That for the Popes Galleys, they
were not to be expected; nor did he know where his Holiness should have
fifteen; for that being at Naples, he knew he had but two, which the Duke of
Valentinois made use of against the Prince of Piombino; and that he could not
learn that he had made any Preparations against the Turk; concluding at last,
that he acknowledged the Grand Master for General of the Christian Fleet, and
that he would not proceed any more without his Orders.

The Grand Master hearing no news of the Pope's fifteen Galleys, and not
enduring that any thing should be acted against the Turk, wherein he had not
his share, resolved to sacrifice his Resentments to his Honor, and the
Interests of the Church. He thought himself obliged also, for the Reputation of
the Arms of France, not to desert Ravestein, what ever reason he had to be
displeased with him. Therefore that he might act with Honor, besides the four
Galleys and four Barks which he was to set forth by the Articles of the League,
he resolved to take along with him the Great Ship belonging to the Order,
twelve great Galliots, several Brigantines, several Foists, with some Italian
and Catalonian Vessels which he had hired.

At his departure, he left very good Orders behind him; for having declared the
Grand Commander Cossa his Lieutenant to govern with the Council, he prescribed
him every week to give public Audience to the People: and in case any of the
Knights should withstand him, to proceed against them according to the Forms
and Rigor of the Statutes. The management of the Treasure, for a time, he
committed to the care of the Admiral; and particularly charged the Grand
Marshal to be exact in doing Justice to the Knights.

For the security of Rhodes, he gave order, that Guards should be kept in all
the Posts of the Languages, as if the place were Besieged; and he himself named
such and such Knights to ride their Rounds about the Island, to hinder the
Landing of the Barbarians.

The Council, in requital, to show the particular esteem which they had for the
Grand Master, ordered, That all the Knights that accompanied him should enjoy
the privileges of Residence, as if present at Rhodes: That all Elections of
Priors and Bailiffs should surcease in his absence, that he might deliberate
upon such Affairs as should present themselves, and that his Decrees should be
of the same force and authority, as if issued out of his Palace: and that in
regard a great number of Knights were to attend the Grand Master, it was
ordained, that after their departure, no Knight should stir out of the Island,
but upon the urgent affairs of the Order.

Things being thus settled, and twelve Vessels of the Fleet being gone before to
stay for the Knights at Lango, the Grand Master embarked the 21 of November,
attended to the Sea by a great throng of People, who could not but let fall
tears at his departure, especially when they saw him threatened by a rising
Tempest ere he was out of sight.

His impatience to be at the assault of Meteline, caused him to make all the
haste imaginable. Scarcely had he reached Lango, when the Knight Baldovin, whom
he had sent before to advertize the French and Venetians of his coming, brought
him news that the Siege was raised; at the same time delivering him Letters
from Ravestein and Pesaro. Ravestein signified to him in a few words, That the
Siege of Meteline being an Enterprise much more difficult, then it had seemed
to be to men of very good judgment, he thought fit to leave it off. That the
Season being far spent, his care was how to be gone before it grew worse, which
would be in two days at farthest, with his good leave. The Letter from Pesaro
was larger, and more rational; the effect whereof was, That whereas Ravestein
had undertaken the Siege without advising with the Venetians, he had also
raised it of his own head: That it was no wonder, that an Enterprise so ill
managed should have no better success. That the French preparing for home,
there was no likelihood that the Venetians should stay at Meteline. That they
were making to Scio; and that if it were his pleasure they should join with the
Knights, they were ready to do what he should think best for the good of
Christendom. Pesaro added, that there was no heed to be given to the Popes
Promise, for that his Fifteen Galleys were only in Idea. That the Spanish
Fleet was about Taranto; and that the Portugal Fleet having gained Corfu, was
returned home, notwithstanding all the entreaties of the Venetians, pretending
they could not stay long out in bad weather in those Seas.

The Grand Master was more perplexed at the ill success of the Enterprise of
Meteline, then surpised at it. But believing that the return of the French
Fleet would do more harm to the Affairs of the League, then the raising of the
Siege, he dispatched away a Foist to Naxi, by which the French were to pass,
desiring Ravestein not to return till they had discoursed together. He sent
another to Scio, to desire the Venetians to meet him at Naxi, and to let them
know, that he had made great Preparations for their assistance; that he had
left Rhodes in a bad Season, and almost contrary to the advice of his Council:
That the misfortune of Meteline was not past recovery, and that they might
return to the Siege with more success, provided the French had not lost their
courage. He desired Pesaro to stay Ravenstein, at what rate soever, if they
were yet together, or earnestly to write to him, if they were parted.

The Rhodian Fleet set sail from Lango presently after the Foists, and, in
spite of contrary Winds, arrived at length before Naxi. But Ravensteins
impatience to quit the Levant, would not permit him to stay for the Knights. He
set sail precisely two days after he had wrote to the Grand Master, according
to the purport of his Letter, the Prayers of the Venetians, the Honor of
France, nor his own, being able to stop him.

The Grand Master had not been so well appeased at the departure of the French,
had he not met the Venetians in sight of the Island. After mutual Salutes of
both Fleets, Pesaro came aboard the Grand Master, where after some deliberation
upon the present state of Affairs, they concluded together, to write to all the
Princes of the Croisade, to engage them to let their Fleets be ready against
the Spring. They also agreed, that the true way to ruin the Turk, was not to
make any attempts upon the Islands of the Archipelago, the loss of which would
do him but little harm; but to force the Dardanels, and besiege Gallipoli with
a potent Army; then to make up directly to Constantinople, and fire the Fleet
that usually rode in the Sea of Marmora; which the Grand Master would undertake
to do, provided that Ladislaus performed his part upon Hungary side. This being
the condition of Affairs at that time, the Grand Master took his leave of
Pesaro, and set sail for Rhodes, three of the Venetian Galleys attending him
out of respect. The Rhodians, who did not expect his Return so soon, were
pleasingly surpised at it; yet easily brookt the misfortune that restored them
their Grand Master.

No sooner was he arrived, but he had intelligence, that several Turkey
Merchants Ships, very richly laden, were in the Seas of Syria and Egypt
homeward bound. The Council was of opinion, that such a Booty was not to be let
slip, but that they should take this opportunity absolutely to break with the
Port. Thereupon the Grand Master commanded out seven Galleys, and some Boats,
to way-lay them. The Knight Diomede de Villaragut, Castellan of Emposta, was
named Admiral of the Squadron. He put to Sea, and took the Ships; so that the
Prize almost recompensed the Expenses which the Knights had been at.

But for all this small success, the Master was not a little troubled at the
slowness of the Princes. He was sensibly afflicted to see the League
half-broken; and therefore to renew it again, he sent Ambassadors to all the
Christian Courts: Who were no sooner departed, but Ambassadors arrived from
Ladislaus King of Hungary; who, after they had congratulated the Grand Master
as General of the League, assured him, that the Hungarian Army was in
readiness; and therefore desired him to engage the Grand Caraman, the Sultan of
Egypt, but, above all, the King of Persia, to take up Arms against the Turk.
The Resolutions of Ladislaus extremely rejoiced the Grand Master; but the
Revolutions then happening in Persia somewhat qualified his joy.

Jacup the Son of Vssum Cassan, succeeding his Father in the Kingdom of Persia,
was afraid lest Arduel, his Cousin, should one day usurp the Crown; and his
fear was upon good grounds. Arduel publicly gave out, that Ali was the true
Interpreter of the Law; and thereby he almost overthrew Mahumetism. The People,
who are always disposed to receive Novelties, and are easily governed by them
that know how to tickle their fancies with Religion, declared themselves for
the Doctrine of Arduel. Thereupon Jacup thought the favor of the People to be
a sufficient crime for which to put him to death, and rid himself of him
without any noise. And a little while after he gave the same order for Ishmael
the Son of Arduel. That order of the King of Persia was not so secret, but
Ishmael had notice of it. Upon which, he fled toward the Caspian Sea, to a
Prince that was one of his Friends, and there immediately made a public
Profession of what his Father had taught him. His comely Presence and his
Eloquence, soon begat him a high esteem among those Barbarous Nations, even to
be regarded as a kind of Deity; for which reason they gave him the name of
Sophi, or Wise. He dexterously kept up so fair a Reputation, and believing it
lawful for him to do any thing to obtain a Crown, he got the King of Persia to
be put to death, by the very means of the Queen her self, who hated her
Husband, and loved Ishmael. After the death of Jacup, Ishmael returned into
Persia, with a great number of his followers, who looked upon him as a Prophet
sent by God: The most part of the Persians took his part, so that having got
together a good Army, he marched against Alvant, who had taken possession of
the Throne, as being the eldest Son of Jacup. The new King was driven first
from his City, then defeated in a great Battle, and slain by Ishmael's own
hand. This fatal news quite dampt the courage of Alvant's Brother, whose name
was Maracatam, and lay at Babylon with a numerous Army. So that in stead of
marching against Ishmael, he fled to the Mountains, and abandoned the Throne
that belonged to him to save his life. Thus the Usurper became the Master; and
though all the Kingdom had not yet submitted to his Scepter, he caused himself
to be called King of Persia.

These Revolutions appeared no way favorable to the King of Hungary, nor to
the intentions of the Grand Master. There was no probability that Ishmael Sophi
would engage in the Affairs of the League, while Persia was not yet at Peace
within it self, and all those accidents were still to be feared that might
ruin a new Dominion, unjust and unsetl'd; besides, that the Successes of
Ishmael naturally bred suspicions in the King of Caramania's breast. Which
reasons would not permit him to enterprise against the Turks, when he had
enough to do to secure himself at home. Nor was the Sultan of Egypt in a better
condition to favor the Princes of the Croisade; for besides that he was
embroiled in the Domestic Dissentions of his own Court, he feared the
victorious Arms of Ishmael, who, by the advice given him by Attula Turcoman,
threatened to begin his Conquests with those of Syria and Egypt, when he had
settled himself in Persia. Nevertheless, when the Grand Master better
considered, he bethought himself, that the Troubles of Persia would be no way
disadvantagious to the Enterprise of the Christians; for that the Turk alarmed
with the Success of his Victorious Neighbor and Enemy, would be obliged to
keep very numerous Armies upon the Fronteers of Turkey; and that being thereby
much weakened, he might be the easier vanquished at home.

The noise of the League no less perplexed Bajazet, then the Revolutions of
Persia. Understanding therefote that the Grand Master was the Head and Soul of
the Enterprise, he be thought himself of dealing with him, by the means of
Sultan Corcut, the best beloved of all his Sons, to whom he had given the
Government of Anatolia. Corcut being well instructed by the Ministers of the
Port what part he was to act, sent very rich Presents to the Grand Master, with
a most obliging Letter, wherein he requested his friendship; and conjured him,
after a thousand offers of his services, that they might live together in Amity
and good Correspondence, and that there might be a freedom of Trade between
each others Subjects. He added, that his Father had given him all power, in
reference to a peace, and that he was ready to do what ever the Knights
desired. But these fair words could not dazzle the Grand Master. He knew by the
Turks themselves, who were his Spies, that the famous Pirate Camali, who had
fitted out several Vessels at Gallipoli for the service of Bajazet, was just
ready to set Sail out of the Straits with above fifty men of War, to attack the
Isles that belonged to the Order. So that without entering into any further
Negotiation, he frankly declared, That being nominated General of the League by
the Pope, he could not forsake the Common Cause, nor could hearken to any Peace
which the Grand Seignior would not make with all the Princes of Christendom, as
well as with the Knights of Rhodes.

The Grand Master declared himself upon this point so much the more boldly,
because he knew, that seven of the Popes Galleys were joined to the Venetian
Armado at the Island of Cerigo, and that his Holiness was setting out thirteen
more, the care of which he had given to the Knight Fabricio de Caretta, who was
then at Genoa. This news was brought to Rhodes by an Envoy of the Bishop of
Baffo, under whose Conduct the Galleys set Sail, and who had also in Charge a
Brief from the Pope to be delivered to the Grand Master. This Brief contained
many Applauses of the Grand Masters Actions, and many Excuses of the Popes
Neglect: That he had the most sincere intentions in the world, but that the
misfortunes of the times would not suffer him to keep his word; that he would
repair what was past with advantage, and send Twenty Galleys instead of Fifteen.

But to return to the Sophi. He had no sooner established his Throne, partly by
fair, partly by foul means, but he resolved to extend his Conquests. Instead of
advancing against Egypt, as he intended, he fell into Armenia with fourscore
thousand fighting men, drawn thither by the Neighborhood, and the hatred which
he bore the Turks. In this Expedition, Ishmael soon mastered Armenia, after he
had cut in pieces above twenty thousand men. Bajazet alarmed by the Success of
the Conqueror, gathered all his Forces together to defend himself; but he could
not believe himself able to resist so potent an Enemy, while he was at odds
with the Christians. For that reason he made Propositions of Peace to the Grand
Master and the Republic of Venice.

The Grand Master, who had intelligence of every thing, and in particular knew
the Consternation of the Grand Signior, failed not to give notice of it to the
Pope, that never a fairer opportunity offered it self to ruin the Common
Enemy: That Bajazet was obliged to go in Person against the Persian, for want
of a Basha experienced in Military Affairs, in whom he could absolutely
confide: That the Sophi, a liberal and affable Prince, drew to his Party the
Militia of the Grand Signior: That there was no likelihood of any accord
between Persia and Turkey, in regard a Conqueror hates nothing more then Peace.
Therefore he besought his Holiness not to neglect the opportunity that
Providence presented. But the Commotions in Italy rendered all these
Remonstrances void. For while the Turks and Persians make War one against
another, the French and Spaniards break the Peace which they had made. They had
contracted an Alliance against Frederick of Naples, who succeeded Ferdinand his
Nephew, and had got possession of his Dominions by force of Arms. But Ambition
soon divided them, which it had united. Lewis the XII. and Ferdinand King of
Castile, became jealous each of other; neither could endure a Competitor nor a
Companion, both of them claim the whole Kingdom which they had parted betwixt
them. And the differences of their Ministers, touching the limits of their
common Conquests serving for a pretense, occasioned a most bloody War, that
filled all Italy with horror and confusion.

The Bishop of Baffo, who had joined himself with the Fleet of the Venetians,
had intelligence of the Rupture between the two Crowns, at what time the Naval
Army of the Venetians had taken the Island of Santa Maura from the Turk, with
the assistance of a Squadron of Knights which the Grand Master sent them, and
some Galleys of a French Captain, called Pre' Jan de Bidoux, a very
understanding Seaman, and a very stout Soldier. Presently the Bishop gave a
shrewd guess at the ill success of the League by the state of affairs in Italy,
and, according to his Instructions, he gave notice to the Grand Master, That
new divisions hindered his Holiness from being exact to his word. He added,
That of Twenty Galleys promised by the Holy See, he had received but Thirteen;
That he could not keep them above four months, without express command from the
Pope; which were almost expired, and most certainly would not be prolonged;
That the French Fleet would not come at all; That Captain Pre Jan de Bidoux was
gone from St. Maura upon the first intelligence of the Broils between France
and Spain; That the Venetians being resolved to fortify St. Maura, could not
spare their Fleet any farther; so that Winter being at hand, he did not believe
that the Confederate Princes would undertake any thing against the Turk this
year.

However, the eager longing which the Grand Master had to see the League
renewed, and his joy for the taking Santa Maura, made him believe, that the
flames of War between the French and Spaniards might be as easily extinguished
as they were kindled; upon this consideration he resolved not to give off so.
So that without taking any notice of the Bishop of Baffo's advice, he fell
again to writing to the Pope. After he had congratulated the Pope for the
Success of his Galleys in the taking Santa Manra, he besought him to keep them
still in readiness, and to excite the Venetians to prepare the most powerful
Armado they could. He besought him to endeavor the reconciliation of the two
Kings, and to make use of all his Art in that particular. He pressed with new
vehemence the Emperor, and other Kings, particularly the King of England, who
was very powerful at Sea, and who was very zealous for the Interests of the
Church. After which, committing the rest into the hands of Providence, he set
himself to regulate the Customs both of the People, and the Knights.

In the first place, understanding, that the Jews that dwelt in Rhodes, led a
very scandalous life, and that their bad example was the occasion of many sins
committed in the City, he took up a resolution to expel them. Having assembled
a Council for this effect, he set forth, in a long discourse, all the evil that
the Trade of the Jews might produce among the Faithful; and that an Order
particularly consecrated to the defense of Christendom, ought to abhor a Nation
which was so much the Enemy of Christ himself. Then he came in particular to
the Jews of Rhodes, whom the Prodigies of the last Siege, and those upon the
Wall, had hardened the more.

The Grand Master's judgment was approved in Council, and they all decreed with
one accord, that the Jews should depart the Island, and all the Territories of
the Order, within fifty days. They were also forbid to settle in the East, lest
they should prove spies to the Turks: and all that was permitted them, was, to
put off their Goods in forty days. But all sorts of Liberty and privileges
were offered, on the other side, to those that would turn Christians. As for
their little Children, it was decreed, that they should be Baptized whether
their Parents would or no. And the Decree of Council was drawn in express
terms, That since it was the opinion of all Divines and Canonists, that the
Jews were the Slaves of the Christian Princes, they had not the Right nor
Jurisdiction of Parents over their Children. So that the Grand Master might
dispose of them for the good of Christendom, and the Salvation of their Souls.
Thereupon according to the power of the Laws, the Jews Children were Baptized.
And lest they should renounce their Christianity when they came to years of
discretion, the Grand Master kept them at Rhodes, and brought them up at the
public Charge, in some measure doing the Duty and Office of a Father to them.

After this, the Grand Master applied himself to examine the Statutes of the
Order, which the Vice Chancellor Caoursin had reduced into a Method some years
before. Some he cancelled that were grow nout of use, the observation whereof
did more harm then good, serving only to multiply Quarrels and Suits of Law.
Others he made new, according to the Constitution of the present Time. For
seeing how far the Impiety and Luxury of the Knights had extended it self, who
lived more like Seculars and Libertines, then men in Holy Orders, he ordained,
That whosoe'er should swear by, or blaspheme the Name of God, or speak a word
to the dishonor of the Virgin Mary, or the Saints, for the first fault should
undergo the punishment of Fast forty days, and be whipped twice a week before
the High Altar.
Lent; for the second, two months imprisonment in the Castle; and for the
third, be put in the public Prison during the pleasure of the Grand Master and
the Council* and that they that were put into these Prisons, should lose three
years privilege of Precedence.

He also forbade, that the Knights should habit themselves like other people of
the world, or wear any thing that had the least semblance of Gallantry or
Vanity. He ordered particularly, that their habits should be plain, and of one
color; and that if any Knight disobeyed this Order, besides the punishment of
the Quarantine, his Habit should be confiscate to the Public Treasury.

But though he loved Modesty in Habit, he was Magnificent in all things that
concerned the Ornament and Beautifying of the Church; as, the stately
Tapestries, Statues of Silver, Crosses of Gold, Chalices, and Image-Chariots of
Malta, engraven with his Arms for the most part, testify to this day.

While he employed himself in this manner, in expectation of his Embassy and
Letters in reference to the League, the Spaniards, who had for their Captain in
the Kingdom of Naples Alexander Cordova, sir-nam'd the Great Captain, made most
cruel War against the French; and both Parties grew so violent one against
another, that there was no likelihood of Peace. The Pope, instead of laboring
an accommodation and reconcilement between the two Nations, as the Grand Master
had desired him, openly favored the Spaniards, and fed the fire which he ought
to have extinguished. Besides, he had no other thoughts in his head, but how to
Aggrandize Caesar Borgia his Son, Duke of Valentinois, whom he passionately
loved so far, as to dare any thing, and think any thing lawful for his
advancement and enrichment. But that which directly ruined the Croisade. was
this, That the Venetians, tired with the War, made Peace with the Turks, after
several private Negotiations, wherein the Knights of Rhodes were not taken
notice of in the least. By this Peace, the Venetians restord the Island of
Santa Maura, which Pesara had fortified at great Expenses; and the Grand
Signior engaged himself to restore what he had taken from the Venetian
Merchants, from the beginning of the War. Ladislaus King of Hungary soon
followed the example of the Republic, making an agreement, though not very
Honorable, with Bajazet. These sad tidings pierced the very heart of the Grand
Master; and to add to his affliction, he understood at the same time, that his
Holiness had conferred Commanderies of the Order upon Secular Persons, and that
he had promised the Priorie of Castile to Don Henry of Toledo. Considering
neither the Privileges of Innocent the VIII. the Nature of the Revenues of the
Order, nor the Dignity of the Generalissimo of the League, whom he had elected
himself.

The Grand Master so highly resented such irregular proceedings, that he wrote
to the Pope; and without swerving from that respect which he owed to the Chief
of the Church, and the Vicar of Christ, he told Alexander his own, as far as a
real Zeal could inspire him. But Alexander taking little notice of his
Complaints, continued his affronts and injuries to the Order, and that with so
much the more Liberty, believing, that now the Venetians had made Peace with
the Turks, he should have no more need of the Knights.

The League thus brok'n off, and the proceedings of the Pope, brought the Grand
Master into a deep Melancholy, that wasted him by degrees, and at length cast
him into a mortal distemper. He began to fall ill the Eeve of St. John Baptists
day. But then he would not disclose that he ailed any thing, and was present at
the Bonfires, and at the public Annual Ceremonies before the Castle, for which
there are extraordinary preparations in Honor of the Patron of the Order. He
also went in state to Church upon the Festival day; and concealing his ill
disposition of body, performed all the Duties of a true Christian.

This striving against his Distemper out of Piety, re-doubl'd the force of the
disease; so that in two days he fell so ill, that the Physicians at first
despaired of his life: nevertheless they were willing to try what Art could do.
But the Grand Master, who perceived himself near his end, slighted his own
preservation, and told them with a smile* That never having taken Physic, it
was dangerous for him to begin at his years. However, he submitted to the
entreaties of his Nephew, and the reasons of the Physicians, notwithstanding
his own natural reluctance.

The Grand Masters sickness, put all the City into a Consternation. The
Inhabitants* like people in despair, ran to the Castle, and from the Castle to
the Churches, to implore of God the life of their Prince. The whole City was
filled with Vows, Prayers, and Processions. But his sickness increasing more
and more, he received the Sacrament of the Church with a lively Faith, and an
ardent Devotion, which both edifi'd and pierced the hearts of all that stood
by. After that, he called all the Knights of the Council, and recollecting all
the strength he had left; My dear Brethren, said he, I have no more then one
short moment to live; therefore before I leave you, take it not amiss that I
exhort you, to choose a Person more worthy then my self to succeed in my Place;
and that I conjure ye also to expend all your Honor in a generous defense of
the Faith, and in the observation of the Rules of the Order. This is the favor
that I beg of you as a dying man. Hardly had he strength enough to pronounce
the last words; nor did he utter above two or three words more, to comfort the
Knights, that shed tears round about his bed. At length he gave them his
Benediction as his Children; and then lying quietly for some time, with his
eyes sometimes lifted up to Heaven, sometimes fixed upon the Crucifix, he
seemed to be in a kind of discourse with God, till he sweetly and mildly
yielded up his last breath. At the very moment Anno 1503.
of his expiration, the Knights made so loud a noise of lamentation, as easily
made known his death to the People, assembled in the Palace. Then was their
sorrow soon expressed by their tears and wailings, and after that by a deep
silence, as usually happens in extreme afflictions.

Thus di'd Peter D'Aubusson, Grand Master of Rhodes, Cardinal of St. Adrian,
Legate of the Holy See in Asia, and nominated Generalissimo of the Holy League.
He was aged about fourscore years, and he had governed the Order above twenty
seven.

So soon as grief would permit the Knights to come to themselves, they made it
their business to render to the dead their last duties with all the
Magnificence imaginable. He was exposed upon a Noble Bed of State. Nor did the
Ghastliness of death deprive him of that sweet and amiable Majesty, that always
appeared in his countenance when alive. Three Knights stood at the Beds head in
Mourning, one holding the Cardinals Cap, another the Legates Cross, and the
third the Standard of Generalissimo. Four other Knights held each of them a
Banner, whereon were embroidered the Arms of the Order, and those of
D'Aubusson. On each side of him stood two Altars, dressed up with Canopies over
each; on the one was laid the Dalmatick Gown, the Mitre, and all the Ornaments
proper for a Cardinal Deacon. On the other lay the Casque, Corslet, Half-Pike
and Sword, which the Grand Master made use of upon the day of the Grand
Assault; together with his Clothes, all stained with his own and the blood of
the Barbarians. Two hundred Knights attended besides, all in deep mourning. The
People that crowded to this fatal Spectacle, could not forbear weeping
bitterly; they cried out, They had lost their Father; and then kissed his hands
to ease their grief, and took their last leaves.

His Obsequies were performed the next day following, which the public Grief
contributed to render more solemn, then all the Funeral Pomp. He was carried to
the Church upon the shoulders of the principal Grand-Crosses, and Interred in
the Chapel he himself had built.

The first General Chapter that was held at Rhodes under Emery D'Amboise, his
Successor, decreed, That in Honor of the Memory of the Grand Master
D'Aubusson, the Order should, at the Expense of the Public Treasury, erect him
a Magnificent Tomb in Brass; and that an Epitaph should be Engraved upon it,
reciting the most Illustrious Actions of his Life. The Historians of the Order
of St. John do not mention this Epigram, and with all the diligence I have
used, I could never hear any thing more of it. However, the Encomiums which
Popes, Princes, and Historians have given the famous Peter D'Aubusson, may well
supply the place of that Epitaph. Sixtus the IV. and Innocent the VIII. affirm
in their Briefs, that the Holy See was infinitely obliged to him, and that they
could not sufficiently acknowledge the Services he had done the Faithful, in
putting a stop, by his cares, and with the price of his own blood, to the
Conquests of Mahomet the Second, the most Formidable Enemy of Christendom.
Alexander the Sixth confessed, That there was in the Grand Master a Sincere
Faith, an Heroic Valor, an Exquisite Prudence, and a most perfect Experience
in all things that concerned the War against the Turks. The Emperor
Maximilian, Ferdinand of Castile, and Matthias Corvin King of Hungary, often
called him in their Letters, The Tamer of the Ottomans, and the Support of the
Church. Caoursin calls him, The Father of his Country, the Protector of the
Unfortunate, and the Invincible Defender of Rhodes. Victorellus, in his
Additions to C. Ciaconius, says, That all was great in him, his Wit, his
Courage, and his Piety: That being invested with the Sacred Purple, he was
never the more remiss in Military Duties; and that he had performed at one time
Actions worthy of a Holy Cardinal, and a Generous Soldier. The same Author
adds* That the Magnanimous D'Aubusson, in all the Conduct of his Life, had no
other aim, then only the Glory of God, and Honor of his Order; That he
governed his Subjects with as much Lenity as Justice; and that his Paternal
Goodness was principally eminent toward the Poor. The Ecclesiastical History
speaks of him as of a most admirable Person, and one that merited all manner of
Applause. In short, the History of the Knights of St. John extolls him above
all the Grand Masters, equals him to the Hero's of Ancient times, and propounds
him as a Model to all the Princes of Christendom.

A CONTINUATION Of the HISTORY OF Rhodes, Under the Government of Philip de
Villiers Lisle Adam, Containing the Siege of Solomon the Magnificent, no less
famous ^^^n that Mahomet the II.
UPon the death of Peter D'Aubusson, Emery D'Amboise, Prior of France, then
absent, was chosen in his place; in whose time, though Bajazet swore to besiege
Rhodes with a puissant Army, yet he attempted nothing. He was a Prince,
virtuous, valiant, charitable, and successful in his Enterpizes; so that under
his Government the Knights performed several notable Exploits to the honor of
the Order, and won among the rest that famous Victory at Sea from the Sultan of
Egypt, signalized by the death of the Soldan's Nephew who commanded the Fleet.
To Emery D'Amboise succeeded, by a fair Election, Guy de Blancefort Prior of
Auvergne. In his time Sultan Selim having caused his Father Bajazet to be
strangled, and put to death Achmac and Corcutt, his two Brothers, with their
Wives and Children, possessed himself of the Empire; wherein he was ^o sooner
settl*d, but he designed to lay siege to Rhodes. The Report whereof alarmed
the Grand Master to make preparations for his defense; wherein he proceeded as
far as could be expected, considering the short time of his Government; for in
less then a year he died, and left his place to be supplied by the Admiral de
Carretta, who the first thing he did, made a League with Ishmael Sophi the King
of Persia against Selim. For understanding that the Turk still continued his
vast preparations for War, he thought it was but a piece of common Providence
to provide for himself. But the Storm fell upon the Sultan of Egypt, who being
overthrown in Battle, lost all Syria, together with his life, in the first
place; and soon after his Successor, having twice unfortunately fought Selim
himself, and being by him at length taken and hanged upon one of the Gates of
Caire, lost all Egypt, of which Selim made himself absolute Master. But whether
Selim intended any mischief against Rhodes or no, his death hastened the fate
of Rhodes; for upon that the Empire fell to his Son Solymon the Magnificent,
the shock of whose fury and puissance, upon the death of the Admiral Caretta,
Philip de Villiers Lisle Adam Prior of France, was chosen to withstand; being
elected Grand Master the 22d. of January, 1521. whose deportment in so Grand a
Siege would he too unkindly left out, where D' Aubusson's Fame is so honorably
expanded; it being certain that never two Courages were better mated in story.
Never was a City more valiantly defended, nor more valiantly lost. And it is a
question undetermined whether of the two got most, Amurach by rising from it,
or Solomon by taking it; while the one prudently saved, the other became a mere
prodigal of blood. Philip de Villiers was absent at the time of his being
elected, and therefore Gabriel de Pomerols was chosen his Lieutenant till his
arrival. Which dignity while he executed, he thought fit to send to the Pope a
Model of the City of Rhodes, that he might see how it was fortified. But that
which might have proved of higher concern, was the arrival of another
Ambassador from the Grand Sophi, to continue that private correspondence which
was begun with Carretta. Unluckily he finds Carretta dead; so that his
Commission being at an end, he went to visit Amurath the Son of Sultan Zelim,
in the behalf of the Sophi. That young Prince was entertained by the Order at
their own Expenses in the Castle of Ferracla, whither the Knights sent several
Presents to the young Sultan, that he might be able to gratify the Ambassador,
who soon after returned home to his own Prince, not so much as mentioning any
thing of the business for which he was sent.

The Grand Master being in France at the time of his Election, made all the
haste he could to his charge, departing from Marseilles in the Carrack of
Rhodes, together with four other hired Vessels. But his Voyage seemed to be
somewhat inauspicious. For one of the Vessels was split by the way; and the
great Carrack it self had like to have been burnt; being all on fire through
the carelessness of the Cook, but was happily quenched again through the
industry and authority of the Grand Master. More then this, having past by Nice
and Corsica, a flash of lightning shot it self into the main Cabin of the
Carrack, and melted his Sword without hurting the Scabbard. Which little
accidents were by some interpreted as ill omens of the success of the Siege of
the Rhodes, that soon after happened. Cortogoli also, the Grand Turkish Pirate
laid way to intercept the Grand Master, with a great number of Gallys and
Galeots, partly out of hopes of booty, partly to revenge the death of his
Brothers which the Knights of Rhodes had slain, and to set the third at
liberty, being then a slave in Rhodes. However the Grand Master, contrary to
the advice and entreaties of the Knights and great Personages that attended
him, with full sails made the Cape of St. Angelo, and in the might time passed
the place where the Turks lay in wait for him, and arrived safe in Rhodes.
Cortogoli, Sept. 11. 1421.
mad that he had so missed his prey, some time after enters into the Channel of
Rhodes, hoping by his unlookt for coming to find some opportunity to do
mischief. But being discovered, the Grand Master sent forth the Rhodian Fleet
against him, the sight whereof not only put him to flight, but made him forsake
a Vessel of Candia which he had almost taken.

While things were thus transacted at Rhodes, Solomon being come to the Empire,
contrary to the Opinion of all men, that he would be a peaceable Prince; soon
after displaying the inordinate Ambition of his Predecessors, with a vast power
of men besieged Belgrade in Hungary, and took it. This Victory swelled him up;
so that burning with a desire to conquer Rhodes, yet willing to conceal his
design, that he might the better make his preparations, he sent an Ambassador
to the Grand Master, to whom he delivered a Letter, written in the Greek
Language, wherein he magnified the Grandeur of his Empire, and his Victories,
highly extolled the Virtues of the Grand Master, and offered him peace and
friendship. The Grand Master, and those of the Council immediately understood
the craft and fallacy of Solomon, and that being young and full of Ambition,
his courage and deliberations tended to other designs then the Tenor of his
Letter implied. And therefore there was an Answer returned him in the name of
the Grand Master; by which he plainly understood that he was discovered; that
the Rhodians neither feared nor trusted him; so that he was likely to find it
afar more difficult task to conquer them, then he had found at Belgrade.
Therefore he entered into several consultations about this Enterprise,
concerning which the most part of his Council laid before him the difficulties
he would meet with, and dissuaded him from hazarding either his Forces or his
Reputation upon an attempt so unlikely to succeed. And indeed Mustapha Basha,
and Curtogoli were the only persons that fixed him in his Resolution. Among
other things they represented to him that there was no other means for him
peaceably to enjoy the Provinces of Egypt and Syria; for that the shortest and
only way for him to receive intelligence from thence, and to send thither, was
cut off by the Knights of Rhodes, who spread themselves upon those Seas, and
intercepted all his Vessels. For which reason he was constrained to keep a
Fleet always out at Sea: Besides, that as long as those of the Order kept
footing in Rhodes, they would be continually animating and inciting the
Christian Princes to make War upon him, and to league themselves together for
the Recovery of the holy Land. He had found among the private Memoirs of Selim
his Father, that the only way for him to secure his own affairs, was to make
himself Master of Belgrade and Rhodes; by the situation whereof the Christians
had always an opportunity to bring the War into the midst of his Territories.
He was also importuned and pressed thereto by the complaints of the Inhabitants
of Metelin, Negropont, Caramania, the Morea, and his new Subjects of Egypt and
Syria, who were perpetually alarmed, pillaged, and plundered by those of the
Order. He was also the more incited thereto by the opportunity which presented
it self by reason of the Divisions and Wars between Charles the fifth and the
King of France, from whom all the main Succor must come, which the Knights
could expect: and more then all this, by the daily intelligence which he had
received from a Jewish Physician, whom Selim had sent to live in Rhodes for a
Spy. This Physician expert in his Art, had performed many excellent Cures, and
by his officiousness and diligence toward all people had so insinuated himself
into the acquaintance and favor of the Principal Knights of the Order, that he
easily dived into their secrets, and sent his Advices to a Greek of Scio, who
conveyed them to Constantinople. Among other things he advertised Solomon, that
there was a great part of the Wall thrown down near the Bulwark of Auvergne to
be rebuilt according to the Design and Directions of the Engineers, so that the
City might be easily surpised, if his Fleet came in time to attacque it in
that place. But the best Intelligence that Solomon received was given him by
Andrew D'Amarall, Prior of Castile, and afterward Chancellor of the Order, who
bare in his mind a mortal hatred and enmity against the Grand Master, ever
since the difference that happened between them ever since the Battle of
Layasso; and against the Order it self, for that notwithstanding all his
underhand dealing for the Honor, they had elected with an unanimous consent,
the Grand Master, both for his merit and his virtues. This venom of Ambition,
Malice and Revenge so strongly possessed him, and gained so far upon him, as to
make him resolve upon this hideous Act of Treason. The day of the Election he
was heard to say, that this would be the last Grand Master of Rhodes: And some
days before the Siege, he wished his soul in the hands of the Devil, so that
Rhodes and the Order might be ruined. He had in his service a Turkish slave, of
a quick and ready apprehension, to whom he pretended to have given his Liberty,
as being ransomed. This slave he sent to Constantinople with a particular and
exact discovery of the State of the City, of the Provisions and Ammunition
therein, and what Corn was wanting; persuading the Great Turk to send his Fleet
with all speed, promising him a certain Victory, and to give him all the
Intelligence that should be requisite.

Solomon found this to be sound Intelligence, knowing that Amaral was one of
the Principal Knights, and being of their Council, knew whatever was decreed or
voted for the defense of the City; and sent back the slave laden with gifts,
and promises of future rewards. Amaral entertained him, pretending he had
brought his Ransom. This Action caused in many an extreme dislike, and a
general suspicion of him, but by reason of his Dignity and Authority, there
were none that durst to speak their minds freely.

In the mean time Leo deceased, after he had governed the Papacy eight years;
and Solomon made all his preparations as privately as possibly he could, giving
it out that he intended either for Apulia or Cyprus. Nevertheless the Grand
Master was advertised of every thing by his Spies; and being assured that he
should be besieged, sat in Council every day; and as often did Amarall labor
to suppress the report of the Siege, as much as in him lay, to divert and
hinder the Order from making those Provisions which were necessary for their
defense; instancing how often such Rumors had been in vain, and how needless
it was for the Order to put themselves to unnecessary charges at a time when
their Exchequer ran low. However the Grand Master received more certain and
pregnant Intelligence by a Ragusian, a person of understanding, and one that
had the Turkish Language at command, whom he had sent to Constantinople for a
Spy, that the Grand Signior was setting forth a vast number of Ships, and
preparing all sorts of Engines of War, and Guns of an extraordinary bigness;
and that there was a stop upon all persons going to Rhodes without the leave of
the Governors. Thereupon the Grand Master making no farther doubt of the
Truth, put all hands to the fortifications, giving the charge thereof to the
Knights, Anthony Brito, a Portoguese, and Francis Nueres of the Priory of
Aquitaine. He also made provision of Ovens and Mills, and Lodgings for the
Country people that should retire into the City. While these things were in
hand, he sent to Pope Adrian, of whom he earnestly requested succor against
the Turks; as also to the Emperor and the King of France, but in vain, because
they were then in open War one against the other.

As for the Pope, he rather prejudiced, then assisted them. For the Italian
Knights being informed that he conferred every day Commanderies in Italy to
their detriment, complained to the Council of Rhodes, and desired leave that
they might go altogether to Rome, to make their complaints to his Holiness;
which Liberty, considering the State of Affairs, was at that time denied them.
Thus was the Pope the Occasion of an unseasonable disorder. For upon this the
Italians openly complained of the Grand Master, while the Chancellor Amarall
secretly blew the bellows of dissension, and carried it so far, as to deny
their service to the Order, and to obey the Commands of the Grand Master.
Thereupon the Grand Master deprived of their habit three of the Principal
Ringleaders, Gabriel Solier, James Palavicino, and Lewis Moroso. And to
justify himself, he referred the whole to the consideration and examination of
the Council, who made their report, that the Grand Master had done nothing but
what was just, prudent and rational. However some of the Knights fearing the
mischief of Commotion and Alteration at such a conjuncture, made it their
business to pacify the Italians, laying before them, that the world would
think and could not judge otherwise, but that they sought for a pretense to go
to Rome, not so much for the sake of their Commanderies, as to escape the
danger of the approaching Siege. Whereby the perswaders wrought so far, that
the Mutineers laid aside their anger, made their excuses and returned to the
Obedience of the Grand Master, who as kindly embraced and pardoned them.

This bustle being over, there arrived at Rhodes an Agent from Peri Basha, who
delivered a Letter to the Grand Master, wherein the Basha invited him to a
Treaty of Peace with the Grand Signior, assuring him that if he sought it, he
should be well received; and advising him withal to send for that purpose
persons of Quality to the Port. The Ambassador also delivered other Letters
from the Grand Signior himself, much to the same effect. Most part of the
Council, considering the Age of Peri, who was ancient, and his known prudence
and moderation, had a good opinion of the Truth of the Embassy, insomuch that
they resolved to send to Constantinople the Chevalier Marquet Cataline, and
with him a Rhodian named Castrophylaca, a person of great judgment, and well
skilled in the Turkish Language, to conclude a Peace in the same manner as it
had been concluded in the time of D'Aubusson. But when they were consulting
about their Instructions, some better considering of the business, began to be
of opinion; that Peri was only a dissembler, and observed that Solymans Letter
gave no credence to that of Peri, and that it was not practicable to send an
Ambassador without a safe conduct in ample manner from the Grand Signiour.
While they were in these doubts, the Grand Master was advertised that Peri's
Ambassador wandered about the City, and with a diligent eye observed the
Fortifications, and made enquiries after the Quantity of Provisions, the number
of Soldiers, and what relief was expected. This opened the eyes of the Council
and gave them to understand that they were abused, and that the Ambassador was
only come as a spy. Thereupon they presently sent him away; ordering a Greek
of mean Quality to go along with him, to whom they gave two Letters, one to
Solomon, the other to the Basha, where in a few words the Grand Master declared
that he had intelligence of every thing, and that he had neither any thought or
fear of the Grand Signiour, or of his forces. Nevertheless he desired a safe
conduct for an Ambassador, and offered to restrain the Incursions of those of
the Order. The Ambassador being arrived at Port Fisco, found Horses there
ready for him, and went Post to Constantinople, leaving the Greek behind; who
being unwilling to travel alone through an Enemies Country so far a journey,
returned to Rhodes in the same Vessel that carried him. By which miscarriage
every one was then ascertained that the Embassy was but only a deceit, and
that the Town would suddenly be besiedg'd.

The City was well provided of Flesh, pulse, and wheat, of which there was
enough all the time of the siege; and as for warlike munitions it was thought
there had bin enough, though the Siege had lasted a whole year. But they found
it otherwise, for they spent a great quantity to hinder the approaches of the
Enemies Trenches: besides the continual wast of powder and shot day and night
against so many thousands of busy Enemies. Thereupon the Chevalier Antonie
Bosio, a person of a quick Capacity, and one who did many services for the
Order, while he lived, was sent into Candy for wine, and to make a Levy of
Archers; but the Candiots, afraid of the Turk, forbid him to raise any men;
However under pretense of a convoy for his freight, he brought away four
hundred Archers, which did eminent service all the time of the Siege. The same
Bosio met also upon the Sea with a Venetian, whose name was Anthony Bonaldi,
coming from Alexandria in a great Vessel laden with Wine and bound for
Constantinople. But Bosio persuaded him to alter his Course, and bring his
Cargo to Rhodes; where after he had sold his Wine, he put himself and his men
into the service of the Order, and behaved himself during the siege, like a
person of great valor. And now intelligence came from all parts, especially
from the Duke of Nixia, that the Galleys were lanching, and that the whole
fleet would depart at the Latter end of May. Thereupon the Grand Master caused
a General Muster to be made as well of the Knights, as of the other Soldiers.
As to those of the Habit, there appeared one and fifty of the Language of
Province; 26 of that of Auvergne; Sixty two of France; Forty seven of Italy;
Fifty one of Arragon, Catalogne and Navar; Eleven of England; Six of Germany;
Fifty seven of Castile; besides 13 others more that kept guard in the Castle of
St. Nicholas. The whole Garrison consisted of about 5000 men. After the muster
was thus made, the Grand Master appointed to every Commander his particular
duty, what Posts, what Bastions to keep or relieve as necessity required; and
what Knights to be continually about his own person. Particularly William
Watson commanded the English Post. Nicholas Hussy the English Bastion; and
Thomas Sheffeild was Captain of St. Anthonies Gate.

The City was in this posture, when there was a signal made by fire from Fisco,
that there were some persons there which desired to parley. Thereupon the Grand
Master sent the Knigh Boniface D' Alluys a Provencal thither with his Gally.
When he came near the place where the fire was, certain horsemen that stood
upon the shore gave the Knight to understand that they had a Letter to deliver
from the Grand Signiour; and invited him a shore: But the Knight too well
understanding the humor of the Turks, told them he had but a short time to
stay, and therefore if they had any thing to say, they should dispatch quickly,
otherwise he would not tarry. Thereupon the Turks threw a Letter tied to a
stone into the Galley; which Letter was delivered to the Grand Master, and read
in Council. In this Letter Solomon demanded that Rhodes should be surrendered
up to him, promising security, and good usage to all in general, with liberty
to the Inhabitants to enjoy their own Laws and Religion, permission to them
that would depart freely with their families and estates, and great advantages
to them that would take up Arms in his service. Otherwise he threatened
utterly to ruin the City, walls and Towers, and to make the Inhabitants all
slaves. To this the Council thought it not convenient to return any answer, but
to stand resolutely upon their guard. Thereupon the Grand Master having certain
advice that the Fleet was under sail, defaced all the Gardens without the City,
beginning with his own, and caused the Earth and rubbish to be carried into the
Town, where it was of great use for the repair of breaches. He sent also for
the Country people in, poisoned the waters, and burnt the Corn and straw that
remained upon the Ground. The Vanguard of the Fleet that first appeared
consisted of 30 Gallys; out of which some few of the Turks landed in Lango to
burn and pillage according to their custom. But the Commander of the Fort
mounting all his men, charged them so vigorously, that having slain five or
six, and taken three prisoners, he drove the rest to their Galleys, though his
own Horse were killed under him, and some few of his men wounded. Thereupon the
Turks left Lango, and made to the Jews Castle, and so entering the Gulf of
Essimes, about fifteen miles from Rhodes they were first discovered by the
sentinels from Mount Sallac. The 24th. of June, being St. John's day, the Turks
came to an anchor on that side of Rhodes, where stood the Castle Favit. There
they landed, and burnt the Corn upon the ground, and the same day the body of
the Fleet appeared in the Gulf of Essimes, where the 30 Galleys joined with the
main Body. And yet the danger being so near, there happened almost as dangerous
a Contest between the Auvergnian, and German Languages; while the Germans
pretended that one part of the new Bastion next St. Georges Gate belonged to
them, and the Auvergnians, claimed it to themselves; insomuch that they had
like to have come to blows. But the Grand Master interposing his Authority, the
decision of the controversy was referred to the next General Chapter. In the
mean time it was ordered that no other ensigns should be set up there but those
of the Grand Master and of the Order.

The 26 of June the whole Fleet was discovered making directly from the Gulf of
Essimes for Rhodes; and coming to that part of the Isle which is called the
Fosse or Hole, 8 miles from Rhodes, they came to an Anchor; which not a little
consternated the women and common people of the City. But the Grand Master
without the least show of Alteration in his Countenance, with his accustomed
constancy and serenity, went up and down from place to place providing for
every thing; and that very day, which seemed to be the most terrible, caused
Service to be said, and Processions to be made with the same order and
tranquillity, as if it had bin in a time of undisturbed peace. After that, he
caused the Gates to be shut, and issued out of his palace armed, and attended
by his guards, causing the Drums to beat, and the trumpets to sound, the
Soldiers to take their appointed Posts, and set up the standards and ensigns
upon the several Towers and Bastions, which a far off afforded a noble and
magnificent sight, revived the courage of the Soldiery, and settled the
Resolution of the people. In the mean time the 30 Galleys made up to Cape St.
Martin, there to keep Guard, and to surprise such Vessels as should come to
bring relief to the besieged. Late in the evening the whole Fleet, consisting
of a hundred sail, left the Fosse or Hole, and passing by the Port at three
miles distance, came and rode in another part of the Island at a place called
Parambolin, six miles from the City; because it was a rode secure from the West
winds that blow hard in that Channel. Some days after the rest of the Fleet
joined, and lay there at an Anchor all the time of the Siege.

There were in this Fleet a hundred Galleys, besides the thirty before
mentioned; thirty great Galeasses, fifteen Mahons, twenty Flat-bottom'd Boats,
sixty Fusts, and a great number of Brigantines, ten or twelve great Ships, as
big as Gallions, carrying provisions. Some few days after arrived more from
Syria, and other parts; so that the whole Fleet consisted of 400 Sail of all
sorts, and the Army of two hundred thousand men, of which sixty thousand were
Pioneers.

The same day that the Fleet arrived at Parambolin, the Grand Master dispatched
the Chevalier Bresols to the Pope, the Chevalier Andugar to the Emperor and
King of Spain, and the Chevalier D'Ansonville to the Kings of England and
France, to give them notice of the Siege, and to crave succor. Other Knights
he dispatched away to buy all the Ammunition and warlike Provisions they
could, and to hasten back with all speed to Rhodes. He also sent away summons
to the absent Knights, to repair forthwith to the defense of their Island.

The Turks were thirteen days before they made one shot, or any other attempt,
by reason that the Lycian Army was not come up; but no sooner was that Army
entered the Island, but the Turks began to set up their Pavilions, and to lodge
their Camp in a place out of the reach of the Rhodian Artillery, to land their
Guns, mount and plant them, open their Trenches, and make their approaches.
Then it was that the Grand Master left his own Palace, and took up his Quarters
in St. Marys of the Victory, as being the weakest part of the City, and upon
which the Turks in there former Siege had made their chiefest Assaults. At the
same time also the Turks, for a beginning, raised a little Penthouse of Boards,
from whence they shot at the Posts of England and Provence. But the Artillery
from the Town immediately ruined it, and killed the Cannoneers. After that they
raised two other Batteries upon the Hill of Saint Cosmus, and St. Damian, and
shot against the Posts of England and Spain, but the shot from the City ruined
those in the same manner.

As the Turks were laboring to advance their Trenches to the place where they
designed to plant their Canon, the besieged were very desirous to make a
Salley; to which the Grand Master having given his consent, St. Athanasius's
Gate was opened, and out they fell upon those that were working in the
Trenches; with whom they made such work, that the Turk were all cut to pieces,
before any relief could come to them. But then the besieged observing a great
Body making toward them, retired skirmishing under the English and Spanish
Guns, which then playing upon the Enemy, made a dreadful havoc among them, in
regard they came on so thick, that it was impossible for a bullet to miss. The
Christians afterward made some Sallies with like success; but because some one
or other still fell, the Grand Master considering that the loss of one man was
more to him then the loss of a hundred to the Enemy, forbid any more Sallies to
be made: For it was observed, that during the Siege the first Army was
recruited with above a hundred thousand men; which was an easy thing for them
to do, having the Land so near them to befriend them, and such a number of
Vessels every day ready at command.

The Salleys being over, the Turks advanced their Trenches with more freedom.
So that they raised in several places above sixty Batteries, chiefly against
the Posts of England, Provence, Spain and Italy; but the Artillery from the
Town overthrew so many, that only thirty four remained.

At that time arrived at Rhodes a Gentleman whose name was Gabriel Radin
Martinengo, a person well known for his skill in Fortifications, whom Bozio had
persuaded to leave Candy and come to the assistance of the Rhodians. Him the
Grand Master highly honored, gave him the habit of the Order, and permission
to wear the Cross; made him supernitendant over the Artillery, with a promise
of the first Vacancy that fell in the Italian Language: honors which he highly
deserved, by carrying himself so nobly and virtuously all the time of the Siege.

Now that the Grand Master might set him at work, he signified his desire to
know the condition of the Turkish Army, and what they intended to do.
Whereupon, a Mariner, born in Trebizond, then in the service of the Order, took
seven or eight young men of his acquaintance, and having shaved and clad
themselves in Turkish Habit, they took Melons, Cowcumbers, and other fruits,
and secretly embarked themselves the next night: and avoiding the Turkish
Fleet, made out to the Sea, and so returned by break of day in sight of Rhodes,
as if they had come from Turkey. From thence they made to the Cape which is
nearest to Lycia, where the Merchants met from all parts to sell Refreshments
of all sorts to the Army. There they put to sale their Melons and Cowcumbers,
and I rankly inquired what news of the Army. The Turks, who took them for
natural Turks, as willingly satisfied them, and told them the whole condition
of their Forces. When they had sold all, and understood all, they made out to
Sea again, having received two Turks into their Vessel, with much entreaty,
that were weary of an Army Life. Those they bound hand and foot, and brought
along with them into Rhodes, and presented to the Grand Master, who ordered the
Prior of St. Giles, and Martinengo to examine them. These two Turks being
carried up to the steeple of St. John, showed the Prior and Martinengo how the
Quarters of the Turkish Army were disposed; told them the Number of the
Soldiers; that Solomon himself was speedily expected; that the Soldiers grew
out of heart, and mutined against their Commanders, being weary of a war, to
which they cried they were lead as to a Slaughter House, with many other things
not believed at first, as being thought to have bin spoken out of flattery, or
to procure good entertainment to themselves, but which were indeed really true.
For Peri Basha observing a manifest and dangerous Mutiny in the Army,
dispatched away a Courrier to Solomon to give him Intelligence, and to
supplicate him to come in person forthwith, that he might put a stop to the
sedition by his presence and Authority. Solomon flies through Asia the less
with an incredible speed, and embarking at Port Fisco, arrived in Rhodes the
28th. of July, where he was received with great triumph, and lodged himself
four or five miles from the City at a place called Megalandra, out of the reach
of the Canon. Solomon held a council, and resolved upon a strict enquiry whence
the Mutiny proceeded, and a severe punishment of the Authors. But Peri Basha by
his grave remonstrances soon softened and appeased his wrath. He laid before him
that this mutiny rather proceeded from fear and an apprehension of danger then
from Malice or Rebellion, and that therefore his Majesty might by his authority
reduce them to their duty, knowing that the Turks had the Ottoman name in so
much Veneration, that upon his appearance they would soon recollect themselves,
and return to their Obedience; but that Rigor was now unseasonable, especially
against the old Soldiers, without whose assistance he could never compass so
great a design as the taking of Rhodes. Solomon hearkened to his advice,
assembled all the Army together, made them lay down their Arms, and prostrate
themselves upon the Ground: then sitting on a Royal Throne, under a Rich
Canopy, turning his face this way and that way with a Majestic and stern
Countenance, He first accused their Infidelity; hightn'd the injuries done by
the Knights of Rhodes to his Subjects, advanced his own power, his Triumphs and
his Victories; upbraided the Old Soldiers of Ingratitude, as having enriched
themselves by his fortune in war; of Cowardice, to let such a handful of men
make head against such a Potent and flourishing Army. Lastly, said he, am not I
here the Companion of your dangers? Nor will I part from hence till I have them
in my power. I swear it by the holy head of divine Mahomet; and if I fail, may
my Kingdoms and my house be ruin d, and my own person perish eternally. Go
then, and think of nothing else but what you are commanded. Nor let any man
distrust my clemency, nor my word, but build upon my Liberality. For I am here
the spectator and judge of your Valor and your Merits.

Solomon had no sooner ended his Harangue, but he withdrew into his Pavilion,
and commanded that the Soldiers should be all sworn anew to their Captains.
And from that time it was, that the Soldiers recovered their courage, became
more obedient and deliberate, and proceeded in all things with more order and
conduct. Now they continued their batteries more terribly then before. They
also played in three several places with two great brass-Cannons like
Morter-Peices, that carried marble-bullets of a prodigious weight, and yet all
the harm then to kill 25 men, and the Chevalier Lyoncel that commanded the
Bastion of Cosquin. This battery they left off by the advice of the Jewish
Physician, who gave them notice how little good it had done. After the Turks
made it their business to advance their trenches, and to fill up the moats with
Earth; and though the Artillery of the Christians continually fired upon them,
nevertheless they gave not over their work till they had finished a great
battery between the Spanish and Auvergnian Post, and another against that of
Italy, and there they lodged their Cannon that played upon the besieged so
furiously that they durst not peep above the battlements, till they had made
themselves new defenses of wood and plankes, upon which the Besiegers having
advanced their trenches to the side of the Moat, made certain gaps in the wall
on their side, through which they much annoyed the defendants with their
Musket Shot, and killed some few of them. In the mean while the Captains lodged
themselves in their Trenches: Mustapha the General against the Bul-wark of
England, Peri against the Italian Post, Achmat against that of Spain, and
Auvergne, with the Aga of the Janisaries; the Beglerbey of Natolia against that
of France; the Beglerbey of Romania against the Gardens of St. Antony, who
began a battery at the beginning of August, against the German Post, which was
weak, and without any platform. Nevertheless the Grand Master caused it to be
fortified within with intrenchments of Earth, great pieces of Timber-planks,
and Bavines, and played his Artillery so thick from several places and Posts on
that side, so that he dismounted the Artillery, and overthrew the batteries of
the Turks till they were aweary of repairing them, and so removed them.

By this time it was that the Rhodians began to find the want of their powder,
and though the Grand Master continually employed fourteen of his own horses to
bray saltpeter, and other materials proper to make powder, in a sure and
well-guarded place, yet the besieged were forced to be very sparing of their
powder, which gave great advantage to the enemy. The Turks seeing no good to be
done on that side, played upon the steeple of St. John's Church, and beat it
down, upon advice given them by the Jewish Physician, that from thence the
Christians discovered what was done in the Camp. The ruin of this steeple being
a lovely structure was much lamented by the Inhabitants. This done, the
Besiegers under the command of the Beglerbey of Natolia removed their batteries
against the Tower of St. Nicholas, which they furiously played upon for the
space of ten days with twelve great pieces of Canon; but the Artillery from the
Tower broke and ruined all their batteries, so that the Beglerbey was
constrained to change the form of his batteries, to remove his mantlets; (which
are made of Earth close ramm'd, and closed with boards fastened together with
great spars of timber) to dismount his Guns, and plant them in the night upon
great plat forms without gabions or Mantlet, with which playing securely all
the night, when day appeared they covered them again with Earth and grave. Thus
they made above 500 shot which only beat down a pane of the wall on the
west side, through which appeared another good wall, and so many stout
defendants, that these difficulties being related to Solomon, he caused the
said Battery to be removed, whereby the Chevalier Castellaine Captain of St.
Nicholas Tower acquired great honor. At the same time the Turks raised 14
Mantelets against the Posts of England and Spain, upon which they planted Guns
of a prodigious bigness, and played upon them for a month together, so that
they ruined the new wall of the English Platform, while the old wall stood
entire; beside that they brought through their trenches unto the Moat three
huge pieces of Canon, with which they levelled the defenses of the Bastion of
Spain, and beat down the wall, by the ruins whereof the Turks might easily
mount the Bastion. The same Battery they raised against the Bastion of Provence
with three pieces of Canon planted upon the side of the Moat, and in a small
time threw down more then the besiegers in a long time were able to repair.
Then the Grand Master leaving St. Mary's of the Victory came to St. Athanasius
Gate, and lodged himself under the English wall, and there he constituted four
Captains, allotting to each ten Knights, besides the Ordinary Guard to succor
and preserve the English wall. Besides all this, the Turks continually played
with their Sacres and Falcons, and other small Artillery; and the besieged did
the like, which stood them in no small stead to ruin their Mantlets, and
dismount their pieces. Among the rest, a Culverin shot pierced through a
Mantlet upon one piece, killed five men, and carried away both legs of the
Turkish Canoneer, of which he died. Solomon was much troubled for his loss,
insomuch that he said he had rather have lost one of his Basha's. Nor was the
Italian Post more mercifully handled, which was continually battered by
seventeen pieces of Canon, so that it had bin an easy thing to have mounted the
wall by the ruins that fell into the Moat. Yet though this long battery had
made a great breach in the Italian Post, yet would not the besiegers venture an
assault, but only continued to make their approaches and to ruin the
entrenchments, and defenses of the besieged. Which the Chevalier Martinengo
seeing, with the Grand Masters permission, made a sally with about an hundred
choice men, and falling upon the Enemy unawares, killed and put to flight
whatever stood in their way, and so with one prisoner and the head of another,
returned with great applause. The Turks that came in heaps to the relief of
their own, were miserably torn to pieces by the Artillery of the Town, having
no shelter, and lost a greater number in their retreat then Martinengo flew.

This being the condition of the City, the Grand Master, who knew it would not
be long ere they gave a General Assault, dispatched away Bosio to the Pope, and
his Secretary into Provence and to the King of France, beseeching them to
hasten the succors which he expected from them. Being also desirous to know
what news was in the Turkish Camp, one Carpathio a Rhodian undertook to satisfy
him, and getting out of the Post in a Brigantine with a crew of good Soldiers
clad after the Turkish manner, he coasted along the shore as far as the Fosse,
where he saw several Soldiers that were taking the fresh Air by the Seaside,
who immediately discovered him. The Rhodiot put on a bold face, and in the
Turkish Language called to them aloud, and told them, the Basha had sent for
them, which they easily believed, and went aboard the Brigantine. One of the
Turks finding he was in the wrong, drew his Sword and wounded the Rhodiot in
the thigh, for which the Rhodian repaid him by cutting off his head; the rest
being elev'n, were easily mastered, and brought to the Grand Master.

Now Martinengo seeing the great ruins which the Enemies Artillery had made,
raised barricadoes, and wrought entrenchments upon the walls, where he planted
a good number of Guns, which playing into the Enemies Trenches, killed a great
Number of the Turks; he also lodged several Soldiers under the shelter of the
houses, who shot incessantly, and made a great slaughter.

The Batteries of the Turks not succeeding to their wishes, they fell to
mining; and had in several parts of the City made above forty, so that of six
parts of the City, five in a few days were undermined. But the most part of
those Mines proved ineffectual, because of the Counter-mnies which were
continually made round about. There was one that was perceived in the midst of
the Trench of Provence. But Martinengo immediately entered the Trench, opened
the Mine, and casting in barrels of Powder and other combustible stuff, burnt
and stifled all the Turks within. Another Mine the Turks made under the Bulwark
of England which played the fourth of September, and blew up above seven times
nine foot of the wall, and filled the Moat so full of rubbish, that the Turks,
that they might easily mount the wall, and come on furiously to the Assault
with their accustomed cries, gained the top of the Bastion immediately, and set
up seven of their Colors, and had made themselves masters of it, but for an
Intrenchment which Martinengo had made the day before, which stood entire about
four foot from the Ruins of the wall. That Intrenchment stopped the Enemy; and
thither the Knights ran and came to a close fight with Pike and Sword; while
others did great mischief to the Enemy with hand-Granadoes and other Artificial
fires; and there it was that Martinengo and the Chevelier de Bidoux did
wonders, becoming men of Extraordinary valor and courage. Here they came to
Sword and Dagger, and even to collar one another; the Turks perceiving that if
they could but get the victory here, they might easily get into the City. And
indeed that small handful of Christians that sustained the weight of such a
multitude, could not have bin able to have held out, had not the Grand Master,
upon the noise of the blowing up of the Mine hasted to their Relief, and with
the Knights of the reserve, and the Soldiers of his guard, rushed into the
midst of his Enemies, and charged them so furiously, that in a small time a
good part of them were cut to pieces, and the rest so smartly repulsed, that
they quitted the fight, and fled in confusion, and disordered and astonished
those that were coming to their assistance, so that neither the threats, nor
Exhortations of the Captains could stop them. Which the General Mustapha
seeing, flew out of the Trenches in great indignation, crying to the fugitives
aloud, that if they would not return to the Assault, he would go on without
them, and having so said, boldly marched toward the breach.

His countenance and Language inspired the fugitives with new vigor, so that
they rallied and returned with their Basha more resolutely then before to the
Assault, and maintained the fight for above two hours. At length the Christians
redoubling their courage, and animated by the presence and Example of the Grand
Master, fell upon the Turks with that fury, that being no longer able to
resist, they turned their backs; besides the Rhodian Canoneers had planted
certain pieces against the bottom of the breach which played upon the Turks
retiring, so successfully, that they killed more then were slain in the
Assault. Two thousand of the Turks were slain that day: of the Rhodians twelve
or fifteen slain outright; and fifteen or twenty wounded. In the midst of
these encounters the Chevalier Didier de Puy Governor of Ferracta gave notice
to the Grand Master, that he had taken certain Turks, who confessed that there
were in Rhodes certain Persons of Quality who sent the Enemy Intelligence of
what was deliberated and concluded in Council, and of all that was done in the
City, and that the Turks were digging a large Mine nere St. John's de
Collaccio. This was no small trouble to the Grand Master, so much the more
because he was forced to conceal his resentments, by reason that no persons
were named. However he promised a large reward to those that could discover the
Mine. But it was not long before it discovered it self under the Bastion of
England, by seven a clock in the morning upon the ninth of September,
overthrowing about nine yards of the wall next to the Mine beforementioned,
and came to the very barricado's before they met with any resistance. But when
the Dread and terror was once over, the Knights resuming their wented courage,
put the Turks to a shameful retreat, till forced by the swords and scimitars of
their Commanders, even of their General himself, they returned again with more
vigor, and renewed a bloody fight; but the Grand Master coming to the relief
of his own with his reserve, sought them with so much fury for three hours,
that the Turks no longer able to abide so powerful a defense, quitted the
fight, and retired into their Trenches, leaving one of their Ensigns behind
them. This Assault cost the Great Turk three thousand of his men, and three
Sangiacs; of the Christians about 30 were slain and some of the Knights wounded.

The Turks repulsed with so much loss in two assaults, began again to murmur
and discommend the enterprise as rash and impossible. Which Solomon perceiving,
began to despair, and to be offended against Mustapha. The mean time Peri Basha
to preserve himself in the good Opinion and favors of the Grand Signiour,
pressed him continually to make a furious battery of 17 Canons against the
Italian Post: But the besieged still repaired with so much speed and diligence
whatever the Enemies Artillery ruined, and played their great and small shot
with so much success, that the Turks durst hardly peep out of their Trenches.
The Beglerbeg of Natolia did the same against the Post of Provence, and fell to
mining very industriously, being advised thereto by a treacherous Greek, who
under pretense of trade had well observed the strength of the City. But the
most remarkable accident was the killing of the Governor of Negropont, and
Solyman's Favorite, who riding by the Italian Post richly clad with a red
Battoon in his hand, was hit by a musket-bullet, from the Italian Post, and
fell down dead immediately; to the great grief of Solomon.

Peri enraged against the Italians, resolved to make a most terrible assault
upon their Platform; which he did so unexpectedly and with so much speed, that
the sentinels that stood without the Entrenchment were killed before they could
be succored. But the Italians taking the Alarm, and being well seconded by
the Grand Master and his usual guard, in an hours time the Bastion was well
soaked with the Blood of the Turks. Peri, finding such a stout resistance here,
and believing that other places were left naked, gave immediate order for other
forces to assail the New Bastion of the Grand Master Carretta; but there the
Chevalier Angelot Captain of the Bastion so behaved himself, having a good
number of Soldiers and Citizens with him, that the most part of the Turks were
either killed or wounded, and the Flanking Artillery of other Bastions made
such havoc among the thick multitudes of the Turks, that at length, quite
dismayed, they began to retire. Peri thereupon seeing the Soldiers would no
longer abide the heat of such a terrible encounter, sounded a general Retreat,
though with the loss of more men then in the former combats.

Not long after Mustapha, covetous to repair his honor, and to regain the
favor of the Grand Signiour, resolved to give a third assault to the Bastion
of England. He imparted his resolution to the Achmat, who agreed with him at
the same time to assail the Bastions of Spain and Auvergne. Upon the 3d. of
September Mustapha unexpectedly fell upon the Bastion, mounted the Ruins, and
fixed their Ensigns near the Rhodian Entrenchments, and at the same time
endeavored to make their way forward. The fight was terrible and doubtful:
neither was Mustapha wanting in any part of a judicious and courageous Captain.
Achmat also at the same time played two Mines, one in the Auvergnian, the other
in the Spanish Post. The Auvergnian Mine proved in effectual; the Spanish Mine
brought down a considerable part of the wall of the Barbacan of the said
Bastion. And yet for these dreadful Ruins, the Christians so well behaved
themselves in every place, that the Turks, having lost above 3000 men, were
forced to retreat with shame to their Trenches. Two days after the Jewish
Physician (often spok'n of before) was discovered shooting an Arrow into the
Turkish Camp, with a Letter fastened to the end of it. Thereupon he was
apprehended; and upon his examination confessed that he was a Spy for the
Turks; that he had sent them five Letters; that he had given them several
advices; and had encouraged them to continue the Siege: For which He was
condemned to be quartered.

After these Repulses, and the giving fire to three other Mines soon after,
that did little or no harm, the Basha's consulted together, and resolved to
give a general assault upon fore several places of the City all at a time.
Solomon approved their Resolution, assembled his Captains together, encouraged
and cheered them up; and assured them of Victory; and by public Proclamation
gave the common Soldiers the whole Plunder of the City. Thus the whole Army
resumed their wonted courage, and full of Hopes prepared themselves for a
general Assault. As a preparation to which the Basha's order the English
Bulwark, the Posts of Spain and Auvergne, and the Italian Platform to be
battered for two days together, on purpose to widen and enlarge the Breaches.

The Grand Master observing this universal motion of the Enemy, and their
continual Batteries for 2 days together, with an extraordinary diligence,
prepared for his defense. Day and night he visited all the Posts, earnestly
besought every one to be watchful and ready; and having taken a little repose
in his arms, by break of day he ranged the Soldiers in their several Posts;
and that there might remain no fear or astonishment among them, he made them a
short speech, Declaring to them the glorious opportunity which offered it self
for them to signalize their Zeal for the honor of God, and their fidelity to
their Order and the welfare of Christendom; and their affection to a people
that had lived under their Dominion for above 200 years. He gave them to
understand how often they had proved their own valor and the timidity of the
Enemy. That though their number were great, yet that there was yet a sufficient
number left of brave and valiant men to defend a just cause, and repel the
force of Ambition and perfidious impiety. That they were to consider their
Enemies were a sort of ignorant people, forced on by their Basha's, for fear of
encurring the displeasure of their Master, to whom they had represented the
enterprise so easy: that they themselves were persons of honor, dedicated from
their Infancy to the service of God. And therefore he besought and conjured
them to do their duties.

The Turks by break of day discharged all their Artilleriy at once, that they
might pass the Moat under the covert of the smoke; and that don, they boldly
fell on in all places at once. The Grand Master posted himself in the English
Bulwark, as being the weakest place, Nor was the Spanish Artillery a little
favorable to the English, flanking the Turks, and making a great slaughter
among them insomuch that they were almost ready to recoyle; when Mustapha's
Lieutenant throwing himself among them, prayed, entreated, threatened, promised
and heading them himself, brought them on again; though to his cost, being the
first man slain with a Canon Bullet as he was mounting the Ruins. The Turks
enraged by his fall, discharged their small shot and arrows like hail upon the
Rhodians. And Mustapha observing their Metal, sent them continually fresh
supplies, and with fair words and promises exhorted them to their Duties. Yet
could they not force the besieged to stir a foot, who in the view of the Grand
Master with an invincible courage sustained all that Impetuosity, and at the
same time fought with equal valor and obstinacy in all the other Quarters. The
very women were not unserviceable; while some carried Bread, Wine and other
refreshments to the Soldiers, others threw stones; others poured down boiling
Oil and water upon the Enemy. But the greatest danger of the Combat was in the
Spanish Post, where the Aga General of the Janissaries, having picked out the
choicest of his men, marched himself to the Assault at the head of them, who
followed him with such a Resoluton, that they covered all the Breach, gained
the platform above, and planted forty of their Ensigns upon it, with the same
violence rushing on to the Barricado's, not minding the prodigious slaughter of
their own that fell on every side. Thereupon the Knights and Soldiers in the
Spanish Bulwark, seeing the distress of those in the Post, ran to the
assistance of their friends, leaving only some few for a guard behind. Which
certain of the Turks that lay concealed behind the rubbish perceiving,
presently mounted the Bulwark, and made themselves Masters of it; pulled down
the Ensigns of the Christians, and setting up their own, cried out in their own
Language, Victory, and invited their Companions to assist them. Upon which
Achmats Regiment advanced; but the Auvergnian and Spanish Artillery soon
stopped their Career, So that the Grand Master being advertised of this new
accident, left the English, and entering the Spanish Post, charged the Enemy so
vigorously, that he put them absolutely to flight. Then seeing the Spanish
Bastion mastered by the Turks, he sent the Commander of Bourbon with a Company
of stout Soldiers with order to enter the Mine and Casemat, and to mount the
Bastion. Which he did so effectually, that in a short time he wholly regained
it. Notwithstanding all this, the Aga with fresh forces returned to the assault
of the Spanish Post; and the Grand Master having left a sufficient Guard in the
Bastion, returned to the defense of the same, and sending for two hundred fresh
men from St. Nicholas Tower, after a bloody fight of six hours, forced the
Turks to abandon their Colors, and to retreat to their trenches, after the
loss of above 15000 men. Solomon was so highly incensed against Mustapha upon
this defeat, that he condemned him to be shot to death with arrows. Peri Basha,
upon the presumption of his Age, his merits, and his Authority, coming to
intercede for Mustapha, was sentenced to the same death. And both had suffered
had not Achmat Basha and all the rest of the Principal Commanders, prostrate at
Solymans feet, implored their pardon.

Solomon seeing all his attempts upon the City of Rhodes so vain and fruitless,
fell into such a deep melancholy, that he shut himself up in his Pavilion for
several days, and would not be seen, resolving to raise the siege and to be
gone. The great Commanders whose hopes lay all in the Mines, finding their
expectations frustrate, resolved to raise the Camp. Nay several had carried
their baggage to the Sea side, and several Companies had quitted the Trenches.
When an Albanese Soldier slipping out of the Town, gave intelligence to the
Turks, that the greatest part of the Knights and Soldiers were either killed
or wounded in the last General Assault. Other Traitors wrought the same,
adviz'd them to stay, assuring them that the City could not hold out two
Assaults more. And it was afterward known that the Chevalier D'Amaral wrought
to the same purpose, and encouraged the continuance of the siege. Upon this
Intelligence the Captains changed their Resolutions, divulged the news through
the Army, and began to batter the City more furiously then before. Solomon also
to let the Soldiers understand his Resolution, and to encourage them, began to
build him a pleasure-house upon Palermos Hill. Mustapha also, though he had
orders to repair to his Government, ventured to give three Assaults
successively upon the English Bastion with the Mamalucks, who were so ill
entertained, the greatest part of them being killed or wounded, that the rest
retired to their Quarters, resolving to return no more. Peri secretly undermind
the Italian Bastion, and the Mine indeed made a terrible noise and shaking, but
took vent on the Camp side, and killed a great many of the Turks.

Mustapha having such ill success, thought it not convenient to stay any
longer, so that upon his departure Achmat was made General. He continued the
siege with the same violence, so that there was not a day passed wherein he did
not both batter, Assault and undermine the defenses of the City. However the
Grand Master remitted nothing of his wonted care and diligence, fighting and
hazarding his person every where, where need required, beyond what was
reasonable for a person of his degree and Importance.

And now when it was almost too late, those conspiracies and treasons were
discovered, which were the loss of the Island. For in the first place Lucio
Custrophilaca, a Rhodian, and a person of great wealth, reputation and
alliances, who had the charge of the fortifications, the bread and ammunition
was perceived, at a time and in a place very much to be suspected, to have shot
an arrow into the Turkish Camp, who was thereupon lay hold on, examined, and
put upon the wrack, but would confess nothing to the purpose. Next to him Blas
Diez Servant to the Chancellor D'Amaral, was taken in the same fact, and being
put to the Torture, confessed his Masters Treason, declaring how he had wrote
to the Turks Basha's to contiuue the Siege, for that both men and provisions
failed in the City. Thereupon the Grand Master caused the Chancellor to be
apprehended, who being examined and tortured, would confess nothing himself;
but being, convicted by sufficient testimonies, confirmed to his face by his
Servant, his Servant was hanged, and he beheaded, dying without any sign of
repentance or Christian devotion.

In the mean time the Canons of the Enemy thundered against the Bastion of
Italy, where they ruined all the defenses and Barricado's that Martinengo had
raised; by which means they advanced their Trenches to the very foot of the
Breach. The Bastion of England was also beaten down to the Ground, and the most
part of the Barricado's and entrenchments ruined, so that some advised the
quitting and blowing it up. But because that signified little in regard of the
vast numbers of the Turks, the Grand Master resolved to hold it out to the
utmost, and to that end gave the command of it to the Chevalier John de Bin,
who kept it to the last.

At this time arrived the Chevalier de Rocque Martin with twelve Knights, a
hundred Soldiers and some Ammunition. But notwithstanding this small relief,
the Grand Master observing the desperate condition of the City (for now in some
places there were no other defenses but beams and boards between the Enemy and
him, beside that they had set up three Pravilions within the City near the
Rhodian entrenchments) sent away to Candy for Soldiers, Ammunition and
victuals, which the Duke of Candy had provided, as also to Naples to hasten the
succors, which the winter season hindered from coming.

In the mean while the Turks gave too desperate Assaults upon the Italian and
Spanish platforms, but were still repulsed with the loss of above 3000 men.
Insomuch that Achmat finding it impossible to take the City by force, resolved
to give no more Assaults, but rather chose to preserve his men, who were grown
quite weary of the Christian valor; nevertheless he continued his batteries,
and advanced* his Trenches, thinking to creep by degrees into the City. Solomon
also thinking to make short work caused several Letters to be shot into the
City, inviting the Inhabitants to surrender, offering them all the Immunities
they could desire; and threatening on the other side in case of obstinacy, all
the severity imaginable. Peri also suborned a Genoese, who having liberty to
speak to the Knights, adviz'd them as Christians to consider the deplorable
condition of the City, and told them withal, that if they were so disposed, he
could put them in a way to make an honorable composition; but they believing
him to be some impostor, sent under hand by Solomon or his Basha's, gave little
credit to his words. Two days after he came to the same place, pretending he
had a Letter from the Grand Signiour, but then they bid him retire, and to
force him the sooner so to do, they shot at him.

Some while after came the Albanian Soldier before mentioned, pretending
Letters also from Solomon to the Grand Master. But then the Grand Master forbid
any farther Parlying.

However these offers were divulged abroad in the City, which begat in many a
desire to heark'n to propositions of peace as more regarding their wives and
Children then their honor. And it was carried so far, that some of the
Citizens went and declared their desires to the Metropolitan, and some of the
Grand Cross, requesting them to declare their grievances to the Grand Master.
But he severely checked them, telling them that it was not a request to be
mentioned; that they should rather resolve to die for the common liberty, and
the Honor of the Order. The next day they came and besought him again to
provide for the Common safety, for that they were assured that the Citizens
would yield to a treaty, rather then be cut in pieces themselves, their wives
and children. Then the Grand Master finding himself pressed and importuned of
all hands, submitted to necessity, and called a general Council. So soon as the
Council was sat, a Petition was presented to the Grand Master, humbly
requesting him to think of a Capitulation; or at least to give them leave to
secure their wives and children; and at the foot of the petition was an
intimation that if the Grand Master would not, they would provide for them
themselves. In this distress the Grand Master; desirous to know the condition
of the City more particularly, before he would resolve any farther, required
the advice of the Prior of St. Giles, and Martinengo, who both declared in full
Council that in either consciences, and upon their Honor and allegiance, they
could not think the City any longer tenable, the Enemy being lodged forty yards
one way, and 30 yards another way within the City, so that it was impossible
for them to retire any farther, nor for the Enemy to be beaten out.

Upon the advice and Relation of two such judicions and great men, the whole
Council considering how much it concerned them to preserve the holy Relics
and the souls and honor of so many Christian Women and Children, and the
evident danger of the whole Orders being dispierc'd and abolished, if all that
were there should be lost, resolved with one accord to Capitulate. The Grand
Master still laid before them, the duty that lay upon them to preserve the
honor of the Order, which had never yet bin defiled with any stain of
cowardice or pusillanimity, having always preferred their honor and Death
before the safety of their Lives. But the Council overrul'd him with so many
circumstantial and solid reasons, that he was constrained to yield to the
present and inevitable necessity, and their grave advice. This design Heaven
was so far pleased to favor, that Solomon began first. For he first set up an
Ensign upon the Church of St. Mary de Lermonitra; and then the Grand Master set
up another upon the Mill belonging to the Cosquin Gate. Immediately two Turks
came out of the Trenches, desiring to parley: upon which the Grand Master sent
forth the Prior of St. Giles and Martinengo; to whom the Turks delivered a
Letter from Solomon.

This Letter was read in Council; wherein Solomon demanded a surrender of the
Town, and offered the Knights liberty to be gone, with security for their
persons and their Baggage: which if they would not accept, he was resolved to
put all to the sword. Thereupon in consideration only of the people and
Inhabitants of the Town, the same Resolution was again taken, and the Chevalier
Anthony de Grolee, and Robert Perucci, Judge of the Castillians, were
commissionated to attend Solomon. So soon as they were gone forth, a near
Kinsman of Achmats, and a Trucheman much favored by the Grand Turk, were
admitted unto Rhodes as Hostages, and a truce was concluded for three days.

The next day Achmat presented the Ambassadors to Solomon, who declared to him
what they had in commission, Solomon to maintain his Reputation, firmly denied
that he had ever wrote or sent to the Grand Master; nevertheless since the
Grand Master had sent to him upon the same Occasion, he commanded them to let
him know his mind, which was the same that he had written, and demanded his
Resolution within three days, and that in the mean time there should be no
working toward the repair of their fortifications, being firmly resolved,
though all Turkey perished, not to stir out of the Island, till he had Rhodes in
his possession. And having so said, he dismis'd them. Perucci returned to the
City. But Achmat kept the Chevalier Grollee with him, led him into his
Pavilion, and caused him to drink with him; and discoursing of several passages
in the siege, Achmat told him with a great oath; that above forty thousand
Turks had bin slain, and as many were sick and wounded. Peruoci having made his
report to the Council, it was resolved upon good considerations that they
should not accept those conditions the first time, but send other Commissioners.

In the mean time certain of the Citizens took upon them, and were mightily
offended that the Capitulation was begun, without their privity. Declaring also
that they would never consent to any such conditions, but rather die with their
Swords in their hands for their liberty, then surrender themselves to the power
of the Turk. For that whatever the Turk promised, he would be sure to exercise
nothing, but rapine and slaughter as he had done at Belgrade. The Grand Master
observing this Grecian fickleness, told them in friendly manner that the
Resolutions he had taken, were resolved upon upon mature deliberation; which
consultations were to be kept secret that they might not come to the Enemies
knowledge, and that it was more for their safety then for the good of the
Order, that they made any conditions at all. To which purpose he was sending
away other Commissioners the better to assure himself of Solymans word and
fidelity. With which answer the Citizens showed themselves very well satisfied.

Upon this two other Commissioners were dispatched away, Raymond Marquet, and
Lopezde Pas, both Spanish Knights, who represented to Solomon that the Grand
Master had to confer with several people of several Nations that the time
Limited was too short, and therefore desired that he would be pleased to grant
them a longer time. Solomon not relishing this discourse without saying any
more, commanded Achmat to continue his batteries, which were begun again upon
the 15th. of December and so the Truce was broken* Solomon however detained one
of the Commissioners, which showed that he had yet some inclinations to to
Capitulate. The Grand Master observing the Hostility begun again, and that the
Turks advanced with their Trenches farther and farther into the Town, sent for
them that hindered the treaty, and protested to live and die with them, and
commanded all the Inhabitants to repair home to their Quarters there to keep
guard, and that no person should quit his Quarters upon pain of Death. This
Order was observed for two days, but the 3d. a young man left his Quarters and
went and lay at home, for which the Grand Master commanded him to be hanged.
Some few days after that, all the rest of the Inhabitants lost both their
courage and their patience, and forsook the walls and breaches, so that the
Turks might easily have entered, had not the Grand Master withstood them with
that small handful of men which he had left him; which some few days after was
a little augmented by the coming of the Chevalier D'Andugar, and the Chevalier
Farfan an English man, with a hundred Soldiers and some Wine.

This Wine was a great consolation to the City, besides that the Ship made such
Bravado's as it entered the Port, that the Turks generally believed it had
brought a Relief of above a Thousand men. However the Turks continued their
Assaults, and particularly they made a violent onset upon the Spanish Barbacan,
from which, though they were at first repulsed, yet returning with such vast
numbers the Rhodians were overwhilm'd and oppressed by multitude, and forced to
retire into the City. The Turks having gained the Barbacan, presently came to
the foot of the English wall, and by the Ruins of the Barbacan got to the top
of it, and there planted several of their Colors. The Citizens beholding the
Extreme danger they were in, confessed their folly, and besought the Grand
Master, as the common Father, to provide for their safety, who gave them
liberty to constitute Deputies of their own to attend Solomon, and to procure
particular security from him for themselves, and ordered them to go along with
the Chevalier Grollee.

The Grand Master however having some hopes of relief, to the end he might
temporize for a while, sent Perucci first to show to Solomon a Letter of
Bajazet his Grandfather, wherein he bequeathed his malediction to those of his
successors that should make war against Rhodes. Perucci addressed himself to
Achmat, who desirous to see the Letter, took it, and having torn it to pieces,
threw it under his feet in great disdain. Having so done, he sent Perucci back
to the Grand Master, to tell him, that if he did not suddenly return Solomon an
answer, he must expect to be miserable.

However the Grand Master had one more delay, which was to offer to Solomon by
the proposal of the Chevalier de Grollee, otherwise called Passim, the expenses
and charges of the whole siege, if he would rise from before it. But Achmat
would not suffer any such word to be delivered to Solomon, saying that Solomon
had more regard to his honor and his Reputation then to all the Riches in the
World. At length the Grand Master finding no way to avoid an agreement, and
that delay would be the Loss of all, vanquished his own courage, and
overwhelmed with grief and vexation, gave his word to surrender the Town upon
the conditions proposed. To which purpose he sent away the Chevalier Passim and
the Deputies of the Town, who were presented to his Majesty; to whom the
Knights declared that the Grand Master was now resolved to surrender the City
upon the conditions proposed to him, upon a full assurance in the faith and
promises of his Majesty, and humbly entreated him to favor the Inhabitants in
the petition which they had to present to him for their peace and safety. The
Inhabitants besought him to remove his Army a little farther off, that they
might not receive any Injury either in their persons or goods, and that those
that would be gone might depart in safety. Solomon accepted the offer of the
Grand Master, and promised to observe inviolably every article of the
Capitulation. That the Churches should not be profaned; that none of the
Children should be carried away as Tribute Children to make Janissaries. That
the Christians should have the free exercise of their Religion. That the
Inhabitants should be exempt from all duties for five years. That they that
would might depart in three years with their Estates unmolested. That Solomon
should furnish the Order with Ships sufficient to carry them and their Subjects
to Candy. That they should carry off as many of their great Guns as they could
Load. That the Castles of St. Peter, Lango, and the other Islands and
Fortresses belonging to the Order shall be surrendered to Solomon. After that
Achmat sent into the City 400 Janisaries with an Aga to take possession, and
the Grand Master sent into the Camp for Hostages 25 Knights, and as many
Citizens, who were by Achmat courteously entertained.

In the mean time Achmat came to visit the Grand Master in the Moat of the
Spanish Post, where after some discourse between them, he gave the Grand Master
Notice that Solomon was desirous to see him, and therefore adviz'd him, as his
best course, to go and wait upon him. The Grand Master unwilling to provoke
Solomon, and to give him any occasion to break his word, by being severe either
to the Knights or the Rhodians, resolved to follow Achmats advice. The next
morning therefore he went, in a plain habit, accompanied with several of the
Knights; and after he had attended for some time before Solymans Tent, he was
presented with a noble Vest, that Solomon gave him; which so soon as he had put
on, he was introduced into the Grand Signiours Pavilion, and kissed his hand.
Solomon received him courteously, cheered him up, and told him by his
interpreter, that it was a common thing to loose or gain Cities and Signiories
through the Instability of Fortune; exhorted him to take his loss patiently,
and assured him of a most punctual performance of all his promises. Then
turning to his own people. I cannot but pity, said he, this brave Man, whom in
his Old Age, Necessity thus compels to abandon the Seat of his own Dominion.
The Grand Master returned him thanks, besought him to remember what he had
promised, and so taking his leave, retired. Solomon caused him to be guarded
into the City, and gave habits of honor to all the Knights that attended him.

Three days after Solomon himself rode to view the Trenches, the Batteries, the
Breaches, and the Tower of St. Nicholas. Upon his return he entered the Palace
attended only by Achmat, and Ibrahim, then a Page, but highly beloved by him,
and asked for the Grand Master. When he saw him, he made a kind of offer to
raise his Turbant from his head with his hand, out of respect not permitting
the Grand Master to make any obeisance to him below his dignity. Bidding him
fear nothing, and telling him withal, if he had not time enough, he would
allow him more. The Grand Master returned him thanks, but desired nothing more
of him then to be mindful of his promise. Thereupon Solomon remounted, and
having viewed the Church of St. John, returned to his Pavilion.

Upon New Years day the Grand Master having taken his leave of Solomon, and
embarked as many of the choicest great Guns as the time would permit, attended
by all the Knights, and as many of the best of the Citizens, who rather chose
to follow his fortunes, then submit to the Tyranny of the Turks, went aboard
the Galleys appointed to carry the disconsolate Train, and the best of their
goods, and steered away for Candy.

Thus did The Order of St. John loose Rhodes, after they had held and
maintained it with so much constancy, so much Expense of treasure, and loss of
blood, against the whole power of the Barbarous Mahometans, for the space of
two hunand thirty years.

FINIS.

