A PASTORAL LETTER FROM The Lord Bishop of MEAVX. TO THE NEW CATHOLICS OF HIS
DIOCESE, Exhorting them to keep their EASTER, And giving them Necessary
Advertisements against the False Pastoral Letters of their Ministers.

WITH REFLECTIONS upon the PRETENDED PERSECUTION.

Translated out of French, and Published with Allowance.

Printed, 1686.

A PASTORAL LETTER FROM The Lord Bishop of MEAVX TO THE NEW CATHOLICS OF HIS
DIOCESE.
James Benign, By Divine Providence, Bishop of Meaux: To the New Catholics of
our Diocese, Greeting and Blessing in our Lord.

AT the approach of the Holy Day of Easter, you I. Obligation to Communicate at
Easter.
ought to be touched with a pious desire of Communicating with your Brethren.
It is JESUS CHRIST himself, who invites you to this Bancquet of Peace, and you
ought to believe what he says to you by my Mouth: With desire have I desired to
Eat this Passover Luc. 22. 15.
with you. For although he desires always to keep the Passover with his
Disciples; that the Dining Room, and the Great-Hall where he will keep this
Feast be always ready, the Church always open, and the Table always furnished:
Nevertheless it is chiefly upon these Holy Days he calls his Children to his
Banquet; and you, my Dear Brethren, are those whom of all his Children, he most
desires to see at his Table, since it is there you will give the last mark of
your sincere Union with his Church.

Call to your remembrance, the Holy King Ezechias, and ^ Chro. 30.
the Solemn Passover which he celebrated in Jerusalem. He was not only content
to call thither all those of Juda, that is to say, those who always lived in
Unity* with the People of GOD in the Worship of the Sanctuary, and in
submission to the true Priesthood which God had established by Moses: But he
resolved with the consent of the Sanhedrim, Ibid. 5, 6. and seq.
and all the People of Jerusalem, to send Messengers to the Ten Schismatical
Tribes, who from the time of Roboam had separated themselves from Juda and from
the Temple; and he sent them Letters to the end that being converted with all
their Heart to the God of their Fathers, they would omo with their Brethren
(whose Communion they had forsaken) to celebrate the Passover at the place
which the Lord had chosen.

As the Messengers of this Pious Prince, went diligently Ibidem 10, 11.
from City to City, the greatest part scoffed at them, and every one that
acquiesc'd to the Council of Ezechias, and the sweet Invitation of their
Brethren, went to Celebrate the Passover in Jerusalem, at the place of Unity
and Peace. This my Brethren, is the Treatment which the Church approves. Since
this unhappy Defection of the foregoing Age, since this deplorable Apostasy
which has torn from the Church whole Nations, and which seems to prepare the
Way for the Kingdom of Antichrist, according to the Prediction of the Apostle,
we have not ceased to put our 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3.
Erring Brethren in mind of those most happy Days, in which our Fathers did
Eat together the Bread of Life, and according to the Precept of St. Paul did
guard the Sacred Band of Christian Fraternity: But the greatest part being
prepossessed with the Blind hatred which their Ministers had inspired them
with, made a Mock of us; and every one that calls to mind our Ancient Unity,
whereof they carry an Impression in their Breast, through Baptism, are returned
to Jerusalem, that is to say, to the Catholic Church, where God has
established his Name, and the Profession of Christianity for ever.

Finally, the Grace of God has abundantly manifested it self in our Days. A
King as Religious and as Victorious as Ezechias, has invited the Trangressors
of Israel to return to the Unity of Juda, that is to say, the Erroneous and the
Schismatics to return to the Peaceable and the Orthodox; and we have seen
something of that which is Written in the Holy Prophet Osea: At that time the
Children Osea 1. 11.
of Judah and the Children of Israel shall Assemble themselves together, and
shall set over them one Head; that is to say, the Catholics and the
Schismatics, should with one accord acknowledge the Chief, whom God had given
them, JESUS CHRIST in the Heavens, and on Earth St. Peter, who lives in his
Successors to Govern the People of God according to his Word. So the
Separatists of whom it was said, Call ye those, for whom there is no Mercy,
Ibidem. 6.
are come in as great number as the Sand of the Sea, to the end, they may
receive Mercy; and instead of what was said to them, ye are not my People; they
are called the Children of the living God.

I do not marvel, my dearest Brethren, that you are returned II. That the
Pastors of the Catholic Church are the only true Pastors.
in Troops, and with so great ease to the Church, where your Ancestors have
served God. The same Foundation of Christianity, and as I have already said,
the Character of Baptism has secretly recalled you thither: NOT ONE OF YOU HAS
SUFFERED VIOLENCE, EITHER IN HIS PERSON OR GOODS. Let them not bring you these
deceitful Letters which are addressed from Strangers transformed into Pastors,
under the Title of Pastoral Letters to the Protestants of France, who are
fallen by the force of Torments. These Letters concern you not, otherwise than
as they are made by People, who could never prove their Mission: So far have
you been from suffering Torments, that you have not so much as heard them
mentioned. I hear other Bishops affirm the same: But for you, my Brethren, I
say nothing to you, but what you may speak as well as I. You are returned
Peaceably to us, you know it. When I Preached the Holy Word, the Holy Ghost
made you perceive I was your Pastor. I have seen you crowding about our Pulpit
with the same earnestness as the rest of my Flock: The wholesome Doctrine
entered into your Hearts as you heard it Expounded clearly to you; and the
Doubts which Custom more than Reason had formed in your Minds, yielded by
little and little to the Truth. Nothing could hinder you from acknowledging
that I was in the place of those who planted the Gospel in these Countries: You
have reverenced them in my Person, though unworthy. I have not Preached to you
any other Doctrine than that which I have received from my Holy Predecessors,
as every one of them has followed those who went before them, so have I done
the same. Look upon all the Bishops, who round about you, and even through the
whole extent of this Kingdom, We have all the same Glory which We will not
suffer to be taken from us. In this Succession a double Language has been never
heard. The Bishops that separate from our Unity, such as are they of England,
Suedeland and Denmark at the moment of their Separation, manifestly renounced
the Doctrine of those who had Consecrated them. It is not so among us, united
always to the Chair of St Peter, where from the beginning of Christianity We
have acknowledged the Band of Ecclesiastical Unity, We have never condemned our
Predecessors, and we leave the Faith of the Churches such as we found it. We
can say without fear of being reprehended, that they Cannot show any change in
the Catholic Church, unless in those matters of Ceremony and Discipline, which
from the first Ages have been always held for indifferent: As for those
insensible changes which they accuse us to have introduced in Doctrine; in that
they call them insensible, it is enough to convince you, that there are none
marked out, and that they cannot show an innovation by any one positive matter
of Fact. But what they cannot show us, we are ready to show to all those who
have forsaken us: There has not been any Interruption of the Ancient Doctrine
in any patt of the Christian World, but is known; the date of the Innovation
and Separation no Person is ignorant of. If there had been such changes among
us, the Authors would have been named; the Spirit of Truth, which is in the
Church would have noted them, and their Names would have been infamous as that
of Arius, Nestorius, Pelagius, Dioscorus and Berengarius. So that all they have
told you of these insensible changes in Doctrine, of which they have not
produced one example in the Christian Church, is no other but an empty
Accusation without any matter of Fact-to support it; and seeing you understand
the Doctrine which I declare to you, and that which the other Catholic Bishops
also declare to you, you ought by no means to doubt, but that you hear in our
Discourse, those who first preached the Gospel, and in them the Apostles, and
in the Apostles him who said, Go, Teach and Mat. 28. 19, 20.
Baptize, and behold I am with you even to the end of the World.

So when your Ministers told you, You needed not trouble your selves about the
Succession of Chairs and Pastors, provided you kept the Right Doctrine, and
true Understanding of the Scripture; they separated that which JESUS CHRIST
has been pleased to render inseparable: And it is in vain they boasted of
understanding the Scriptures, when in the mean while they rejected the Means by
which it has pleased God to transmit it. It was his Will that it should come
to us from Pastor to Pastor, and from Hand to Hand, without the least suspicion
or appearance of Innovation. By this means we come to know what has always
been Believed* and by consequence what ought always to be Believed. It is, as I
may say, in this (always) that the force of Truth and the Promise is evidenced:
and the whole is lost, if an Interruption be found but in one only Point. --
Those things which thou have heard from me ( says 2 Timothy 2. 2.
St. Paul) before many witnesses, commit thou to faithful men, who shall be fit
to teach others also. To separate the wholesome Doctrine from this Chain of
Succession, is to separate the River from the Channel: And to vaunt themselves
of the Understanding of the Scripture, when they acknowledge they have lost the
Stream of Tradition in their Pastors, is to vaunt of having preserved the
Waters after the Pipes are broken.

Do not therefore hearken, My Well-beloved, to the III. That the Author of the
false Pastoral Letter to those who are fallen, imitates in vain the Language of
St. Cyprian, whose Doctrine condemns him a^ a false Pastor.
Word of Falsehood, and suffer not your selves to be seduced by these Pretended
Pastoral Letters which they address to you from so many Parts, and in such
different Forms. That which has for its Title, A Pastoral Letter to the
Protestants of France who are fallen through Torments, is not the better for
being full of Words which that great Bishop and Martyr St. Cyprian addressed to
the Faithful of Carthage, to exhort them to Penitence and Martyrdom. Those who
dare imitate the True Pastors, and who use the Language of St. Cyprian, ought
to consider whether they can from so good a Title attribute to themselves the
Pastoral Authority. But let them consult this Holy Martyr; he will teach them,
That the Church is One; That Episcopacy is One; That Cypr. l. de ^nit. Eccl.
to possess it lawfully, it is necessary to ascend by One continual Succession
even to the Source of Unity, that is to say, even to the Apostles, and even to
him to whom only JESUS CHRIST has said, that he might found his Church upon
Unity. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I Build my Matthew. 16. 18. 19.
Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; and I will give
unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. and also after his
Resurrection, Feed my Sheep. John 21. 17.
The same St. Cyprian will teach them, That from this Source of the Apostles,
rising from perfect Unity, all the Pastors have issued: That from hence
Episcopacy is One, not only in all Places, but also in all Times: That the
Church, like a Sun, spreads her Rays through the Universe; but that it is the
same Light which extends it self on all Sides: That she spreads her Branches,
and causes her Streams to run through the Earth; but that there is but one
Source, one Chief, one Common Beginning, one self-same Stock, and finally, one
self-same Mother, rich in the Fruits she brings forth from her Fruitful Womb.
And least We should imagine some Cases might happen in which it might be Lawful
to separate from the Unity of the Church, or reform her Doctrine, he adds these
excellent Words, which I beseech you, my Brethren, to consider. The Spouse of
JESUS CHRIST can never be an Adultress; she cannot be corrupted, and her
Chastity is inviolable. He that separates himself from the Church to join
himself with an Adulteress, thus he treats the Sects that are separated from
the Unity of the Church, has no part in the Promises of JESUS CHRIST, he is a
Stranger, he is Profane, he is an Enemy. He cannot have God for his Father,
since he has not the Church for his Mother. It Is in vain that he pretends to
break the Holy Unity, which is founded on the Unity of the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost. And can they believe (pursues he) that the Unity which is Built
on so firm a Foundation can ever be dissolved? He that keeps not this Unity of
the Church, keeps not the Law of God; he has not the Faith of the Father and
the Son* he has not Life and Salvation.

Do not you perceive, My Brethren, how opposite the Method which they use in
your pretended Churches is to that of St. Cyprian? Your Ministers tell you
without ceasing, That to believe the Church without examining, is without
examining to believe Men subjects to Error; and that to know the True Church
which one may believe, one must by a discussion of particular Questions know
before hand the True Faith taught by the Scriptures. But Id. init. lib. de
Unit. Eccl.
you see that St. Cyprian takes quite another Method. To confound by an easy
and compendious Argument, as he proposed to himself, all Heresies and Schisms,
he alleges the Authority of the Church: He knew nothing more manifest; and so
far was he from suffering them to inquire after the Church by examining into
her Doctrines, that he would have them know her first, and hold it for certain,
that they cannot enjoy either the Law of God, or Salvation, or Life, when they
are out of her Unity.

This great Man has always followed the same Method: For when Antonian, one
of his Colleagues in the Episcopal Dignity, was loath to condemn Novatian, and
would first be infirm'd of his Doctrine, St. Cyprian makes him this grave
Answer: As for that which concerns the Epist. 51. ad Anton.
Person of Novatian, since you desire to be informed what Heresy he has
introduced, you must know, my dear Brother before all things, that we need not
curiously enquire what he has taught, since he has taught out of the Church;
let it be what it will, it is not Christian, since it is not in the Church of
JESUS CHRIST.

So when Men separate themselves from the Unity, and, after the Example of
Novatian, send new Apostels to establish Ibidem.
their new Institutions, and their new Doctrines, in a word, to build a new
Church; though they vaunt like him, of Reforming the Church, and of reducing it
as well to a Purer Doctrine as to a more Regular Discipline, they are so far
from being admitted to prove theirs to be the True Church, because of the True
Doctrine which they pretend to teach, that, on the contrary, they are convinced
that they cannot have the True Doctrine, when they are not in the True Church,
and when they would Build a new one.

Let these False Pastors, who boast of their being extraordinarily Conf. of
Faith. Art. 31.
sent to Build the Church anew, fallen into Ruin and Desolation, hear St.
Cyprian: Let them remember on what Maxims he founded his Episcopacy: And since
they cannot show us a Mission like his, let them cease to imitate the Language
of so great a Bishop, and to assume to themselves his Authority.

You have often heard them say, That you need not trouble IV. How often the
Heretics abuse this Passage of the Gospel, If two or three are gathered
together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them. The Explication of this
Passage by St. Cyprian, and the Conviction of Pastors without Mission. Cypr.
lib. de Unit. Eccl.
your selves where the Church was, since JESUS CHRIST has pronounced, That in
whatsoever place two or three Persons shall meet together in Name, he is there
in the midst of them. It is a long time that the Heretics and the Schismatics
have abused this Passage: They serve themselves of the times of St. Cyprian, to
Authorize the Assemblies which they hold a part. But this Holy Martyr confounds
them by the foregoing Words where JESUS CHRIST speaks in this manner, If two of
you shall agree together on Earth, as touching any thing that they shall ask,
it shall be done for them of my Father which is in Heaven; where at first sight
it is manifest, that these two who agree together ought to be in the Body, and
Christian Unity, in Common Fraternity. If two, says he, of you, that is, as St.
Cyprian understands, If two or three Children of the Church, two or three who
are together in Communion, shall Assemble themselves in the Name of JESUS
CHRIST, he will be in the midst of them, and will hear their Prayers. Secondly,
says this Holy Doctor, It is necessary that these two or three be united. And,
continues he, how can Ibid.
they unite themselves with any one, when they are not united with the Body of
the Church, and with all the Fraternity? How can two or three be Assembled in
the Name of JESUS CHRIST if it be apparent at the same time that they are
separated from JESUS CHRIST, and from his Gospel? FOR WE HAVE NOT SEPARATED OUR
SELVES FROM THEM, BUT THEY HAVE SEPARATED THEMSELVES FROM US: And since that
Heresies and Schisms are always posteriour to the Church, as they have formed
different Conventicles, and diverse Assemblies, they have forsaken the Head,
and the Origin of Truth. Lend an Ear, my Brethren, to this Decision of St.
Cyprian: He points at those who came after, those who separate themselves from
the Church which they found Established, those who make themselves New
Assemblies, who upon that account are incapable of Assembling in the Name of
JESUS CHRIST; and so far are they from being permitted to justify their
Separation, and their New Assemblies upon this ground, because they Preach the
Gospel, and because JESUS CHRIST is with them, that it is manifest on the
contrary according to the Doctrine of St. Cyprian, That they are separated from
JESUS CHRIST and from the Gospel, in as much as they separate themselves from
the Church, and account themselves obliged to form a new one.

And to the end they may the better understand of what Church this Holy Martyr
would speak, it is of the Church which acknowledges at Rome the Head of her
Communion, and in the place of Peter; the Eminent Degree of the Epist. 31. ad
Anton. Epist. 54. ad Co^^.
Sacerdotal Chair, which there acknowledges the Chair of Peter, and the
Principal Church, from which the Sacerdotal Unity has taken its Original;
Finally, which there acknowledges a Bishop endowed with so Eminent a
Priesthood, that the Emperor who assumed among his other Titles, that of
Pontifex Maximus, or High Priest, could Epist. 51. ad Anton.
no more endure him in Rome, then he could a Caesar in the Armies disputing the
Empire with him.

Why do not these Coyners of Pastoral Letters, who to adorn their deceitful
Discourses, catch up Fragments of St. Cyprian, take all his Doctrine entire?
Why do not they tell you with him, That there can be no Martyr out of the Lib.
de Unit. Eccl.
Church, that since they are separated from its Unity, it is in vain they shed
their Blood for the Confession of the Name of JESUS CHRIST; that the stain of
Schism cannot be washed out by Blood, nor the crime expiated by Martyrdom; That
there can be no Charity out of the Church; and so whatsoever Torments they
endure out of Her Bosom, they are of that kind of which St. Paul said, If I
deliver my 1 Corinthians. 13. 3.
Body even to be burned, if I have not Charity, all this will avail me nothing?
If then these pretended Pastors will speak the Language, and attribute to
themselves the Authority of the true Pastors, let them show us the Original of
their Ministry; and like St. Cyprian, and the other Orthodox Bishops, let them
make us see that they are descended from any Apostle; let them show us the
Eminent Chair, where all the Churches preserve the Unity, where principally
shines the Concord and Succession of Episcopacy. Open your selves, my Brethren,
the Books which you call your Ecclesiastical History; it is Beza that has
Composed it. Open the History of these salse Martyrs whose unhappy number they
would have you to augment; you will find, that the first who modeled the
Churches in France, which you call Reformed, were of Laics made Pastors by the
Laics, and by consequence; always Laymen, who dared at all times to take the
Law of God in their Mouth, and without Power Administer the Holy Sacraments,
Call to your Remembrance, Pierre le Clerc, a Wooll-Carder: I do not speak it in
scorn of his Profession, or to revile an Honest Trade; but to tax the
Ignorance, the Presumption, and the Schism of a Man, who without having
Predecessor or Pastor to ordain him, bolts out of his Shop to preside in the
Church. It is He who carved out the Pretended Reformed Church of Meaux the
first hatched in this Kingdom, in the Year 1546. It is he who has erected a
Profane and Sacrilegious Chair against the Successor of St. Faron and St.
Sainctin. Those who founded the other Churches have nothing more to brag of;
all are Laymen created Pastors by the Laity, contrary to all the Examples of
Antiquity, against the Universal practice of the Christian Church, where they
have never seen a Pastor, who was not ordained by other Pastors; and contrary
to the Authority of the Scriptures, where the Holy Ghost neither prescribes nor
shows us any but this means to perpetuate the Ecclesiastical Ministry. Behold,
my Brethren, the Original of the Ministry under which you were. But if a
Luther, a Bucer, a Zuinglius, a Peter Martyr, if other Priests and Religious
Lawfully Ordained in the Catholic Church made themselves Ministers of the
Erring Multitude, without mentioning other Reasons which condemn their Rashness
to exercise this New Ministry, they were obliged to Apostatize from the Faith
of those who Consecrated them. They made them Priests in saying to them, that
they gave them Power to transform by their Holy Benediction Pontific. de Ordin.
the Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of JESUS CHRIST, and to offer them
in Sacrifice for the Living and the Dead; They were Consecrated in this Faith,
but were forced to renounce it before they could be qualified to exercise their
New Ministry; so they carry in their Forehead the Mark of Innovation, and the
separating Herds Anton. Caracciol.
so little acknowledged their Ordination and Mission which they received in the
Church, that this weak Bishop of Troy (I do not Name him so of my self, it is
the Ecclesiastical History of Beza which gives us this Idea) after having Beza
Hist. Eccles. lib. 2, and 6.
embraced the Pretended Reformation obtained not without trouble and much
entreaty that they would permit him to be a Minister; so unprofitable did they
believe all that which he had before received. So all these Founders of the
Pretended Churches are People without Authority and without Mission. It is from
thence that they who composed these Pastoral Letters are descended; and for all
that (forsooth) they set up for Cyprians and Athanasius's. But their Error is
manifest; and although they endeavor to counterfeit the Language of the Holy
Bishops, yet since they have neither Succession, nor Authority, nor Doctrine,
you cannot look upon them but as false Apostles, and deceitful 2 Cor. 11. 13.
Workers transformed, as St. Paul says, into Apostles of JESUS CHRIST.

Thus you see nothing in the Writings which they address V. That the Pretended
Pastoral Letters are full of Passion and an intolerable bitterness against us.
to you, but a Bitter Zeal, passionate Sentiments, and a manifest abuse of the
Word of God. The Author of the Letter to the Protestants fallen through fear of
Torments, treats those who have rendered themselves, as he calls it, before the
Combat, that is to say, without being Tormented, as a People for whom there is
no Mercy; and applying to them a Passage of St. Paul, from whence there is
nothing left them but Despair, he vouchsafes not so much as to exhort them to
Repentance. Another gives his Letter this Title; To our Brethren who groan
under the Captivity of To those who groan under the Captivity of Babylon.
Horrible Calumny touching the Litanies and Prayers to Saints.
Babylon: And renews, by this only Title, all the as vain as injurious
Applications of the Apocalypse, which they are ever making, to render the
Church odious to you. All the rest is of a piece, and the whole answers the
furious Title. He speaks to you of nothing but the horror you ought to have of
Popery: To the end you may be preserved, as he speaks, in this just horror of
Popery, such as it deserves: Forget not, pursues he, continually to fix your
Eyes upon all its Deformities; have a care of looking upon it through those
Qualifications which the Doctors of Lies cast before our Eyes of late.

You understand well this Language; you know it to be the same Spirit which
told your Ministers, That the Exposition of the Catholic Doctrine, which I
published, although it was taken Word for Word out of the Council of Trent, and
that for this Reason so many Bishops, so many Cardinals, so many Doctors, all
the Clergy of France, the Pope himself, and finally, the whole Church had
approved it, was not our true Doctrine, but a deceitful Softning and
Dissembling it, where the whole Church, and the Pope himself, were entered into
a Conspiracy with me to circumvent you. What Prodigy cannot Men believe, when
they believe such things as these? But those who would seduce you, have no
other means but this to preserve the Horror which they breathed into you
against us since the beginning of the Pretended Reformation. If they had not
disguised our Sentiments to you, they had wanted means to improve into Schism
the Aversion to the Church which they would creat in you. A Hatred so violent
cannot be entertained, but by continuing the same Calumnies; and when they
exhort you to reject the Qualifications of Popery, by considering without
ceasing all its Deformities; if you understand their Language, it is as much as
to say, That you must judge of our Sentiments, not by the Public Profession
which we make, but that which our declared Enemies impute to us; and that you
ought not to know our Religion but in their Calumnies. Without this, perceive
you not that they would not dare to say, as does this furious Author, That our
Religion was the Religion of the *Devil; a Religion of Brutes, filled up with
Idolatary, and Jewish and Pagan Ceremonies; Open your Eyes, My dear brethren;
acknowledge the Malice and bitter Zeal of those who from the beginning would
make you Martyrs of the Schism. I do not pretend here to enter into
Controversies; But with what Conscience can they Write to you, That you are
made to say the Litanies in a Barbarous Language, to the Honor of the
Creatures, and to the Dishonor of the Creator? Read these Litanies, since you
have them in your Hands, not only in the Latin Tongue, which these furious Men
mean by Barbarous, but also in the French. Is it to say the Litanies to the
Dishonor of the Creator, to say at first, Lord have mercy upon us: Christ have
mercy upon us: Christ hear us: Christ graciously hear us: God the Father
Eternal, God the Son, Redeemer of the World; God the Holy Ghost, have mercy
upon us: Holy Trinity, One God, have mercy upon us? Having laid this Foundation
of our Hope, is it to speak to the Honor of the Creature, and to the Dishonor
of the Creator, to say, Holy Mary, pray for us: Holy Mother of God, pray for
us: Ye Holy Angels, pray for us: St. Peter pray for us: And the rest? Does not
this manner of naming the Saints in the Litanies, visibly place them rather in
the number of those that Pray, than of those that are Prayed to, as all our
Doctors have taught?

But how profitable soever their Prayers appear to us, our Devotions stop not
there. We return presently after to JESUS CHRIST, whom we conjure by all his
Mysteries, and by all the Names which he has taken to assure us of his
Goodness, to deliver us from all Evils, of which the greatest and most terrible
is Death in Sin. We continue the Litany in praying God to bless all the
Children of the Church, and to endue them with his Graces, of which a Pious
Enumeration is made. Finally, we three times invoke the Lamb who takes away the
Sins of the World; and after an Admirable Psalm, and many other Prayers
addressed to God, the Priest offers up the Vows of his People, which he Prays
him favorably to hear for the Love of his Son JESUS CHRIST our Lord. Behold
these Litanies which we Sing to the Honor of the Creatures, and to the
Dishonor of the Creator! Is it thus then we estrange our selves from God? Is
it thus we injure the Creator, when we begin with him, and end with him, and in
the middle join our selves to the Company of his Friends, to Pray to him in
their Communion? After all, what have they to say to this Prayer, Pray for us?
Is it not Word for Word St. Paul's in many places? Is it more injurious 1 Thessalonians. 5. 25.
to the Creator, because in the same Spirit we address to the Saints that live
with him? Let us pass over your captious Question, Whether they hear us or no?
A captious Question I say, since it cannot be said of the Holy Angels that they
hear us not, those of whom it is expressly Written, That they present our
Prayers to God. This Reason then does Rev. 8. 3, 4, 5.
not hinder, but that we may say to them, Ye Holy Angels, Pray for us; and at
last we must come to this Cavil, to distinguish the Beatified Souls from the
Holy Angels, with whom they are united by the same Illuminations, the same
Graces, and by an Eternal Society. But once more let us lay aside this: To
decide the Question, if our Litanies are to the Dishonor of the Creator, is it
not enough that it is clearly revealed by God, that this Prayer, Pray to God
for us, does not take any thing away from God? Is not the thing evident of it
self? Does it take off our Hearts from God? Where do we place our last End,
where do we fix our Heart and our Confidence, when we say, Pray to God for us,
if not in God? But by whom do we ask the Saints to Pray, if not by JESUS
CHRIST? Is not this the Faith of the Council of Trent, and of the whole Church,
That the Saints themselves are not heard, neither can obtain any thing for us,
but by JESUS CHRIST? So far is the Prayer by which we desire them to pray for
us, from weakening our Confidence in God, and in our Savior, that it entirely
presupposes it, as much as the like Invitation which we make to our Brethren
who are on Earth.

But then it seems our Images, and the Honor which we VI. The same Author's
Calumnies upon account of Images.
render them, cause an Abhorrence. Again, once more, my Brethren, let us not
dispute; let us not run into Controversy. But suffer me to speak in simplity,
and with a Fraternal and Paternal Integrity, to those who have not yet had the
Power to get out of their vain Scruples. Will you believe an Injury is done to
God, in kissing, as we do, That the Accusations they bring against us in this
matter, proceed from Ignorance and Superstitious Fears.
the Book of the Gospel? To rise up to Honor it when it is carried in
Ceremony; and to bow your Head before it? The Ministers, you will say, have not
taught us this. I know it; and the Dryness of their Devotions reaches not to
these tender and affectionate Actions, though they testify and excite Devotion
and interior Fervor. But this, you will reply, is not Written. What an Error
it is to desire every thing should be Written, even to the least Particular? Is
it not enough for the Perfection of the Holy Scripture, that the Fundamentals
are Written; and the Church the Faithful Interpreter of those Fundamentals in
Faith which the Scriptures contain, ought she not also to be a sufficient
Guarantee for all the rest? But, my Brethren, without disputing, I ask you; Is
it Written any where, That it is good to Swear upon the Gospel? Do they make
difficulty of this in the New Reformation? And at the same time, is it by the
Ink, or by the Paper, or by the Letters and Characters that they Swear? Is it
not by the Eternal Verity which these things represent? How would you treat
those who were afraid to make this Oath, and how would you call this vain
Scruple? Would not you declare it to be a Weakness, and a Superstitious Fear?
Now what is the Image of the Cross, but another manner of Writing that which is
Written in the Gospel, and of which it is an Abridgment* That JESUS CHRIST is
our Savior by the Cross? If this be not true, if it be not true that JESUS
CHRIST has Redeemed us by the Cross, let them cease, as an Holy Pope says, to
Preach it, and to Write of it. But if it be truly a Mystery of Faith and Piety,
why do they not Write it all manner of ways that can be? And wherefore should
not this Scripture of Images be as Venerable, as that which is made upon Paper?
Are not Paper and Letters the Work of Man's Hand, as well as Sculpture and
Painting? But who does not see, that in all these things we regard not what
they are, but what they signify? And that it is no less an Error, no less a
Superstition, to be afraid that the Honor which we give to an Image terminates
in the Marble or the Metal, than it is to be afraid that it stops at the Paper
and Ink, when we touch the Gospel to Swear upon it?

You will wonder your selves, my Brethren, I say it again to the weak, who yet
retain the unhappy Relics of their Ancient Errors: I say, you will wonder to
hear your selves taxed of Superstition, and you will answer certainly, it is
not your Vice. But tell me in the mean time, what is the fear which hinders you
from making your Prayer to JESUS CHRIST upon your Knees before his Image, as
well as before a Pillar or a Wall? For in short, you must be always before
something; Why then do you not choose an Image of JESUS CHRIST as well as a
White Wall? Is this Image become incompatible with our Devotions, because it
represents to us the dear Object of them? But I see, My Well-beloved, what it is
you fear: You fear that your Genuflexion instead of Reaching to JESUS CHRIST
will stop at the Wood, or the Ivory; as if this Genuflexion could of it self
pass to any thing, without being directed by your Intention whether it should
tend? But do you not well know, that your Intention is to address your Vows to
JESUS CHRIST himself? Or fear you that JESUS CHRIST does not know it? Or fear
you that this Language of the Body signifies to him some other thing then that
which the whole Church, and your selves conforming to Her Intentions have a
design it should signify? Acknowledge then once for all, that it is a gross
Ignorance, a pitiful Weakness, and a true Superstition, to fear that in effect
you Honor the Wood, when you have an Intention to Honor JESUS CHRIST.

But you fear, say you, that then you shall not take the prohibition of the
Decalogue sufficiently according to the Letter; Very well, Take it then
entirely according to the Letter, and tell me, that it is as unlawful to make
Images, for it is Written, Thou shall not make them, as it is to fall down
Exodus 20. 4. Ibid. 5.
before them, because it is Written, Thou shall not prostrate thy self before
them. Understand then, my dear Brethren, that it is forbidden to make Images,
and prostrate our selves before them in the Spirit of Pagans, believing that
they are filled with a Divine Virtue, or that the Divinity incorporates it self
with them, as the Pagans did believe; in one Word, with a design to serve them,
to put our Confidence Isa. 44. 17.
in them as the Pagans, and with them to say, Deliver me, spare me, for you are
my God; for this was the true Character and Foundation of Idolatry, as Isaias
in this place, and the whole Scripture teaches us.

And say not, That if the Pagans believed these things, they were intolerable
stupid; for so indeed they were: and it is not in vain that this Holy Prophet
says in the Ibid. 18. 19.
Place just now cited, They know not, they understand not, they have no Eyes,
they have neither sense nor understanding, they make no reflection in their
heart, they know nothing, they perceive nothing. Is this enough to make you
see, that the grosness of Idolatry ineffect kept within no Bounds, and
proceeded even to incorporate the Divinity, which they believed was Corporeal,
with Matter? Now whereas in the course of time the Philosophers bore above this
Common Error of Mankind, it would be easy for me to show you, that they always
relapsed into it in some kind, and in every Case, as the Apostle convinced
them, they confirmed the Impiety of the Public Worship in adhering to it. But
without entering into these Disputes, and to keep our selves to the Scripture,
you see what it Cat. Dim, 23. Advert. to the Expos.
condemns when it forbids Images. The Catechism of the New Reformation agrees
to it: It tells us, as I have Remarked elsewhere, and it is no pain to me to
repeat it since it is necessary for you to understand it; this Catechism tells
you, That the Images which God prohibits in the Decalogue, are those where the
Divinity is believed to be represented as if it were Corporeal, and are looked
upon as if God showed himself there to us. They cannot say that we have this
Belief, without an insupportable Calumny. They allow, that concerning the
Divine Nature and the Creation our Belief is most pure: With this Belief it is
impossible that we should be Idolaters. We serve not Images; but we serve our
selves of Images, to render us more attentive to the Pious Objects which excite
our Faith. When you say, That the People place their Confidence in them, you
rashly Judge your Brother: He is obedient to the Church, which so exactly
distinguishes that which belongs to the Original, from that which belongs to
the Representative; and since he submits to Her Decrees, why will you not
believe that he conforms his Intentions and Sentiments to Hers also? If you at
any time fee a Taper lighted before the Image of a Saint, you will presently
believe that it is to serve the Image. You deceive your selves: This is to tell
you, that this Saint is the Light of the World, and that you ought either to
follow his Doctrine, or imitate his Virtues. If at any time we burn Incense
before Relics, or, if you will, before any Image; it is as much as to say, that
the Doctrine and the Examples of the Saints are a sweet Odor of JESUS CHRIST,
and that we ought, after their Example, to send forth a like Perfume before
God, and in the Church. When you Judge otherwise, you Judge the Servant of
another, contrary to the Romans 14. 4.
Precept of the Apostle. But you shall never persuade either a French man that
his Vulgat Language can signify any other thing than what Custom has
allowed; or the Children of the Church, that the Language of Her Ceremonies can
have any other Signification than that which the Decrees and Usage of the
Church have affixed to them. And though particular Persons may not have
Intentions pure enough, the weakness of one does not prejudice the Faith of
another: And tho there were an Abuse in the Practice of these particular
Persons, is it not enough that the Church reprehends them? And suppose they
were not sufficiently reprehended, it is one thing to approve a thing, another
to tolerate it: And suppose it were ill to tolerate this Abuse, I would not
break the Unity for this; and to separate my self from a thing which can do me
no hurt, I would not plunge my self into the Abyss of Schism, where I should
perish. St. Augustine avouches, That he saw many Superstitious Practices, which
he could not approve; and yet that he durst not always reprehend them Aug. Ep.
119. ad Jan. cap. 19.
with an entire liberty, lest he might scandalize either pious Persons, or hot
and turbulent Zealots. He was not the less pure, because there was Iniquity in
these Practices. The Church, continues the same Father, in the midst of the
Chaff and the Tares that surround her, tolerates many things: but neither does
she approve, nor do any thing contrary to Faith and good Manners. What the
Church tolerates* is not our Rule, but what she approves: And those who serve
themselves of such like things to exasperate you against us, and to hinder so
great a Good as is that of a Reunion, VII. Unjust Reproaches touching
Ceremonies, the Service in Latin, and the Adoration of Jesus Christ in the
Eucharist. That the Pretended Reformed are gross and carnal, not we, as they
accuse us. Jam. 5. 14. 15.
are accursed of God.

As for what concerns the Pagan and Jewish Ceremonies, with which this fierce
Letter says our worship is filled; where are they? Is it the Sign of the Cross?
Have we taken that from the Jews and Pagans to whom the Cross is folly, and a
scandal? Is it the Oil we make use of in the Sacrament according to the precept
of St. James? Is it the Holy Water which we take in remembrance of our Baptism,
or the Blessed Bread, the precious remains of the Agape, or the Christians
Feasts of Charity, and the Symbol of our Union? Tho we should apply to holy
uses any of these Indifferent Ceremonies either of the Jews or Pagans to fix
our Spirits on more Holy Objects would it be a crime? But perhaps you complain
that the Priest appears at Mass sometimes with his Hands lifted up to Heaven,
as the Apostle prescribed, sometimes with his Hands joined, to 1 Timothy 2. 8.
testify greater Ardour, when the matters require it, or that so often as he
begins any New Action he turns toward the People to give them, and receive
from them a Salutation in Sign of their Communion. Are the Ministers offended
at the Sacred Habits which their Brethren the Protestants of Germany, and their
yet more dear Brethren the Protestants of England have retained as well as the
greatest part of the Ceremonies; And do they expect that these things which
appear either profitable or indifferent in other Countries, should strike you
with horror, only when you see them practiced by your fellow Subjects, and in
the Catholic Church?

In effect, they aim at nothing else but to cast Venom upon all that we do. I
shall have other occasions to instruct you concerning the Service in the Vulgar
Tongue, and I have often done it already by word of Mouth. But what would this
furious Minister mean by these words, Accustom not your selves to this
Barbarous Language which robs the Peoples Ears of Religion, and only leaves
something for the Eyes? Is not this a visible Calumny to asperse the Catholic
Church, that she would conceal from the People her Mysteries after the Council
of Trent has made* this Decree: That least the Sheep Conc. Tri. Sess. 22. Chapter
8.
should be without nourishment, and that there may be always some Person ready
to give to the little ones the Bread which they ask, the Pastors shall explain
to them during the celebration of Mass, especially on Sunday's and Holy days,
some Point of what is there read, and some one of the Mysteries of this most
Holy Sacrifice? It is not then the Intention of the Church to hide from you the
Mysteries, but on the contrary, to Expound to you every Day some part with so
much care, as to render them known and familiar to you. The Books which they
have put into your Hands explain all to you; and those who persuade you* that
we would take from you the knowledge of the adorable secrets of Religon, aim at
nothing else but to fill you with gall and bitterness against your Brethren.

But behold the great grievance, We make you adore Bread. I have already
professed to you, that I will not enter into Controversies; but I will only
tell you, that this Reproach is like that which the Socinians cast upon us, and
which heretofore the Disciples of Paulus Samosatenus objected to us; they
denying the Divinity of JESUS CHRIST, accuse us of being Idolaters, and imagine
they have a purer Worship than ours, because they render not Supreme Honor to
a Man. But whilst they glory in being more Spiritual than we, and of paying to
the Divinity a purer Adoration; they are in effect Carnal and Gross, because
they follow nothing but their Sense and Humane Reason, which persuades them
that a Man cannot be a God. They would make you Spiritual after the same
manner; they boast of purifying your Worship in obliging you to believe, it is
only Bread which you see upon the Holy Table, and that the Body of JESUS
CHRIST, which you see not there, is not also there, neither can it be there.
What do you also in this but follow Flesh and Blood? But if after the Example
of Catholics, you would raise up your minds, if you would render your selves
capable of believing that JESUS CHRIST has power to vail himself under the
Figure of Bread to exercise our Faith; what could hinder you from
understanding these words, This is my Body, as literally Mat. 26. 2^. John 1.
1, 14.
as these, The Word was God; and the Word was made Flesh? Formerly you were
taught, that it was an Inhumane Action and contrary to Piety to eat Man's Flesh
with the Mouth of the Body, and especial the Flesh of ones Father. This Title
of Anthropophagi and Cannibals which the Ministers gave us, made us pass for
Brutes in the Opinion of their blind followers; and there is no sort of
violence they did not think themselves obliged to us the Words of JESUS CHRIST
rather than own a Sense so Barbarous. Now that Men's Minds are more calmed, and
they have acknowledged in favor of the Lutherans, that this Manducation of the
Flesh of our Lord, which was looked upon with such detestation, has no poison
in it; that it contains nothing either repugnant to Piety, or to the Honor of
God, or to the good of Men; insomuch as the Lutherans, who believe and practice
it as well as we, are thought worthy to partake of the Holy Table, and to be
true Members of JESUS CHRIST: What reason have you to strain the Words of JESUS
CHRIST and by force introduce a Figure of which not one Example is found in
Scripture? But if we are Idolaters because we adore JESUS CHRIST in the
Eucharist: What are the Lutherans? It is not true, tho they tell you so, that
they do not adore JESUS CHRIST in the Blessed Sacrament. If you consult them,
they will tell you, that believing JESUS CHRIST to be there only when he is
received, they adore him there only when they do receive him, and that it is to
adore him in receiving him that they receive this Holy Sacrament on their
Knees. But tho they did not render him any exterior Adoration, who knows not
that it is not in this Exterior the Service does consist? The Acts of Faith,
Hope, and Charity, addressed to JESUS CHRIST as present, is not this a perfect
Adoration they render to him? And if it be an Idolatry to Adore JESUS CHRIST in
the Sacrament of the Supper, can he that Adors him there Interiourly exempt
himself from being an Idolater? How then can he have part at the Table of JESUS
CHRIST, and in the Celestial Heritage? Weight, my Brethren, weigh this so solid
and also so intelligible a Reason, you will see how they connive at all the
Lutherans do, but are outrageous against all that we practice, aiming at
nothing but to inspire you with anun just horror against our Worship.

Finally, If it be an Idolatry to Adore JESUS CHRIST VIII. That they cannot
accuse us of Idolatry without Blaspeming against JESUS CHRIST, and the promises
made to the Church. A remarkable Passage of M. Claude.
in the Blessed Sacrament, where have the true Adorers been for so many Ages?
Deceive not your selves, my Brethren; The Adoration of JESUS CHRIST in the
Eucharist is as ancient as the Church Her self. But not to tell you only those
things which we our selves are agreed upon; This Adoration, as all acknowledge,
was at least established in the Church, and constantly there decided, ever
since Berengarius's time, that is to say, above Six hundred Years ago. Has
Hell prevailed during so many Ages? And that which was always to subsist, even
to the end of the World, according to the Word of JESUS CHRIST, has it
suffered so considerable an Interruption?

And that you may not think I would amuse you with a nice discussion of the
History of passed Ages: Where were the true Adorers when Zuinglius and Calvin
came into the World? For as for Luther, it is manifest, that if he changed any
thing in the Adoration, it was very late. Nevertheless, where were these true
Adorers at the first starting up of Luther, and in the beginning of the New
Gospel? You presently betake your self to the Seven Thousand unknown to the
Prophet Elias, who had not bowed their Knees to Baal. But these Seven Thousand
sure would have declared themselves at least when they saw the Reformers
appear. I have pressed Monsieur Claude to Name Conser. Reflect. 13. p. 460, 461.
but one; who joining himself to these Pretended Reformers, did say to them, I
have always believed as you do: I never adhear'd to the Roman Faith, nor to
the Mass, nor to the Real Presence, nor the Adoration of JESUS CHRIST in the
Eucharist. To this so precise a Demand, to this Matter of Fact so clearly laid
down, what has this Minister, so full of subtilties, answered? Does Monsieur de
Meaux (says he) imagine, that the Disciples of Luther and Repons. a^ disc. de
M. de Condom, page 362.
Zuinglius are obliged to make formal Declarations of all they thought before
the Reformation, and that they are bound to insert these Declarations in their
Books? You see that he had not a Man to name; and this Answer may pass for a
solemn Acknowledgment, that in effect he knows not one Person who has made such
a Declaration. It is a manifest Illusion to say, That these things are not
committed to Writing; and that, notwithstanding it was objected on all Sides;
and in all Books to the Pretended Reformers, That the Doctrine which they
taught was unknown when they first appeared, yet it never entered into their
Minds to tell us, That the greatest number of those that followed them had
always believed as they believed. Moreover, though the World has been filled with
Letters, Histories, and Treatises, and that a thousand and a thousand times
they have endeavored to satisfy the World concerning the Novelty which we
imputed to them, they never yet named these Comerades which they suppose they
had among us; and even at present, Monsieur Claude cannot find them, though he be
pressed to name at least some one. But in stead of satisfying this Demand, he
alleges to us the sudden Progress of the Reformation; Which shows us (says he)
that the ^bidem.
Matter was extraordinarily disposed. As if the desire to free themselves from
Vows, from Fasts, from Continance, from Confession, from the Mysteries which
transcended our Senses, from Subjection to Bishops, who were in so many Places
Temporal Princes; as if the Sweetness of Church Revenues, the Disgust taken
against Ecclesiastics, who were, alas! too Ignorant, and too Scandalous; thee
deceitful Charm of Railleries and Invectives, and that of a Turbulant and
Seditious Eloquence; the Power given to Princes and Magistrates to decide
Matters in Religion; and to all Men, of rendering themselves Judges of their own
Faith, and of believing nothing but the Dictates of their own Sense; in short,
as if Novelty it self had not been the alluring Bait to draw in Troops into the
New Reformation, whole Cities, Princes, People, and even Priest themselves, and
Apostate Religious. Now whilst Catholics alleged to the Reformers and their
Disciples these causes of their Revolt, this was the time to Answer, it was not
of Yester-day they had these Thoughts; nay, they ought to have explicated this,
even before that time. For, in fine, they have supposed in their New Pastoral
Letters, that according Romans 10. 10.
to the Doctrine of St. Paul, It is not enough to believe with Heart unto
Righteousness, but that we ought also to confess with the Mouth unto Salvation,
and glorify God with the Body and the Spirit, because he is the Redeemer of
them both. It Is thus the Letter addressed to them who are fallen speaks; and
that which is Written to the Oppressed by Babylon, does not explain it self in
less formal terms: Know that it is enough to hate these things with the Heart,
but they ought to be condemned with the Mouth. Why do they not then show us
those whom they suppose to have Confessed before the Reformation, the Doctrine
which is taught? Nevertheless they cannot show us any one: So true is it, that
there were none at all. And it appears on the contrary, that the first
Reformers, Priests and Religious, for the most part, had been Consecrated in
the Faith which we profess, as we have already seen; and those whom they draw
into their Rebellion, looked on them as extraordinary Men, who taught them a
New Doctrine. Where then in the Name of God, were those who believed aright,
since all the World, and as well the Reformers as those that followed them
believed as we do?

Take heed, my Dear Brethren, that you look not upon this Question as
unprofitable, or curious. The intent is, to verify the Promises of the Gospel.
Monsieur Claude acknowledges, that in Virtue of these Promises of JESUS CHRIST,
Teach and Baptize, I will be always with you, Matthew. (...) 19, ^^
Successors, was established in the Church but for a time. Under pretext that
the Holy Ghost descends visibly no more, they pretend that he descends no more
at all, and that this Ceremony is useless. They might have pretended, with as
much reason, That because Satan afflicts no more* as in former times, visibly
in their Flesh, those whom the Church 1 Cor. 5. 5.
delivered to him, she has lost the Power of delivering them to him by her
Censures. Believe them not, my Brethren, and be not more wise than all
Antiquity. Learn diligently of your Pastors what is the Effect of this
Sacrament, and of the holy Chrism which we bless, after the Example of our
Fathers from the very beginning of Christianity. You should already have
demanded of us with ardour a Sacrament so necessary to fortify your
Infant-Faith. Come, my Brethren, come and receive it from our hands: Come, you
that are near; desire it, ye that are far off, and I will come and bring you
this Heavenly Gift.

But above all, prepare your selves to Communicate at Easter, and to receive
the Adorable Flesh of the Lamb without Spot, who takes away the sins of the
World. What is there more to be desired, than to exercise the Right belonging
to the Spouse; to enjoy the Sacred Body of the Heavenly Bridegroom; to deliver
him your own to be Sanctified by him; to be united to him Body to Body, Heart
to Heart, Spirit to Spirit, to the end we may be made perfect in one with him;
that we may be bone of his Joan. 17. 23. Ephesians. 5. 30. 1 Cor. 6. 16, 17.
bone, and flesh of his flesh; and finally, two in the same flesh, and also in
the same spirit, with JESUS CHRIST? It is not only the Spirit, but the Body
also, which we must prepare for the Body of JESUS. For since the Word was made
Flesh, the Body which he took is the Means to unite us to his Divinity; and to
consummate the Mystery, it is also by uniting himself to our Body that the Son
of God makes this Grace and his Virtue pass into our Souls. Run eagerly then to
the Body of our Savior: What have you more to desire, when you have there
found with the Divinity and the whole Person of JESUS CHRIST, the Source also
of Grace and Life?

He has said, Whosoever Eats me, shall live by me. He has Joan. 6. 52. 58. 59.
said* Whosoever Eats of this Bread, shall have eternal Life He has said, The
Bread which I will give you is my Flesh, which I will give for the Life of the
World. What other Grace could they receive with the precious Blood? And who
sees not, that the one and the other, and both together, have but one and the
same Virtue? Ought you not to be content to Communicate as Pious Antiquity
Communicated See the Treatise of the Communion under both Kinds, p. 9. 23.
Ibid. p. ^1.
the Sick; as St. Ambrose Communicated when he was Dying; as St. Cyprian and
other Saints Communicated Infants; as the Martyrs Communicated in their Houses,
and the Hermits in their Retreats; as many Saints have understood that JESUS
CHRIST Communicated the two Disciples at Emaus; as our Adversaries themselves
Communicate Ibid. p. 223.
those who have an Aversion to Wine, and believe not they deprive them of the
Sacrament of JESUS CHRIST, though they make the whole Virtue of it to consist in
the Species? How much more ought they to be content with one Kind alone in the
Catholic Church, where the Efficacy of the Sacrament is placed in JESUS CHRIST
himself? Do you believe the Church, that good Mother, would deprive Her
Children of the Grace of a Sacrament, whose Sweets and Virtue she so well
knows? Or, that JESUS CHRIST, who has promised to be always with Her, would
permit it? Upon account of this Promise, Monsieur Claude acknowledges, That
there is always a Church which publishes the Faith, a Church Repo^se au Disc.
de M. de Cond* q. 4. p. 102.
to which JESUS CHRIST has given an exterior Ministry, and by consequence, a
Church which is Plain and Visible. He allows, That we must acknowledge, in
Virtue of this Promise, a perpetual Subsistence of the Ministry in Ibid. p. 10^.
a State sufficient for the Salvation of God's Elect, for the Edifying the Body
of Christ, and for the bringing of all his Elect and true Faithful Ones to
perfection. If they want Ibid. p 109.
any thing Essential to so great a Sacrament as this of the Communion, is the
Ministry sufficient to the Salvation and Perfection of the Faithful? Is it to
be in this State, not to receive such a Sacrament, but by violating the
Commandment of JESUS CHRIST? It is a manifest Truth, both among us and the
Ministers, That the Church cannot be where the Sacraments are not. If then both
Kinds are absolutely necessary to every particular Faithful, if the Sacrament
does not subsist but in the Distribution of them both; the Ministers must say,
That so long as but one Kind was given, the Church was without the Sacrament of
the LORD'S SUPPER. Nevertheless, they dare not say this: They are forced to
allow, that People were saved amongst us, at least before their Reformation,
and that the True Church was there. They are necessarily bound then to
acknowledge, the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper was there also, and that by
consequence it subsists in its full perfection, being distributed but in one
only Kind.

This is also what Monsieur Claude acknowledges after such a manner, that it
leaves no doubt to those who will but ^ead him with Attention. Behold how he
defines the Church: The Church is the true Faithful, who make Profession Ibid.
p. 129.
of the Truth, and of Christian Piety, and of true Sanctity, under a Ministry
which furnishes them with necessary Food for a Spiritual Life, WITHOUT
DEPRIVING THEM OF ANY THING OF IT. There is nothing more Essential to the
Church than what enters into the Definition of it. There enters into the
Definition of a Church* That it be under a Ministry, that is to say, under
Pastors, who are to furnish it with all necessary Food for a Spiritual Life,
without depriving them of any of it. This Minister agrees with us in this
Foundation; and all the Ibid. p. 130. and ^^^qu.
Ministers grant it, That at least until the Pretended Reformation People were
saved under the Ministry of the Latin Pastors and of the Roman Church, and that
the true Church was there also. It was under a Ministry then, that furnished it
with all necessary Food, without depriving them of any, even though they had
ceased to give the Cup; and the Cup cannot then be reckoned among those
Aliments necessary to a Spiritual Life.

Come then, my dear Brethren, come to the Sacred Bancquet of the Church, and
make not its Perfection to consist in both the Kinds, since the Ministers
themselves are forced to grant they give you under one Kind all the Aliment
that is necessary to a Spiritual Life, without Depriving you of any of it. In
effect, what ground can you have to doubt? It is upon the Faith of the Church
you content your self with your Baptism, though you received it in your
Infancy, without the Authority of Scripture, and after a manner, if the Letter
only be regarded, so different from that which JESUS CHRIST ordained; that he
himself observed the first; wherein also the Apostles have placed the
Mysterious representation of our Burial as well as of our Resurrection with
JESUS CHRIST. You understand well, that I speak of the Immersion practiced in
Baptism during so many Ages, and comprised in the Words of our Lord, Baptize,
etc. that is to say, Plunge and dip entirely under Water. If upon the Faith of
the Church you are at quiet as to your Baptism, rely upon the same Faith as to
your Communion, and deprive not your selves of the whole Sacrament under
pretense of desiring a part of it. It is the utmost of my wishes to see you at
the Holy Table, perfecting the Mystery of your Peace and Reconciliation with
the Church. But least you should there receive your Condemnation, and for want
of discerning the Body of our LORD, render your selves culpable, we desire, as
far as it is possible, to prepare you our selves for this Celestial Bancquet;
and we will go from we must understand, I will be always with you, Teaching and
Baptizing. From whence it follows by his Confession, Respons. au disc. de M. de
Condom p. 106. p. 109. p. 333, etc.
That JESUS CHRIST promised to his Church to be with her, and to teach with
her, without interruption even to the end of the World. And again, There shall
always be a Church, and JESUS CHRIST will be always in the midst of her,
Baptizing with her, and Teaching with her: Without doubt it is by the Pastors
he will exercise this Ministry: it is with the Pastors then he promised to
Baptize and Teach. Let them explain to us, how those can Baptize ill, or Teach
ill with whom JESUS CHRIST Baptizes, and with whom JESUS CHRIST Teaches.

Monsieur Claude opposes to us Experience; and to show us, that this invincible
force which we attribute to the Ecclesiastical Ministry in virtue of the
Promises of JESUS CHRIST, does not at all belong to it, he brings us many
Passages of Heriveus, of St. Bernard, of Alvares Pelagius, and of others, who
in the foregoing Ages deplored the disorders of the Clergy, and desired a
Reformation. I undertake not here to Examine these Passages: You may read them;
and if you find but only one where these Authors have complained of
Transubstantiation, or of the Sacrifice, or of the Adoration of the Eucharist,
or finally, of any of the points of Doctrine upon which Luther and Calvin have
grounded their Reformation, I will readily abandon the cause. But if on the
contrary, among so many Passages culled out as it were for Ostentation, there
be not to be found one that regards the least of these things; acknowledge that
these Pretended Reformers have IX. The Blasphemies of the pretended Pastoral
Letters against the Catholic Church, yea, and against the Primitive Church also.
only taken from these Venerable Men, the name of Reformation, and have done
nothing but abused the World with a specious Title.

Hearken then no more to their dangerous Discourses. Call not any longer that
horrid Schism which has desolated Christianity, a Reformation; and turn
against the Enemies of Reunion, the abhorrence with which they would inspire
you against us. For is there any thing more worthy of Horror than to make you
hate the Church? Than to represent as Babylon her, who carries in her Forehead
the name of JESUS CHRIST, and who puts her Confidence in him alone? Than to
make her the Mother of Idolatries and Prostitutions, who from the beginning of
Christianity even unto our days, has not ceased to send her Children
throughout the whole Earth, and even to the most unknown Regions, to cause the
one only and True God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost to be there Adored? It is
not we then, My Brethren, who deserve this just horror which all of us have of
Idolatry; it is those who accuse us falsely. Those who bear false and scandalous
Witness against an Innocent Person, are condemned to the same punishment which
the crime of which they bear Witness did deserve, had it been found true: So
those who accuse us of Idolatry, whilst we confess with so much Purity the name
of God, deserve before Men, that horror which is due to Idolatry, and shall
receive the just punishment thereof in the sight of God.

But above all, what horror are they worthy of, who cast this Accusation upon
the whole Church, and also on the Church of the first Ages? It is a long time,
my Brethren, since the Ministers acknowledge, That during the Fourth Century
the Church desired the Prayers of Martyrs, and Honored Relics: And
Vigilantius opposing himself to this Ancient and Universal Practice, was so
smartly reprehended by the Writings of St. Hieronymus, that he remained single
and alone in his Opinion. If it be then an Idolatry to request the Prayers of
Saints, and to Honor their Relics, this Illustrious Fourth Age; yea, this Age
wherein the Prophecies of the Kingdom of JESUS CHRIST were accomplished more
manifestly than ever, wherein the Kings of the Earth, till then Persecutors of
the Name of JESUS, became, according to the ancient Oracles, his Adorers: this
Age, I say, served the Creature; the Prophecies of the Kingdom of JESUS CHRIST,
extended over Idolaters, were accomplished in it, by leading them into a new
Idolatry; the Ambroses, the Augustines, the Hieroms, the Gregory's of Nazianze,
the Basilius's, and the Chrysostomes, whom all Christians have respected even
till now as the Doctors of Truth, were not only the Followers, but also the
Teachers and Masters of an Impious Worship, from which only Vigilantius kept
himself pure: So ill founded was Christianity, of so little concern was the
Name of the Church of JESUS CHRIST even in the First Ages.

Can you endure, my Brethren, the Ministers who by such Reproaches dishonor
the Christian Religion? This is not the only Outrage they commit against the
Church; and without going further than this pretended Pastoral Letter to those
who are fallen through Torments, you shall there find this Blasphemy: Thus in the
first Ages we see the Church fall into an Apostasy, like yours, after having
tasted the charming Sweets of the Reign of Constantine the Great. Oh Prodigy
unheard of among Christians! The Holy Fathers reproached Heretics with
Apostasy, in separating themselves from the Church: But that the Church her
self has apostatized, he that hears it without horror, is no Christian; and
you cannot look upon those as Pastors, who have uttered such a Blasphemy. But
this Blasphemy is inseparable from the Pretended Reformation, To be able to say
with any color, that you must go out of the Church as out of Babylon, they
must say, That the Church her self had before apostatized. If they had
reproached her with less Crimes than Idolatry, they would not have been able to
rout out of the Hearts of the Faithful the Veneration they had for her; and it
was only by such Excesses that a Breach could come.

Detest it then, my Brethren, and come with all your X. An Exhortation to the
New Converts, to invite them to the Sacraments, and above all, to the Holy
Eucharist. That to Communicate under one kind is sufficient. Testimonies of M.
Claude, and of other Ministers.
Hearts to our Unity. Begin by the Confession of your Sins, that you may
receive Penance and Absolution according to these Words: Receive ye the Holy
Ghost; whose sins you remit, they shall be remitted to them; and whose sins you
retain, they shall be retained. Believe not that to fulfill this Saying it is
sufficient to have the Remission of Sins announced to you in general, as the
Ministers do, seeing JESUS CHRIST said not, Announce, but Remit; and that it
suffices not to pronounce only in general, since it is ordained the Priests
should make a Judgment, and Retain as well as Remit. But we need not wonder
that False Pastors dare not act according to the Terms John 20. 22, 23.
of the Commission which JESUS CHRIST has given to his True Ministers.
Consider, my dear Brethren, what kind of Reformation this is, where they Reform
the Commission given by JESUS CHRIST himself; and where, together with
Confession and the Censure of the Priests, they take away the very Sinews of
Discipline, and the Bridle to Licentiousness.

It is no less Attempt to have retrenched from the Church the Imposition of
Hands, by which the Holy Ghost is given to the Faithful. This Sacrament is
proved by these express Words of the Acts: When the Apostles who Acts 8. 14.
were at Jerusalem had understood that those of Samaria had received the word
of God, they sent unto them Peter and John; who being come, prayed for them, to
the end they might receive the Holy Ghost. For he was not as yet descended on
them, and they had been only baptized in the Name of our Lord JESUS. But they
forthwith laid their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost. It has
pleased the New Reformers to decide by their own Authority, and without any
Testimony of Scripture, That this Sacrament, tho administered in all Ages, and
according to the Practice of the Apostles, reserved to the Bishops their Parish
to Parish to give you necessary Counsels and Instructions. For the rest we
require not extraordinary Perfections. Provided you come to the Eucharist with
a firm Faith, an innocent Conscience, and a holy Fervor, we will bear with the
remains of your infirmity; Remembering that Passover of Ezechias whereof we have
spoken at the beginning of this Instruction. Many of those who were returned
from the Schism, had not been sanctified so much as was requisite to keep the
Passover: But Ezechias 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19.
prayed for them, saying, The Lord who is good will have Mercy on those who
seek with all their Heart the God of their Fathers, and will not impute to them
this, that they are not enough purified: and the Lord heard him, and was
appeased to his People. Provided then, that being returned to God with all your
Heart, you will serve him in the same Spirit as your Fathers, in the Church
where they served him, that which is wanting to your Faith as yet weak, will be
supplied by the Mediation of JESUS CHRIST, of whom Ezechias was a Figure, and
the Holy Eucharist will be your strength.

In the mean time, my dear Brethren, frequent the Instructions and Catechisms,
send your Children thither Let me hear no more that there is any among you who
absents himself; Lest, as the Apostle says, not finding you 2 Cor. 12. 20.
such as I would, I be found of you such an one as ye would not. Answer me, my
Brethren, What will ye? shall I 1 Cor. 4. 21.
come to you with a Rod, or in Love, and in the Spirit of Meekness? If you have
any scruple remaining, come to us with Confidence: at all Hours we shall be
ready to hear you, and to deliver to you not only the Gospel of God, 1 Thessalonians.
2. 8.
but also our own Souls, because you are become most dear unto us. Thus you
will be my Consolation and my Joy on Earth, and you will be my Crown at the Day
of our Ibid. 19. 20.
Lord Jesus. I know that some Artful Spirits secretly endeavor to inspire you
with Dissension, and Prophecy to you, changes and imaginary Victories of the
Religion which you have forsaken. In defect of any real Appearance, the
Apocalypse is not wanting to them, and they make credulous Persons find what is
agreeable to their Fancies in those Obscurities. But without pretending to be a
Prophet, I dare be bold to tell you, Such an unexpected Change as this in the
whole Kingdom, has too much the Hand of God in it, not to be maintained; and
the Piety of the King, who is visibly Protected by God, will put an end to this
great Work. The Work of a Reunion shall be finished, the Work of Charity and
Peace, which shall convert the hearts of the fathers to the children, and
Malac. 4. 6.
the hearts of the children to their fathers; that is to say, which shall cause
the Faith of our Fathers to live again in their Children, so long separated
from an Union with them, and recall the Children to the Church where their
Fathers have served God, where their Bodies rest in Peace, and where they
expect the Resurrection of the Just.

Given at CLAYE, Sunday, March 24. 1686. J. BENIGN E. de MEAUX.
By my Lords Command, LEDIEU.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for Henry Hills, Printer to the King's most
Excellent Majesty, for his Household and Chapel, 1686. And are to be Sold next
door to his House in Blackfriars, at Mr. Richard Cheese's.
REflections upon the Answer to the Papist Misrepresented etc. Directed to the
Answerer. Quarto. Kalendarium Catholicum for the Year 1686. Octavo. Papists
Protesting against Protestant-Popery. In Answer to a Discourse Entitled, A
Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants. Being a Vindication of the Papist
Misrepresented and Represented, and the Reflections upon the Answer. Quart.
Copies of Two Papers Written by the late King Charles II. Together with a Paper
Written by the late Duchess of York. Published by his Majesty's Command.
Folio. The Spirit of Christianity. Published by his Majesty's Command. Twelves.
The first Sermon Preached before their Majesty's in English at Windsor, on the
first Sunday of October 1685. By the Reverend Father Dom. P. E. Monk of the
Holy Order of S. Benedict, and of the English Congregation. Published by his
Majesty's Command. Quarto. Second Sermon Preached before the King and Queen,
and Queen Dowager, at Their Majesty's Chapel at St James's, November 1, 1685.
By the Reverend Father Dom. Ph. Ellis, Monk of the Holy Order of S. Benedict,
and of the English Congregation. Published by his Majesty's Command. Quarto.
The Third Sermon Preached before the King and Queen, in their Majesty's Chapel
at St. James's, on the third Sunday in Advent, December. 13. 1685. By the
Reverend Father Dom. Ph. Ellis, Monk of the Holy Order of St. Benedict, and of
the English, Congr. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty. Published by His
Majesty's Command. Quarto. Sixth Sermon Preached before the King and Queen, in
their Majesty's Chapel at St. James's, upon the first Wednesday in Lent, Febr.
24. 1685. By the Reverend Father Dom. Ph. Ellis, Monk of the Holy Order of St.
Benedict, and of the English Congregation. Published by his Majesty's Command.
Quarto. An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic Church in Matters of
Controversy. By the Right Reverend James Benign Bossuet, Counselor to the
King, Bishop of Meaux, formerly of Condom, and Preceptor to the Dauphin: First
Almoner to the Dauphiness. Done into English with all the former Approbations,
and others newly published in the Ninth and Last Edition of the French.
Published by His Majesty's Command. Quarto. A Sermon preached before the King
and Queen, in Their Majesty's Chapel at St. James's, upon the Annunciation of
our Blessed Lady, March 25. 1686. By Jo. Betham Doctor of Sorhon. Published by
His Majesty's Command. Quarto. An Abstract of the Douay Catechism, for the Use
of Children and Ignorant People. Now Revised and much amended. Published with
Allowance. Twentyfours. The Answer of the New Converts of France, to a Pastoral
Letter from a Protestant Minister. Done out of French, and Published with
Allowance. Quarto.

