Quakerism A-la-Mode: OR, A HISTORY OF Quietism, Particularly That of the Lord
Archbishop of Cambray and Madam Guyone.

CONTAINING An Account of her Life, her Prophecies and Visions, her way of
Communicating Grace by Effusion to those about her at Silent Meetings, etc.

ALSO An Account of the Management of that Controversy (now depending at Rome)
betwixt the Archbishop of Cambray and the Bishop of Meaux, by way of Answer to
the Archbishop's Book.

Writ by Messire Jacques Bonignes Bossuel, Bishop of Meaux, one of the French
King's Privy Council, and Published by his Majesty's Authority.

Done into English from the Original printed at Paris.

LONDON, Printed for J. Narris at the Harrow in Little Britain, and A. Bell at
the Cross-Keys and Bible in Cornhill, near Stocks market. School. Price 1 s.

THE PREFACE.
THe Controversy of Quietism, which is the Subject of the following Book,
having made a great Noise in the World; and taken up the Conclave of Rome for
some Months, and nothing having as yet appeared in English, but on the side of
the Defendant, the Arch bishop of Cambray: It is not at all doubted, but this
Book, which is the Bishop of Meaux's History of that Heresy, and his Answer to
the Archbishop of Cambray, will meet with a good Reception from the Public.

The Church of Rome, who has all along boasted so much of her Unity, must of
Necessity forbear now to urge that Plea any more, when as it will appear by
this Book, she is reduced to such a strait, that either she must condemn the
Generality of the Clergy of France, or the Archbishop of Cambray, and diverse
Persons whom she has Canonized for Saints. It will also appear but too too
evidently from this Treatise, that Quakerism owes its Origin to that
Antichristian Church, and that their Opinions are much favored there at
present, when such horrid Blasphemies as those the Bishop of Meaux charges upon
M. Guyon, and her Champion, the Arch bishop of Cambray, from Letters and
Manuscripts under their own Hands, continue so long without a Public Censure,
whilst at the same time she foments a Raging Persecution against the
Protestants in France, and has raised a New One against those of Germany.

A HISTORY OF Quietism.
Seeing my Lord Archbishop of Cambray desires an answer to his demands so
precisely, and that in this conjuncture, none of 'em are more important than
those that regard our proceedings, which he endeavors by all means possible
torender odious, whereas he himself pretends always to abound with Charity and
Meekness even to excess; If I should delay to satisfy him, he would reap too
great an advantage from our silence. What does he not insinuate against us by
these words of his answer to our Declaration? The proceedings of those Prelates
of whom I have just cause to complain, have been such, that I have reason to
think I should not be believed if I related them, and indeed it is fit to
conceal the knowledge thereof from the Public. Nothing can be imagined more
vigorous and extreme than what is included in this discourse, wherein by
feigning a desire to keep silence, he says more than if he spoke out. That he
may justify himself to be in the right, and make us appear to be in the wrong,
this Prelate in the first Edition of his Answer lays down this important matter
of Fact: That he had got it to be proposed to my Lord of Chartres that we
should by consent Petition the Pope to order a new Edition of his Book to be
regulated by his Divines at Rome; so that we should have nothing to do but to
rely upon those Divines: And a little after, I demanded a speedy answer, but
instead of that I received the Printed Declaration against me. We know nothing
of this pretended matter of fact. My Lord of Chartres will inform the Public
touching his concern: But without expecting the confutation of a fact of such
importance: My Lord of Cambray retracts it himself, seeing he would have
recalled that Edition, though published at Rome by his own order; and that in
the other which he substitutes, in its place, he suppresses the whole Article.
We have in our hands both Editions, the one wherein he alleges that matter of
fact, and the other where it is suppressed; and the proof is demonstrative,
that that Prelate, without remembering the facts he alleges, writes the most
odious things that can come into his Head, and at the same time so false, that
he himself is obliged to retract and suppress them entirely.

2. This is enough to let the World see what a fine gloss he would put on his
own Conduct; and in what frighful Colors he would set off ours. His chief aim
is to defame me; and he is not satisfied to accuse me in all his Letters of a
precipitant and imbittered Zeal: It is to me that he writes those words: You
never cease tearing me in pieces; and what is still more injurious, You every
where deplore my Condition, and rend me pretending to bewail me. He adds, What
can any one think of those Tears that serve only to give more Authority to the
Accusations? in the same Letters he says, Passion hinders me from seeing what
is before my Eyes; and the excess of my prejudice bereaves me of all exactness.
I am, says he, the Author of the Accusation against his Book: I am that
unmerciful Man, who not being able to glut my fury by the indirect and
ambitious Censure contained in our Declaration; redouble my blows upon him in
particular: And adds, That when come to my self again I make use of smooth
words to call him a second Molinos; an expression that never came out of my
Mouth, this Prelate knows himself, that I have always distinguished betwixt him
and Molinos in their Conduct, and also in certain Consequences, though he has
advanced all his principles. But here are more particular Accusations:

3. I do not comprehend at all, says he, the Conduct of Monsieur de Meaux: On
one hand he inslames himself with indignation: ( for to hear him speak I am
never compos meant is) etc. Inflames himself, I say, with indignation, when any
one seems but to doubt whether there may not be something of Evidence in Md.
Guyons System: On the other hand he gives her the Communion himself, he
authorizes her in the daily use of the Sacraments, and when she leaves Meaux he
gives her a full attestation, without requiring any act from her whereby she
may formally recant any Error: Whence then can so much severity and so much
remisness proceed?

4. These are the reproaches we have under the Hand of My Lord of Cambray, in a
writing still extant. He knows well enough to whom he directed it, and we shall
have occasion to speak of it hereafter: Every thing is untrue in the place just
now mentioned: He would not be so just as to say that I gave the Communion
(once only) to Madam Guyon, and to observe in the mean time that it was at
Paris, where she was admitted to it by her Superiors: So that it was not so
much as in my power to exclude her from the Sacred Table: They gave her the
Holy Sacraments in consideration of the frequent profession she made of an
actual Submission and Obedience. At Meaux I appointed her a Confessor, to whom
I gave full permission to give her the Communion upon account of the entire
Submission she expressed both by word and writing in the most expressive terms
that could be conceived. She subscribed the Condemnation of her own Book, as
containing ill Doctrine: She also subscribed our Censures, wherein her Printed
Books and her whole Doctrine are Condemned: And in the last place she rejected
by a special writing on purpose, the Chief Propositions that formed her
Systems. I have all these acts under her Hand, and I gave that Attestation
which they call a full one, only in respect of those acts therein expressly
enumerated, and with special prohibition that she should not Direct, Teach or
Dogmatise; which she agreed to under her Hand in that same attestation. Thus
that incomprehensible mixture of remisness and rigor is cleared by those Acts,
and the Accusation of my Lord of Cambray manifestly proved to be false: Who
does not then perceive by this, that no Credit ought to be given to the Facts
which that Prelate alleges against a Brother, and intimate Friend such as I
was? I readily grant to my Lord Archbishop of Cambray, that if we have done
him any wrong, he ought, as he repeats without ceasing, to maintain the Honor
of his offended Ministry; let him do us the same justice. I am then on the
other hand bound to make the truth appear, upon the complaints he makes use of
to exasperate the Public against me. We must then find out the source, and
what may be the causes of those deceitful Tears, and of the Passion he accuses
me of: We must look back as far as the Origin to see whether it be Charity or
Passion that has guided me in that Affair, It has lasted above four years, and
I am the first that was drawn into it. The connection of the matters of fact
does not allow me to separate them, and I am necessarily bound to relate all
the particulars of that unpleasant History when the Conduct of my self and of
my Brethren cannot be understood but by that means.

5. It cannot choose but be very afflicting to see Bishops come to such
disputes, even as to matters of fact; it is a subject of Triumph for the
Libertines, and an occasion of their accounting Piety Hypocrisy, and of
holding the astairs of the Church in derision: But if People will not be so just
as to look to the Original, they must judge without reason. My Lord of Cambray
boasts of it every where that he was not the first that wrote, that he might
thereby persuade the World he has right on his side, and lay us under an odium
as being the unjust agressors: He directs those words to my self: Who was it
that writ first? Who was it begun the Scandal? But is it lawful to dissemble
certain and public matters of fact? Who is it really that appeared first in
Print upon this Subject, I or my Lord of Cambray? Who was it that frst in an
Advertisement at the beginning of an important work gave notice that he
designed only to explain more at large the Principles of two Prelates, (my Lord
of Paris and my self) which were made public to the world in four and twenty
Propositions? Had we agreed together that he should explain our Principles? Had
I so much as ever heard of his Explanation? My Lord of Cambray says many things
of my Lord of Paris, which that Prelate has confuted by unquestionable facts,
and with general applause. But as to me, the excuses my Lord of Cambray makes
have not the least ground, seeing it is certain that I never so much as heard
of the explanation he had a mind to publish of our Common Principles. Did I
deal with my Lord of Cambray in this manner? And when I was about to publish
the Explanation I had promised of our Doctrine, did not I at first put the
Manuscript into the hands of my Lord of Cambray in order to examine it? These
are most certtain matters of facts, and such as are not to be denied. I am then
plainly innocent of the differences that have happened between us; though I am
accused as the Author of all the mischief: If instead of explaning our
principles, it appears that we are accused of Capital Errors: If he fill a
whole Book with the Notions of Molinos, and only gild them over with specious
pretenses, ought we to suffer it? The only thing then we are to do, is to
examine whether the bottom of our cause be as good as we have demostrated it
else where: But in the mean time it is clear in the face of the Sun, and before
God and Men that we are not the Aggressors; that our defense was lawful in as
much as it was necessary, and that there was not the least shadow for
controverting that part of the proceeding which is the ground work of all that
followed.

6. The rest is no less evident: But in order to acquaint the Public
therewith, seeing my Lord of Cambray himself urges us thereto, and that he has
five hundred People at his beck all over Europe to echo his Complaints every
where; what else can we do, but repeat things again, from the very Original by
a Narrative as plain on the one hand as true on the other, and maintained by
certain Proofs.

1. For a long time I heard it from Persons eminent for Piety and Prudence that
the Abbot of Fenclon was favorable to the new way of Prayer, and I had proofs
given me of it, that were not altogether to be rejected. Being concerned for
himself, for the Chruch, and for the Princes of France, whose Tutor he was, I
often discoursed him upon that Subject, and endeavored to discover his
Sentiments in hopes of bringing him back to the Truth, if he should a little
swerve from it. I could not persuade my self that a Person of his Light, and of
that docible Temper I took him to be, could fall into these Delusions; or at
least continue in them, though he might perhaps be dazzled by them. I have always
entertained a firm persuasion of the strong influence of Truth upon those that
hearken to it, and I never doubted but the Abbot of Fenclon was attentive to
it. Yet I was somewhat uneasy to find he did not enter so frankly with me upon
that matter, as he did upon others that we treated of ever day. At last God
delivered me out of that uneasiness: And a Friend to us both, a Person of
eminent Merit and Quality, came when I thought least on it, to declare to me
that Madam Guyon and her Friends were willing to refer her way of Prayer and
her Books to my Judgment. It was about September, 1693. when this was proposed
to me. Now to divine why they imparted that Secret to me, whether it was one of
those Sentiments of Trust God puts, when he pleases, into the Hearts of Men, to
bring about his hidden Designs, or whether they only thought that in the
present conjuncture, some protector or other, must be looked for amongst the
Bishops: This, I say is beyond my reach. I will not use Arguments, I I design only
to relate Matters of Fact, which, as in the sight of God, I have as fresh in my
Memory as the first day, and know them also by the Writings concerning them, I
have in my Hands.

I am naturally afraid to incumber my self with Business to which I have not a
manifest Call; What happens in the Flock committed to my Charge,
notwithstanding my Unworthiness, does not give me much Trouble; I put
confidence in the Holy Ministry, and the Divine Vocation. As for that time when
they proposed to me to examine that Matter, they repeated so often, that it was
the Will of God, and that Madam Guyon, desiring nothing else but to be taught,
a Bishop in whom she trusted could not well refuse her the Instruction she
demanded with so much Humility, that at last I yielded. I soon knew it was the
Abbot of Fenclon who had given that Counsel; and I thought it a happiness to
find such a natural occasion offer of explaining my self with him: God would
have it so. I spoke to Madam Guyon; all her Books were delivered to me, and not
only the Printed ones, but also the Manuscripts, as her Life, which she had
written in a great Volume, some Commentaries upon Moses, Joshua, Judges, the
Gospel, the Epistles of St. Paul, the Revelations, and several other Books of
Scripture. I took them with me to my Diocese, whether I was agoing: I read them
with attention: I made large Extracts of them as are usually made of a Subject,
by one who is to judge of it; I wrote down at length with my own Hand her very
words; and marked the pages, and in four or five months I fitted my self to
pronounce the Judgment that was demanded of me.

2. I never would take upon me neither to hear the Confession of that Lady, nor
to direct her though she proposed it to me, but only to declare my sentiments
of her of prayer, and of the Doctrine of her Books, making use in the mean time
of the liberty she gave me to command or forbid her, in that matter, as God
whose light I continually begged, should be pleased to inspire me.

3. The first occasion I had to make use of that power was this: I met with an
account in the Life of that Lady, that God did give her such abundance of
grace, that she burst out with it in a Literal sense, so that they were fain to
unlace her: She did not forget to take notice that a Duchess once on a time
performed that Office for her in that condition, they often laid her upon her
Bed; and many times if they did but stay and sit by her, they received the
grave of which she was full, and that was the only way to ease her: She said
moreover in express words, that those graces were not for her; that she had no
need of them, being full of grace otherwise, and that this superabundance was
for others. I looked upon this immediately as haughty, new, and unheard of, and
therefore at least very suspicious, and my heart that had a continual loathing
of the Doctrine of the Books I read, was not able to brook that manner of
giving grace. For if you take it distinctly, it was neither by her prayers nor
admonitions she gave it; there was no need of any thing else but to sit by her
to receive an immediate effusion of that fullness of grace, being struck with so
amazing a thing, I wrote from Meaux to Paris to that Lady, forbidding her, as
God did by my mouth, to use that new way of communicating graces, until she
were further examined. I was willing to proceed moderately in every thing, and
to connemn nothing absolutely before I had seen all.

4. That part of the Life of Md. Guyon is of too great consequence to be lest
doubtful; therefore I shall give the explanation of it in her own words. Those,
says she, that the Lord has given me; ( this is the style all over the Book) my
true Children have a tendency to keep silence by me. I discover their need, and
communicate to them in God what they want; they feel very well what they
receive, and what is communicated to them with fullness. A little after, There Is
no more to be done but to sit by me in silence; Therefore that communication is
called the communication in silence, without speaking and writing; it is the
Language of the Angles, that of the Word which, is but an eternal silence: Such
as sit thus by her are nourished, says she, inwardly by the grace which I
communicate in fullness as they did receive the grace around her, I felt my
self, says she, to empty and be eased by degrees; every one received their
grace according to their degree of prayer, and fell by being near me that
fullness of grace brought by Jesus Christ: It was like a Sluice that over-runs
with abundance: They did feel themselves filled, and for my part I felt my self
to be emptied, and to be eased of my fullness: My Soul was represented to me
like one of those torrents that fall from the Mountains with unconceivable
swift.

5. What she tells with particular care is, as has been said, that there is
nothing for her self in that fullness of grace; she repeats every where that all
was full; there was nothing empty in her: She was as a Nurse that bursts out
with Milk, but takes none at all for her self: I am, Says she, for these many
years, in a state that seems equally naked and empty; and for all that I am
very full: A water that fills a Pool to the brink: as long as you see it keep
within bounds, it affords uothing by which its fullness may be distinguished;
but if a superabundance be added, it must either discharge it self or burst
out: I never feel any thing for my self; but when they stir at any time that
Fund which is inwardly full and calm, that causes the fullness to be felt with
so much excess, that it gushes out upon the sense: It is, continues she, an
overflowing of the fullness, a gushing out of a Well, always full for such Souls
as have need to draw the Waters of that fullness: It is the Divine Cistern
whence the Children of Wisdom draw incessantly what they stand in need of.

Being at a time in one of those excesses of fullness, having some person about
her, and a Woman said that she was fuller than usually; I told them, said she,
I should die of fullness, and that my senses were so overwhelmed by it as I
should burst: It was upon this occasion that the Duchess she mentions, and
whom I shall never discover, unleced me, says she, out of charity to ease me;
which was not able to prevent my body from bursting on both sides, through the
violence of the fullness. She eased her self by communicating of her fullness to
a Confessor whom she describes, and to two other persons that I shall not name.

It was after having seen those things, and many others of as great consequence
which I shall relate, that my Lord of Cambray persists in his Defense of Madam
Guyon in such terms as will be amazing, when we come to the Article where I
must quote them, as written with his own hand. It will be then as clear as the
Day; and by what is already perceived, that Madam Guyon is the ground of this
business after all, and that his desire alone to maintain her, has separated
that Prelate from his Brethren, seeing he attacks me, as has been seen, upon my
procedure with Madam Guyon, as well as with himself, and that too in such a
manner as might render my Ministry and my Conduct odious to the whole Church,
he should have foreseen what his reproaches would constrain me at last to
discover: But a higher reason still compels me to speak. We must fortify the
minds of the Faithful against a seducing Doctrine, which still has a being: A
Woman that can deceive Souls by such Delusions ought to be made known,
especially when she meets with Ad^^^rers and Defenders; and has a great party
for her with an expectation of new things as shall be shown hereafter. I
confess this was really a a work of Darkness which we ought to wish might have
been kept hidden, and I should have concealed it for ever, as I have done for
above three years with an unpenetrable silence; had they not too excessively
abused my discretion, and had not the thing come to such a point, that we must
for the Service of the Church plainly lay open what she had privily hatched in
her bosom.

8. Madam Guyon perceiving presently that I found many extarordinary things in
her Life, she thereupon prevented me by a Letter written and signed with her own
Hand, thus, There are three sorts of extraordinary things that you may have
observed: The first which regards the inward Communications in silence; this
may be easily attested by a great number of persons of Merit and probity that
have tried it: Those persons whom I shall have the Honor to name, when I have
that of seeing you, are able to justifis it. As for the things that are to
come, it is a thing that I don't much care any body should mind: This is not
the essential point: But I have been obliged to write all. Our Friends may
easily justify that to you, either by some Letters they have in their hands,
written ten years ago, or by several things they have been witnesses of, the
Idea of which I easily lose. As for the things that have respect to Miracles, I
have writ them in the same plainness as the rest. You see then already that in
her opinion she communicates Grace in that unheard of and prodigious manner
just now mentioned: And besides, that she is a great Prophetess and a Worker of
Miracles; she desires me thereupon to suspend my Judgment till I had seen and
heard her; which I did as much as I could upon the last Heads.

9. I shall leave for a little while the Miracles that I meet with in every
page of her Life, and her Predictions which are either wavering, false, or a
confused medley. As for the Communications in silence, she endeavors to
justify them by a Writing she subjoyns to this Letter with this Title; The
Lords Hand is not shortened: She alleges the Example of the Celestial
Hierarchies which she does also in several places in her Life; that of the
Saints who understand one another without speaking; that of Iron touched with
the Load stone; that of loose Men who communicate one to another a Spiirit of
Debauchery, that of St. Monica and of St. Austin in the Tenth Book of the the
Confessions of that Father: Where it is true he speaks of the silence whereinto
those two Souls were drawn, but without the least mention of those prodigious
Communications, of those arrogant fulnesses, and of those overflowings just now
spoken of. I don't speak of those Experiences I was referred to; nor yet of
certain effects which possession, or if you will, a strong fancy, may operate.
These are nothing else than proofs, seeing they are to be tried and examined
according to that principle of the Apostle, Try the Spirits whether they be of
God; try all things: And again, Hold fast that which is good. When in order to
come to this Trial, I had begun by forbidding those absurd Communications;
Madam Guyon endeavored to excuse one part of it, as the bursting of her
Clothes in two places by that frightful plenitude: I have her unsatisfactory
Answer in a Letter writ with her own Hand, which serves to justify the matter
of fact. As for the examining of so strange a Communication, we may well
perceive it is to no purpose; All that was good in the Answer was, that the
Lady promised to obey and to write to no body; which I had required, to keep
her from meddling with directing of any body, as she used to do with an amazing
Authoty: For amongst other things in her Life, as appears also by her Printed
Exposition upon the Canticles, that by an Apostolical Power and Mission
wherewith she was endowed, and to which the Souls of such a pitch are raised;
she not only saw clearly into the bottom of the Souls, but like wise received a
[marvelous] Authority upon the Bodies and Souls of such as our Lord had given
her. The inward state, says she, seems to be in my hand, (by the flowing out,
as has been said, of that Grace communicated out of her fullness) without their
knowing how, nor wherefore they could not forbear to call me their Mother; and
when they had tasted of my direction all other conduct was burdensome to them.

10. Amidst the precautions I made use of against the course of those
Delusions, I continued my reading, and came to that place where she foretells
the approaching Reign of the Holy Ghost over all the Earth: A terrible
persecution against her method of Prayer was to precede it; I saw, says she,
The Devil unbound against the said Prayer, and against me: That he was a going
to raise a sad Persecution against the followers of that sort of Prayer: He was
afraid to attack my self: He feared me too much: Sometimes I defied him: He was
afraid to appear: I was as terrible to him as a Thunderbolt.

11. One Night ( says she to God) being thoroughly awake, You showed me unto my
self under the form of that Woman in the Revelations: You showed me that
Mystery; you made me to comprehend that Moon: My Soul was above vicissitude and
changes. She remarks also her self and the Sun of Justice that surrounded her,
and the Divine Virtues which made as it were a Crown about her Head: She was
big with Fruit; that is, of that Spirit, Lord, said she, that you were willing
to communicate to my Children: The Devil throws up a flood against me: It is
Columny: The Earth would not swallow it up: It should fall by little and
little: I should have Millions of Children: After the same manner she applies
her self to the rest of the Prophecy.

12. Afterward she sees the Victory of such as as she calls the Martyrs of the
Holy Ghost. O God, says she, As an inspired Person, you do hold your peace: You
will not always be silent. After this Enthusiastic fit, she shows the
Consummation of all things by the extent of that same Spirit over all the
Earth. A little after she gives an Account that going to Versailles she saw the
King a Hunting afar off: That she was taken up in a Divine Rapture with so
entire a Possession that she was constrained to shut her Eyes: She had then an
assurance that His Majesty would assist her in a particular manner, etc. Says
she, O that our Lord would permit I should speak to him: I write, goes she on,
in order to conceal nothing; the matter finds little credit now because she is
a cried down Person. But she had in the mean time an assurance that she should
be delivered from Reproaches by means of a Female Protectress, who we know
favors her very little, though she names her in two parts of her Life.

13. Every one may make their reflections upon the Prophecies of that Lady as
they please; as for me [I will insist only on matters of Fact:] This is a very
considerable one; in one of her Enthusiastic fits upon the Wonders she
apprehends God was about to work by her; it seems to me says she, as if God
has chosen me in this Age to overthrow Humane Reason: To establish the Wisdom
of God by overthrowing the Wisdom of the World: He will Establish the Cords of
his Empire in me, and the Nations will acknowledge his Power: His Spirit shall
be [poured upon all Flesh:] They shall Sing the Song of the Lamb, as a Virgin,
and they that will Sing it shall be utterly disapropriated: What I bind shall
be bound, and what I loose shall be unloosed: I am that Stone fastened by the
Holy Cross, rejected by the Builders; the rest I have read my self to the Abbot
of Fenelon: He knows well who were present at the Conference, and it was
himself alone whom I regarded, because it was he who ought as a Priest to teach
others.

14. Madam Guyon continues to assume to her self a Prophetic Air in her
explanation of the revelations from whence I have extracted these words: The
time is at hand; it is nearer than we think; for God will choose two particular
Witnesses, whether it be those who are really living and are to give Testimony;
or those just now spoken of ( which are Faith and pure Love:) And afterward, O
Mystery truer than the day that shines, you are now looked upon as a story, as
little Childrens Tales, as diabolical things: The time shall come when all
those things shall be looked upon with respect, because they shall see then that
they come from God; he himself will preserve them until the day he has
appointed to have them declared.

15. It is of her writings she thus spoke. She insinuates in every place of her
Life that they are inspired: She brings as a remarkable proof thereof, the
wonderful swiftness of her hand, and omits nothing to show that she is the Pen
of that ready Writer spoken of by David. Her Disciples have boasted of this to
me an Hundred times: She her self boasts that her Writings shall be preserved
by Miracle; and one day it shall come to pass, says she, again, in her
Exposition on the Revelations, that it is written here shall be no more
Barbarous nor Foreign.

16. Thus she entertains her Hearers, with hopes of wonderful things to come. I
have transcribed with my own hand one of her Letters to Father la Comb; of
which I shall speak in its place: I have given back the Original, which was
given me from a sure hand, to take a Copy of it. Not to insist upon her
Predictions, mixed with truth and falsehood, which she continually ventures at;
I shall only remark, that therein she confirms her empty Visions upon the Woman
Big with Child in the Revelations; and it is perhaps for this reason she
inserts in her Life that pretended Prophetical Letter.

17. I Collected every thing I thought useful to open the Eyes of the Abbot of
Fenelon, whom I thought incapable of being deceived by the Delusions of such a
Prophetess when I should set them before him; but here are other Remarks
besides that I made, for the same end.

18. I know not how I shall do to explain the thing that offers first. For,
says she, That Dream so seized me, and my Mind was so clean, that there
remained in me neither distinction nor thought except what our Lord gave me.
But what was that Dream then? And who is it that this Inspired Woman saw
therein? A Mountain where she was received by Jesus Christ: A Room where she
asks, for whom those two Beds were that she saw: There Is one for my Mother, and
the other for you my Spouse: And a little after, I have chosen you to be here
with me. When I reproved Madam Guyon for so strange a Vision: When I
represented to her that Bed for a Spouse separated from the bed of the Mother,
as if the Mother of God in a Spiritual and Mystical Sense, was not so to speak
the Bride of all Brides: She always answered me: It is a Dream. But, said I to
her, it is a Dream that you give us a great Mystery, and as the ground of your
manner of Prayer, or rather not of a Prayer, but of a State, of which nothing
can be said because of its great Purity. But to pass over this, and you, O
Lord, if I durst I would beg of you one of your Seraphims with the most burning
of all its Coals to purify my Lips that are polluted by this Narrative though
absolutely necessary.

19. I shall with less trouble speak of another effect of the Title of Bride, I
meet with in the Life of that Woman. It is thus; She came to a State wherein
she could no more pray to the Saints nor even to the Holy Virgin, That is
already a great evil to acknowledge such a State, so contrary to the Catholic
Doctrine: But the reason she gives of it is far more stange: It is not, says
she, for the Bride, but for the Domestics, to pray to others to pray for them;
as if every pure Soul was not a Bride: Or that she were the only perfect one:
Or as if the Blessed Souls we were to pray unto were not Brides more united to
God than whatsoever is most Holy, and most united to him upon Earth.

20. What we most frequently meet with in that Book, and in all her other
Books; is, that this Lady was without Error. This is the mark she gives every
where of her state, entirely united to God, and of her Apostleship; but though
her Errors were infinite, that which I took notice of most, was, that which
concerned the exclusion of all desires, and of all petitioning for ones self by
resigning up our selves to the Will of God how secret soever it be; in respect
either of our Damnation or Salvation. This is the Reigning Doctrine in all that
Ladies Printed Books and Manuscripts; and upon which I examined her in a long
Conference I had with her privately, I showed her in her Writings and caused it
to be repeated to her several times, That every Petition for ones self carried
some interest along with it contrary to pure Love, and conformity to the will
of God; and at last very precisely that she could not ask any thing for her
self. What, said I to her, cannot you ask nothing for your self? No, answered
she, I cannot. She was much perplexed about the Petitions of the Lords Prayer:
I said to her: What, cannot you beg of God the remission of your Sins? No,
replied she: Well, said I to her again immediately, I whom you make the Judge
of your way of Prayer; I (...) you, as God does by my Mouth, to say after me;
Lord I beseech thee forgive me my Sins. I can, said she, well enough repeat
those words; but to make the sentiment thereof enter into my Heart is against
my way of silent Prayer. It was then that I declared to her that I could no
more allow her the use of the Holy Sacraments whilst she entetained such
Doctrine; and that her Proposition was Heretical. She promised me four or five
times to receive instructions, and to submit to it; and this was the end of our
Conference. It was h^ld in the beginning of the year 1694, as I can easily
justify by the Dates of the Letters relating thereunto.

Soon after, this was followed by another more important Conference with the
Abbot of Fenelon in his Appartment at Versailles; I entered into the same full
of confidence, that by showing him in Madam Guyons Books all the Errors and
Excesses just now mentioned, he would agree with me that she was deceived, and
was in a state of delusion. All the answer I had was, that seeing she had
submitted as to the Point of Doctrine, the Person must not be condemned: As for
all the other Excuses, those prodigious communications of grace, as for what
she said of her self, of the height of her graces, of the state of her eminent
sanctity; that she was the Woman with Child in the Revelations, her to whom it
was given to bind and to unbind, the Corner Stone, and the rest of that Nature;
he told me that it was the practicing what St. Paul says; Try the Spirits; as
for the great things, she said of her self, -- it was a magnanimity in her not
inferior to that of S. Paul when he recounts all his gifts, and that it was
that very thing that must be tried. God gave me quit other sentiments: Her
submission did not render her form of silent prayer good; but gave us only hope
that she should be brought back into the right way: The rest appeared to me
manifest delusions, that there was no need of any other proof, but only a plain
relation of the matter of fact. I intimated my Opinion with all imaginable
freedom, but at the same time with all possible meekness, fearing nothing so
much as to exasperate him whom I designed to bring again into the good way. I
withdrew astonished to find a man of such fine wit, admiring a Woman whose
light was so short, her merit so little, and her delusions so palpable. The
tears I poured out then in the sight of God, were none of those wherewith my
Lord of Cambray upbraids me now; you shed tears for me, and you tear me in
pieces. I designed nothing else but to conceal what I saw, without opening my
mind to any but to God alone; and hardly could I believe it my self: Nay, I
wished I had been able to hide it from my self: I as it were felt my self
trembling, and afraid at every step lest I should fall as well as a person of
so much light; yet I did not lose courage, but comforted my self from the
experience of so many great Spirits whom God has humbled for a little while,
to make them afterward walk more steadfastly; and I applied my self so much the
more to undeceive the Abbot of Fenelon, because they whom we had instructed
were under his Charge.

21. A little after this Conference, I wrote a long Letter to Madam Guyon,
wherein I explained my self upon the difficulties just now mentioned; reserving
some of them for a larger examination: I marked all my own Sentiments, as I have
just now represented them; not forgetting those prodigious communications, nor
the Authority of binding and unbinding; her Visions upon the Revelations, and
the other things I have related. My Letter is of the 4th of March 1694. her
Answer that follows upon it is very [submissive] and justifies all the matters
of fact I have advanced as to the Contents of the Books. She accepted my Advice
to retire, and neither to be seen or to write to any body otherwise than about
her business: I did much esteem the docible Temper that appeared in her Letter;
and I applied all my attention to the disabusing the Abbot of Fenelon, as to a
person whose Conduct was so strange.

Sect. 3. The second part of the Relation, containing what passed betwixt Mr.
de Chaalons, and Mr. Tronson and my self.
1. Whilst I was taken up with these thoughts, and laboring betwixt hope and
fear, Madam Guyon turned the examination to quite another thing than what it
was at first.

She took it in her head to have the accusations brought against her Morals,
and the disorders that were imputed to her, examined. Upon this she wrote to
that future Protectress, whom she thought to have seen in her Prophecy,
beseeching her to beg of the King that some Commissioners should be appointed,
with power to inform themselves, and to pronounce Judgment upon her Life. The
Copy she sent me of her Letter, and that which she joined to it, show by their
Dates, that this happened in June 1694. This was a design to fulfill her
Predictions, and for that end Mad. Guyon gave a specious turn to the thing,
dexterously in sinuating that she must be cleared of the Crimes she was accused
of, without which they would enter upon the examination of her Doctrine with
too much prejudice. But it is not so easy a matter to surprise an enlightened
Piety. It was soon perceived by the Mediatress she had chosen, that this
Proposal of the Commissiners, besides other inconveniences, shot wide of the
Mark, which was to begin by examining the Doctrines contained in her Wrirings
they had in hand, and in the Books where with the Church was overflowed, and so
the Proposal dropped off it self: Madam Guyon yielded, and then demanded by her
Friends the thing in the World that was most agreeable to me; viz. that to put
an end to an examination of a thing of that importance, wherein the matter of
Question must be thoroughly canvass'd, and a sort of prayer so pernicious,
abolished, if possible; I should be associated with Mr. de Chaalons, now
Archbishop of Paris, and Mr. Tronson superior General of the Congregation of
St. Sulpice. The Letter by which Madam Guyon acquaints me with this step, makes
out to the full all the reasons that induced her to submit to those two
Gentlemen and to my self. The last of 'em was unknown to me, except by his
reputation; But the Abbot of Fenelon and his Friends had a particular
confidence in him. As for Mr. de Chaalons, it is known with what holy
friendship he and I have always been united: He was also an intimate Friend to
the Abbot of Fenelon. With such Colleagues I hoped to compass all things. The
King was acquainted with the thing so far as it related to Madam Guyon only,
and approved of it. The Archbishop of Paris has explained what was written to
him upon that account, and what he answered. The Books I had seen were
delivered to those persons: The Abbot of Fenelon begun then very privately to
write upon that matter. The Writings he sent us augmented every day; and
without naming in them Madam Guyon or her Books; every thing he wrote tended to
maintain or to excuse them: The thing really in question was those Books, and
they made the sole Subject of our Meetings. The silent prayer of Madam Guyon
was, that M. de Fenelon was for, and perhaps 'twas his own in a particular
manner. That Lady did not forget her self, and during seven or eight month that
we applied our selves to so serious a discussion; she sent us fifteen or
sixteen big Bundles, (which I have still) to make a parallel betwixt her Books,
the holy Fathers, Divines, and the Spiritual Authors. All this was attended
with proffers of entire submission. The Abbot of Fenelon took the trouble with
some of his Friends to come to Iby, a house belonging to the Seminary of Sr.
Sulpice, where we were obliged to hold our Conference, because of the
infirmities of Mr. Tronson. They all desired that we would enter upon that
examination thoroughly, and protested they would refer all to our Judgment.
Madam Guyon testified the same submission by Letters full of respect, and
afterward our only care was to terminate that Affair very privately, so as to
prevent all suspicion of any dissension in the Church.

2. We began to read, with more Prayers than Study, and with Groans, God knows,
for all the Writing they sent us, especially those of the Abbot of Fenelon: To
compare all the passages, and often to read over again whole Books how tedious
and laborious soever the reading thereof might be. The long extracts I have by
me show what attention we gave to an Affair, wherein really the Church was so
nearly concerned; seeing the thing in question was no less than to hinder the
revival of Quietism, which we saw again appearing in the Kingdom, by the
Writings of Madam Guyon which were spread over all.

3. We look upon it as the greatest misfortune of all, that she had the Abbot
de Fenelon for her Defender: His Wit, his Eloquence, His Virtue, the place he
filled, and those he was designed for. Engaged us to labor with utmost
diligence to reclaim him. We could not despair of success; for although he
wrote to us things that we must own made us afraid, the memory where of is as
fresh to those persons as to me; he mixed them with so many testimonies of
submission, that we could not persuade our selves that God would deliver him up
to a Spirit of Error. The Letters he wrote to me during the examination of this
Book, and before we had come to a Final Resolution, breathed out nothing but
obedience; and tho he surrendered himself entirely to those Gentlemen: I must
own here, that beside my being the President of the Conference, he semmed to
address himself to me with so particular a freedom, because we had been long
used to treat together of the Theological matters in dispute: One of those
Letters was conceived in the following terms.

4. I receive my Lord with -- great acknowledgement the kindness you show me. I
cannot but see that you are willing out of Charity to to settle my Heart in
Peace: But I confess it seems to me, that you are somewhat afraid to give me a
true and perfect security in my State. When ever you please I shall acquaint
you as to my Confessor with whatever may be comprised in a General Confession
of my whole Life, and of all that regards my inward State. When I besought you
to tell me the truth, and not to spare me, it was neither formal Complement,
nor a trick to discover your sentiments; If I had a mind to use Art it should
be in other things, and we should not have come to this pass. I never desired
any thing, but what I will ever wish, that is, if it be Gods will that I may
know the Truth. I am a Priest, I owe all to the Church, and nothing to my self,
nor to my personal Reputation. I declare to you still my Lord, That I wont
abide in Error one moment through my own fault; If I don't abandon it without
delay I declare it is you who are the cause of it, seeing you determine nothing
to me. I do not value my place, but I am ready to leave it if I am rendered
unworthy of it by my my Errors. I summon you in the Name of God, and for the
Love you have to the truth, to tell it me in the utmost severity. I shall go
and hide my self and do Penance the remaining part of my Days; after having
abjured and recanted the Erroneous Doctrine that has seduced me; But if my
Doctrine be innocent, do not keep me in suspense out of some Humane Respect. To
you it appertains to instruct with Authority those that are scandalized,
because they know not the Operations of God in the Soul: You know with what
confidence I have delivered my self to you, and applied my self without
intermission, that you should not be Ignorant of my strongest persuasions.
There remains nothing for me to do but to obey. For it is not the Man, or the
most Grand Doctor that I esteem in you; it is God. And though you should
mistake your self, my simple and upright obedience shall -- not deceive me; and
I account it as nothing to mistake, when I do it with Vprightness and Humility
under the hand of those who have Authority in the Church. Once more, my Lord,
if you doubt never so little of my decible Temper withou reserve, be pleased to
put it to the proof without spairing me. Although your mind is more enlightened
than that of any other Man. I pray to God, that he would be pleased to take
away all your own Wisdom and to leave you none but that which is his.

5. Thus, you have the whole Letter word by word. And may see by his Offers to
leave all, and to make a Solemn Recantation of what consequence the matter was,
and how far he was engaged therein: Though he had not as yet writ any Defense
of the new way of Prayer. I accepted with joy the Prayer he made for me, that I
might lose all my own Wisdom, which indeed I did not rely on; and I
endeavored to listen to nothing but Tradition.

Thus seeing the Abbot of Fenelon so well disposed to submit, I look upon it as
an injustice to entertain any doubt of his compliance. It never entered into my
mind that the Errors wherein I saw him involved, though in themselves very
important and pernicious, could ever do him any injury, or debar him from the
dignities of the Church. They were not afraid in the fourth Age to make the
famous Synesius a Bishop, though he confessed many Errors; they knew him so well
disposed and so full of compliance, that they did not so much as think that
those Errors, though Capital ones, ought to be an obstacle to his Promotion. I do
not speak thus to justify my self: I only set down the matter of fact, the
judgment whereof I refer to those who consider it: If they will defer their
Judgment until they have seen the effect of the whole, they will do me a great
favor. Every thing here depends upon what follows; so that it is not possible
for me to conceal any thing from the Reader, without involving all in darkness.
Moreover, the compliance of Synesius was no greater than that which the Abbot
of Fenelon showed. Another of his Letters contain these words.

6. I cannot forbear to ask you with a full submission, whether you have at
present any thing to require of me. I conjure you in the Name of God, not to
have any regard for me in any thing; and without expecting the Conference you
promise me, if you now believe that I owe any thing to the Truth, and to the
Church wherein I am a Priest, one word without Arguments shall suffice. I hold
only one thing which is simple obedience, so that my Conscience is in yours. If
I do amiss, it is you who make me to err for want of advising me. It is your
part to answer for me if I continue one moment in the Error. I am ready to be
silent, to recant, to accuse my self, and even to retire, if I have failed as
to what I owe to the Church. In a word, regulate me in whatever you please; and
if you do not believe me, take me at my word to entangle me. After such
declaration I think I ought not to conclude with Complements.

7. In another Letter, he said: I have already besought you not to delay one
moment, out of any respect to me, the decision that I beg of you. If you are
resolved to condemn any part of the Doctrine I have exposed to you, out of
obedience, I beseech you to do it with as much speed as you shall be desired. I
had as good, nay, rather recant to Day than to Morrow. The rest was to the same
purpose, and concluded with these words: Deal with me as with a Schoolboy,
without minding either my place, or your ancient Kindnesses toward me. I shall
be all my life full of Acknowledgement and Compliance, if you deliver me, as
soon as possible, out of Error. God forbid I should propose this, to engage you
into a precipitant Decision, to the disadvantage of Truth; I only wish you
would not delay at all on my account.

8. Those Letters were written to me by the Abbot of Fenclon, betwixt the 12th
of December, 1694. and the 26th of January 1695. during which time we were
drawing up the Articles. Having read all the Writings, as well those of Madam
Guyon, as of Monsieur Fenelon, wherein we comprised the Condemnation of all the
Errors we found in the one and the other; weighing all the Words, and endeavoring
not only to resolve all the Difficulties that appeared, but also to prevent by
Principles, those that might arise afterward. We were at first, after the
reading of the Writings, for Conversation by word of Mouth; but we feared lest
by bringing things to a Dispute, we should sooner exasperate, than be able to
instruct a Person whom God was pleasto lead into a better Way, which was that
of an Absolute Submission. He wrote thus himself to us, in a Letter I have yet
by me: Spare your selves the trouble of entering upon that Discussion: Take the
thing in gross, and begin by supposing that I have mistaken my self in my
Citations. I forsake them all; I don't pretend either to understand Greek, or
to make fine Arguments upon Passages: I insist only upon those that you think
may deserve some regard: Pronounce my Judgment according to those, and give a
Decision upon the essential Points; after which, the remaining part will be of
little moment. By this it may be perceived, that we had declared our selves
enough upon his Writings. He had explained himself therein so thoroughly, that
we perfectly comprehended his Sentiments. We met every day; we agreed so well
on the Point, that there was no need of a long Discourse. Notwithstanding, we
carefully collected what the Abbot of Fenelon had told us at the beginning, and
what he spoke upon occasion. We dealt plainly, as is usual among Friends,
without taking any advantage one of another; and so much the more, because we
our selves, whom they took for Arbitrators, had no other Authority over the
Abbot of Fenelon than what he himself gave us. It seemed that God made his
Heart sensible of the Way we were to follow, in order to reclaim him gently,
without offedning so fine and acute a Spirit. The Examinauion lasted long: It
is true, the Necessities of our Diocesses caused some interruption to our
Conferences. As to the Abbot of Fenelon, we had rather not to have given him
any trouble at all about his Opinions, than to seem to have condemned him
rashly, and before we had heard all his defenses. It was something of a Blow
given to them, to hold them as supicious, and to subject them to Examination.
The Abbot of Fenelon had reason indeed to tell us, That after all, we knew not
his Opinions any other way but by himself. As he could have concealed them from
us, so the freedom wherewith he discovered them, was to us a mark of his
docible temper; and we concealed them so much the more carefully, the more
freely he discovered them to us.

9. So that during all the time we three treated of that Affair with him, that
is, for Eight or Ten Months, the Secret was no less impenetrable than it had
been during the time that I alone was upon it. It must be confessed here, that
the least whisper to the King, of the Abbot de Fenelon's favoring M. Guyon and
her Doctrine, would have produced strange effects in the Mind of a Prince so
Religious, so nice as to mattets of Faith, and so circumspect in filling up the
great Places of the Church; and the least that this Abbot must have expected
from it, had been an unavoidable exculsion from all Dignities. But we did not
so much as suspect (at least for my part I own it) that any thing was to be
feared from a Man, whose return was thought so sure, his Mind so docible, and
his Intentions so upright; and whether it were by Reason, or prepossession; or
if you will, through Error: (For I rather here make a public Confession, than
seek to defend my self) I thought the Instruction of the Princes of France in
too good a hand, not to do, on this occasion, whatever might conduce to the
Keeping of so important a Trust therein.

10. I carried that Confidence to the highest pitch, as will be known by the
following Discourse. It was the Will of God, perhaps to humble me: And perhaps
also, I sinned by putting too much confidence in the Knowledge I believed a Man
endowed with; or else, that in reality, I thought I might put confidence in the
strength of Truth, and power of Grace; I spoke with too much assurance of a
thing that surpassed my Power: However we acted upon that ground, and as we
were laboring to reclaim a Friend, so we applied our selves with a scrupulous
regard to manage his precious Reputation.

11. It was this that inspired us with the Design you shall hear of presently.
We thought our selves obliged, in order to set bounds to his Thoughts, to
restrict him by some thing under his hand; but, at the same time, we proposed
to our selves, in order to avoid making him look like one that retracted, to
have him sign with us as an Associate in our Deliberations. We had no other
design in any respect, but how to save such a Friend; and we were unanimously
agreed for his Advantage.

12. A little while after, he was named to the Archbishopric of Cambray. We
applauded the Choice, as did every body else, and he continued nevertheless in
that way of submission God put him in: The higher he was to be raised upon the
Candlestick, the more I thought he should attain to that great splendour, and to
the grace of the Episcopal State, through the humble compliance we saw in him.
So we continued the forming of our Sentence; and he of his own accord begged if
of us with the same humility. The Four and Thirty Articles that were drawn up
at Issy in our private Conferences, Monsiur de Chaalons and I, presented to the
new Prelate in my Apartment at Versailles. The Archbishop of Paris has
expressed in his Answer to the Archhishop of Cambray, how uneasy he was in
reading it. We told him without disputing, with an Episcopal sincerity, how he
ought to dispose of the Writings he had sent us in so great numbers; he said
not a word; and notwithstanding the reluctance he had showed, he offered that
very moment, to sign the Articles merely out of obedience. We thought it more
fit to put them into his hands, that he might peruse them some time. Though they
went to the quick, or rather indeed overthrew the Foundation of the new way of
Prayer; yet their Principles being clear, we thought that the Abbot of Fenelon
would not contradict them, when once he understood them. He brought us some
restrictions to every Article, which eluded all the strength of them; and the
ambiguity thereof did not only render them useless, but also dangerous; we did
not think fit to admit them. My Lord of Cambray yielded, and the Articles were
Signed at Issy, at M. Tronsons, the 10th of March, 1695.

13. When the Archbishop of Cambray says in his Answer to our Declaration, that
he drew up the Articles with us; I am sorry he has forgotten those holy
Dispositions God had then put him into. It has been seen by the Letters he
wrote, during the time we were busy in drawing those Articles, that he begged
a Decision without Arguments. If we came to be of that Opinion. I desire those
that read this, not to impute it to any haughtiness or disdian. God forbid! on
any other occasion we would have accounted it an honor to deliberate with a
Man of so much Light and Merit, who was moreover going to be received into our
Episcopal Body, but at that time God showed him another way; which was, that he
must obey without examining. Men must be led in the Path which it pleases God
to open unto them, and by the Disposition his grace puts into their Hearts.
Therefore the first time M. de Cambray spoke of our Thirty Four Articles,
(which was in the Advertisement of the Book of the Maxims of the Saints) he
mentions only two Prelates, Monsieur de Chaalous and I, that had drawn them up,
without thinking then that he should name himself as one of the Authors. He
remembered the disposition of Mind we were all in when we signed. Thus you have
an Account of the little Mystery we were put upon merely in regard to his
Advantage. I hear his Friends give out, that this was as a secret of Confession
among us, which he would not discover, and that we have revealed it. Never any
such thing came into our thoughts, nor did we imagine any other Secret but that
only of having a regard to his Honor, and of his retractation under a more
specious Title. If he had not declared himself too much in his Book, and then
forced our silence, that Secret should still have lain in Darkness.

We have seen how in one of his Letters he offered to make a general Confession
to me; he well knows that I never accepted that offer. Whatever could have
relation to Secrets of that nature, upon his inward disposition, is forgotten,
and will never be called in question. The Archbishop of Cambray insinuates in
some of his Writings, that I made nice Exceptions to some of his Restrictions,
and that the Archbishop of Paris took me up sharply for it. We have then both
of us forgotten it, since we have no Idea of it left in our Minds: We were all
along so unanimous, that we never had any occasion to persuade one another, and
being wholly guided by the same Spirit of Tradition, we were all the time of
one and the same mind.

14. The Archbishop of Cambray continued so steadfast in the spirit of
submission God had put him into, that, having desired me to Consecrate him, two
days before that divine Formality, kneeling and kissing the Hand that was to
Consecrate him, he took it to witness that he would never entertain any other
Doctrine but mine. I was cordial, and I dare say it, more at his Devotion than
he was at mine. But I received that submission as I had done all others of the
same nature, which are still to be seen in his Letters. My Age, my being older
in Orders than he, the simplicity of my Sentiments conformable to those of the
Church, and the Person I was to act, gave me that confidence. M. de Chaalons
was desired to be one of the Assistants in the Ceremony, and we thought we
should give the Church a Prelate, of the same mind with those that Consecrated
him.

15. I don't believe that M. de Cambray will forget this praiseworthy
Circumstance of his submission. After the signing of the Articles, and about
the time of his Consecration, he desired me to keep, at least some of his
Writings, to serve as an Evidence against him, if ever he should stray from our
Sentiments. I was far from that spirit of mistrust. No Sir, said I, I will
never use any other precaution with you than to take your word. I gave back all
the Papers as they were given me, not keeping so much as one, nor any other
thing except my extracts for a memorandum of the Errors I was to confute,
without naming the Author. As for the Letters that belonged to me, I kept some
of them as has been seen, rather for my comfort, than that I believed I should
ever have need of them, except perhaps for M. Cambray, to put him in mind of
his holy Submissions, in case he should be tempted to forget them; that they
are now published, is really owing to pure Necessity, which compelled me to
speak more than I would. The protestation he made to me a little before his
Consecration, should also have been kept in silence as well as the rest, if it
had not come to the King's Ears, that advantage was made of it, and that they
made as if I confirmed the Doctrine of the Book of the Maxims of the Saints,
because I had Consecrated the Author.

16. A little before the Publishing of that Book an Affair happened that gave
me a great deal of Trouble. In my Pastoral Instructions of the 16th of April,
1695, I had promised a larger one to explain our Articl^s, and I desired the
Archbishop of Cambray to join his Approbation to that of M. de Chaalons, then
promoted to the Sea of Paris, and to that of M. de Chartres, for the Book I
designed for that Explication. Seeing we are to name here the Bishop of
Chartres, I must take notice he was the first of the Bishops of that
neighborhood, who discovered the evil Effects of the Books and Conduct of
Madam Guyon. The Consequences of that Affair made us concur together in many
things; as for the Archbishop of Paris, I was so much the more obliged to
support my self by his Authority, because for the good of our Province, he was
become the Chief of it. I thought also, it was for the public Edification,
that our unanimity with M. de Cambray should be known more and more every where
I put my Book, in Manuscript, into the Hands of that Bishop: I expected his
Exceptions, and to correct my self according to his Advice: I found in my self,
I thought, the same compliance for him that he had showed to me before his
Consecration: But about three Weeks after, his Approbation was refused me, and
that too for such a Reason as was far from my being able to foresee. A Friend
to us both gave me, in the Gallery of Versailles, a Letter of Credentials from
the Archbishop of Cambray, who was in his Diocese. Upon which I was given to
understand, that that Prelate could not enter into the Approbatition of my
Book, because I therein condemned Madam Guyon, whom he could not condemn.

17. It was in vain for me to represent unto that Friend the Incovenience that
M. de Cambray would fall into. What! it will appear, said I, that to sustain M.
Guyon, he disunites himself from his Brethren? then all the World will see that
he is her Protector; the suspicion wherewith he was dishonored abroad, will
now be found a certainty? What becomes of those fine Discourses we so often had
of M. de Cambray, and which he and his Friends spread abroad; as that he was so
far from being concerned in the Books of that Woman, that he was ready to
condemn them if it were necessary? Now that she had condemned them her self;
that she had, before me, subscribed the Condemnation of them, together with the
Evil Doctrine contained in them; would he countenance them more than her felf?
In what amazement will the World be, to find at the head of my Book, the
Approbation of the Archbishop of Paris, and of the Bishop of Chartres, without
his? Was not that the way to make the signs of his Division from his Brethren
manifest? his Consecrators, his most intimate Friends? What Scandal, what
Reproach to his Name? Of what Books would he become the Martyr? why would he
bereave the People of the comfort of seeing in the Approbation of that Prelate,
the solemn Testimony of our unanimity? All these Reasons had no effect; my
Manuscript was restored to me again, having staid three whole Weeks in the
hands of M. de Cambray. The Friend that had taken upon him to give it me again,
said he had kept it for most part of the time himself, and that M. de Cambray
had it but few days, and gave it back without having read much of it. I wrote a
few Lines to that Prelate, intimating to him my just Fears. I received an
Answer that signified nothing, and then he had begun to prepare what you shall
see afterward.

18. You would perhaps know beforehand what was become of M. Guyon. She had
desired to be received into my Diocese, in order to be there instructed. She
was six Months in the Holy Convent of the Damsels of St. Mary, upon condition
she should have no communication with any person whosoever, either within or
without, by Letter or otherwise, save only with the Confessor I appointed her
according to her Desire, and with two Nuns I had chosen, one of whom was the
venerable Mother le Picard, a most prudent Woman, Superior of that Monastery.
Seeing all her Letters and Discourses breathed out nothing but submission, and
a blind submission, we could not refuse her the use of the Holy Sacraments. I
instructed her diligently; she subcribed the Articles where she plainly saw
they utterly condemned her Doctrine: I rejected her Explications, and her
submission was pure and simple. A little after she subscribed the just Censure
that M. de Chaalons and I published against her Books, and the Evil Doctrine
contained in them, condemning them with Heart and Mouth, as if each Proposition
had been expressly uttered. Some of the chief of 'em were specified that
comprised all the rest, and she renounced them in plain terms. The Books she
condemned, were the Short Method, and the Song of Songs, which were the only
Printed Books she owned: I would not meddle with the Manuscripts that were not
known abroad: She offered at every word to burn them all; but I thought that
precaution needless, because of the Copies that remained. So I satisfied my
self with forbidding her to communicate them, or to write of 'em to others; or
to teach, dogmatise, or direct, condemning her to silence, and retirement as
she desired. I received the Declaration she made against the Abominations she
was accused of, presuming her to be innocent, as long as she was not Convicted
by a lawful Examination whereupon never entered. She asked me leave to go to
the Waters of Bourbon; after her submissions she was free: She desired to be
received after her return from the Waters into the same Monastery, where she
kept her Apartment. I granted it one design to instruct, and thoroughly to
convert her, without leaving her, if possible, not so much as the least
tincture of the Visions and Delusions past. I gave her that attestation her
Friends so much bragged of abroad; but she never durst show it, because I
expressly specified therein, that Account of the Declarations and Submissions of
M. Guyon, which we had by us, subscribed by her own Hand: and of the
Prohibitions accepted by her with submission, neither to Write, Teach, nor
Dogmatise in the Church, nor to spread abroad her Printed Books, or
Manuscripts, nor to lead People into the way of her silent Prayer, or
otherwise. I was satisfied with her Conduct, and had continued her in the
participation of the Holy Sacraments, wherein I found her. This Attestation was
dated the First of July, 1695. I set out the next day for Paris, where we were
to advise what course we should take concerning her for the future: I shall not
recount how she went off before the day I had fixed for her departure, nor how
she since absconded her self; how she was taken again, and convicted of several
things contrary to what she had signed. What I cannot conceal is, that she set
up always for a Prophetess; I have in her Writings signed with her own hand,
that God had put into her disposal the life of such as oppose themselves to her
Visions: She has made Prelates and Archbishops, far different from those the
Holy Ghost has chosen: She has also made such Predictions as would strike
horror into those that hear them. You have already seen what she had foretold
as to the Protection of her Silent Prayer by the King himself: She has since
given out, that after what she calls Persecution, her Prayers would spring up
again under a Child: The Prophecy has been taken notice of to the August
Infant, without making any Impression upon his Mind. God forbid I should accuse
M. de Cambray, nor the wise Heads that are about that lovely Prince, of the
Discourses that have been made to him concerning it; but there are amongst all
Parties, People of outrageous tempers, who speak without measure or aim, and
that sort of People spread Reports abroad, that the times will change, and thus
they frighten the simple. You see then plainly, the Reasons I have to write
those Circumstances: You see in whose presence it is I write them, and why, at
last, I make a Woman nknown, who is at present a cause of Divisions in the
Church.

14. M. de Cambray, during the time of our examination, spoke of her in
different manners; he has often frightened us, when he said to two or three of
us together, that he had learnt more from her than from all the Doctors
together; and at other times he comforted us, saying, he was so far from
approving her Books, that he was rather ready to condemn them, if it were
thought necessary in the least; I doubted no more of his Conversion upon this
point than upon the rest; and seeking nothing else but to convince thoroughly of
his Errors a Man of parts, by a method so much the more sincere as it was meek,
and without compulsion: I wished he might come, of his own accord, to himself
again, as it were from a short fit of giddiness; and we thought fit to defer
the proposing to him the express condemnation of the Books of that Woman, 'till
such time as he could do it without reluctance. Thus you have an Account of
those unmerciful Men, and of those Persons that envied the glory of M. de
Cambray; those that had a mind to ruin him; that have carried their severity so
far, as it is impossible the relation of it can find Belief amongst Men. Let the
time at least be instanced when that madness seized us. They might well have
found fault that we spared him too much, showed him too much meekness, and were
guilty of too much compliance: Let it be so, and I will own it; and, to speak
only of my self, that I carried my Confidence, the love of Peace, and that
benign Charity which suspects no evil, too far; hitherto it remains at least an
uncontroverted Truth, That the Archbishop of Cambray disunited himself from his
Brethren, to maintain Madam Guyon against them.

Sect. IV. M. de Cambray's Excuses for refusing me his approbation.
1.That Prelate well foresaw the inconvenience I had intimated to his Friend,
to whom he gave the Charge of his credential Letter; and here I shall give you
what he writ with his own hand, to the Person in the World before whom de
desired most to clear himself: I shall relate the whole without retrenching one
word: Let the Reader be attentive to it, and therein see the true cause of all
the Troubles of the Church: The Writing begins thus.

2. When M. de Meaux proposed to me, that I should approve of his Book, I
testified to him with all imaginable tenderness, that I should be very glad to
give that public mark of my conformity in Opinion with a Prelate, whom I have
looked upon from my Youth up, as my Master in the Science of Religion. I offered
to go to Germigny, to draw up with him my Approbation. I said, at the same
time, to my Lords of Paris and Chartres, and to Monsieur Tronson, that I saw no
shadow of difficulty between M. de Meaux and me, as to the Point of Doctrine.
But that if he would attack Madam Guyon personally, I could not approve of it.
This is what I have declared six Months ago. I never knew any thing of it more
than what follows.

3. M. de Meaux gave me lately a Book to be examined; at the opening of the
Packet, I found that they were full of personal Confutation: I presently
acquainted My Lords of Paris and Chartres, and M. Tronson, with the hardship
that M. de Meaux put upon me.

4. Let us explain whether he takes for personal Coufutation, the Condemnation
of the Person: I did not so much as once think of condemning the Person of
Madam Guyon, who had submitted her self. If he call the Confutation of her Book
a personal Confutation, it was not then her Person, but her Book he has a mind
to defend. He goes on,

5. They did not fail to tell me, that I might condemn the Books of Madam
Guyon, without defaming her Person, or doing my self an injury: But I conjure
them that speak so, to weigh, as before God, the Reason I am about to present
to them; the Errors imputed to Madam Guyon are not to be excused by the
Ignorance of her Sex; there is no rustic Woman, though never so clownish, but
would presently abhor what they will have her to have taught: The thing in
question is not a remote and subtle consequence, which might, contrary to her
intention, be drawn from her speculative Principles, and from some of her
Expressions; but the question is, whether it be a diabolical Design, as they
say, which is the Soul of all her Books; that it is a monstrous System which
has a connection in all its Parts, and which upholds it self with great Art from
one end to the other. These are not obscure Consequences that may have not been
foreseen by the Author; but rather the formal and sole aim of all her Systeme.
It is clear, say they, and it would be want of sincerity in any body to deny
it; that Madam Guyon has writ only with a design to ruin, as an imperfection,
all the explicit Faith of the Attributes of the Divine Persons; of the
Mysteries of Jesus Christ, and of his Humanity: She would dispense with the
sensible Worship of Christians, and with all distinct invocation of our only
Mediator. She pretends to destroy in the Faithful all the interior Life, and
all real Prayer, by suppressing all the distinct Acts which Christ and his
Apostles have commanded, by bringing Souls for ever to an idle quietness, which
shuts out every Thought of the Understanding, and every motion of the Will. She
maintains, that when a Person has once done an Act of Faith, and of Love, that
Act subsists perpetually during the whole Life, without ever having need of
being renewed; that they are always in God, without thinking of him; and that
they must take heed not to reiterate that Act. She leaves to Christians nothing
but a brutish and impious indifferency betwixt Vice and Virtue, betwixt the
eternal hatred of God and his eternal love, for which we ought to believe that
every one of us has been created. She forbids, as unfaithfulness, all real
resistance to the most abominable Temptations: She would have it believed, that
in a certain state of Perfection, whereunto she speedily raises Souls, there is
no Concupiscence, that they cannot sin, that they are infallible, and enjoy the
same Peace that the Blessed do in Heaven: That, lastly, what one does without
reflection, with facility, and by the inclination of the Heart, is done
passively, and by pure Inspiration. This Inspiration which she ascribes to her
self, and her Followers, is not the common Inspiration of the Just, it is a
Prophetic one; it includes an Apostolic Authority, above all the written
Laws: She establishes a secret Tradition upon such a foundation as overthrows
the universal Tradition of the Church. I maintain there is no ignorance how
gross soever, that can excuse a Person who advances so many monstrous Maxims:
They assure us nevertheless, that Madam Guyon has written nothing but to raise
the credit of that damnable spirituality, and to procure the practice thereof.
This is the sole aim of her Works; take away that, you take away all: She could
think on nothing else. Then the manifest Abomination of her Writings, renders
her Person manifestly abominable; I cannot then separate her Person from her
Writings.

6. The manner after which M. de Cambray charges things here, he seems to have
had a design to frighten himself, and to delude the Reader, without examining
whether I impute all those Errors to Madam Guyon, or part only, and the rest to
other Authors; there is but this one word to be considered. If we suppose that
this Lady persists in her Errors what ever they be; it is true, that her Person
is abominable: If on the contrary she humble her self; if she subscribe the
Censures which reject that Doctrine, and her Books wherein she owns it is
contained; if she condemns her Book, there is then nothing but her Book that
remains to be condemned; and through her humility, if sincere, and that she
persists therein, her Person is become innocent, and may even become holy
through her Repentance. There was reason then, to tell M. de Cambray, that he
might have approved of my Book, without blaming M. Guyon, whom I supposed
penitent, and against whom I said not a word; and unless it be supposed that
her Repentance was feigned, and that she was returned again to her Vomit, M. de
Cambray was unjust to represent her Person as abominable by my Book, and to
refuse his Approbation to it, upon that vain pretext.

7. It is in this place that he recounts what has been transcribed before word
by word; that he does not comprehend M. de Meaux, who on the one hand admits M.
Guyon to receive the Communion, and on the other condemns her so severly. As
for me, continues he, if I believed what M. de Meaux believes, touching Madam
Guyon's Book; and by a necessary consequence of her Person, I should have
thought, notwithstanding my friendship to her, I was bound in Conscience to
make her own, and formally recant in the face of the whole Church, the Errors
she had so manifestly taught in all her Writings.

8. Nay, I am of Opinion, that the Secular power should go farther; what is
more worthy of the Flames than a Monster? who, under a specious spirituality,
aims only at the establishing Fanaticism and Impurity? who overthrows the
Divine Law, who looks upon all Virtues as so many imperfections; who turns into
Proofs, and all Imperfections Vices; who leaves neither subordination, nor Rule
in Humane Society; who by the Principle of the Secret authorizes all manner of
Hypocrisy and Lying; lastly, who leaves no certain Remedy against so may
Evils? All Religion set aside, the Civil Government alone is sufficient to
inflict the last punishment upon so pestiferous a Person. It is then certain,
that if that Woman had a Design to establish that damnable System, she should
have been burnt instead of being dismissed; as it is manifest that M. de Meaux
has done, after he had given her the Communion frequently, and an authentic
attestation, without her having recanted her Errors. If then she has recanted
them, if she has repented, if she has detested the impurities, and several
other Excesses you say they ascribe to her? If you falsely suppose that she is
charged with them, there is not so much as a Design to accuse her? if she be
reputed innocent of all what she is not found to be convicted of by Evidence?
if they do not so much as think upon that Examination which was not then ripe,
and which was not the question in hand, but only the Errors of which really she
was lawfully convicted; and which she rejected by an authentic Act with the
Books that contained them, would you deliver her into the hands of Justice?
would you burn her? do you consider well what is required of the meekness of
our Ministry? are we not the Servants of him that says; I desire not the death
of the sinner? When St. John and St. James would have commanded Fire to come
down from Heaven; is it not to us, that Jesus Christ speaks in the Persons of
those two Apostles: Ye do not know of what Spirits ye are? Is it not enough to
be unmerciful toward Errors, and to condemn the Books that contain them? but
must we throw into despair, a Woman that condemns both her Errors and her
Books? ought we not to presume that she is sincere, as long as there appears no
Acts of her to the contrary? and did not her presumed sincerity deserve some
indulgence in regard of her Person? One would really think you to be
transported with Passion, if you should carry your Zeal to that excess; and he
is to be accounted so, who maintains that a Book must not be condemned without
judging the Author of it worthy of the Fire, even when the Author himself
condemns his Book. As for me, continues M. de Cambray, I could not approve of
the Book wherein M. de Meaux ascribes to that Woman so horrible a System in all
its parts, without defaming my self, and doing her an irreparable wrong. The
Reason is thus: I have seen her often: I had her in esteem: I suffered her to
be esteemed by illustrious Persons, whose Reputation was dear to the Church,
and who had confidence in me. I neither could, not ought to have been ignorant
of her Writings; tho I have not examined them all at the time, at least I knew
so much of them as induced me to suspect her, and to examine her with all rigor.
I have done it more diligently than her Examinators could do it, for she was
much more free, more in her natural disposition, more open with me in a time
she had nothing to be afraid of: I made her often explain her Mind as to the
things now in dispute. I have compelled her to explain to me the force of each
Term of that mystical Language she used in her Writings. I saw plainly upon
every occasion, that she undestood them in a most innocent and most catholic
Sense. I have also been willing to examine the particulars both of her Practice,
and the Counsels she gave to the most ignorant and least suspicious Persons. I
never met with any part of these Infernal Maxims imputed to her; could I then
in conscience impute them to her by my approbation, and give her the last
stroke toward her defamation, after having seen so narrowly and so plainly
into her innocence.

10. This is certainly to answer stoutly for Madam Guyon: Here Is fine words,
but very vain; for there is but one word to determine all this; that is, that
they should, without hesitation, have approved in my Book, the condemnation of
those of Madam Guyon, if I took the sense of 'em well; and if I imposed upon
her, M. de Cambray could not avoid entering with me upon that Examination,
unless he were, as it appears now he is, too much resolved to defend both that
Woman and her Books, at what rate soever against his Brethren.

11. Let us then speak the truth: He well knew in his Conscience that I imputed
nothing to him but what was true, and therefore he continues in this manner:
That others who only know her Writings, take them in a rigorous sense; let them
do so, I do not defend nor excuse neither her Person nor her Writings; and is
not this much to one that knows what I know? As for me I ought, in justice, to
judge of the Sense of her Writings by her Sentiments, which I know to the full,
and not of her Opinions by the rigorous sense they put upon her Expressions,
and which never came into her mind; if I did otherwise, I should perfectly
convince the Public, that she deserves to be burnt. Thus you see my Rule is
for Justice and Truth; let us now come to decency.

12. All that Rule of Justice is grounded upon this false Maxim, that she
deserved the Fire, notwithstanding her having given an abhorrence in Writing of
the Errors she was convinced of, and of such as followed from the natural sense
of her words. Besides, it is very certain, that her Books and her Doctrine had
scandalized the whole Church: Rome her self had declared her Sentiments, and so
many Prelates in France and other Places, had followed her Example, that it was
impossible to dissemble any longer the mischievous Effects of those Books, and
the Scandal given thereby over all the World. Notwithstanding M. de Cambray,
who had given them for a Rule to such as had confidence in him, will not to
this very Day retract them. And least he should condemn them, he breaks all
measures with his Brethren; and yet he is not willing we should see his
bigoted conceit of those Books: What follows will make it appear much better.
At present it suffices to take notice of two things that result from his
Discourse: The one is, That he suffers Madam Guyon to be esteemed by
illustrious Persons, whose reputation is dear to the Church, and who had
confidence in him. He adds: I neither could nor ought to have been ignorant of
her Writings: It is then by her Writings, that he allows her to be esteemed of
by Persons truly illustrious, who had confidence in him; in a word, whom he
guided. They esteemed Madam Guyon and her Writings, with the approbation of M.
de Cambray, then the Abbot de Fenelon: The method of Prayer he advised them to,
was that which M. Guyon taught in her Book which he allowed them to esteem
tegether with her Person. It is just, as he says, to preserve the Reputation of
those Illustrious Persons, who are dear unto the Church, which we never so much
as thought once to attack it. But who can deny that M. de Cambray was obliged
to disabuse those illustrious Persons of the esteem he had given them (or
allowed 'em to have if you will) of Madam Guyon and her Books? the thing then
in question is not at their Reputation, which was protected by the authority of
M. of Cambray: Our business is to know whether M. de Cambray himself would not
too much preserve his own Reputation in their Minds, and in the Minds of so
many others who knew how he recommended M. Guyon, to such as put confidence in
his Conduct: Whether he would not too much save the Approbation he had given of
Books so pernicious, and disliked wherever they appeared. This is what M. de
Cambray cannot excuse himself from, after his Confession just now mentioned.
Seeing by that in the second place, it now appears, That he endeavors to this
day to maintain those Books, and that he finds nothing dubious in them, but
that mystical Language Madam Guyon uses in her Writings. Is this a mystical
Language, when she has said in her Short Method, that the act of giving up
one's self, being once performed, ought never to be reiterated: Is this a
mystical Language, when she reduces to the inferior sort of Contemplation, that
of the particular Attributes, and of the Divine Persons, without excepting
Jesus Christ himself: Is that a mystical Language, to suppress all Desire, even
of our Salvation, and of Heavenly Joys, only out of a desire to rest upon the
Will of God, either known or unknown, either for our own Salvation and that of
others, or for our Damnation. What is afterward drawn out of her Short Method,
and interpretation of the Song in the Book of the sorts of Prayer, though it be
no less pernicious, is, according to M. de C. a mystical Language.

It is true indeed, but this mystical Language is that of the false mysticks of
our Days: Of Falconi, Molino's, and Malavals, all condemdemned Authors; but not
that of any approved Mystic. You see how M. de Cambray excuses the Books of M.
Guyon. To take what has been just now recited, and whatever is of the same
nature in the literal Sense, and according to the Consequence of the Discourse,
is in the Sense of that Prelate, rigorous and severe, though it be the natural
sense of 'em, and that which he endeavors to excuse, in order that those
pernicious Books might remain authorized, though he knows in his Conscience, that
he is not able to justify them; and therefore to save them, he has recourse to
that absurd method of judging of the sense of a Book, by the particular
Knowledge he has of the Sentiments of the Author, and not of the Sentiments of
an Author by the words of his Book, to this end are all the fine Excuses of M.
de Cambray directed. But lastly, this rigorous sense, as he calls it, is that
which astonished and scandalized all Christendom: And to Answer so boldly for
Madam Guyon, that such things never came into her Thoughts, is another bold
stroke of judging of her Words by her Thoughts, and not of her Thoughts by her
Words; this is always to open the Door to the grossest of Equivocations, and to
furnish Excuses for the most pernicious of Books.

14. It is true indeed, that to this very day M. de Cambray makes use of this
method; he would have us divine what were his Sentiments in his Book of Maxims,
though he has not so much as said one word of them; and we must not wonder that,
after having justified Madam Guyon by so false a Doctrine, as that we have just
now heard, he should also make use of it to justify himself. But let us come
to what he adds upon decency

15. I have known her: I could not be ignorant of her Writings, I ought
certainly to know her Sentiments, I being a Priest, a Tutor to Princes, and
having applied my self from my Youth to a continual Study of Doctrine, ought to
have seen what is manifest. I must then, if it be so, have at least tolerated
that impious System? which is the thing that makes me guilty of Error, and
covers me with Eternal Confusion. All our Correspondence has also been held
upon that abominable Spirituality, wherewith, as they say, she has filled her
Books, and which is the Soul of all her Discourses. And in owning all these
things by my Approbation, I render my self infinitely more unexcusable than M.
Guyon. That which will appear at first sight to the Reader, is, that I have
been constrained to subscribe to the Defamation of my Friend, whose Monstrous
System I could not be ignorant of, being manifest in all her Works, according
to my own Confession. So that my Sentence should be pronounced and signed by my
self, at the Head of M. de Meaux's Book; where that System is set off with all
imaginable Horror. I maintain it, that such a Dash of my Pen given against my
Conscienee, out of a base Policy, would for ever render me infamous and
unworthy of my Ministry.

16. You see nevertheless, what these most wise and affectionate Persons
toward me, have desired and prepared against me by a deep Contrivance. It is
then to secure my Reputation, that they would have me sign, that my Friend
deserves to be burnt with all her Writings, for a damnable Spirituality, which
is the sole Tie of our Friendship. But further, how must I explain my self
thereupon? Must it be freely according to my Thoughts, and in a Book wherein I
shall have opportunity to speak at large? No, I must be treated like a Man that
is dumb and confounded; they will hold my Pen, they will constrain me to
explain my self in the Works of another Man; by a simple Approbation I must
own, that my Friend is manifestly a Monster upon the Earth, and the Poison of
her Writings, can proceed from no where but out of her Heart. Thus you see,
what my best Friends have contrived for my Honor. If the most cruel Enemies
would have set Snares to catch me, is not this exactly the thing that they
should have demanded of me?

17. What does he not think, that amidst his Excuses, every one that reads,
them answers him? No, your Friend deserved not to be burnt with her Books,
seeing she condemned them. Your Friend was not a Monster upon Earth, but an
ignorant Woman, who being dazzled with a specious pretext of Spirituality,
deceived by her Directors, applauded by a Man of your Figure, has condemned her
Error, when Care was taken to Instruct her. This Confession could not but
edify the Church, and wean from her Books those that have been seduced by
them: M. de Cambray had nothing else to do, but to approve so just a Conduct,
had not an unreasonable fear that he should defame his Friend and himself,
stuck too much in his Stomach. What he calls a Defaming his Friend, is to
understand her Books in their natural Meaning, as his Breathren did; and as
every Body else did that condemned them. He would not have his Friends
perceive, that he had put so bad a Book into their Hands; this is what he calls
Defaming himself: And now we shall have cause of Wonder, to see him retreat so
many Steps backwards, without being willing to own it; he fears too much, not
to defame himself, but to own a Fault. This is not to defame himself, but on
the contrary to honor himself, and repair his wounded Reputation. Was it so
great a Misfortune, to have been deceived by a Female Friend? M. de Cambray is
to this very day, careful to spread abroad at Rome, that he hardly knows M.
Guyon: What Conduct is this? at Rome he is ashamed of this she Friend, in
France he dares not say that she is unknown to him, and rather than suffer her
Books to be blasted, he answers and gives Security for their Doctrine, though
already condemned by their Author.

18. What shall it be said then? that M. Guyon has subscribed her Condemnation
by force? is that forcing her, when she willingly subscribed it in a Monastery,
where she had confined her self of her own Accord, in order to be there
instructed? Is that force, to yield to the Authority of the Bishops, whom she
chose for her Teachers? But could we condemn those Books more expressly, than by
subscribing to their just and severe Censure? but this, say they, is to
constrain M. de Cambray to own too great a Mistake: What Remedy is there for
it? It is certain, by the common Declaration of all Christendom, and by the
acknowledgment of M. Guyon, that her Spirituality ought to be condemned. It is
certain, by the present Confession of M. de Cambray, that all his
Correspondence with Madam Guyon, was about that Spirituality she her self had
condemned, and that it made the only Tie of that Friendship so much boasted of:
What Answer can be given to so formal a Confession? what can we say to them who
will Object, That this Correspondence united by such Tie, was either known or
not known? if it was not, M. de Cambray had nothing to fear, in approving the
Book of M. de Meaux; if it was known, that Prelate was so much the more obliged
to declare himself; and there was nothing he had reason to fear, but holding
either his Peace, or making Evasions upon that Subject.

19. M. de Cambray seems to have foreseen that Objection, and therefore he
continues in this manner; for I Omit none of his Words; They will be sure to
tell me, that I ought to Love the Church more than my Friend, and more than my
own self: As if the Church were in Danger, in an Affair wherein her Doctrine is
secured, and where the thing relates to a Woman, whom I am ready to suffer
should be defamed for ever; Provided I have no Hand in it, against my
Conscience. Yea, I would burn my Friend with my own Hand, and my self too
cheerfully, rather than the Church should be in Danger. She is a poor Woman,
confined, oppressed with Grief and Reproaches; No body defends her, nor excuses
her, and one is always afraid. Good God! is that nothing to the Church, to
Bless a Seducing Book, spread all over the Kingdom, and further? especially
when he is suspected to approve it? Is it nothing to the Church, to observe to
set in a true light to Confute the Errors of such a Book? this is what M. de
Cambray will not hearken to. Why does he separate himself from his Brethren, and
not show before the whole Church, the Consent of the Episcopacy against a Book
really so pernicious? A Body is always afraid, says M. de Cambray: It is well
seen: He would have no Body to meddle with that poor Captive, whose Fate he
deplores, and that we should suffer a Party that has already too much overrun
the World, to strengthen it self. To what purpose is it for him to say, Yea, I
would burn my Friend wish my own Hands, I would burn my own self? Such as do
burn after this manner, do it that they may burn nothing at all: These are
Transported Zealots, who go beyond the Burt, to pass over the Essential Point.
Burn not M. Guyon with your own Hand, you should be irregular in so doing: Burn
not a Woman that shows she is coming to her self again; unless once more you be
assured that (...) Recantation is not sincere: Burn not (...) own-self; save
the Persons, condemn the Error, proscribe with your fellow Bishops the
pernicious Books that spread all over the World, and put an end to a Business
that disturbs the Church.

20. After all, continues M. de Cambray, which is most proper, either that I
should revive in the World the remembrance of my past Intimacy with her, and
acknowledge my self the most insipid Man living, for not having seen manifest
Infamies; or that I am execrable, for having tolerated them? or that I should
keep to the last a profound Silence, as to the Writings and Person of M. Guyon,
as one that excuses her in his Heart, by reason she did not perhaps know the
extent of each Expression, nor the severity wherewith they would afterward
examine the Language of the Mysticks, upon the Experience of the Abuses that
some Hypocrites have committed upon it? Tell me truly, which is the wisest part
of these two?

21. I have nothing to do here, but to observe in one Word, that profound
silence to the last, which M. de Cambray promises here; it will soon be seen,
what Mischief such a determined Silence causes to the Church. After this
necessary Remark as to the Fact, let us go on with the Writing of that Prelate.

22. They don't cease to tell us every day, that the Mystic Divines
themselves, even the most approved of 'em, have much exagerated Matters: Nay,
they will have it, that St. Clement, and several of this chief Fathers, have
spoken in terms that require abundance of Correction. Why do they expect that a
Woman only could not exagerate? why must whatsoever she has said, tend to the
forming of a System that makes a Body tremble? If she could exagerate
innocently, if I have thoroughly known the Innocence of her Exagerations, if I
know what she would say, better than her Books have explained it, if I am
convinced of it by Proof as decisive, as the Terms they reprove in her Books
are equivocal, can I defame her against my Conscience, and defame my self with
her? This Prelate declares himself more and more, the Terms of M. Guyon are but
equivocal, the Bishops, and even the Pope have condemned her Book, only because
they did not understand them well. We are, you see, brought again in her
behalf, to those unhappy Disputes of the Question of Fact and Right; M. de
Cambray is the Author of it, and there is none but this Shift left him to
defend M. Guyon against his Fellow Bishops, and against Rome it self.

23. See how in this Condition he Triumphs, saying without interruption, Let my
Conduct be closely observed. Was the bottom of the Doctrine the Question? I
presently told M. de Meaux, that I would sign with my own Blood the thirty four
Articles he had drawn up, so that he would explain certain things therein. The
Archbishop of Paris made earnest instances to M. de Meaux upon such things as
appeared to him just and necessary. M. de Meaux yielded, and I did not defer
one Moment afterward to sign. But now when the Business tends to the defaming
by a back-blow my Ministry and Person, by defaming M. Guyon and her Writings,
they find I make an invincible Resistance. Whence comes that difference of
Conduct? Is it that I was weak or timorous at the signing the thirty four
Propositions? They may judge of it by my present Constancy. Is it that I refuse
now, out of Conceit, and from a factious Principle, to approve the Book of M.
de Meaux: They may judge of it by my readiness to sign the thirty four
Propositions. If I was headstrong, I should have been more especially so as to
the Doctrine of M. Guyon than as to her Person; I could not in my Bigottism,
how ridiculous and dangerous soever, care any thing for her Person; but so far
as I could believe it necessary, for the promoting of he Doctrine. All this is
plain enough by the Conduct I have Observed, she has been condemned, confined,
laden with Infamy: I never spoke a Word to justify her, to excuse her, to
make her Condition easy. As to the Matter of the Doctrine, I never ceased to
write, and to quote the approved Authors of the Church. They that have seen our
Discussion, must own that M. de Meaux, who was at first for thundering against
all, has been constrained to admit one after another, things which he had a
hundred times rejected as most pernicious. It was not then the Person of M.
Guyon, and her Writings I was concerned for; it was the Doctrine of the Saints,
but too much unknown to most of the Scholastic Doctors.

24. As soon as the Doctrine was secured, without sparing the Errors of such as
are led away by Delusions, were not concerned at M. Guyon's. Captivity and
Disgrace. If I refuse now, to approve what M. de Meaux says of M. Guyon, it is
because I will not disgrace her utterly against my Conscience, nor dishonor my
self, by charging her with Impieties and Blasphemies, that reflect unavoidably
upon my self.

25. Thus you see all the Reasons M. de Cambray gives for not approving my
Book, from thence result Facts of the greatest Consequence, in order to know
perfectly the Spirit that Prelate was at first in, and the alteration that has
happened in his Conduct, since he has been Archbishop. One may easily
understand, what the Meaning of those thundering Airs is, that he begins to
give me; of that profound Ignorance he ascribes to the Shool, the Authority
whereof he now feigns himself to have a Mind to maintain; of those Divisions
which he echoes out so loud, although there never was the least Ground for it,
between M. de Chaalons, who was constrained to make great Instances; and me,
who resisted him, (...) did not yield without force. Those Matter of Fact and
others are of the greatest Consequence, let the prudent Reader remember them:
But in order to comprehend them the better, let us without Interruption go on
with what follows of his Writing.

26. Since I have signed the thirty four Propositions, I have declared upon all
Occasions that offered themselves naturally, that I had signed them, and that I
thought it was never to be allowed, that any should go beyond those Limits.

27. I afterward showed to the Archbishop of Paris, a most large and exact
Explication of the whole System of the inward Ways, in the Margin of the thirty
four Propositions. That Prelate did not observe in it, the least Error or the
least Excess. M. Tronson, to whom I also showed that Work, did not correct any
thing therein. Observe by the way, in the Matter of Fact, that there is no
mention made here, of having communicated those Explications to me, of which
truly I never heard any Body speak one Word.

28. It is about six Months since, a Carmelite of the Suburb of St. James,
desired of me some Instruction in that Matter; I wrote presently a long Letter
to him, which I had examined by M. de Meaux. He proposed to me only to avoid a
Word indifferent in it self, but which was by that Prelate observed, had been
sometimes abused to ill Ends. I took it out presently, and added besides some
Explications, full of preservatives against those Errors that he required not.
The Suburb of St. James, that gave Birth to the most implacable Critic upon
the Mystic Divines, had not one Word to say against that Letter. M. Pirot said
boldly, it might be used as a certain Rule in those Matters. In effect, I have
condemned therein all the Errors that have alarmed some good people in these
latter times. By the way, it falls much short of it, and when all is done, we
don't talk here of examining a particular Letter, the Nature of which I know
only by a confused Recital. But here he begins to come to something more
essential.

29. Yet I do not find it enough to dissipate the vain Umbrages, and think it
necessary to to declare my self still in a more Authentic Manner. I have writ
a Book, wherein I explain to the bottom the whole System of the inward Ways,
wherein I mark on one side whatsoever is conformable to the Faith, and grounded
upon the Tradition of the Saints; and on the other whatsoever goes beyond, and
which ought to be rigorously censured. The more I am under a necessity of
refusing my Approbation to the Book of M. de Meaux, the more Capital it is to
declare my self at the same time, in a more Emphatical and Express Manner. The
Work is now ready. They have no cause to be afraid, that I should contradict
there M. de Meaux. I would rather choose to dye, than to present the Public
with so scandalous a Scene. I shall not mention him, but to praising him, and
making use of his words. I know perfectly his Thoughts, and I may promise, that
he will be satisfied with my Work when he sees it published.

30. Further, I will not presume to have it printed without Consulting any body. I
design to entrust the Archbishop of Paris and M. Tronson with it, as a great
Secret of the highest degree; as soon as they have read it over, I will publish
it according to their Corrections. They shall be the Judes of my Doctrine, and
nothing but what is approved by them shall be printed. I should have the same
Confidence in M. de Meaux, were I not under a Necessity of Concealing from him
a Work, the printing whereof, it is likely he would hinder, out of respect to
his own.

31. In this Work I shall exhort all the Mysticks that have errred in Doctrine,
to own their Errors. I shall add, that such as have explained themselves ill,
without falling into any Error, are obliged in Conscience to condemn their
Expressions without restriction, never to use them any more, and to prevent all
Equivocating by a public Explanation of their real Sentiments. Can any body go
further to repress Error?

32. God alone knows to what degree I suffer, in making a Person suffer upon
this occasion, for whom I have the most constant and most sincere Respect and
Affection of any Person in the World.

33. Thus the Memoire written by the Archbishop of Cambray concludes. We may
easily understand, who the Person is, whose Suffering he is so sorry to
occasion, and what the Subject of that Suffering is. All the sincere Friends of
M. de Cambray do truly suffer, to see him so strangely addicted to the Defense
of that Book; that he had rather separate himself from his Fellow-Bishops than
Condemn it, than to unite himself to them by a common Approbation of my Book,
to which he just now declares in this Memoire that the only Obstacle that
hinders him, was his being unwilling to disapprove the Books of M. Guyon: But
we leave these Reflections, and come to the Essential Facts contained in this
Memoire.

SECTION V.
Of the Matter of Fact contained in that Memoir.
1. LEt us begin at the last, whilst our Memory is yet fresh. There are two of
'em very important: The One of which is, That the Explications put on the
Margin of the thirty four Propositions were concealed from me, and showed only
to the Archbishop of Paris and M. Tronson. They begun then from that time to
Comment upon the Articles; they turned them, they explained them after his way:
He Concealed it from me; Why? because he knew in his Conscience that he
departed from our first Sentiments. He will say, that M. de Paris and M.
Tronson would have thought as I did: Who doubts of it? So they did; and M. de
Paris has well showed it: But then every one has his own Eyes, and his own
Conscience: One helps another: Why then did they separate me from those
Gentlemen? seeing that they and I drew up those Articles with a perfect
unanimity, as has been saip? Why did he hide himself but from him, to whom,
before his being Archbishop, and at the time of the Examination of the
Articles, he referred all things as to God, without any further discussion, as
a Child, as a Schoolboy? It is not for my advantage that I put him in mind of
those words; it is to show the laudible disposition of Humility and Obedience
God then inspired M. de Cambray with. What has since happened, that should
alter his Resolution? is it because I had Consecrated him? is it because he was
not satisfied with his having Chosen me for that Work, when at that time he was
more full than ever of the Sentiments God had inspired him with toward me,
though unworthy, and renewed his Protestation, that he would never entertain
other Opinions than mine, the Purity whereof he knew? It was, notwithstanding,
after having Signed the Articles, that he gives, unknown to me, a large
Explanation of 'em to the Archbishop of Paris and to M. Tronson. As for me, I
should be satisfied with it; but as for M. de Cambray, would he separate and
disunite Brethren and Unanimous Persons, that had labored and concerted things
so perfectly together, and as became Churchmen? If that was his Design, what
Conduct is this? if it was not, why does he hide himself from me, who breathed
out nothing but Unity and Concord? Was I become of a sudden morose, capricious
and unmanageable, it had been much better to have Communicated to me what he
was treating with the inseparable Fellows of my Labor, than a Letter to a
Carmelite, which related nothing to our purpose, seeing that was writ rather
with respect to his particular Instruction, than to the State of the Matter in
General. But, what? he would make show of some Remains of Confidence, for a Man
that deserved an entire Confidence; whilst the Essential Part is concealed from
him; and whilst M. de Cambray, in order to lessen the Number of the Witnesses,
of the Variations he was contriving, labors secretly to separate him from them
to whom God had joined him in this Work.

2. I have writ a Book, wherein I fully explain the whole System of the Inward
Ways: The Work is now ready: They need not be afraid that I shall therein
Contradict M. de Meaux: I Would rather choose to dye, than to present the Public
with so Scandalous a Scene. Without the Trouble of Dyeing, to avoid that
Scandal, he should have only Communicated that New Work to me, as all the
others had been Communicated, and as I had Communicated that which I was
Medirating. I take here Heaven and Earth to Witness, that I never knew, even
according to the Confession of M. de Cambray, what he was Contriving, and that
I have my Hands free from the Scandalous Divisions that are thereupon happened.

3. I shall not speak of M. de Meaux, but to praise him, and make use of his
Words.

Whom do they think to amuse by that ambiguous Discourse? to what purpose
serves wavering Praise in a Book of Doctrine? Is it not common, to use the
Words of an Author against himself, and to convince him? Thus M. de Cambray did
not give the World any Assurance, against the Dissentions they had reason to
fear from his Book, so that once more I am innocent.

4. I know perfectly well the Thoughts of M. de Meaux, and I may venture to
promise, that he will be satisfied when he shall see my Work published. What,
he knows my Thoughts so well, that he will not do so much as ask them? I will be
satisfied, He answers for it, so I see but his Book published. Did he think to
draw the Public after him, and by their Authority to drag me also along? to
make me believe, that in the Articles of Issy, I had thought of all that he
would do, or that though he might be assured, if I durst say so of my pacifick
Temper, he believed I would connive at every thing? did he not think that
Discretion, Patience, Compliance, especially in matters of the Faith, have
bounds beyond which they must not be pushed? There was a surer Method to
prevent so great a Mischief, which was to concert, and to endeavor to
understand one another, as I had given him Example. He shunned a way so fair
and so natural, and thought to draw the Public after him, but so far were they
from suffering themselves to be drawn away, that he saw an universal Uproar
against it, that the like will hardly be found exemplified. Thus God turns Men
out of the way, when they neglect the certain and simple means they have in
their Hands, and rely upon their Eloquence.

5. I don't presume to have this Work printed without consulting any body. He
promises to consult the Archbishop of Paris, and M. Tronson, and not to have
any thing printed but what they approve. I would have, says he, the same
confidence in M. de Meaux, were I not under the necessity of concealing from
him a Work, the printing whereof it is likely he would hinder out of respect to
his own: Why should I hinder it? Did he know in his Conscience, that by turning
the Articles as he has done, our Books would be contrary to one another; and
that he argued upon Principles opposite to those we had agreed upon? This is
what he should have prevented. It was perhaps, out of Jealousy of excelling
me, that I would hinder his Book from coming out? what Mark had I ever given of
so mean a Disposition? why would he suspect such a thing of his Fellow-Bishop,
his Friend, his Consecrator, who may well be accused of being too much
possessed with a good Opinion of his Compliance? If I had been as unreasonable
to show so shamful a Jealousy, and to wrangle vainly with M. de Cambray, M. de
Paris and M. de Tronson would have confounded me? and because it is likely I
should contradict them upon this Conjecture and Appearance, he really exposes
the Church to the greatest Scandal that could be raised.

6. But whence comes this change of Conduct? He to whom all was referred during
the Discussion of the Matter, he, whose only Judgment was expected, with a
Submission I did not abuse. In a word, he, to whom he was willing to refer all
things without Discussion and Reservation, is now the only Man from whom he
conceals himself: Why? no new thing is happened to me since M. de Cambray was
made Archbishop, I have given him a new Mark of Confidence in desiring his
Approbation, and in submitting my Book to his Examination; but it happened,
that he being raised to that sublime Dignity, would for some concealed ends,
change the Articles he had signed, and he must since then have forgot, what he
had promised to one of the Arbitrators he had chosen, and to whom he had showed
most Submission.

7. He was no less mistaken when he thought so, than when he thought he could
impose upon the Public; M. de Paris has refused him his Approbation, he has
given his Approbation O my Book. He attempted in vain, to disunite those whom
God, I dare say, had united by the common Faith, and by the Spirit of the
Tradition that we had sought for in the same Fountains. It is true, M. de
Tronson grants, that he did not oblige M. de Cambray to give me his
Approbation; but when all is done, all depends upon the Exposing of it to the
Public: M. de Cambray did so expose it, saying, he could not approve my Book
without betraying his Sentiments; to tell him, that he ought not to approve of
his having so exposed it, is the same thing as to Advise one not to sign the
Confession of Faith, so long as he is not persuaded of it. It is exactly what
M. Tronson had ordered to be told me: It is what he told me himself, he told me
besides by several Persons, and to my self before unexceptionable Witnesses,
that he believed M. de Cambray obliged in Conscience to condemn the Books of M.
Guyon, and disown his own Book; then all would have been at an end if he had
stood to his Advice: The Proof of this would he very easy, but it is better to
stick close only to what is decisive.

8. We may now see one of the Reasons, why M. de Cambray who still conferred
with M. de Paris and M. de Chartres, constantly refused to confer with me. It
appears already by that Writing, that even before the Publication of his Book,
all his Care was to divide us; but the Truth is stronger than the Wiles of Men,
and it is impossible for Man to disunite those that it unites.

9. I shall exhort the Mystic Divines that have erred, continues M. de
Cambray, to own their Errors; and they that have not explained themselves well,
to condemn without restriction their Expressions: Can any one go further to
repress Error? Who doubts but they may, and ought to go further? when he has
authorized an evil Book, a Book not only, suspected every where, but besides
condemned at Rome already and elsewhere: When he has allowed it to be esteemed
by illustrious Persons, and suffered her to make use of the Confidence they had
in him to authorize that Book; and moreover, though they could not justify it,
but by recourse to secret Explications, which they to whom it was recommended,
neither ought nor could divine: When he alleges for his chief Defense, that
the reason of his excusing that Book was, only because he explains it better
than it explained it self: Is that enough to exhort in general, Authors that
have failen, to acknowledge their Faults; and if they have spoken in an
ambiguous sense, to explain themselves? No, without doubt it is not enough:
That is a mere Illusion, it is certainly one, to propose to make a Woman write,
who never ought to have written, and who is condemned to perpetual Silence. He
ought to clear himself before the Public, and not to make use of a vain
pretext to excuse himself of it.

10. He is so deeply engaged in defending the Doctrine of that Woman, that he
not only owns her to be his Friend, but also that all his Correspondence and
Intimacy with her, was only grounded upon the Sprituality she professed.

11. He is, I say, to this very day, so wedded to M. Guyon's Book, though
condemned by so many Censures, that he affects to excuse the Errors thereof, as
a Mystic Language, and as Exagerations which he offers to maintain by those of
some Mystic Divines; Nay, even of some Fathers; without considering, that what
we reprove in that Woman, is not only some Exagerations which may happen
innocently, but also that she has sur passed in her Principles, all the
Mystical Divines true or false; nay, has outdone the Book of Molinus himself.

12. Yet once more, he remains so closely wedded to those ill Books, that he
had declared just now in his Memory, that he will continue silent upon that
Subject to the last. He is indeed silent to Extremity, seeing that to this very
day, notwithstanding the danger he is in for endeavoring to excuse those
Books, a clear Condemnation thereof cannot be extorted from him.

13. In order to conclude his Observations upon the plain matters of Fact, we
must further observe the prodigious difference betwixt what was really acted
between us on the signing the Articles, and what is related thereof by M. de
Cambray. If I say, that he offered to subscribe all that very moment, without
examining any thing out of an entire and perfect Obedience, I should only
repeat what is to be seen in all his Letters; it is he that taught us, it is he
that laid upon us the Condition of the Signature: I was a severe, morose Man,
and must be earnestly pressed by M. de Paris, then M. de Chaalons, in order to
bring me to the Sentiments of M. de Cambray. I never refused to be taught by
any of the lowest order of the Church; and much less by great Prelates: But as
for this time, and this Matter, I do repeat it, and God knows that there never
was the least Controversy between M. de Chaalons and me; we drew up the
Articles with one Voice, without any thing like a Dispute, and we unanimously
reject the subtle Interpretations of the Archbishop of Cambray, which tended to
render all our Resolutions useless.

14. As for the matter of Doctrine, says he, I did not cease to write, and to
hearken to those approved by the Church. To what purpose is this Discourse? the
Question was about understanding them right. What is it that M. de Cambray
submitted to our Judgment, if it was not the Interpretation he gave to them?
but now it is quite another thing: It is he that teaches us the Tradition, let
us give Glory to God if it be so; but was it we that desired Arbitrators of our
Doctrine? who desired only a Decision to submit our selves thereto, without
reserving to our selves the least Reply? who so earnestly pressed that they
would take us at our Word upon that Offer, and that they would try our
Compliance? what is there happened since the time that M. de Cambray wrote
those things, except that he being since made Archibishop of Cambray, would no
longer tie himself to the Doctrine he had voluntarily subscribed, that he would
now vary from it; and Lastly, that he has forgot the Submission that God had
then put into his Heart.

15. They that have seen our Discussion, must own, continues he, that M. de
Meaux, who at first would thunder against all, has been constrained to admit
one after another, things which he had a hundred times rejected as most
pernicious. It was I then that taught an evil Doctrine, it was I to whom they
must give Arbitrators; M. de Cambray who spoke only of Submission to our
Sentiments, really he that taught us: M. de Meaux was for thundering against
all, but if he was altogether of so thundering a Disposition, and so unjust in
the time of the Discussion, why would you expect his Decision to submit your
self to it? why would you desire it so earnestly? why would you hear in him,
not only a Doctor whom you were pleased to call one of the greatest, but God
himself? were these serious Words, or Flattery and Derision? were these the
Thunderclaps that you respected, and a Man who thundered right or wrong, that
you took for your Judge? and that you would hearken to as to God himself?

16. Let us read once more the same words, They that have seen our Discussion,
must own that M. de Meaux who was for thundering against all, was constrained,
one after another, to admit things that he rejected: But who was it that saw
that Discussion? who besides us was admitted there? by what Witnesses will he
prove, that I have so much varied? but if I was to acknowledge so many faults,
was M. de Cambray to acknowledge nothing? for me, I have produced his Letter,
and a Memoire written with his own hand. It must be confessed, that he acts two
very contrary Parts; let us read the Letters he wrote during the Discussion; he
desired only a Judgment, after which he offered a Retraction at first, and to
abandon all. Let us read the Memoire he makes after the same Discussion; M. de
Cambray has not only no Sentiment he was to forsake, but it was we that were to
forsake ours to embrace his, which we did nothing but thunder against, right or
wrong, without Judgment.

17. It was not, says he, the Person of M. Guyon, and her Writings, I was
concerned for; but for the Doctrine of the Saints, which is but too little
known to most part of the Scholasticks: We were those Scholasticks then, to
whom the Doctrine of the Saints was so unknown, and it was M. de Cambray that
taught us that Doctrine. During the Discussion he carried himself as a Scholar,
but since he is arrived to an higher Degree, he would propose new Rules by his
Explication, he repents that he had so submitted, and he speaks now as though he
was the Arbitrator of all.

18. We are not infallible; No, without doubt; but yet he should show us
wherein we had need of Instruction: What Errors did we teach? Did we except
against some part of the Doctrine of the Saints? Did we desire Doctors and
Arbitrators? Go, let us take heed not to glory, except it be in the Lord: Let
us not speak of the deference we owe to one another; a Disciple of Jesus Christ
reckons it his glory to learn every day, and that too of all Men: But yet we
must not forget the part that we acted, M. de Chaalon, M. de Tronson, and I:
Without doubt they look upon us as Men of sound and incorrupt Doctrine, to
whom they would referr all upon the Mysteries of Prayer and Pure Love, that is
to say, upon most Essential Points of Faith. M. de Cambray himself proposed us,
received us, and looked upon us as such, and now all of a sudden we are no more
but a sort of Doctors to whom, as well as to the most part of the Scholasticks,
the Doctrine of the Saints is utterly unknown.

19. But whilst M. de Cambray ascribes to himself so much Authority and Light,
God permits that he should discover to us his Changeableness. Now he boasts
only of the School, and accuses us as being Opposers of the Scholastic
Doctors, but then his Business was only to teach us the Doctrine of the Saints
unknown, yea, most unknown, not to some, or to a small Number, but to most of
the Doctors of the School.

20. It is not the Person of M. Guyon and her Writings I was concerned for:
What was the thing then in Question at that time? Who was it that proposed the
Question? Why were Arbitrators chosen and desired? Arbitrators to whom all was
submitted; was it not to Judge of the Prayer, and of the Books of M. Guyon?
will he always forget and loose sight of the express Subject of the Dispute? M.
de Cambray had not then published any thing upon that Matter: It was not he
that was accused, it was M. Guyon and her Books: Why did he meddle so far in
that Business? who called him thereunto, if not his own Conscience, by which he
knew, that if we Condemned the Books of Madam Guyon, which he had so much
recommended, he would be thereby Condemned himself? Why did he Compose so many
Writings? was it to accuse or excuse and defend those Books? that must then
have been our Question; and yet if we believe M. de Cambray, this was not the
Matter he was concerned for; it was for the Doctrine of the Saints. What; For
the Doctrine of the Saints in general, or in relation to those Books that were
so mightily accused? He would then teach us, that those Books were conformable
to the Doctrine of the Saints, and that if they were accused, it was because
the Doctors of the School, for the most part, were ignorant of that Doctrine
which Madam Guyon came to teach them?

21. Let us tell the truth, as it results from the Matters of Fact, and from
the Writings just now mentioned: Whilst she wrote before as the Party accused,
the Abbot de Fenelon wrote also as much as she, either as her Advocate or
Interpreter: However to hinder her Condemnation, the Matter in Question was not
the Person who always spoke as having submitted, it was the Books and the
Doctrine he had a mind to defend, and he had no other Reason or Title for
entering upon that Cause: What he had begun when only M. de Fenelon, he
continued it when made Arch bishop of Cambray; it is under this Title that he
subscribed the thirty four Propositions: He persisted to submit all to the
Arbitrators he had Chosen, and to whom he sent all his Writings: He received
that Motion as a Motion from God, which he entertained even to the time of his
Consecration: If he afterward forgets all, what have we to say to it, but that
he dissembled? or that being advanced as high as he could be, he had changed
his Designs, and taken another Method.

22. He makes wonderful Arguments upon his Conduct: Is it that I was meek and
fearful when I signed the thirty four Propositions? they may judge of that by
my present Resolution: Is it that I have refused out of Self-conceit, and a
Factious Spirit to approve the Book of M. de Meaux? they may judge of that by
my readiness to Sign the thirty four Propositions. To what purpose are his
Arguments, when Matters of Fact speak? Those Matters of Fact show a Rule, and a
more simple and natural way to judge of his Change of Conduct: It is in a word
to be Archbishop or not; to observe Measures before his being made so, and to
keep none when the Business is consummated.

23. He Values himself much upon Readiness to suffer M. Guyon to be condemned,
confined, fined, and laden with Reproaches, without saying so much as one word
to justify her, to excuse her, or to sweeten her Condition. We must not yet
argue too much on this Point: It is naturally and plainly thus, that M. Guyon,
by her ill Doctrine, and her rash Conduct, for it was not then thoroughly dived
into, was become so ridiculous and odious, that the Prudence and Precaution of
the Abbot de Fenelon, even since he was made Archbishop of Cambray, did not
permit him to expose himself in vain: What, do I say to expose himself? to lose
his good Name utterly by upholding her, and that there was no other way for one
that would defend her, but to take indirect Methods.

24. It is what appears to us in all his Writings, that he had secretly
undertook to defend her: Thus that he defends her to this very day, in
maintaining the Book of the Maxims of the Saints: He lays down now, as he did
then, all the Principles he can to uphold her: If, by his Knowledge he covers
her Doctrine, if he mittigates it in some places, that way of Teaching it is so
much the more dangerous. In fine, we could not excuse him then but by his
extreme Submission, the Proof whereof we have been constrained to give by his
own Letters, and we had not lost those Hopes of him but by the Publication of
his Book, of which we must now speak.

SECTION VI.
Of the History of the Book.
1. THat Book that ought to have been so well Concerted with my Lord of Paris
and M. Tronson: (As for me, I was one to whom he would no more hearken:) That
Book, I say, wherein he had engaged himself, as has been said, not to put any
thing but what was Corrected, and approved by them, appeared at last on a
sudden in February, 1697. without the least Mark of any such Approbation. The
Archbishop of Paris has explained himself to the Archbishop of Cambray, how
that Book appeared against his Advice, and against the formal Word M. de
Cambray had given him. As for me, who restrict my self wholly to what is
public on that Head, I shall only Observe, that not to find the Archbishop of
Paris's Approbation at the Head of that Book, is the same in my Opinion as the
Refusal of it, seeing, that according to the Obligations M. de Cambray had
taken upon him, he ought to have demanded it: Let us not then any more speak of
mine, which was no less necessary, seeing I was one of the two Prelates whose
Principles he promised to explain. We must not forget that Authentic Promise
in the Advertisement of M. de Cambray. There was published a Book, that was to
decide such Nice Matters, to distinguish so exactly betwixt the true and the
false; to take away all Equivocations, and to reduce the Expressions to the
utmost rigor of the Theological Language, and by that means to serve as a Rule
to all Spirituality. We saw, I say, that Book appear without any Approbation,
not so much as of those from whom it was most Necessary, and whose Approbation
he had promised to take.

2. It is in vain to Answer, that M. de Cambray had, it is true, promised to
speak nothing but what M. de Paris should approve of, but not to take his
Approbation in Writing, for it is not the Custom to prove an Approbation by a
Chimerical Matter of Fact: It must be showed in Writing, and Signed, especially
when he of whom he takes it, is concerned in the Case, as the Archbishop of
Paris was manifestly so in the New Book, seeing he promised in the Preface of
his Book that he would explain his Doctrine.

3. So M. de Cambray ventured at and: He, that chose rather to dye, than to
present the Public with so scandalous a Scene as to contradict me, exposes
himself likewise to contradict the Archbishop of Paris, and to set the whole
Church in a Combustion. He had rather indeed expose himself, and did it
accordingly, than with his Friends, with his Fellow-Bishops, not to say with
them he had Chosen for Arbitrators of his Doctrine, whilst on our part we
offered to Concert all things with him, and did so accordingly, and put our
Compositions into his Hands. He has broke all Union, out of an eager desire to
give Laws to the Church, and to furnish Excuse to M. Guyon; nor can he endure
to be told, that he alone is the Cause of Division among the Bishops, and of
the Scandal of Christendom.

4. He would have it forgot, how speedy and universal an Opposition was made to
his Book: The Town, the Court, the Sorbonne, the Monasteries, the Learned, the
Ignorant, Men, Women, yea, all Orders without exception showed their
Indignation, not against the Proceedings, for they were known but to few, and
indeed to no body thoroughly; but against the boldness of such an ambitious
decision, against the refinedness of the Expressions, the strangeness,
unprofitableness, and the ambiguity of that unheard of Doctrine: It was then
that the Public Noise conveyed to the Sacred Ears of the King what he had so
carefully concealed: He heard it from an hundred Persons, that M. Guyon had met
with a Protector in his Court, in his Family, one that waited upon the Princes
his Children: And with what Displeasure, we may judge by the Piety and the
Prudence of that great Prince. We were the last that spoke of it, every body
knows the just Reproaches we underwent from the Mouth of so good a Master, for
having concealed from him what we knew; with which you may be sure he charged
our Consciences: Yet M. de Cambray, in such a general dissatisfaction only
complained of us; and when we were constrained to excuse our selves for having
served him too much, and that we must lastly beg Pardon for our Silence that
had saved him, he made and contrived the most strange Accusations that could be
against us.

5. Did I alone raise up the Public? what! my Cabal? my Emissaries? shall I
dare to say so? I can say it with Confidence and before the Sun; the most
simple of all Men, I would say the most incapable of all Cunning and of all
Dissimulation, as one who never found Credit, but because I have always walked
so as to obtain common Credit: All of a sudden I have conceived the bold Design
of ruining by my Credit alone the Archbishop of Cambray, whom until then, I
had always been willing to save at my own Peril: But that is nothing, I alone
have by imperceptible springs, from a Corner of my Closet, amongst my Papers
and my Books, stirred up the whole Court, all Paris, all Europe, and Rome it
self, where the universal Astonishment, not to say more; was carried as fast as
the Public News could convey it: What the most credited, and most absolute
Potentates could not perform, and care not undertake; viz. to make Men concur,
as it were in an instant, in the same thoughts, I alone have done it without
stiring from my Closet.

6. Yet I wrote nothing; my Book that was finishing, and printing when that of
M. de Cambray appeared, stayed three Weeks longer in the Press; and when I
published it, they sound therein it is true, Principles contrary to those of the
Maxims of the Saints; (it could not be otherwise, seeing we took such different
ways; and that I designed only to establish the Articles that M. de Cambray had
a Mind to elude) but not one Word against that Prelate.

7. I shall say nothing of my Book, but one well known and certain Matter of
Fact: It passed without any seeming Contradiction, I had no Advantage of it, I
therein taught the Doctrine of the Catholic Church; the Approbation of M. de
Paris, and that of M. de Cambray, did add thereunto that Authority which the
Holy Concurrence of Bishops gives naturally in Matters of Faith. The Pope
himself did me the Honor to send me a Letter upon the Book I had laid at his
Sacred Feet, and was pleased to express himself in brief, that my Volume had
much increased the good Will he entertained for me: That brief Letter is
published in my Second Edition. It appears also in the Letter to M. de Cambray,
whether there be a Word of his Book: That difference regards not my Person: It
is an Advantage from the Doctrine I taught, which is known all over the Earth,
and which is authorized and always favored by the Chair of St. Peter.

8. Affairs seemed afterward to be somewhat embroiled. It is the ordinary
Conduct of God against Errors. There happens at the very first Appearance of
'em an illustrious Declaration of the Faith. It is as the first stroke of the
Ancient Tradition, that repulses the Novelties they design to introduce: A
little afterward a second Time followed, which I call the time of Temptation;
the Cabals, the Factions began to stir, Passion and Interest divides the World:
Great Bodies, great Potentates stir themselves, Eloquence dazzles the simple,
the Dialecticks lay Snares for them, Extravagant Metaphy sicks carries the
Minds of Men into unknown Countries, many know no more what to believe, and
hold all in Indifference, without Understanding or Distinction, they embrace
their Party merely out of Humor. There Is the Times I call Times of Temptation,
if they will, Times of Darkness; we must wait in Faith for the last Time, when
Truth shall triumph, and get the victory.

9. The first thing that appeared upon opening the Book of M. de Cambray, was a
manifest affectation to excuse the Mysticks newly condemned, by cutting them
off once, twice and thrice, from the List of the false Spiritualists. Here we
may discover him that had promised to keep silence to the last upon the Account
of M. Guyon. We have showed in another place, that the short Method of that
Woman was nothing else but a more express Explication of Molinos's Guide, and
especially as to indifference about Salvation, and that they had besides
affected to transcribe into that small Book, the same Passages Molinos relyes
upon in his Guide; among others a Letter of Father Falconi, which has been
censured at Rome. So that to save Madam Guyon, they must save Molinos; and for
this reason M. de Cambray spared him in the Maxims of the Saints. It is true,
that he durst not forbear condemning expressly, that Heresrarcha in his Letter
to the Pope. But he spoke therein only of 68 Propositions of that Wretch, and
affected to keep silence as to the Guide, which is the Original of the New
Quietism, and of the short Method. As for this last Book, very far from
condemning it, he excused it in the same Letter, by comprising his Author among
the Mysticks; Who, says he, carrying the Mystery of the Faith in a pure
Conscience, had favored the Error by an excess of affectionate Piety, for want
of precaution, the choice of terms, and through a pardonable Ignorance of the
Principles of the Divinity. He adds, that this was the Subject of the Zeal of
some Bishops, and of the 34 Propositions; although those Propositions and
Censures had no regard to any, but to M. Guyon and Molinos. There Is the
pretended Exagerations, the pretended Equivocations, and in one Word, the
pretended Mystical Language, which is plainly to be seen he prepared as a
Refuge to that Woman; and he presented that Excuse to the Pope himself, to draw
his Advantages from it, if he would have received it.

10. Here we may see the same Spirit of Indulgence for the short Method, and M.
Guyon's other Books, when speaking of the Censures of some Bishops against
certain little Books, of which he durst not hold his Peace altogether before
the Pope, he reduces the same Censures to some places, which taken in the sense
that naturally offers at first, deserve to be condemned. He would seem thereby
to condemn them, if we remembered not the particular sense he would have to be
found in the same Books, notwithstanding their proper Words, and judges them to
be condemnable only in a rigorous sense, which he assures us never came into
the Mind of their Author; by which it is but too plain, he reserved to himself
the Liberty of excusing them, by this particular sense he pretends to find in
the Book, notwithstanding the Words of the Book it self.

11. In the mean while, how little soever he may have said of it, he is so
afraid we should believe that he has passed a Sentence of Condemnation upon
the Books of M. Guyon, by so speaking in his Letter to the Pope of the Bishops
that have censured her, that he explains it in his Answer to the Declaration;
where he says, that he does not rely at all upon their Censures, wherein he
never had any part neither directly nor indirectly: Words chosen on purpose, to
show that he was very far from approving them.

12. What he answers upon the affected Omission of Molinos, and of M. Guyon, is
no less estrange; Do they pretend, says he, seriously, that I would defend or
excuse Molinos, when in all my Books I detest all the Errors of the 68
Propositions, that occasioned him to be condemned? Yes without doubt, they
seriously pretend it, seeing that these very Words confirm the perpetual
affectation of suppressing the Guide of that Author, and of touching only upon
the 68 Propositions, as if they were the only Subject of the Condemnation of
the Holy See, without comprizing that Book therein.

13. As for the person, adds he, whose Books the Prelates have censured, I have
already given an Account to the Pope my Superior, of what I thought thereupon.
Who does not see, that this is to shift off the essential point? is it in vain
that St. Peter had said, That we must be ready to give an Account of our Faith,
not only to a Superior, but to all those that desire it? What would it have
been for M. de Cambray, to explain himself to the whole Church, without
affecting to spare and uphold M. Guyon? But yet let us see, what Account he has
given to the Pope, of his Sentiments upon the Books of that Woman. I do not
repeat it, says he, my Letter being made public. There is no Letter public,
but that wherein he says to the Pope, That there are some certain small Books
censured by the Bishops, some places whereof, in the sense that naturally
offered, were condemnable. You see all the Account he gives to the Pope of
those Books that are pernicious throughout, and not to be countenanced in any
sense, because what is read in them is pernicious, and what he conjectures is
to be found in them, is forced and not sufficient.

14. One may also observe here his affectation of naming to the Pope only
Molinos, and not M. Guyon. It is true, he has set down in the Margin of the
Letter to the Pope the short Method, etc. with the Explication of the Song of
Songs. But after the Liberty M. de Cambray has taken, to say, that they have
inserted what they would in his Text, who shall hinder him from disowning a
Marginal Note, the Text whereof is insignificant? and whatsoever happens, he
will come off with condemning some places only in those Books, whilst he spares
the bottom, which is wholly corrupted; and besides, he condemning them only in
that pretended severe sense, for which he is surety that it never came into the
Author's Mind.

15. He does not satisfy the public any thing more in adding these Words: I
shall do on this point as on all others, what the Pope will judge fit; for what
was he to expect since the Centure of Rome in the Year 1689. do we not see that
M. de Cambray, who has so long after defended that Book, designs still to shift
off the Condemnation thereof by deferring it? So that Letter which he has made
public, does visibly say nothing at all; therefore M. de Cambray would fain
have us to believe, that he has written a more secret and express Letter to the
Pope: It is for this reason that in the second Edition of his Answer, he has
suppressed these Words, My Letter is made public, and he would have recalled the
Edition wherein they were, because we saw there very plainly, that as to the
Books of M. Guyon, he was merely for shifting off, and never for explaining
himself.

16. He does more than keep silence. M. de Paris has demonstrated that his Book
of the Maxims is only a faint Mittigation, a dexterous and artificial
Justification of the Books of M. Guyon: M. de Cambray has only covered over
with fine Colors the Exclusion of the Hope, and of the Desire of Salvation,
with that of Jesus Christ, and of the Divine Persons in pure Contemplation, and
all the other Excesses of that Woman: It is visibly, her interior Life, that
this Prelate designed to describe, and that he would palliate her manifest
Failings in his 39 Articles, it is what is found in her Life, where she speaks
of her self in this manner; Souls of inferior degrees will often appear more
perfect: Then they find themselves soremote from the rest of Men, and they
think so differently from 'em, that their Neighbor becomes insupportable.
Here Is a new Wonder, to find themselves so much above other Men, that the
Eminency of Perfection, which induces us to look upon our Neighbors with the
most tender Condescension, should hinder us from enduring them: But the Wonder
of Wonders is this, We feel, adds he, in the new Life, that We cover the
exterior part by apparent Weaknesses: So that among the Failings which she can
neither overcome nor cover, she flatters by those haughty Excuses the hidden
Complaisance, that makes her to turn her Weakness into Pride, and by the same
means M. de Cambray entertains the Admiration of the just that know her.

17. What signifies these fine Discourses in the Maxims of the Saints, upon
Souls that pretend to be perfect: They speak of themselves out of pure
Obedience, simply well or ill, as they would speak of another: Who does not
see, that they were designed as Excuses for the Enormous Boastings of a Woman,
that gave out she was endued with a Prophetic and Apostolic Spirit, with
Power to bind and unbind, so full of Grace as to overflow, and with a
perfection so eminent, that she could not endure the rest of Men? when such
Excesses discover themselves, the Excuse is ready for it in the Book of M. de
Cambray: M. Guyon spoke of her self, as she would have spoke of another; she
spoke out of Obedience to Father Lacombe her Director, to whom she addresses
her Life, wherein are found all those things which have been related.

18. Father Lacombe was he that was given her in a particular and wonderful
manner; if he was become her spiritual Father, she had first been his Mother;
it was he alone to whom she communicated Grace, though afar off; with all the
tenderness that she represents in her Life to that degree as to feel her self
constrained that it might evaporate, to tell him sometimes, O my Son, you are
my beloved Son, in whom alone I am well pleased: God had notwithstanding given
her in her Prison, and as the Fruit of her Labors, another Man far more
intimate than Father Lacombe; and how great soever her Union might be with that
Father, that she was to have with the latter was quite another thing. As to
that, I will not conjecture any thing, I relate here only that of her Life, to
show that the false Mystery is continued, and that we are not come to the end
of the Delusions that we are to expect from that Woman.

19. In the mean while that Father Lacombe is the Author of the Analysis
condemned at Rome, and since by several Bishops. The Circumstances of his
Intimacy with that Woman have been known of the late Bishop of Geneva, of holy
Memory, John d' Aranthon: And the History thereof is become public in the Life
of that holy Bishop, which the Learned and pious general of the Carthusians has
published. The time is come, when the pleasure of God is, that this Union
should be entirely discovered: I shall say nothing more of it, but shall
content my self to describe the Person by whose Order M. Guyon wrote her Life.

20. In every page of that Life she gives way to her Rapture, so far as to say,
O let me hear no more of Humility! The Virtues are no longer for me! No, my
God, let there be no more for me neither Virtue, nor Perfection, nor Holiness!
And every where in her Life she says, Virtuous Manners are imperfect Manners:
The Virtue Humility is a feigned Virtue, or at least affected and forced: It is
there also that we find the Source of the New Language; where it is mentioned,
that they will have no more Virtue as Virtue. M. de Cambray has adopted those
words: Thence comes whatsoever we find in his Writings to lessen the Esteem of
Virtue, and thence comes in the last place his perpetual forcing so many
passages of St. Francis de Sales, which are to be understood more simply as
that Saint did.

21. We had said nothing like this in our Articles: Such Explications as are
added in Favor of M. Guyon are not a more large explication, as M. de Cambray
promised; but an evident Depravation of our Sentiments and Principles. In the
as Article we spoke all upon the Conditions and Suppositions impossible: This
was sufficient to verify what had been said of it by St. Chrysostom and other
Saints, who would never introduce those Suppositions, but with the Expression
of an impossible Case. But what was sufficient for the Saints, was not
sufficient to excuse M. Guyon: So that to Contemn her, they were fain to invent
the absolute Sacrifice never heard of before, and all the Circumstances that
have been often remarkt, all things added to our Articles, and unknown to all
Authors, except to Molinos and M. Guyon.

22. To speak a word of it by the by, and to bring the Reader a little back
again to the Matter of Fact, was that an Expliction of our Principles, or his
acquiescing to his just Condemnation, which one of our Articles has expressly
condemned, that we must never suffer troubled Souls to acquiesee in their
Despair, and apparent Damnation: On the contrary, M. de Cambray permits such as
acquiescence by a Director; and to render it more voluntary, to ascribe it to
the highest part of the Soul, he calls it a Sacrifice, and an absolute
Sacrifice. We said in the same Article, that we must with S. Francis de Sales
assure those Souls, that God will not forsake them: But far from approving that
Article, M. de Cambray confutes it expressly, when he says that our Business is
not, neither to argue with those Souls that are incapable of all reasoning, nor
to represent unto them the Goodness of God in general. We must then deprive of
Comfort those Souls we suppose to be holy, and bereave them with their Reason
of the reasonable Service St. Paul teaches: We must deliver them up to their
Cruel Thoughts, and to speak it in one word, to their Despair; was this to
explain or to deprave our Principles? Did we say any thing like this in our
Articles?

SECT. VII.
On the Archbishop of Cambray's Explications, and the Necessity of our
Declaration.
1. IF we must now come to the Explications of M. de Cambray, three Things are
to be Observed in the Matter of Fact: The first is, that they were Explications
we never heard one Word of, and that we were to own them as contained in the
Articles of Issy, seeing it was those Articles which my Lord of Cambray would
have had explained: The second was, that he changed them every day, so that
they are not yet finished: And the third was, that they did visibly contain new
Errors.

2. What had we to do with his Natural Love, which never came into our Mind?
and suppose we had admitted it, did it avail any thing toward solving the
Difficulties? the chief of all was the acquiescing to his just Condemnation on
the part of God: The Archbishop of Paris has lately demonstrated, that the
acquiescing to the Loss of that natural Love, is so far from acquiescing to
one's own Condemnation on the part of God, that it is on the contrary a
receiving of Grace from it, seeing according to the Author himself, this is one
of the 'greatest, to be deprived of a Love which they account the sole Obstacle
to perfection? what could we have said to an Argument so clear? and was not
this sufficient to hinder us from receiving Explications, which afford no help
to the Book they would have us to excuse.

3. On the other hand, that Explication is so bad, that M. de Cambray has
lately changed it, in the very last Letter he addressed to me. In that last
Letter, to acquiesce in one's own Condemnation, is no more to acquiesce in the
Loss of Natural Love, as hitherto he would have us to understand it: To
acquiesce in his just condemnation, is (for a Sinner) to acknowledge that he
deserves Eternal Punishment: So the Natural Love is useless to that act; it is
not out of a Natural Love that a Sinner owns himself to deserve Eternal
Punishment. But this new Answer is not better than the rest, and the
Archbishop of Cambray will find himself constrained to forsake it, as soon as
he considers this short Reflection, It is not true, that to acknowledge ones
self to deserve Eternal Punishment, is to acquiesce in his just Condemnation:
For it is so far from acquiescing therein, which happens to Men in Despair, that
we beg Pardon of the just Judge: We beseech him to change his Justice into
Mercy, and not to deal with us according to our deserts, but to save us through
Grace in the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord; so far are they from Consenting by
that Act to their own Condemnation, that it is on the contrary to oppose his
Mercy thereunto, which hinders the Effect thereof.

4. So, (and this is the Second Remark) those Explications changed every day:
That which M. de Cambray seems to adhere to, is that of Natural Love, and of
the terms of Motive, to which, as he grants, he now gives a new Sense different
from that of the School. I do not touch upon that Matter, whereof the Bishop of
Chartres, by whom the Explications have been transmitted to us, will say what,
according to his Prudence, he thinks fit: But I shall only take Notice of those
public Matters of Fact. The Letter to the Pope appeared a few Months after the
Book, in order to soften the Expressions thereof; without mentioning therein
either a Natural Love, or the New Sense of Motives. Soon after there came into
our Hands by M. de Chartres, another Explication, wherein that Prelate can
testify, no mention was made of Natural Love, and he gave Motive a Sense
therein, quite contrary to that which has been proposed since. At last, the
Natural Love which we had not yet heard of, is come out, and this is that same
Explication which was set forth in the Pastoral Instruction.

5. To draw all the Dispute on that Point, M. de Cambray published at Rome, and
other places where he had a mind, the Latin Version of his Book. He altered it
after a strange manner in the translating it: For almost in every place where,
in the Book, the word proper Interest, Commodum proprium, is found, the
Translator has inserted the word desire, and mercenary appetite, appetitionis
mercenariae. But our own Interest is not a desire: Our own Interest is
manifestly an Object without, and not an Affection within, nor an inward
Principle of action: All the Book is therefore altered by this Change. It is a
vain Excuse for M. de Cambray to say, that he thus understood it, seeing that
in a Version one must simply translate the words, and not insert any gloss.

6. He has also inserted every where the term of mercenary, without ever having
defined it, and that he might have room to insinuate in the Book whatsoever he
had a mind to, by a double Sense that reigns all over it.

7. In the same Latin Version the word motive is translated by that of inward
affection; appetitus interior; against the natural signification of that word,
which is that we ought to follow in a faithful Translation. It was nevertheless
this Version that the Archbishop of Cambray besought the Pope he would be
pleased to advert to in order to judge of his Book: So that he would be judged
upon a false Translation. He added thereto Latin Notes, which did no less
disagree from his Book, and this he proposed, to shift off the Examination of
the French Book, by Explications not only added to his Book, but also
disagreeing from it.

8. They that have neither seen that Version nor those Notes, may judge of it
by his Pastoral Instruction. It has been showed by so demonstrative Proofs, how
little that Instruction is conformable with the Book, that there is none but M.
de Cambray who dares deny it: So much are his Explications visibly forced. But
that which proves the uncertainty of those Explications is this, that their
Author seems to be so little satisfied with it himself, that he cannot cease to
give New Senses to his Pastoral Instruction. He had observed therein, as has
been demonstrated in my Preface, That his Natural Love was not confined to
himself, but that it tended to God as to the Supreme Good: That also those who
are imperfect, who acted likewise by that Love, desired the same Objects, and
that the difference was not on the part of the Object, but on the part of the
Affection wherewith the Will desires it: But he perceived the Inconvenience of
that Doctrine, and in the Letters he directed to me, he will not there have it,
that his Natural Love is a Natural Love of God in it self, nor any thing else
but the Natural Love of a Created Gift, which is the formal blessedness.

9. But in that he mistakes still; we must not believe that because it is a
Created Gift, the formal Blessedness, that is to say, the enjoying of God can
be desired naturally, because that Created Gift is supernatural, and the Love
of it is inspired by Grace only, as the Love of God; so that the Reason that
obliged him to correct himself, does as strongly militate against his
Correction as against his first Discourse.

10. I bring only this Example, though there are a great many others of that
Nature; because it is sufficient to let us see by a sensible Proof, that to
engage in the Explications of M. de Cambray, was to enter into endless Turnings
and Windings, seeing he adds some new Strokes to them continually.

11. Here Is nevertheless another Proof of it, the Archbishop of Cambray, has
published at Rome, two Editions of his Answer to the Declaration of three
Bishops: The one in 1697. without any Name either of Printer or of Town: The
other is in School. at Bussels, by Eugen Henry Frix. Wherein the Additions or
Restrictions are enough to fill 5 or 6 Pages, and when he presented it at Rome,
he desired to have the other again, though given by his Order; which shows that
he would have covered his Changeableness; and yet he wonders, that we should
not join with him in such Variable Explications.

12. One weighty Reason that shows the Inconvenience of joining with them is,
that those Explications are oftentimes new Errors. I shall bring only one
Example, but a very clear one, M. de Cambray does not know how to distinguish
his Love of the fourth degree from the fifth, nor how to preserve to this last
the Pre-eminence he would give it, seeing that the fourth Love as well as the
fifth, Seeks God for the Love of himself, and prefers him to every thing
without Exception; carrying also the Perfection and the Purity so far, as Not
to seek its own Happiness, but with relation to God; which is so pure, as it is
impossible for one to go beyond it, or to show less regard for our own Interest.

13. I speak of these things only in short, because they are enough explained
elsewhere, and cannot be always repeated. M. de Cambray being perplexed with
this Remark, which overthrows his whole System, answers that the Love of the
fourth degree, though it be justifying, (observe that Word) refers truly all
things unto God, but habitually and not actually, as the fifth; as, says he,
the Act of Venial Sin is referred unto God, according to St. Thomas, habitually
and not actually.

14. This Answer is hitherto a stranger to the Schools, and contains two
Evident Errors: The first is, that he makes justifying Love relate unto God, in
the same manner as the Act of the Venial Sin does: The second is, to make the
Act of Venial Sin it self habitually relate unto God, which no Body ever did
before M. de Cambray.

15. The Error is enormous; for if the Act of Venial Sin is habitually referred
unto God, it follows thence, that one may commit it for the sake of God, which
takes away all the Malice of Venial Sin. One may then well say with St. Thomas,
that Venial Sin hinders not, neither the Man nor the Humane Act indefinitely,
from being referred unto God as the last End; but that the Act it self of
Venial Sin, wherein is found that which we call Disorder, Inordinatio, should
be referred habitually unto God, it is against the Nature of all Sin, and by
consequence of Venial Sin.

16. The Rule which M. de Cambray gives here is no less Erroneous: The Rule is,
that Acts which have no relation at all to the last End, and which are not
referred unto God, at least habitually, are mortal Sins; but thence it follows
in the first Place, that all Sins are mortal, seeing that no sin can in any
ways be referred unto God: And Secondly, As M. de Paris has observed it, that
all the Acts of the Pagans are mortal sins, seeing that which hinders the
Venial Sin from breaking in the just, that commits it, the Relation at least
habitual unto God, is the Habit of Charity abiding in their Soul: Whence by a
contrary Reason it follows, that a Pagan not having in him such a Principle of
Habitual Charity, nor any thing that unites him to God, by the Rule of M. de
Cambray, though he may do never so much, he always sins mortally.

17. So the New Explications being sideways, go off more and more from the
Truth; to enter into them was to throw one's self into a Labyrinth of Errors,
which is not yet finished. The Author writes no Books without producing some
Novelty against sound Divinity: He seemed to have rejected the involuntary he
had admitted, in the Trouble of the Holy Soul of Jesus Christ; but it is
clearer than the day, that in his last Writings he re-establishes that impious
Doctrine: I have made a Demonstration of it, which I don't repeat; that is to
say, he walks without Rule and Principle, according as his present Occasions
push him.

18. It is evident by such Matters of Fact as these, that we could not receive
his Explications: It is therefore likewise evident, that we could not but
reject the Book, nor be hindered from disowning publicly the Author, who had
publicly ascribed to us the Doctrine of it. For what could we do, or what
could M. de Cambray advise us? to hold our Peace it is to consent: It is
failing in an essential part of the Episcopal Function, all the Grace whereof
consists in speaking the Truth: It is so opposing our selves to the Sentence of
Pope St. Hosmidas, Ipse impellet in Errorem qui non instruit ignorantes: He
drives the Simple into Error, who does not Instruct them: Especially in such a
Case wherein you are appealed to as a Witness, and your Name made use of to
deceive them. What then shall we speak? it is what we have done with all
simplicity in our Declaration. But, say they, it is an anticipated Censure: Not
at all; it is a Necessary Declaration of our Sentiments, when we are forced to
speak them out. What obliged M. de Cambray to explain our Articles without our
Consent? to Cite us in our own Names, and lastly to make us believe, that his
Book, where we found so many Errors, was but a more large Explication of our
own Doctrine? is he allowed to undertake whatever he pleases, and must we keep
silent, though he goes on against us? These are not mere Pretexts, they are
Reasons clearer than the Sun. M. de Cambray is no less unjust, when he says,
that we have denounced him: Sincerity would oblige him to acknowledge, that he
denounced himself by his Letter to the Pope, when he desires him to judge of
his Book: No Body had accused him, it is he who did himself the Honor to bring
the Business before the Pope. We approved of his Submission, but we could not
dissemble that it was without consenting to his Doctrine.

19. Why, says he, did you send your Declaration to Rome? The answer is ready
in every one's Mind. It is because his Book had been sent thither, that he
himself had sent it thither, and that he wrote to the Pope, that this Book
contained no other thing but our Doctrine: Does Sincerity allow any Man to
dissemble in things so clear? but the thing is, he had a mind to complain, though
he had no reason for it.

20. These Complaints are confuted by one word only; they tend only to this, to
say that we had a mind to ruin M. de Cambray: God knows the contrary. But
without calling so great a Witness, the thing speaks of of it self. Before his
Book appeared, we concealed his Errors, so far as to endure the Reproaches you
have heard of already: When the Books appeared, he had already ruined himself
enough: If we have been willing to ruin him, he concurred with us, by raising
up all the World against him by his ambitious Decisions, and by filling his
Book with Errors so palpable, and with so many unexcusable Excesses.

21. When he upbraids us, and me in particular, as if he had proposed it to us,
that we should by a common Letter beseech the Pope, to order our Question to be
judged without Noise by his Divines, and in the mean time to keep silence:
First, he tells a thing of which I never heard one Word, and so false that he
himself suppresses the chief Circumstances, as has been seen from the beginning
of this Relation. It is besides true, that the Proposal was impracticable: What
he had imputed to us, as to his Doctrine, was made public in his Advertisement
in the Book of the Maxims of the Saints. He had reiterated it without asking
our Consent, as he owns it, and he repeated therein once or twice, that his
Doctrine was conformable to ours: Therefore our Conscience obliged us to disown
it as publicly, as we had been appealed to as Witnesses of it. In the third
place we made no question of the Falsehood of his Doctrine: We held it
determinately to be evil, and not to be countenanced: This was not a particular
Affair between M. de Cambray and us: It was the Cause of the Truth, and the
Concern of the Church, which we could not take upon our selves alone, nor treat
it as a private Quarrel, which M. de Cambray would have been at. Then suppose
he persisted invincibly, as he has done to impu^e unto us his Thoughts, and
would never retract it. We should not save our selves, but by declaring our
Sentiments to all the World. This Declaration remained naturally submitted to
the Pope, as all Particulars in matters of Faith do; and presenting it to him
was as much as to submit it to him, but in the mean time we discharged our
Conscience, and as much as we could, we rejected the Errors which our Silence
might have confirmed.

SECTION VIII.
Upon Gentle Methods and Amicable Conferences.
IF it be said that we should have tried all ways of Mildness, before we had
come to a Solemn Declaration; this we did also. The Archbishop of Paris has
demonstrated it so clearly for himself, and for us, that I should have nothing
to add upon that Fact, were it not for the particular Accusations whereby they
attack me.

2. But if any one has a Mind to be satisfied by his own Eyes, as to the
fairness of my Conduct; let him but read the Writing I addressed to M. de
Cambray, before the sending of our Declaration. If the Reader thinks it tedious
to be referred to other Writings, and would find all in this; here is in short
what I said: That after so many Writings, we must take a shorter way, and where
also we may explain our selves more precisely, which is a Conference Viva Voce;
that this way was always used, and even by the Apostles, as the most
efficacious and gentle, to agree about any thing, this being often proposed
him, I did again propose it my self by writing, upon condition to put far away
from me all manner of Contention, and to be declared an Enemy of Peace, if on
my side it was not amicable and respectful. As for what he seemed to fear my
quickness, as he called it, I alleged to him the Experience, not only of my
Conferences with the Ministers, but also those we had sometimes together upon
this Occasion, without having raised my Voice so much as half a Note higher.

3. If there were any Expedients to be found, they could not but issue from
such Conferences, but I placed my hope in another thing; I conceived hope I
say, from the strength of Truth, and from a perfect Acquaintance with the
Disposition of M. de Cambray, that I could bring him again to right Principles;
God is my Witness, clearly and amicably, I durst say so, certainly and without
reply; in a few Conferences, and perhaps in one only, and in loss than two
hours time.

4. All that M. de Cambray objected was, that I had engaged my self to answer
to 24 Demands in Writing* which I thought fit afterward to defer, by reason
said I, of the Equivocations of the 24 Demands, which would take too much time
to disintangle, and by reason of the long time that must have been employed in
writing the Consutations and Proofs: Adding notwithstanding, that I would
readily write all the Proposition I should have advanced in the Conference, if
desired; but that we were to begin at what was most short, most decisive, and
most express, I added also most charitable; nothing being able to supply Verbal
Conference, and a lively though plain Discourse on the presence of Jesus Christ
in the midst of us, when we should be assembled in his Name to agree upon the
Truth.

5. Every body was amazed at the inflexible Refusal of M. de Cambray during six
Weeks, we have undeniable Witnesses for it, and they earnestly desired to have
us confer together. I refused no Conditions; a Clergyman of Note being moved,
as every Body else was, with the charitable desire of re-uniting the Bishops,
obliged me to give my Word to agree to a Conference, where he should be. If he
had told the Answer he brought me, to me alone; perhaps we should have left it
with himself: It was in a word, that M. de Cambray would not have it said, that
he changed any thing by the Advice of M. de Meaux. If this Prelate will not grant
that this was his Answer, let him make such an one as he pleases; but we may
see that he cannot make any that is good. However, I my self sent him the
Writing, the Extracts whereof you have just now heard: It is not long, one may
read it over in less than a quarter of an Hour, amongst those I have collected:
M. de Cambray does not deny that he received it. Here Is five great Letters he
addresses to me, where he only reprehends me for having said in my Writing,
that I bore him in my Bowels; he does not believe it possible for a Man to bear
in his Bowels, such as he reproves for the sake of the Truth, nor to deplore
their State, but by shedding artificial Tears to tear them the more in pieces.
Why did he not come to the Conference, to try the Strength of such brotherly
Tears and Discourses, which Charity, I dare say so, the Truth had inspired us
with. We expected three Weeks the effect of that new Invitation, and the
Declaration was not sent, 'till at last we had made use of all the mild ways
imaginable, of which Declaration we must yet speak a Word.

SECTION IX.
Upon the Declaration of the three Bishops, and the Summa Doctrinae.
1. THey complain it is too severe, but the Archbishop of Park has truly
affirmed, that the Archbishop of Cambray has been very much spared therein. We
have there kept under silence, those Temptations of a particular kind, which
cannot be resisted, and of which we could not forbear to speak in another
place, wherein we had kept nuder Silence those Compliances of Ingenuous Souls
upon humbling things indefinitely, which should be commanded them: The
Deprivation not only of all Comfort, but also of all Liberty; that readiness to
forsake all, and the way it self, that teaches this readiness: That Disposition
without bounds, to all the practices laid upon them, and that universal
forgetfulness of their Experiences, of their Readings, of the Persons they have
formerly consulted with confidence: Lastly, We there kept under silence the
Possessions, the Obsessions, and other extraordinary things, which the Author
had given us, as belonging to the interior ways: It is known what use the false
Spiritualists make of it, as well as of other things just now mentioned. M. de
Cambray himself insinuates it, and we receive little Comfort in hearing him
say, that the way of pure Love and pure Faith that he teaches, is that wherein
you shall see less of it than in others; as if nothing were to be done here,
but to consider the more or the less, and that he ought not to have explained
himself more expressly against such abominations.

2. The Author objects continually, that we have not taken Notice of his
Correctives, wherewith he will have his Book to be fuller than any other Book
whatever; that is the very thing we complained of: We thought it an Unhappiness
for a book of that Nature, to have so many Correctives, as it is for a Rule to
need too many Exceptions: The Truth is more simple, and that which must be so
often modified, discovers naturally an ill Foundation: He had nothing to do,
but to explain himself simply, as he had promised: Whatsoever he has said upon
the absolute Sacrifice, has only afforded Difficulties in the Article of the
impossible Suppositions, therefore he should have omitted those Correctives,
which serve only to increase the evil; for instance, the dangerous Corrective
of the Persuasion, not inward but apparent, which serves only to excuse the
Language of Molinos, as has been showed elsewhere. All impartial Readers
acknowledge, that these Correctives are but so many Perplexities, fit to make
Men mad, and we have seen enough to make us sensible of the Snares, that
ignorant People meet with in the obscurity of that Book, which promised so much
plainness, and neatly to cut off all Equivocations.

3. One of the things they cry up most as an excellent Corrective, is the false
Articles, where it is true, M. Cambray condemns the false Mystical Divines, the
Archbishop of Paris has discovered the Subtilty of it; a Man entangles himself
naturally, when he will not condemn what he dares not defend openly. In another
place he overstrains Quietism, the better to pass over the Error. What Max. Art
2. faux p. 31, 32.
Quietism has ever consented to hate God eternally, nor to hate himself with a
real hatred, so that we cease to love in our selves the Work of God, Art 12.
faux.
and his Image? Who has ever consented to hate himself with an absolute hatred,
as supposing the work of the Creator not to be good? To carry the renouncing of
one's self so far, by an impious hatred of our Soul, which suppose it to be
evil in its nature, according to the principle of the Manichees? When we shoot
at this rate, we shoot at random, we pass over the body, and after the manner
of the Poets, endeavor to satisfy the just aversion of the faithful against
Quietism, by giving them a Phantom to tear in pieces.

SECTION X.
Proceedings at Rome on the submission of M. de Cambray.
1. THe Relation would be imperfect, if we omitted the Italian and Latin
Writings published at Rome, in the Name of the Archbishop of Cambray, and are
in the Hands of so many Persons, that some Copies of them are come as far as to
us; one of those Latin Writings I have in my Hand, Entitled, Observatious of a
Doctor of the Sorbonne, which says, that the Jansenists have joined with the
Bishop of Meaux against M. de Cambray, and that the other Bishops have united
against him, as against another Susanna, because he would not come into their
Cabal, and join in their mischievous Designs. The same Writing magnssies M. de
Cambray, as a Necessary Person to maintain the Authority of the Holy See
against the Bishops, and therefore it behooveth her not to suffer such an able
advocate to be oppressed. In other places we are called Enemies to the Monks,
whose Protector M. de Cambray is. We may see by this, what Engines he has set
on work. But the Pope who governs the Church of God, will not suffer any thing
to lessen the Glory of the Clergy of France, who have been always so obedient
to the Holy See. The Truth does not maintain it self by Lies, and as for the
Monks, in what Diocesses of Christendom, are they more fatherly dealt with than
in ours? Perhaps M. de Cambray will say, that all this is spoken without his
Order; but I leave it to the prudent Reader to judge, whether in an Accusation
so visibly false, which equally concerns Religion and the State, and the
Reputation of the Bishops of France, that make so considerably a part of the
Episcopacy, it would be enough simply to disown with his Mouth, suppose he had
done it, such manifest Calumnies, after they have had their Effect upon certain
Persons: And whether Justice and Truth require not a more Express and more
Authentic Declaration.

2. They boast mightily in those Writings of the great Number of Bishops and
Doctors that favor the Sentiments of the Archbishop of Cambray, and that
nothing but fear hinders them from declaring themselves; they should at least
name one, but they dare not; the Bishops have not been infected, and M. de
Cambray cannot cite for his Opinion any one Doctor of Note.

3. Amongst other things, that the Archbishop seems to have most Reason to
reproach me for, this is one, that he deserved not to be treated with, seeing
he has submitted after the same manner the Pelagians are treated: As if it
were not known, that these Heretics have for a long time acted the part of
such as had submitted, even to the Holy See. I wish nothing more than to see M.
de Cambray separated from such as have made an ambiguous Submission; but to
speak sincerely and in Conscience, can any Man be content with the Demand which
that Prelate, notwithstanding his former Submissions, would make of the Pope,
to determine the manner in which he was to pronounce Judgment, as he declares
it in his Letter of the 3d. of August, 1697. It is true, that in a following
Letter he speaks these words: God forbid I should prescribe a Law to my
Superior: My promise of Subscribing, and to publish a Mandate conformable
thereunto, is absolute and without Restriction. What meant then those words in
the Letter of the 3d. of August? I shall only desire of the Pope, that he would
be pleased to mark precisely the Errors he Condemns, and the Sense in which he
Condemns them, to the end that my Subscription may be without Restriction.
Without that then the Restriction is unavoidable: But this is to put the Pope
and the Church upon impossiblities. There should never have been any Decision,
if this Church must have foreseen all the Senses which the vicious fertility of
subtle Wits could have produced: At this rate we should neither have had the
Homousion of Nice, nor the Theotows of Ephesus. We see then that the Moderate
Wisdom of St. Paul is to be followed, otherwise we shall fall into vain and
undeterminable Questions, forbid by that Apostle.

4. They may say perhaps, that M. de Cambray retracts that absurd Proposition
in his Second Letter: But it is not so; seeing he continues to demand, that the
Pope should be pleased to Mark every Proposition worthy of Censure, with the
precise Sense upon which the Censure is to fall. This is again to replunge
himself into impossibilities, by which all Ecclesiastical Decisions are eluded.
If M. de Cambray declares that he will submit, and that no body shall ever see
him, whatever happens, neither write nor speak to evade the Condemnation of his
Work: It is at the same time in declaring that he will Content himself to
demand of the Pope a particular Instruction upon the Errors he is to reject. On
that Condition he protests he will be quiet, both as to the Matter of Right and
Fact: But it is after having before hand declared to the whole Universe, that
he is so far from being quiet within, he will not cease to make instances to
the Pope to make him say other things than what he decides.

5. Some Complaisant Persons will perhaps say, tha^ this is carrying the
Suspicion too far: But in the mean time I only repeat the words of the two
printed Letters, which M. de Cambray denies not: However I pray to God that he
may keep to the general Terms of his Submission; and although the Truth compels
me to remark what ill things he publishes, I will hope always with St. Paul,
for better, tho I so speak: Confidimus meliora, tametsi it a loquimur.

SECT. XI.
CONCLUSION.
1. WE have been Obliged then in fine to reveal the false Mysteries of our
days: Here you have it in short, such as it has appeared in the former
Discourses: A New Prophetess has undertaken to raise up again the Guide of
Molinos, and the Prayer which he teaches therein: It is with this Spirit she is
filled: The Mysterious Woman of the Revelations, it is with this Child she is
bigg: The Work of this Woman is not finised; we are come to the Times which she
calls Times of Persecution, when the Martyrs, as she says, of the Holy Ghost
shall suffer. The time shall come, and according to her we are at the brink of
it, when the Reign of the Holy Ghost and of Prayer, whereby she understands her
own, which is that of Molinos, shall be established with a Train of Wonders,
that shall amaze the Universe: From thence comes that Communication of Graces;
from thence comes it that a Woman has the power of binding and unbinding. It is
evidently true, that she has forgot what she has Subscribed before me, and
before others more considerable, upon the Condemnation both of her Books, and
of the Doctrine contained therein. Every Bishop ought to give an Account in
Convenient time, of what the Disposition of the Divine Providence has put in
his Hand: Therefore I have been constrained to explain, that the Archbishop of
Cambray, a Man of that Dignity, is fallen into that unhappy Mystery, and has
made himself the Defender, though by indirect ways, of that Woman and her Books.

2. He will not say, that he knew not that prodigious and non-sensical
Communication of Graces, nor so many pretended Prophecies, nor the pretended
apostolical Mission of that Woman, when he has suffered her, according to his
own Confession, to be esteemed by so many great Persons who put a Confidence in
him as to Matters of Conscience. He had then suffered a Woman to be esteemed,
who Prophesied according to the Delusions of her Heart. His great Intimacy with
that Woman, was grounded upon her Spirituality, and this was the only Bond of
their Correspondence: This is what we have seen writ with his own Hand, after
which we have no reason to be amazed at his having undertaken the Defense of
her Books.

3. It was to defend them that he wrote so many Memoirs before those that were
chosen Arbitrators; nor is it necessary for me to represent the long Extracts
of 'em I have yet by me, seeing the substance of 'em is to be found in the Book
of the Maxims of the Saints.

4. That he might have a Pretext for defending those pernicious Books, the Text
whereof he himself thought could not be maintained, he must have recourse to a
hidden sense, which that Woman has discovered to him; he must say, that he has
explained those Books better than the Books explained themselves; the Sense
that naturally offers, is not the true Sese: It is but a rigorous Sense, which
he assures us she never thought on; so that to understand them well, we must
read the thoughts of their Author; we must guess what is known to M. of Cambray
only, and judge of Words by Words by Sentiments, and not of Sentiments by
Words: The most non-sensical in the Books of that Woman is a Mystical Language,
for which the Prelate is our Security; that her Errors are mere Equivocations,
her Excesses are innocent Exagerations, like unto those of the Fathers, and of
approved Mysticks.

5. These are the Thoughts of this great Prelate, touching the Books of M.
Guyon, after having, if we may believe him, examined them unto the utmost
rigor; this is what he has writ with his own hand, some time before the
publishing of his Book; and after so many Censures we have not for all that,
been able to draw from him a real Condemnation of those Evil Books: On the
contrary, it was to save them, that he spared the Guide of Molinos, which is
the Original of them.

6. Yet notwithstanding all the Mittigations in the Book of the Maxims of the
Saints, we may still find therein M. Guyon and Molinos too weakly dignified not
to be known; and if I say further, that the Work of an Ignorant and
Enthusiastical Woman, and that of M. de Cambray, have manifestly one and the
same Design; I shall say no more after all, but what appears of it self.

7. I shall not say it, but after having tried to the utmost, what Meekness and
Charity could do, we used no Tricks as to the Submission of M. Guyon: We
admitted them with a well-meaning mind, (I shall make use of this Word) and
presuming always on her Sincerity and Obedience, we consulted the Honor of her
Name, of her Family, of her Friends, and of her Person, as much as was
possible; nothing has been omitted to convert her, and nothing was censured but
her Errors and ill Books.

8. As for the Archbishop of Cambray, we have but too well justified our
selves by the undeniable matters of Fact contained in this Relation; as to my
own particular, I am justified more than I wish I were: But in order to confute
all the unjust Reproaches of that Prelate, we were under a Necessity, not only
to discover part of the matter of Fact, but to have the whole, as far as the
Source: By which, if I may say so, it appears from the beginning, that we have
endeavored to follow the motions of that Meek and Patient Charity, which
neither suspects nor thinks any evil: Our Silence was insuperable, till M. de
Cambray declared himself by his Book. Nay, we had Patience to the utmost, so
that notwithstanding his obstinate Refusal of all Conference, we did not
declare our selves 'till the Extremity. Where will he fix the Jealousy he
accuses us of without Proof, and if we must clear our selves of so mean a
Passion, what were we jealous of in the New Book of that Archbishop? Did we
envy him the Honor of defending and setting forth M. Guyon and Molinos with
fine Colors? Did we bear an Envy to the Style of an ambiguous Book, or to the
Credit it gave to its Author, whose Glory on the contrary was thereby buried? I
am ashamed for the Friends of M. de Cambray, who make Profession of Piety, and
yet have, without any ground, published every where, and even as far as Rome,
that some private Interest has set me at Work. How strong soever the Reasons
be, which I could produce in my Defense; God puts no other Answer into my
Heart, but that the Defenders of the Truth, as they ought to be free from all
self-interest, they ought no less to be above the fear of that Reproach, to be
accounted self-interested Persons. However, I am not against their believing,
that Interest has provoked me against that Book, if so be that there is nothing
worthy of Reproof in its Doctrine, nor any thing that may be favorable to the
Woman, whose Delusions must be made manifest. God has permitted, that against
my Will, they should put into my Hands those Books that are Evidences of it:
God was willing that the Church should in the Person of a Bishop, a living
Witness of that Prodigy of Error: It is only invincible Necessity obliges me to
discover it, when they continue so wilfully blind in their Error, as to force
me to declare all: When not being satisfied to triumph, they will needs insult:
When God on the other hand, discovers so many things that were kept secret. I
take great care, not to impute to M. de Cambray any other Design, but that
which he has discovered by his Handwriting, by his Book, by his Answers, and
by several undeniable matters of Fact: This is enough and too much, that he
should be so open a Protector of a Woman that prophesies, and who proposes to
her self the seducing of the whole Universe. If they say this is too hard
against a Woman, whose Errors seem to be the effect of madness. I will grant
it, if that madness be not a pure Fanaticism; and if the Spirit of Seducing did
not work in that Woman, and if this Priscilla has not met her Montanus to
defend her.

9. If in the mean time the Weak are scandalized; if the Libertines triumph; if
they say, without enquiring into the Source of the mischief, that the Quarrels
of Bishops are implacable: It is true, if it be understood, that they are
really points of revealed Doctrine. This is the Proof of the Truth of our
Religion, and of the Divine Revelation which guides us, that Questions upon
matters of Faith are never to be accomodated. We can suffer every thing, but
cannot endure any Evasions or Shifts, how little soever, upon the Principles of
Religion. If those Disputes be of no consequence, as Men of the World would
have it, we must say with Gallio, Proconsul of Achaia, which was the highest
Dignity of the Roman Empire in her Provinces: O Jews, if the thing in question
was some Injustice, or some ill action, or some business of importance, I
should think my self obliged to hear you Patiently: But this regards only to
some Points of your Doctrine, and Disputes of Words, and touching your Law:
Decide your Differences among your selves as well as you can: As though he said,
Fight amongst your selves about this Matter as long as ye please, I will not be
the Judge of it. And in effect the Jews beat Sostheneo even before the
Tribunal, without Gallio's taking the least Notice of it. This is a Description
of the Politic World, and of worldly Men upon Disputes of Religion; which
holding as of no consequence, they think it enough to say, that the Heat of the
Bishops is too great: But (a thing very different in all respects from Gallio)
if a great King, full of Piety, will not become the Judge of those Matters, it is
not out of Contempt; it is out of respect for the Church to whom God has given
the Right to judge of it: Yet what is there New here, and which has not been
always practiced by his august Predecessors, and all Christian Princes, to
protect the Bishops who walk in a beaten Path, and according to the Solid and
ancient Rule?

10. We wish, and we hope speedily to see the Archbishop of Cambray acknowledge
at least the Unprofitableness of his Speculations. It did not become him, the
Title he bears, the part he acted in the World, nor his Reputation and his Wit,
to defend the Books and the Doctrine of a Woman of that sort. As for the
Interpretation he has invented, let him remember of his having agreed, that he
finds none of them in the Scripture: He quotes not one passage of them for his
New Doctrine: He Names the Fathers, and some other Clergymen, whom he
endeavors to draw after him by Consequence, but wherein he finds neither her
absolute Sacrifice, nor her simple Acquiescency; nor her Contemplation from
whence Jesus Christ is absent by Estate; nor her extraordinary Temptations that
she must yield to; nor her actual Grace, which makes us to know the Will of
good Pleasure on all Occasions and Events; nor her natural Charity, which is
not the Theological Virtue; nor her Concupiscence, which without being Virtuous
is the root of all Vices; nor her pure Concupiscence, which is, though
Sacrilegious, the Preparation to Justice; nor her dangerous Separation of the
two parts of the Soul, after the example of Jesus Christ involuntarily
troubled; ^o^ her unhappy return to that involuntary trouble; nor her Natural
Love, which he reforms every day, instead of rejecting it wholly once for all,
as equally useless and dangerous in the use he makes of it; nor her other
Propositions which we have mentioned, they are the fruit of vain Logic, of
extravagant Metaphysics, and of a vain Philosophy, which St. Paul has
condemned. We hear every day his best Friends bewailing him, that he should
have showed his Learning, and exercised his Eloquence upon Subjects of no
Solidity at all. Does he not see, with his Abstractions he is so far from
inspiring the Love of God into Men, that he does but dry up their Hearts, by
weakening the Motives capahle of softning or enflaming them? The vain Subtleties
wherewith he dazles the World, have always been the Subject of the Churches
groans. I will not enumerate to him all such as have been deceived by their
fine Curious Wit; I shall Name him only one, in the Ninth Age, viz. one John
Scot born at Air, whom the Saints of his time upbraided (though it is true in
another Subject) with vain Philosophy, wherein he alleged that Religion and
Piety consisted. It was by reason of this that the Fathers of the Council of
Valence said, that in those unhappy times he accumulated their Labors, he and
his followers, in proposing frivolous Questions; ineptas questiunculas; in
authorizing empty Visions; aniles Fabulas; in refining upon Spirituality; and
to speak with those Fathers, it composing high relished Devotions, which
rendered the Purity of the Faith loath some; Pultes puritati ^idei nau seam
inferentes: They ought to have taken Care not to add to the Groans of the
Church by their Superfluity seeing she had already too many other things to
deplore Superfluis coe^um pie do^entium and ge^^e^^ium non onerer We do exhort
M. de Cambray to employ his Eloquen Pen and his infruitful Wit upon Subjects
more becoming him: Let him prevent, it is not yet past time, the Judgment of the
Church: The Church of Rome Loves to b^ prevented in this manner; and seeing she
is always governed in the Sentences she pronounces, by Tradition one may in a
certain Sense be said to hear her before she speaks.

FINIS.

