A WARNING FROM THE LORD GOD out of SION, who is Mighty and Terrible, Sounded
forth unto the INHABITANTS Of the City of WORCESTER, And of the TOWNS and
VILLAGES round about them;

And may serve to the Nation in general, that they may hear and fear, and
repent, and turn to the Lord with their whole hearts; Lest the overflowing
Scourge come and sweep them into the Pit, from whence there will be no
Deliverance.

By a Follower of the Lamb, who makes War with the Sword of his Mouth: known
amongst men by the Name of EDW. BOVRNE.

Revel. 9.20, 21. And the rest of the men which were not killed with these
Plagues, repented not of the works of their own hands, that they should not
worship Devils and Idols, of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and wood,
which neither can see nor hear.

Neither repented they of their Murders, nor of their Sorceries, nor of their
Fornications, nor of their Thefts.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the sign of the Black Spread-Eagle and
Windmil, in Martins Le Grand, 1660.

The Preface.
READER,
UNto whom this shall come; Before thou determinest of any thing mentioned in
this Warning, (as to the casting of it by, or rejecting of it) first of all
read, or hear it read; and then, as the Light in thy own Conscicnce, which is
Gods faithful and true VVitness, does Answer thereunto, receive it, and own it,
and so believe it, and no otherwise, that so thou may reap the benefit
thereof: for by taking Warning before it be too late, thou will know thy foul
delivered from the evil to come.

And you who worship, but not the true God, who is a Spirit, and must be
worshipped in Spirit and Truth; if any of the Servants of the Lord should come
into your Assemblies, to declare his Mind and Will unto you, or to speak to any
of you as he shall direct them. see that you entreat them well, hear them with
patience, and as Gods Witness in you answers to what they say, own it, and
receive it, and suffer none to injure or persecute them, but let them have
liberty to return from you in peace, after they have cleared their Consciences
unto you, lest by doing otherwise, you kindle the Wrath and Indignation of the
Lord God against your own souls; for what you do unto them, he takes it as done
unto himself; and though we are poor, yet we desire not your riches: but our
trust is in the Lord, whose care is over us. And though the world hate us, and
scorn, and reproach and persecute us, yet herein can we rejoice, knowing that
it was the portion of those which feared the Lord in Generations before us; And
although we are accounted Fools by some, yet so long as it is for the sake of
Christ, we can rejoice therein; knowing that the Apostles and Servants of the
Lord were accounted so before us; So then if for the sake of Christ we suffer
as Fools, would God ye suffered so too, that you might partake of our joy and
rejoicing, which we have in the Lord. But what if they who are wise to do evil
shall speak thus of us, what need we regard it? for this is wisdom to us, and
strength to us, to fear the Lord, and to keep his Commandments; and the Day of
the Lord does and will declare, that who does otherwise, are foolish and
unwise: for Wisdom is, and will be justified of her Children.

I am a lover of your Immortal Souls, EDW. BOVRNE.

A WARNING To the Inhabitants of Worcester, etc.
O That you would consider, ye Inhabitants of the City of Worcester, and ye
Towns and Villages round about you, the long-suffering of the Lord, and his
forbearance toward you, who has waited long to be gracious unto you! O that
you would yet repent and turn unto the Lord with your whole hearts, even while
it is called to day, while the Visitation of God is continued to you-wards, and
put from you whatsoever is evil and contrary to the Light of Jesus, and do that
which is right and wel-pleasing unto the Lord, as the Light of Christ in your
own Consciences does show you, that so it may go well with you for ever: For
know this, that God is just and righteous, and holy in all his ways; and such
as work Iniquity shall not go unpunished: for every secret thing to Judgment
must come, and all idle words must be accounted for in that day.

Therefore in the fear of the Lord, and in his dread and power, I warn you as
you will give Account to him, and make your Answer to him, when you shall
receive a just Recompense according to your doings, that while time is
continued unto you, you prize it; and while the Light shines, you walk in it,
that so we may have Fellowship together therein, that so you may know the Blood
of Christ to cleanse you from all sin: for yet a little while, and time shall
be no more, and the wicked and them which forget the Lord, shall be turned into
Hell, from whence no redemption can be found. O that you were wise, that you
would consider and lay to heart the long-suffering of the Lord, and his
goodness and gentleness toward you, who desires not your ruin nor
destruction, but rather your Salvation, that you may be saved from the wrath to
come: For which of you knows not, but if the Lord had rewarded you according
unto your doings, but you had been cut off from being a People at this day? but
he has spared you, and given you a time to repent, that you may bring forth
fruits unto holiness, the end of which will be life eternal; and if you do it
not, but shall run on and harden your hearts against the Lord, and rebel
against him, by adding sin unto sin, and transgression unto transgression; then
Woe and Misery will be your portion, and the Wrath and Indignation and sore
Displeasure of the Lord will you feel upon your souls. And to you this is the
Word of the Lord, which shall not go unfulfilled.

When it is considered what wickedness did lately abound amongst you, and in
all parts of the Nation, who cannot but say, but God has been long-suffering
unto this Generation? Where is the City or Town where Wickedness was not broken
forth like a mighty Flood? What tumultuous gatherings of people were there?
What Shoutings, and Bonfires, and Ringing of Bells were there? What setting up
of May-poles and Dancings, and Revellings, and Drunkenness did abound in the
Nation? And mighty disorderly and wickedly were they bent against those which
feared the Lord, as if they would have massacred in the Nation? Do you believe
that these things were well-pleasing to the Lord? May Christians do such things
as these beforementioned? Where was the fear of the Lord when these things
were so? let sober-minded people answer. And do you believe that it is not just
with the Lord to visit for these things? Was there greater Wickedness found in
Sodom and Gomorrah before the Lord destroyed them, than the things
beforementioned? if there were, declare it. These things considered, with much
more that might be mentioned, who can but say but the Lord has been
long-suffering unto this Generation?

But after all this you have a little time given you, and I dare not say but it
is but little; yet this I say, and not I, but the Lord, whose Word it is unto
you, that if you make a right use thereof, you will be happy for ever. O that
there were yet in you a heart to do the thing that it right and well-pleasing
unto the Lord, that it might go well with you, and your posterity after you!
Well, whatever you may judge of me, yet I am your friend, and a lover of your
souls, and my desires are for you, that you may know in this your day the
things that do belong unto your peace: Surely the Lord has been very good unto
you, and many Warnings have you had from him, Time after time, Warning after
Warning, and still the Lord waits to be gracious unto you; and though he suffer
long, and bear long, yet if you shall choose to follow your own ways, and not
the way of the Lord, it will go ill with you in the end. In love I warn you of
it; for the Spirit of the Lord will not always strive: therefore take heed
that you do not rebel against the Lord, nor resist that manifest of him in you,
lest you be found fighters against the Lord, as the Jews were, who did always
resist the holy Ghost: and though he had given them his good Spirit to lead
them, nevertheless they rebelled against him, and after he had been long
provoked by them, he swore in his wrath, that they should not enter into his
rest. And afterward their posterity went a whoring after strange gods, and did
after all the abominations of the Heathen, yet was not the Lords love straightened
toward them, but his compassion was great toward them, and sent his
Messengers amongst them, rising betimes and sending them; But notwithstanding
his love and tender compassion toward them, they ill requited him for his
great kindness, they mocked his Messengers, and misused his Prophets, and
despised his Words; and after the Lords long-suffering to them-wards, his wrath
was kindled against them, and his displeasure waxed hot against them, and then
he gave them over into the hands of a merciless and cruel-hearted enemy, (...)
neither old nor young, nor had regard to (...), but all became a prey unto the
devouring sword.

And yet, notwithstanding all this, their posterity which succeeded them, took
not warning by these things, but they sinned against the Lord also, and
provoked him by their great wickedness, as their fathers had done, and became
very cruel, in slaying the Prophets, and stoning those which the Lord sent
amongst them, who would often have gathered them unto himself, but they refused
and would not, but rebelled against the Lord, and so run on in their
wickedness, until the things which did belong unto their peace, was hid from
their eyes, and after all this their Wickedness abounded, in putting Christ to
death, whom God has exalted, and given him a Name above every Name. And what
followed after all this? Did not Destruction come upon the whole Nation of the
Jews for the shedding of his Innocent Blood? O how did they rage against him,
and cried out to Crucify him! When Pilate washed his hands, to be clear from
the Blood of the Innocent, then said they, His Blood be on us, and on our
Children; Whose Blood stands charged upon them, and who is ignorant of the
great Misery and Destruction which came upon the whole Nation of the Jews
afterward? And it is to be noted, that the Chief Priests were the most forward
in putting Christ to death.

Now to bring you to that which will profit you, and tends unto your
Everlasting Comfort and Benefit; you have read in the Scriptures of Truth what
Christ the Light has said; that Great Prophet, whom God has raised up, whom
all People ought to hear, God is a Spirit (said he) and they which worship Him,
must worship him in Spirit and in Truth; Which who comes to learn of him, it
will bring them to Truth within: who comes to learn of Christ the Light, by
whom they be enlightened, are taught thereby to owe nothing to any man but Love:
The Light teaches to love Enemies; the Light teaches to bless them that
curse; the Light will teach you, to pray for them that despitefully use and
entreat you. And what good is there which the Light which makes Sin manifest,
which every man is enlightened withal, will not lead them unto? By the Light
the Apostles were led to the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ; by the Light they were led to enjoy the heavenly Treasure in the
earthen Vessels which they had in them. And as you take heed thereunto, and
obey it, it will lead you to the same, whereby you will know an Inheritance
with the Saints in Life, which does not pass away, but remains for ever: And
to you this is the Word of Truth.

Therefore ye Inhabitants of the City of Worcester, and of the Towns and
Villages round about you, I have this to say to you in the fear of the Lord,
and in his counsel, whole I am, and whom I serve, That you make this your
choice, to fear the Lord, and to serve him with a perfect heart. Oh do not that
thing which you know by the Light of Christ in your own Consciences, to be
contrary to the Mind and Will of the Lord; for now you cannot plead Ignorance
in the Day of the Lord, and say, Lord, if we had known thy Mind, and if thy
Will had been declared unto us, we would not have done contrary thereunto, but
we would have obeyed thy Voice; but we did not know it, and therefore spare us,
O Lord, we pray thee. But then Gods Witness will answer for him; My Mind you
knew, and my Will you were not ignorant of: for you knew that you ought to have
done justly, and to have loved Mercy, and to have walked humbly before me;
which was the Sacrifice which would have pleased me well, and that unto which
my Soul had, and has regard unto; but seeing you chose to do the thing which
you knew you ought not to have done, and refused to do the thing which you knew
you ought to have done; therefore is this Evil come justly upon you; and so
hereby shall all mouths be stopped in the Day of the Lord, and every tongue
shall confess unto his righteous Judgments: And then shall such confess, that
die Lord was long-suffering toward them, and gave them time to repent, but
they repented not.

And what shall I say more unto you? What would you have the Lord to do for you
more than he has done? For Life and Death has he set before you, and his
desire is that you may choose Life, that your Souls may live; as he said of
Israel of old, Have I any pleasure in the death of a sinner? Why will you die,
O house of Israel? And therefore let none blame the Lord, as though he was the
cause of their ruin: for the destruction of a People is of themselves, but
their help is in the Lord: Wherefore forsake your own waves, and every evil
desire, which proceeds from the corrupt heart; and every deceitful imagination
which from thence does arise, and come to the Light of Christ, which shows you
whatsoever is evil and contrary to the Mind of the Lord, that by it you may be
led out of the same; that Salvation you may know, and Healing you may find,
from him who is come to seek and to save that which is lost, that so you may
come to witness Christ Jesus, the Savior of your souls, made manifest within
you, to condemn Sin there, to destroy the Devils works in you, and so to save
you from the wrath to come.

Something concerning Religion.
ANd further, it is in my heart, to write something as concerning Religion.
There is a great deal of Profession in the Nation about the Worship of God:
some would have it after one manner, and some after another, as they imagine
and conceive in the dark, being from that of God in them; and one cries, Lo
here, and another cries, Lo there, as Christ foretold; but said he, Believe
them not: The Kingdom of God is within you. And said John, The Anointing
abides in you. By which we plainly perceive, that they which draw people from
the Light which shines in the heart, and makes Sin manifest, are the Deceivers
and Seducers, which are to be turned from; And now the time is come, that the
true Worshippers do worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth; who are come to
that of God in them, whereby they retain God in their knowledge, and hold the
Truth in Righteousness; which those that profess the Truth, and are from that
of God in them, do hold in the Unrighteousness, being Strangers from the Life
of God, and Aliens to the Covenant of Promise; and so though they profess the
Words of Truth, yet denying the Light of Christ who is the Truth, and not
believing therein that they might be saved; In what do such differ from the
Jews, who professed God in words, but in their works denied him, because their
deeds were evil? And though they had the Scriptures, which testified of the
Light, which Christ, the Light, bid them search them; but they would not come
to Him, that they might have Life, their eyes were without from that of God in
them, and doubtless, they expected he would come in some outward, Glorious
Appearance; but he coming otherwise, after a low degree, and taking upon him
the form of a Servant, they despised him in their hearts, and said, Is not this
the Carpenters son? etc. and so rejected him, and would not have him to reign,
who was a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief; and so they would build
without the Light: therefore said the Apostle, This is the Stone set at naught
by you builders, etc. Yet Him has God exalted, and given him a Name above
every Name; and this is Him whom all People ought to hear, the Son of God, by
whom God has spoken unto us in these last days; that great Prophet which
Moses prophesied of, whom all People ought to hearken unto: Therefore turn your
minds inward unto the Light which shows you Sin, and hearken diligently unto
the Word which is near in the Mouth and Heart, to hear and obey it; For if they
who transgressed against the Word spoken by Angels, received a just recompense
of reward, consider-how shall you escape, and go unpunished, if you neglect so
great Salvation?

And this is that which would bring all to be of one heart, and of one mind,
and of a found judgment, and to dwell together in the love and fear of the
Lord, as every one comes to the Light of Christ in them, which makes Sin
manifest, that thereby they may be led out of the same unto God, and this will
lead them to worship God in Spirit and in Truth; and it is a sure and
everlasting Rule for all People to take heed unto; for by this can none be
deceived. And as every one comes here, then Love, and Peace, and good will will
abound amongst them, and they will seek the welfare one of another, and watch
over one another for good, and not for evil.

And such as would persecute, and destroy, and stone, and. stocks, and
imprison, and whip, and banish those which cannot worship as themselves, they
have not yet learned of Christ the Light, who came not to destroy men's lives,
but to save them; and so this is a true sign, that those which persecute others
about Religion are not led by the Spirit of Jesus: for he did not cause any to
be persecuted, but was persecuted himself, and put to death, witnessing a good
Confession before Pontius Pilate, and the Chief Priests were the cause of it,
who said he was a blasphemer, when he spoke the Truth: Therefore you Priests
who are in the persecuting nature, read whose Children you are. And his
Apostles were persecuted, but did not persecute, nor used any carnal weapons in
their own defense; but the weapons of their warfare were spiritual and mighty
through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, casting down Imaginations,
and every high thing that exalted it self against the knowledge of God; They did
not wrestle with flesh and blood, but warred against the Powers of Darkness,
that so people might be brought from under the Power of Darkness, into the
Kingdom and Dominion of the dear Son of God; and so they sought the
Preservation, and not the Destruction of any; turning people from Darkness to
Light, mid from Satan's power unto the Power of God, that they might be saved by
Christ the Light, who is given for a Covenant of Light, and for Salvation unto
the Ends of the Earth: these fought the good fight. And it is manifest and
clear, that they which wrestle with flesh and blood, persecuting and destroying
others about Religion, do fight the bad fight, and are not followers of the
Lamb of God, who makes war with the Sword of his mouth.

And so now, as to what has been written concerning Religion, this is the sum:
God is a Spirit, and they who worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in
Truth: which none can do but who comes to that of God in them, even the measure
of the Spirit of God, which is given them to profit withal, that thereby they
may be led into all Truth.

You Inhabitants of the City of Worcester, and of the Towns and Villages round
about you, God has put it in my heart to warn you, and to signify unto you
that he expects fruits from you which his Soul accepts, and in which he
delights and is well-pleased withal; which is fruits of Righteousness, the end
of which will be unto you Life eternal. Wherefore fear the Lord, and serve him
with a perfect heart, speak every man truth unto his Neighbor, and do to
others as you would be done unto, and come to Truth in the Inward parts; for,
the Lord searches the Heart, and tryes the Reins; and who works Iniquity,
the Lord will find them out, and justly reward them, even according to the
fruit of their doings: Wheresore, while you have time, take warning, and bring
forth fruit unto God; lest the overflowing scourge come and sweep you into the
Pit, from whence no Redemption will be found.

But if after all this, you harden your hearts against the Lord, and remain
stiff-necked and rebellious against him, by adding sin unto sin, and so grieve
the Spirit of the Lord, which will not always strive with you, though he has
suffered long, and born long with you, and waited long to be gracious unto you;
yet the Day of the Lord will come upon you when you are not aware of it, like a
Thief in the night; and when you cry, Peace, peace, and think that you are
safe, then will sudden destruction be at the door; therefore while you have a
little time, O that you would prize it, and repent, and turn to the Lord, and
seek him with your whole hearts, that mercy you may find.

So now whether you hear, or whether you forbear, if you shall still go on to
do wickedly, then let your blood remain upon your own heads; for hitherto I am
clear herein, and have the Answer of a good Conscience with the Lord, in
obedience unto whom I have thus far proceeded to warn you, that you may be
saved from the wrath to come.

And though I may meet with scoffs, and reproaches, and scornings from some,
yet my Reward is with the Lord, and I have learned to pass by and forgive
them; the reproach of Christ (...) being greater riches than the treasures of
thi^ world. And thus my Light I have not hid under a Bushel but in the fear of
God have I cleared my Conscience unto you: and whosoever takes not warning, let
their blood remain, upon their own heads.

Therefore from the Highest to the Lowest, without respect to the persons of
any, hear the Word of the Lord, Repent and turn unto God with your whole
hearts, and let the time past suffice wherein you have lived in doing those
things which you ought not to have done; and for the time to come approve your
hearts unto God, by doing those things which are just and right, and
well-pleasing in his sight) as the Light of Christ in your own Consiciences
does show you, that so your sins may be blotted out, and times of refreshment
you may know from the presence of the Lord; Unto whom all Praises, and
Thanksgiving, and Dominion belongs for evermore, Amen.

Worcester the 20th of the 8th Month, 1660. From a lover of Truth and
Righteousness, who waits to see it set up and exalted over all Deceit. E. B.

THE END.

