THE HISTORY Of the EXECRABLE Irish Rebellion Traced from many preceding ACTS,
TO THE Grand Eruption The 23. of October, 1641. And thence pursued to the Act
of Settlement, MDCLXII.

Spartanos (genus est audax,
Avidumque ferae) nodo cautus
Propiore liga.
Sen. Hippolytus. LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavel, in St. Paul's Churchyard.
MDCLXXX.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Am not ignorant that he exposes himself (as a public mark) to many
inconveniences, who appears in Print; Yet there has been so long an
expectation of the Proceedings of the whole War of Ireland, Peter Walsh in his
Epistle to the Reader, Fol. 47. as also from R. B. the zealous Nuncionist, and
first Legate to Rome, from the Confederates, and others, whose observations
have been singular.
as (by an evil silence) some interpretately question, whether there was any
such thing or no? Whereby those Pamphlets, the Roman Catholics of Ireland,
have dispersed through Europe, get Credit and Reputation; That his Majesty's
Protestant Subjects, first fell upon and murdered them; which being so openly
and frequently asserted (even on the very Place) where those dire Tragedies
were acted, and that averred also in a time when many are yet living, who have
seen and felt those miseries in themselves, and their Relations, I could not
but let that drop from me, which might flow from others, niceness in this Case
being the next degree to unfaithfulness; Yet I cannot say, what I have persued
here is not to be cavell'd at, no! that were to presume my fate were happier
than others; but I may aver, that nothing is imposed on the Reader, but what I
have either Records, public Evidences, credible Relations, or my own knowledge
for its Ground; searching the best Intelligence I could reach to, though in
clearing some doubts, I have encountered Obstacles, I could not rationally have
expected, which I impute to my own misfortune, no ones Design; None (treated
with) being so little affected, as not frequently to desire the digestion of a
History, the English Interest in Ireland was not less concerned in, then
Humanity it self: The horror and cruelty (there committed) bidding defiance to
whatsoever before had been acted in the World. -- Hinc Terras Cruor
Inficit omnes fusus and rubuit mare.


So that after all, if there be any Deficiency in what I shall relate, it may
well be pardoned, where there has been as much Artifice to parget Truths, as
Countenance could reach to; though as to what may be objected, (in reference to
my Relation) I have been so cautious, that in Disputes I have not let Interest
biass me: no! where I have found any Humanity, though it may be conjectured to
proceed from self-Interest, that it may be returned in gratitude, I have not
designedly let it o're-slip me; but of this nature there has been little:
indeed the whole Scene has been so barbarous, as I have scarce found any into
whose wound the Traveller has poured Oil: and yet willingly (more then what a
just account of the Business requires) I would not fester the least Soar;
However I expect all will not think so, it is natural for the Wasp to be angry;
yet when it shall be weighed on what little reason the Irish more then the
English, (equally, if not beyond them, concerned in all Levies, Oppressions,
and Grievances,) had to be enraged, pretending to be held in with a ruder Bit,
I doubt not but the more Intelligent will allow them no common Sinners.

I am not ignorant what examples (some say) they had to encourage them to their
Insurrection; though that encouragement (how confidently soever affirmed to be
their Guide) never commenced in Blood, or marched on in Murders and
Surprisals, of an innocent, naked, and unarmed People, or (at first) seized on
those (much less murdered them) who contrary to their Judgment, lived
peaceably amongst them: However it is not my intention, to mitigate the flame
they light their Torches by; all Rebellions being detestable; But certainly the
Copy exceeded the Original, and what they would solely entitle to their
Religion, (as interdicted by the Age) more justly is to be imputed, to their
Detestation of the English Government and Nation, which from the Conquest to
this instant, has been the grounds for all Rebellions, even when both Nations
were drunk with the Wine of Romes Fornication; So that though some (to mitigate
the Result of so horrid a Rebellion) place the grounds of it on Religion, which
(as my Lord Bacon observes) Erects a Monarchy in the minds of Men, by which
they would enforce all to that yoke; Yet it is evident, they never had so free
an exercise of their Religion, (under Pretexts of Civil Contracts, and Politic
Agreements,) as when the Troubles began; not so much then as the least Violence
being offered to their Diana, nor afterward, till they made it one of their
principal Demands; so that if at any time (since or before) they found a check,
That must be attributed to the rude and boisterous behavior (as a Statist The
Author of the Animadversions upon Fanaticism. Page 88.
seasonably notes) of some of them, who disturbed the happy Calm they all
enjoyed, rather then to any willing severity in the State, whose bounty and
generosity toward them, has (by their ill usage of the Indulgence) been
interpreted a Product of the Kings Affection to their Religion, not his charity
and compassion toward their Persons; That thence some have proceeded to Acts,
which have alienated the affections of those, who desired they should not have
been disquieted; Till Recusancy began over-boldly to look Government in the
Face; in as much as thence some have suspected whether Hannibal were not at the
Gates: Else could any vaunt at home? as others write to their Friends abroad,
that they hope all will be well, and doubt As Sir Edward Dering (in his
Collection of Speech, P. 6.) observes of Sir Benjamin Rudyard, treating of
Religion, 1641.
not to prevail and win ground upon us; in as much as (merely from this
encouragement) a Romanist (well observed by the Silver-Mouth Trumpet) not long
since congratulated in Print, That the Face of our Church began to alter, and
the Language of our Religion to change; ( says Sancta Clara) So as if a Synod
were held non intermixtis Puritanis, (O those are Pestilent fellows!) our
Articles and their Religion would soon be agreed. Upon which and other
Circumstances, the learned and foreseeing Primate, Archbishop Usher, once in an
Assembly of the whole Nation, averred, That the Magistrates yielding to meet
the Papists, as far as they might in their own way, in the first Reformation in
England, had (upon the experience of many years) rather hardened them in their
Errors, then brought them to In his Proclamation at Westminster, 22. of Feb. in
the first year of his Reign, afterward reprinted at Dublin, 1604.
a liking of our Religion. This being their usual saying, If our Flesh be not
good, why do you drink of our Broth? The consideration of which, made King
James of blessed memory, take notice*, That having after some time spent in
settling the Politck Affairs of this Realm, of late bestowed no small labor, in
composing certain differencies we found amongst our Clergy, about Rites and
Ceremonies, heretofore Established in this Church of England, and reduced the
same to such an Order and Form, as we doubt not, but every Spirit that is led
only with Piety, and not with Humor, shall be therein satisfied. It appeared
unto us in the debating of those Matters, that a greater Contagion to our
Religion, then could arise from those light differencies, was imminent by
Persons, common Enemies to them both; namely, the great number of Priests, both
Seminaries and Jesuits, abounding in this Realm, as well of such as were here
before our coming to this Crown, as of such as have resorted hither since;
using their Functions and Professions with greater liberty, then heretofore
they durst have done, partly upon a vain confidence of some Innovation in
matter of Religion, to be done by us, which we never intended, nor gave any man
cause to expect, and partly upon the assurance of our general Pardon, granted
according to the custom of our Progenitors, at our Coronation, for offenses
past, in the days of the late Queen, which Pardons, many of the said Priests
have procured under our great Seal, and holding themselves thereby free from
the danger of the Laws, do with great Audacity, exercise all Offices of their
Profession, both saying Masses, persuading our Subjects from the Religion
Established, and reconciling them to the Church of Rome, and by consequence,
seducing them from the true persuasion, which all Subjects ought to have of
their Duty and Obedience to Us; Of which though I might urge more, I have no
itch to enlarge, their own Scourge may be their Punishment, Saepe in Magistrum
scelera redierunt sua: Certain it was, the Irish hoped to shake off the English
Government by that attempt; but how improbable, a Series of 500 years
Succession, sufficiently evinces, every defection in the People having rooted
the Prince more entire; that at length (methinks) they should be weaned from
further Assays of that nature; though where there are a People who look toward
Egypt, there will not want some to cry out for a Captain to lead them.

But to descant hereupon, is not my design, being willing to believe that
Janus's Gates may henceforth be shut, Allegiance being the aim, not the
pretense of their present Submission: What I here endeavor, is to clear by
what Steps the late Rebellion arrived at its Height, and how it came (in so
short a time) to sweep all before it.

In handling of which, I shall first show the Condition of the Kingdom some
years before the Rebellion.

Then I shall speak of the preliminary Acts thereunto, and therein detect the
vanity of those who would fix the Rebellion at first, upon a few discontented
inconsiderable Persons, a Rabble (Authors of all the Civil War that followed) in
Ulster only; when the Plot was a long laid Design, determined by the main Body
of the Nation; as Rory-Mac-Guire ingenuously told Colonel Audley Mervin Col.
Audley Merv. Exam. 5. July, 1643. Husb. Collect. Fol. 253.
, That this great undertaking, was never the Act of one or 2 giddy fellows: We
have (said he) our Party in England, we have our Party in Scotland, that will
keep such (as would oppose us) busy from sending you any Aid: in as much, as I
could tell you, who the Persons were that were designed for the Surprisal of
all the Places of Strength; And in the Declaration of the Archbishops, Bishops,
and other Prelates of Ireland, at Jamestown, the 12. of August, 1650. It is
there acknowledged, That the Catholic People of Ireland, (so not the Rabble) in
the year 1641. were forced* to take up Arms for the defense of Holy Religion,
their Lives and Liberties, which some (very industriously) would fain wipe off,
as being too undeniable an evidence of their inclinations, before those vain
pretenses they fly to, (as their main Subterfuge) drove them into the Net with
others; Yet we shall herein so clear the folly of what they would have the
World believe, as their Excuse serves mainly to aggravate their Crime. Men's
Impudicam facere, non casus, Solet.


Afterward I will fall on the Subject, till the Cessation, managed by subtle
Instruments of State; Yet not without great Disgusts to some, highly improved
to the event of what afterward ensued.

Then we shall proceed to the Conclusion, which (betwixt the Cessation and
that) will appear to have many notable changes, such as though some Histories
may lead you through many varieties, this more.

In clearing of which, I should have been glad of more Originals than I could
meet with, especially such as might have detected the whole Proceedings at
Kilkenny, where the Design was so closely anvil'd, as all things afterward
were found there in defiance of his Majesty's Authority: There first the Clergy
compact a General Congregation, which summoned a General Assembly, equivalent
(in their Veneration) to a Parliament; and that Established a Supreme Council
of the Confederate Catholics, which received from them Sanction and Laws, by
which Coin was stamped, National and Provincial Court, Established, Estates
settled, their Clergy Re-established, the Popes Nuncio received Ambassadors sent
thence, and others entertained from Foraign Princes; all under a Sovereign Seal
of their own, and what else might bespeak them independent on any, but their
own Power: But the Evidence of these and some other Records, being the Treasure
of fearful men, (whom a specious Artifice had charmed) easy Keys o^ Interest
could not freely purchase. The Records however of that presumptious Assembly,
are (notwithstanding the unfortunateness of the Age) yet secured in his
Library, which (though before it wanted little to make it venerable) will in
future Ages be resorted to, as a Treasure invaluable, securing those Secrets,
which the malice of so potent an Enemy would have improved, to the ruin of an
Empire: Yet (as I have already said) I ground little, (if any thing) but on
Proofs; Nay! I have so well sifted Kilkenny it self, (though no Art has been
omitted to shuffle up the Proceeding there) as the Original Progress and State
of that Conclave, is not without faithful and notable Remarks, more being under
the Vizard, than appeared in the Disguise; though the Retirement I have now
betook my self to, (suitable to the effects of so disconsolate a Rebellion)
deprives me of those Councils and Societies, which (by a free'r Commerce) might
have rectified either my Sense or Style.

For the most part, I have in the Appendix set down Copies of the weightiest
Records, they carrying so much (even of the History) in them, as they eased me
in the Story: I should have been forward to have enlarged more, nothing of that
nature being otherwise than important; But in that, his Majesty's Works, Sir
John Temple, of the Irish Rebellion, Husbands Collections of Orders, Ordinances
and Declarations of both Houses of Parliament, the Commissioners of Ireland's
Remonstrance to the House of Commons in England, of the condition of the Clergy
and Protestants, the Speeches of several Members, Diurnals, Walshes Loyal
Formulary, the Answer to the Irish Remonstrance, presented at Trim, 1642. And
other Prints being extant, I have rather chose to refer the Reader often
thither, then engage him in too Voluminous a Tract; though where any Relation,
act, or other Material Instrument makes up the Story, (not without injury to be
abreviated) we have tied our selves to the Words. It was my happiness (I must
acknowledge) to meet with a Manuscript, whence I was supplied with much of the
latter part of this History, though a part of it was so weaved, as if Justice
could not have been done to some, without mutchthing of others, which we had
reason to wave; and if there be any obstinacy in that Particular, we are ready
to clear the truth.

In handling of which, I have insisted on the Proceedings of the King and
Parliament too long, (I suspect) some will judge, considering the diversity of
the Subject; but when it shall be weighed, how jointly they were interessed in
the prosecution of the War against the Irish, and that the unfortunate
difference betwixt them, retarded the success in Ireland; I fear not that any
ingenious Person should esteem this addition Alien: However the affections of
the King (whom some have traduced) were so legible to chastise the Rebels, as
without injury to his Sacred Memory, less could not be collected for Posterity,
least the Irish by their Pamphlets, (plentifully scattered at home and abroad)
should entitle the Parliament, more then his Majesty, to their just Correction;
The bleeding Iphigenia, being forward to cast more upon a Malignant Part of the
Council, (whom he would have the World believe, misinformed his Majesty) then
his Majesty of himself was really sensible of: A Consideration so important, as
he abuses Posterity, who delivers not the Truth entire. And that we may yet
further assume this Particular, I must affirm, That when the Confederates
Agents insisted passionately, why Ordinances of Parliament should be in force
against them? It was most judicially answered by the Committee (then managing
that Affair) that the constitution of our Laws, (indeed) receive their Essence
from the Royal Assent: but yet when they perused the Act 17. Car. 1. wherein a
particular Trust is in an extraordinary, and unusual manner, devolved unto the
Lords and Commons in Parliament; It is possible, that such Ordinance or
Ordinances may equitably continue, when others are justly laid aside; And it is
observable, that during the time of the unhappy and unnatural War betwixt his
late Majesty and his two Houses; That his Majesty was so far from
discountenancing any Ordinances or Proceedings of them, in order to the War of
Ireland, that his Majesty (in all his Condemnation of the Injustice of that
War, betwixt himself and them) laid it as an aggravation of their Fault, that
(by such Diversion) his Protestant Subjects of Ireland, (the care of whom he
had entrusted them withal) were exposed to the Butchery and Rapine of their
merciless Enemies: Nor would his Majesty have charged them, for not affording
Protection to his said Subjects, if the only Mediums for effecting it, viz.
Their Ordinances had been unjust, irregular, or unreasonable; as is evident in
his Answer, the 5. of May, 1643. to a Bill brought him to Oxford, by
Commissioners for the Service of Ireland, could they have secured the Ends, his
Majesty desired might be observed in that Bill.

I had thought (for the fuller Illustration of the History) to have inserted
constantly the Articles on the delivery of each Place, but finding those
sometimes many, I rather chose to exemplify a few, that thence the scope of
the rest might be conceived, that (which in the whole) was most considerable,
was, That none who Contrived the Rebellion, or had a hand in the first years
Murders, were ever to have any other Conditions, then to be left to Justice.

It must be confessed, I have missed it some times in the Synerisis, as in such
variety and confusion of Matter, it is imposible to be exact; But then
considering that Relative Affairs are brought sooner under on Head.

The Descrepancy of the other may be better excused.

I shall find it a hard task to run the Gantlet, for that several have (in
their Prints abroad) vented already their venom, not only as to what may skreen
the Rebellion, but on the proceedings of the State before; So Carue in his
Annals of Ireland, 1603. insinuates, P. 312*
That when King James had forgiven Tyrone, he says, Quidem sub specie (observe
the Rancour of the Author) In Anglia omnia condonavit sed cum in Hiberniam
rediisset ac Dublinium devenisset, confestim omnis rei seriem and Catastrophen
in se molita percepit, Then which, a greater Calumny could not be cast upon a
Prince, imposing on the World a Belief; That though in England he favored
Tyrone, yet clandestinely, he took all advantages to undo him; Which Tyrone
perceiving, Clanculo (writes this Author) In Ultoniam, deinde desertis omnibus
suis ditionibus in Galliam, post vero in Flandriam, and demum Romam perexit ubi
ultimum diem vitae exul terminavit, Whereas in truth, going out again into
Rebellion, (through his detestation of the English Government) he was forced to
sly, being absolutely routed by the Kings Forces.

If I should plead for what my self apprehends amiss in this Work, (much more
others) I should too long fix the Reader here: I shall therefore submit to the
fate of Books liable to the Capacity of the Reader, to whom I must affirm, that
if some of these Transactions had not been (through the Providence and
Integrity of a Reverend and eminent Person) prevented to have fallen into his
hands, who (if he plead not for it now?) was no mean Instrument of the
Rebellion; And that one Nicholas French, Titular Bishop of Ferns in Ireland,
about 80. years old.
under the Title of the bleeding Iphigenia, (a virulent and scurrilous Piece)
had not of late ( viz. 23. of December, 1674.) aspersed the State; I should
willingly have excused my self. That Me dulcis saturet Quies
Obscuro positus Loco
Leni persruar Otio.


But considering what Glosses, what Depravations of credible Witnesses, and
expurgation of their own, what Evasions, what leavings out, and Insertions
would have happened, had this History (in his hand) proceeded: I rather chose
to expose my Weakness, than leave Truths (of this consequence) nipt and sullied
to Posterity, not much valuing whose Teeth corrode most, Truth being in its
Lenith.

And truly when I consider how many are excellently skilled in Foraign
Histories, who scarce know our common occurrences at home, I think their
omission hardly pardonable, A man (as one Full. Col. of Speech. in the Preface.
well observes) being most morally edified by reading such Men, and Matters as
are his own Contemporaries; the Recitement of those things, which come nearest
to our times, being of most force and efficacy to instruct and delight us: A
sense of which made a most Reverend, and Intelligent Person (some months since)
so apprehensive of this Story, to be necessarily writ, that (upon Discourse) he
professed his observing so little of it before, became his wonder, having
satisfied himself (as most do, where the Concern touches the State, not their
Personal Interest) with the bare sound of the thing, rather then enquire into
the Nature, Growth, and Virulency thereof, (the Commons crying loud) which
thoroughly considered, is the import of the Nation; Though when such designs are
blasted, as the present tremendous Plot against his Sacred Majesty, and the
constituted Government, some often undervalue them as foolishly laid, and
weakly attempted, though that was not (as it seems) to determine here, but (as a
place more combustible and fit for fuel) to extend to Ireland, carefully
provided against by Proclamations, Dubl. 16th. October. 1678. 2d. November. 20.
November. 13. December.
(if not since relaxed?)

The Management of which Affairs fell to be very difficult on those then at the
Helm, which I cannot but say, some might have more easily carried on; yet when
it shall be impartially considered, I believe the caution and prudence of the
State, then will in their Acts to Posterity, appear more significant and
valuable, than Malice or ingratitude can justly sully them with: Besides, what
Exigences? what Misapprehensions? what Straights? did these daily encounter in
their own, and the State Affairs, (supportable by none that had not been of an
even and great Courage) is not to be passed over: Yet as to the Integrity of
their Service, few ever waded through their Task with greater Acquiescency,
what ever has been their misfortune to be censured at Pleasure, That being
their aim, which was their Glory, His Majesty's Honor, and the Protestants
Support, how slenderly soever the Merit of that Service has been since looked
on, in their Posterity; To whom little has been indulged, Praeter Nomen and
Famam and ea quoque a multis calcata.

And as then, so since, the State has labored under great Difficulties, (many
pangs and throws) to Establish the Settlement of Ireland, witness all those
Interests, which his Majesty (in his Declaration for the Settlement of Ireland
30. of November, 1660.
) crouding one upon another, carefully and with singular caution, as well
provided for, as could reasonably be expected after so great Troubles and
Confusions, and such blessed Circumstances of his Restoration: Act of
Settlement. Fol. 10.
Though how observed by the Court of Claims, is not my work to insist on, that
having been (with singular Perspicuity and Judgment) spoken to 13. Feb. 1662.
at large by the Speaker of the House of Commons in Ireland, and since then, by
the Adventurers Case Stated, etc. The state of the Question arising chiefly
from the distinction of Nocent and Innocent: In reference whereunto; First,
some were to be considered, as fit to be restored to their Estates, who not
only gave early evidences of their Crimes, but also persever'd in their
Loyalty; As 2. others who submitted to the Peace without Apostasy; And 3. such
as being transported into Foraign Parts, united and served his Majesty through
many difficulties, and accepted not of other satisfaction; As 4. others who in
an especial manner merited the restoring of their Estates, which Grace and
unparalleled Favor (whether sufficiently refflected or no by the Confederates)
took off many of those, who by the Declaration were to be Nocent, as all of the
Rebels Party before 1643. As also such as enjoyed their Estates in the Rebels
Quarters, except the Inhabitants of Cork, and Youghall, or those who entered
into the Roman Catholic Confederacy before the Peace, 1648. adhering to the
Nuncio, opposing the Kings Authority, Excommunicating such as adhered to the
King, impowering Commissioners to treat with any Papal Power, or bringing into
Ireland Foraign Forces; As also such as had been Wood Kerns, or Tories before
the Marquess of Clanrikards Act of Settlement. Fol. 37.
leaving the Government, on whom the Letter of Condemnation is writ in their
foreheads, as having been not only eminently Guilty of that horrid and
unprovoked Rebellion, but also active in the very Conduct of it, as Generals,
Lieutenants, and Major Generals, Counselors in the Supreme Assembly, etc.
though many of these since enjoy a plentiful Estate.

In this War the Soldiers were forced on many sad inevitable streights; Yet
their Gallantry, Courage, and Patience, carried them on so unanimously, as in
all the Encounters they had with the Rebels, (as far as an honorable Person
writ) they never (writes he) received any Scorn or Defeat, and (what was more)
without any assistance either from the mere Irish, or English Irish, that were
Gentlemen of Quality; In as much as one Sir Audley* Mervin, Speaker of the
House of Commons in Ireland. P. 11. and 12.
(who knew as well the Genius as the Progress of the Irish in his excellent
Speech to the Lord Lieutenant, (since Anno St. 1662.
published in Print) thought it no Scandal to affirm, That amongst all the
Persons that have been restored, (as Innocent) we cannot) says he) understand
of one, neither can we say upon our own knowledge, (and we come from all parts
of the Kingdom) that any one of them from the 23. of October, 1641. to
September, 1653. ever drew a Sword against the Irish in Rebellion, or ever
assisted our English Forces in prosecution of them. Nor is it to be thought
strange, That none of the Irish gave any assistance to his Majesty's Forces,
for that (besides those Decrees of Salamanca, etc. Cited by Philip Sullevan,
Tom. 3. Hist. Cath. Hiber. Lib. 8. Cap. 7. Fol. 202. Fol. 11.
mentioned in our State of Ireland before the Insurrection? To this History)
Mahony in his Disputatio Apologetica. Page 43. (having sullied much Paper in
quoting Bulls against English Heretics invading Ireland) there insists upon
it, Addendum est hic etiam tanquam omnino certum omnes Hibernos teneri ex
Praecepto Humano, Divino and naturali convenire inter se ad Haereticos
expellendos, and adevitandam cum illis Communicationem; and multo magis
obligari ad non praestandum illis aliquod Auxilium Consilium, Favorem, Arma,
aut Commeatus, etc. contra Catholicos. Fol. 742.
That it was then also to be added, (as altogether certain) that the Irish are
engaged by a Divine, Human, and Natural Precept, unanimously to join to
extirpate Heretics, and to shun Communion with them, and much more to be
obliged not to assist them with Aid, Council, Favor, Arms, or any
Accommodation, etc. against Catholics; which Principle of Mahony, Walsh Fol.
741. tells us, with his Book was condemned to be burned, by order of the
Supreme Council of the Confederates at Kilkenny; Yet we do not find, whilst the
Irish were themselves, that (in Detestation to Mahony's Principle) they ever
assisted the English, nay! Father Nich. Redmond Secretary to the Congregation,
(giving Walsh an account of the Acts of that Congregation) tells him, That they
were never formal ones, seriously digested and couched by select Committees,
nor were they the Principal Scope of that meeting; whereby it may be
conjectured (without violence to their good Intentions) that their Censure (on
Mahony's Book) was rather a Fucus cast on their present Complexion, than any
abhorrency thereof; what at other times they Solemnly intended, being ever
seriously digested.

1st. Some (it must be confessed) there were who (cleaving a Hair) so demeaned
themselves, as they were Denisons in either Quarter, an Artifice so well forged
as they had the fortune to be more countenanced than suspected; though its
believed their Access to both sides, was a prejudice to ours.
And for those who joined with his Excellency after the Peace of 1646. (who
would be thought to have merited thereby, after they had assumed a
Contradistinct Government; and in defense thereof, maintained a War, and (which
is worse) a Cessation with Detention of his Majesty's Forts, and the
Inheritances of his Subjects) It cannot be said (without the forfeiture of our
Reason) that their pure Loyalty (but self-preservation) engaged them thereunto:
For seeing how resolute the Parliament of England was to pursue that War, their
security could be no where, but in siding with the King; And that this (not
affection or sense of what they had done) was the grounds of that Compliance,
appears in their subsequent Acts, shamefully afterward diserting the Marquess
of Ormond, fixing upon him incredible Scandals, when he had exposed himself (at
their request) to all the inconveniences imaginable, for their Peace and his
Majesty's Interest; First, parting with the English under his Command, (an
evidence that those were they whom they still endeavored to root out) and then
ordering their Bishops and Commissioners of Trust, to share in his Councels,
and the management of Affairs; At last ejecting him as questionable before his
Majesty, for his injuries to them, and his ill Government; whilst they assumed
the Management of all, in acting, That no Temporal Government or Jurisdiction,
should be assumed, kept, or executed in that Kingdom, or any Province or County
thereof, other then what is approved or instituted by their General Assembly or
Supreme Council, which was indeed the first Commonwealth set up in his
Majesty's Empire: And yet these are those who were received as Penitents to
Mercy, strange Penitents! Who after so much blood, and spoil of Innocents, such
sins against Indulgence, and Oaths of Obedience and Submission, were so far
from satisfying their wrong doings, that they were never brought to profess
themselves Guilty, whose Penitence seems to be only, in that they failed to
accomplish their evil in fullness: Twice Conspired they a Peace, the better to
accomplish (to the utmost) what they might not need further Penitence, Act of
Settlement, in Fol. 10.
thereby foolishly forfeiting all the Grace which they might have expected from
his Majesty; though amongst the General, there were some, who upon the Peace
made with them, honestly performed what they had promised to him, though with
inconveniency enough to themselves, whose demeanor could not but be thought
very worthy of his Protection, Justice, and Favor, as they find fully enlarged
in the Act of Settlement.

And here I cannot but take notice, that though some would impute the
Irregularity of these Proceedings to the Clergy only, (who indeed were the main
spoak in the Wheel) yet some of the Committee of Trust, and of the Nobility,
(who ever else were free?) were also privy thereunto, (how close soever they
behaved themselves) as appears in their cherishing privately the ill Humors and
Jealousies of the People, and their averseness to punish the greatest
exorbitancy, wherein the Clergy were concerned without the Cooperation of the
Bishops, whose consent they were sure never to have: Indeed I dare not but say,
(having it from an excellent Pen) that some of the Irish Descent have in the
late Troubles (as in all Ages) well deserved of the Crown, though it may wrack
the Memory of the strictest observer to enumerate many, few having assisted the
Protestants against the Mighty.

However great struggling there has been, That the Peace of 1648. should be
inviolable, whereas besides other important Reasons referring to their
abominable Reservation; That if those Articles of Peace were not in every
particular for their Advantage performed, they would not be concluded thereby:
It must be considered, that when the King was necessitated to comply with the
Rebels, he was then under sad streights; The odious Court (by which his Sacred
Life was afterward taken away) being then erected: So as no body could wonder,
that he desired (though upon difficult Conditions) to get such an united Power
of his own Subjects, as might have been able with Gods blessing, to have
prevented that infamous and horrible Parricide; Yet then in that Article of
time, the Irish pressed for the conclusion of the Peace: Whereas if they had been
truly Loyal and Unanimous? Generous Souls, would never have took that
opportunity to have enhaunc'd their Price: But (in submission to what Grace
they might afterward find) freely have waded through the difficulties they
were called to, having long before promised a vigorous Assistance, which they
never attempted: Though many of these since, must confess, that they have been
as well provided for, as after so great Troubles and Confusions, and such
blessed Circumstances of his Majesty's Restoration, they could reasonably
expect; And yet the bleeding Iphigenia (that piece of Ingratitude and Scandal)
will tell you, That the Body of a noble, ancient, Catholic Nation, (Ireland)
clad all in red Robes, is not now to be offered up as Victime, but is already
Sacrificed; not to a Profane Diety, but to the living God for Holy Religion,
As if after all the Indulgence, (which has been and is vouchsafed, that
Nation) nothing attends it but Misery and Ruin, a Trumpet certainly to another
Insurrection.

But to proceed, the success of our Armies (considering the numbers they often
opposed) exceeds a common Belief; in as much, as some have extenuated the Glory
of their Service, by the Cowardliness of the Enemy, who seldom made a noble or
brave Defense, save where an extremity reduced them to an exigence, or a
surprise made them cruel: But on this subject Sir Francis Bacon (in a Letter
Scrin. Sacr. P. 46.
to the Earl of Essex, going for Ireland) observes, That the justest Triumphs
that the Romans in their greatest Greatness did obtain, and that whereof the
Emperors in their Styles took Additions and Denominations, were of such an
Enemy, that is, People barbarous, and not reduced to Civility; magnifying a
kind of Lawless Liberty, Prodigal of Life, hardness in Body, fortified in Woods
and Bogs, placing both Justice and Felicity in the sharpness of their Swords:
It being a higher Point of Honor to reduce such to Civility, than to be
enriched by a Praeditory War.

I *am sensible that the undertaking of this War has passed with many, as an
opportunity to enrich the Servitour; nor can it be denied, but that reward is
the just expectation of Merit: But when it shall be considered at what rates
Debenters were paid off, what hardship the Soldiers encountered, how many in
Rebellion shared the mercy of a Gracious Prince, what were the Difficulties
attended all in Government; it cannot be denied, but more then a Praeditory
War, even the Establishment of a Religion and Nation the Irish would have
extirpated, the settling of his Majesty's Rights, and the reducing of a People
(loose in their Principles) to Civility, were the main Ends of this War, to
which his Majesty was forced by the causeless and inhuman Insurrection of the
Irish: In reference to which, the Rebels (being before prepared thereunto) soon
Marshalled a considerable Force; But though it was for their Altars and
Inheritance (as they pretended,) never any Nation fell under greater
Pusillanimity, which some impute to their want of Warlick Provisions; their
ignorance in the Discipline of their Army, the lack of unity amongst
themselves; and the Supplies of the English ever found of all necessaries: But
certainly the greatest Defect was in the badness of their Cause, which Conor O
Mahon Alias Cornelius a sancto Patrico virulent Jesuit.
in his Disputatio Apologetica urges from an Ethnic Poet, (led merely by the
light of Nature) is most material. Frangit and attollit vires milite Causa
Quae nisi justa subest, excutit Arma Pudor.


For it must be allowed, (not to be denied by the Ingenious) that the Natives
have Courage and Abilities sufficient, few (in their Employments abroad)
proving better Soldiers, more temperate, better versed in the World, or
readier to be put on the forwardest Action.

Here I might enlarge much in the Encomiums of those who so vigorously opposed
them, though at length the Irish got Courage, or rather (from the certainty of
what they were sure to suffer) grew desperate; extremity forcing that, no sense
of Honor before could Animate; And yet then, the Conduct and vigor of the
English appeared such, as the Rebels though in some skirmishes (assisted by
surprisals) prevailed, they could never arrive at a perfect Defeat: Here though
I am sometimes lead to mention eminent Persons in their Places, I am yet forced
to omit many, whose Offices and Names I cannot attain to, which by their
Prowess and Virtue, would have added Date to the History; And yet I know some
Persons are so apprehensive of their Merits, that not to express them in Terms
aequivalent, may be worse than to omit them; willingly I insist on None, with a
Disrespect to others.

Here I cannot (without injury to a Reverend Prelate) but take notice, what I
find clearly, and most eloquently expressed by Dr. Loftus, Vicar General of
Ireland, in a Speech at a Visitation in the Diocese of Clogher, touching Dr.
John Lesley, Lord Bishop of Clogher, who (during the first fury of the
Rebellion in Ireland) vigorously opposed the Rebels; and when Sir Ralph Gore (a
worthy Servitor) at Machrebeg, and many other British Inhabitants, were reduced
to great extremity by a long Siege, and necessity of a sudden Surrender of
themselves, without hope of Quarter to the enraged Cruelty of the Irish; He
sallied forth amidst the Flames of the whole Country, and relieved him at that
time reduced to such Streights, as they were forced to cast their dishes into
Ball; And the Laggan Forces (consisting of three Regiments) refused to hazard
them for the Relief of the Besieged, whilst the Bishop (with his Company,
Tenants and Friends) attempted their Relief and perfected it, evidencing at
that instant as much Personal Valor, as Regular Conduct, yet mentioned with
much astonishment.

Affairs thus carried on, its evident how the Royal Throne (by whom the Army
advanced) is justly to be vindicated from those Calumnies some would asperse it
with; as if they had not proceeded by his Majesty's Command; So impudently did
these Rebels affront, not his Authority only in his Instruments at the Helm,
but thereby gave his Proclamation, Speeches, Acts, and Vows, the Contradiction;
And when his Execellency had made the first Peace with them, notwithstanding
his Majesty's Letter, To proceed no further in Treaty with the Rebels, that
Letter (as Pernachief well observes) having been solicited by the Scots (in
whose Power he was then) to make their War more valuable. The Irish yet so ill
managed that condescension, as nothing in History equals their ingratitude,
that thence the Integrity of the Prime Minister of State being to them, and his
Master Signal their Defection, remains a Blot to Posterity: Indeed it is seldom
seen that where a People (by Insurrection) obtain their first pretentions, but
they aspire to greater; Whence it is observed of Hen. 7. that he was ever in
the Head of his Army, lest Rebels prevailing, (at the beginning) they might
soon roll into an Host: Nor is it found that ever he complied with their
requests, how plausible soever, least they might be thought to purchase that by
their Insurrection, which they did not dare to impetrate by their Prayers; Upon
which Account it may be thought his late Majesty desired to go for Ireland,
Conceiving that the Rebels were capable of no greater Terror, than by the
Presence of their Lawful King in the Head of an Army, to chastize them, though
the consequence of it were otherwise apprehended, and his Journey stayed
thereupon, He not being so weary of his Life as to hazard it impertinently,
whereby the Parliament conceiving (by a Commission under the great Seal of
England) that they had Power to Advise* According to an Order of the 4th. of
Febr. 1641. That there should be Commissioners to manage the Affairs for
Ireland, whereby the Parliament might be eased in that Particular.
Order, and Dispose of all things concerning the Government and Defense of
Ireland, wholly applied themselves to that Work, till the unhappy Difference
betwixt his Majesty and them fell so considerable, as though they sent
(sometimes) scattering Supplies, the wants of the Army grew clamorous; Yet in
the end, they so far prevailed, as to declare 26. Sep. 1653.
the Rebels subdued: In accomplishing of which, so many changes, such variety
of matter, and several alterations of Scenes happened, as a Pen (armed with the
Rhethorick of the best Historian) is but sufficient to Register them to
Posterity; Inferior Pens being probable to lessen so considerable a Story;
However it is now fallen to my Lot, (it may be thought voluntarily) indeed thus
much I must allege for my self, that besides a strong impulse, so many (and
considerable Persons) have drawn me to it, that without a more than ordinary
Hardiesse, I could not well resist their Importunity, which if any judge too
easy a Flexibility, I submit to their Censure, so they think the Work (shunned
by many) really necessary, considering the affront some bold Pens have offered
to the Sincerity of the State and their Gallantry, who (in Honor of the
Empire) have sustained the Insolences of a sad and unnatural War, which if I
do not express answerable to the subject, it may satisfy the Reader, that my
aim is to be intelligible and significant, though rude and plain.

Amongst several encouragements, I shall here only insert One from a Person
better versed in the Language he writes than English. Vir Clarissime.
TAnta fide and industria, tantoque successu, finem imposuisti operi diu
expectato, quod texit nobis Hibernicae Rebellionis Historiam, quae coepit Anno,
a reparata Salute, 1641. Octobris 23. Gratulor tibi hocce calamo, quo e
tenebris eruisti veritatem, and pene obrutam per hujus AEtatis negligentiam, in
apertum protulisti: Non puto quicquam unquam horridius and funestius sua
origin, suo progressu and eventu excogitatum fuisse ab orb condito, quam quod
machinati sunt Authors execrabilis in Britannos Protestants, quibus sola
defensionis Arma erant in sua Innocentia; cedunt huic Immanitati Siculae
Vesperae, Rabies Paparum in Convallenses and Pidemontanos, and Laniena
Parisiensis: Non queo satis praedicare nostra tempora, quae tulerunt te virum,
Qui vivis coloribus and graphice depingeret, exprimeret, palam faceret
Sicariorum coepta incoepta complexus, facinora nefanda, singulosque actus
horrendae Lanienae; In qua tamen, tanquam in re been gesta, triumphant ejus
Patroni Mahony and Alii Satanicarum Artium Consortes and perinde homicidarum
and percussorum Advocati, ut ulterius animos addant contribulibus suis
perstandi in Incaepto, ut Haereticorum, quos vocant, Jugum semel excussum non
admittant, unquam iterum nec permittant, sed potius Eligant sibi Regem
Catholicum and vernaculum, seu naturalem Hibernum, Qui Eos Catholice gubernari
possit, quemadmodum Loquuntur in sua exhortatione ad Catholicos; utique Jesuita
Hibernus Mac-Mahon (ut recte observat Walsh) insinuavit, quod liceat occidere
non solum omnes Protestants, sed and quoscunque Hibernos de Romany Catholicis
Qui starent a partibus Coronae Regis Angliae and tuerentur Jura Regia in
Hiberniam, Quique interdixerent ne sibi proprium Regem Eligerent.

Profecto circa initia Rebellionis immensum quantum obstitit in coeptis and
molitionibus Rebellium Illustrissimus Parens tuus destinatus ad id a
potentissimo Rege, Cui nota erat virtus fortissimi viri, pacis and belli
artibus clari, Cujus prudentia par erat animi Robori, and qui hacce virtute res
nutantes and ad ruinam properantes incompositasque firmavit, adversus
Consiliarios Magna negotia administrantes, majori cum Studio privatae quam
publicae Utilitatis; quo in Conatu and per virtutem vitamque pie and innocenter
actam muneri magis suo consuluit quam facultatibus parandis, Cujus Vestigiis
insistens Johannes ejus filius eques auratus frater tuus clarissimus ob res
fortiter gestas, Droghedam, and Rossam, nec pro meritis pensatas non debuit a
te praeteriri, Quanquam nulla privata ratione sed solo Elatere veritatis
proferendae commovearis ad imputandum publico Historiam tuam, Quae tua est
Modestia.

Idus Novembris 1678. Vale.



To this (as a Resepect I must ever acknowledge) I cannot but annex the
following Letter, lately received from the Honorable and Eminent Lord Bishop
of Mead, a constant Assertor of the English Interest and the Protestants
Sufferings, minding, me from whom I had several Passages in the ensuing
History: A History which must want much of its due Method and more Eloquence,
not having his. Doctor.
I Understood by Letters from London, and after by Two from your self, of your
forwardness in the History of the Irish Rebellion, Anno 1641. that being, I
find, now in the Press.

How far you have therein proceeded, or what is your way in that, I know not,
that not having been to me by any communicated; To that therefore I can say no
more, than, that its passing your hands, assures me of what may satisfy.

What may satisfy, I mean not those, who shut their eyes against light, and
even Rebel against it.

There are, who contrary to all evidence, confidently averr, write and openly
proclaim to the World, that there was then no such Rebellion of the Irish,
neither such Massacres of the British and Protestants in Ireland; but that they
themselves, the Irish and Papists of Ireland, were then the Sufferers, and that
by the Protestants, (they say) the first aggressors.

This bold assertion in the face of the Sun; and in that very age, when things
were acted, there having been many also then, and some yet living, who can
speak to the truth in that; This (I say) might gain on Strangers to the
Kingdom, and has already on some, even at home, especially at this time, about
40 years after.

But the contrary appeared by those Collections, which you had from me, to
which herein* as in other particulars, I refer.

And what do they in this, but what was before, and is by them done ordinarily?
Have they not with like confidence disclaimed that black and hellish
Powder Plot, Nov. 5. 1605. from being Popish? do they not give that out for
false, and as a forged Calumny cast on that Party, of whom none of theirs (they
say) was therein concerned? whereas, it is well known, that Hammond, Baldwin,
Gerard, and Tesmond, Jesuits, with their Provincial Garnet, were all in that
Conspiracy; Thomson also, a Jesuit boasted after at Rome, that his shirt was
often wet with digging under the Parliament House in London, besides others in
that Conspiracy, who were all Papists, and many of them Suffering for their so
practicing; the public proceedings on those Trials remaining extant on Record.

And do They not now, even now, cry down what our eyes behold of their horrid
and bloody Design, and hellish Treason against the Royal Person of our Gracious
Sovereign King Charles II. and against his Protestant Subjects: and for total
extirpation of the Protestant Religion out of the Three Kingdoms? The truth of
which is every day, even as by miracle, more and more evidenced, to the Glory
of Gods watchful Providence over this his Church and People.

Among which, I find our selves threatened with a yet other like demonstration
of zeal, for the promoting of the Catholic Religion, and Interest in Ireland,
(Dr. Oats Nar.. 50.) so they term those Massacres, and Blood, for rooting out
the Protestant Religion, and casting off the English Government in Ireland;
which their other demonstration of Zeal, (as they term it) shows the former
actings in that kind to have bin theirs, and how such their Actings are by them
esteemed; a demonstration of Zeal for promoting the Catholic Religion.

But He that sits in Heaven laughs them to scorn, and has them in derision,
speaking to them in his wrath, and vexing them in his sore displeasure, saying;
yet (or notwithstanding all such their Designs) have I set up my King;
preserving our Gracious Sovereign, the breath of our Nostrils, by the care and
vigilance of those our worthy Patriots whom God has raised up happy
instruments in it.

As to Ireland. To evidence the restless Spirits of such there for mischief: I
shall mind here in brief, what in the mentioned Collections, had bin given you
more at large, so to lay all open at one view; thereby not to wonder at
Rebellions here, than which, comparing times, nothing will appear so ordinary.

In which, passing what occurs of that kind in elder ages, and fixing only on
such as had Religion for a pretense, and was by Rome influenced, and by its
Emissaries fomented: Therefore I begin with the Reign of that Queen of famous
memory, Queen Eliz. of whose Troubles in England from that Party, I speak not,
as not of present consideration, but recounting what work they found Her in
this her Kingdom of Ireland only.

I. Anno 1567. There was a Rebellion in the Province of Ulster of Shane O-Neal,
who for the suppressing of the Title of O-Neal, had bin by King Hen. 8. created
Earl of Tyrone, His Forces were broken by Sir Henry Sidney, then Lord Deputy,
and he himself fleeing for succor to Alexander Mac Donnel, then in the
Clandeboyes, with 600. Highlander-Scots: He was by them there slain, in revenge
of one of theirs by him formerly killed; his Head was ( June 20. 1567.) sent to
the Deputy by Captain William Piers, then eminent for Service and Command at
Carrickfergus and thereabout, that Arch-rebels head was pitched on the Castle
of Dublin.

II. Since after, Anno 1569. followed in the Province of Munster the Rebellion
of James Fitz Mauris Fitz Gerald, and John Fitz Gerald, brothers to Gerald Earl
of Desmond, in which the Earl himself after declared, Anno 1578. His Parties
were considerable in Leimster, to whom joined the Viscount Baltinglas, with the
Pools, Birns, and Cavenaughs, having also Foraign assistance, the design being
pretended for Religion, the Pope, and his giving therefore Aid and Countenance;
but Desmond being defeated, he was after by his own murdered.

III. About 6. years after, Anno 1595. brake out in Ulster (also for Religion)
another Rebellion, that of Hugh O-Neal, commonly called Tyrones Rebellion,
whose Forces, together with the Spanish assistances were overthrown by Mountjoy
Lord Deputy at Kinsale, Dec. 24. 1601. he himself submitting March 1602. These
were during the Reign of Queen Eliz.

IV. After whose death King James succeeded, and within one Month after Anno
1603. the Cities of Waterford, Cork, and Limerick, stood out, and opposed the
Proclaiming the Kng, he not being (they said) a Catholic, these acted
Hostility, inviting all other Cities to a conjunction, to which Kilkenny, and
Wexford were inclining, but by the Deputy Mountjoys marching against them with
an Army, they were forced to Submission.

V. After, Anno 1607. was a Providential discovery of another Rebellion in
Ireland, the Lord Chichister being Deputy, the Discoverer not being willing to
appear, a Letter from him not subscribed, was superscribed to Sir William
Usher, Clerk of the Council, and dropped in the Council Chamber then in the
Castle of Dublin, in which was mentioned a Design for seizing that Castle,
murdering the Deputy, etc. with a general revolt, and dependence on Spanish
Forces, etc. and this also for Religion; for particulars whereof, I refer to
that Letter, dated March 19. 1607. which you have.

VI. The very next year Anno 1608. was the breaking out of Sir Cahie O
Dogherty's Rebellion in Ulster, by whom Derry was taken and burnt, the Governor
Sir George Paulet murdered, and Culmore Castle, some miles distant, surpised,
that being the Magazine for Arms and Ammunition for those parts: His
Confederates were considerable, his Forces increasing, and expecting Tyrone,
and Tyrconnil's return with Forces from Flanders. Against him was the Marshal
Sir Richard Wingfield, sent with a strong Party, the Deputy following with more
Forces from Dublin: But this short, yet smart Rebellion, ended with the death
of the Arch rebel, and the dispersing his followers.

VII. Seven years after Anno 1615. was a Providential discovery made by one
Teige O Lenan, to Sir Thomas Philips of Lemovadey in Ulster, of a Design of
Alexander mac Donel, Bryan Cross O-Neal, and other the principal of the Irish
in Tyrone, and Tyrconnil, with large Confederacies for Religion; They first
designed the taking Charlemount, commanded by Sir Toby Caulfield, where was
then Prisoner Conne Greg O-Neal, Tyrones Son, and about the same time by
severally appointed Parties, was ordered the taking in the principal Forts and
Towns in Ulster: and murdering the Protestants in that Province and elsewhere.
They had promises of Foreign assistance from Spain, France, and Rome, the
particulars you have: During the Reign of King James were these 4 last
mentioned.

VIII. After Anno 1634. under the Government of the Lord Viscount Wentworth
Lord Deputy, Ever, or Emerus mac Mahon, a Popish Priest, privately discovered
to Sir George Radcliffe, principal in trust with the Lord Deputy, that there
was a Design for a general rising in Ireland, to be seconded and assisted from
abroad: The Discoverer having assurance of Pardon, acknowledging himself
engaged in that Conspiracy; having been employed some years on that account in
Foraign Courts, soliciting supplies for carrying on that work for Religion.
This Discoverer was after the Popish Bishop of Down, and after of Clogher:
Hereof the Lord Deputy informed his Majesty King Charles I. who thereupon by
his Ambassadors, watching practices in Courts abroad, there were at length,
general and dark hints given of something tending to a Rebellion in Ireland,
but how, or when, or by whom, was not then so appearing.

Hereof his Majesty by his Royal Letters, Signed by Sir Henry Vane, one of his
principal Secretaries, dated March 16. 1640. and directed to the then Lords
Justices, Sir William Parsons, and Sir John Borlase, did charge them with the
care of that danger imminent, of which his Majesty's Letter you have likewise a
Copy.

And this brings to that Rebellion Anno 1641. which on the 23d. of October, did
break out unexpectedly, notwithstanding all cautions concerning it, this, like
a violent Hurricane, bearing all down before it, which gives you your work at
present.

The result and design of all which, thus here briefly collected, shows.

1. That from Shane O-Neals Rebellion, Anno 1566. until that in 1641. there
passed about 75 years, a space of time within the ordinary age of a man.

2. That within those but 75. years, there had been in Ireland, Five open
Rebellions, one as it were in the neck of another, ( viz.) Shane O-Neals, Anno
1566. Desmonds, Anno 1569. Hugh O-Neal, called Tyrones Rebellion, Anno 1595. O
Doghertyes, Anno 1608. and this Grand Rebellion 1641. this surpassing all
before, I know not why that Rebellion of the Cities of Waterford, Cork, and
Limerick, may not add to that number, this being as open as any, and dangerous,
and requiring the presence of the principal Commander, and the marching of the
Forces of the Kingdom to suppress it. Add to these, those 2 Discoveries
mentioned, Anno 1607. and 1615. (not to mention apart that Anno 1634. falling
into that of 1641.) which 2 former had been dismal to the Kingdom, if not by
Gods providence, seasonably, and wonderfully discovered, and happily prevented.

Therefore have we herein not to wonder at Rebellions in Ireland, than which,
nothing there more common, from generation to generation, and may not the like
be yet expected, when opportunity shall be for it, the same Spirit and Causes
remaining.

This is not (Sir) to forestal your work, but serves as an Index directing to
what follows of yours: giving also an edge to this desire of finding the
breviat as by you enlarged, if you have thought fit to make use of it.

I shall now end your trouble herein, giving you the deserved praise of your
labors, and zeal to that necessary undertaking. I rest

Sir, Your very affectionate Friend and Servant, Henry Midensis.
Dublin, May 27. 1679.



Since I reduced the History to what it is, I reflected on several, to whom I
might have adrest it, some who (having run through the Hazard of that War, and
the Councils of that Age) might well have owned it, it being (in the main) an
Epitome of their Illustrious Actions: Others being designed to the Government,
but not aiming at the Work, (as too sensible of the English Interest to betray
it) justly challenges a respect and Title thereunto: And not a few (through
whose Provision the Irish were subdued) might well have contenanc'd the Event;
But considering how insignificant a great Title is, where Truth must be the
main support, (elated Dedications bespeaking Authors more ambitious than known)
I could not delude my Reason with a Conceit that a Mecaenas, as the Laurel,
exempts from Thunder, and therefore countent with the Integrity of the Story,
(having no ends to oblige me to a single respect) I here commit it naked to the
Decision of the Age.

It may be some (whose Excellency consists in Detraction) will think (by this)
I had a particular Design (besides the bare History) to preserve the Memory of
some, who (otherwise) in tract of time might be lost in the common Rubbish: And
I dare not disown those Conjectures, the Deserving being to be in everlasting
Remembrance; Nor has it in all Ages, and amongst the worthiest Persons, been
esteemed Pride, but Justice, to erect Memorials and Altars to Meriting Heroes;
Though herein (I conceive) none could be so much concerned who would have less
insisted thereon, then my self, resolving to be sparing, in what I might have
been prodigal; How contrary soever it may be Conjectured by some, who (pleased
with the public breath) dare blaspheme those whom they could never wean from
their Countries Interest, or Religion; though as to an utter extirpation,
(which was strongly insisted on by many) I may affirm that they (whom the
Malice of some would traduce) were ever so far from that, (abominating the
thought) as the Rebels Reformation not their Ruin, was their Principal care,
well distinguishing betwixt the Head and the Train, which a most eminent and
noble Person (just to his Honor) ever avouch'd.

Somethings (it may be) were not always suited to the just standard of the Law,
which in such Exigences have ever been indulged, though not commanded; The
preservation of a State being more than the security of a Person; And thence
Prudence as well as Justice, has been a necessary Attendant on Magistrates: No
State being so secured by her Laws, as that something emergent may not require
a speedier Help, the effect of which if severe? (being out of the common Road)
is the Offenders, not the State Fault.

And hereupon a known Instrument of State perfectly experienced in that Road,
excellently well Cautions, Not to weigh and measure Statesmen's Proceedings, by
grains and scruples, lest the public Affairs of a Kingdom lie wast, whilst men
of Honor and Fortune in meddling with them are sure to loose.

The Rebels (by their Pamphlets) affirm that few Murders (if any?) were done,
till some examples of that nature were acted by the English; whereas the
contrary plainly appears by those Examinations in the Remonstrance Printed at
London. 1642.
of diverse remarkable Passages concerning the Church and Kingdom of Ireland,
which cannot be waded, whatever R. S. in his Collections of Murders 1662.
would insinuate, as if that was only framed to win Compassion and Succor from
England, or scandalize Authority, whereas it is clear the Remonstrance P. 6.
was passed on such undeniable Evidences, that the Circumstances he takes
notice off, (to justisie his own) of Time, Place, and Persons, (as if they were
not considered in the Remonstrance) are generally observed and that on Oath,
Not encouraged (as he would infer) from the hurry of the Times, and the
Examinants Frights, but before his Majesty's Commissioners, a Circumstance this
Detractor dare not pretend to, what Favor soever he thinks to draw from
Cromwell's proceedings (Summo Jure) in Ireland, which Page 10.
was on another score than we shall here insist on, and were promiscuously
cruel; yet those lessen nothing of the Irish Barbarism at First, or indeed of
their Mercy at Last, in stripping the English in so miserable a Season, driving
them from their Habitations, and exposing them to the Woods and Deserts for
their Rest and Sustenance, such as remained (being deluded by the Rebels
promises, and wedded to their own Habitations) were generally Massacred:
Certainly the lingering and sad Deaths which attended many, are justly to be
accounted the highest Barbarism, worse than whatever determined in a short
time, how cruel soever: Though some (who would be thought Civil and
Compassionate) think they merit much, in not having (as they write, not others)
their hands actually imbrued in the Blood of any of the British Protestants: of
which its believed there are but few if any) that may be justly entitled to
that Clemency. However are they not to be accounted equally Guilty, who moved
by the same Councils? Subsisted by the same maintenance? Whose Victory was
their Victory, and the Blood shed by One, was the consent of the Other.

Qui non vetat peccare, cum possit, jubet, Especially when they knew of the
Villainies that had passed, and yet sided with the Party so imbrued and fleshed
in Blood; No Check being given to that Career, when Leinster, and Ulster,
Valence, and Brabant agreed: However we have contexed in this History few
examples of Murders and Cruelties, in reference to the Luxury of the Rebels
took in the Scene: The effect of whose Malice and Animosity, being (in truth)
the Burden of the whole, is not omitted, (as not abounding in Proofs) but
because the Martyrology of the Clergy and the Protestants, deserve an account
apart. Besides though there be some Gleanings of Murders in Ulster, Connaght,
and Leinster, yet the care which was took to register those in Munster, has
been obstructed, as the others (if they had not been early) might have been so
too, However they are not lost, though at present confined.

Some Remarks on the Rebels Pamphlets and Pretentions, we have coursorarily
answered; Not holding our selves obliged to reply to each Particular, else the
Volume would swell too big; Besides there are many things which (in reading) an
Intelligent Person cannot but blow over with an easy Breath; Some are so
ridiculous, others improbable, most without their Circumstances: what is fairer
Varnished we have (from their own Principles, or their Parties Confession)
cleared, therein not so much veiling Truths, (whether for or against us) as
disclosing their nakedness, a deformed Face needs a Fucus.

The Favorers of that Party insist much on the Parliaments being Prorogued,
which should have met soon after the Insurrection; whereby what they would have
presented to the King, (by way of Accommodation) was (say they) thereby
prevented, and that the Lords and old English of the Pale, who had been
constant to the Crown in other Rebellions, were (by the usage of the State)
forced to take part with the Ulster Rebels; The first of these is in the main
discoursed Fol. 32.
of, to which we must add, (as being an undeniable consequence of their Desires
then) That their endeavors (to meet at that time in Parliament) was to no
other end, but that the Plot having been discovered, (whereby they could not
strike hands at first with the Northern Rebels, without apparent Rebellion,
which they were willing to screen under fairer pretenses) They might in
Parliament the more solemnly contest with the King, for their Religion and
Liberty; which neither the just Jealousies of the State, or the Distractions
then, could rationally admit of, lest meeting in such numbers (as a Parliament
would colourably bring to Town) they might take new Councils, the former
(seeming in some part) to be disappointed. And as to the Latter, the truth
thereof is already cleared from Fol. 39. to 42. nor indeed needs there any
thing more to be said, but what his Majesty (C. I.) on this subject verified to
the Protestant's Agents at Oxford, 1644. That what the Rebels pleaded as to
this Particular, was not his Belief but an Assertion of the Irish; And when the
Protestant Agents would further have cleared this Point, (some at Court being
apt to blow up those Cindars) the King said, That needed not, for to what
purpose is it to prove the Sun shines this day, when we all see it? And from
the Proceedings of the State expressed in their 25th. of Oct 1641.
Letter to the Lord Lieutenant, it is evident that all the hopes they had, was
of the old English of the Pale, and some other Parts, that they would continue
constant to the King, as they did in former times, Then which, what could be a
clearer demonstration of their Confidence in them, strengthening afterward
their Belief in affording them Arms and Trusting them with Commissions Civil
and Martial? And whereas these men will have it, that they offered Propositions
to the State, charging them with the neglect thereof, it is justified in the
Lords Justices Letter 14th. of Dec. 1641.
to the Lord Lieutenant, That not one of them (to that hour) offered to the
State any Advice or real Assistance, toward the Pacification of these
Troubles: Or when they were invited, (by all the engagements Honor or Loyalty
could enforce) would they ever comply with any; Nay, let the Insolency They
used to the Orders Fol. 35.
of Parliament, and the Invitation and Condescension of the State, Fol. 40.
tearing the First, and vilifying the Latter, remain a perpetual Witness of
their Arrogance and Ingratitude, that the State would have secured their
Allegiance, and they would not.

When I first entered on this History, I proposed to my self a Series of the
whole, but pressed with my own Affairs, and Matter increasing plentfully upon me,
I held it rational to sum up the whole after I had brought it to the Cessation,
which some Col. Crafford's Remonstrance Page 5.
had an apprehension was not a less Plot to deliver the Remainder of his
Majesty's true Subjects, into the Rebels hands, and to root out the Protestant
Religion, then what was commenced the 23. of October 1641. But the Articles of
that Cessation speak otherwise, necessity being the Ground thereof, legible in
his Majesty's Motives to a Cessation the 19th. of October 1643. which
afterward was highly controverted, and in the end so enfeebled, as the War
(according to the first intent) was (after the long Parliament grasped all)
pursued with Vigor and Success: Which here (induced to it by many Reasons) we
have at last (according to our first thoughts) brought to a Period under his
Majesty's Test, in the Voice of his Parliament in Ireland 1662. though with
omission of many Circumstances, lest in such variety, we might fall short of
those considerable Actions, which frequently intervened, fit indeed for none
less Privy to the Rebels, than the State: However we have not omitted
sufficient to clear the Rise as well as the Conclusion of this War, not so much
dreading Censures, as caring to inform Right: Yet I Question not, but there
will be some who will find (if not sufficient) enough to carp at; No History
was so round as to pass a General Acceptance: Happily Reader. Non facit ad
Stomachum nostra Lagena tuum.


Thy Appetite relishes not truth too near the Quick, another thinks the time
ill chosen, and some have other Prejudice; Whether one or other raises an
Exception, the Story is Tragical; And those who have trod the Theater, find
such Tracts as are Horrible to repeat, never to be forgot.

Though the Errata's seem many, they are more in Accents and Literal Defects,
then considerable mistakes; Such as an Ingenious Reader may as soon rectify as
view: The running Title from Fol. 24. to 32. (instead of what is there) must be
this, The Dismal Effects of the Irish Insurrection, and some numbers in Battles
are carefully to be Corrected, as Fol. 73. 8000. Foot for 3000. and Fol. 112.
13000. Foot for 1300. The rest are generally easy.

Errata's in the History.
FOl. 9. Line 13. read An, Fol. 10. Line 35. read Ghostly Confessor, Fol. 13.
Line 45. read Peisley, Fol. 15. Line 24. read Momonia, Fol. 16. Line 31. read
formed, Fol. 18. Line 2. read Courts, Fol. 19. Line 28. read would, Fol. 19.
Line 33. that for our Sins, that is omitted, Fol. 21. Line 22. prevent it, it
is left out, Fol. 22. Line 34. read Majesty, Fol. 25. Line 45. read pursue,
Fol. 38. Line 52. read also, Fol. 39. Line 26. read Kilbrew, Fol. 43. Line 9.
read Fishingboats, Fol. 44. Line 29. read dispatch, Fol. 49. Line 29. read
Westmeath, Fol. 52. Line 13. read 1641. Fol. 64. Line 32. and killed, leave out
and, Fol. 73. Line 43. read 3000. Fol. 76. Line. 35. read Balinasto, Fol. 82.
Line 18. read a Gigantick, Fol. 83. Line 11. read from Court, Fol. 86. Line 5.
read Haste, Fol. 86. Line 43. leave out take or, Fol. 91. Margin. read
Subscribed, Fol. 102. Line 45. from whence, is to be blotted out, Fol. 103.
Line 39. read themselves, Fol. 94. Line 27. read intent, Fol. 105. Line 9. read
approach, Fol. 106. Line 6. read Straights, Fol. 106. Line 13. read for, Fol.
112. Line 15. read 1300. Fol. 118. read 115. and F. 115. read 118. Fol. 120.
Line 8. read Besiegers, Fol. ibid. Line 15. read Carrickdrumroosh, Fol. ibid.
Line 25. read skirmish'd, Fol. 129. Line 2. Apprehension left out, Fol. 132.
Margin. read the 5th. Fol. 134. Line 18. our obedience, blot out our, as also
the Superscription, it being to be as the former Letter was Superscribed, Fol.
292. Line 36. But that, but is left out, 141. Line 46. immediately after
Sreights, pressed on him is omitted, Fol. ibid. in the Marg. read Teag O Bryan,
Fol. 181. Line 52. his, is left out, Fol. 185. Line 35. read restrain, Fol.
187. Line 36. read Kilkitto, Fol. 200. Line 4. read desist, Fol. 218. Line 16.
read Marquess of Ormonds, Fol. 225. Line 4. Lieutenant is to be left out, Fol.
226. Line 6. which was, was blot out, Fol. 252. Line 35. the Earl, the blot
out, Fol. 282. Line 21. read 20. of August, Fol. 287. Line 26. read unsound,
Fol. 316. Line 16. read 27. Fol. 326. Line 32. read blanched.

Errata's in the Appendix.
FOl. 10. Line 27. I is to be omitted, Fol. ibid. Line 28. read Torilagh, Fol.
12. Line 12. read Tool O Conly, Fol. 12. Line 45. read Ever mac Mahon, Fol. 15.
Line 23. read Torilagh, Fol. 19. Line 41. from is omitted before, read
Loghross, Fol. 25. Line 4. read Costilough, Fol. 66. Line 18. read resent, Fol.
66. Line. 44. do continue, is twice printed, Fol. 94 Line 9. read Sword, Fol.
98. in the Margin read Car. 342. and lower 344. Car. An. Hib. 344. Fol. 101.
Line 18. after Commission, would have been violated, is left out, Fol. 101.
Line 23. and after the Parenthesis, And he, is omitted, Fol. 102. in the Marg.
read put in, Fol. 114. Line 26. read Lisgool, Fol. 124. Line 32. read sense.

Errata's in the Epistle.
FOl. 6. Line 3. read formed, Fol. 7. Line 11. read reflections on, Fol. 9.
Line 28. read impt, Fol. 9. Line 29. read Zenith, Fol. 13. Line 27. Penitence
for, for is left out, as also violating it as often, Fol. 11. Line 11. read
Reflected on, Fol. 17. Line 12. read Perinchief, Fol. 17. Line 30. read
Consequences, Fol. 18. Line 29. read Execrabiles.

An Account of what the subduing the Rebellion of Ireland, begun the 23d. of
October, 1641. has cost, and what Damage the Protestants there have sustained
thereby, and what Lands have been forfeited and disposed of to Adventurers,
Soldiers, and other English, and what to the Irish, and now in their
possession: Abstracted out of the Accounts of Moneys in the Exchequer, during
such time as any regular Accounts were made up, and by probable and rational
Estimates, for the time in which no Accounts were kept, by reason of the
general Rebellion and Confusion, and out of the Surveys, Decrees, and
Settlements, made by his Majesty's Commissioners, for executing the Acts of
Settlement and Explanation in Ireland.

l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. 1. Moneys received and issued from the 6th. of
July, 1649. to the 1st. of November, 1656. being 7 years and 4 months,
according to an Account thereof, remaining as a Record, in the
Auditor-General's Office in Ireland. Transmitted out of England, in specie
1566848 13 4 3509396 17 0 22191258 3 0 Assessments in Ireland. 1309695 14 11
Rents of forfeited and sequestered Houses, Lands, Fishings, etc. 161598 8 7
Tithes sequestered 135524 3 2 Customs and Excise 252474 18 10 Preys of Cows,
Horses, and other Goods, taken from the Rebels, and for other casual Revenue
083258 18 l. s. Money issued in England toward transporting Armies, raising
Recruits, buying and sending over Provisions of all sorts for the Army, and
other Moneys issued by Warrant from the then Council, or the Committee of the
Army in England, which was not accounted for in Ireland, the Warrants and
Accounts being never transmitted thither, of which there is a Reference in the
account of Record, in the Exchequer abovementioned, which is estimated to be
as much, if not more, than the above sum of 3509396 l. 17 s. 0 d. In that all
Cloths, Linen and Woollen, Stockings, Shoes, Boots, Horses, Saddles, Arms,
Ammunition, Tents, Bread, Cheese, and all other eating Provisions, were sent
from England, and the price thereof deducted from the weekly Pay of the Army,
and not brought to Account, and so estimated as above 3509396 17 l. The Charges
of the Armies in the several Provinces of Ireland, from the 23d. of October,
1641. the time the Rebellion broke out, to the 6th. of July, 1649. from whence
the Account is stated, as above, being about 7 years and 9 months, when no
regular Accounts were or could be kept, by reason of the Confusion in which the
Kingdom was by the Rebellion, there may be by probable Estimate added, without
any Allowance, for Provision of all sorts, after the Rate of what was paid the
Army after the 6th. of July, 1649. when Provisions were deducted 3760068 l. s.
The Loss of Rents for 14 years, from October 1641. until the year 1655.
reckoning the Land but at 12 d. an Acre yearly, is 7608264 l. 6 s. and
reckoning all the Corporations, Houses and Tithes, but at a Moiety thereof,
comes to -- 11412396 9

Besides the Loss by the Devastation of Houses, Orchards, Gardens,
Improvements, Household Stuff, Corn, Cattle, and the impairing the value of Land
unto that time, not to be estimated, but in reason to be accounted, as much as
before is computed for all other Charges, Losses and Expenses, if not much
more, the same extending to the whole Kingdom.

2. By the Surveys of Ireland, there is in Ireland, as forfeited by the
Rebellion, and belonging to Protestants, not forfeited, of Plantation-Acres,
accounting 21 Foot to the Perch, and 160 Perches to the Acre, in the respective
Provinces, the quantity of Land hereafter mentioned.

a. Acres Leinster 2603520 10868949 Munster 3255874 Ulster 2777875 Connaght
2231680 The which Lands are divided and distributed, as by the Surveys and
Records of the Court of Claims will appear, as follows: a. To the
Protestants, and others, that proved their constant good affection, including
the Bogs, Loughs, and Mountains in Ireland 6110292 10868949 To Adventurers
396054 2717549 To the Officers and Soldiers 1442839 To the Officers that
served his Majesty against the Rebels in Ireland, before the year 1649. 278041
To his Royal Highness the Duke of Tork, as Regicides Lands 111015 To
Protestants on Provisoes by the Acts of Settlement and Explanation 383975 To
the Bishops for their Augmentations, of which some have possession 118041
Reserved to his Majesty as un-disposed, upon the account of Lewis Dyke, and
Thomas Conyngham, being set out on fraudulent Adventures 14006 Left of course
Lands un-disposed, the Title to the greatest part whereof was doubtful 73578
Restored unto the Irish upon Decrees of Innocence 965270 2041108 Restored to
them by special Provisoes in the Acts of Settlement and Explanation 408083 Set
out upon their Transplantations of Connaght and Clare, over and above what is
confirmed to English Protestants, who purchased Interests there from the Irish
667755

So that the Irish, notwithstanding the Rebellion, and their great complaints
of losing all their Lands, are restored unto, and possessed of, almost one half
of all the Lands formerly accounted forfeited by the Rebellion. Besides, that
the 2717549 Acres granted to the English, has cost as before (besides the loss
of hundreds of thousands of Men murdered by, and killed in subduing the said
Rebels) the sum of 22191258 l. 3 s. 0 d. And accounting the said 2717549 Acres
to be worth 12 d. per Acre, one Acre with the other yearly, they will come to
135876 l. 9 s. which for the Purchase thereof, at 10 years Purchase, comes to
1358764 l. 10 s. After which Rate, the Lands granted to the English and
Protestants, are not the 15th. part, of what the Money expended in subduing the
said Rebellion, would have bought, and accounting the Devastations, and the
loss of many thousands of Men's Lives for nothing.

A REFLECTION Upon the State of IRELAND; With occurrent Accidents before the
breaking forth of the Rebellion 23d of October. 1641.
THough we date the Conquest of Ireland from the submission of the Kings and
Natives there to Henry the Second, 1172. yet on a truer estimate, we must
conclude, that Ireland was never really subjugated to the Crown of England,
till our Laws became as communicable to the Natives, as the English, whereby
each Party, without distinction, grew up together into one Nation; which was
never effectually vouchsafed, till after Tir-Oen's last submission at
Mellifont, to the Lord Mountjoy, 1603. by which, the minds of the People were
broken to the obedience of the Law, and after that became so pliable, as near
forty years there seemed no material distinction betwixt the Natives and other
Inhabitants, each concentring in subjection to the Laws, making up but one
Jury, living in mutual amity and friendship; till Indulgence so far became a
mischief, as thence Conspiracies hatched our ruin; not discernable, ere the
Monster arrived at its Birth; a Prodigy scarce credible in so vigilant a State:
Though when it is considered how tenderly the great concerns of Religion (the
principal wheels of all Commotion in a State) were handled, the astonishment
(that things aspired to so much Villainy) may easily be unridl'd.

Toward the end of the Lord Falkland's Government (there being great need of
Money for support of the standing Army in Ireland, and maintaining of 500
Horse, and 5000 Foot; much by extraordinary means having been otherwise
disposed) the Catholics of Ireland (glad of the occasion) seemed very forward
to supply the State, in hopes of a Connivance (if not a Toleration) of their
Religion, though therein they were only to bear their share (or rather offered
their Mite) with the Protestants; which they improved to so great an insolence,
as the Lord Falkland (with the Council) was forced to take notice in a
Proclamation, dated the 1st. of April 1629. That the late Intermission of Legal
Proceedings against Popish pretended Titulary Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Deans, Vicars General, Jesuits, Friars, and others of that sort, that derive
their pretended Authority and Orders from the Sea of Rome, ( in contempt of his
Majesty's Royal Power and Authority) had bred such an extraordinary insolence
and presumption in them, as he was necessitated to charge and command them, in
his Majesty's name, to for bear the exercise of their Popish Rites and
Ceremonies.

Notwithstanding which, their Insolences afterward so increased, as that the
power of the High Commission (raised in respect of them) being withdrawn, they
erected a new University at Dublin, to confront his Majesty's College there,
continuing their Nunneries and Monasteries; that thence many things were
objected against the Lord Falkland's Government: to clear which, the Council of
Ireland (in his defense to the King the 28th. of April, 1629.) declared, That
toward the insolences of the Papists, and the late outrageous presumption of
the unsettled Irish; in some parts your Deputy and Council of late used
particular Abstinence, holding themselves somewhat limited concerning them by
late Insinuations, Letters, and Directions from England. And yet afterward so
mindful too were the Lords of the Council in England of what had been (by the
State of Ireland) happily suppressed, that the 31 of January, 1629. they returned
their acknowledgment, and put the State of Ireland in mind, How much it
concerned the good Government of Ireland, to prevent in time the first growing
of such evils; for that where such People are permitted to swarm, they will
soon grow licentious, and endure no Government but their own, which cannot
otherwise be restored, than by a due and seasonable execution of the Law, and
of such Directions as from time to time have been sent from his Majesty and
Council, etc. further encouraging them to carry a soft or harder hand according
to their discretions. Which I do not find but they prudently observed; though
all was too little to root out the Leven that had seasoned the Batch, during
the Government of the then Lords Justices. (As Dr. Bedel (the Reverend Bishop
of Kilmore) takes notice of at large, In his Letter to the Lord Deputy
Wentworth. the 5. of November. 1633. as formerly in a Letter to Bishop Laud of
the 1st. of April, 1630.
with a deep and hearty resentment, worthy his Piety, Courage, and Learning)
till the arrival of Thomas Lord Viscount Wentworth, who by his singular Wisdom,
Courage, and quick Intelligence, so managed affairs there, (though some thought
they were carried on too severely) as doubtless the Nation, in general, was
never more seemingly in obedience; what ever afterward was aggravated against
that Noble Person, whose behavior was less pleasing to some men (interess'd in
the detection of their morose and sinister dealings) than to the Nation, which
flourished under his Auspicious Government. Reverence is that wherewith Princes
are girt from God: Yet then the contrivance of some Spirits was so restless, as
Anno 1634. (being the 10th. of King Charles the First) they designed to have
engaged the Nation in a War, which one Ever Mac-Mahon (an eminent Popish
Priest) privately discovered to some of the Privy Council at Dublin, at whose
feet he prostrated himself for mercy, having, with others been employed abroad
to Foreign Princes ( viz. the Pope, the Kings of France, Spain, and other
Princes) on that service, as (in the Relation writ by the Lord Macquire in the
Tower) is apparent, the Design having been of as ancient a Date, as the Isle of
Rhee's Enterprise, 1628. About which time the Earl of Tyrone and Cardinal
Richlieu held an intimate correspondence; though the King of France's Wars then
in Italy frustrated, for that time, the Insurrection and Invasion. Upon the
discovery of which, Ever Mac-Mahon seeming penitent, had his Pardon: So that
the thing being only treated of in general, the prudence of the Governor
(giving the People no suspicion that he feared it, and yet watched against it)
blasted their design: The same Providence we may also believe this Noble Person
had in the antecedent warnings, which the Reverend Dean of Kilmore particularly
mentions In his Depositions annexed to the Remonstrance of the state of the
Rebellion of Ireland, p. 24.
, though he (in reference to the Intregues of State) moved not so visibly as to
make every one capable of his foresight. Prime Ministers are not to level their
proceedings to the capacities of all, who pretend vigilance of the State: yet
thence (during his Government) all things in the Public proceeded with a
serene countenance, so as the Lord Deputy Wentworth came for England, and
returned into Ireland several times, with his Majesty's greatest Approbation,
and the Peace of the Nation.

Anno 1634. a Parliament was summoned in Ireland, by his motion; 1. For that
the Contribution from the Country, toward the maintenance of the Army, ended
that December. 2. For that the Revenues there fell short of his Majesty's
Charges 20000 l. yearly. 3. That there was a Debt of 80000 l. upon the Crown.
4. For that there had been no Subsidies but one since the beginning of King
James's Reign; and the People were now grown wealthy, being continued in their
Estates, who ever had enjoyed them twenty years. By the Supply of which
Parliament, the Lord Deputy paid the 80000 l. Debt due from the Crown; than
which, nothing was more to his Majesty's Honor, and his Servants Integrity; in
testimony of which, his Majesty In his Answer to the two last Papers of
Uxbridge, concerning Ireland, fol. 569.
says, That they cannot but witness (who know that Kingdom) that during the
Government there by Lieutenants of his choice, that Kingdom enjoyed more Plenty
and Peace than ever it had since it was under the subjection of the Crown of
England; Traffic by Sea, and Trade by Land increased, Values of Land improved,
Shipping multiplied beyond belief, never was the Protestant Religion more
advanced, nor the Protestants protected in greater security against the
Papists; Inasmuch as we must remember you (the Parliament capitulating with him
to nominate a Governor for Ireland) that the present Rebellion was begun when
there was no Lieutenant there, and when the Power (which had been formerly used
in that Kingdom) was questioned and disgraced; when those in the Parliament
there (by whom that Rebellion was hatched) were countenanced in their
Complaints and Prosecution.

And as to the Progress of Religion there, receive from the Bishop of Derry
this account, in his Discourse of the Sabbath; Fol. 934.
where (having occasion to mention the incomparable and pious Primate,
Archbishop Usher) he takes notice, That having lived sundry years a Bishop in
the Province of Ulster, whilst the Political part of the care of that Church
lay heavy upon his shoulders, he praised God, they were like Candles in the
Levitical Temple, looking one toward another, and all toward the Stem; no
contention arising amongst them, but who should hate contention most, and
pursue the Peace of the Church with swiftest paces; inasmuch as if the
highsoaring Counsels of some short-wing'd Christians, whose eyes regarded
nothing but the present Prey, with the Rebellious practices of the Irish Enemy,
tied together like Samson's Foxes, with Firebrands at their tails, had not
thrust them away from the Stern, and chased them from their Sees with Bellona's
bloody Whip: They might before this time, without either persecution or noise,
have given a more welcome and comfortable account of the Irish Church, than our
Age is likely to produce.

The last time this Noble Person (the Earl of Strafford) entered Ireland, was
the 18th. of March, 1639. when he arrived at Dublin Lord Lieutenant a little
before, having (in an extraordinary Solemnity and conflux of Ambassadors and
Peers) been made Earl of Strafford; at which time he appeared in Parliament
(begun the 16th. of March, in the 14th. of King Charles the I.) expressing his
Majesty's Necessities in such terms, as immediately Four entire Subsidies
(without further expostulation) were unanimously consented unto; the freedom of
which added much to the largeness of the gift, with which he raised 8000 Foot,
and 1000 Horse, additional to the Veterain Forces, which (at the breaking forth
of the Rebellion) consisted but of 2297 Foot, and 943 Horse. And so having
settled his Majesty's affairs in Ireland, he went for England to the Parliament
at Westminster, summoned by his Mediation the 13th. of April, 1640. being
attended from Ireland with the acclamations of the whole House of Parliament,
yet legible, in a very remarkable manner, in the Preamble of their Act of
Subsidies, Anno 16 Car. 1. yet afterward we know his fate. Never (writes
Perinshief) sufficiently bewailed by the King, till the issue of his blood
dried up those of his tears. All the actions of his Government were narrowly
sifted, and though no one thing (after the mercenary Tongues of the Lawyers had
endeavored to render him a Monster of men) could be found Treason, many
accumulated were so voted. That him (whom even now the Parliament of Ireland
extolled as an excellent Governor, and one for whose due and sincere
Administration of Justice, they had principally consented to so great a
Subsidy) they afterward pursued as the cause of all their mischiefs, and so by
their Agents even those who afterward complotted the Rebellion) incensed the
Parliament at Westminster against him, as they denied all that they had
attributed to his Worth, fixing on him whatever might contribute to a
praevious Government, or the Kingdom's impoverishment; the state of which
cannot be better cleared, than by what his Majesty, in a full Council at
White Hall the 27th. of Ian. 1640. seemed clearly to acquiesce in, upon the
Earl of Strafford's avowing of the Answer to the Irish Remonstrance against
him, ordering, that a Copy thereof should be forthwith given, by the Clerk of
the Council, to the Committee of Ireland then attending upon him; since
Registered among the public Records.

Thus was this great Man accused, thus justified; yet all was not sufficient to
exempt him from the destructive Bill of Attainder, suggesting, His tyrannous
and exorbitant Power over the Liberties and Estates of his Majesty's Subjects
in Ireland, laying and assessing of Soldiers by his own authority upon the
Subject, against their consent; saying also, that he had an Army in Ireland,
which his Majesty might make use of to reduce this Kingdom, meaning England, as
appears by the Act which passed the 10th. of May, 1641. His Majesty having
Signed a Commission to the Earl of Arundel, the Lord Privy Seal, the Lord High
Chamberlain, and others, to that intent; which had an after Act, vacating the
authority of the precedent (...), p. 10.
for future imitation; sufficiently thereby (says his Majesty.) telling the
World, that some remorse touched even his most implacable Enemies, as knowing
he had very hard measure, and such as they would be loath should be repeated to
themselves.

And that it might remain to Potesterity (to whom the Age is accomptable for
her Actions) what he suffered in his Trial, and by what artifices he was
brought to it, the Act for the reversal of the Earl of Straffords Attainder,
Anno xiv. Car. II. fully shows; to which it may seem impertinent to add more,
Histories, and the Occurrences of those times, having presented his Actions at
his Trial more significant than I dare pretend to, such a Scene of Justice
(attended with that Magnificence in its Structure, such Seats for their
Majesty's, for Ambassadors, and the most discerning Audience of England) not
being to be paralleled. Therefore I shall conclude (as to Him) with what his
Majesty speaks in his (...) That his great abilities were prone to create in
him great confidence of undertakings, and this was like enough to betray him to
great Errors, and many Enemies, whereof he could not but contract good store,
while moving in so high a Sphere, and with so vigorous a Luster, he must needs
(as the Sun) raise many envious Exhalations, which, condensed by a Popular
Odium, were capable to cast a Cloud upon the brightest Merit and Integrity,
etc. Yet says this Excellent King) I could never be convinced of any such
criminousness in him (having heard all the particulars of his great Cause from
one end to the other) as willingly to expose his life to the stroke of Justice,
and the malice of his Enemies. However, He suffered on Tower Hill the 12th. of
May, 1641. taking his death with as much Christianity as Courage; though some
account nothing Christian that is not Effeminate, of whom we should say more,
but must refer the rest to what is extant in Print.

The 19th. of May following, Robert Earl of Leicester Grandson of Sir Hen.
Sidney, that Excellent and Noble Person, who had, at times, been eleven years
Governor of Ireland.
was designed by his Majesty Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, newly returned from
his Embassy in France, where he had discharged his Trust with singular Prudence
and Courage, as he had done before in Denmark, and elsewhere: The choice of
whom exceedingly endeared his Majesty's Wisdom to the most knowing and
intelligent Party of the Nation; the Earl having been one never engaged in
Monopolies (one of the Grievances of the Times) or the public Complaints of
the Kingdom; but being long experienced in State Affairs, promised nothing save
his Majesty's Honor, and the Kingdoms security; Sir Benjamin Rudyard's Speech
in Parliament, Aug. 28. 1641.
Being thought by his knowledge in Martial Affairs, and other his great
Abilities, to be, no doubt, abundantly capable to reduce the Irish to a due
obedience. Yet after all, having attended his Majesty at York, and other
Places, as the Court moved, for his Dispatch, he came in Novem. to Chester, in
expectation of an easy remove thence into Ireland; but falling indisposed at
Chester, was commanded back to Oxford about the beginning of Ian. 1642. so as
in conclusion, he, ever going, never went. His stay was at first resented by
the King, then the Parliament; to evidence the truth, he writes a Letter from
York to the Earl of Northumberland, (which, by Order of Parliament the 26th. of
September. 1642. was printed) wherein he writes, That he besought his Majesty,
that he might not be staid at Court, for that the Affairs of Ireland required
his speedy repair thither; or at least that some Governor (if he were not
thought worthy of it) should be presently sent into that Kingdom. And upon the
21 of September. he appeared in Parliament, informing the Houses, That he could
never (since his first going to his Majesty) get his Commission Sealed till the
18th. of September. referring himself to the pleasure of the Houses, whether they
would dispatch him for Ireland or no. Whereupon the 1st. of October following,
his Case was again debated, and it was Voted (for the future) That the said
Earl should not put in execution any Instructions from his Majesty (concerning
the Affairs in Ireland) until such time as they should be made known and
approved by them. After which, many things (in his Instructions) were debated;
and it being moved the 4th. of November. (in a Conference of the Houses) that he
was ready to set forward for that Service, he had his Dismiss. So as (I have
said) he came to Chester, and was remanded back to Oxford; the important
Affairs of Ireland being in another Channel than as yet they appeared visibly
to run in. Though it was a good while after before he had his discharge from
that Employment, being kept in suspense, till others had perfected their
Design, by which there accrued to him a great Arrear, somewhat considered in
the Act of Settlement, though short of what he was prejudiced thereby.

Upon the Earl of Straffords quitting Ireland, Christopher Wendesford Esquire
Master of the Rolls, the 3d. of April, 1640. was sworn Lord Deputy: He managed
the Government with much Policy, advantage to his Majesty, and faithfulness to
his intimate Friend and Ally, the Earl of Strafford; adjourning the Parliament
in November following, somewhat to the dis-satisfaction of the Members, who
(before their Dissolution) made shift to form a Remonstrance against the Earl
of Strafford, which he would have prevented to have been sent for England,
could he, as he endeavored, have staid the Committee The Lords. Lord Viscount
Gormanston, Kilmalloc, Castiloe, Baltinglass. The Commons. Leimster. Nich.
Plunket, -- Digby, Richard Fitz-Garret, Nich. Barnwell, Esquires. Munster. Sir
Hardress Waller, Jo. Welsh, Sir Donnogh Mac-Cartie. Connaght. Robert Linch.
Geffry Brown. Thomas Bourk. Ulster. Sir Will. Cole. Sir James Montgomery.
of the Parliament in Ireland from going over, the greatest part of which were
Papists, which the Irish took as a good Omen: But he being not able to hinder
them, (they finding conveniences from every Port) grew thereupon much
discontented; and having quick intelligence how affairs were carried against
the Earl of Strafford: He died the 3d. of December following, betwixt whom
(even from their Youth) there had been an especial intimacy, nor did it
afterward grow cooler (but more strengthened) in Judgment.

After his decease, Robert Lord Dillon, of Kilkenny-West, and Sir William
Parsons, Knight and Baronet, Master of the Court of Wards, December. 30. were
sworn Lords Justices: But it was not long before the Committee of Ireland (then
at Court) so prevailed, as that his Majesty displaced the Lord Dillon, a Person
of notable Parts, and one (by his Son's Marriage with the Earl of Strafford's
Sister) passionately concerned in the Earl's Case.

Yet lest the Execution of his Majesty's Graces to his Subjects of Ireland
(obtained by their late Committee's solicitation) should be deferred till
those (who were designed to succeed the Lord Dillon) were in Office, his
Majesty was pleased to direct a Letter, dated the 4th. of January, in the 16th.
year of his Reign, to his Privy Council of Ireland, and Sir William Parsons and
Sir John Borlase (then designed Justices) to grant (amongst other things) that
his Subsidies there should be reduced to a lesser rate than formerly; and that
all Letters directed to the Lord Deputy, Justices, Chief Governor or
Governors, or to any other Officers or Ministers of that Realm, either
concerning the public Affairs, or private Interests of any Subject there,
might be entered into his Signet-Office in England, to the end that they might
be (upon occasion) found to take Copies of, for the Subjects better information
in such public things as may concern them; as also that all Dispatches from
Ireland should safely be kept apart, that like recourse may be had to them for
the better satisfaction of the Subject, who shall be concerned therein. And
whereas in the former Governor's time, there were endeavors to hinder some
Agents of Parliament to have recourse into England, his Majesty taking notice,
That for as much as the Committee of the Parliament of Ireland, John Bellew Esquire
and Oliver Cassel, with others employed thence, have repaired into his Kingdom
of England, to represent their Grievances: He has manifested his gracious
condescensions to them, admitting them into his Royal Presence; forbidding his
Counselors in Ireland, or any other Officers or Ministers of that State, to
proceed any ways against them, or any of them, for the same. And that his
Subjects shall have Copies of Records, Certificates, Orders of Council, Public
Letters, or other Entries for the Declaration of their Grievances made. In
grateful acknowledgment of which, the Parliament then sitting the 10th. of
Febr. 1640. ordered, That the said Letter should be forthwith Entr'd amongst
the Ordinances and Records of that House. So that if there had not been a
general defection, long anvil'd in the minds of that People, the event of so
unnatural and horrid a Rebellion (as few months after happened) could not have
been the issue of such remarkable Condescensions.

The 10th. of Febr. 1640. his Majesty instituted Sir William Parsons, Master of
the Court of Wards, (before mentioned) long experienced in the Affairs of
Ireland, and Sir John Borlase Knight, Master of the Ordnance, Lords Justices,
One well known to his Majesty by the Eminency of his Employments abroad, and
the opinion He had of his integrity and skill in Military Affairs, the
Discipline of the Army having been ever under his Charge since his arrival
there: These (writes an Honorable Person Sir John Temple, in his Treatise of
the Irish Rebellion, p. 13. A Piece of that Integrity few can equal, none
exceed: He having (as a Privy Counselor) opportunity to view and consider all
Dispatches, rarely obvious to others; and being singular Entire and Ingenious,
adventured then into the List, when some dared scarce think on the Attempt: A
Consideration (in reference to what he suffered) very considerable; though
more, in that to this day (what ever has been barked against other accounts of
the Rebellion) never any thing was objected against his.
) applied themselves with all manner of gentle Lenitives, to mollify the sharp
humors raised by the rigid passages of the former Government; They declared
themselves against all such proceedings, as they found any way varying from the
Common Law; They gave all due encouragement to the Parliament then sitting,
endeavoring the reasonable ease and contentment of the People, freely
assenting to all such Acts as really tended to the Legal Reformation; They
betook themselves wholly to the advice of the Council, and caused all matters,
as well of the Crown as Popular Interests, to be handled in his Majesty's
Courts of Justice; no ways admitting the late exorbitances (so bitterly decried
in Parliament) of Paper Petitions or Bills in Civil Causes, to be brought
before them at the Councilboard, or before any other by their Authority;
reducing (by his Majesty's approbation) the Subsidies from 40000 l. a Subsidy,
to 12000 l. a Piece. Bringing all things to that compliance, as best suited
with his Majesty's Interest, and the quiet of the Nation, that (if it were
possible) there might not be the least discontent or jealousy raised amongst
the People; and, for a season, all things seemed so peaceable, as never any
Government was less excepted against. Yet then, in the end of the year 1640.
his Majesty (being informed of an intention to raise Troubles in Ireland)
commanded Sir Henry Vane, his Principal Secretary, to write unto these Lords
Justices this Letter. Right Honorable,
HIs Majesty has commanded me to acquaint your Lordships with an advice given
him from abroad, and confirmed by his Ministers in Spain and elsewhere, which
in this distempered time, and conjuncture of affairs, deserves to be seriously
considered, and an especial care and watchfulness to be had therein; which is,
That of late there have passed from Spain (and the like may well have been from
other Parts) an unspeakable number of Irish Churchmen for England and Ireland,
and some good old Soldiers, under pretext of asking leave to raise men for the
King of Spain; whereas it is observed (among the Irish Friars there) a whisper
runs, as if they expected a Rebellion in Ireland, and particularly in Connaght.
Wherefore his Majesty thought fit to give your Lordships this notice, that in
your wisdoms you might manage the same with that dexterity and secrecy, as to
discover and prevent so pernicious a Design, if any such there should be, and
to have a watchful eye on the proceedings and actions of those who come thither
from abroad, on what pretext soever. And so herewith I rest.

Your Lordships most humble Servant, Henry Vane.
White Hall, March 16. 1640.



Which was delivered to the Lord Justice Parsons, and since his death found in
his Study, and by Sir James Barry, Lord Baron of Santry, (a right Honorable
and worthy Person) presented to his present Majesty; who looked upon it as a
precious Jewel, discovering his Father's Royal thoughts toward the
preservation of his Protestant Subjects and People. But how far it was at first
communicated, is uncertain, though being of so great a Trust, it may very well
be believed to have been often reflected on with caution and prudence: Certain
it is, that notwithstanding that there was an Item, that there should be an
especial care against levying of Soldiers for Spain, yet Colonel John Barry,
Colonel Taaff, Colonel Garret Barry, and Colonel Porter, had all Warrants to
transport 4000 Men thither, which several of the House of Commons in Ireland,
and England too, with much artifice (though with diverse ends) endeavored to
prevent on plausible terms; As that, from the experience of what they might
learn abroad, they afterward might prove ill Instruments at home; whereas it
was more necessary, that they should be employed on Husbandry, whereof that
Kingdom had great need. And many of the active men of the House of Commons in
Ireland, as Darcy the Lawyer, Plunket, Chevers, Martin, and others, urged their
stay, with a passion seemingly much concerned, for that, amongst many Reasons,
which I will not undertake (at so long a distance) positively to remember,
(though I had the honor to be a Member of that House) yet I cannot forget,
that their chief Argument was drawn from the Spaniards having long born an ill
will to England and her Empire: And therefore they did not know (mark the
insinuation) how soon those very Regiments (acquainted with every Creek of the
Kingdom) might be returned on their own Bowels, having naturally a love to
their Religion, which such an Incendiary (as the King of Spain) might soon
inflame to the highest prejudice. Which I the longer insist on, for that the
Collection of Murders committed on the Irish (published by R. S. 1662.) would
insinuate (the better to invalidate the Abstract of Murders committed by the
Irish) that the Catholic Members of the House of Commons in Ireland never
hindered (as that Abstract affirms) the Transportation of the Earl of Straffords
disbanded Soldiers into Spain, purposely to advance the Rebellion, which is
clear they did: Inasmuch as upon these and other Arguments, their
Transportation was deferred; though if the discontented Irish Army had been
disposed of Beyond Sea (according to the Contracts with the French and Spanish
Ambassadors) it was very clear, as is judicially affirmed, that there could
have been no Rebellion in Ireland, the Pretense and Means thereof having been
thereby taken away; though some were of opinion, that wherever these Forces
had been, they could yet easily have been brought over again, (as others have
been since) the principal Heads of the Rebels Army being led by old experienced
Soldiers, who (at the breaking out of the Rebellion) were generally Beyond Sea,
as the Leimster Forces by Colonel Preston, a branch out of the House of
Gormanston; the Ulster Forces by Owen Roe O-Neal, (both bred in Flanders)
Munster Forces by Garret Barry, and the Connaght Forces by one Burck; animated
with their Cause and the Pope's encouragement. And it cannot be denied, that
the promiscuous completing of the Army (lately raised of 8000 Foot and 1000
Horse) in Ireland, taught many of the Common Soldiers the use of Arms, who
otherwise would have been ignorant thereof: And evil in Perrot's and
Fitzwilliam's Government, much took notice of, and by Camden in his Eliz. Anno
1593. toward the end, observed in the like case to be most improvidently done,
as afterward was found, the Irish being always disloyal to the English. Upon
which I cannot but reflect on what Antalcidas (in Plutarch *) tells Agesilaus,
The life of Agesilaus, fol. 624.
of being sorely hurt by the Thebans, That they had paid him his deserved hire,
for teaching them against their wills to be Soldiers, who before had neither
will nor skill to fight. Certain it is, that most of these Soldiers (thus
raised) betook themselves to the Rebels Party; although very few of their
Officers (if we may credit a late Historian) were polluted with the crime.

Yet notwithstanding the Letter forecited, and many troublesome passages in
Parliament, wherewith the Lords Justices and Council were not seldom alarmed,
(sufficient to waken their confidence) no Cloud, not the breadth of a hand,
appeared; but the Lords Justices kept a fair correspondence with the
Parliament, giving all the furtherance they could to the going of their
Committee into England, hoping that what his Majesty should be pleased to
grant, (at their requests) might redound to the common benefit of the Nation.
Neither did the Lords Justices or Council transmit unto his Majesty, or any of
the State of England, any mis-reprehensions of the proceedings and actions of
that Parliament, as some maliciously insinuated; in as much as a Noble Person,
a Peer in the Lords House, said, That the Lords Justices had always cheerfully
received their Requests and Messages, and were ready to comply with them;
desiring that this their compliance might be entered in the Journal, to the end
that it might remain to Posterity. Having by his Majesty's Commission, dated
the 4th. of January, 1640. authority to Continue, Prorogue, or Determine the
Parliament, as they thought fit; which liberty they indulged much to the
freedom of the Parliament. However (being resolved, as the sequel proved, to
pretend any thing, rather than not to have some exceptions against the
Government) the Irish Parliament sent to his Majesty a Declaration, therein
magnifying the Six entire Subsidies they had given in the 10th. year of his
Majesty's Reign, and the Four Subsidies in the 15th. year of his Reign;
pretending moreover, that they had been ill presented to his Majesty, which was
clearly evinced to the contrary, and several Graces vouchsafed them thereupon.

Amongst other things, the State (at that time) found difficult to do, the
Disbanding of the new raised Army was not the least, which the Parliament of
England had great jealousies of, and besought his Majesty that it should be
dissolved. In answer whereof, his Majesty replied, That the thing was already
upon consultation, but he found many difficulties in it, and therefore told the
Parliament, He held it not only fit to wish it, but to show the way how it
might conveniently be done. However, in August, 1641. it was effectually
performed, for which afterward the Lords Justices had his Majesty's gracious
approbation; and the Arms and Ammunition were carefully brought into his
Majesty's Stores, by the vigilance of the Master of the Ordnance, (the Lord
Justice Borlase) else, certainly, most of those Arms (as well as the Men) had
been undoubtedly listed in the Confederates Army; which many of their Party (in
the House of Commons in Ireland) having an eye to, made them so averse to have
them Disbanded. And the Plot proceeded, being so cunningly managed by some of
the Members of Parliament, (subtle in their insinuations) that many of the
Protestants, and well-meaning people of the House, (blinded with an
apprehension of Ease and Redress, lying under the same pretended Yoke with the
rest) were innocently decoi'd into their acting violently with them. Hence Sir
Richard Bolton, Lord Chancellor of Ireland, was impeached of High Treason, and
others of the prime Officers and Ministers of State, were Articled against;
yea, some of the Bishops were not spared, contrary to all presidents of that
nature, as was certifi'd by the Lords Justices to the Principal Secretary, on
search made, upon his Majesty's commands, for that purpose. So as (besides)
some of the active men of the House, Lawyers, Darcy, Martin, Plunket, Cusack,
Brown, Linch, Bodkin, Evers, and others, took upon them with much confidence to
declare the Law, to make new Expositions of their own upon the Text, as, That
killing in Rebellion was no forfeiture of Lands Appendix 1.
; and to frame 21 Queries: Which in a solemn Committee of the House, Adjourned
from time to time, they discussed at their own freedom in the Dining Room at
the Castle, disdaining the moderate Qualifications of the Judges, (who gave
them modest Answers, such as the Law and Duty to their Sovereign, would admit)
and in stead of them, vented their own sense, as if the State were then in its
Infancy, and from them merely to receive its Constitution; as Sir John Temple
observes, resolving upon an alteration in the Government, and drawing of it
wholly into the hands of the Natives: Sir Phelim Oneal making it plain, in his
Letters of Triumph to his Holy Confessor, That his purposes were Conquest, and
not defense of Religion, his Majesty's Prerogative, or their Liberty. No! No
King of England (writes Mahony a Jesuit) nor Crown, nor People, nor state of
that Kingdom, having at any time, any kind of Right to the Kingdom of Ireland,
or any part thereof; that the English Title to it was but mere Usurpation and
Violence, and that therefore the old Natives (i. e. the mere Irish) might choose
and make themselves a King of one of their own Irish; and in the then
Circumstances of Charles the First of England' s, being a Heretic, ought (i.
e.) were bound in Conscience, to do so, and throw off together the Yoke both of
Heretics and Foreigners. Which Tenants, being roughly drawn, the Confederate
Irish seemed afterward to condemn (forsooth) in a Council of their own at
Kilkenny: Yet it is very observable (and that from Walsh himself) who says, He
can never forget it (having extraordinary great admiration thereat) That there
was not one in the National Congregation (met by an extraordinary favor the
11th. of June, at Dublin, 1666.) that opened once his mouth for confession of
any Villainies committed against the King, at any time in the late Rebellion, or
Civil War, or even to speak a word for so much as a general Petition to be
exhibited to his Majesty, imploring his Majesty's gracious Pardon.
Notwithstanding the first Rebellion 1641. and what followed upon the Nuncio's
access, and the violation of the first Peace 1646. and the Nuncio's Censures
against the Cessation with the Lord Inchequin, and the Peace 1648. And the
Declaration and Excommunication of the Bishops as James-Town 1650, against the
Lord Lieutenant the Marquis of Ormond, and those who obeyed him. Emphatically
enough expressed by P. W. No. 1. (He enforces this Argument further) There was no
crime (writes he) at all committed by All or any of the Roman Catholic Clergy
of Ireland, nor even at any time, nor in any occasion or matter hapen'd since
the 23d. of October, 1641. that needed Petitioning for Pardon, either for
themselves, or any other of the Irish Clergy; if we must believe the Bishop of
Ardagh, Patrick Plunket, pleading for them in so express terms, and the tacit
approbation of his words by the universal silence of that Assembly. In
pursuance of which, the Protestant Commissioners of Ireland (in their Answer to
the Objections the Rebels Agents put in against the Preamble of the Bill of
Settlement) took notice, that (in the whole Volume of Papers which were put in
by the Catholics about that Affair) there was not one grateful Acknowledgment,
or so much as one civil mention of his Majesty's singular Condescension. They
having the favor to inspect that Act of Settlement, and object as they
pleased, as if all his Majesty could do for them were no more than he ought.
And further it is these Commissioners observation, That in all the Irish
Papers, they do not own the slaughter of so many thousands to be a Rebellion,
or once give the Title of Rebels to those who were the first Agents in that
horrid and bloody Massacre; which being not acknowledged by them, more easily
absolves the rudeness of their Ingratitude for his Majesty's favors. And a
Person of Honor (in his Animadversions on Fanaticism p. 72.
, who deserves much for his excellencies in the case) takes notice, That no
Catholic ever made any profession against the Rebellion, or manifested his
detestation or dislike of it by any public Writing, that the Design seemed a
Birth acceptable to the Catholic Community. And the Pope, by his Nuncio
afterward (to whom the general part of the Clergy and Natives adhear'd) in
effect maintained what Mahony had delivered for wholesome Doctrine, accounting
the Popes Bulls, and Interdictions, and Absolutions, (how long soever since
published) still in the same force and vigor, as they were the first day of
their publication. And it is very few years since (writes this Honorable
Person p. 74.
) that (upon the meeting of the Secular and Regular Clergy of Ireland,
beforementioned, to frame an Address to the King in testimony of their
obedience, disclaiming any Temporal Authority in the Popes) the Court of Rome
was so alarmed by it, that Cardinal Barbarin writ to them, to desist from any
such Declaration, putting them in mind, that the Kingdom of England was still
under Excommunication. And Walsh acquaints us at large of Mac-Mahon, the Irish
Jesuits printed Book of the lawfulness of killing, not only all the
Protestants, but even all such of the Roman Catholic Irish, who should stand
for the Crown of England, and the Rights of the King to Ireland. A Tenent
agreeable to Salamanca's approbation of Oneal's Rebellion, 1602. instigated by
Pope Clement the 8th. whereby it is declared, That all Catholics who followed
the English Standard against Prince Oneal, mortally sinned. And Osulevan the
Priest, in King James's Reign, said, It was a Doctrine fetched from Hell, that
Catholics in Ireland should join with the Queens Forces, which were
Protestants, against the Rebels, Catholics, in Ireland, and that such English
ought to be no less set upon than the Turks. So that whatsoever delusive
Tenants have been broached of late, as to persuade us the Adder is without
sting, the contrary has been written in letters of blood, not in his Majesty's
Kingdoms only, but wheresome-ever the Papal Power was exalted, That persons
professing the Reformed Religion, are but Tenants at Will for their Lives and
Fortunes, and through Centuries of Ages it appears, that as their Fleeces grow,
they are shorn, till a time of slaughter be appointed. That hence we may see,
at what we should have arrived, had the Irish been fortunate in their attempt;
for though the loyal Formulary or Remonstrance (highly magnified by some) may
seem a Bond of Iron, it may easily (by the Pope) become weaker than a Rope of
Straw.

During the Summer Sessions of Parliament (already spoke of) wherein the Heads
of the Rebellion were closely complotting, some under a suspicion, that the
Earl of Strafford's Servants (in revenge of their Lord's death) intended a
Mischief to the Parliament, moved the House, and accordingly had Orders, that
the Lords Justices would let his Majesty's Stores (for Powder and Arms) be
searched, which (by a Committee) they so curiously performed, as they turned
over several improbable Chests to find it out; and when they had seen that
there was none, according to what the Officers of the Ordnance had before
assured them, yet they seemed unsatisfied, and repaired (on a new Order) to the
Lords Justices, to be admitted to see the Stores of Powder and Arms, placed in
other Parts in and about the Castle: To whom the Lord Justice Borlase (Master
of the Ordnance, principally interess'd in securing his Majesty's Stores)
answered, That those were the King's precious Jewels, not to be (without
special Gause) showed, assuring them further, that they needed not to be
afraid, for that, upon his Honor, there was no Powder underneath either of the
Houses of Parliament, as at the Trial of the Lord Mac Quire, at the King's
Bench in Westminster, was openly in Court testified by the Lord Blaney, a great
sufferer, a worthy and gallant Person, the said Lord Justice Borlase, having at
that time such a motion in his blood, (upon the importunity of that enquiry) as
he would afterward often mention that action of theirs, as aiming (how
slightly soever then looked on by others) at some further mark, than was th^n
discernable: So that at that instant he denied them, whereat they seemed
discontented, as being left in uncertainty, in what state his Majesty's Stores
stood, which they desired particularly to know (the late new Army being
disbanded then, and their Arms brought in) that if the Powder and Arms were not
there, they might find them elsewhere; or if there, then (by the intended
surprise) to be sure of them, and to know where (on the sudden) to find them:
In which search, the Lord Mac Quire was a chief actor, and very inquisitive.

Thus, in order to their Design, they made ready for the Business, passing that
Session of Parliament (began the xi. of May 1641.) for the most part away in
Protestations, Declarations, Votes upon the Queries, the stay of Soldiers from
going over Seas, and private Petitions, little to the good of the
Commonwealth, or advancement of his Majesty's Service, whereof the Lords
Justices and Council having notice, finding withal, that the Popish Party in
both Houses grew to so great a height, as was scarce compatible to the present
Government, they imparted (by a Message to both Houses the 14th. of July
following) their intention to give a recess for some months, the harvest coming
on, and both Houses growing thin: Which intimation of a recess both Houses
readily assented to; so that the 7th. of August, the Lords Justices adjourned
the Houses to the 9th. of November following, which afterward the Members of
Parliament aggravated as a great unkindness, the Committee of Parliament being
expected from England, and arrived at Dublin near the end of August: Whereas,
when the Parliament was adjourned, (and before) there was no certainty of their
Committee's return, the Earl of Roscommon, who (few days before) coming from
England, expressing in plain terms, that the Bills desired were not likely (in
any short time) to be dispatched, as the Letters from the Irish Committee at
London, (which this Lord brought over) informed too; and, That they were daily
about their dispatch, but could not guess when they might have it. Yet (as I
have took notice) in August, beyond expectation, the Committee returned, upon
whose arrival, the Lords Justices and Council (desirous to give them all
satisfaction imaginable) sat daily composing of Acts, to be passed the next
Sessions of Parliament, for the benefit of his Majesty, and the good of his
Subjects, on which the Members of Parliament then at Dublin, and their
Committee (newly arrived) seemed with great contentment to retire into the
Country, the Lords Justices forthwith sending Briefs to all the Ports in the
Kingdom of the Graces concerning Customs, commanding the Officers punctually to
obey those his Majesty's Directions, particularly whatever concerned Wool,
Tobacco, as all other things of that nature, wherein his Majesty had been
pleased to gratify the Committee. They gave Order also for drawing a Bill, for
repeal of the Preamble of the Act of Subsidies. They also desired Sir William
Cole and Sir James Montgomery (two of the Committee) if they could ever take
the Assizes in the County of Ulster, to give public notice to all the
Undertakers, of what his Majesty had graciously granted and intended to them;
which accordingly they undertook to do, the Lords Justices leaving (as they
thought) nothing omitted, which might evidence their compliance with his
Majesty's gracious Intentions, acting (during this recess of Parliament) so
vigilantly, and with that vigor, in relation to all the Committee's
Transactions in England, and his Majesty's Service, that they had little time
(if any) to spare for their other occasions; that if we reflect on their
unwearied and faithful Endeavors, it cannot but be imputed as the greatest act
of ingratitude (that ever a Nation was guilty of) to calumniate such a
Government, which had been mainly instrumental to accomplish those Graces, that
Favor, such Indulgence, as never any of his Majesty's Predecessors would
vouchsafe.

Yet then (in the midst of this Condescension) many of those (even the major
part which were Papists) who had been thus graciously heard by his Majesty,
countenanced in England, carassed at Court, most treacherously conspired
against his Crown and Dignity, the original of this Rebellion being brought
over (deposes Prisley of Mac-Mahon) by the Irish Committee, who were employed
by the Parliament to his Majesty, for the redress of their Grievances in that
Kingdom, complotting thereby the most execrable and bloody Rebellion History
can parallel, improving their Neighborhood (at that time) to a mighty access
of Visits and Freedom, especially in Ulster, where the Irish seemed to mind
nothing else but Entertainment, lodging (under color of friendship) the night
before themselves, with those whom they intended to kill the next morning. That
with his Majesty (in his Solitude) I may say that; That Sea of Blood, which
these Men have cruelly and barbarously shed, is enough to drown any Man in
eternal both infamy and misery, whom God shall find the malicious Author or
Instigator of this effusion. And all this perpetrated, not for Religion, (as
with great industry they endeavor to make foreign Princes believe) No! It was
their inbred malice and hatred to the English, which (from the first Conquest
to this present) may (by very sad Examples) be clearly demonstrated, all
Rebellions to Hen. 8. his time (that the Reformation in Religion seemed more
favorable) being wholly to extirpate the English, then with them all of one
Religion, as may be easily showed in a constant Series of Affairs, were not
every History (concerning Ireland) full of this Truth, with horrible Presidents
of Treachery and Barbarism. And since Hen. 8th's time (that the Protestant
Religion has had greater freedom) it is evident too, as Cambden In Annal.
Eliz. fol. 311. Anno 580.
notes, That their Rebellions sprung from their zeal to the Romish Religion,
and their malice to the New English, not to leave one alive. So that Giraldus
Cambrensis his Character of them in his Typography Fol. 743.
, is suspected to remain yet too great a Truth, to which we shall refer you,
concluding this with what a late Historian Dr. Bates Elench. Mot. par. 2. p. 19.
in fewer words observes: Hiberni magna ex part fallaces, sanguinarii,
faedifragi, diversis micantes inter se factionibus, alter in alterius viscera
ferrum immittere, quam cum host communi congredi, paratiores. To which we may
add that of the Orator Caesar Williamson in his Epist. to his Oration in
suscepti diadematis diem. Car. 2.
, not more pathetical than truly, That Ex omnibus Gentibus vix ullam reperias
cui peccare and flere magis natural est. But as to my own Inclinations, I
truly reverence what the judicious and learned Bishop of Mead, in his Epistle
to his Excellency the Earl of Essex, Lord Lieutenant, in his Sermon of
Antichrist, observes, That the Irish of themselves were a People peaceable,
harmless, and affable to strangers, and in themselves, and to all, pious and
good, whilst they retained the Religion of their Forefathers.

Yet that we may come more closely to the Business, it will not be impertinent
to recount what Rebellions ensued upon Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and since to
the fatal year 1641. That the practice of the Irish formerly being summed up,
it may appear what seeds of Rebellion were ever sown in their hearts and soil,
ripened constantly as opportunity and season gave them hopes of a harvest, all
their submissions (as Sir John Davies observes) being mere mockery and
imposture. Nor are we now without jealousies of what may yet be, were there
opportunity for it, writes that excellent Bishop before cited, in the said
Epistle.

Soon after this glorious Queen (whom the Bishop of Rhodes calls one of the
most Heroic and Illustrious Princes of her Age) came to the Crown, all the
Interests and Powers of Rome were animated against her, she having cleared the
light of the Gospel, by dissipating the fogs and mists of Superstition, so as
thence the Spirits of Darkness raged every where, the Confederates of the Beast
exalting their Power.

1. Anno 1567. Shane O-Neal raised a notable Rebellion in Ulster, merely in
hatred to the English, erecting a Castle upon Lac-Eaugh, which he named
Feognegall, ( i. e. The hatred of the English) and prevailed much, till Sir
Henry Sidney routed his Forces.

2. The Fitz-Geralds in Munster, 1569. (to whom the Birns, Tools, and Cavenaghs
joined) raged in Rebellion, till they were subdued by Sir William Drury. All
Attainted by Parliament 27, 28 Eliz. Of the Justice of which War, an Edict was
shortly after divulged, which in respect of those Tenants, yet maintained in
the bleeding Iphigenia, and is indeed the sum of all their Infelicity and
Malice, we have thought good to insert immediately betwixt the first and second
Appendix.

3. Hugh O-Neal, Anno 1595. succeeded in his Villainies, (the War being called
Tyrone's Rebellion) till 1603. the War determining with that Glorious Queen. Of
which three Rebellions, the Analecta de rebus Catholicorum in Hibernia,
published Anno 1617. has summed up these notable and just Remarks.

1. Praecesserat Spiritus grandis and fortis subvertens montes and conterens
petras, id factum est in famoso illo Dynasta Johanne Nealo initio Regni Eliz.
instar saevientis procellae omnia provadente, and populante, qui nec montibus
pepercit, nec collibus aut petris divina pariter and humana miscens -- Post
multas strages quas fecit, accitis etiam e Conacia and Momonia Primipilaribus
quos sui Consilii participes fecit, deinde post probra and opprobria quae
contraxit plurima cum vellet haberi restitutor Patriae Libertatis and avitae
Religionis, quia non erat de Numero eorum per quos salus facta est in Israel.
Qui seminavit ventos, non messuit nisi Turbinem, Fatus ipse turbo impellens in
parietem in vindictam Caedis antea per eum perpetratae filio Paterni Sanguinis
ultore Scoto in Rixa Scotorum and Hibernorum interiit, itaque non in Spiritu
tam praecipiti and praepostero Dominus.

2. Post hunc Spiritum sequuta est gravis Commotio, quam suscitavit in Monronia
Jacobus Geraldinus Mauritii filius cui accessit Johanne Geraldi Desmoniae
Comitis Germanus frater, and ipse postmodum Comes Geraldus insequutus est cum
multis sequalibus; in Lagenia vero se adjunxerant Jacobus Vice-Comes de
Baltinglass cum Kavanachiis, Briniis and aliis Nobilibus illius Provinciae,
visa est magnis and piis Principibus Causa Dei tractari and quia pro fide
bellum susceptum intellexerunt. Copias etiam auxiliares, transmiserunt sed
propter Delicta seculi irritus fuit Conatus Deo tunc non decernente speratum
Bellatoribus effectum tribuere, quem in aliud tempus, pro alia Generatione,
aliis Instrumentis and modis parandum reservavit, atque ita difflatum est
Consilium illud, dissiluit in parts, opus and coeptum ipsum infaeliciter
dissolutum est, neque enim in illa Commotione transire ad refrigerium nostrum
voluit Dominus.

3. Illa vero Geraldinorum commotione sic praetervecta successit ignis omni
late devastans, dum flamma ferroque omnia populatur Comes Tyronensis plusquam
decennali bello intercipiens hujus Insulae quietem, multa visus prospere
aggredi multis etiam congressibus victor, sed nonnullis victoriis infolescens
exercitus tametsi Cohortium antesignari and ipse Gubernator and Dactor
exercitus causam praetulerit honorificam restituendae Religionis nec ullam
vellet capitulationem admittere, cum Anglis in qua Primario non ageretur De
fide Orthodoxa public stabilanda per universum regnum, quia Tamen via and
violentia tunc exercita non erat secundum propositum Dei efficax, hinc peccatis
Hominum irato Numine frustra se exerebant vires Hominum.

4. At King James's access to the Crown, Waterford, Cork, and Limerick in
Munster, Kilkenny, and Wexford in Lemster, openly opposed the King's Title, as
not being a Catholic; but were soon brought into obedience by the Lord Deputy
Mountjoy.

5. Within four years after, the Lord Chichester Deputy, Tyrone and O Donnel
conspiring with Mac-guire, Cormack O Neal, O Cahan, the Lord Delvin, and
others, designed a notable Rebellion, but were prevented in May, 1607. and an
Act of Attainder past, Anno 11, 12, 13 Jacobi, Cap. 4.

6. The year following Anno scil. 1608. Sir Cahir O Doghertie's War succeeded,
sharp, though short, determining in five months, encouraged by the Priests,
That all who died in that Service, went forthwith into Heaven.

Afterward the State of Ireland seemed very happy, both as to Improvement of
Land, Plenty, and Peace, till the year 1634. that Ever Mac-Mahon (before
mentioned) discovered an intended Plot, which by the prudence of the Governor
(the Lord Wentworth) never arrived at its design, nor afterward was any thing
further suspected, till Sir Henry Vane, by his Majesty's command (K. C. 1.)
gave the Lords Justices, the 16th. of March, notice of a suspected Rebellion;
of which (with its circumstances) we have already insisted. Though we must say,
that the result of the former Conspiracies, which by the blessedness of the
Times, prudence of Governors, or other accidents, were delayed, in this ( Anno
sc. 1641.) met the accomplishment of them all. Yet nothing was here attempted,
which the bleeding Iphigenia (the great Incendiary of that Nation) does not
passionately justify, it being, in his Divinity and Logic, rational, That the
Irish (though not then visibly assaulted) might however assume Arms in defense
of their Religion and Property, both threatened; it being (writes he) a common
Doctrine of Divines, That it is lawful to prevent an evil, that cannot be
otherwise avoided than by preventing it; nor need the authority of the Prince
(in that case) be required. A Doctrine so hellish, as none certainly is so
besotted, but he may easily read therein the ruin of States and Kingdoms;
excellently answered by the Learned and accurate late Proselyte, Dr. Andrew
Sal, to whom in this point we must refer you: And as to matter of Fact,
bequeath you to the ensuing History, clearly evidencing, That before the Irish
assumed Arms, no Instrument was ever thought on, much less found against them.

Formerly indeed it has been strongly imputed to the State of England, that
(conquering Ireland) they did not also endeavor to make them one People;
holding them Enemies, not taking care to settle Civility and a Property amongst
them; the cause (as some thought) of frequent Rebellions. But though these and
some other defects in the Civil Policy (some think) are inexcusable, it may
clearly be demonstrated, they were not of so large a size as they are marked.
And it may appear (by ancient Records) that the Laws of England were at first
communicated to the mere Irish, as far as their Barbarism and Cruelties
exercised (on occasions) upon the English would well admit. But (to let these
times pass, whereof we cannot speak much with any certainty) let us now see
what fruits we have of all the Royal endeavors of his Gracious Majesty, and
his two Glorious Predecessors, what return for all their Care, for all their
Charge, and for all the English Blood which has (within the compass of the
last Age) been spilt for purchasing of Peace, and introducing of the true
Religion and common Civility into Ireland.

It cannot be denied, that since the happy Reign of Queen Elizabeth, all the
former defects in the Government, and Civil Policy, have been abundantly
supplied, and all those Means used, those Acts performed, those Designs fully
accomplished, and all things else perfectly brought to pass, which (in the
judgment of all wise Men) were conceived, would undoubtedly effect the full
settlement and reduction of that Kingdom. As first, The barbarous Customs
continually used by the Irish, have been quite abolished; all sorts of People
(even the most wicked amongst them) have been allowed the benefit of the Law,
and lived under the King's immediate Protection; all the Laws of England (found
useful for that Kingdom) have been made current by Act of Parliament, in
Ireland; many other good Laws enacted, and the execution of them has had free
course through all parts of the Kingdom; the Courts of Justice have been open,
and the Judges (for the more free distribution of Justice to the People) have
constantly (twice every year) gone their Circuits, through the several Counties
of the whole Land; the Church Government has been fully settled, many preaching
Ministers (generally placed throughout the several Parishes) as likewise
Free-Schools, together with sufficient Maintenance for them, have been
established; the Lands (belonging to the Natives) have been always duly settled
according to Law in the Proprietor; and what noise soever was raised,
entituling the Crown to Roscommon, Mayo, Slego, Galloway, Clare, besides some
parts of Limerick and Tipperary (as one of the Masterpieces of the Earl of
Strafford's Service in Ireland) nothing was ever effected thereupon, though it
had cost his Majesty 10000 l. upon the enquiry, and had they had patience till
the next Sessions of Parliament, there was an Act for Limitations, passed by
his Majesty, to bar all Titles, Claims, and Challenges of the Crown, before 60
years last past, to have cut off all expectations upon the ancient Title, and
have strengthened (by new Grants and Patents) all Titles from the Crown.
Multitudes of British were brought in, and planted in great numbers, even in
the most barbarous Places of the Kingdom; many corporate Towns have been
erected; some walled Towns have been also lately built; Castles, Stone-houses,
and Villages, daily made in every part in great abundance; Trade and Traffic
so well settled, as (the obstructions therein being removed) the native
Commodities were so freely exported, as they did (to the great advantage of the
Kingdom) by far exceed the foreign Importation; and all other necessary
Provisions were made for the Public, which might be thought any ways to
conduce to the Peace, Plenty, and flourishing Estate of a growing Kingdom.

And for the Irish themselves (though they have ever been observed to be a
whining Generation, a People always given unjustly to complain of their
Governors) yet (in these later times) there has been a most special care
taken, to preserve them free from all manner of Pressures. They have had
liberty (beyond the examples of former Ages) to redress their Grievances in
their own Parliament, being elected Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, according
to the Affections of the Commons; they had too (of their Communion) Lawyers
bred up in England, frequent at their Bar; also upon their Bench Justices of
the Peace; in their Counties Sheriffs, and Mayors and other Officers in their
Corporations, Favors not aspired to by the Catholics of England, or ever
granted. And in Cases where they thought fit to present their Complaints unto
his Majesty, they were graciously received, and fitting Remedies applied. They
were admitted to enjoy the free and full exercise of the Roman Religion without
control; to entertain Priests, Friars, Jesuits, and all sorts of their
Ecclesiastical Orders, without number, whilst the Protestants dissenting from
the Regimen of the Church of England, were frequently summoned to the Bishop's
Court. Justice was equally administered to the British and Irish without any
manner of difference; the Country Duties and other Taxes were levied upon all
without distinction of Persons; all private Animosities suppressed; all ancient
Grudges removed; and in all outward appearance, they lived so affectionately
intermixed together, as they could not be esteemed two Nations in one Kingdom,
but that they did Coalescere in unam Gentem. And it is without all
contradiction not to be denied, That never any Conquered Nation enjoyed more
fully the Liberties and Privileges of Free Subjects, and (through the great
Indulgence of his Majesty) lived with greater contentment, Ease, Peace, Plenty,
and freedom from all manner of extraordinary Taxations, other than such as they
were pleased to impose upon themselves in Parliament, than the Natives of
Ireland have lately done. Inasmuch as an Excellent Lawyer Thom. Rivii Jur.
Consult. Regiminis Anglici in Hibernia Defensio in Analecten, lib. 1 p. 1.
clearly evidences from 1601. to the year that he writ in, That Ex illo tempore
quantum creverunt Hibernorum Res, desertissimae sollitudines in vicos and
oppida Conversae, Itinera olim clausa Exercitibus, nunc patent Viatoribus,
Portus Navibus, Urbes Mercatoribus, Agri Colonis, fora Judiciis frequentantur,
nec siquid inter Cives controversiae inciderit, ferro nunc ut olim, sed lege
and Judicis Arbitrio deciditur: Ipsae vero Gentes Anglicanae and Hibernicae
quae non solum studiis sed etiam Castris olim dissidebant, nec ullo faedere
tenebantur, sed alteri alterum utcunque occidere jus erat, sublatis nuper
Hostilitatis legibus in unum populum coaluerunt, nec Commercia nunc and
Convivia verum Conjugia inter ipsos celebrantur, adeoque aequo Jure, pari lege,
and eadem Condition, absque omni Gentis discrimine, sub justissimo Rege
vivitur, ut nec Angli se vicisse, nec Hiberni victos se esse, sentiant. That
hence ensued the calmest and most universal Peace, that ever was seen in
Ireland, it being not to be produced, that after the Irish were received into
the Condition of Subjects, without difference and distinction, (which was in
the Parliament begun at Dublin, under the Lord Chichester, the 18th. of May,
Anno Regni Jacob. 11.) that ever the English in Ireland offered the least
violence to any of the Natives, eo Nomine, Papists or Irish; yet nothing could
keep them from Rebelling, the Corn being then full eared. And so we are arrived
at the Rebellion, which (as you have read) has had many steps to its Rise,
which we shall now pursue in its Progress and Success.

The Irish Rebellion, 23. October. 1641.
THE first dark Light, of which Sir William Cole (the 11th. of Sir William Cole
gave the first light of the Rebellion.
October, 1641.) gave the Lords Justices, and Council notice of: As that there
was a great Resort made to Sir Phelim O Neals, in the County of Tyrone, as also
to the House of the Lord Mac-Guire, in the County of Fermanagh, and that by
several suspected Persons (fit Instruments for Mischief.) As also that the said
Lord Mac-Guire had of late made several Journeys within the Pale, and other
Places, and had spent his time much in writing Letters, and sending Dispatches
abroad. Upon the receipt of which Intelligence, the Lords Justices and Council
writ to Sir William Cole, requiring him to be very vigilant and industrious, to
find out what should be the occasion of those several Meetings, and speedily to
advertise them thereof, or any other particular that he conceived might tend to
the public service of the State. And more than this (rationally) could not
have been done; for that what Sir William Cole informed the State of, was but
conjectural; and had any notice been took publicly of it, whereby Sir Phelim O
Neal, or the Lord Mac-Guire had been seized on, the same would certainly have
been a pretended cause for the Irish (ready Touch-wood) to have risen in Arms,
being suspected, before they manifested any dis-satisfaction. Besides, there
was some so unwilling to receive the least mis-conceit of the Irish, (believing
Time had worn out all Animosities, and the State had secured each Interests) as
they used the utmost artifice imaginable to suppress those thoughts in others:
That thence more than a circumspect eye was not to be advised. Some say, one
John Cormack revealed to Sir William Cole, the 21. of October, That the Irish
resolved to seize upon his Majesty's Castle and City of Dublin, to murder his
Lords Justices and Council there, and to seize upon all the Castles and Forts
of the Kingdom, etc. Which Sir William Cole the same day sent the Lords
Justices notice of. As others from an Ultogh would infer, That they had
informed the State thereof, and that Sir Lucas Dillon thereupon had been
summoned before them, and told, that they had heard something of him and others
in Connaght, that made their fidelity suspected; which with a sober
countenance, and solemn protestation, (Arts he had been long bred to) he soon
wiped off. So (says my Author) that for our sins our Counselors were
infatuated, and our Watchmen slumber'd. But Sir John Temple (whose Integrity
over-weighs all Assertions to the contrary) testifies In his Letter, 28. of
May, 1677.
, That those Letters and Informations never came to their knowledge, and that
indeed they had never any certain notice of this general Conspiracy of the
Irish, until the 22d. of October, late in the evening Sir J. T. in his Hist. p.
17. l. 12.
, that Owen O Conally ( a mere Irishman, Servant to Sir John Clotworthy,
trained up in the Protestant Religion) imparted the same to the Lord Justice
Parsons, as a sense of his Duty, and Loyalty to his Majesty, and an effect of
that Religion he was trained up in.

At first, the Lord Parsons gave little belief to the Relation, in regard it
came from an obscure Person, and one, as he conceived, somewhat distempered (at
that time) with drink, delivering his story besides in so broken a manner, that
it scarce seemed credible; whereupon his Lordship let him go, strictly charging
him to return back the same evening, with what further discoveries he could
make. Yet in the interim, the Lord Parsons (being touched with the Relation)
repaired (about Ten of the Clock at night) to the Lord Borlase, at
Chichester-house, without the Town, and disclosed to him what Owen O Conally
had imparted; which made so sensible an impression on his Colleague, as (the
Discoverer being let go) He grew infinitely concerned thereat, having none to
punish, if the story should prove false; or means to learn more, were it true.
In the disturbance of which perplexity, Owen O Conally comes (or, as others
write, was brought) where the Lords Justices were then met, sensible that his
discovery was not thoroughly believed, professing, that whatever he had
acquainted the Lord Parsons with, (touching the Conspiracy) was true; and could
he but repose himself, (the effects of drink being still upon him) he should
discover more. Whereupon he had the convenience of a Bed. In the interim, the
Lords Justices summoned as many of the Council, as they could give notice to,
to their assistance that night, at Chichesterhouse. Sir Thomas Rotheram, and
Sir Robert Meredith, Chancellor of the Exchequer, came immediately to them.
They then with all diligence secured the Gates of the City, with such as they
could most confide in, and strengthened the Warders of the Castle, (which were
a few in-considerable men) with their Foot-Guard, usually attending their
Persons, charging the Mayor and his Brethren to be watchful of all persons,
that should walk the streets that night. However, many of the Conspirators
escaped over the River, or at least lay concealed in Citizens houses, (a
Receptacle too ready for most of them) and some of those who were brought
before the Lords Justices and Council, as James Warren, (Sir Phelim O Neal's
Servant) and Paul O Neal, (an active Priest) though neither of them then were
discovered to be such, found means to get away; of which Sir Phelim bragged of
afterward; Paul O Neal having been a prime Instrument in the contrivance of
the Rebellion: Whilst Hugh Oge, Mac-Mahon Esquire (Grandson by his Mother to the
Traitor Tir-Oen) a Gentleman of good Fortune in the County of Monaghon, who had
served as a Lieutenant Colonel in the King of Spain's Quarters, was, after some
little resistance, apprehended before day in his own Lodging over the Water
near the Inns, and brought to Chichester-house, where, upon Examination, he
did, without much difficulty, confess the Plot, resolutely Mac-Mahon's
Examination abbreviated.
telling them, That on that very day (it was now about 5 in the morning, the
23. of October. 1641.) that all the Forts and strong Places in Ireland would be
taken; That he with the Lord Mac-Guire, Hugh Birn, Captain Brian O Neal, and
several other Irish Gentlemen, were come up expressly to surprise the Castle of
Dublin, and that twenty men out of each County of the Kingdom were to be here
to join with them. That all the Lords and Gentlemen in the Kingdom (that were
Papists) were engaged in this Plot; That what was that day to be done in other
parts of the Country, was so far advanced by that time, as it was impossible
for the wit of Man to prevent it. And withal told them, That it was true, they
had him in their power, and might use him how they pleased; but he was sure he
should be revenged.

Before Mac-Mahon was apprehended, Owen O Conally having (on his repose)
recovered himself, had his Examination taken in these words. Who being duly
sworn and examined, says, That he being at Monimore, O Conally's Examination.
in the County of Londonderry, on Tuesday last, he received a Letter from
Colonel Hugh Oge-Mac-Mahon, desiring him to come to Connaght in the County of
Monaghan, and to be with him on Wednesday or Thursday last. Whereupon he this
Examinant came to Connaght on Wednesday night last, and finding the said Hugh
come to Dublin, followed him thither; he came hither about six of the Clock
this evening, and forthwith went to the Lodging of the said Hugh, to the house
near the Boat in Oxmantown, and there he found the said Hugh, and came with the
said Hugh into the Town, near the Pillory, to the Lodging of the Lord
Mac-Guire, where they found not the Lord within, and there they drank a cup of
Beer, and then went back again to the said Hugh's Lodging. He says, That at
the Lord Mac-Guire's Lodging, the said Hugh told him, That there were, and
would be this night, great numbers of Noblemen and Gentlemen of the Irish
Papists, from all parts of the Kingdom, in this Town, who, with himself, had
determined to take the Castle of Dublin, and to possess themselves of all his
Majesty's Ammunition there to morrow morning, being Saturday: And that they
intended first to batter the Chimneys of the said Town; and if the Citizens
would not yield, then to batter down the Houses, and so to cut off all the
Protestants that would not join with them. He further says, That he the said
Hugh told him, That the Irish had prepared men in all parts of the Kingdom, to
destroy all the English inhabiting there to morrow morning by Ten of the Clock;
and that in all the Seaports, and other Towns in the Kingdom, all the
Protestants should be killed that night, and that all the Posts that could be
could not prevent it. And further says, That he moved the said Hugh to forbear
executing of that business, and to discover it to the State, for saving of his
own Estate; who said, He could not help it: But said, That they did owe their
Allegiance to the King, and would pay him all his Rights; but that they did
this for the Tyrannical Government that was over them, and to imitate Scotland,
who had got a Privilege by that course. And he further says, That when he was
with the said Hugh in his Lodging, the said Hugh swore, That he should not go
out of his Lodging that night, but told him, he should go with him the next
morning to the Castle; and said, if this matter were discovered, some body
should die for it. Whereupon this Examinant feigned some necessity for his
Easment, went down out of the Chamber, and left his Sword in pawn, and the said
Hugh sent his Man down with him; and when this Examinant came down into the
Yard, and finding an opportunity, he, this Examinant, leaped over a Wall, and
two Pales, and so came to the Lord Justice Parsons.

October. 22. 1641. William Parsons. Thomas Rotheram. Robert Meredith. Owen O
Conally.




How it came to pass that the other Lord Justice attested not the Examination,
(it being took in his house, he present) has begot some doubts, evidencing how
(since) Counsels severed into Cabals.

In the interim, (whilst Owen O Conally was examining) Mac-Mahon (walking in
Chichester-hall) drew (with Chalk) several Postures, some on Gibbets, others
grovelling on the ground; intimating how his fancy run on what was then acting:
So little did he dread the event.

The night being thus passed over, the Lords Justices removed themselves (for
their better security) into the Castle, where the body of the Council attended
them; and having secured the Lord Mac-Guire (taken, after several removes, in
an obscure Cock-loft in Cook-street) they joined in this Proclamation. By the
Lords Justices and Council. W. Parsons, John Borlase.
THese are to make known and publish to all his Majesty's good Subjects in this
Kingdom of Ireland, That there is a discovery made by us the Lords Justices and
Council, of a most disloyal and detestable Conspiracy, intended by some
evil-affected Irish Papists, against the Lives of us the Lords Justices and
Council, and many other of his Majesty's faithful Subjects, universally
throughout this Kingdom, and for the seizing not only of his Majesty's Castle
of Dublin, (his Majesty's principal Fort here) but also of all the other
Fortifications in the Kingdom. And seeing by the great goodness and abundant
mercy of Almighty God to his Majesty, and this State and Kingdom, those wicked
Conspiracies are brought to light, and some of the Conspirators committed to
the Castle of Dublin by us, by his Majesty's Authority, so as those wicked and
damnable Plots are now disappointed in the chief Parts thereof: We therefore
have thought fit hereby not only to make it publicly known, for the comfort
of his Majesty's good and loyal Subjects in all parts of the Kingdom, but also
hereby to require them, That they do with all confidence and cheerfulness
betake themselves to their own defense, and stand upon their Guard, so to
render the more safety to themselves and all the Kingdom besides; and that they
advertise us with all possible speed of all Occurrents, which may concern the
peace and safety of the Kingdom, and now to show fully that Loyalty and Faith,
which they had always shown for the public Services of the Crown and Kingdom,
which we will value to his Majesty accordingly, and a special memory thereof
will be retained for their advantage in due time; and we require, that great
care be taken, that no Levies of Men be made for Foreign Service, nor any Men
suffered to March upon any pretense.

Given at his Majesty's Castle at Dublin, 23. October, 1641. R. Dillon, To.
Digby, Ad. Loftus, J. Temple, Tho. Rotheram, Franc. Willoughby, Ja. Ware, To.
Meredith.



Which being immediately printed, was dispersed to as many Places as they could
convey it to: Against which, some of the Lords of the Pale (though at first
they had offered their service at the Council Board, with great protestations
and affections to his Majesty) few days after appeared with a Petition to their
Lordships, wherein they uttered the deep sense they had of an expression in
that Proclamation, as if by the words, Irish Papists, there being no
distinction, they might doubt themselves involved. Upon which the Lords
Justices and Council, being tender, lest they (in whose fidelity, from the
example of their Ancestors, their Lordships then rested confident) should take
umbrage at any of their expressions, condescended, by their Printed
Declaration, dated the 29th. of the same October, to publish and proclaim, That
by the words, Irish Papists, they intended only such of the old mere Irish in
the Province of Ulster, as had plotted, contrived, and been actors in that
Treason, and others that adhered to them, and none of the old English of the
Pale, and other Parts, enjoining all his Majesty's Subjects, whether
Protestants or Papists, to forbear upbraiding matter of Religion. So that this
Cavil being removed, the Lords Justices and Council (with all imaginable amity
and confidence) animated the Lords of the Pale, and their adherents, to join
with them, as one Body, for the suppression of the present Rebellion, and the
maintenance of his Majesty's just Right and Prerogative. To which end they
parted with 1700 Arms, and proportionable Ammunition, as well to the Roman
Catholics, as Protestant Subjects, for the defense of their Houses in several
parts. As to the Lord of Gormanston, there were delivered Arms for 500 Men, for
the County of Mead; there were also delivered Arms for 300. for the County of
Kildare; Arms for 300. for the County of Lowth; Arms for 300. for the County of
West-Meath; Arms for 300. for the County of Dublin; and about the same time,
there were sent down 400 Muskets to the Lords of the Ardes and Clandeboys, for
the Arming of the Scots, in the County of Down; also the State furnished
Wexford, Waterford, Trim and Dundalk, with Arms, and license to import Arms and
Powder, a condescension never indulged without great confidence and favor,
that nothing should be wanting to testify their confidence of all, but such as
were in actual Rebellion.

And now having heard Mac-Mahon's, and Owen O Conally's Examinations, and the
proceedings thereupon, it will be time to give you the Lord Mac-Guire's, though
at first (when he was brought before the Council Board) nothing could be wrung
from him, till the 26th. of March, 1642. that his Examination was taken before
Charles Lord Lambert, and Sir Robert Meredith Knight. Chancellor of his Majesty's
Court of Exchequer, by direction of the Lords Justices and Council, in these
words: Who being examined, says, That about the time when Mr. John Bellew came
out of England, with the Commission for the continuance of the present
Parliament, Roger Moore, in the said Moore's Chamber, in the House of one Peter
de Costres, of this City, acquainted him this Examinant, That if the Irish
would rise, they might make their own Conditions, for the regaining of their
own Lands, and freedom of their Religion. At which time the said Moore also
acquainted him this Examinant, that he had spoken with sundry in Leimster, who
would be ready for that purpose; and withal told him this Examinant, that he
was assured a good part of Connaght would do the like; and thereupon moved this
Examinant to join likewise with them, with all he could make; unto which motion
he this Examinant yielded. And the next day following, there was a Meeting in
his the said Moore's Chamber aforesaid, where were Col. Mac-Bryan, Mac-Mahon,
Tirelagh O Neal, Philip Mac-Hugh O Rely, this Examinant, and Roger Moore,
where Discourse was had about that Business, yet nothing concluded on, save
that Roger Moore and the rest should go and prepare their Parties. And this
Examinant further says, That about May last, he this Examinant, Roger Moore,
Philip O Rely, and Roger Mac-Guire ( this Examinant's Brother) dispatched a
Priest ( one Tool O Conley) who lived in Leimster, unto Owen O Neal, into
Flanders, to acquaint him with the Business, concerning the General Rebellion
then in preparation; which said Priest returned about a month before the time
appointed for execution thereof: And the Answer which the said Priest brought
from the said Owen O Neal, was, That he would (within 15 days after the People
were up) be with them, with his best Assistance and Arms: And it being
demanded, Why he the said Owen would bring Arms, considering the Castle of
Dublin was to be taken, and the Arms therein; this Examinant answered, That
they so provided for Arms, that they might not want any in case they could not
take the said Castle, whereof they doubted. And this Examinant acknowledges,
That the Castle of Dublin was to have been surpised by himself, Capt. Bryan O
Neal, Capt. Con O Neal, Capt. Mac-Mahon, one Owen O Rely, Roger Moore, Hugh
Mac-Mahon, Col. Plunkett, and Capt. Fox; and likewise further acknowledges,
That Hugh Mac-Phelim, Capt. Con O Neal, and Bryan O Neal, brought from Owen O
Neal, out of Flanders, the very same Message which the Priest brought. And this
Examinant further says, That he was told by Roger Moor, that a Great Man was
in the Plot, but he might not name him for the present: And at another time,
and during the sitting of the Parliament the last Summer, he this Examinant was
informed by one John Barnewell, a Franciscan Friar, then resident in this City,
That those of the Pale were also privy to the Plot (meaning the present
Rebellion.) And lastly says, That of those Persons who came to attend him this
Examinant, for the surprise of the Castle of Dublin, only Cohonough Mac-Guire
was privy to the Business in hand; and that the last Meeting (when the day
appointed for the execution thereof was resolved on) was at Loghross, where
were present only Ever Mac-Mahon, Vicar General of the Diocese of Clogher,
Thomas Mac-Kearnan, a Friar of Dundalk, Sir Phelim O Neal, Roger Moor, and
Bryan O Neal.

Charles Lambert, Robert Meredith.
Concordat cum originali. Ex. per Paul Harris.


Which Examination he also acknowledged before Judge Bramston, Lord Chief
Justice of England, and Justice Mallet, the 22. of June, 1642. in the presence
of Jo. Conyers, W. Ayloffe, Nath. Finch. And being Prisoner in the Tower of
London, he delivered to Sir John Conyers (then Lieutenant thereof) a Relation
of the whole Scene, to be presented to the Lords in Parliament, which being
stored with many remarkable Circumstances, sufficiently evidencing the
dis-satisfaction, long contrivance, and general combination of the Natives, I
shall commit to posterity in his own words, Appendix 2.
that it may be seen (what Fucus soever is now endeavored to be cast on the
horrid Conspiracy) it was not any ill miscarriage of the State (at that time)
or any real suspicions that the Irish had of any violence to be obtruded on
their Religion, or Persons, which drove the Natives into a general revolt, but
the deliberate complotted Counsels of many years, that anvil'd out the
Rebellion in detestation of the English; that was the Sore (however skinned)
which they endeavored again to exulcerate; to which end, O Neal's Regiment in
Flanders (consisting most of Irish Papists) was purposely raised, to train up
the Irish in Arms, against a fitting opportunity, as by Henry Mac-Art's
Examination Pryn's Abbrev. of Archbi. Laud, fol. 301.
is most evident.

Thus was this inhumane and treacherous Rebellion unanimously complotted, which
brake forth the 23. of October, 1641. St. Ignatius his day, that less than such
a Patron might not be entitled to so close and bloody a Conspiracy, forty
years before fore-warned by the incomparable and pious Archbishop Usher,
preaching (soon after the overthrow of the Spaniards at Kinsale, 1601.) on the
Vision of Ezekiel. Chap. 4. Verse. 6. whence (in reference to a connivance of
Popery following) he drew this Application, From this year (a day being for a
year) I will reckon the sin of Ireland, that those whom you now embrace shall
be your ruin, and you shall bear this iniquity. A little before which time,
this Reverend Primate went for England; I cannot say his reflecting on this
Prophecy Dr. Bernard in his Funeral Oration on the Primate, p. 39.
was the cause of his repair thither, no! many things were thought to be in
dispute, which his moderation might probably have composed. However, writes
Armachanus Redivivus, toward the end, Monitu proculdubio divino tempestivus ab
Hibernia recessit, priusquam funestae calamitates erupissent, and illi lupi
bipedes, belluaeque deproedatrices dispersas oves horribili Laniena
jugulassent. The Castle of Dublin (as you have read) was the chief Place they
aimed at, as in the Lord Grey's Government, 1580. it was then the design of the
Rebels to have killed Conspirare caeperunt ad Proregem cum familia opprimendum,
Castrum Dublinense (ubi omnis apparatus bellicus) ex improviso intercipiendum.
Camd. Eliz. fol. 311. P. 27.
him, and his Family, and to have surprised the Castle of Dublin, wherein was
all the Provision of War. The like was intended by the Conspirators about the
beginning of the Reign of King James, Sir Arthur Chichester Lord Deputy.

The full determination of the Conspiracy we now speak of, was (as Dr. Jones,
in his clear and excellent account he gives thereof, in his Depositions took
the 3d. of March, 1641.) designed at the Abbey of Multifernan; (notwithstanding
that Tyroen's Son, who had long consulted it in Flanders, was suddenly
strangled about that time in Bruxels, and the Earl of Tirconnel drowned near
the time of the Earl of Strafford's death; prime Instruments in anvilling the
Design abroad, and great hopes of countenancing it at home) where there was a
Covent of Franciscans, (convened, it seems, on a pious intent) in the County of
West-Meath, after the last Sessions of Parliament; where, amongst many other
things there debated, the question was, What course should be taken with the
English, and all others, that were found in the whole Kingdom, to be
Protestants? Some were only for their Banishment, as the King of Spain
dismis'd the Mores out of Granado, with some of their Goods. Others were
urgent, that all the Protestants should be universally cut off; the King of
Spain's lenity being his and his Queen's act, not the advice of his Council,
which (say they) afterward cost Christendom dear, the Mores surviving to
return with Swords in their hands and infest them, as Algiers and Sally does at
present. Those Disputes held long; at last, some leaned a middle way, neither
to dismiss or kill. And we find by the event, each of these thoughts had some
execution; in some places All being generally put to the Sword, or a more
deplorable end; in other places, Imprisonment (accompanied with the utmost
extremity of that condition) was the lot of many; and others (who being
dismissed with their Goods) were afterward stripped of all, exposed to Cold and
Famine, worse than Sword or Halter.

Thus having determined what to do with the Protestants, which (in general, too
sadly succeeded to their wishes) they (according to the presumption of the
event) consulted (in the next place) what course they would peruse in reference
to their Government of the State.

First, (they agreed) That their Loyalty to his Majesty should be still
reserved, say they of the modest sort; but both his Revenues and Government
must be reduced to certain bounds: His Rents none other than the ancient
Reservations before the Plantations; and the Customs so ordered, as to them
should be thought fitting.

Secondly, For the Government, such as would be esteemed Loyal, would have it
committed into the hands of two Lords Justices, one of the ancient Irish Race,
the other of the ancient British Inhabitants in the Kingdom, provided that they
be of the Romish Profession.

Thirdly, That a Parliament be forthwith called, consisting of whom they shall
think fit to be admitted, wherein their own Religious Men shall be Assistants.

Fourthly, That Poining's Act must be repealed, and Ireland declared to be a
Kingdom independent on England, and without any reference to it in any case
whatsoever.

Fifthly, All Acts prejudicial to the Romish Religion shall be abolished, and
it to be Enacted, That there be none other Profession in the Kingdom but the
Romish.

Sixthly, That only the ancient Nobility of the Kingdom shall stand; and of
them, such as shall refuse to conform to the Romish Religion, to be removed,
and others put in their room. Howsoever, the present Earl of Kildare must be
put out, and another put in his place.

Seventhly, All Plantation Lands to be recalled, and the ancient Proprietors to
be invested into their former Estates, with the Limitations in their Covenant
expressed, That they had not formerly sold their Interests on valuable
Considerations.

Eighthly, That the respective Counties of the Kingdom be subdivided, and
certain Bounds or Baronies assigned to the Chief Septs, and other of the
Nobility, who are to be answerable for the Government thereof: and that a
standing Army may be still in being, the respective Governors are to keep a
certain number of men to be ready at all Risings out (as they term it) they
also being to build and maintain certain Fortresses, in places most convenient
within their Precincts: And that these Governors be of absolute Power, only
responsible to the Parliament.

Lastly, For maintaining a Correspondency with other Nations, and for securing
the Coasts, that also they may be rendered considerable to others, a Navy of a
certain number of Ships is to be maintained; that to this end, five Houses are
to be appointed, one in each Province, (accounting Mead for one of them) that
to these Houses shall be allotted an Annual Pension of certain thousands of
Pounds, to be made up of part of the Lands appropriate to Abbeys; and a further
Contribution to be raised in the respective Provinces to that end: That these
Houses are to be assigned to a certain order of Knights, answerable to that of
Malta, who are to be Seamen. And to maintain this Fleet, that all Prizes are
to be apportion'd, some part for a Common Bank, the rest to be divided; to
which purpose, the selling of Woods serviceable for this use is forbidden. The
House for this purpose to be assigned to the Province of Leimster, is
Kilmainham, or rather Howth, (the Lord of Howth being otherwise to be
accommodated, provided he join with them) that place being esteemed most
convenient in respect of situation, which they have small grounds to hope for.

For the effecting of which, they considered, that the Forces of the Kingdom
would easily amount to two hundred thousand able men, wanting only Commanders;
which (as I have already took notice of) might be supplied from O-Neals
Regiment in Flanders, and other places, breeding up the Irish in Arms and
Rebellion. And for Money, (the other Sinew of War) they were resolved not to
want it, if it could be rais'd-either from Tenant, or the Farmers of the
Customs, who (having it then ready) were to bring it to their respective Banks.
So as nothing was omitted, which rationally might further their design: Which,
after the State, by Proclamation, had made known, and many (on suspicion) were
daily seized on, Certainties of its success were hourly brought to the State:
That night the Lord Blany brought the ill news, of the Rebels seizing upon
Castle Blany in the County of Monaghan, and his Wife, and Children, and
Servants; as also of the surprisal of Carrick Mac-ross, a House of the Earl of
Essex's, and Sir Henry Spotswood's in the same County, burning diverse Villages,
robbing and spoiling many English, none but Protestants. On Sunday, Sir Arthur
Tirringham gave intelligence, that the Irish in Newry had broken up the King's
Store of Arms, and had seized upon them and the Ammunition there, listing
themselves under the command of Sir Con Mac-Gennis Knight, and one Creely a
Monk. Thus almost every hour some (like Job's Messengers) hasted to the State,
as preserved only to acquaint them of the disasters of their Relations, and
the sufferings of the Protestants: of which, with all circumstances to it, the
Lords Justices and Council gave his Majesty an account by Sir Henry Spotswood,
(being then in Scotland) and sent Owen O Conally with Letters, dated the 25th.
of October, to the Earl of Leicester, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland Sir John
Temple's History of the Rebellion, p. 28.
, the effect of which Letter you may see in its proper place. In the interim,
the State being from all parts terrified with the insolences of the Rebels,
they scarce knew how to steer their course, no Money being in the Treasury, and
the main part of the Citizens being justly suspected, for that being moved to
advance Money on the occasion, (will Posterity believe it) their whole
Community would not reach 50 l. And such as had escaped the violence of the
Rebels, having nothing but their Persons for a prey, could contribute little,
many of which were so frighted with what they had seen and suffered, that, like
inanimate Bodies, they appeared senseless and stupid. However, the Lords
Justices and Council having secured the Castle by a Company of Foot, under the
command of Sir Francis Willoughby, (one of the Privy Council) a known and
experienced Soldier, and settled Sir Charles Coote (also of the Privy Council)
in the Government of the City, wherein (as in other Services) he proved
afterward signally eminent and noble. They advertised the Earl of Ormond,
(whom the Rebels boasted they had made of their Party) then at his House at
Carrick, of what had hitherto happened, desiring him to repair to Dublin with
his Troop, which he accordingly observed about the beginning of November.

About the 27th. of October, the Lords Justices and Council sent Commissions to
the Lords Viscounts of Clandeboys, and of the Ardes, to raise the Scots in the
Northern Parts; they also writ to Sir William and Sir Robert Stewart, with
other Gentlemen of Quality in the North, Giving them power to prosecute the
Rebels with Fire and Sword; yet so, as to rescue such as should submit to his
Majesty's Grace and Mercy; signifying withal, That although by the said
Commission they gave them full power thereunto, yet they did then let them
know, that for those who were chief among the Rebels, and Ringleaders of the
rest to disobedience, that they adjudged them less worthy of favor than the
others whom they had misguided: And therefore for those principal Persons, they
required them to take care not to be too forward (without first consulting the
Counsel-board) in proffering or promising mercy to those, unless they the said
Commissioners saw it of great and unavoidable necessity. They likewise writ to
the Lords Presidents of Munster and Connaght, advising them to be upon their
Guards: And that several of the Catholic Communion might not say, but that
they also were confided in, the Lords Justices (who were willing to continue
all proofs imaginable of their confidence in them) gave in November several
Commissions of Government to the Lord Gormanston As in Sir J. Temp. p. 57. and
in the Answer to the Remonst. at Trym, p. 22.
in Mead, the Lord Mountgarret in Kilkenny, Nicholas Barnewell in Dublin,
Walter Bagnall in Caterlagh, the Lord Lowth in Lowth, Sir Thomas Nugent in
Westmeath, Sir Robert Talbot in Wickloe, the two Sir James Dillon's in
Longford, and several others, as well in Munster as Connaght and Ulster; who
contrary to the trust reposed in them, not forbore to protect, or endeavored
to reduce any, but soon after joined with the Rebels, and proved as violent, if
not worse, against the Protestants, as those who first appeared in the
Rebellion. And because the Times required something extraordinary, beyond the
course of Common Law, the Lords Justices and Council gave several Commissions
of Martial-Law, to the Commissions of Martial-Law granted to several of the
prime Irish.
prime Gentlemen of the Pale (all Roman Catholics) as to Henry Talbot, in the
County of Dublin, John Bellew Esquire in the County of Lowth, Richard Dalton, and
James Tuit Esquire in the County of Westmeath, Valerian Wesley, in the County of
Mead, James Talbot, in the County of Cavan. And understanding of Sir Phelim
O-Neal's proceedings in Ulster, (the only person remaining of nearest alliance
to the Earl of Tyrone) how that he had surprised Charlemont, where the Lord
Caufield lay with his Foot-Company, (afterward basely butchered by him) the
Lords Justices endeavored to reduce many to their obedience: But the root of
their Design being deeplier laid, than on threats or encouragements to
frustrate their hopes, the Lords Justices hourly endeavored to fortify his
Majesty's Interests, wih the most powerful Forces they could raise. But in the
interim the Magistrates of the City of Dublin, perceiving great numbers of
Strangers to come to Town from several Parts, (lingering in the Suburbs and
Fields, to the terror of the Inhabitants) they repaired to the Council Board
with much fear and astonishment, beseeching the Lords Justices and Council to
inhibit the same, lest the concourse of people Strangers inhited (by
Proclamation) the City.
(promiscuously gathering in such a crowd) might threaten the security of the
City. Whereupon their Lordships (considering somewhat more than ordinary must
necessarily be done in such an exigence) caused some to be apprehended, and
immediately published a Proclamation in his Majesty's Name, commanding all
Persons (not Dwellers in the City and Suburbs) to depart within an hour after
publication thereof, upon pain of death; in the interim, and afterward,
receiving all (who applied themselves to the Lords Justices) with singular
friendship and integrity: But the Magistrates growing still jealous of the
concourse of people, applied themselves again to their former refuge. Whereupon
the State (that the Inhabitants might receive no dis-encouragement, who were
like to bear the brunt of all Taxes, Levies, and Supplies) the 28th. of
October, published a Proclamation to the same intent with the former, with the
penalty of death to such as wilfully harbored them.

However, the Insolences of the Rebels threatening even Dublin it self, most of
the prime Gentry of the County (Justices of Peace) looking on in all places,
and giving way to those hateful actions; the State having intelligence from Dr.
Jones (a Service very remarkable) that (during his imprisonment amongst the
Rebels at Cavan, which ripened his integrity, highly improved to the Service of
the State) they intended to besiege Tredath, the Lords Justices the better to
divert them from Dublin, appointed Sir Henry Tichborn, Col. and Governor of
that Town, Sir Faithful Fortescue (the former Governor) finding Supplies not
hastened with that speed he desired, having resigned up his Commission, not
being willing to lose his Reputation, though he was forward enough to hazard
his Person. So the Lords Justices designing the said Sir Hen. A Garrison sent
to Tredath.
Tichborn a Company of Foot, and to complete his Regiment, ordered Sir John
Borlase Junior Capt. Lt. Col. Byron Capt. Lt. Col. Wenmond Capt.
Who though they had been all (in former Employments) Field-Officers, yet out
of their zeal to the present Service, came as private Captains. Jacob Lovell
Sergeant Major, who died in the Siege, Capt. Chichester Fortescue, Capt.
William Willoughby, Capt. Edward Billingsley, Capt. Lewis Owens, Capt. John
Morris to associate him. These they sent from Dublin the 3d. of November, who
happily arrived at Tredath the 4th. having been enabled thereunto by 3000 l.
most opportunely in the hands of the Vice-Treasurer, intended before the
Rebellion, for the satisfaction of a public Engagement in England. Besides
these, there was sent Troops under Capt. John Slaughter, Lt. to Sir Thomas
Lucas, Commissary-General, Thomas Greimes, Lt. to Sir Adam Loftus; besides
others, which in their due time may be taken notice of. These being gone to
Tredath, Sir Charles Coote had a Commission for a Regiment of the poor stripped
English; so likewise had the Ld. Lambert. A little while after arrived from
England, Sir Thomas Lucas, who commanded a Troop completed with such Men as he
found there; also Capt. Armstrong raised a Troop; Capt. Tardner soon after
landed, Lt. to the Ld. Lieutenant's Troop, all very considerable; not long
after Col. Crafford came over also, and bringing with him Letters from the
Prince Elector, then attending his Majesty in Scotland, also raised a Regiment
of the Townsmen, and the poor dispoil'd English.

The State at that time had store of Arms and Ammunition, by which these
Soldiers and the rest were seasonably furnished, though (as I have took notice)
what (in confidence of the Loyalty of the Pale) the Lords Justices had
furnished many of the Lords and Gentlemen of Quality with, were either
slenderly (if ever) restored, or made serviceable against his Majesty.

Yet for all this, the Outrages of the Rebels still increasing, adding to The
Rebels pretend a Commission under the King's Broad Seal.
their Cruelties, a pretended Commission under the Great Seal of Scotland, from
the King, bearing date at Edinburgh, the first of October, 1641. though in his
Majesty's Declaration to the Parliament's Resolution, of no further Addresses,
Fol. 289.
it appears; That the Scot's Great Seal (which is said thus to be made use of
had for many months before and after that date never sealed any thing; of which
notwithstanding Sir Phelim O Neal, and Rorie Mac-Guire (from the Camp at Newry,
the 4th. of November following) gave notice to their Confederates, within the
Kingdom of Ireland, incloseing in their Letters a Copy of the Commission, a
Copy of which is extant, but so improbable, as it needs an expiation to mention
it; the Lord Mac-Guire (equally privy to all Transactions) denying it to the
last, with more sense of conscience (says his Majesty in his Answer to the
Parliament's two last Papers concerning Ireland) than they who examined him,
expected: However, (one Plunket having taken an old Broad Seal from an absolete
Patent out of Farnham-Abbey, and fixed it to a forged Commission) it to seduce
the Vulgar into an opinion of their Loyalty, when they had first incited them
to a Rebellion, as in a parallel Case his Excellency takes notice of, in his
Answer to their Declaration at James-town Walsh, 121.
. And, says his Majesty, in his Declaration to the Parliament's Answer at
Newmarket, the 9th. of March, 1641. We must think our self highly and causlesly
injured in our Reputation, if any Declaration, Action or Expression of the
Irish Rebels, any Letter from Count Rosettie to the Papists, for Fasting and
Prayer, or from Tristram Whitcombe, of strange Speeches uttered in Ireland,
shall beget any jealousy or mis-apprehension in our Subjects, of our Justice,
Piety and Affection; it being evident to all understandings, that those
mischievous and wicked Rebels are not so capable of great advantage, as by
having their false Discourses so far believed, as to raise fears and
jealousies, to the distraction of this Kingdom, the only way to their security.
Wherefore the Lords Justices and Council, detesting such Umbrages, the 30th. of
October published a Proclamation, to take off the people, from being seduced by
seditious and scandalous reports fathered on the Crown Appendix 3.
.

And that none ignorantly involved in so detestable a Guilt (as the public
Conspiracy) might suffer, the State yet further to manifest their desire, of
reducing all into a general obedience, (having never drawn his Majesty's Sword
upon jealousies or presumptions, till the highest Extremities and unparalled
Outrages compelled them thereunto) published, the first of November, a
Proclamation, declaring, That all in the Counties of Mead, Westmeath, Lowth,
and Longford, being no Freeholders, nor now in prison, who had taken any Goods
from his Majesty's faithful Subjects, not having shed blood in the Action, and
came in within ten days after this Proclamation, should be received to his
Majesty's mercy, and no further prosecuted.

Which (as others of the like nature) little prevailed to un-deceive the
Rebels, they being before linked in an un-dissolvible tie of Animosity and
Superstition. Thus every day (notwithstanding that the Conspiracy was
discovered, and all endeavors used to reclaim them) the Irish proceeded in
their Massacres and Rebellion, though they did not (after the knowledge of the
detection of their Plot) execute so generally their Villainy with such open
slaughters and cruelties, as they did at first; but stripping, wounding, and
turning the English and Protestants out of their Houses, they sent them naked
and desolate (in miserable weather) to Dublin, where their numbers (at length)
grew so burdensome, as though Thousands were shipped away soon after they arrived
there, and such as could serve in the Army were daily in-listed, yet they
brought so great an extremity, and want of all provisions to Dublin, as the
Inhabitants were reduced to great exigencies, inasmuch as the mercies of the
Rebels were extreme cruelty, Thousands of the dispoiled English dying
afterward by lingering Diseases, contracted by the inhumane and cruel usage of
their Enemies.

Miseries still increasing, the Lords Justices and Council sent a second
Dispatch to the King, the 5th. of November, then in Scotland, directing also
their Letters to his Privy Council in England, there being an absolute
necessity to invoke all Powers, that might stand with his Majesty's Honor.
They then (and not before) directed Letters to the Speakers of both Houses of
Parliament, (enclosing in those they writ to his Majesty) what they had
signified by Letters to the Lords of the Council, or to the Speakers of both
Houses of Parliament.

About the 6th. of November, 1641. the Rebels of Cavan, commanded by Philip
Mac-Hugh, Mac-Shane O Rely, Knight of the Shire for that County, and others of
the Sept of O Relies, proffered an humble Remonstrance The Rebels of Cavan's
Remonstrance.
(so they entitled their presumptuous Paper) to the Lords Justices and
Council, to be recommended by them to his Majesty; which Dr. Jones and Mr.
Waldrone then delivered to their Lordships, the Doctor being obliged to that
service, He, his Wife and Children lying at the Rebels mercy: To which their
Lordships answered, with all the moderation and satisfaction that could stand
with their Duty, and the weak conditions of affairs in Dublin, the safety
whereof wholly depended on the gaining of time; and (says my Author Dr.
Jones's Relation of Cavan, p. 17.
) he assured himself, the Remonstrants expected not any other Answer, the
Remonstrance being tendered rather to win upon the People, (whose cause they
pleaded) then to give any reasonable account or satisfaction to the Lords
concerning their proceedings; which yet their Lordships forthwith certifi'd,
with their Answer, to the Lord Lieutenant, to whom his Majesty had expressly
commanded all Affairs of Ireland should be addressed. However, they (during the
presenting of this Remonstrance) mustered their Forces, summoning all from 16
to 60 years of Age to appear the Monday following at Virginia, (a Place distant
from Cavan twelve miles) and in the way to Dublin; notwithstanding that they
had empowered Dr. Jones to assure their Lordships, That their should be a
cessation of all things, until the return of their Lordships Answer. Thus no
faith or confidence could ever be reposed in them. And afterward it fell out,
that none were more treacherous and fierce than they, as great inhumanity and
cruelty being acted by them of Cavan, as of any other Place; that County, by
the 11th. of December, being wholly reduced into the hands of the Rebels,
excepting the two Castles of Keilagh and Crohan, belonging to Sir Keilagh and
Crohan Castles notably defended.
Francis Hamilton, Knight and Baronet, and Sir James Craig Knight, who so nobly
defended each their own, and alternatively succored one another, that they
perpetually furnished the Rebels with work sufficient, notwithstanding
whatsoever Mulmore O Rely the Sheriff Who having shaken off his obedience to
the English Government, quits Miles, sounding English, and takes Mulmore.
, or Edmond O Rely his Father, or Philip Mac-Hugh O Rely, their chief
Commander, could possibly do with all their Horsemen, whom these gallant men
often beat, though encountered with much disadvantage; Sir Francis Hamilton not
losing in the whole Service, from the 23d. of October, 1641. to the 15th. of
June, 1642. (setting aside such as were cut off in straggling) more than five
men belonging to this Castle, one of them being a Sergeant, who being taken at
an advantage, was barbarously mangled with thirty six wounds: so that all that
the Rebels could do, effected no Conquest on these Places, till the 8th. of
April, 1642. that Sir James Craig, (a Gentleman of singular and the best
abilities) died, and the Store in both Castles fell short, Water growing
scarce, a mortal infectious sickness increasing, the Rebels having tainted
their Well with dead Carcases. And now the care of both Castles fell unto Sir
Francis Hamilton's Charge, which being impossible to be relieved from Dublin,
or to hold out longer, their straits daily increasing, both these Castles were
delivered up the 4th. of July, 1642. to Philip Mac-Hugh, Mac-Shane O Rely, and
others, on honorable Conditions, Sir Francis Hamilton, the Lady Craig, Sir
Arthur Forbes Baronet, Since ( Anni^ scil. 1671 and 1672.) one of the Lords
Justices, as now Viscount Granard, who then not above 17 years of age, had been
on all Services.
and others, marched thence with credible Articles, faithfully set down by Dr.
Jones, in his Relation of the Rebellion in Cavan Printed at London, Aug. 11.
1642.
, worthy perusal. Those, with others that came from these Castles, were 1340 in
number, who being conveyed toward Tredath, were all received by Sir Henry
Tichbourn, eight miles from Tredath, and afterward disposed of as was most
convenient. One of the Places most considerable in this County, first
surpised, was Cloughouter, whereof Arthur Culme Esquire was his Majesty's Captain;
a Fort certainly of great strength, environed with a deep Water, and distant
from shore more than Musket Shot, in which the Lord Bishop of Kilmore Dr. Bedel
was imprisoned, though afterward Exchanged by Sir James Craigh, and, contrary
to Articles, seized on again, who died near Kilmore about the midst of March,
1641, and was buried in the Cathedral Churchyard; a worthy Person, (as formerly
we had occasion to take notice of) One of the brightest Lights of that Church,
both for Learning and a shining Conversation, and (in his constant diligence in
the Work of the Ministry) a Pattern to others. In the beginning of the
Troubles in this County, Captain Richard Rives (Commander in Chief of Sir John
Borlase (Lord Justice) his Troop) Garrisoned at Belturbet, acted very close and
gallantly, attending the English with much faithfulness, till by the command of
the State, (who suspected his surprizal) he was recalled to Dublin, marching
thither (through the Enemy) over many dead Bodies that with Famine had perished
in the way; performing afterward (being Sir John Borlase's Junior's Lieutenant
Colonel) very many honorable services, (as at Athboy near Trim with the Lord
Lisle, where they notoriously beat up the Rebels Quarters, as elsewhere, viz.
Kells, Carickmacros, the Earl of Essex's Castle in Monaghan, which they took
from the Rebels, with a considerable advantage, in October, 1642.) highly
deserving the public notice; though since he was unfortunately put away,
heading Colonel Penruddock's and Sir Joseph Wagstaff's Party in the West of
England, about the 14th. of March, 1654.

And now by reason that more People flocked to the City, and that the Lords
Justices and Council had frequent intelligence from several parts, of the
insolent proceedings of the Rebels against the British and Protestants in the
Borders of the Pale, as well as the adjacent Counties, they (the xi. of
November) prohibited the access of unnecessary Persons, not The States
Proclamation against unnecessary Persons flocking to the City. Appendix 4.
any way restraining such, as by their Quality, or Business, gave no grounds of
Exceptions, as by the Act it self is evident, which you will find in the
Appendix.

However there were some (venomed with the vigilance of the State) who
endeavored to cast a blemish on this Proclamation, though afterward it
appeared to be his Majesty's sense in his Letters to the Lords Justices in
December following. Yet the 16th. of November the Parliament freely met
according to the Adjournment, Mr. Darcy, Mr. Burk, and The Parliament meet.
other active Members of the House of Commons having exceedingly importuned the
same; the deferring thereof being (as they urged it) an injury to the whole
Nation, as hindering them from expressing their Loyal affections to his Majesty,
and showing their desires to quell this dangerous Rebellion; withal engaging,
that there should be (on their meeting) a clear Protestation against the
Rebels; else, for fear there should have been some prejudice to the State, (by
the concourse of People at that time) the State was once resolved (having power
from his Majesty so to do) by a Proclamation of the 27th. of October, to have
deferred the Parliament to the 24th. of February next ensuing, for several
causes therein mentioned, but especially, for that his Majesty desired the Lord
Lieutenant should be there. As by another Proclamation the same 27th. of
October, the Lords Justices and Council had adjourned Michaelmass-Term, To
avoid, in that exigency, those great and manifold perils and dangers, that
might have ensued to the State by such concourse of People, out of all the
parts of the Kingdom, unto the City of Dublin, as the holding of the Term would
necessarily require, by reason of the late most disloyal and detestable
Conspiracy, plotted by a multitude of evil-affected mere Irish Papists. But
however, the Parliament met. And here it was visible, that more were tainted
with the Infection, than appeared in Rebellion. Lord! what artifice? what
cunning? what varnish was put upon all the Rebels actions and cruelties? Those
who seemed to be most affected with the Insurrection, covered it with such a
vail, treated of it so nicely, with such tenderness, as if they themselves
(being all indeed of the Conspiracy) had been to participate immediately of the
Punishment, as well as they were clandestinely involved in the Plot; By always
contesting, that they might not be called Traitors and Rebels, being privy to
what themselves had formerly (with these Rebels) contrived to be done. And
fearing it might move the Rebels to recriminate, writes a most judicious
Instrument of State The Irish Remonstrance answered. p. 65.
, That the Appellation of discontented Gentlemen was the worst that could be
wrung from them; till One, heartily detesting the Fig Leaves thrown over this
nakedness, told the Speaker, That though he had not arrived at that consistency
of years, as that his words might challenge there an audience; Days should
speak, and multitude of years should teach wisdom; yet he could not but observe
many passages in that Assembly, too like Catilines in the Senate; and therefore
moved, that it might not be told in that House, or published at Askelon, that
so general a Revolt (accompanied with such horrid and barbarous circumstances)
should be took notice of with a more favorable expression than Treason and
Rebellion. He added further, That he did not know, but that that was the season
wherein they were cast on their trial, whether Allegiance or Rebellion, God or
the Pope were to be owned. And that as to any thing that might soften the
Rebels, he conceived they were hardened with so much villainy, that they
esteemed all things justifiable that were attainable. Iram atque animos a
crimine sumunt. And therefore it was fit that that House should act as sensible
of the Rebels cruelties, and trust God to vindicate his and his Peoples Cause.
Upon which, and other Arguments, (too shameful for them to palliate) the
Parliament discovered their Resentment in these words. The Protestation and
Declaration of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament
assembled.
WHereas the happy and Peaceable Estate of this Realm has been of late, and is
still interrupted by sundry Persons, ill affected to the Peace and Tranquillity
thereof; who, contrary to their Duty and Loyalty to his Majesty, and against
the Laws of God, and the fundamental Laws of this Realm, have traitorously and
rebelliously raised Arms, seized upon his Majesty's Forts and Castles, and
dispossessed many of his faithful Subjects of their Houses, Lands, and Goods,
and have slain many of them, and committed other cruel and inhumane outrages
and acts of Hostility within this Realm.

The said Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, being justly moved with a
right sense of the said disloyal rebellious proceedings and actions of the
Persons aforesaid, do hereby protest and declare, That the said Lords and
Commons from their hearts, do detest and abhor the said abominable actions, and
that they shall and will, to their uttermost power, maintain the Rights of his
Majesty's Crown, and Government of this Realm, and the peace and safety
thereof, as well against the persons aforesaid, their Abettors, Adherents; as
also against all Foreign Princes, Potentates, and other Persons and attempts
whatsoever. And in case the Persons aforesaid do not repent of their aforesaid
Actions, and lay down Arms, and become humble Suitors to his Majesty for Grace
and Mercy, in such convenient time, and in such manner and form, as by his
Majesty, or the Chief Governor or Governors, and the Council of this Realm
shall be set down. The said Lords and Commons do further protest and declare,
That they will take up Arms, and will with their Lives and Fortunes suppress
them and their attempts, in such a way, as by the Authority of the Parliament
of this Kingdom, with the approbation of his Excellent Majesty, or of his
Majesty's Chief Governor or Governors of this Kingdom, shall be thought most
effectual.

Copia vera exam. per Phil. Percivall, Cleric. Parliament.


And after that the Parliament had sat two days, to whom the Lords Justices
had imparted his Majesty's gracious intentions, not to depart from any his
former favors promised to them for settling their Estates, who should remain
faithful and Loyal; and that the Lords Justices had shortened the Prorogation
to the 11th. of January, the Lord Viscount Costelough, empowered by the Lords,
went for England, not long before having been sworn a Privy Counselor in
Ireland, even since the Rebellion; with whom the Lord Taaff also embarck'd,
having before presented to the Lords Justices and Council, from many of the
Gentry and Inhabitants of the County of Longford (in Rebellion) a rebellious
and scandalous Letter, in the nature of a Remonstrance, full of pretended
Grievances, The Contents of the Longford Letter.
and unreasonable Demands, as namely, to have freedom of Religion, a Repeal of
all Laws made to the contrary, and the like.

Upon the information of which, especially that there should be a toleration of
the Popish Religion in Ireland, it was resolved on the 8th. of December, 1641.
upon solemn Debate by the Lords and Commons in the Parliament of England, That
they would never give consent to any Toleration of the Popish Religion in
Ireland, or in any other his Majesty's Dominions. Which Vote has been since
adjudged a main motive for making the War a cause of Religion, consequently of
calling in Foreign Princes to their aid and assistance; which before ever this
Vote past, to ground the least pretense thereupon, the Irish made Religion the
principal end of their Insurrection; and this Proposition was (as you see) one
of the first to be demanded, which gave the Parliament a cause for the Vote
forementioned. In pursuance of which, Sir Benjamin Rudyard (whom the cause
ever made eloquent) thus delivered his sense. Mr. Speaker.
PEradventure I could have wished, that Toleration of Religion had not Sir Ben.
Rudyard's Speech in defense of Religion.
at this time come in question; but now it is brought on the Stage, I am
brought to the Stake. When Religion is so nearly concerned, I love not to take
any Civil or Politic respects into consideration: Reason of State has almost
eaten up all the Laws and Religion of Christendom.

I have often heard it discoursed, whether we should make Religion an Argument
of any of our undertakings abroad, wherein the wiser sort have been very nice
and tender, believing, that the over-number of Papists would overwhelm us; yet
I have been long of opinion, that our Attempts and Assistances have so often
miscarri'd, because we have not boldly and publicly avowed our Religion. It
may be, God thinks we are too many, who can conquer as well with few as with
many. Shall the Irish now make their Religion the cause of their Rebellion, and
shall we be ashamed or afraid to maintain our Religion, in reducing them to
their Duty and Obedience? God will not honor them who do not honor him. Let
us remember that expostulation in the Chronicles, Why transgress ye the
commandments of God, so that ye cannot prosper? This is a great transgression,
to shrink from God in his truth.

When we deny the Irish a Toleration, we do not withdraw the eases and favors
they have heretofore enjoyed; Greater, I am sure, than they would afford us, if
we were in their power. Wherefore, Mr. Speaker, let us uphold our Religion, and
trust God with the success.



Upon which, and other motions thereupon, the Vote mentioned proceeded without
dispute; and that the cause thereof might appear, we shall Appendix 5.
refer you to the Longford Letter it self.

What reception it had at the Council Board may easily be conceived, by these
Lords speedy repair into England; who afterward centred in that, which in time
brought on a Cessation of Arms with the Rebels, in its own place to be spoke
of. The Lord Dillon (upon his coming into England) was seized on by the
Parliament, and his Papers rifled, (according to a Vote in Parliament the 3d.
of November) which (by the Confederates) was looked upon as a heinous crime,
though the discovery of the Concerns in Ireland (as well as the management of
the War) were entrusted to the English Parliament, (so no crime in them.) But
he escaped from them at last, and went to the King; having in his private
Instructions orders to move, that no Forces might be sent over out of England,
but that the whole work might be left to the Remonstrants, and that they would
then undertake to suppress the Rebels themselves.

In the interim, we must not omit, that some of both Houses of Parliament The
Parliament Prorogued.
in Ireland, lately met, but now Prorogued, were appointed to treat with the
Rebels; So they received their Instructions from the Lords Justices, who were
to empower them under the great Seal thereunto. But instead of any happy
effects thereon, the Rebels were so puffed up with their Victories over the
poor, surpised, unresisting, innocent English, as they barbarously tore the
Order of Parliament, together with the Letter sent unto them, promising
themselves success and Dominion in all their Attempts.

By this time the State had received an Answer from the Lord Lieutenant, of the
Account they had given him of the Rebellion, wherein he certified the Lords
Justices, that he understood his Majesty had received some Advertisements out
of the North of Ireland, of the present Rebellion; and that the Business of
Ireland might not suffer by his stay in Scotland, ( which was somewhat longer
than he expected) his Majesty had referred the whole Business of Ireland, to the
Parliament of England, who (after a most serious and solemn information of this
horrid Plot, by a select Committee The Lord Keeper. The Lord Privy Seal. The
Lord High Chamberlain. Lord Admiral. Lord Marshal. Lord Chamberlain. Earl of
Bath. Earl of Dorset. Earl of Leicester. Earl of Warwick. Earl of Holland. Earl
of Berks. Earl of Bristol. Lord Visc. Say. E. Mandevile. Lord Goring. Lord
Wilmot. All of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
of the Lords seated in the House of Commons, in an extraordinary manner)
undertook the charge and management thereof, ordering at that time 500 l. in
present for Owen O-Conally, and 200 l. per annum, till Lands of greater value
could be ordered for him, designing for the present Supplies of Ireland, the
sum of 50000 l. and had taken order for all Provisions necessary thereunto, as
by the Order of Parliament it appears. An Order of the Lords and Commons in
this present Parliament in England, concerning Ireland.
THE Lords and Commons in this present Parliament, being advertised of the
dangerous Conspiracy and Rebellion in Ireland, by the treacherous and wicked
Instigations of Romish Priests and Jesuits, for the bloody massacre and
destruction of all Protestants living there, and other his Majesty's loyal
Subjects of English blood, though of the Romish Religion, being ancient
Inhabitants within several Counties, and Parts of that Realm, who have always
in former Rebellions, given testimony of their fidelity to this Crown. And for
the utter depriving of his Royal Majesty, and the Crown of England, from the
Government of that Kingdom, (under pretense of setting up the Popish Religion)
have thereupon taken into their serious Considerations, how those mischievous
Attempts might be most speedily and effectually prevented, wherein the Honor,
Safety and Interest of this Kingdom, are most nearly and fully concerned.
Wherefore they do hereby declare, That they do intend to serve his Majesty with
their Lives and Fortunes, for the suppressing of this wicked Rebellion, in such
way as shall be thought most effectual by the Wisdom and Authority of the
Parliament: And thereupon have ordered and provided for a present Supply of
Money, and raising the number of 6000 Foot and 2000 Horse, to be sent from
England, being the full proportion desired by the Lords Justices, and his
Majesty's Council resident in that Kingdom, with a resolution to add such
further Succors, as the necessity of those Affairs shall require. They have
also resolved for providing Arms and Ammunition, not only for those Men, but
likewise for his Majesty's faithful Subjects of that Kingdom, with store of
Victuals, and other Necessaries, as there shall be occasion. And that these
Provisions may more conveniently be transported thither, they have appointed
three several Ports of this Kingdom, that is to say, Bristol, West-Chester, and
another in Cumberland, where the Magazines and Storehouses shall be kept, for
the supply of the several Parts of Ireland. They have likewise resolved to be
humble Mediators to his most Excellent Majesty, for the encouragement of the
English or Irish, who shall upon their own charges raise any number of Horse or
Foot, for his Service against the Rebels, that they shall be honorably
rewarded with Lands of Inheritance in Ireland, according to their merit. And
for the better inducing of the Rebels to repent of their wicked Attempts, they
do hereby commend it to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, or in his absence, to
the Deputy, or Lords Justices there, according to the power of the Commission
granted to them in that behalf, to bestow his Majesty's gracious Pardon to all
such, as within a convenient time (to be declared by the Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, or in his absence, by the Lord Deputy, or Lords Justices there,
according to the power of the Commission) shall return to their due obedience,
the greatest part whereof they conceive to have been seduced on false grounds,
by the cunning and subtle practices of some of the most malignant Rebels,
enemies to this State, and to the Reformed Religion; and likewise to bestow
such rewards as shall be thought fit, and published by the said Lord Lieutenant,
Lord Deputy, or Lords Justices and Council there, upon all those who shall
arrest the Persons, or bring in the heads of such Traitors, as shall be
personally named in any Proclamation published by the State there. And they do
hereby exhort and require all his Majesty's loving Subjects, both in this and
in that Kingdom, to remember their duty and conscience to God and his Religion,
and the great and eminent danger which will befall this whole Kingdom in
general, and themselves in particular, if this abominable Treason be not timely
suppressed, and therefore with all readiness, bounty, and cheerfulness, to confer
their assistance in their Persons, or Estates, to this so important and
necessary Service, for the common Good of all.

Jo. Brown, Cleric. Parliament.



And that the Army might be led by an honorable and promising Person, the Lord
Lieutenant (being not permitted to come over speedily himself) made the Earl of
Ormond Lieutenant General of the Army, approved of afterward by the King, as
one who (by his Relation, Integrity and Quality) was pitched on as the fittest
Person for that employment, of whose affection to the Protestant Religion, and
his Majesty's Service, his Majesty had great cause to be assured As in his
Majesty's Reply to the House of Commons Answer, concerning Licenses to Persons
to go into Ireland, is at large expressed upon Mr. Pym's Speech, at a
Conference with the Lords, the 25th. of Jan. 1641. therein affirming, That
since the stop upon the Ports, against all Irish Papists, by both Houses, many
of the chief Commanders (then in the Head of the Rebels) had been suffered to
pass, by his Majesty's immediate Warrant; sufficiently detested in his Answer.
The Party sent to reinforce Tredath, betrayed to the Rebels.
.

Soon after his settlement in that Place, he had notice from Sir Hen. Tichborn,
that the Rebels with 1300 Foot had sat down before Mellifont, the 24th. of
November, intending to surprise it; but the Lord Moor (whose House it was)
having placed 24 Musketeers and 15 Horsemen therein, defended it with much
resolution, (as long as their Powder lasted) and at last the Foot yielded on
Quarter the same day, (never observed by the Rebels) but the Horse charged
vigorously through the Enemy, and came safe to Tredath.

This Siege of Mellifont somewhat retarded the Rebels unanimous approach to
Tredath; upon which the Lords Justices forthwith designed 600 Foot and a Troop
of Horse, for the further strengthening of that Garrison. They marched from
Dublin the 27th. of November, but under such a Conduct, (being newly raised and
unexperienced) that most unfortunately (the Lord Gormanston's Groom giving
intelligence of their approach to the Rebels, not without his Lord's privity)
they were defeated the 29th. of November, near Julians-Towns, at
Gellingston-Bridge, not above an hundred of the Men (besides the Major that led
them, and two Foot-Captains, escaping to Tredath With the Troop of Horse, which
some accuse of much negligence, not to say worse. Sir Char. Coote sent to
relieve Wickloe Fort. Beats the Enemy there.
. This unhappy Defeat put such a disheartning on the State, as it begat sad
Suspicions; who being surrounded with Rebels, Sir Charles Coote the same day
was commanded into Wickloe, with such Forces as the State could then raise, to
relieve the Castle of Wickloe, then besieged by the Rebels, who (some days
before) had (with miserable slaughter and cruelty) surpised his Majesty's
Forts of Cairis Fort, Arkloe Fort, Chichester Fort, and all the Houses of the
English in that County, the Lord Esmond's House, and the adjacent Parts of
Wexford, threatening to assault Dublin, approaching within two miles thereof in
actual Hostility. Upon which Service Sir Charles Coote vigorously advanced, and
fought with the Rebels, under the Command of Luke Tool, conceived to be a
thousand strong, himself not being many hundreds; yet defeated them so
shamefully, as the terror thereof raised a fear in the Rebels ever after of
Sir Charles Coote, who thenceforwards so well attended his Commands, as to the
Government of the City, and other Charges, his particular Vigilance proved a
good Guard; and that Dublin might be fortified, the 22. of November, 1641. the
Lords Justices and Council by their Proclamation enjoined the same.

Now the State finding the Storm to increase, and that (though they had some
glimmerings of comfort by the success of their Forces in Wickloe, under Sir
Charles Coote) the Rebellion grew general, the Lords Justices and Council
published a Proclamation the 27th. of November, for a Weekly Fast every Friday,
to be devoutly and piously observed and solemnized, in and through the whole
City of Dublin, and the Suburbs thereof; that being humbled for their sins, the
affliction might be removed.

The 28th. of November, the State had an Account of Sir Phelim ONeal's and Sir
Con. Mac-Gennis his approach to Lisnegarvey, with about 4000 Men; who being
fearful of the Garrison's Field-Peeces, drew out two considerable Divisions of
Men, to fall on the Town on both sides at once: The strength of the Town
exceeded not 400 Foot, besides the Lord Convay's Troop, and part of Capt. St.
John's, who made up about 380. generally mounted on small Nags; yet so well
maintained they the Place, as having skirmish'd with the Rebels without the
Town on one side, the rest charged others in the Street, and in a short time
droye them to the Body of their Army, faced by Sir Phil. O-Neal and Sir Con.
who played upon them with their Field-Peeces, but were so pelted with Muskets,
as they gave ground, the main Body of the English still securing the
Marketplace. We took 6 Colors, killed many, without any considerable loss on
our side, more than that Capt. Boid and Capt. St. John were killed, Mr. Rawden
and Capt. Burly hurt, Sir Arth. Tirringham managing the whole with excellent
Conduct.

By this time, his Majesty (then in Scotland) having (as is before mentioned)
recommended the Affairs of Ireland to his Parliament of England, immediately
(on the first intelligence of that Rebellion) sent over several Commissions to
Sir Robert Stewart, and other Persons of Honor and Trust in the North; and
(assisted by the Duke of Richmond) caused some proportions of Arms and
Ammunition to be conveyed thither His Majesty sends Money, Arms and Ammunition,
into Ireland out of Scotland.
out of Scotland (with what Money he could spare) a care and providence worthy
so sensible a Prince, which though it were little, will be found to have done
much service, testified in his Majesty's Answer to a Pamphlet, entitled, A
Declaration of the Commons, touching no further Addresses Fol. 290.
. At the same time he moved all the Parliament in Scotland, (as being nearest)
to a speedy help; but they excused their Aids, because Ireland was dependent
upon the Crown of England, intending rather, as it seemed (by the sequel) to
afford their service upon Hire, than Compassion or Conscience.

Yet notwithstanding his Majesty, the State, and Parliament of England's
appearing thus incensed against the Rebellion, (all fair means of exceptions
being removed, and a desire of its suppression endeavored) the Irish finding
as yet no considerable relief sent to the English, (and being exceedingly
flushed with the defeat of those commanded to re-enforce the Garrison of
Tredath) they unanimously drew down their Northern Forces to infest that Town.
And that you may see with what union even the Lords of the Pale (formerly
faithful to the Crown) conspired in this Rebellion, though by their humble
Apology (fraught with many vain pretenses) they would evade the Conspiracy, we
must here render you an Account of the Truth, given in upon Oath, March 1641.
before Sir Robert Meredith, Knight. Chancellor of the Exchequer, in the Examination
of Edward Dowdall Esquire a Person of great esteem amongst them.

He deposes, That some 3 or 4 days after the defeat of the English Soldiers,
at the Bridge of Gellingstone, there issued a Warrant from the Lord of
Gormanston, to the Nicholas Dowdall.
Sheriff of the County, for a general Meeting of all the County at Dulick; but
the place of Meeting was afterward changed to the Hill of Crofty, where all
the Lords and Gentry of the County met, viz. The Earl of Fingal, the Lord
Viscount Gormanston, the Lord Slane, the Lord Lowth, the Lord Dunsany, the Lord
Trimblestone, the Lord Nettervile: And of the Gentry, Sir Patrick Barnewall,
Sir Christopher Bellow, Patrick Barnwall of Kiltrew, Nicholas Darcy of Plattin,
James Bath of Acharn, Garret Ailmer the Lawyer, Cusack of Gormanston, William
Malone of Lesmullin, Sedgrave of Kileglan, Linch of the Knos, Lynam of
Adams-Town, Lawrence Dowdall of Athlumney, Nicholas Dowdall of Browns-Town,
this Examinate's Brother, and him this Examinate, with a multitude of others,
to the number of a thousand Persons at least, whose Names he this Examinate
cannot for the present call to mind. And after about two or three hours spent
upon the said Hill of Crofty, (by the Lords and Gentry aforesaid) there came
unto them Col. Mahone, Philip ORelie, Hugh boy-Relie, Roger Moore, Hugh Birne,
and Capt. Fox, attended on with a Guard of Musketeers: And this Examinate
says, That as soon as the Parties drew near unto the said Hill, the Lords and
Gentry of the Pale rode toward them, and the Lord Gormanston, being one of the
first, spoke unto them, and demanded of them, why, and for what reason, they
came armed into the Pale; unto whom Roger Moore made present Answer, That the
ground of their coming thither, and taking up Arms, was for the freedom and
liberty of their Consciences, the maintenance of his Majesty's Prerogative, in
which they understood he was abridg'd, and the making the Subjects of this
Kingdom as free as those in England were. Whereupon the said Lord Gormanston,
desired to understand from them truly and faithfully, whether these were not
pretenses, and not indeed the true grounds of their so doing; and likewise,
whether they had not some other private end of their own: Which being all
denied, upon profession of their sincerity to his Lordship, (the Lord of
Gormanston) then told them; Seeing these be your true ends, we will likewise
join with you therein, unto which course all agreed: And thereupon it was
publicly and generally declared, That whosoever shall deny to join with them,
or refuse to assist them therein, they would account him as an enemy, and to
the utmost of their power labor his destruction. And this Examinate says,
That after the Agreement made as aforesaid, there issued another Warrant to the
Sheriff of the County of Mead, to be at the Hill of Taragh, about a week
after; and accordingly there met at the same place the Earl of Fingal, the Lord
Gormanston, and the rest of the Lords and Gentry aforenam'd, together with Sir
Thomas Nugent, and Nicholas Plunket the Lawyer, Birford the Lawyer, and a
multitude of others. And the work of that day was first, to make Answer to a
Summons made by the State, for the calling of the Lords of the Pale to Dublin;
which Answer was brought ready drawn by the Lord Gormanston, and presented by
his Lordship; and being perused by the said Council at Law, was signed by the
Lords.

To which we will add (passing by many other testimonies of their Conjunctions)
that which is confirmed by a very credible Person, of Colonel Richard Plunket
of Dunsaghly, in the County of Dublin, within the Pale, (one destined for the
taking of the Castle of Dublin) who affirmed openly, That he had a Contract
under the hands of all the Lords of Ireland (that were Catholics) to stand
firm in this Insurrection; most of their actions confirming his words. And
Philip O Relie's Wife, told James Talbot, a Person of eminent note amongst
them, That if those of the Pale would have let them alone, and not set them on
work, they were so well at ease, as they would never have begun that
troublesome task.

Upon which it is evident, (though Some The Author of the English and Scotch
Bresbytery, p. 222.
would insinuate the contrary) that both the old Irish and old English (what
ends they would severally pretend to have) centred in the destruction of the
Protestants; and that the old English Papists were a little backwarder than the
Irish, was, in that they had something more to loose than the other, and so
would put them first upon the work, wherein themselves were equally engaged:
Which the Lords Justices, and Council perceiving, writ, the 3d. of December. to
the Earl of Fingal, the Lord Viscount Gormanston, and the rest of the Lords of
the Pale, To come to Dublin, and consult for the safety of the Kingdom. Luke
Nettervile and others having caused Proclamation to be made at Lusk, (twelve
miles from Dublin) that all the Gentry of the County should (upon pain of
death) meet within three or four days at Swoards, (within six miles of Dublin)
which accordingly they did, constituting Captains, Richard Golding, Thomas
Russel, Francis Russel, Robert Travers, Christopher Hollywood, and other
Commanders; their Militia amounting (on that short warning) to 1200. which
would have been impossible to have raised, had they not before been Armed, and
instigated to that Cause. Upon which, these Lords of the Pale (Conspirators
with the first) returned to the Lords Justices, the 7th. of December. this
Answer, received the 11th. May it please your Lordships,
WE have received your Letters of the 3d. instant, intimating, that you had
present occasions to confer with us concerning the present state of the
Kingdom, and the safety thereof in these times of danger, and requiring us to
be with you there on the 8th. of this instant. We give your Lordships to
understand, that we have heretofore presented our selves before your Lordships,
and freely offered our advice and furtherance toward the particulars
aforesaid, which was by you neglected, which gave us cause to conceive that our
Loyalty was suspected by you. We give your Lordships further to understand,
that we have received certain advertisement, that Sir Charles Coote Knight, at
the Council Board, has offered some speeches, tending to a purpose and
resolution, to execute upon those of our Religion a general Massacre, by which
we are all deterred to wait on your Lordships, not having any security for our
safety from those threatened evils, or the safety of our lives, but do rather
think it fit to stand upon our best guard, until we hear from your Lordships
how we shall be secured from those perils. Nevertheless we all protest, that we
are and will continue faithful advisers, and resolute furtherers of his
Majesty's Service, concerning the present state of this Kingdom, and the safety
thereof, to our best abilities. And so with the said tender of our humble
service, we remain,

Your Lordships humble Servants, Fingall Gormanston, Slane Dunsany Nettervile,
Oliver Lowth, Trimblestone.




And Luke Nettervile Esquire George Blackney of Rickenhore, Esquire George King of
Clantarfe, Gent. and others, met at Swoards, being charged on their Allegiance,
the 9th. of December. immediately on sight of the Lords Justices Warrant to
separate, and not to unite any more in that manner without direction from the
State. They, instead of obedience to the States command, returned this answer,
That they were constrained to meet there together for the safety of their
lives; That they were put into so great a terror, by the rising out of some
Horse-Troops and Foot-Companies at Dublin, who killed four Catholics, for no
other reason than that they bore the name of that Religion, as they durst not
(as they pretended) stay in their houses, and therefore resolved to continue
together, till they were assured by their Lordships of the safety of their
Lives, before they ran the hazard thereof; by manifesting their obedience due
unto their Lordships. Upon which the The States Manifest, in Answer to
Nettervile and his Accomplices fears.
Lords Justices and Council published a Proclamation the 13th. of December. to
satisfy the world of the innocence of the State from the guilt of any man's
blood; and concerning the four they alleged were killed as Papists, they were
such as were found faulty in rebellious actions, of which, one was a
Protestant: Commanding them furthermore, on the allegiance to his Majesty, to
separate upon the sight of their Warrant; and that Luke Nettervile and his
Accomplices should appear before the State on the eighteenth of the said month,
to the end they may be fully heard by the State; To which end the Lords
Justices and Council thereby gave them, and every of them, the word of the
State, that they might then securely and safely repair thither, without danger
of any trouble or stay whatsoever.

And that the Lords of the Pale might not be less satisfied in what they
objected, the same day also the Lords Justices and Council published a
Proclmation, and sent it to those Noblemen, positively affirming, That the The
Lords Justices Vindication of Sir Charles Coote.
Lords Justices and Council did never hear Sir Charles Coote, or any other,
utter at the Council Board, or elsewhere, any speeches tending to a purpose or
resolution, to execute on those of their Profession, or any other, a general
Massacre; nor was it ever in their thoughts to dishonor his Majesty, or the
State, by so odious, impious, and detestable a thing; giving them assurance of
their safety, if they would repair thither the 17th. of that Month.

Yet notwithstanding these Condescensions, or whatsoever else the State could
do, (whereby the doubts of those men might be removed, and their security
ascertained) still the Torrent of the Pale ran to make up the intended Deluge,
despising whatsoever security or faith the State was pleased to promise them.
Whereupon the Lords Justices and Council were enforced to send this Warrant to
the Earl of Ormond and Ossory, to send out a Party of Soldiers, Horse and Foot,
against those that dared so impudently to affront them. By the Lords Justices
and Council. William Parsons, John Borlase.
FOrasmuch as diverse of the Inhabitants of Clantarfe, Rhaheny, and Kilbarrock,
have declared themselves Rebels, and having robbed and spoiled some of his
Majesty's good Subjects, are now assembled thereabouts in Arms in great
numbers, mustering and training of their rebellious Multitudes to the terror
and danger of his Majesty's good Subjects, as well at Land as at Sea; which
their boldness is acted in such manner, as to put scorn and affronts upon this
State and Government; they acting such depredations even before our faces, and
in our view, as it were in despite of us. It is therefore ordered, That our
very good Lord, the Earl of Ormond and Ossory, Lieutenant General of the Army,
do forthwith send out a Party of Soldiers, of Horse and Foot, to fall upon
those Rebels at Clantarfe, and thereabouts, who, in such disdainful manner,
stand to outface and dare us, and to endeavor to cut them off, as well for
punishment as terror to others, and to burn and spoil the Rebels Houses and
Goods. And to prevent their farther annoying any Shipping going out, and coming
in, and lying in harbor, those Soldiers are to bring up, or cause to be
brought up to the new Crane at Dublin, such of the Boats and Vessels now lying
there, as they can upon the sudden, and to burn, spoil, sink, and make
unserviceable the rest. Given at his Majesty's Castle of Dublin, December the
14th. 1641.

Ormond Ossory, Rob. Dillon, Char. Lambert, Ad. Loftus, John Temple, Char.
Coote, Francis Willoughby.



The Lords of the Pale however effectually endeavored to strengthen the
Northern Rebels, and thereupon declared the Lord Viscount Gormanston See Sir J.
Temple, part 2. p. 30. as the Answer to the 9th. Article of the Rebels
Remonstrance at Trym, p. 78.
General of the Forces to be raised in the Pale, Hugh Birn Lieutenant General,
the Earl of Fing all General of the Horse; who in several Baronies raised
Captains accordingly, and Provisions suitable, to every hundred men in a
Company for their daily allowance, one Beef, and half a Barrel of Corn, during
the Siege of Tredath.

And that nothing might be wanting to straighten the State, Nettervile and his
Party (being increased by their confederacy with Wickloe and Kildare) the 15th.
of December, sent two strong Parties to Santry and Finglass, where they
continued till the 22d. of the said December, when they were beaten by Colonel
Crafford from Finglass, (two miles from Dublin) after they had like to have put
us to a shameful retreat. Those at Santry hearing of Sir Charles Coot's
approach, saved themselves by a cowardly quitting of their Quarters, leaving
their best Equipage and Provisions behind them; whilst near 300 men showed
themselves at Clantarf, a Village on the Seaside, about a mile and half from
Dublin: The Inhabitants strengthening the Rebels confidence with store of strong
Fishing-boat, having the day before spoiled two English Barcks lying at Anchor
near Clantarf, in the Road of Dublin, much to the disquiet of the Lords
Justices and Council, suspecting thereby, that the Port to Dublin might have
been blocked up: Robberies also of that nature having been committed at
Skirries, twelve miles from Dublin, and the Prey of those Barks carried to
Barnewell of Brimore, a prime Man, as the Prisoners to the Lord Gormanston's,
who sent them to Balrothry, sufficient to prove the Robberies, Murders, and
other Outrages committed on the British Protestants, were by the allowance and
privity of the principal Gentlemen of the Pale, if not their command; how
speciously soever, in their humble Protestation (a piece of as much vanity as
falsehood) against the States Proclamation, the 8th. of Febr. 1641. they would
insinuate, That none of the better sort had robbed or pillaged any of them, nor
dispossessed them of their Estates. Whereas by the example of what is here
produced, the falsity of all they assert is clearly proved, though further
particulars (without much sifting may easily be exposed, were not the story
like to be tedious. And the truth of these assertions may be fully read in the
end of the Answer to the Eighth Article of the Rebels Remonstrance of
Grievances, at Trym, 1642.

Whereupon the Lords Justices found it absolutely necessary, that some Forces
should be sent against them at Clantarf; which Forces were commanded by Sir
Charles Coote, the 15th. of December. who burnt the Village, destroyed their
Boats, and excellently well quitted the service enjoined him, clearing that
place of Piracy and Rebels: Though in the interim, Nettervile (being frighted
from Santry) lay with near 2000 men at Swoards, and possessed himself of the
Castle of Artain, and some other places, within two miles of Dublin. On the
West side of which, at Tassagard, Rath-Coole, Castle-Lyons, and other Villages,
there lay 2000 more of the Rebels out of the Counties of Katerlagh, Kings
County, and Kildare, under the command of Roger Moore, and Sutton Eustace of
Castle-Martin, and others. The Clandonells, Birns, and Tools from Wickloe,
toward the Sea, three or four miles on the South of Dublin, came also down,
blocking up (on all sides) Passages thereunto; their Forces in Lemster
amounting to 20000 men. So as the State being now put in eminent danger, few
hopes survived of her recovery. The Naas and Kildare, as Trim and Ashboy in the
County of Mead, being taken by the Rebels: Which in a Letter to the Lord
Lieutenant, dated the 14th. of December, the Lords Justices and Council very
emphatically expressed; adding in the close, That if notwithstanding all this,
so often and truly made known by us to your Lordship, we shall perish for want
of Supplies, we shall carry this comfort with us to our graves, (or any other
burial we shall have) That your Lordship can witness for us to his Royal
Majesty, and all the world, that we have discharged our duties to God, to his
Majesty, and to that Nation, and to this, in humbly representing to his
Majesty, by your Lordship, (the chief Governor of the Kingdom) the extremities
and dangers, wherein his Kingdom and People stand, and the necessities of
hasting Supplies hither by all possible means, for preservation of Both; so as
whatever become of our Persons, our Memory cannot be justly stained with so
wretched a breach of Faith and Loyalty to the King our Master, as to forbear
representing thither the extremities wherein we are, whether we have received
credit to be believed or no; and that we write truth, and most needful truth,
will be found true, when perhaps we shall perish, and which is more
considerable, the Kingdom also, for want of being believed and succored in
time.

The Consideration of which (long before presented to his Majesty) wrought so
sensibly on Him, that being then newly returned out of Scotland, (before the
Letter mentioned arrived at the Parliament) He took the first opportunity
(which was the 2d. of December, 1641.) to tell the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, (other things being rehearsed) That He had one Particular more to
recommend unto Them, which was Ireland, for which (says He) I doubt not your
Care, yet methinks the preparations His Majesty's Works, fol. 393
for it go on but slowly.

And being touched with the truth of what He had observed in this Business, he
came to the Parliament the 14th. of December, and thus expressed his resentment.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THE last time I was in this Place, and the last thing that I recommended unto
you, was the Business of Ireland, whereby I was in good hope, that I should not
have needed again to have put you in mind of that Business: But still seeing
the slow proceedings therein, and the daily dispatches that I have out of
Ireland, of the lamentable Estate of my Protestants Subjects there, I cannot
but again earnestly commend the dispach of that Expedition unto you, for it is
the chief Business that at this time I take to heart, and there cannot almost
be any Business that I c^^ have more care of.

I might now take up some of your time, in expressing my Detestation of
Rebellions in general, and of this in particular: But knowing that Deeds and
not Declarations must suppress this great Insolency, I do here in Word offer
you, whatsoever my Power, Pains or Industry, can contribute to this good and
necessary Work of reducing the Irish Nation to their true and wonted Obedience.

And that nothing may be omitted on my Part, I must here take notice of the
Bill for pressing of Soldiers, now depending among you, my Lords, concerning
which I declare, that in case it comes so to me, as it may not infringe or
diminish my Prerogative, I will pass it. And farther, seeing there is a Dispute
raised (I being little beholding to him whosoever at this time began it)
concerning the bounds of this ancient and undoubted Prerogative, to avoid
further Debate at this time. I offer that the Bill may pass with a Salvo Jure,
both for King and People, leaving such Debates to a time that may better bear
them. If this be not accepted, the fault is not mine that this Bill pass not,
but theirs that refuse so fair an offer.

To conclude, I conjure you by all that is or can be dear to you or me, that
laying away all Disputes, you go on cheerfully and speedily for the reducing of
Ireland.



A Charm (one should think) sufficiently powerful: Yet the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, from his Majesty's Speech took great exceptions, suffering the
Supplies of Ireland to be retarded, demanding of the King the Names of those,
who had counseled Him to take notice of any Debate in the House, before it was
from'd into a Bill; whence began the Cry against evil Counselors, afterward
the pretext of the Misery that ensued. Some Forces indeed the Parliament had
sent to the Seaside, and others were on their March, yet Winds and Tides,
Votes and Councels, did not equally agree, so as the Exigences (by this means)
that the State of Ireland was cast upon, almost split them. Whereupon the Lords
Justices and Council published a Proclamation, dated the 28th. of December,
1641. Requiring all Persons, other than such as had necessary Causes to Dublin,
such as the Lords Justices, the Lieutenant General of the Army, or the
Governor of his Majesty's Forces in the City of Dublin, should approve, or
other than such as should bring Provision to the City to be sold, should
forbear coming to the City or Suburbs thereof, upon pain of Death. Which was
done in time of high necessity, Provision being scarce, and few repairing to
the City but what were Spies and Traitors.

And because what his Majesty had proposed (beforementioned) for the service
of Ireland, seemed to have little effect, he again sends a Message to the Lords
House by the Lord Chamberlain, the 28th. of December: That being sensible of
the Miseries of Ireland (the Succors for which went on slowly) he offered to
raise 10000 Volunteers, if the Commons would undertake to pay them: A
Proposition rather heard than consented to.

About this time Sir Thomas Carey and Dr. Cale (a Sorbonist) offered from the
Rebels these Propositions, to the Council Board, for a Treaty.

First, That there should be a Toleration of Religion.

Secondly, That Popish Officers, as well as Protestant, should be admitted to
all Employments.

Thirdly, That the Wrongs of Plantations should be repaired, since 1610.

Fourthly, That there should be a Protlamation to take off the File, the Title
of Rebels and Traitors.

All which passed somewhat currantly, till One (then being absent through
sickness) hearing thereof, repaired to the Council Board, though at that time
much indisposed, and upon strong Arguments (Arguments that would admit of no
Sophistry) stopped the proceeding of so dishonorable a Motion; so early did
some endeavor to force on the State, a necessity of complying with the
insolent Demands of the Rebels, by this faithful Minister of State confidently
rejected. And here that you may see, what the Rebels afterward thought the
only means to reduce Ireland into Peace and Quietness, we shall here present
you with their Propositions, methodically digested. The Means to reduce Ireland
unto Peace and Quietness.
1. THat a general and free Pardon, without any exception, be granted to all
his Majesty's Subjects of this Kingdom, and that in pursuance thereof, and for
strengthening the same, an Act of Abolition may pass in the Parliament here.

2. That all marks of National distinction between English and Irish, may be
abolished and taken away by Act of Parliament.

3. That by several Acts of Parliament to be respectively passed here and in
England, it may be declared, that the Parliament of Ireland has no
subordination with the Parliament of England, but that the same has in it self
supreme Jurisdiction in this Kingdom, as absolute as the Parliament of England
there has.

4. That the Act of the 12th. of H. 7th. commonly called Poining's Act, and all
other Acts expounding or explaining the same, may be repealed.

5. That as in England there passed an Act for a Triennial Parliament, so there
may pass in Ireland another for a Sexennial Parliament.

6. That it may be enacted by Parliament, that the Act of the 2d. of Q. Eliz.
in Ireland, and all other Acts made against Catholics, or the Catholic
Religion, since the 20th. year of H. 8th. may be repealed.

7. That the Bishoprics, Deanaries, and all other spiritual Promotions in this
Kingdom, and all Frieries and Nunneries, may be restored to the Catholic
Owners, and likewise all Impropriations of Tithes, and that the Scits, Ambits,
and Precincts, of the Religious Houses of the Monks, may be restored to them;
but as to the rest of their temporal Possessions, it is not designed to be
taken from the present Proprietors, but to be left unto them, till God shall
otherwise incline their own hearts.

8. That such as are now entitled Catholic Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, or
other Dignitaries in this Kingdom, by donation of the Pope, may, during their
lives, enjoy their spiritual Promotions, with Protestation nevertheless, and
other fit Clauses to be laid down, for preservation of his Majesty's
Patronages, First Fruits, and twentieth Parts, in Manner and Quantity, as now
his Highness receives benefit thereby.

9. That all Inquisitions taken since the year 1634. to entitle his Majesty to
Connaght, Thomond, Ormond, Eliogartie, Kilnemanagh, Duheara, Wickloe, and
Idvagh may be vacated, and their Estates secured, according to his Majesty's
late Graces.

10. That an Act of Parliament may pass here, for securing the Subjects Title
to their several Estates against the Crown, upon any Title accrued unto it
before sixty years, or under color or pretext of the present Commotions.

11. That all Plantations made since the year 1610. may be avoided by
Parliament, if the Parliament shall hold it just, and their Possessions
restored to them or their Heirs, from whom the same were taken; they
nevertheless answering to the Crown the Rents and Services proprotionable,
reserved upon the Undertakers.

12. That the Transportation of all Native Commodities to all Places of the
World in Peace with his Majesty, may be free and lawful, his Customs first
paid; and that the Statutes of 10, 11, and 13 of Queen Elizabeth, for
restraining the Exportation of Native Commodities, be repealed.

13. That all Preferments Ecclefiastical, Civil, and Martial in this Kingdom,
that lie in his Majesty's Gift, may be conferred on the Natives of this Kingdom
only, such as his Majesty shall think meet, without any distinction for
Religion: Provided always, that upon the Princes of his Blood of England, he
may bestow what Places he shall think meet.

14. That a Martial and Admiral of this Kingdom may be elected in it, to have
perpetual succession therein, with the same Preheminency, Authority, and
Jurisdiction, as they respectively have in England; and that the said Places be
ever conferred upon Noblemen, Natives of this Kingdom.

15. That there may be Train'd-bands in all Cities, Towns Corporate, and
Counties of this Kingdom, armed and provided for at the charge of the several
Counties, Cities, and Towns, and commanded by the Natives of the same, who
shall be named by the Counties, Cities, and Towns respectively.

16. That his Majesty may release all Tenures in Capite, and by Knights
Service; in consideration whereof, he shall receive a settled Revenue of 12000
l. per annum, being double the sum which he casually receives by them; Reliefs,
Seismes, Licenses for Alienations; Escuage and Aids nevertheless to remain.

17. That all Monopolies may be for ever taken away by Act of Parliament.

18. That such new Corporations, that have not the face of Corporate Towns, and
were erected to give Voices in Parliament, may be dissolved, and their Votes
taken away, and hereafter none such to be admitted to Voices in Parliament.

Lastly, That there may be Agents chosen in Parliament, or otherwise, as
thought meet to attend continually his Majesty, to represent the Grievances of
this Nation, that they may be removable by such as did elect them; and in case
of death or removance, others may be for ever successively substituted in that
Place.



Propositions so destructive to the Crown of England, the English Interest, and
Protestant Religion, as I conceive none are so hardy as to maintain their
rationality, as long as the Crown of England is able to improve the Power of
her Conquest. More I might add, but each Proposition carries in it self its
insolency and vanity; which (by the Rebels success on the British, through
their Treacheries and Surprisals) they were encouraged to propose with such
audacity.

However, the State, in hope to gain time, (till Supplies might come) listened
to an offer made by some Popish Priests to treat with the Rebels: Whereupon Dr.
Cale (pretending how far he could prevail with the Rebels) was admitted
thereunto by a Warrant from the State, in confidence that he could obtain
better terms than the former. But Sir Phelim O-Neal would yield to no Treaty,
unless the Lord Mac-Guire, Mac-Mahone, and the rest in the Castle might be
freed: Which the State refusing with indignation, that design ended.

And that the City of Dublin might be supplied with Corn, (the Market growing
very thin, through the Confederates seizing on the Protestants Corn in the
Haggard) the Lords Justices and Council (having that example) published a
Proclamation the 28th. of December. 1641. That all Corn-Masters within fifteen
miles of Dublin, should be careful to send their Corn to the City, to be sold
at the Rates following, viz. Wheat, Pease, and Beans, at 20 s. a Dublin Peck,
and Oats at 6 s. 8 d. a Barrel. Whereupon the Market was somewhat (though not
considerable to their urgent occasions) relieved; rather than the Irish would
suffer their Corn to be thrashed outby Warrants from the Lord Gormanston, for
the use of the Irish Army then lying before Tredath, or burnt by the State to
prevent that inconvenience.

And that nothing irregular might justly be imputed to the State, who studied
the preservation of his Majesty's Subjects; or those indeed who but pretended
(without appearance to the contrary) a submission to his Ministers, the 14th.
of January, 1641. they published a severe Proclamation against Pillagers, and
Volunteers not listed under some Colonel or Commander: So early was the
vigilance of the State in what might preserve their Integrity and Repute: Which
some finding contrary to their envious Licentiousness, wanted not boldness to
encourage the Soldiers to a return for England. Which the Lords Justices and
Council having notice of, published this Proclamation. By the Lords Justices
and Council.
William Parsons, John Borlase.
WE do hereby in his Majesty's Name charge and command all his Majesty's
Soldiers of this Army, that upon pain of death none of them presume to depart
hence for England, without express license in that behalf from the Lieutenant
General of the Army. And we command all Owners and Masters of Ships, Barques,
and other Vessels, that upon pain of death none of them do permit or suffer any
of the said Soldiers to go aboard them, or to be carried from hence into
England. And we require the Searcher, and all other Officers and Waiters of the
Customs, that they, and every of them, do take special care to prevent the
Shipping or Importing of any of the said Soldiers, as aforesaid; whereof they
may not fail. Given at his Majesty's Castle of Dublin, 18th. Jan. 1641.

Ormond Ossory, R. Dillon, Ad. Loftus, J. Temple, Charles Coote, Fran.
Willoughby, Rob. Meredith.



And now the Flame having marched through Ulster and Leimster, it discovers its
fury about the beginning of December, 1641. in Munster, which Provincetill that
time (by the moderation of the State) had stifled About the midst of December
the Rebellion breaks forth in Munster.
its rage, then expressing its consent with the other Provinces; The Rebels of
Wexford, Kilkenny, and Caterlaugh coming over the River to prey and spoil the
County of Waterford: To resist which, the Lord President of Munster (Sir
William Sellenger) who to that time had behaved himself with much Prudence,
Vigilance, and Honor, hastened to encounter them, whom (though he was far
inferior to in number) he then discomfited, and restored to the Owners what
Prey he recovered; in which action he found many of his Provincials, yet
suffered none of them to be hurt, supposing they came to save their Goods, not
being interess'd in the Conspiracy, which afterward he found general, Mr.
Purcell (called the Baron of Loghmo) exciting, about the 9th. of December (in
Tipperary) the Irish to rob and spoil the British and Protestants, acting (with
many others) daily villainies, being armed by a long Provision underhand, and
furnished with the Wealth of the British and Protestants in that Province,
which was very great and considerable.

And that Connaght might not be said to be quiet, the Lord President The
Rebellion appears in Connaght.
of that Province (the Lord Rannelaugh) coming thither from Dublin, about the
beginning of November, (after the Rebellion brake forth) found there many of
the inferior Irish, and some of the Gentry in Rebellion, in the County of
Rescommon and Sligo, with whom he dealt mildly, presuming his former intimate
Friendship, and some Alliance, might work on them: but nothing prevailed, they
were otherwise hardened; nor had he Force sufficient (which they well knew) to
compel them, their Swarms were so numerous, their Cruelties so outrageous; so
that at the last, they blocked him up in the Castle of Athlone by the help of
the Conspirators of Wess-Meath, notwithstanding the Commissions of Government,
the Lords Justices and Council (that nothing still might be wanting on the
States side, to evidence the confidence and trust they were willing to repose
in the Prime Natives) entrusted the Earl of Clanrickard, the Lord Mayo, the
Lord of Costiloe, and others with; in which condition he remained, till the
Earl of Ormond (Lieutenant General of his Majesty's Army) carried down two
thousand Foot, and some Troops of Horse to his Relief, the Spring following.
Notwithstanding the Commission the Lord Rannelaugh had from those, whom his
Majesty entrusted of the Parliament in England, to raise five hundred
Protestants nearest adjoining, for the defense of the said Province, and to
name the Officers, his Son Arthur Jones Esquire being at the same time made
Constable of the Castle of Roscommon, in the County of Roscommon, and allowed
thirty one Protestant Warders to guard the Town and Castle: As Sir Robert King
(at the same time) was appointed in the like Command for the Castle of
Abbey-boyle: Yet the Rebels (in the interim) burnt the Town of Roscommon, and
the Bishops Town of Elphin, besides many other Englishmen's Habitations;
surprising also several Castles of the Earl of Clanrickards in the County of
Galloway. However, Sir Charles Coote Junior, (vigilant in all concerns) so
manned and guarded Castle-Coot, as that being in January, 1641. besieged by Con
O-Rourk with 1200 men, he so notably encountered him, as within a week he raised
the Siege; as he did Hugh O Connor, Son of O Connor Dun of Balintober, Titular
Prince of Connaght; lineally (as he would have it) descended from Rodderick

O-Connor, King of Connaght, and Monarch of Ireland, never afterward durst
make any formal approach against that Castle; in as much as Sir Charles Coote
fetched in Corn and Cattle at liberty: Yet the second of March following,
O-Rourk came with all his Forces to fetch away the Prey of Roscommon, before
day, hurrying them almost to Molinterim, before our Forces could come up to
him, endeavoring to make good a Pass against our men, who soon break their
stoutest Ranks, and (killing most of the Rebels) recovered the Prey, took many
Prisoners, and amongst the rest Con O-Rourk.

Thus each Province was in a flame, and that it burst not forth all at The
Reasons, why each Province burst not (at once) into a flame.
once, was partly out of the backwardness of some, who would first (in the
proceedings of the others) see how far, and with what security, they might put
themselves on the Work: A horrid Work! that had no promising, or good Aspect:
And then others in the Counties of Dublin, Mead, Lowth, who (by the aforesaid
compact, should have furnished themselves with Arms from the State, under
pretense of service against Ulster) missing of their Design in full, halted a
time: and many declared not themselves at first, by reason the surprising of
the Castle of Dublin was prevented; Nor did the noble and solemn Resentment of
the Parliament in England a little startle others, though after that the Winter
came close upon them, and that the English were almost every where harrast; And
the succors from England came not so soon as they were expected, the Irish
every where gathered that heat as in all Places, to express their virulency.

Some The Author of the English and Scotch Presbytery, p. 222.
will have it that the Gentlemen at Westminster, instead of suppressing the
Irish speedily by Arms, made an Ordinance wholly to extirpate them, whereby the
Irish extirpated most part of the Protestant Colonies, killing Man, Woman, and
Child, with most horrible Barbarousness: Whereas it is apparent that the
greatest, and most horrid Massacres, were acted before the Parliament could
possibly know there was a Rebellion, for after that the Plot was detected, the
Rebels somewhat slackned their first Cruelties: though then they proclaimed,
That if any Irish should harbor, or relieve, any English suffered to escape,
them with their lives, that it should be penal, even to death, to such Irish;
So that though they put not those English actually to the Sword, yet by that
Design, they cut them off more cruelly: It being a certain truth (not subject
to the evasion of the Sophister) that in all the four Provinces, the horrid
cruelties used toward the British, either in their bloody Massacres, or
merciless dispoiling, stripping, and extirpation of them, were generally acted
in most parts of the Kingdom, before they could gather themselves together, to
make any considerable resistance against their fury, and before the State had
assembled their Forces, or were enabled by the power of his Majesty's Arms, to
make any inroads into the Countries possessed by the Rebels: A circumstance,
which totally destroys all those vain pretenses, and fond recriminations,
which they have since most falsely taken up to palliate this their most
abominable Rebellion, or actings thereupon; Besides, in the first Order of the
Lords Commons, in Parliament of England, touching this Concern, for the better
inducing of the Rebels to repent of their wicked Attempts, they did thereby
commend it to the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, or in his absence to the Lord
Deputy, or Lords Justices there, according to the power of the Commission
granted them in that behalf, To bestow his Majesty's gracious Pardon to all
such as within a convenient time (to be declared by any of the said
Magistrates) should return to their due obedience: Which rule the Lords
Justices in all Commissions, either to Officers, or Marshals, they had also
before observed, that if (amongst them) there had been any relenting, they
might have experienced the mercy of the State.

And thus much may be said even for the Parliament, that after the expense of
much blood and treasure, for suppression of the horrid Rebellion in Ireland,
when they had brought that Affair to such an issue, as that a total Reducement,
and settlement of the Nation was effected, whereby they came to divide the
Rebels Estates; They manifested, that it was not the Parliaments intentions, to
extirpate that whole Nation, but Scobels Acts* fol. 197.
they ordered Mercy and Pardon, both as to Life and Estate, should be extended
to all Husbandmen, Laborers, Artificers, yea to higher rank and Quality,
according to the respective Demerits, and Considerations, under which they
fell, and that all should enjoy the benefit of their Articles.

It is indeed Enacted, in the Acts of subscriptions for Ireland, that every
Person who shall make, enter into, or take any Compact, Bond, Covenant, Oath,
promise, or agreement, to introduce, or bring into the said Realm of Ireland,
the authority of the Sea of Rome, in any case whatsoever, or to maintain, or
defend, the same, shall forfeit his Lands, and Goods, as in case of Rebellion:
Before which there was no pretense (some thought) to make the War a matter of
Religion, Whereas, I do not conceive, that that Clause is any more then what
was in several Acts provided, as Anno 28. H. 8. Capite 13. Anno 2. Eliz. Cap.
1. as elsewhere: And by his Majesty's Letter to the Marquess of Ormond, the
15th. of December. 1644. is there specified, That many Acts in favor of the Irish
should be repealed, but those against Appeals to Rome, and Praemunire, should
stand. That had not the Rebels first intended (what afterward they pursued)
that Clause could not have made them more obstinate Rebels, nothing being in
it, but what was before in force.

Now besides other miseries (which aggravated the unhappiness of the State at
that time) there flocked to the City (from all Parts) such as having escaped
the fury of the Rebels, sheltered themselves there, of which (by reason of the
diseases they had contracted by their journey, and ill usage) there died many,
else proved a burden to the City; Which the Confederates of the Pale would
have the World believe, was mercy and Signal Humanity in them, not to have
imbrued their hands in the blood of any British Protestants, When as the
lingering deaths, and Exigences these were put to, exceeded any death which at
once might have been inflicted: though after the Siege of Tredath, that the old
English Papists of the Pale, were driven into Ulster, they (as a meritorious
act) vaunted that they had killed more English and Protestants in Fingall, then
were killed in many other Counties; for the discoveries of whose miseries, and
what besides others had suffered by the Rebels, the Lords Justices authorized
several Commissioners to state their Case, and the state of the deplorable
English, by two Commissions, the one bearing date the 23d. of December, the
other the 18th. of January, both in the 17th. year of his Majesty's Reign,
whereby the Murders, Losses, and Cruelties, committed upon the English and
Protestants, were discovered on Oath, and presented in a Remonstrance by the
Dispoil'd Clergy of Ireland, to the Honorable House of Commons in England; And
lest the Remonstrance should seem the act of a few Persons (highly interessed
in their own Concerns) it was accompanied with a Letter from the Lords
Justices, and Council, dated at Dublin the 7th. of March, 1641. to the Speaker
of the said House of Commons; the Remonstrance showing such depredations of
Goods, such cruelties exercised on the Persons and Lives of the loyal Subjects,
such wasting, and defacing of all monuments of Civility, with such Profanation
of Holy Places, and Religion, that by the most barbarous, and heathenish
Nations, the like could not in any Age be found to be perpetrated: of which I
might say more, having not yet forgot the cruelties legible in most Noble, and
ancient Families; But the day would fail us, should we sum up what is in the
Clergies Remonstrance, Printed at London, 1642. briefly mentioned, to which,
and the History of the Irish Rebellion, 1646. from p. 84. to 136, we must refer
you, that the Proofs of all may be before your eyes; May they be writ on our
Posts of our houses, and our Gates? that they may be looked upon, and remembered
for ever; what Amalek did, when we were faint, and weary, and he feared not God!

Thus the State having (to their power) supported his Majesty's Authority, and
the English Interest, searching out whatsomever might fathom the bottom of this
Conspiracy, they being driven to great necessities, trampled on by the Enemy,
not further able to support their own miseries. When the last of December 1641.
arrived at Dublin (from the Parliament of England) Sir Simon Harcourt, with a
Regiment Sir Simon Harcourt arrived out of England with the first Forces.
of 1200 Foot, a Gentleman of Good Extraction, long bred in the Low Countries
(the School of War) under Sir Horatio, the Lord Vere, that renowned, and
Excellent Person, one of the most noted, and eminent Commanders of the late
Age: He was designed Governor of Dublin, much to the comfort of the
Protestants, and terror of the Rebels; soon after whose arrival (the City
being secured thereby) the Lords Justices commanded forth Sir Charles Coote,
with such Forces as could be spared to Swoards, about the 10th. of January
following, the better to let them know how far the State resented their
Insolences, whom no assurance, fair, or open Resolves, or any free course
could satisfy; Sir Charles Sir Charles Coote goes to Swoards.
Coote found the access to the Village straightly blocked up, yet so managed
the attempt, as he soon forced them to a flight, beating them out of their
Fortifications, and killed 200 of their men, without any considerable loss on
his side, more then Sir Laurenzo Carey, second Son of the Lord Falkland (late
Lord Deputy) a Gentleman of excellent and ingenious Parts, well principled, and
one whose virtues and resolution, promised much happiness to the State: After
settling of which Place, Sir Charles Coote returned to Dublin, and ere long,
there arrived from Five Regiments more arrived out of England.
England, by Order of the Parliament, three Regiments of Foot, the
Lord-Lieutenants Regiment, under the Conduct of Lieutenant Colonel Monk (since
Duke of Albemarle) the second under the Command of Sir Michael Earnely, and the
other under the Command of Colonel Cromwell; and two Regiments of Horse, one
belonging to Philip Lord Lisle, General of the Horse, and the other under the
Command of Sir Richard Greenvile. That now the English Interest began to
revive, the Irish being much disheartened thereby, yet grew confident in their
Allies and Confederacy, they had made through the whole Nation, to weaken
which, and vindicate his Majesty's Honor, the State received the 20th. of
January a Proclamation from his Majesty, dated the first of the same month,
declaring them Rebels and Traitors: and that it might want no solemnity, to
impress the greater Character of obedience, His Majesty was pleased to Sign all
the Proclamations with his Royal Hand, affixing also thereto his Privy Signet
(a circumstance scarce presidenc'd) The Original of which I have in my Custody.
Charles R.

WHereas diverse lewd and wicked Persons, have (of His Majesty's Proclamation
against the Rebels, the first of January.
late) risen in Rebellion in our Kingdom of Ireland, surpised diverse of our
Forts and Castles, possessed themselves thereof, surpised some of our
Garrisons, possessed themselves of some of our Magazeen of Arms and Ammunition,
dispossessed many of our good and loyal Subjects of the British Nation, and
Protestants, of their Houses, and Lands, robbed and spoiled many thousands of
our good Subjects of the British Nation, and Protestants, of their Goods, to
great values, Massacred multitudes of them, imprisoned many others, and some
who have the Honor to serve us as Privy Counselors of that our Kingdom; We
therefore having taken the same into our Royal consideration, and abhorring the
wicked disloyalty, and horrible acts committed by those Persons, do hereby not
only declare our just Indignation thereof, but also do declare them, and their
Adherents, and Abettors, and all those who shall hereafter join with them, or
commit the like acts on any of our good Subjects in that Kingdom, to be Rebels,
and Traitors against our Royal Person, and Enemies to our Royal Crown of
England, and Ireland.

And we do hereby strictly Charge, and Command all those Persons, who have so
presumed to rise in Arms against us, and our Royal Authority (which we cannot
otherwise interpret than acts of high Rebellion, and detestable Disloyalty,
when therein they spoil, and destroy our good and loyal Subjects of the British
Nation, and Protestants) that they immediately lay down their Arms, and forbear
any further acts of Hostility, Wherein if they fail, we do let them know, that
we have authorized our Justices of Ireland, and other our Chief Governor, or
Governors, and General, or Lieutenant General of our Army there, and do hereby
accordingly require, and authorize them, and every of them, to prosecute the
said Rebels, and Traitors with Fire, and Sword, as Persons who (by their high
Disloyalty against us their lawful, and undoubted King, and Sovereign) have
made themselves unworthy of any Mercy, or Favor; Wherein our said Justices, or
other chief Governor, or Governors, and General, or Lieutenant General of our
said Army, shall be countenanced, and supported by us, and by our powerful
Succors of our good Subjects of England, and Scotland, that so they may reduce
to obedience, those wicked disturbers of that Peace, which by the blessing of
God, that Kingdom has so long, and so happily enjoyed, under the Government of
our Royal Father, and us. And this our Royal pleasure, we do hereby require our
Justices, or other chief Governor, or Governors, of that our Kingdom of
Ireland, to cause to be published, and proclaimed, in and throughout our said
Kingdom of Ireland.

Given under our Signet, at our Palace at Westminster, the 1st of January, in
the 17th. year of our Reign, 1641.


Which coming forth so late, and but 40 of them only ordered to be His
Majesty's Reasons, why his Proclamation came out so late.
Printed, was by the Parliament in their Declaration of the 19th. of May, 1642.
interpreted as a countenance to that Rebellion, in answer whereunto, his
Majesty in his reply to that Declaration, shows, That the Proclamation not
issuing out sooner, was because the Lords Justices of that Kingdom desired them
no sooner, and when they did, the number they desired was but twenty, which
they advised might be Signed by us, which we for the expedition of that
service, commanded to be Printed ( a Circumstance not required by them)
thereupon we Signed more of them then our Justices desired.

And that it might further appear how deep a sense his Majesty had of the
Rebellion, which called upon Him, and his People of England, for a general
Humiliation of all Estates before Almighty God, in Prayer and Fasting, for
drawing down his Mercy and Blessing upon Ireland: His Majesty was pleased by a
Proclamation, dated at Whitehall the 8th. of January, 1641. Straightly to
Charge and Command, That the last Wednesday of every Month during the troubles
in Ireland, a Solemn Fast should be observed through his Kingdom of England,
and Dominion of Wales, showing in his own Person and the Court, and example
thereof; which accordingly (for some years) was observed, and considerable
Collections were gathered (at most Churches) that day, for the miserable People
of Ireland: Several, but especially Sir Benjamin Rudyard, excellently speaking
on that Subject, which being much in a little, accept of, in his own Words. Mr.
Speaker.
THis Day is appointed for a charitable Work, a Work of Bowels and Compassion;
I pray God, we may never have the like occasion to move, to stir up, our
Charity.

These miserable People are made so, because of their Religion: He that will
not suffer for his Religion, is unworthy to be saved by it; and he is unworthy
to enjoy it, that will not relieve those that suffer for it.

I did know but the last year here in England, some (and they no Papists) who
were resolved to make Ireland their Retreat, as the safer Kingdom of the two.

We do now see a great, a dismal Change, God knows, whose Turn shall be next,
it is wrapped up in his Providence; that which happens to one Country, may
happen to any; Time and Chance comes upon all, though guided by a certain Hand.

The right way to make a Man truly sensible of another's Calamity, is to think
himself in the same case and condition, and then to do as he would be done unto.

Wherefore, Mr. Speaker, let our Gift be a matter of Bounty, not of
Covetousness, that it may abound to our Account in the Day of Reckoning: He
that sowes plentifully, shall reap plentifully; I am sure, he that lends to the
Lord, has the best Security, and cannot be a loser.



The first President of the Fast beforementioned, which ushered in the Charity
that succeeded, was (before it came to be Monthly) by the Lords House, kept in
the Abbey of Westminster, where the Archbishop of York, and the Lord Primate of
Ireland, preached to the Lords, as in St. Margrets Westminster, Mr. Calamy and
Mr. Marshall, to the House of Commons. Though when his Majesty afterward found
by the ill use made thereof, that the Lecturers in their Sermons and Prayers
stirred up, and continued the War raised against Him in England, the great
Promoters too thereof deserting the Care of Ireland, He, the 6th. of October,
1643. forbad it to be kept, and instead thereof expressly commanded a solemn
Fast to be observed, every second Friday of the Month, through England and
Wales.

But to return to the King's Proclamation against the Rebels, which the
bleeding Iphigenia, and others of that lying Spirit, would have to be grounded
on the information of a malignant Part of the Council, informing his Majesty,
that the Catholics of Ireland without discrimination, had entered into a
Rebellion; whereas there was never any such general Information: Nay, in all
the Accounts they gave to his Majesty, they still intimated, that they hoped
the Pale and other Parts would continue their Loyalty, affording the Lords of
the Pale, as other Towns, (which afterward shamefully revolted) Arms,
Ammunition, Commands, informing his Majesty only of what they had discovered in
the North, with the suspicions that they had learnt on Examinations from
others, which would have been Treachery in them to have concealed, and grand
Disloyalty. Nor does his Majesty take notice in his Proclamation of any other,
than that diverse lewd and wicked Persons had of late risen in Rebellion in his
Kingdom of Ireland, not so much therein as naming Papists or Catholics, that
thence any of that profession should take Umbrage: Nay, so circumspect were the
Lords Justices and Council at that time, that they avoided all expressions,
which might any ways encourage the Irish to apprehend, the English intended to
make it a War of Religion.

However, the Rebels were so far from paying obedience to his Majesty's
Proclamation afore-mentioned, saying, it was counterfeit, or done by Coertion,
as they acted now, not as before apart, but united in one Body, under the style
of the Confederate Roman Catholics of Ireland, binding themselves also in that
Confederacy, by the following Oath of Association. I A. B. do, in the presence
of Almighty God, and all the Saints and Angels in Heaven, promise, vow, swear
and protest, to maintain and defend as far as I may with my Life, Power, and
Estate, the public and free exercise of the true and Roman Catholic Religion,
against all Persons that shall oppose the same. I further swear, that I will
bear Faith and Allegiance to our Sovereign Lord King Charles, his Heirs and
Successors, and that I will defend Him and Them, as far as I may, with my Life,
Power and Estate, against all such Persons as shall attempt any thing against
their Royal Persons, Honors, Estates, and Dignities, and against all such as
shall directly or indirectly endeavor to suppress their Royal Prerogatives, or
do any Act or Acts contrary to Regal Government; as also the Power and
Privileges of Parliament, the lawful Rights and Privileges of the Subjects,
and every Person that makes this Vow, Oath and Protestation, in whatsoever he
shall do, in the lawful pursuance of the same. And to my Power, as far as I
may, I will oppose, and by all means and ways endeavor to bring to condign
punishment, even to the loss of Life, Liberty, and Estate, all such as shall,
either by Force, Practice, Counsels, Plots, Conspiracies, or otherwise, do or
attempt any thing to the contrary of any Article, Clause, or any thing in this
present Vow, Oath, or Protestation, contained.

So God help me.


This is the Oath the Confederates thought so loyal, so worthy their owning;
whereas never any thing was more pernicious, more destructive to his Majesty,
and his Protestant Subjects, the close of it (after all their insinuating and
fair pretensions of Faith and Allegiance to their Sovereign, his Heirs and
lawful Successors) vowing to bring to condign punishment, all that should
attempt any thing to the contrary of any Article therein; whereas the first
thing (they insist on in this Vow) is the free exercise of the Catholic Roman
Religion, which if the King shall not admit of, He is (by the issue of this Vow
and Protestation) to be opposed, all being to be opposed, that shall be
against, do, or attempt any thing to the contrary of any Article, Clause, or
any thing in this present Vow, Oath, or Protestation, contained. And if in a
more favorable sense this were not (as to his Majesty) to be so interpreted,
yet his Protestant Subjects were doubtless to be fallen upon with fire and
sword, resisting the Ends the Rebels proposed to themselves by this Oath, and
without which no Peace was to be accepted. How loyal and acceptable this could
be to a Protestant Prince (who in testimony of his Faith laid down his life) is
legible without Spectacles: so that in conclusion, this Oath could really
deceive none, but those, who seeing will not see, and hearing will not
understand.

Thus their strength (notwithstanding whatsoever his Majesty had proposed The
Rebels, notwithstanding his Majesty's Proclamation, grew more united.
in his Proclamation) by endeavoring to break it, was united; their Armies
were now formed, the most considerable Persons amongst them had openly declared
themselves, and the meanest of their Soldiers were flesht in the slaughter of
the English; they had likewise almost all their Goods in their possession, and
the strongest Places of the Kingdom with the whole Country at their Devotion;
so as they now counted themselves powerful enough to go through with the Work,
and resolved to expel all the British and Protestants out of the Kingdom, to
make themselves absolute Masters, or there to die ingloriously as Traitors and
Murderers; which is fallen to their lot; for few of those inhumane Butchers
have come with dry throats to their Graves, there being no more ordinary
dispensation to be observed in the Revolutions of things here below, than
returns of blood for blood, their blood being violently to be poured forth, who
have maliciously contrived, or wantonly delighted, in the slaughter of others,
which will appear by the sequel of the Story.

Though the Polititian's Catechism The Insolences of the Polititian's Catech.
briefly reflected on, and what the English are charged with.
(a Piece of as much Venom as Art or Malice can connect) would insinuate, that
the Murders and Massacres done in Ireland by Protestants, far exceeded without
comparison those committed by Catholics, as well in respect of brutishness as
numerousness; I may admit, that many things (contrary to the Law of Arms and
Christianity) during the Rebellion, were severely committed by the English: But
then it must be considered, That whatsoever was rashly done by them, was either
acted in open Hostility, or had the anguish and memory of former Villainies
first commenced on their Relations, Friends, or Countrymen, without the least
provocation for their ground, instigating them thereunto. Inasmuch as Mulmore
O-Relie, O-Sule-van, and others, being at a Meeting at London, immediately
after the King's happy Restoration, a Colonel (a Person of great Ingenuity and
exemplary Virtue, who had served faithfully against the Irish) coming into
their company, was acquainted by them, that they were met together, to draw up
a Remonstrance of the Cruelties, the English Army had offered to the Irish,
which (say they) indeed nothing concerned him, he having been a noble and
generous Enemy. Upon which he advised them to desist, in that they might be
certain to have an Answer much to their dis-advantage, considering, that if any
Violencies or Irregularities were offered, they might thank themselves, in
respect that after Castles, or any Places, were delivered up upon Composition,
it was a usual Custom with them to spoil the Meal and Food, which they should
have left entire, and to have wet the Powder, as also to have made the Guns
un-serviceable; all which were violations of Articles no ways justifiable, and
might require a severe return: Upon which, they being confounded, this worthy
Person heard no more of their Design. And for what the Polititian's Catechism
would infer from a Daughter of O-Hara, an Irish Lord, being barbarously
murdered, as a President for what succeeded; it is evident, that the Rebellion
commenced in blood, Rowry Mac-Guire that day (in which the Rebellion began)
hanging not less than 18 Persons in the Church of Clownish, and afterward
burnt it; several other Examples may be produced of the same nature. And for
what this insolent Assertor braves the World with, from the Irish Remonstance,
offered by Viscount Preston, and Sir Robert Talbot, the 17th. of March, 1642.
That they desired the Murderers on both sides should be punished, is mentioned
but for a flourish; those Testimones of their Cruelties being given in upon
Oath, in several Remonstrances, which must remain an evidence to posterity of
their Villainy; whatever R. S. in his Collections of Murders, would (by way of
Recrimination) charge the English with: Inasmuch as what Cruelties he affirms
to be acted after protection had been given, and Articles (at this or that
Place) allowed, will be found upon due enquiry, (which they durst never stand
to) to be raised on breach of Faith, and under color of protection to act the
greatest Villainies imaginable, some of which being found out, the Authors were
punished, and it may be others (upon the same reason only suspected) were
partners in equal sufferings. Nor could the State in such a confused,
distracted time, be justly blamed, that some Irregularities (how cautiously
soever looked after) were not in each particular prevented, seeing the rage of
the Soldier had exceeded the justice and providence of the State. Besides, can
it be reasonable, that those who began and pursued so bloody a Conspiracy, with
such un-heard of aggravations, should be put in balance with such, as (only to
vindicate his Majesty and his People's Right) sometimes proceeded beyond their
own Temper? Nor is it here to be omitted, That those whom they pretend should
be singled out, and particularized for barbarous and inhumane, should by virtue
of their 18th. Article, be tried by the Lord Lieutenant, and several
Commissioners, some of which were chargeable with the same barbarous and
inhumane Crimes, and all of them nearly interess'd in such as may be so
charged, if to abett, aid, or countenance those, be in the eye of the Law
accounted equally involved; so that from such, what justice could be expected,
were easy to be conceived, (how entire soever the Lord Lieutenant were in his
Principles.) And whereas this R. S. would free Kilkenny, and other Places, from
the horrid actions which were committed there, the testimony of such as avows
them, makes whatsoever he would extenuate as to them, and aggravate as to
others, mere fabulous and vain; though to make up his Fardle, he takes in
whatsomever Cromwell and his Party afterward committed in Ireland. Thus
confounding Actions with Times, an Artifice so shaped to his Humor, as who is
he that cannot see, but that those actions of Cromwell's no whit concerned the
British, or could be any encouragement for what the Irish did long before;
Cromwell's proceedings being on a ground well known, extending to the English as
well as the Irish; such as if the Rebellion of Ireland had not been, no Sect
had been able to have done any harm in England. Indeed his whole Piece is such
a Web, as unravled, would be found mere Fictions and Imposture, after what is
accounted for breach of Protection, forfeiture of Articles, Treachery, and the
like. That which he writes of the Scotch Forces in Knockfergus, murdering (if
you will believe him) in the Isle of Mac-Gee, 3000 innocent Persons, in the
beginning of November, to be the first Massacre in Ireland on either side, (it
seems he heard nothing then of O-Hara's Daughter) is so false, as he that will
read John Carmick's Testimony, at the Trial of Hugh Oge Mac-Mahon, the 18th. of
November, 1644. attested by Sir William Cole, Sir William Hamilton, Sir Arthur
Loftus, Sir Charles Coot, and others, upon Oath, (besides what the Clergy's
Remonstrance clears) will plainly perceive the vanity and falseness of that
Assertion, as (amongst others) appears by John Kerdiff, Rector of the Parish of
Diserteraugh in Tyrone, a Person of known Integrity, who deposes, That the
very first day Mr. Mader, Minister of the Parish of Donnoghmore, was murdered
by the Donnelies: and within a while after, Mr. New, Curate to Mr. Bradley, of
the Church of Ardira, as Mr. Blyth, with eight more; not to say any thing of
Rowry Mac-Guire's dealing with Mr. Middleton, the 24th. of October, at
Castle-Skeagh, alias Ballibalfure, where (after he had by treachery got into
the Castle, seized on his Money, burnt the public Records, and compelled him to
acknowledge the Mass) he caused him, his Wife and Children, to be hanged,
besides a hundred to be murdered at least in that Town: And thence daily
proceeded in such outrages.

Thus for the present all things seemed (in their sense) to prosper under their
hands; for they had in this short time made themselves Masters of the whole
Province of Ulster, except the Cities of Londonderry and Coleraigne, the Town
and Castle of Eniskillin, and some other Places and Castles, which were at
first gallantly defended by the British Undertakers, though afterward, for
want of relief, surrendered into the Rebels hands.

The Fire thus kindled, shortly after spread its fury in the Provinces of The
Rebels endeavor principally to make themselves Masters of Leimster.
Munster and Connaght, (of which we have given you a touch) where the English
were quickly dispoil'd of all their Substance, and either driven naked out of
their Habitations, or most barbarously murdered or starved in them. But their
main design at present was, to make themselves Masters of the Province of
Leimster, which was the chiefest and most flourishing part of the Kingdom; and
having advanced their work, they so far prevailed therein, as they had in a
manner gained it wholely, except the Cities of Dublin and Tredath, against
which they applied their whole strength: For Dublin, it being the Seat of the
State, (by the great care of the Lords Justices) had the best Provisions made
for the strengthening of it, that those crazy Walls, and their want of Forces
would admit. The Rebels contented themselves to block it up at a distance with
their Forces, and to make some attempt to hinder Shipping from coming into the
Harbor; but for Tredath, (having overrun the County of Mead, and surpised
the Towns of Trym, Kells, Navan, Ardbracan, Ashboy, etc.) the Rebels sat down
on both sides that Town, the last of November, or The Rebels begirt Tredath.
the first of December, drawing very near the Walls, blocking up the Passage of
the River which runs into the Sea, that no succor could be brought in to them
either by Sea or Land, no, nor Intelligence be gotten out of Town; so as Sir
Henry Tichborn (as we have before mentioned) with the Provisions he had there,
and the Forces he carried with him, which were not above a thousand men,
remained close besieged, without any hopes of Succors, or further Supplies.

Tredath is an ancient City, of great Circuit, the River of Boyne passes The
Situation of Tredath.
through the midst of the Town; it is encompassed about with an old Stone-Wall,
without Bulwarks or any kind of Rampires, or other Fortifications than an
ordinary Ditch; it lies about three miles from the Sea, the Harbor is but ill,
yet such as would admit Vessels of good burden, and such as exceed not 60
Tuns, may come up to the very Bridge in the Town: It is situated in a plain
open Country, plentiful for all manner of Provisions, no Bogs or Marsh-ground
near it; so as the Rebels had all the opportunities and advantages they could
desire, for making their approaches to the Place: But so unhappy were they in
their undertakings, and so unprosperous in their executions, as notwithstanding
the weakness of the Place, and the small numbers of men that kept it, they lay
before it (after they had thus closely begirt the Town almost three months)
without doing any thing of moment, being resolved (either in regard of their
want of great Guns to batter the Walls, skill to undermine them, or courage to
scale them) to sit still, till Famine within had made them an entrance.

The State being very sensible of what this poor Place suffered, consulted in
the first place, after the Landing of Sir Simon Harcourt which way was most
likely to weaken the Rebels strength, the main of which Tredath had long felt;
therefore they resolved now with their new Forces to relieve that Town. But
before we come to the result of that The Siege of Tredath, and its strength.
Determination, it will not be unpleasant to show, against how many troubles
that Place incredibly extricated it self. And here we are obliged first to take
notice what Forces Tredath had. The 26th. of October. 1641. Henry Lord Viscount
Moor of Tredath, with his Troop of Horse, consisting of sixty six, entered the
Town in its defense: As did Sir John Nettervile, Capt. Rockley, Capt.
with their two half standing Companies. Seafoul Gibson, Capt. whose Company of
the English Inhabitants, and other Protestants, to the number of 120.

November the 4th. following. Sir Henry Tichborn, Col. and Governor of the
Town, with the Regiment and two Troops of Horse (formerly mentioned) came in.
November. 10. Captain Henry Bryan, Captain Patrick Trevor, Captain Foulk Martin.
November. 22. Christopher Roper, Serj. Major; Capt. William Cadougan, Capt.
Charles Sounsley.
These escaped from the defeat of Gellingstone. Fifty Horse under the Command
of Sir Patrick Weams, Captain Lieutenant to the Earl of Ormond.




All these, with three Companies more which came in with the second Relief,
were under the Lord Moor; those excepted which Sir Henry Tichborn brought in.

The Lord Moor, upon the first discovery of the Plot, (having notice of his
Sister the Lady Blany's and her Childrens imprisonment, with surprizal of her
Castle, Castle Blany, the Town and Castle of Newry, Carrick Mac-ross,
Charlemont, Town and Castle of Monaghan, Tonrages, Mountjoy, Cloughoter,
Dunganon, and multitudes of Castles and Houses of Strength, Towns and Villages
in the North) repaired in the midst of the night from Mellifont to Tredath, and
knocking up the Mayor and Aldermen, invited them to a speedy defense; who at
first promised him fair, but proceeded slowly, producing few Arms, who (on a
Muster-day before) could appear with some hundreds. His Lordship (conceiving
his presence necessary) drew his whole Family thither; and having regained some
old Pieces of Ordnance, cast into a Dungeon, he fitted them (and four took out
of a Merchants Ship) for service; and placing some at one Gate, some at
another; making up the North-Port, and strengthening the Walls, which he
effected with singular diligence and speed; one Sir John Netterviles.
of the two half-Companies in the Town proving afterward false, the Citizens
themselves (Papists) being no way real; which put his Lordship on a perpetual
watch, there being little relief; so that he was with his Troop constantly
scouring the streets, the Inhabitants being no ways assisting: Yet so managed
he his affairs, as he kept all passages free for Sir Henry Tichborn's
admittance, who, entering Governor there Sir Hen, Tichborn enters the 4th. of
November. Governor of Tredath.
the 4th. of November with his Forces, was coldly received by the Citizens, not
admitted into any Quarters, till himself (after many hours being in the
streets) found one. Having first drawn out several Companies to continue the
Watch that night, never excusing his own vigilance or pains: The next day after
he entered. He endeavored to make the Town as defensible as might be, wherein
he and his Officers ordered much to its security, though many things conspired
to make it (in so short a time) not artificially tenable; which yet they
afterward made good with their Bodies and Valor. He expelled many of the
Popish Inhabitants, which held intelligence with the Rebels without, and got in
all the Provisions he could, ordering them with the greatest parsimony
imaginable. He and the Lord Moor (who accompanied him in all services)
alternately walked the Rounds, performing all Duties so industriously, as they
disappointed all the frequent little Plots which the Rebels had upon them; and
so careful were they to encourage and provide for their Soldiers, as they
raised them up to a far greater confidence of their Abilities to defend the
Place, (against so numerous an Enemy) than there was just reason for. That
which discouraged the Soldiers most, was, the constant Duty which they
performed in their Night-Watches; the circuit of the Wall was very large, the
Weather (being the depth of Winter) was very sharp; and the numbers of the
Soldiers (who were to watch) were but small, and those very ill clothed, so as
it came oftener to their turns than usual, which bred sickness and diseases, and
some even fell down and died upon the Walls.

The third of December (there being a want of Corn) there issued forth a Party
at St. Lawrence and the West-gate, of 350 Foot, and two Troops of Horse, to
secure some Carriages sent out for Corn at the Green-hills, about half a mile
off; where unexpectedly (the Citizens having been treacherous in their
intelligence) there appeared in view 3000 men: whereupon some Officers advised
to retreat, and many of the Horse (Papists) in the Rear running back, with a
confused cry exceedingly disturbed those that were at the Gates drawing out. To
remedy which, Sir Henry Tichborn presently lights off his Horse, and in the
Front (to the hazard of his Person) marched before the Foot, commanding the
Musketeers up the Hill, and his Pikes in that narrow Passage to open for the
Horse, and so with all expedition made ready to charge the Enemy, giving the
Rebels so home a Charge, as they betook themselves to their heels, with the
loss of above 200 of them, but not one of ours, though before we charged them
they had set twice on us: The Victory exceedingly animated our Soldiers,
notwithstanding afterward many Soldiers (Papists) daily revolted from us; and
we received frequent Alarms, which we finding frivolous, afterward neglected.
Then the Confederates sent to Parley; upon which, one Darcy, a Friar, and a
Captain of his Name, demanded the absolute surrender of the Town for his
Majesty's use and service, in the name of the Commanders of the Catholic Army,
expressing how impossible it would be to keep it against their Forces. The
Governor with the Captains returned an Answer as short, That they had a
Commission from his Majesty for the defense of the Town, and without his
Majesty's Command, or the Lords Justices, to the contrary, they would keep it;
if the Rebels attempted it by the Sword, they would defend it; if by Famine,
they should hear they eat their Horses Hides. In prosecution of which, the
Governor and Captains of the City, made this unanimous Protestation in its
defense, for his Majesty's use and service. WHereas we are beset with such, who
pretend their Attempts (in taking of this Town) to be for the advancement of
his Majesty's Service, (which notwithstanding we believe is but a pretext to
delude the Vulgar) We the Governor and Captains of the said Town, for the
further manifestation and approbation of our Loyalty, and thankfulness to his
Majesty, by whose immediate Command we are charged for the defense of his just
and Royal Title in it; do likewise hereby unanimously make this following
Protestation and Oath, and do enjoin it to be taken by every Soldier and
Inhabitant of this Town, as the evidence of their Faith and Truth to the Kings
Crown and Dignity, which we shall maintain with our Lives and Estates; and that
such as shall refuse it, be put out of the Gates.

The Oath.
I Shall, to my uttermost, endeavor the defense of this Town against all
outward and inward Attempts whatsoever, for his Majesty's Service. I shall
forthwith discover any Plot, Conspiracy, or Combination, which may or shall
come to my knowledge, from without or within, which may any ways be intended to
the prejudice of the whole Town, or to the Person of the Mayor, Governor,
Aldermen, or any of the Captains or Officers Garrisoned in it.

I shall not attempt or consent, that the Town shall be given, upon any
pretense or cause whatsoever, without consent of the Governor, Mayor, and
greater part of the Captains and Aldermen in it, or without special Command
from his Majesty, or Chief Governor or Governors of the Kingdom.

All which I do hereby swear truly and faithfully to observe and keep, without
any fraud, deceit, or mental reservation whatsoever.



Notwithstanding which, some (who took it) were afterward perjured, not
without example; and the Mayor and Aldermen refused it.

On St. Thomas Eve, the Rebels (being encouraged from the Popish Inhabitants
within) about one of the Clock at night (after a Watchword) approached the
Walls with a terrible shout; which the Governor answered from the Mount with a
Canon, continuing the same for some hours; the Townsmen (in the interim) being
upon pain of death commanded to keep within doors. Toward morning, the Rebels
fled, being pursued by our Bullets, (from all Quarters) so that many dropped; the
numbers of their slain is not certain: certainly many fell by that attempt, of
ours, not one; notwithstanding at St. John's Gate (which was most naked, and
where Captain Morris This Captain John Morris was Page to the Countess of
Strafford, one of singular courage through the whole War, and a Colonel in
England, and Governor of Pontfract Castle; for which Service (having past many
Fortunes) he was Condemned and Executed at York, the eight of August, 1649. The
first Relief of Tredath, the xi. of January.
excellently well performed his Command) was the hottest work. This deliverance
was no sooner over, but new Conspiracies were hatched in the Town, a
clandestine Oath being imposed on some to seize on the Soldiers Arms as they
were asleep, and kill others in their beds; happily discovered by a Priest, not
so bloody as the rest: Yet necessities of all sorts (as well for Beasts as Men)
grew so urgent, that within few days no Enemy but those need to do execution:
In which extremity, God was particularly flown to, and even in the midst of
their Devotion, the 11th. of January, there came in from the State (vigilant in
whatsomever might concern them) a Pinnace, a Frigate, a Gabbard, with two
Shalloops, and a Vessel laden with Biscuit, Powder, and Ammunition; whereby the
Garrison was seasonably relieved in the midst of great extremities; which at
the first appearance, the Townsmen (well-wishers to the Rebels) would needs
have persuaded the Soldiers, that they had been Ships from Spain in favor of
the Rebels, and appeared cheerful. But the mercy proving otherwise, the
Soldiers grew hearty, which (without an especial providence) might have proved
their ruin; for, contrary to the Command of the Governor, and his vigilance,
(which was never more remarkable than then) the Soldiers carous'd it too
liberally, being (by the Friars themselves) made to drink, inasmuch as
Sentinels (from their Guards) were drawn in: So as the Rebels, Jan. 12. (by the
help and treacherous intimation of their own within) made a breach in the Wall
about four in the morning, at which, many of their best Soldiers and Chief
Commanders, to the number of 500, entered unheard, till having marched as far
as the Key, they gave a shout; which the Governor hearing, instantly ran down,
unarmed, only with his Pistols in his hands, and was the first that caused a
Drum to beat, at which all was soon alarmed; and finding their Pikes to be
short of ours by a yard, we charged home, and forced them to a retreat, though
they had o'r-turn'd a Drake of ours (that lay there) off its Carriage. Soon
came in my Lord Moor with 15 Horse, (all that could of a sudden be got ready)
with which, and the rest, (that were now got together) they quickly repulsed
them. Sir John Borlase hasting so speedily, undrest, and with that courage to
the Breach made by the Nunnery, that his service there in falling upon the
Enemy (who fought it stoutly) was very remarkable. Here the Besieged killed
many of the Rebels, as well those as came near the Walls for the succor of
those that first entered, as they that Invaded it: and great was the
deliverance, the Rebels Party within (very considerable) having their Doors
marked with Chalk, as a token to the Rebels, should they have prevailed: The
Besieged lost few, if any. Though the Pinnace, on its return, ran a ground;
upon which, the Rebels played thick upon her from both sides the River,
desperately approaching her very Stern with Pick-axes and Crows of Iron; at
which, Captain Stutfield (Comptroler of the Ordnance, an excellent Engineer, a
stout and daring Person) presently threw some Granado's amongst them, which did
such execution, as thoroughly frighted them; yet chased them not away till the
seventh was flung; after which they parted, but were so pursued by our Musket
and Canon, that many were slain.

After this Relief, (for some time) Tredath enjoyed reasonable Peace, though at
distance they had often alarms, and within a fortnight, what quantity of Biscuit
and Meal was brought to the Garrison, was easily spent, Famine Fluxes, with
other diseases return again, in as much as diverse of the English Inhabitants
(especially such as had flown thither for relief) died daily, and now the Town
was narrowly searched for Provisions, in which scrutiny the Friars (against
their vow of Poverty) were found full of Trunks of Plate, Money, and other
Treasure, which they not owning (being the Goods of the Rebels) were equally
distributed amongst the Garrison, but could not supply the want of food, which
raised Mutinies (speedily allayed by the Vigilance of the Governor.) However
many English as well as Irish, fled to the Rebels out of mere necessity. In as
much as Sir Phelim O-Neal writ into the North, and gave it out amongst his
Soldiers, that he was certain of the sudden surrender of Tredath: so as the
Town being now driven to great streights, the best expedient that could be
thought of, was to Man out a Boat for Dublin, that the State might be rightly
informed of its Condition, in endeavoring which, the Aldermen and Mariners of
the Town seemed very backwards, till the Governor threatened to make some of
the Aldermen themselves prove Mariners in that service; whereupon at last men
were found, and Commissioners sent to the Lords Justices, to inform them of the
misery of the Town, in which service Sir John Borlase, Junior, and others were
employed, who having obtained some men, and two Pieces of Battery, returned
with a very satisfactory supply.

The same day they weighed Anchor for Dublin, a part of the Garrison made a
sally on the Rebels, Northward, who encountered them sharply, but were soon
affronted by ours; many of the Enemy were slain, but of ours none, only by the
breaking of a little brass Piece, a Gunner was hurt, which yet gave them so
rugged a Salute, that they took leave of us, and we recovered some Provisions:
Sir Henry Tichborn that night with some Musketeers, falling on their Court of
Guard, and killed some of their Sentinels; As the 11th. of February, Lieutenant
Greenham, with a Party of Horse and Foot, routed 60 of the Enemy, taking a
Lieutenant, Ensign, and several other, Prisoners; Sallying also forth the next
day, with the like success, getting in some Grain, and burning the Country.

By these Sallies though some were relieved, the Soldiers (in general) fell
into great extremity, Horseflesh, Dogs, and Cats, being greedy food, yet
(having but an intention to seek God) February the 14th. a booty The second
Relief Febr. the 14th.
of 80 Cows, and 200 Sheep being offered, they were (though with much hazard)
soon recovered of the Enemy: And from the worst of Winds, a Northwest, it
instantly turned to the best, a S. E. and so continued, till in the Evening,
that Sabbath, (having all that day craved the blessing from God) tidings came
in that our Relief was come within the Bar: viz. two Pinnaces, 6 Gabbards, 3
Frigots, with one Shallop, with a plentiful Relief for three months, a large
Fisher-Boat of the Rebels, laden with Herring (going to the Confederates)
being also brought in, notwithstanding what Cables, Masts of Ships, and other
things they had chained over the River, to prevent their arrival: so faithful
and fortunate was Captain Stutfield, whose happy Conduct, Trodath had now twice
experienced in the height of misery, a mercy not to be forgot no more then
that, that Sunday morning about four of the Clock, Sir Phelim O-Neale (marching
silently with all the strength he could make) made so bold an Attempt, as to
apply scaling Ladders to the Walls, especially near St. Laurence Gate, where
(sometimes) a Sentinel had been omitted, two of which they had presently fixed,
and on each one mounted, the Sentinel (missing fire) the Assailants presumed
higher, till the Sentinel knocked them down with the Butt of his Musket, and
cried out to the Guard, who instantly plied the rest with their fill of shot,
so that they left thirteen of their Ladders, and many of their dead behind
them: nor could all that the Rebels Officers could say, encourage their
Soldiers to return.

With the last Relief, there came a Proclamation, dated the 8th. of February,
1641. from the State, prizing Sir Phelim O-Neals head at 1000 l. O-Relie's, and
others at 600 l. and the rest of the Principal at 400 l. if they were brought
in before the 25th. of March next, which made the Soldiers ready to be abroad;
the Proclamation may be found at large in the Appendix. After that the Lords
Justices, and Council had Appendix. 6th.
thus particularly named those then in Rebellion, and sat a Price on their
heads, few (if any) were ever brought in, so entire were the Confederates;
though in former Rebellions this Policy produced good effect: whereupon the
Commons in Parliament, Ordered all rotten Members fit to be cut off, and new to
supply their Places, publicly affixing in their Orders, their Names whom they
knew engaged in the Rebellion, which Sir Audley Mervin In his Speech the 13th.
of Febr. 1662. p. 17. 38.
brings in as just evidence of their Conviction, from undeniable Presidents of
Parliament, how many Nocent Persons soever have since passed in Triumphant
innocence, whilst those stand by, whose evidence (if admitted) would write the
Letter of Condemnation on their foreheads. However the Catholic Lords of the
Pale (could words make them innocent) framed a Protestation against the
Proclamation of the eight of February, but so false, scandalous, and
insinuating, that no answer (further then every intelligent man's abhorrency
thereof) is requisite or expedient.

Since the last Relief, the Rebels (as to their Menaces) were somewhat milder;
and relief and hope, having now animated the Soldiers, the 26 of February, the
Governor issued out with 220 Foot, and 120 Horse to Beaubeck, securing thereby
some Corn and Hay for the service of the Town, and then advanced to Smithstown,
where they met a Party of the Rebels, fought them, and slew 300. Sergeant Major
Fortescue took two Colors, Captain Bryan a Drum, and eightscore Cows near
Gellingston, where not long before they had defeated our men; Colonel Preston
was there hard put to it: The Victory (that it might tend to the raising of the
Siege) was pursued by 600 Foot, and 120 Horse, under the Conduct of my Lord
Moore, with Carriages and two Field Pieces, who assaied Stanime, which they
found so unexpectedly Fortified, as having only slain some of their men,
(abundance of rain falling) the great Guns did small execution, that thence the
Party returned that night, and called in upon Colp, a little Village, where
they loaded themselves with Corn, and returned without any opposition. Those of
Stanime hearing of our Supplies, and resolution to come on, quitted the Castle
few days after, which without further work fell into our hands; scarce a day
now passed, without some attempt upon the Enemy.

The first of March, Sir John Borlase Jun. Lieutenant Colonel, had the Command
of four Companies, with which he faced the Enemy, and beat them with much
disadvantage, securing at that time 200 l. worth of Corn, burning withal, such
of their Lodgings as remained of the former days work at Colp, and returned
with great satisfaction: Whilst the same day, the Lord Moore, and the Governor
marched further, and the Rebels having lined Hedges and Ditches, Captain
Billingsley very resolutely scoured those places with 80 Musketeers, soon
routing them, a Lieutenant with 13 Soldiers were slain, and a Captain of the
O-Neals taken Prisoner: The Castle of Colp (after much hazard) was taken, and
all therein ( viz. 26) were slain, save the Captain, who was taken Prisoner.

The third of March some Forces marched out, under the Command of Colonel
Waineman to Marlington (three miles off Tredath) with whom all Persons were
permitted to pillage, and returned home with all sorts of Grain, having burnt
Draicot's house, and some other places considerable: at which time the Rebels
forsook many of their Houses, and we began to be at pretty ease.

The first of March, the Lord Moore commanded out a Party of 400 Foot, and 80
Horse on the Northside, amongst his Traitorous Tenants, to Talagh-hallon, where
Sir Phelim O-Neal, with Colonel Mac-Bryan, had that night confederated
together, eight Colors instantly appeared, being entrenched much to their
advantage, but our men (Lieutenant Colonel Byron commanding the Foot) drew up
boldly, and gave such sure fire, as they soon betook themselves to their last
refuge (their heels) near 400. with 7 Captains, were slain, and one took
Prisoner ( viz. Rory-mac-Art-mac-Cross-mac-Mahon, and one Color; 100 Muskets
were taken, and Pikes covered the ground, others securing themselves by a bog
near at hand, were so roughly admonished by a Drake from us, that they soon
removed their standing: This hot skirmish was in sight of our Walls, the Lord
Moore in this encounter behaving himself most gallantly, indeed no man braver;
for after he was known by the Rebels, they endeavored to have seized on him;
yet though he had but 7 in his Company (being then at a distance from the main
Body) charged them home, killed many, scattered the rest, and got off clear.

After that Tredath had relieved it self, and his Majesty's Forces Tredath
being freed, several of the Lords of the Pale offer (upon Conditions) to come
in.
became full Masters of the field, several (as the Lord Nettervile, Lord Slane,
and others) writ Letters to the State to excuse themselves, as did those with
the Lord Gormanston, about the 21st. of March, to the Earl of Castlehaven,
under the name of the United Lords, that he would move the State for a
Cessation of Arms, and to know upon what Conditions they might come in and
submit; which the Lords Justices and Council thought a demand full of
Insolency, they having (till then) acted with the forwardest of the Rebels,
notwithstanding whatever dehortations or encouragements, the State gave them to
the contrary, so that then the State had no power to mitigate their Crimes; Nor
did the Lords Justices and Council then think fit to prostitute his Majesty's
Royal Grace, to men so ungrateful and unnatural: Besides, the State in their
Commission and Instructions, found no express Warrant to pardon such pernicious
Traitors, as (before they inclined to come in) hoped to carry all before them,
by surprizal or open force.

In the last Service of my Lord Moore's, Barnewell of Rahasket (one of
dangerous Parts) was taken, with some Priests and Friars; Darcy of Platten in
Mead, about two miles from Tredath, was soon after summoned, who denied the
surrender of his House to the Earl of Ormond, yet after hearing of two Pieces
of Battery, surrendered it. However, at Atherdee, the Rebels killed all the
Protestants, whilst the Earl of Ormond, Lieutenant General, leaving Dublin the
7th. of March, (prosecuting the Design formerly mentioned, upon the arrival of
the Forces out of England, that they might not be idle in the City) was not far
from Tredath, The Earl of Ormond visits Tredath with 3000 Foot and 500 Horse.
with 3000 Foot, and 500 Horse, burning the County of Mead, and several of the
Lords of the Pale's Houses in their March, who came to Tredath the 11th. of
March, exceedingly admiring that such weak Walls should be able to resist so
potent an Enemy. His Lordship, with the Governor, the Lord Moore, Sir Thomas
Lucas, Sir Simon Harcourt, Sir Robert Ferrall, and others, in a Council of War,
determined to prosecute the Rebels: But the Earl of Ormond, with the rest of
his Forces, being summoned to Dublin, on Business of great importance, (beneath
the capacity of those who would have had it otherwise) the Work fell wholly on
the Lord Moore and the Governor, who were by the Earl of Ormond recruited with
four Companies of Foot, and two Troops of Horse, and two Pieces of Battery; and
upon the 21. of March, with 1000 Foot, and 200 Horse, they marched forward,
finishing what they had left unburnt at Slane, and other Villages in the way.
And the 23. of March, they advanced with Fire and Smoke toward Atherdee; about
a mile from Town, the Enemy was descried to be drawn up into two Divisions,
reported to be 1100 or 1500. upon which Sir Henry Tichborn drew his Soldiers
into Battalia, sending up a forlorn Hope before to scour the Ditches, which
they so effectually did, as stumbling upon an Ambuscado of the Enemy's
Musketeers, they beat them out of their Holes, drawing so nimbly upon them, as
they killed about 400 of them in a miles space. At the foot of the Bridge our
Foot found some resistance, by Musketeers placed in a Tower; upon which Sir
Henry Tichborn (finding a passage over the River) galled them so on the other
side, that they soon abandoned it. The passage thus opened, the Horse entered,
and with a full career chased them through the Town, where one Lieutenant
Colonel, and five Captains of the Rebels, were slain, the Lord Moore doing much
execution with his own hands. Now the passage being clear, our Forces Dundalk
assaulted and gained.
made an assault on Dundalk, fortified by the Rebels, with a double Wall,
double Ditch, Marsh-ground on one side, and Sea on the other, so that our
difficulty was great. Yet we approached the Town the 26th. of March, about Nine
in the Morning, planted our Ordnance on a little Hill near the Gate, which 500
of them defended a while against a forlorn Hope of ours, till they pursued
their Work so close, as they made many of the Rebels fall, at which they
retired; which our Men perceiving, increased their fears by shouting, that at
length a Division, under the Command of Lieutenant Colonel Waineman, of about
300, resolutely approached the Gate with Pick-axes, and after a strong
encounter entered with the Horse, who pursued the Enemy with a full Gallop,
killing many; but (upon the turning toward the next Gate, seeing 2 or 3 brass
Pieces planted, and 500 of the Rebels ready to receive us) we fairly retreated,
whilst a Castle, placed at the head of that Street, (manned with their best
Musketeers) in our return played very hot upon us, whereby 10 of our Men were
slain, and Ensign Fortescue (a sprightly Gentleman) one Sergeant, and one that
carried the Colors for another; Lieutenant Francis Moore was there also shot
upon the shoulder-piece of his Armor, without much hurt, (a Gentleman that
merits much for his service through the whole Business.) At this (we being not
subject to lose any Men) the Governor and the Lord Moore were so enraged, that
they set the Houses near the Castle (the only Remora) on fire, through which
(the Wind blowing the smoke on the Castle, and the Soldiers making bundles of
dried Bean-stalks, intermixed with Tow and Gunpowder, and carrying these on
their heads) they got themselves un-descried to the Castledoor, where they laid
down their bundles, and giving fire by a train of Powder, blew up the Door, and
some other Boards, those within (being almost choked, and fully frighted)
leapt out at a Window, and a Sergeant of Captain Owen's, with 5 Men (upon
condition that they might have the pillage of the Place) entered it, and
speedily showed (by their naked swords on the top of the Castle) that they were
Masters of it. At which the Governor and the Lord Moore were revived, and
immediately quenched the Fires, and manned the Castle with 30 good Musketeers,
who, playing thick into the Town, hindered the Rebels from walking the Streets.
Afterward we drew up two Pieces of Ordnance against the inner Gate, and with
10 Wool-packs (found in the Castle very opportunely) a kind of Bulwark was made
for the Musketeers, which the Rebels perceiving, left their Pieces there
laden. Whereupon the Governor took a Division of a Party of Horse, and drew
by the back of the Town, (toward the North-Gate) killing 40 in his way, and
entered at a by-Gate, found the Town deserted. The Lord Moore, in the interim,
also beating open the Gates, took possession of the two brass Pieces, and
another in the Marketplace, and so at Seven a Clock the same Night we were
Masters of all. About 100 of theirs were killed, and some 14 of ours, 120
Protestants were thereby relieved, and much good Pillage of all sort taken
therein: Our Forces upon Muster next Morning were found to be but 750 Foot, and
200 Horse, theirs near 3000 within the Town, besides in Artillery and brass
Pieces they much exceeded us.

Thus Tredath, which not long since was (in the opinion of most) given up as an
irrecoverable prey to the Rebels, now survived their scorns; and that merely
through God's Mercy, on the courage and valor of the besieged, bearing out
against the utmost of Extremity and Treachery, faithfully set down by Dean
Bernard, in his siege of Tredath, 1642. described with the Follies of several
superstitions and vanities, no ways prevalent to the practiser; and had not the
providence of the State (at that time) been singular, no doubt but Dublin would
soon have been the triumph of their malice and cruelties. And now the County of
Lowth (which lay on the other side of the Boine) being cleared, Ardes and
Dundalk also being taken in, Sir Phelim O-Neal, who (on all occasions) made a
most inconsiderable resistance, ran with the first, being reserved for a
further mischief; he got to the Newry, and thence passed down into the Counties
of Tyrone and Ardmagh, where (in revenge of his losses Sir Phelim Oneal being
disappointed at Tredath, revenges himself on the British in other Parts.
before Tredath) he exercised the uttermost of his Cruelties on Men, Women, and
Children, whom he had to that time suffered to live amongst the Irish, most
barbarously killing the Lord Cawfield, when he least suspected it, and caused
Mr. Blany (a Gentleman of good Quality) to be hanged for refusing to hear Mass.
About the same time, Mulmore O-Relie being likewise driven from the siege of
Tredath, retiring to Belturbet, (in the County of Cavan) there commanded the
poor British, who thitherto ( i. e. after the great slaughter) had survived to
the number of 60. to be forced off the Bridge into the Water, where they were
swallowed up: As did Sir Phelim O-Neal, who missing the taking in of the Castle
of Augher, in the County of Ardmagh, in revenge gave directions to
Mulmore-Mac-Donnel, (a most cruel and merciless Rebel) to kill all the English
and Scotch within the Parishes of Mullebrack, Loghgilly, and Kilcluneny,
destroying there not less than 1500 Protestants, since the 23. of October,
1641. He exercised also his cruelty in the same manner, for his loss before
Lisnagarvy, Newry, and other Places, upon the poor Protestants, as if by
offering so many innocent Souls to death, he should have expiated the guilt of
his Cowardliness and Treacheries.

Thus the English Forces enduring no resistance where they came, either possessed
themselves of the Castles tenable, or demolisht the rest, and having cleared
all passages 'twixt Dublin and Tredath, part of them retired to Dublin; whilst
Sir Phelim O-Neal gave but cold entertainment to the Inhabitants of the Pale,
that had for their safety (after their Confederacy with him) retired into his
Quarters; he and his Confederates renewing their ancient Animosities against
them, (the old English) as those who The Irish taunt the Lords of the Pale with
old Miscarriages.
formerly pursued the Irish in the defense of themselves, telling them, That
the time was not yet past memory, when they had done, as now, stirred up the
mere Irish to rebel, making those in the North declare themselves, and when
they found them not likely to prosper, deserted them, exposing them to the fury
of the English, and their Country to ruin and desolation; but now they were
even, their Country being first ruined. This harsh scornful usage of the old
English, by the Northern Irish, after so solemn a conjunction between them, and
under such a public calamity fallen upon them, bred in them a great
consternation and trouble; and it made so sad an impression upon the Lord
Viscount Gormanston, (who was the chief instrument to bring the Northern Irish
into the Pale, and there to work out that solemn conjunction between them) as
it broke his heart, and he soon after died, lamenting his Treachery and
Infidelity, that he had not been only the ruin of himself and his posterity,
but the great firebrand of his Country, out of vain ambitious ends, or for the
setting up of fond superstitious Inventions, entertaining such Designs, as had
already caused huge streams of blood to be shed, and were now likely to
determine in nothing, but the extirpation of the old English Families, out of
those plentiful Parts of the Country, wherein they had most happily seated
themselves, and which they had most pleasantly enjoyed, ever since the first
Conquest of Ireland. Others had the same Apprehensions; but being now involved
with the Ulster Forces, and having withstood the date of his Majesty's Favor,
the next course was to color their Proceedings by pretense of Grievances, that
by Forgeries and Calumnies, which they never spare to vent and publish, when
they would withdraw the Subjects from their obedience, they might the more
colourably palliate their foul Contempts, confounding Times, that the rise of
their Insurrection might seem to have some ground and encouragement thence: And
to that end, they of the Pale made an Apology to his Majesty, fraught with so
many vain, impertinent, and malicious Stories, as (in the judgment of the
knowing and moderate Statesman) serve only to increase their guilt; the main
of whatsoever is there alleged, being fully answered, in the Reply to the
Remonstrance given in at Trym, the 17th. of March, 1642.

About this time the King (considering how slowly the Supplies for Ireland went
on) offered (by a Message the 8th. of April, 1642.) in Person to go thither,
(as before he had done the 14th. and 24th. of February, The King offers to go
for Ireland.
as also the 9th. of March, 1641.) intending to raise his Guard of 2000 Foot,
and 200 Horse, out of the Counties near Chester, and to engage his Crown Lands
for the relief of his miserable Subjects there: Well knowing, (as in one of his
Declarations to the Parliament he expresses) That as he was (in his Interest)
more concerned than any of his Subjects, so he was to make a stricter account
to Almighty God for any neglect of his duty, or his Peoples preservation. But
the Parliament Voted, That for his Majesty to go thither in Person, He would be
subject to the casualty of War, and the secret Practices and Conspiracies of
the Rebels; it would be an encouragement to the Rebels; it would impair the
means to subdue the Rebels, and increase the Charge; and withal dishearten the
Adventurers to subscribe and pay in their Money: It would also interrupt the
proceedings of the Parliament, increase the jealousies and fears of the People,
and bereave the Parliament of that advantage, whereby they were induced to
undertake the War, upon promise that it should be managed by their advice; so
as the Journey would be against the Law. And that whosoever should assist him
in it, should be an Enemy to the Commonwealth; and that the Sheriffs of
Counties should raise Power to suppress any Levies he should make to that
purpose: Being loath (says his Majesty in his Solitudes) to shoot at any mark
here less than himself; or that any should have the glory of his destruction
but themselves. Whilst at the same time, his Majesty's Subjects of Scotland, in
an Act of Council at Edinburgh the 22d. of April following, upon this occasion
takes notice, That there could be no greater demonstration of Care and Princely
Courage, than this his Majesty's intention to go in Person into Ireland against
the Rebels. Upon the signification of which Royal Intent to the State there,
the Lords Justices and Council, in a Letter to his Majesty the 23d. of April,
1642. taking notice of his Princely Purpose, to take just vengeance on the
perfidious Rebels, humbly besought him to come so provided, as to appear in
that Kingdom suitable to the Greatness and Wisdom of so mighty a King. Which
Letter, how finely soever it was covered, went not (in some men's opinion)
without a discouragement; forasmuch as that though some (at Court) might
conceive (by his Majesty's coming over) a Peace might be made with the Irish
when his Majesty pleased; yet by taking in so base, perfidious, and barbarous a
People, who in so execrable a manner had cut off such multitudes of the
English, the event (as was privately signified by some) could not redound to
his Majesty's Honor. Besides, the Soldiers were then grown so implacable to
the Irish, as they would scarce endure any ordinary Papist, much less suffer a
Rebel to be admitted amongst them. After all, his Majesty's resolutions for
Ireland were prevented, not without several constructions, as each Party
apprehended the Scene: Though his Majesty expressed, that he would never refuse
or be unwilling to venture his Person for the good and safety of his People,
yet he was not so weary of his life as to hazard it impertinently, and
therefore at present should desist. However as yet, the Protestant Army in
Ireland being competently supplied, the Rebels were frequently chastized.

To say truth, after the raising of the Siege of Tredath, and the consequences
thereupon, his Majesty's Forces so enlarged their Quarters, as no considerable
Enemy (save some Castles) lay nearer Dublin than twenty miles on any side, that
now the Lords Justices thought it high time to provide for the safety of such
places as lay more remote in the Country, the English having in many Places
(upon the first rising of the Irish) possessed themselves of some Forces,
Strong Holds, Towns and Castles, which (though very ill provided) they did for
many months (yea, some for years, after the first breaking out of the
Rebellion) defend, notwithstanding long Sieges, multitudes of Rebels
encompassing them, and all means by Treachery, Force or Famine, experienced to
draw them into their possession.

It will here take up too large a space in this Story (where many considerable
things may fall besides the Pen) to recite the gallant actions performed by
several private Persons in some inconsiderable (in respect of Strength) Places;
many Women showing more courage, constancy, and resolution in the defense of
what they were necessitated to, than the Men without did in their undertakings
against them. Great were the Straits many of them were put unto, enduring all
manner of extremities, subjecting themselves to all kind of dangers, not
daunted with the multitudes of Rebels that lay about them, they in many places
issued out, and lived only on the Spoils they took from them, fighting
continually for their daily bread, which they never wanted as long as their
Enemies had it. The Rebels were so undextrous in the management of their
Sieges, as they took very few Places by force; in all their Attempts, whether
by Mine, Battery, Assault, they seldom prosper'd: The great Engine whereby they
mastered any Fort of the English, was Treachery; Offers of safe Conduct, and
other Conditions of Honor and Advantage, which might induce the Besieged
(sometimes reduced to the utmost extremities) to surrender their Places into
their hand; which (though solemnly sworn and signed) they yet seldom or never
kept, but left several Places as Monuments of their Treachery and Infidelity,
using those (who surrendered them) as they did the poor Protestants in the Town
and Castle of Longford, whom (they having besieged, and drawn to yield up into
their hands upon condition of Quarters, and safety for their Persons) they (as
soon as they issued out) fell upon with their Skenes, their Priest (as a signal
for the rest to fall on) first ripping open the belly of the Minister amongst
the English; then his followers soon killed and hanged the rest. After this
manner used they the 150 Protestants, who yielded up (upon fair Quarter) the
Castle of Tullagh, and the Church of Newtown, in the County of Fermanagh. And
the 1400 or 1500 at Belturbet, and the Inhabitants of Ardmagh and Loughgell,
and those under the conduct of the Lord Mayo; and those 120 murdered by the
Mac-Swynes; as those who yielded the strong Castle of Cloghleigh (situate upon
the Manningwater) to Richard Condon, who promised Quarter and a safe Convoy to
Castelions, contrary to which, they were all of them either hanged, killed,
wounded, or kept Prisoners by him and his Company. In the same manner also he
used a Party of the Earl of Barrimore's Troop, who (having bravely maintained
themselves in a House in Cool against his Forces) were by his Promise (on the
Faith of a Soldier and a Christian) of a safe Conveyance to Castelions,
contented to yield it up; but were immediately (upon their coming forth)
murdered: As some English Families, and the Garrison Soldiers at Sligo were
used by O Connor Slygah, who (upon the quitting of their Holds) promised them
Quarter, and to convey them over the Curlew Mountains in safety to Abbeyboyle
or Roscommon; but he first imprisoned them in a most nasty Goal, allowing them
only Grains for their food, and afterward (when the Rebels were merry with
Company, that came to congratulate their Victory over these poor Creatures)
those which survived were brought forth (by a Friar, O Connor's Brother, and
others) and killed, or precipitated over the Bridge into a swift Water, where
they were presently destroyed. And at Teagh-Temple, after the English and Scots
(who retired thither, were not able longer to resist the Enemy) had yielded the
Place, on Conditions to be brought in safe Conduct to Abbeyboil, were
murdered, hanged, or buried alive: At which terrible sight, Mrs. Olyfant (a
Ministers Wife) being great with Child, fell in Labor, but was still beat
forward, till at last the Child slipped from her, and, what was horrible, she was
forced to draw that poor Infant (and the Concomitants of such an accident)
after her, till she died, with sport to them. The Story would be too long,
should we mention those 140 taken forth to be sent for England, and drowned at
Portadown: or those numbers drawn to Florence Fitz-Patricks house, and there
slain: Or those 60 and odd persons gathered together, on pretense of sending
them to Clanhughboyes, drowned by them: Or their perfidious breach of Quarter,
as that of Captain Sanders, which we rather remit to future Story, not touching
what they do in open War, but their putting the blood of War in their Girdles
in the time of Peace. Though we must say, that when the Instructions for the
Protestant Agents of Ireland came afterward to be considered, great artifice
there was, that the cruelties committed against the Protestants, after Quarter
given, Promises and Oaths for security or safe Convoy, should be struck out.
But no more of this.

The State considering these sad truths, and that none but a considerable Army
was to appear abroad, they provided 4000 Foot, and 1500 Horse, to be sent out
under the Command of the Earl of Ormond, Lieutenant General of the Army.

While Preparations were making for this Expedition, Sir Simon Harcourt Sir
Simon Harcourt's Expedition into Wicklow.
(who loved always to be in action) the 26th. of March, 1642. took a small
Party of men, and went out toward the County of Wickloe, where he found the
Rebels had possessed themselves of a Castle, called Carrickmain, within four
miles of Dublin; and seeing him draw near to it with those small Forces, and
finding him to have no Artillery, so as their Walls were of sufficient strength
to bear them out against any attempts he could make, they began to brave him
from within, and to use reproachful signs from the top of the Castle, thereby
to express their contempt and scorn of him. This his spirit was not well able
to brook; and considering the Castle was not invincible, and that it would be
very great advantage to the City of Dublin to remove so ill a Neighbor; and
that with two Pieces of Battery he could take it (in some few hours) he sent
presently away to the Lords Justices to acquaint them with his Design, and to
desire them to send unto him the two Great Guns for the effecting of it. They
very well approved his Design, and gave present order for the carrying them
out, together with all necessaries and provisions fitting for the service. In
the mean time, he took special care for the surrounding of the Castle, and
disposing of his Men so, as they might prevent the Rebels issuing out: In which
Service, Sergeant Major Berry (with 200 Firelocks, viewing the Castle) was
shot in his side, though he died not till eight days after of a Fever. All
things being put in order, whilst they attended the coming of the Great Pieces,
(now on their way) Sir Simon Harcourt, with some of the Commanders, laid
themselves down under the side of a little thatched house, standing near the
Castle, (which they took as a shelter to keep off the Enemies bullets) from
whence he suddenly rose up to call to the Soldiers, to stand carefully to
their Arms, and to their Duties, in their several Stations; Which one of the
Rebels (from within) perceiving, discharged his Piece at him, and shot him into
his right breast, under the neck bone; and being so wounded, he was carried
off, expressing his submission to the good hand of God, and much joy'd to pour
out his last blood in that Cause; The pain of his Wound was so great, as they
could not bring him to Dublin, but carried him to Mirian, a house of the Lord
Fitz-Williams where the next day he died, to the great grief of the English,
and the prejudice of the Service. His Lieutenant Colonel Gibson took the
Command of that Party, and the Lieutenant Colonel Gibson pursues the Design,
and took Carrickmain.
great Guns being come, within the space of very few hours, made a breach
sufficient for the Soldiers to enter, who, being mightily enraged with the
loss of their most beloved Colonel, entered with great fury putting all to the
Sword, sparing neither Man, Woman, or Child. The first Officer that led them on
in the breach, was Robert Hammond, (Brother to Doctor Hammond, that famous and
excellent Divine) Ensign to Sir Simon Harcourt, who carried himself very
gallantly in this Service, and from thence returned into England, where (in the
ensuing War, by the several exploits he performed in the Reduction of the West
of England, under the Command of the Parliament) he attained unto a very great
Reputation, and one of the chief Commanders in their Army; And at the King's
coming to the Isle of Wight, was Governor of Carisbrook Castle, and of the
Isle, and (upon his notice to the Parliament that the King was arrived there)
had Command to attend May in his Hist. 8. p. 174.
his Majesty with Respect and Honor, with a promise that nothing should be
wanting to defray the Kings expenses, in which service (a ticklish task at that
time) I do not find that he forfeited his trust, or otherwise demeaned himself,
then was well accepted.

At the time that Sir Simon Harcourt went forth, the Lords Justices and
Council, finding what ill Instruments the Priests continued to be, in kindling
and fomenting the Rebellion, caused as many of them as were in Town to be
seized on, who being put into French bottoms, were shipped into France.

By this time the intended preparations to march forth, under the Lieutenant
General (the Earl of Ormond) were ready; The Design was to relieve several
Places of strength, some besieged, others much distressed by their wants and
necessities, but which way the Army was The Marquess of Ormonds Expedition.
to march, or what Place they were first to go to, was kept as a secret;
However the Army, Saturday the second of April, 1642. marched from Dublin
toward the Naas, with 8000 Foot, and 500 Horse, arriving at Athy, the 5th.
being 27 miles from Dublin; from whence they sent out several Parties to
relieve Carlow, Marryburrough, Balinokill, the Burr, Caterlagh, Clogh-grevan,
Ballylivan, and several other Castles and Towns then in distress, which they
did without much opposition, releasing many Women, Children, and other
unprofitable People, much incommoding those Places; Sir Patrick Weams, Captain
of the Lieutenant Generals Troop, Captain Armstrong, Captain Yarner, Captain
Harman, Captain Schout, Colonel Crafford, Sir Richard Greenvile, Sir Thomas
Lucas, and Sir Charles Coote, in their several Commands, doing excellent
service in their Relief of these Castles, and strong Holds; The last passing
with no little danger through Mountrath Woods (whence Sir Charles Coote's Heir
had his title worthy his, and his Fathers merits) to Marryburrough, a Place of
great consequence, seated amongst ill Neighbors.

Whilst these things were acting, the Rebels having gathered their Forces from
Wickloe, Wexford, Caterlagh, Kildare, Queen's County, Kilkenny, Tipperary, and
West-Meath, on Easter Sunday, the 10th. of April, they displayed 40 Colors,
within two miles of Athy, near the Barrow, (of which Colonel Crafford gave
speedy intelligence) under the Command of the Lord Viscount Mountgarret, the
Lieutenant General's great Uncle, making of the old English and Irish near
10000 men, Horse and Foot; which the Lieutenant General perceiving, on the
other side of the River of the Barrow, to have sent out some Horse near
Tankardstown, over against Grangemellain; His Lordship returned to Athy, giving
out he would fight them the next day; but their numbers vastly exceeding his,
and he, having done the service he went out for, thought it as honorable to
retire to Dublin, in the face of them, with Sir John Bowen, Fitz-Girrald of
Timoga, Richard Grace of Marryburrough, and Captain Crosby, Prisoners. But when
they came to Black-hale-heath, between The Battle of Kilrush.
Kilrush and Rathmore, about 20 miles from Dublin, the Army of the Rebels drew
up in a place of advantage, to hinder the passage of the English Army, having
two great Ditches on each Wing, so high that we could see no more then the
heads of their Pikes, and with such a hill before, (betwixt them and us) that
we could scarce see their Colors, the wind also on their backs, and a great
Bog a mile behind them. However the Lieutenant General called a Council under a
thorn hedge, (being loath to venture so gallant an Army on such disadvantages)
but the English Commanders were all of opinion, they should be fought with,
numbers making no difference, where the Cause was so good: in as much as Sir
Charles Coote told them in few words, that he discerned fear in the Rebels
faces, as well as Guilt in their Persons, and that he thought they would hardly
stay, till his Lordship had put his men in order for the battle, and therefore
desired they might have presently Command to fall on, which indeed he was ever
ready to obey before the Word was given, neither the matter nor the time now
admitting of debate. Whereupon, Friday the 15th. of April, about 7 in the
morning, the English Army marching, as if they would force their way to Dublin,
leaving in and about Athy, Captain Erasmus Burrows, Captain Grimes, Captain
Thomas Welden, and the two Captain Piggots, with their Companies, 300 whereof
was part of our Army, which made ever now and then (as the Enemy halted) an
halt, and resolving to fight the Enemy, drew up in that sort as did best agree
with the Ground; Sir Charles Coote (who commanded in chief under his Lordship)
had the ordering of the Foot; Sir Thomas Lucas of the right Wing of Horse, and
Sir Richard Greenvile of the left; The Lieutenant General having many Gentlemen
with him, (who voluntarily followed him in that expedition) put them all in a
Troop, under the Command of Major Ogle, a Reformade, (a worthy Person) and
himself in the midst of the first rank of them, and so attended the Encounter;
the Ordnance first began to play, but without much effect; The Rebels Army led
by Mountgarret, Purcel Baron of Loghmo, Hugh-mac Phelim Birn, Lieutenant of the
Leimster Forces, Colonel Tool, Sir Morgan Cavenagh, Colonel Morris Cavenagh,
Arthur Caanaugh, Colonel Bagnall, the Lord Dunboyne, Colonel Roger Moore, was
drawn up (as I have said) in a place of great advantage, upon the top of a
hill, where there were but too narrow passages to come at them; yet our forlorn
Hope (commanded by Captain Rochford) consisting of 150 Musketeers, making up
the hill fiercely, discharged upon the Rebels, and was seconded by Captain
Sandford, with his Firelocks, Sir Charles Coote leading up the rest of the
Foot with great celerity; Colonel Crafford in the Van, and Sergeant Major
Pigot, excellently well discharging their Commands. But before these could come
near them, our Horse both under Sir Thomas Lucas, and Sir Richard Greenvile,
(one charging at one of the passages, the other at the other) fell in upon
them, who would not stand the first shock, but fled presently, taking their
flight to a great Bog not far from them, (a Sanctuary which the Irish in all
their flights, choose commonly to provide for themselves, and seldom fail to
make use of it) and so the English gained this Victory without any considerable
loss, or much hazard; whilst a body of 2000 Rebels, led by the Lord Viscount
Mountgarret, and General Hugh Birn, wheeling about, thought to possess
themselves of our Ordnance, Carriage, and Ammunition, which my Lord of Ormond
perceiving, drew out one of his Divisions to attend that great Body, and with
them and some Voluntier Horse, to the number of 30. which were then with his
Lordship, (the rest following the execution) he faced that Body, and within a
short time put them to rout: there were not above 600. some write 300, of the
Irish slain, amongst which, there was the Lord of Dunboyn's Brothers, the Lord
of Ikernis Sons, and Colonel Cavenagh's Heads, brought by the Soldiers to the
Lieutenant General. The Enemy lost twenty Colors, many Drums, all their Powder
and Ammunition, the Lord Mountgarrets Wain, drawn by 8 Oxen, where all his
Provision was, his Sumpture, and the Lord of Ikernis Sumpture. Colonel Monk,
who (by the quick flight of the Irish) was prevented from doing that service in
the field he intended, followed with a Party of his Regiment, to the Bog which
the Rebels had taken, which looked even black, (for their Apparel was generally
black) being all covered over with them, and there began to fall upon them, as
resolving upon a severe execution; But he was commanded to retire, having got
Honor enough that day, and so the Army marched off the field confusedly,
whereas that Victory (how just soever) is ill gloried in, which is the loss of
Subjects. The Van of our Army lay that night at old Connel, the rest on the
Corrough of Kildare, all in open field; arriving at Dublin the 17th. of April,
where they were received by the Lords Justices and Council, with all imaginable
demonstrations of Joy and Honor; The Lieutenant-General's behavior being
presented to the King and Parliament, with the greatest advantage to his
Person, as the business would afford: in as much as the Parliament voted 500 l.
to be bestowed in a Jewel, and to be sent him, as an honorable mark of the
high esteem they had of him, for that days service, which was accordingly done,
and brought to his Lordship, with a Letter of thanks from them, though I do not
hear that he did ever place the Jewel or Letter in his Archive; Notwithstanding
we find his Majesty takes notice, that he was the Person very well approved of
by the two* Houses of Parliament, so as the War of Ireland was still managed by
his Care, and the future Concerns thereof entrusted to his vigilance, as the
condition of his Majesty's Affairs there, should be thought important: though
it was not long before the Parliament entertained some jealousies, to the
prejudice of his service against the Rebels, which (in reference to what was
committed to his charge*) never altered his Principles or Integrity.

In Connaght generally, the English Garrisons excellently well bestirred Some
Transactions in Connaght.
themselves, to the relief of their own, and neighbors streights; wherein Sir
Charles Coot Junior, moved with much vigor and Integrity, often infesting the
Rebels from Castle-Coot; he had frequent intelligence from the Marquess of
Clanrickard's own hand (not daring to trust another, lest he might be betrayed)
who being Governor of the County of Galloway, had Loghreogh and Portumna, his
proper Inheritance to reside in, to which the English resorted with much
security, and were indeed by him relieved with great Hospitality, to an
incredible charge of his own Purse, hanging many (though of his own kindred)
whom he found imbrued in Blood, greatly resenting the Barbarism and Inhumanity
of the Irish; In as much as Hubert Boy Bourk, and Sir Ulick Bourk, his near
Relations, preying on the English, he often frustrated by discovering, their
Designs, and furnishing Sir Charles Coot from time to time, with supplies of
Arms and Ammunition, to oppose them, and impoverish their Country: So that at
last by the advice of Colonel Walsh and others, they erected a standing Camp
near the Kreggs, to molest and pen up our Garrison of Castle-Coot, which being
almost completed, the Garrison issued out upon them, who received us with a
good volly of Shot, which ours answered not, (according to command) till we
came close to them; which being done with great resolution, their hearts failed
them, and they betook themselves to the next Bog, which being at some distance,
gave our Horse and Foot a fair opportunity to hew them down, before they could
reach it; in which service Major Walsh behaved himself well, with Courage and
Rhetoric, endeavoring to make the Rebels stand, but in vain, he at length
being forced to take the Bog for his own refuge, leaving in the Camp, Bread,
Arms, Powder, Corn, Meal, etc. in great quantity, which being more then we
could carry away, we were forced to burn. In the Spring following, Sir Charles
Coot being informed of a good Prey of Cattle in the Barony of Athlone, toward
Balniaslo, in the O Mores Country, he (with his Forces) adventured thither, got
some Cattle, great quantity of Cloth, and other necessaries, killing many of
their Soldiers in their beds; though in his return he was fought with by the
Rebels, sculking in in-accessible Places, from whence he at last got free, with
no small hazard to his Person, and loss to the Enemy; Major Sumner in this (as
in the whole Siege of Castle-Coot, and other places in Connaght) doing
excellent service, as Councellor, Engineer, and Soldier, worthily keeping his
promise with one Kelly, a Gentleman of good Quality, and a kin to the Earl of
Clanrikard, whom, begging his life, he saved, ransoming himself afterward for
10. l. in money, ten barrels of Wheat, and as much Salt, which at the following
Siege of Castle-Coot, proved of great value, being sold then at 2s. a Quart.
After which in Easter week 1642. Sir Charles Coot attempted to relieve Athlone,
and (after some small dispute) did it, though the access to the Place was such,
as a few men might have been able to have stopped 1000. he found his greatest
difficulty was to fill up the trenches that the Enemy had made, as his Horse
might have free access, which at last he compassed, relieving the Place with
what Cattle and other Provisions he got in his Expedition, not being a little
startled, that by such a Troop as the President there had, and other
Conveniences, no more should have been before attempted. Nor had Roscommon,
Tulsk, Elphin, Knockvicar, Abbeyboyle, Belanfad, Persons less active in their
defense, even from the first surprizals of the Rebels, acting to amazement,
when nothing but their own courage secured their Forts; though the last, for
want of Water, was compelled (after a long siege) to yield to the Rebels, after
that the Governor's two Brothers, (the Kings from Boil) with Sir Charles
Coot, had resolved to have relieved him; but at Carickdrumroosk, Sir Charles
Coot having intelligence that his own Castle was assaulted, he was forced The
Lord Lisle lands at Dublin.
to retire back, and very happily prevented that Design in the nick of
execution, though thereby the other Design was frustrated.

The 30th. of April, the Lords Justices and Council appointed a Fast to be
observed monthly upon each Friday before the Sacrament, to continue until
Declaration were made to the contrary, for the wonderful discovery of the late
Plot against the State and true Religion, as for the happy and prosperous
success which God in his mercy had given his Majesty's Forces against the
Rebels, and for the avoiding Gods just indignation for the future.

Upon the return of our Forces from the Battle of Kilrush, within few days,
Philip Sidney, Lord Viscount Lisle, eldest Son to the Earl of Leicester, Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, landed at Dublin, (his Regiment having arrived before.)
He was a Member of the House of Commons in England, and by them recommended to
his Father, to be made Lieutenant General of the Horse in Ireland, though very
young. As Soon as he landed (being desirous to put himself upon action,) he
undertook the relieving of the Lady of Offalia This Lady Offalia was the only
Daughter of Gerald, eldest Son of Gerald, Earl of Kildare, (who died before his
Father, Brother of Thomas, beheaded the 28. of H. 8.) She was Entitled Lady
Offalia, by the special Favor of King James, in an Award betwixt her and
George, late Earl of Kildare, else she could not have had that Title, properly
belonging to the eldest Son of the Earls of Kildare.
; (Relict of Sir Robert Digby) who (upon the most insolent Menaces of the
Rebels,) had returned a noble answer, seconding that (though then very aged)
with an unparalled and gallant defense, besieged in her Castle of Gheshell in
the Kings-County, by a numerous company of Rebels, in a place of most difficult
access, by reason of the Bogs and Woods which encompassed it on every side. The
Rebels Letter to the Lady Offalia, at Gheshel.
Honorable,
WE his Majesty's loyal Subjects, being at present employed in his Highnesses
Service, for the taking of this your Castle, you are therefore to deliver unto
us free possession of your said Castle, promising faithfully, that your
Ladyship, together with the rest in the said Castle restant, shall have a
reasonable Composition; otherwise upon the not yielding of the Castle, we do
assure you, that we will burn the whole Town, kill all the Protestants, and
spare neither Man, Woman, nor Child, upon taking the Castle: Consider (Madam)
of this our offer, and impute not the blame of your own folly unto us, think
not that here we brag; Your Ladyship upon submissiion shall have a safe Convoy
to secure you from the hands of your Enemies, and to lead you where you please.
A speedy Reply is desired with all expedition, and thus we surcease.

Henry Dempsy.
Charles Dempsy.
Andr. Fitz. Patrick.
Con. Dempsy.
Phelim Dempsy.
John Vicars.
James Mac Donnel.
Superscrib'd, To the Honorable and thrice Virtuous Lady, the Lady Digby:
These Give.

The Lady Offalia her Answer to the Rebels. Superscrib'd, For her Cousin Henry
Dempsy, and the Rest.
I Received your Letter, wherein you threaten to sack this my Castle, by his
Majesty's Authority. I am and ever have been a loyal Subject, and a good
Neighbor amongst you, and therefore cannot but wonder at such an Assault. I
thank you for your offer of a Convoy, wherein I hold little safety; and
therefore my resolution is, that being free from offending his Majesty, or
doing wrong to any of you, I will live and die innocently, and will do my best
to defend my own, leaving the issue to God; and though I have been, and still
am desirous to avoid the shedding of Christian Blood, yet being provoked, your
threats shall no whit dismay me.

Lettice Offalia.




Sir Charles Coot accompanied the Lord Lisle in this Action, which, The Lord
Lisle and Sir Charles Coot relieve the Lady Offalia.
with 120 Foot and 300 Horse, was performed without much difficulty, the Rebels
not daring to attend their Approaches to the Castle in a Body, but made little
skirmishes from the Bogs as they passed along. In their way they took in the
strong Fort of Phillips-Town in Kings-County, which was built upon a Pass in a
Country, almost inaccessible in the former Wars, and kept always by the
English against the Irish; but the Rebels, having by Treachery surprised this,
(as they had done most of the other Places of Ireland) it was now taken from
them by this small Party under the Lord Lisle, with their Pistols and Muskets,
the swiftness of their March, and the illness of the Way, not admitting any
other Artillery, such an Enemy not much needing it.

Being now upon their return to Dublin, understanding that the Lord Gormanston,
and other Lords and Gentlemen of the Pale, had gathered a considerable Force
together about Trym, the Lord Lisle (by the advice They take in Trym.
of Sir Charles Coote) turned his March that way with that small company. When
they came near the Town, they saw those Lords at no great distance from them,
but in such a posture as showed they intended not to fight; and so facing
about, they marched directly into the Town of Trym, which was a Place of very
inconsiderable strength, but pleasantly situated upon the River of the Boyne,
in an open Champion Country, and encompassed with a stone-Wall so old and
ruinous, as afforded (in some places of it) entrance to Horse, over the heaps
of rubbish, that lay instead of the Wall. The Lord Lisle approached with those
Forces to the Town, and Sir Charles Coote finding a place where he could get in
some of his Horse, brought them on, and got them in without opposition, the
Lords of the Pale resolving, of their dis-ability, to keep that Town, (though
they had treble the number of the Assailants) quitted it, and marched out in
some have, while the Lord Lisle's Horse entered in: so as they became Masters
of the Town without the loss of one Man, and finding it a Place of great
advantage, situated in the most plentiful part of the Rebel's Quarters, they
resolved to make a Garrison of it. And for this Reason Sir Charles Coote got
the Lord Lisle to go to the Lords Justices at Dublin, and acquaint them with
the success they had had, and the great benefit which might redound to the
service of the State, if they would think fit to send them down Moneys to
fortify that Place, and a Regiment of Foot to keep it.

The Lord Lisle (willing to improve all Arguments that might secure the present
Affair) took some of his Horse to guard him to Dublin, and soon acquainted
their Lordships with the Concern, pressing the Business with all advantages
imaginable, whilst the Rebels having notice (the day following) of his repair
to Dublin, (no Business being carried so private, as they had not soon
intelligence thereof) gathered all their Forces together, and having near 3000
Men, they came (in the dead of the The Rebels resolve to surprise Sir Charles
Coot in Trym.
Night) to the very Walls of Trym, before they were discerned, thinking to
surprise it. But the Sentinels gave the Alarm, and Sir Charles Coote (who never
used to go to Bed when he was abroad) was the first that took it, and having
his Horse ready, presently mounted, but could not (at the instant) get above 17
Horse with him; with these, however, he goes to the Gates, knowing that
expedition was not only the life of Action, but must (at that time) be the only
means of their preservation. He issued out, and faced the Enemy, very numerous,
making their approaches toward them, some few more Horse re-inforcing his
strength: He charged the first Troop of the Rebels that came toward him,
routing them immediately, and following on, (upon their disorder) charged their
main Body, which presently began to grow loose, which he perceiving, so
vigorously charged in amongst them, as they all betook themselves to flight,
and he (having now more Men come out of the Town) pursued them with great
alacrity, doing singular execution with his own hands. And as he was
encouraging his Men, (bravely to pursue their Sir Charles Coot slain at Trym.
flying Enemy) he was unfortunately shot in the Body (as it was thought) by one
of his own Troopers, whether by design or accident was never known, it being
(for many months after his death) generally reported, and as generally
believed, that He was accidentally slain by one of the flying Rebels, who in
despair turned about and discharged his Musket at him. And this end had this
gallant Gentleman, who began to be so terrible to the Enemy, as his very Name
was formidable to them: His Body was brought to Dublin, and there interred with
great solemnity, floods of English tears accompanying him to his Grave: After
whose death, and Sir Simon Harcourt's, the Fate of the English Interest in
Ireland seemed eclipsed, if not buried; the great Artifice being then (under
several pretenses) to keep the Soldiers within their Garrisons, to consume the
Provisions and Stores they had, or else to lead them forth without any
considerable service till the Battle of Ross.

About the beginning of June, 1642. came over some Regiments, under the Conduct
of Sir Foulk Hunks, and Lieutenant Colonel Kirk, who brought over the Regiment
designed for the Lord Rannelagh; whereupon two Regiments were immediately
dispatched for Connaght, and accompanied thither by the Lord Lieutenant, who in
that Expedition, took by storm, Knocklinch, a strong Castle of Mr. Linches, the
besieged, except Women, (not accepting of Quarter) were put to the sword; and
Trimbleston, a Castle of the Lord Trimbleston's, quitted on the former's
success, as Kymkelf, a fair Castle of the Lord Nettervile's, and diverse other
Castles: And upon his approach toward Athlone, Sir James Dillon (who had
besieged it ever since Christmas) ran away; so that the Lord President, with
about 50 Horse, and some 200 Foot, met the Lieutenant General 5 miles from
Athlone; and after an hour or two's stay in the Field, the Earl of Ormond took
leave of the Lord President, leaving at his departure a Regiment for the
President himself, and another under Sir Michael Earnly, Sir Abraham Shipman,
and Sir Bernard Ashley, and two Troops of Horse, with which Forces the Lord
President might have subdued all Connaght, except Galloway. But he, instead of
employing such brave Men abroad, while the Summer lasted, kept them at home on
short and rotten Commons, whereby most of them were famished, or contracted
mortal Diseases, and were presently so enfeebled, that the tenth Man was hardly
able to march. In the mean time, all almost that had fought against him of his
Neighbors, were received under Contribution, which was never paid, nor
Victuals brought in for his Men, though the Country yet abounded in Corn and
Cattle; so that the Garrison of Castle-Coot, for mere pity, baked Bread, and
sent them many Cart-fulls thereof, bringing away in their empty Carts many of
their sick Men, that they might not perish. And yet at last the General (the
Lord President) was persuaded to draw out his Men to service, besieging Ballagh
Castle, in the midway between Roscommon and Athlone, wherein he made a breach,
and commanded a Party to storm it. The Rebels killed many of our Men that day
by shot, besides what perished by Stones, and other Materials thrown from the
top of the Castle; the Night afterward the Rebels stole to a Bog, not far
distant, through the negligence of our Guards, and left us the Castle. The next
Exploit of my Lord President, was (with the remnant of the two English
Regiments, and what could be spared out of our Garrisons thereabouts) a March
toward Balintober, to which he was provoked by the Enemy, and stimulated on by
his own Party, impatient of further delays. O Conner Dun of Balintober, ever
since his Son was taken, till now, (that is the middle of July, 1642.) had
acted nothing, though the tacit Votes of the Province did seem to own him as
their King, Prince, Roy telel, or what Name of Supremacy in that Province could
be greatest; who seeing that those Forces which were sent from England, to the
Lord President, to subdue that Province, (which at first much frighted the
Rebels) had done nothing of moment, through a supine negligence, if not worse,
and were much less considerable than those Forces which we had before, he began
to awake out of his Ale and Aqua-vitae, and to call in Subjects to help him,
out of all the Parts of Connaght; but above all that came to join with him,
none were more forward, or came in greater numbers, than the County of
Maio-Men, and the rather, because in all the Conflicts of Connaght with the
English, few of that great County came to fight with us. They drew together
1800 or 2000 Foot, and 160 Horse, and more had joined with them, if we had
deferred to visit them. It was therefore adjudged necessary by the Lord
President, Sir Charles Coot, Sir Mich. Earnly, Sir Abraham Shipman, Sir Edw.
Povey, Sir Bernard Ashley, and others of the Council of War, That we should
draw out all the Men, sick or sound, that were able to march, and march to
Balintober. It was a wonder to see with what alacrity and courage, our new-come
English put themselves on this service, even they that were ready to die, (as
diverse of them did on the way) rejoicing that they might expire, doping their
Country the best service they could, as Soldiers, and not as Dogs on a
Dunghill. Our March that day was from* Roscommon, through Molinterim, and over
the Hill of Oran, near Clalby, which is little more than 2 miles from
Balintober; The Battle of Balintober, fought at a Place called now Na Nart, the
midway betwixt Oran and Balintober.
from thence we might see the Enemy coming with all speed to meet us. The Lord
President was of opinion that our Forces should retreat, and commanded it; but
the rest were otherwise resolved, and without his Orders drew on toward the
Rebels, whilst he washed his hands from what evil might accrue. Our Commanders
as they marched, agreed how to order their Men, and on what piece of Ground;
but the Enemy came on so fast, that they could not gain the Ground desired,
which made the Work on our part more difficult, for all the way on that Hill,
till we come near Balintober, is boggy, with great long Heath in all places,
very unfit for Horse-service. However, when the Rebels came near us, Captain
Rob. King with his Troop (well mounted, and well armed with Back and Breast, and
as well disciplined as any in Ireland) was commanded to pass by their Front to
their left Flank, as Sir Charles Coot, and Sir Edw. Povey, with the rest of
their Troops, being before, nearer to the top of that ridge of Ground, were
almost past, that they might make way for our forlorn Hope of Musketeers, to
play in the Front of their great Body of Pikes coming on. Captain Rob. King (an
old Soldier) in executing of this, saw (by the badness of the Ground he
marched on, and by the Rebels haste to come up) that he should not, without
disorder, get by the left Point of this Battalia, gave order to his Men to fire
in flank all at once, when they should be close up with the Point of the
Battalia, over one another's Horses Manes, which was a thing seldom heard of or
practiced, yet was no new thing either to him or his, for he had taught them
this, amongst other Points of War he had long nurtured them in, which they
exactly performed, when he was come within two Pikes lengths of the Enemy, with
their Carbines. At which time our forlorn Hope of Foot being come up, fired
with excellent success on that part of the Front that lay to the right hand; so
that by this unexpected way of firing by the Horse, (timely assisted by the
Foot) the Enemy was soon put into disorder, with the loss of many Men; which
breach Captain King soon apprehending, and finding the Pikes of the fallen Men
to have entangled and galled others, he rushed in with his Horse, and breaking
the left corner of the Battalia, so amazed the Rebels, as they fell into
disorder, who (quitting their Pikes all at once) made a great noise, and began
to run; but before their running, (that was almost as soon as Captain King was
got into their Front) Sir Charles Coot and Sir Edward Povey charged them in the
Flank with their Troops, with which they had kept the upper Ground, on purpose
to encounter with the 160 Horse of the Rebels; and to them was Captain Robert
King drawing to second them, or to fall into the Flank of this Battalia, (which
he had new broken) but the Rebels Horse fled before they were able to come
near, and therefore they had leisure to fall into the Flank of the Foot. This
Battalia of Pikes was supposed to be 1200. They had 1000 Musketeers, which
either by bad way, or staying longer than the other, for to receive Ammunition,
were not come up to begin the Battle, but were within Musket Shot, who also ran
for company. Our men pursued, and killed most of them, but were commanded not
to come too near Balintober, where the Credulous were to believe, some had seen
beyond the Castle another great Body of Men; so as not pursuing this Victory,
we lost the benefit of it. In this Battle there was a young Gentleman on the
Irish side, who very gallantly behaved himself, after that his Party was fled,
getting to the corner of a Ditch, where with his Pike he withstood the
encounter of five Horse that had spent their shot, till an Agantick Soldier of
the English getting within him, slew him. And amongst the dead, one pulling a
Mountero from the head of one, there fell down long Tresses of flaxen hair, who
being further searched, was found a Woman. After this, the President considered
what was to be attempted; and it was resolved to go into the County of
Galloway. But as in all other Designs, many Objections were alleged, and the
Lord President with a few, accompanied with the Marquis of Clanrickard, went to
Galloway, before which the Lord Forbes (Lieutenant General under the Lord
Brook) was come (the 9th. of August, 1642.) to besiege the Town with a Fleet;
and having taken possession of the Abbey near adjoining, landed many of his
Battering Guns. But before he attempted any thing (according to his Commission)
he first advised with the present Governor, (the Lord of Clanrickard)
affectionate to his Majesty's Service. As the Town seemed to be placing his
Majesty's Colors on the top of their Tower, charging Captain Willoughby
(Governor of the Fort) with the breach of Pacification, (an Agreement, it
seems, assented to by the State) though in vindication of himself, he and
Captain Ashley alleged much: Great straits he had been put to, though at
length happily relieved by the Earl of Clanrickard, when he was closely
Beleaguered, together with the Archbishop of Tuam (Richard Boil) and his
Family, besides 36 Ministers, 26 of which served as Soldiers, and did their
Duty. After all, the Lord Forbes being by the Town, the Earl of Clanrickard,
and the President of Connaght (with whom he had had several ineffectual
Conferences) daily delayed in what he endeavored to give Captain Willoughby
satisfaction in, prepared to make his approach to the Town; but not being
strengthened by any supply he could get from the Lord President, or Sir Charles
Coot, and disheartened by Captain Willoughby, in that every House in the Town
was a Fort, he drew off, being persuaded to a Composition to be paid in Money
within two months, which he never got. And at the Lord Presidents return to
Athlone, the Soldiers Mutini'd, both Officers and Soldiers offering to go to
Dublin; but the Common Soldiers being very weak, not able to draw into a
considerable Body, (the Irish Kerns killing all sick and fainty persons, that
could not accompany the Body of the Army) that intent for the present was
deferred; though not long after they returned with Sir Richard Greenvile, whose
seasonable relief, and the Battle of Raconnel, will be mentioned in its due
place. Whilst the Lord Forbes sailed up Limerick River, relieving some Places,
and without much opposition took in Fits-Geralds (the Knight of the Valley, or
Glyn) Castle, furnished with all Utensils and Provisions for a Family.

About the 20th. of June, 700 Foot, and two Troops of Horse, under the Command
of Colonel Gibson, went into Wickloe, where the Rebels not daring to face them,
they got much Prey, burnt many Villages, and returned with success.

The Kings affairs now growing every day more straightened in England than other,
Sir Lewis Kirk at Court withdrew Sir Henry Stradling and Kettleby from guarding
the Irish Coast, whereby presently after there came in both Arms and Ammunition
in great quantities to Wexford; as also several Irish Commanders, as Preston,
Cullen, Plunket, and others, who having been Colonels in France, were readily
entertained there, much to the heartning of the Rebels.

However, in Ulster, the 28th. of June, Sir Robert Stewart and Sir William The
account of some Affairs in the North.
Stewart (Persons deserving excellently well of the State) near Raphoe, got a
considerable Victory over the Rebels under Sir Phelim O-Neal, slaying near 2000
of them, though much inferior in number, Arms, and Ammunition; whilst Monroe
sought them toward the Newry, but had not so good luck to encounter them, as
he had the 23d. of May preceding, when he gave the Irish Committee of the
Parliament of England this account, That with 2000 Foot and 300 Horse, he beat
Owen Mac-Art O-Neal, Sir Phelim O-Neal, and Owen Mac-Art the General's Son,
being all joined together with their Forces, and forced them to return upon
Charlemont: after quitting the Generals house to be spoiled and burnt by them,
with the whole Houses in Louhgall, being the best Plantation in Ulster, and
straightest for defense of the Rebels.

Thus in some places whilst we find the War succeeded, the Lords Justices in
the midst of August, suspecting Preston's Forces should increase, and
(according to the resolution of the Parliament at Kelkenny) should first gain
the Out-Garrisons, and then besiege Dublin, were forced to require the Lord
Conway to come unto their aid with 3000 Foot, and all the Horse he could
procure, to prosecute the War in Leimster: Who returned an Answer, That their
Companies were so weak, they could not draw them together; and that the Rebels
(having then received new Supplies) were strong, and that he was engaged to
meet the Earl of Leven (the Scots General) to encounter Owen O-Neal, with all
the Forces he could See the Article 6. of Aug. 1642. Kings Works, fol. 534.
get. Thus that Province reserved to it self its own strength, not coming in,
as by the Tenth Article with the Parliament of England the Scots were engaged
to.

In Munster the Scene was hot; for the Parliament of England having The Affairs
in Munster.
sent over (as into Leimster) several Regiments of Foot, and some Troops of
Horse unto Sir William St. Ledger, Knight, who (having long served in the
Low Countries with singular reputation) was, some years before the Rebellion,
made Lord President of Munster; a Command he discharged with much vigilance and
courage, in as much as the Enemy now feared no man more: What he did upon the
first breaking out of the Rebellion, (in hope to have stopped its current in that
Province) we have already mentioned, and should have told you, that the State
(to empower him thereunto) admitted him to raise a Regiment of Foot, consisting
of 1000 men, and two Troops of Horse, 60 to each Troop; which afterward
(besides the supplies mentioned) were listed in his Majesty's Musters, with Pay
accordingly. But the Design being general, Munster (at length) was as well
disturbed as the rest of the Kingdom; Cashel, Clonmel, Dungarvan, and Featherd,
with other Places, were all (on an easy summons) soon yielded to the Rebels,
raging through the Country; which the Lord President endeavored to suppress,
as far as those small Forces he had with him would admit, resolving near
Redsheard to have given them Battle, having (at that time) in his company the
Earl of Barrymore, the Lord Dungarvan, the Lord Broghil, Sir Hardress Waller,
Sir Edward Denny, Sergeant Major Searl, Sir John Brown, Captain William
Kingsmil, with 600 Foot, and 300 Horse. But the Rebels on the other side the
Mountain privately avoided them, though four to one; and getting to Cashel,
held there a general Rendezvous; from whence Mountgarret went with his Forces
to Kilmallock, a Town treacherously surrendered to the Rebels (a little before)
on demand, situated on the Frontiers of the County of Limmerick toward Cork,
environed with a strong Wall, which held out Loyally for the Crown all Tyrone's
Wars, though sometimes strongly besieged, and highly distressed. And the 9th.
of February, 1641. he went to Butavant, where the Gentry from all parts
appeared. It is an ancient Town, belonging to the Earl of Barrimore, in the
Barony of Orrory, an old Nest of Abbots, Friars, and Priests. There the General
Mountgarret exercised his greatness with reserved gravity and distance, so as
none, except Sergeant Major Purcel (who had now joined himself with the
Confederates, contrary to the expectation the Lord President had of him) were
admitted to any Command in the Army, more then they had over the Men they
brought with them. However, Mountgarrets Forces infinitely increased, so as the
Lord President (to secure Cork) thought it most convenient to retreat thither,
whilst Mountgarret, the 11th. of February, lodges his Forces in Moyallo,
(brought thither by Mountgarret lodges at Moyallo.
Sergeant Major Walsh) the Inheritance of Captain William Jephson, a Town
containing one Street of near 200 English Houses, thirty whereof were strongly
built and Slated, having at the South-end thereof a very fair and pleasant
House, called, The great Castle, committed to the charge of Arthur Betesworth,
with 200 Men, Arms, and Ammunition convenient, and one Iron Piece of Ordnance,
with two Curriers, whereof they made good use and advantage. And at the
North-end of the Town stood another strong Castle, called, The short Castle,
excellently well afterward defended by Lieutenant Richard Williamson, who,
after many Breaches in the Wall, the best Assaults Sergeant Major Purcel could
make, and the loss of many Men, was given over, though at length yielded out of
necessity, on terms never performed; though the remarkable stoutness of
Lieutenant Williamson was such, as he (finding the Rebels to faulter in what
they had promised) resolutely getting up a Sword, vowed to be the death of
those who should hinder his and his Parties repair to the other Castle, never
yielded by Betesworth; which (being resolutely and on a sudden done) struck
such a fear in the Rebels, as Williamson and his Party were all admitted to go
to the Great Castle with what they had, which The Lord Muskery (contrary to his
promises) takes part with the Rebels.
was not irreparably rifled from them by the Rebels. And shortly after, the
Rebels having some aerie rumors of the Lord Presidents Forces to fall upon
them, Mountgarret marched thence with his Army, the Lord Muskery
(notwithstanding all his fair pretenses to the President) being now come to the
Rebels, which was a great strengthening to that Party, he having a considerable
Estate, and much Money left him by a miserable Father; whilst it may be
thought, the Lord Roch, Mac-Donnogh, and others, (being brought to great
straits) could not worsen, but might advance their Estates by the Rebellion.
Many were much concerned, that A contest (upon Mountgarret's leaving Moyallo)
who should be Chief.
the Lord Mountgarret would go from Moyallo, leaving the Country to be
governed by themselves; a great contest arising amongst them who should be
Chief, Sergeant Major Purcel (Baron of Loghmo) challenging the Generalship of
that Province: But the Heads of the Confederacy meeting at the Lord Muskery's
House, (to avoid contention about Superiority) there resolved, that none of the
Gentry of the County should bear any Office in the Army; but that one Garret
Barry (who had long Barry chosen General; Muskery, etc. styled, The Council of
War.
served under the King of Spain, and was reputed a good Soldier) should be
General, and the Lord Muskery, and some other prime and select Men, should be
called, The Council of War; so that that difference at the present was
composed. And this doughty General mustering up his Forces, hovered about Cork,
without any Attempt worth notice; whilst other parts of the Irish Army visited
Lismore, the Cattle in and about that Place being driven away by Colonel
Richard Butler. The 23d. of February, Mr. Bealing's vain Summons of the Castle
of Lismore.
Richard Bealing summoned the Castle; but the Lord Broghil, whom neither
Promises nor Threats could work any thing upon, told them, That he knew not
what Quarter meant, daring him to the Assault as soon as he would; which He
threatened within half an hour after: But intelligence being brought, that Sir
Charles Vavasor was landed at Youghal with 1000 Men, the Enemy fled to
Dungarvan; and the Lord President determining The Lord President's advance to
Talloe.
to look abroad, advanced with that Regiment, and the Lord Broghil's, and
Captain Courtney's Troop of Horse, toward Talloe, hoping to surprise Colonel
Richard Butler; but being disappointed (Intelligence flying swifter than our
March) he set forward toward Dungarvan, burning the Country as he went, being
in all 2000 Horse and Foot, taking order, that a Piece of Artillery should be
brought him from Cork by Sea; and, having slain many of the Enemy in Talloe, he
burnt the Town, and so went forward to Dungarvan; and coming to it the 3d. of
March, Dungarvan taken by the Lord President.
1641. sent a Summons; but they refusing, (and setting out a Flag of Defiance)
he with his Men violently entered the Town, and upon the 5th of March took the
Castle, giving the Enemy Quarter. He put a Ward of 40 Musketeers into the
Castle, under the Command of Lieutenant Rosington, from whom the Enemy not long
after surpised it. The Lord Broghil, the Lord Barrymore, marching each of them
afterward on several Expeditions, happily succeeded, taking in diverse Castles,
as Tourin the 8th. of March, which the Lord Broghil burnt; and
Bally-Mac-Patrick, standing upon the Black-water, which the Earl of Barrimore
shortly after burnt; meeting now and then with the Enemy, on whom they did good
execution: As did Captain Jephson in the relief of Rathgogan, and taking in of
Balliha; as also in the Encounter, he and Lieutenant Downing had with the Enemy
at his return, where he slew 150 of them: The like success he had in taking in
Ballynageragh, Sir Philip Purcival's Castle. Not long after, Captain Sherlock,
Head of the Waterford Rebels, amounting to 700, endeavoring to take Cappaquin,
guarded by Captain Hugh Crocker with a hundred men, was in the streets killed,
and his Forces routed. The 3d. of July, 1642. the Lord Broghil, with 60 Horse,
and 140 Foot, went to fetch off Sir Richard Osborn from his Castle of
Knockmone, in the County of Waterford, six miles from Lismore, who in his
advance thither, burnt and destroyed the Rebels Quarters, though in his return
toward Lismore, he sent his Scouts to descrie the Enemy, suspecting they
should way-lay them, as indeed they did, setting themselves in Battalia in a
Field near unto Cappaquin, having a little half-Grove at their backs; The
Battle near Cappaquin, the first in Muster well fought and managed.
upon which the English perceived, that there was no way to secure themselves,
but by making their way with the Sword, and therefore put their Men in the best
posture they could, the Enemy playing very hard upon them: upon which the Lord
Broghil resolutely encountered them with his Horse, whilst Captain Stephen
Brodrip led on his Foot in an orderly and well-compacted Body, galling them on
all sides so effectually with his Musketeers, that the Enemies Horse and Foot
were soon put to flight, with the loss of one only man of ours, and at least
200 of theirs, besides two of their best Captains, who died the next day,
though their Horse carried them off then. This was the first pitched Battle
since the Rebellion in Munster; and had the Enemy succeeded, Cappaquin,
Lismore, and some other Places would have been an easy Prey. Not long after,
the Earl of Barrymore took in, upon Quarter, the strong Castle of Cloghleagh
The Earl of Barrymore took in Cloghleagh.
in the County of Cork, the Inheritance of Sir Richard Fleetwood, who admitted
Sir Arthur Hide to keep it, but most treacherously he left it to be surprised
by Condon, whose Ancestors had been formerly the Proprietors of it; (an
insolent Rebel, as his Predecessors were before him.) Afterward the Lod
Dungarvan, and the Lord Broghil, summoning the Ardmore Castle taken in.
Castle of Ardmore, in the County of Waterford, belonging to the Bishop of
Waterford, after some petty boasts to withstand the utmost hazard, it was
yielded the 21 of August, 1642. on Mercy, Women and Children being spared, but
140 Men were put to the Sword: into which Castle they afterward put a Ward.
And here I might give you a Diary of Passages concerning his Majesty's Fort of
Dunganon, the Lord Esmond (an old experienced The Fort of Dunganon.
Soldier) being Governor thereof, to its surrender the 4th. of August, 1642.
to the Rebels, at which time it was yielded up upon Quarter for Life and Goods:
Sergeant Major Flin, accompanied with Captain Cronyne, entering thereupon; Flin
protesting, that he had a Commission for that end, and in taking of it,
resolved to keep it against the Puritans, his Majesty's Enemies; otherwise he
and the rest loved the English, and thereupon settled the Lord Roch in the
possession of the same, and the rest of Mr. Courtney's Estate. To which I might
add the Siege of the Castle Limerick.
of Limerick, Captain George Courtney Constable, from the 15th. of January,
1641. to its surrender to the Rebels the 23 of June, 1642. in which time many
memorable accidents happened, worthy the besieged. As of Bonrattie, under the
Earl of Thomond; Rosmanagher, possessed by Christian Powel; as of Cappagh,
defended by Francis Morton; as of Dromline, kept by Edward Fenner; or should we
particularly take or give you a Diary of the Passages of the Ward of
Michaels-town to the Cessation, and of the Services of Knockmone, Sir Richard
Osborn's Castle. But we are scanted in time, as we should be more, should we
take notice of the Siege of the C. Archerstown.
Castle of Archerstown, in the County of Tipperary, commanded by Henry Peisly
Esquire, from the 1st. of December, 1641. to its surrender to Purcell, Baron of
Loghmo. As also should we insist on the Siege of Rathbarry-Castle, Rathbarry
Castle.
in the County of Cork, Arthur Freek Owner thereof, and Commander in Chief,
from the 14th. of February, 1641, to the 18th. of October following, when Sir
Charles Vavasor Baronet, and Captain Jephson, fetched them off safe to Bandon,
firing the Castle and its Appurtenances. As also the Rebels taking in of the
Castle Dundede, the 14th. of February, 1641. as also Dunowen shortly after. As
also of their taking in Dundede and Dunowen Castle.
of the Castles of Traley, Clare Castle, Clonelowane, and 26 others in the
County of Clare, whose name, with their Governors, would be too tedious to
rehearse. Not to particularize the Siege of the Castle of Asketon, Asketon.
in the Barony of Conello, in the County of Limrick, William Eams Seneschal,
from the midst of November, 1641. to the 14th. of August, 1642. when it was
surrendered (upon Conditions) to Patrick Purcel of Croe, Lieutenant General of
the Rebels. To which we might add the Siege of Castle Matrix, in the Parish of
Raceele, in the Barony and County Castle Matrix.
forementioned, beginning the last of April, 1642. by Morris Herbert the
Younger, and was yielded up to the Rebels in October following. As also the
Castle Loegar, William Weeks and Richard Heart Constables, so Castle of Loegar.
appointed by the Lord President St. Ledger, the 18th. of March, 1641. to its
surrender. And amongst the rest, (omitting many whom we have not time to insist
on) we might particularize the passages of the Siege of the Castle of Kilfinny,
in the County of Limrick, the Lady Dowdall Commandress, and Owner of the
Castle, which after forty weeks resistance, Castle Kilfinny.
(in that time behaving her self, in several Encounters, with more than Amazon
courage, and exemplary conduct) was delivered up to the Rebels, she being
reduced to the uttermost extremities: which particularly to insist upon, would
extend this to a Volume beyond my leisure, though I will not say, the Readers
content, which they (as well as persons interessed in the excellent management
of those and other affairs) must favorably pass over, it being safer (in
general) to name them, than (not particularly) to express their actions,
deserving a History; which the imperfect information (I could hitherto reach
to) rather wounds than illustrates. Yet that from Hercules his Foot, the
success and courage of the English may be drawn, accept of an Abbreviate of Sir
William An Abbreviate of Sir William Cole's Services, in his Fort of Eniskillin.
Cole's Services with his Regiment, consisting of 500 Foot, and one Troop of
Horse, out of his Garrison of Eniskillin, performed in the Counties of
Fermanagh, Tyrone, Monaghan, Cavan, Leytrim, Sligoe, and Donegall, since the
23d. of October, 1641.

Swordmen of the Rebels, killed in several Fights and Skirmishes, that account
has been taken of 2417 Starved and Famished of the Vulgar sort, whose Goods
were seized on by this Regiment 7000 English and Scotch Protestants rescued
from bondage, and relieved by this Regiment 5467 Colors taken from the Rebels
in those Fights 0013 Drums (with some Arms) taken from them 0011 Boats taken
from them in Loghearn and Loghmelvie 0027 Cotts broken and sunk there 0109
Islands taken and cleared in Loghearn 0365 in Loghmelvie 0006 Leather Boats or
Curaghs taken from them by Sea-service at Tellinhead and Loghearn 0010 Boats
gained there by Sea from them by this Regiment 0005 Castles taken from the
Rebels 0004

Viz. The Castle of Newportown, Castle Atkinson, Castle Knockballymore, Castle
Hasset, alias Crewmish.

After this rate the English (in all parts) fought, so as indeed the Rebels (by
the War they had commenced) lost in the general many Men, and much of their
substance, as a Judgment upon their Design and Treachery.

And here we cannot but mention Sir Frederick Hamilton, who had Sir Frederick
Hamilton's Enterprises.
a Garrison of Horse and Foot at Manor Hamilton, in the County of Leytrim in
Connaght, by which he performed frequently excellent service against the
Rebels, never attempting them or their Quarters but with singular success; as
at Sligoe, about the 1st. of July, he entered and burnt the Town, freed many
Protestants, slew in the streets 300 of the Irish, and in his return
encountered Owen O-Rork from Cavan, who besieged his Castle (in the interim)
with 1000 men, which he cleared of the Rebels without any considerable loss to
himself, but much to the Enemy: a Diary of which, even from the 23d. of
October, 1641. to the end of the ensuing year, I have read with much
satisfaction. And had not some differences happened betwixt Sir William Cole
and him (the one not liking a Superior, the other an Equal) their concurrence
might have been more fatal to the Enemy; though, apart, they did what became
worthy men.

We have declared how the excellent management of Affairs in Munster (by the
Lord President and his Assistants) kept all things in some reasonable temper,
(though the English were much despoiled, and driven out of their habitations in
several Places, by their Irish Neighbors) until the Battle of Kilrush before
mentioned: When the Lord Mountgarret, and others of the Rebels Commanders
(having had ill success there) fell back with all the Forces they could make
into Munster, and there wasted the Country with Fire and Sword, making that
Province a seat of the War, coming down even to the very Walls of Cork with
great Forces; not far from whence the Confederates, promising General Garret
The Rebels under Garret Barry beaten before Cork.
Barry, with the consent of his Council of War, (the Lord Muskery and others)
planted his Camp at Rochforts Town, holding thereby Cork (in a manner) besieged
on the North-side; whilst my Lord Roch, the Lord of Ikern, Dunboin, the Baron
of Loghmo, Mr. Richard Butler, with the Tipperary Forces, were drawing down on
the South, till by the valor of those few English then in Town, ( viz. the
Lord Inchiquin, Col. Vavasor, and 400 Musketeers, and 90 Horse) they were
beaten off, with the loss of 200 of their Men, their Tents, and whole Bag and
Baggage being taken. Sir William St. Ledger, Lord President of Munster, vigilant
and faithful.
In the whole Service, Sir William St. Ledger (as long as he had health) was
active with the meanest Officers of the Army, doing many times a private
Soldiers duty, as well as a careful Generals. But finding at length the Rebels
multitudes to increase, and his Men to decay, (even in being victorious) and
the Supplies of Men and Money with Provisions (which he expected out of
England) to come over very slowly, and far short of what the necessities of
that Province required; well understanding too the difference then in England
betwixt his Majesty and the Parliament, and what were the designs of some,
putting fair Glosses on the Rebellion of Ireland, which his Soul apprehended as
one of the most detestable Insurrections of the World: These things so troubled
his Spirit, as being discouraged in the desperate undertakings, necessity, and
the honor of his Nation put him daily upon, so deep an impression fixed in his
mind, as the distemper of his body increasing, he wasted away, and died at his
The Lord President of Munster dies.
house at Downrallie, four miles from Cork, in the County of Cork, 1642. and
was there buried; a little before whose death, he writ (the second of April,
1642.) a most significant Letter to the Lord Lieutenant touching the Affairs of
that Province, and his utter detestation of the Rebels Remonstrance (sent him
after a motion made for a Cessation) which he would have seconded with further
testimony of his aversion to their insolency, as would have tended much to
their dis-encouragement, had he been enabled with any reasonable strength so to
have done.

The Command of the Forces in this Province was, after the death of The Lord
Inchequin chosen in his Place.
Sir William St. Ledger, for the present (by the Lords Justices and Council)
committed to the Lord Inchequin, who had married his Daughter, and (during his
Father in Law's life) had showed himself very forward in several Services
against the Rebels: He was a mere Irishman, of the ancient Family of
O-Brian's, but bred up a Protestant, and one that had given good testimony of
the truth of his Profession, as his hatred and detestation of his Countrey-mens
Rebellion; and having matched into the Lord President's Family, was held the
fittest Person to cast the Command upon, till there were another Lord President
made by the King, or he confirmed by his Majesty in that Province. In the mean
time, the Lord Inchequin takes some opportunity, and having beaten the Rebels
The Lord Inchequin's excellent service at the Battle of Liscarrol.
Forces at the Battle of Liscarrol in the County of Cork, got great reputation
by that action. The Battle was fought on Saturday the 3d. of September, 1642.
in which, on the English Party, was killed Lewis Boil, Lord Viscount
Kynalmeaky, second Son to the late Earl, and Brother to this of Cork, who
behaved himself most nobly in that Expedition, and was buried at Youghall in
his Fathers Tomb. And on the Irish side was slain Captain Oliver Stephenson,
Grandson of him, who in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth had done eminent service
in the Wars against the Earl of Desmond. And afterward the Division increasing
in England, the sending over a new Lord President was neglected; so as the Lord
Inchequin continued in the Government, managing affairs there, sometimes for
the King against the Parliament, sometimes for the Parliament against the King,
as he conceived might bring on the absolute settlement of that Government upon
himself; of whom we shall speak more hereafter.

And now having showed you the effects of the English Courage strangely
revived, and managed against the Rebels; it will be seasonable to acquaint you
by what means the Forces there have been animated to so eminent a Service.

You have already read the generous resolutions of the Parliament in England,
upon the first discovery of the Rebellion, as the encouragement his Majesty
gave them upon his first and second appearance in the House of Lords, after his
return from Scotland. And you have read (if it would have been admitted) how he
would have adventured his Royal Person thither, and have raised 10000 English
Volunteers speedily for that Service, if so the House of Commons would have
declared that they would pay them; which would not be accepted, but instead
thereof, the 24th. of January following, the Town and Castle of Carickfergus
were advised Carickfergus delivered to the Scots.
(by the two Houses) to be given in Command and Keeping to the Scots, 2500 of
which were to be transported thither, and paid by England; so as to be
accountable (according to their Order the 22. of Jan.) to the King and
Parliament, and the Lord General in his Place, for all their actions in that
Service. Which his Majesty was loath to grant, as prejudicial to the Crown of
England, and employing too great trust for Auxiliary Forces. Though at the
importunity of the Parliament, it was so settled at Windsor the 27th. of
January, 1641. But what service the Scots did in those Parts, more than subsist
by English Pay, deserves an enquiry.

It will now be convenient to acquaint you, that after many necessary
Propositions to the King from the Parliament, (passionately affected with the
miseries of Ireland) it was, in the Petition of the House of Commons, December
the first, moved, That his Majesty would be pleased to forbear to alienate any
of the Forfeited or Escheated Lands in Ireland, which shall accrue to the
Crown, by reason of this Rebellion, that out of these, the Crown may be the
better supported, and some satisfaction made to his Subjects of this Kingdom
(England) for the great Expenses they were like to undergo in this War. To
which his Majesty answered, That concerning Ireland, he understood their
desire, of not alienating the forfeited Lands thereof, to proceed from their
much care and love, and likewise that it might be a Resolution very fit for him
to take: But whether it be seasonable to declare resolutions of that nature
before the event of a War be seen, that he much doubted. Howsoever, we cannot
(replied his Majesty) but thank you for this care, and your cheerful Engagement
for the suppression of that Rebellion, upon the speedy effecting whereof, the
Glory of God in the Protestant Profession, the safety of the British there, our
Honor, and that of the Nation so much depends; all the Interests of this
Kingdom being so involved in that business. We cannot but quicken your
affections therein, and shall desire you to frame your Councils, and to give
such Expedition to the Work, as the nature thereof, and the pressures in point
of time require, and whereof you are daily put in mind by the insolences and
increase of the Rebels.

Upon which the Parliament (willing to omit no time, precious in so The Bill of
Loan passed at Westminster.
weighty a Concern) past a Bill of Loan toward the Relief of Ireland,
beginning thus. Whereas (sit hence the beginning of the late Rebellion in
Ireland) diverse cruel Murders and Massacres of the Protestants there have
been, and are daily committed by Popish Rebels in that Kingdom, by occasion
whereof, great multitudes of Godly and Religious People, there inhabiting,
together with their Wives, Children, and Families, for the preservation of
their Lives, have been enforced to forsake their Habitations, Means, and
Livelihood in that Kingdom, and to flee for succor into several parts of his
Majesty's Realm of England, and Dominion of Wales, having nothing left to
depend upon, but the charitable Benevolence of well-disposed Persons.

The Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament taking the same into their
charitable considerations, for the Honor of Almighty God, and the preservation
of the true Protestant Religion and Professors thereof, have resolved presently
themselves to contribute toward the necessities of the said poor distressed
Christians, who being many in number, it is thought expedient, that through all
his Majesty's Realm of England, and Dominion of Wales, a general Collection
should be with all expedition made for that purpose, etc.



Other Expedients (considering the state of the Kingdom at that time) not being
convenient to be urged, the effect of which was incredible, so vast and free a
Sum flowing in thereupon, as nothing but a compassionate sense of the
sufferings of their Brethren, and a duty to their Religion, could ever have
raised so much: Yet that being short of their Exigencies, the State was then
forced to another Act passed for Subscriptions on certain Propositions, for
Lands of the Rebels in Ireland. To which those of the United Provinces of
Holland were also encouraged, by a Declaration of both Houses, the 2d. of Feb.
1642. which is worthy often to be considered; but being long, though
excellently, and with much caution, penned, we shall refer you to the Act it
self, Anno 17. Carol. primi. Immediately upon which Act, diverse Captains,
(entertained for the Irish service) adventured their first 6 Months Pay upon
the Propositions.

Yet before these Propositions could be brought into an Act, (that no time in
so great a Concern might be omitted) both Houses of Parliament joined in a
Letter to the High Sheriffs of England, that they might publish at the ensuing
Lent-Assizes, all the Propositions touching his Majesty's Promise, to pass the
two Millions and half of Acres of Land in Ireland, for an encouragement to such
as should in the interim subscribe: After which, the Act forementioned,
immediately ensued; upon the passing of which Act, these subscribed in the
House of Commons.

Mr. Walter Long, 1200 l. Sir Robert Pie, 1000 l. the 8th. of March, Several
Sums prescribed.
1641. Mr. Samuel Vassal, 1200 l. Sir Samuel Rolls, of Devon, 1000 l. William
Lord Munson, 2400 l. Sir John Harrison, 1200 l. the 19th. of March: Sir William
Brereton, 1000 l. the 21. of March: Sir Edward Aishcough, 600 l. Mr. John and
Mr. Edward Ash, 1200 l. the 24th. of March: Sir Gilbert Pickering, 600 l. the
25th. of March* 1642. Sir John Clotworthy, in Money, 500 l. Sir John
Clotworthy, for his Entertainment, as Colonel in the Irish Wars, 500 l. Mr.
Henry Martin, 1200 l. the 26th. of March: Mr. Arthur Goodwin, 1800 l. Sir
Arthur Haslerigge, of Leicestershire, 1200 l. Mr. Robert Reynolds, 1200 l. Sir
Robert Parkhurst, 1000 l. Sir Thomas Dacres, 600 l. Sir John Pots, 600 l. Sir
Arthur Ingram, 1000 l. Dr. Thomas Eden, 600 l. Mr. Oliver Cromwell, 500 l. Mr.
Nathaniel Fines, 600 l. Mr. John Pym, 600 l. Sir Walter Earl, 600 l. Mr.
Cornelius Holland, 600 l. Sir John Northcot, 450 l. Mr. Roger Matthew, 300 l.
Sir Nathaniel Bernardston, 600 l. Sir William Masham, 600 l. Sir Martin Lomley,
for Martin Lomley Esquire his Son, 1200 l. Mr. Thomas Hoyle, of York, 600 l. Mr.
Anthony Bedingfield, and Mr. William Cage, 700 l. Sir William Allenson, of
York, 600 l. Mr. William Havengham, 600 l. Mr. Harbert Morley, 600 l. Sir
William Morley, 1200 l. Sir John Culpeper, 600 l. Sir Edward Partherick, 600 l.
Richard Shuttleworth Esquire 600 l. Mr. John More, and Mr. William Thomas, 600 l.
Mr. John Lisle, 600 l. Mr. John Blackston, 600 l. Sir Gilbert Gerrard, 2000 l.
Mr. Bulstrod Whitlock, 600 l. Sir Edmond Momford, and Mr. Richard Harman, 600
l. Mr. John Trenchard, 600 l. Mr. John Gurdon, 1000 l. Mr. John Barker, 1000 l.
Mr. William Harrison, 600 l. the 29th. of March: Mr. John Wild, Sergeant at
Law, and Mr. Thomas Lane, 1000 l. Nathaniel Hallows, of Derby, for himself and
others, 1400 l. John Franklin, 600 l. Mr. George Buller, of the County of
Cornwall, 600 l. Sir Henry Mildmay, 600 l. the 1. of April: Mr. Oliver St. John,
600 l. Sir John Wray, 600 l. Sir Thomas Barrington, 1200 l. Mr. Robert Goodwin,
and Mr. John Goodwin, 600 l. the 2. of April: Mr. Denzil Hollis, 1000 l. Mr.
John Crew, 600 l. Sir John Peyton, 600 l. the 4th. of April: Sir William
Plactors, 600 l. Sir William Strickland, 600 l. Sir Thomas Savine, 1000 l.
Alexander and Squire Bence, 600 l. Mr. John Rolls, of Devon, 450 l. Mr. John
Hampden, 1000 l. Mr. William Jesson, 300 l. Sir Edward Baynton, 600 l. Thomas
Lord Wenman, and Mr. Richard Winwood, 1200 l. the 5th. of April: Sir William
Drake, 600 l. Mr. William Spurstow, 600 l. Sir John Welyn, of Godstow, in the
County of Surrey, for himself and others, 1500 l. the 7th. of April: Mr. Miles
Corbet, 200 l. the 9th. of April.

And that this intended Design might proceed, (till the whole made up a
considerable sum) the Gentlemen of the County of Buckingham, freely offered
unto the House of Commons, to lend 6000 l. upon the Act of Contribution for the
Affairs of Ireland, and to pay in the same before the first of May, 1642. which
the House took in very good part, and accepted of, and ordered the 9th. of
April, 1642. that the said 6000 l. should be repaid out of the first Moneys,
that shall be raised in that County, upon the Bill of 400000 l. and that Mr.
Hampden, Mr. Goodwin, Mr. Winwood, and Mr. Whitlock, should return thanks to
the County of Bucks from this House, for their kind offer, and acceptable
service. And it was further ordered and declared by the House of Commons, That
if any other County or Persons shall do the like, it will be kindly accepted of
by them, and that the Moneys so lent shall be repaid them, (with Interest, if
they desire it) out of the Moneys that shall be raised in those Counties where
such Persons inhabit, out of the Bill of 400000 l.

To strengthen which precedent Act for Subscriptions, etc. there was an Act of
Additions, and Explanation of certain Clauses in the former Act; as also an Act
giving further time to Subscribers for Lands in Ireland, with an Advantage of
Irish Measure: By virtue of which great sums were raised, and (in truth) the
Forces of Ireland yet competently well supplied. But his Majesty perceiving a
defect, in the necessary Transportations of what was requisite, he (by the
Advice of his Council) declares In a Declaration to all his loving Subjects, in
Answer to the Remonstrance of the Commons, the 15th. of December. 1641.
, That he hopes, that not only the Loyalty and good Affections of all our
loving Subjects, will concur with us, in the constant preserving a good
understanding between us and our People, but at this time, their own and our
Interest, and compassion of the lamentable condition of our poor Protestant
Subjects in Ireland, will invite them to a fair Intelligence and Unity amongst
themselves; that so we may with one heart, intend the relieving and recovering
of that unhappy Kingdom, where those barbarous Rebels practice such inhumane
and unheard of Outrages, upon our miserable People, that no Christian Ear can
hear without horror, nor Story parallel.

And yet further to dis-burthen his thoughts for Ireland, he was pleased The
King expresses his deep Resentment for Ireland.
to signify to both Houses of Parliament, the 24th. of Feb. 1641. That for
Ireland, in behalf of which his heart bleeds, as he has concurred with all
Propositions made for that Service by his Parliament, so he is resolved to
leave nothing undone for their relief, which shall fall within his possible
power.

And because his Majesty's removal to York from the Parliament, should not
hinder the Supplies for Ireland, he, from Huntingdon, the 15th. of March, 1642.
declares, That he does very earnestly desire, that they will use all possible
industry, in expediting the Business of Ireland, in which they shall find so
cheerful a concurrence by his Majesty, that no inconvenience shall happen to
that Service by his absence, he having all that passion for the reducing of
that Kingdom, which he has expressed in his former Messages, and being unable
by words to manifest more affection to it, than he has endeavored to do by
those Messages, (having likewise done all such Acts, as he has been moved unto
by his Parliament;) therefore if the misfortunes and calamities of his poor
Protestant Subjects shall grow upon them, (though his Majesty shall be deeply
concerned in, and sensible of their sufferings) he shall wash his hands before
all the World, from the least imputation of slackness, in that most necessary
and pious Work.

Thus his Majesty resented that horrid Rebellion, having nothing left further
to express the deep sense he had of the public miseries of his His Majesty's
sense of Ireland, and the Parliament's Return.
Kingdom. Yet the Parliament, who conceived themselves deeply entrusted with
the Concerns of Ireland, (the prosecution of that War being left to them, but
not so as to exclude his Majesty) replied* That they humbly besought his
Majesty to consider, how impossible it is that any Protestation, (though
published in your Majesty's Name) of your tenderness of the miseries of your
Protestant Subjects in Ireland, etc. can give satisfaction to reasonable and
indifferent Men, when at the same time diverse of the Irish Traitors and Rebels,
the known Favorers of them, and Agents for them, are admitted to your
Majesty's Presence with Grace and Favor, and some of them employed in your
Service, and when Clothes, Munition, Horses, and other Necessaries, bought by
your Parliament, and sent for the supply of the Army against the Rebels there,
are violently taken away, some by your Majesty's Command, others by your
Minister's. To which it is replied, That those Clothes, etc. entering into
Coventry, his Majesty had good reason to believe, they would have been disposed
of amongst the Soldiers, who there bore Arms against him; putting the
Parliament besides in mind, That he was so far from diverting any of those
Provisions made for the relief of Ireland, (the thought of whose miserable
condition made his heart bleed) that 3000 Suits of Clothes being found at
Chester, for the Soldiers in Ireland, he commanded that they should be
speedily transported thither, no necessity of his own Army being sufficient to
prevail with him to seize on them.

Thus both the King and Parliament, interessed in the great Concern of Ireland,
were passionately affected with her sad condition, whilst the distractions and
jealousies at home so dis-cemented their Forces, as the Irish Harp hung on the
Willows, and those noble Souls (which even now returned with Laurels) droopt
betwixt the living and the dead.

Affairs standing in this posture, neither of them proved at leisure to
consider, Ireland neglected.
(more than in Declarations) the miserable condition of bleeding Ireland;
inasmuch as they were so far from sending over thither any further supplies of
Men, Money, or Ammunition, how incessantly soever they were moved to it from
the Lords Justices and Council, as the Parliament at that time (finding
themselves under great Necessities for want of Money) ordered the sum of 100000
l. of the Adventurers Money, (then in the hands of the Treasurer, for the
relief of Ireland) to be made The Parliament makes use of part of the Money
collected for Ireland.
use of, for the setting forth their Army, under the Command of the Earl of
Essex, then ready for his March against the King at Nottingham; notwithstanding
a Clause in that memorable Act, That no part of that Money shall be employed to
any other purpose, than the reducing of those Rebels. This raised a great
noise, and highly reflected upon the Parliament, That they (who so heartily on
all occasions, had complained of the King's neglect of his poor Protestants in
Ireland) should now make use of that Money, to raise Arms against him in
England, and so leave the remnant of those suffering Souls in Ireland, to the
Insolences of the Rebels, and their own Forces, Flesh of their Flesh, sent
over with so much Charge, for the suppression of that horrid Rebellion, to
neglect and scorn, for want of a seasonable and just supply. Upon which, his
Majesty, from York, the 30th. of August, 1642. sent a Message to the House of
Commons, requiring them to retract that Order: To palliate which, they alleged
many things against the King; As the denying the Lord Wharton, to go with 5000
Foot, and 500 Horse, for the relief of Munster; the hindering of two Pieces of
Battery, (writ for by the Lords Justices;) the detaining of the Lord
Lieutenant, (the Earl of Leicester) when the Affairs of Ireland were known to
suffer, for want of a Commander in Chief; notwithstanding his Majesty In his
Answer to the Parliament's Petition, the 28th. of April, 1642.
had charged them, that they had detained the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, on
whom (writes he) he relied principally, for the conduct and management of
Affairs there, never regarding his earnestness, formerly pressed, (when he was
thought to be stayed by the Parliament) that he should repair to his Command;
of which, the Earl of Leicester, in a Letter to the Earl of Northumberland, is
not silent, ordered by the Parliament to be printed, the 26th. of September,
1642. To which the Parliament adds, The calling away of Sir Charles Lloyd,
Captain Green, and others, in actual employment against the Rebels, attesting,
that the 100000 l. borrowed of the Subscription-Money for Ireland, they soon
re-paid with advantage, being then forced to make use of it, to prepare a
competent Army for the defense of the King and Kingdom, without any prejudice
to the Affairs of Ireland, whose subsistence depends on the welfare of this. In
Answer to which it was replied, That that Kingdom (were the Money restored) in
the mean time suffered by that Diversion; and that had the Lord Wharton's
Forces been approved of, there was no further security, (that those should have
been sent for Ireland) than other Forces that were raised for that purpose, and
yet employed against his Majesty at Edgehill; the other Exceptions of the
Parliament (in his Majesty's Papers) being also answered, which begot a Reply,
not altogether pertinent in this place to pursue.

However, the Parliaments employing the 100000 l. (contrary to the Interest of
the forementioned Act, in the 17th. year of Car. 1. with his Majesty's full
consent before he left the Parliament,) was the cause that it produced so
little good effect for Ireland; many of the Subscribers taking that occasion
(as others before had done upon his Majesty's motion to go for Ireland) to
withdraw their subscriptions, and others not to pay in their Money, which was
with so much Caution provided for, and guarded with so many advantageous
Circumstances for all the Adventurers, as if it had been carried on, and
seasonably applied, with that Care and Sincerity it ought to have been, it
would in a little time have reduced that whole Kingdom, and have eased that
poor People of many of those Calamities, they have since endured. The want of
which put the Lords Justices and State on many difficulties.

Yet that something might seem to be done, there was an Order of the Commons
House of Parliament, the 3d. of August, 1642. That the Ministers about the City
of London, should be desired to exhort the People, to bestow old Garments and
Apparel, upon the distressed Protestants in Ireland; in reference to which, the
19th. of September following, the Lord Mayor of London ordered, that those
Clothes should be brought to Yorkshire-hall in Blackwel-hall, to be ready for
shipping them for Ireland; and a vast Supply was brought in, Charity never so
much manifested its compassion as in that Cause; which afterward was entrusted
to a Reverend Person, who discharged his trust with singular Prudence and
Integrity; though as to the Army these Clothes never reached or intended.

And now the Rebels finding their Strength much augmented by the unhappy
differences in England, their chief Contrivers of the Conspiracy (the Clergy)
met at Kilkenny, and there Established in a General-Congregation, several
Considerations for their future Government. Appendix 7th.


Upon which Proceedings, and the validity of the 6th. Article of those
Prelate-Dignities, and learned men; the first General-Assembly at Kilkenny,
sat the 10th. of November, 1642. according to what Scobel In his Collection of
Acts and Ordinances of Parliament, fol. 197.
gives us an account of; Though Peter Walsh (one of the Assembly certainly to
be credited) in his second part of the first Treaties of his History, and
vindication of the Loyal Formulary, Fol. 740. The General Assembly at Kilkenny.
As also Mahone in his Disput. Apologet. p. 101.
writes that the first General or National-Assembly of the Confederates, began
at Kilkenny, the 24th. of October, 1642. and continued to the 9th* of January
following, upon which day they were dissolved, having constituted (to succeed
them) the Supreme Council of the Confederate Catholics of Ireland; and that
they might be the better tied together with the Holy bond of Union and Concord
(as is expressed in the thirty third Article of the General Assembly, and the
third of the Congregation;) They framed the ensuing Oath of Association to be
taken by all in that Confederacy. The Preamble to the Oath of Association.
WHereas the Roman Catholics of this Kingdom, have been enforced The Preamble
to the Oath of Association.
to take Arms for the necessary defense and preservation, as well of their
Religion Plotted; and by many foul Practices endeavored to be quite suppressed
by the Puritan Faction, as likewise their Lives, Estates, and Liberties, as
also for the defense and safeguard of his Majesty's Regal Power, just
Prerogatives, Honor, State, and Rights, invaded upon; and for that it is
requisite that there should be an unanimous Consent, and real Union between all
the Catholics of this Realm, to maintain the Premises, and strengthen them
against their Adversaries: It is thought fit by them, that they, and whosoever
shall adhere unto their Party, as a Confederate, should for the better
assurance of their adhering fidelity and constancy to the public Cause, take
the ensuing Oath.

The Oath of Association.
I A. B. do profess, swear and protest, before God, and his Saints, and his The
Oath of Association.
Angels, that I will, during my life, bear true Faith and Allegiance to my
Sovereign Lord Charles, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and
Ireland, and to his Heirs, and lawful Successors; and that I will, to my power,
during my life, defend, uphold, maintain all his and their just Prerogatives,
Estates and Rights, the Power and Privilege of the Parliament of this Realm,
the Fundamental Laws of Ireland, the free exercise of the Roman Catholic Faith
and Religion, throughout this Land, and the Lives, just Liberties, Possessions,
Estates and Rights, of all those that have taken, or shall take this Oath, and
perform the Contents thereof; and that I will obey and ratify all the Orders
and Decrees, made and to be made by the supreme Council, of the Confederate
Catholics of this Kingdom, concerning the said public Cause; and that I will
not seek directly or indirectly, any Pardon or Protection, for any Act done or
to be done, touching this general Cause, without the consent of the major part
of the said Council; and that I will not directly or indirectly do any Act or
Acts, that shall prejudice the said Cause, but will, to the hazard of my Life
and Estate, assist, prosecute and maintain the same.

Moreover, I do further swear, That I will not accept of, or submit unto, any
Peace, made or to be made with the said Confederate Catholics, without the
consent and approbation of the general Assembly of the said Confederate
Catholics. And for the preservation and strengthening of the Association, and
Union of the Kingdom, that upon any Peace or Accommodation, to be made or
concluded with the said Confederate Catholics, as aforesaid, I will, to the
utmost of my power, insist upon, and maintain the ensuing Propositions, until a
Peace, as aforesaid, be made, and the Matters to be agreed upon, in the
Articles of Peace, be established and secured by Parliament.

So help me God, and his holy Gospel.
The Propositions mentioned in the aforesaid Oath.
1. THat the Roman Catholics, both Clergy and Laity, to their several The
Propositions.
Capacities, have free and public Exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion and
Function throughout the Kingdom, in as full luster and splendour, as it was in
the Reign of King Henry the 7th. or any other Catholic King's, his
Predecessors, Kings of England, and Lords of Ireland, either in Ireland or
England.

2. That the secular Clergy of Ireland, ( viz.) Primates, Archbishops, Bishops,
Ordinaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, Prebendaries, and other
Dignitaries, Parsons, Vicars, and all other Pastors of the secular Clergy, and
their respective Successors, shall have and enjoy all and all manner of
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Immunities, in as full and ample manner, as the
Roman Catholics secular Clergy had or enjoyed the same, within this Realm at
any time, during the Reign of the late H. 7. sometimes King of England, and
Lord of Ireland, any Law, Declaration of Law, Statute, Power and Authority
whatsoever, to the contrary notwithstanding.

3. That all Laws and Statutes made since the 20th. year of King H. 8. whereby
any Restraint, Penalty, Mulct, Incapacity or Restriction whatsoever, is or may
be laid upon any of the Roman Catholics, either of the Clergy or of the Laity,
for such the said free Exercise of the Roman Catholic Religion within this
Kingdom, and of their several Functions; Jurisdictions and Privileges, may be
repealed, revoked, and declared void, by one or more Acts of Parliament to be
pas'd therein.

4. That all Primates, Archbishops, Bishops, Ordinaries, Deans, Deans and
Chapters, Archdeacons, Chancellors, Treasures, Chaunters, Provosts, Wardens of
Collegiate Churches, Prebendaries, and other Dignitaries, Parsons, Vicars, and
other Pastors of the Roman Catholic secular Clergy, and their respective
Successors, shall have, hold and enjoy, all the Churches and Church Livings, in
as large and ample manner, as the late Protestant Clergy respectively enjoyed
the same, on the first day of October, in the year of our Lord, 1641. together
with all the Profits, Emoluments, Perquisits, Liberties, and the Rights to
their respective Sees and Churches, belonging as well in all Places, now in the
possession of the Confederate Confederate Catholics, as also in all other
places that shall be recovered by the said Confederate Catholics from the
adverse Party, within this Kingdom, saving to the Roman Catholic Laity their
Rights, according to the Laws of the Land.

And that the Supreme Council (the legitimate issue of the General Assembly)
might look with the better face of Authority, they framed to Their Seal.
themselves a Seal, bearing the mark of a long Cross, on the right side whereof
a Crown, and a Harp on the left, with a Dove above, and a flaming Heart below
the Cross, and round about this Inscription, Pro Deo, pro Rege, and Patria
Hibernia unanimis; with which they sealed their Credentials to Princes, and
under that Seal passed their principal Acts of Sovereignty.



Having now modeled themselves into a separate State, confronting his
Majesty's Royal Government settled in Dublin, ordering in their Supreme Council
at Kilkenny (in the said Province of Leimster) all their Affairs, Civil and
Military, through the whole Kingdom.

As to War, they had their Forces under the Conduct of four well experienced
Generals, (before mentioned) answering the several Provinces of Leimster,
Munster, Connaght, and Ulster. Giving out Letters of Mart, An Example of which,
together with the Authority they assumed, (notwithstanding his Majesty's
Proclamation of the 1st. of January, 1641.) we shall hear give you at large. By
the Supreme Council of the Confederate Catholics of Ireland.
TO all Men, to whom this Present shall come. We the Supreme Council The
Confederates Commission to a Privateer.
of the Confederate Catholics of this Realm, send Greeting. Know ye, That we
have taken into our serious consideration the great and necessary use we have
of Ships of War, for the defense of the Coasts of this Realm, and advancement
and furtherance of Commerce with Foreign Nations, and for opposing his
Majesty's Enemies, who daily hinder and annoy his Majesty's good Subjects of
this Kingdom by Sea, and stop all free Trade in this Realm and abroad; have
therefore constituted and appointed, and do hereby ordain, constitute, and
appoint our well-beloved Friend, Captain Francis Oliver, Native of Flanders,
having received good testimony of his sufficiency and integrity, to be Captain
of the Ship, called, St. Michael the Archangel, of burden 120 Lasts or Tuns,
or thereabouts; hereby giving and granting unto the said Captain, full and
absolute Power, Commission, and Authority, to furnish the said Ship with all
Necessaries, fit for Sea and War; and with the same to cross the Seas, and
take, hinder, and prejudice all such as he shall find or meet of His Majesty's
Enemies, the Enemies of the General Catholic Cause now in hand in this
Kingdom, their Ships and Goods whatsoever, either by Sea or Land, by what means
soever; and the said Shipping or Goods to set to sale, and dispose of as lawful
Prizes, and open Enemies Goods; saving unto his Majesty and his lawful
Officers, and unto all other Person or Persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate,
all Rights, Requisites, and Duties, due or usual, answered out of all Prizes.
And we hereby command all Officers of all our Ports, Harbors, and Havens,
within our Jurisdiction, throughout this Realm, to admit the said Captain
Francis Oliver, and his Companies, Ships, and Goods, from time to time, to pass
and repass, come and go, without molestation or trouble. And that all
Commanders of Forts, and all other Officers of his Majesty's loving Subjects,
to be aiding and assisting unto him in execution, and furtherance of the
Premises whatsoever, and as often as occasion shall require.

And lastly, we pray all Foreign Princes, States, and Potentates, to defend,
protect, assist, and favor the said Captain, his Ships and Goods, when, and as
often as he shall come into their respective Coasts and Harbors.

This our Commission to continue during pleasure. Given at Kilkenny, the last
of December. 1642.

Was signed, Mountgarret, Hugo Armachanus. Gormanston, Johan. Episc.
Clonfertensis. Nic. Plunket, Patr. Darcy, James Cusack, Jeffry Brown.




And as to Civils, they had their Officers of State, Justices of Oyer and
Terminer, and of the Peace, with their Courts of Judicature in several kinds,
and Councils Supreme, County, Provincial, and (on occasion) National; this
being as Parliamentary called their General Assembly.

They had their Negotiations also abroad, and from abroad, and by Envoys,
Agents, and public Ministers, Extraordinary and Resident; they received the
sense of other Princes, and returned their own, being also by those Princes
treated at home, in like manner as if they had been some State absolute, or
more considerable; of which, read the Appendix 8.
Appendix. All the subsequent Acts being derived from the Orders established at
Kilkenny, the 24th. of October, 1642.

By what I have mentioned you may see, how the Rebels endeavored to get credit
abroad, and repute at home, managing their Concerns with so much subtilty, as
having them anvil'd in every Covent: nothing was omitted to mature their
designs, or color what they had now begun with the fairest pretense; whilst
the State in the interim (through the distractions in England daily increasing,
which gave fresh fuel to the Rebels presumption) were so straightened for want of
Supplies, that the Lords Justices having (by all the ways imaginable)
represented (as well to his Majesty as to the Parliament) the miserable
condition they were in; assuring them, that without further Supplies of all
kinds, (the Soldiers being so unruly, as the Lieutenant General, the 23d. of
May, 1642. was forced to publish a sharp Proclamation against their
exorbitancies) it was not possible for them to carry on the War, or to hinder
the Incursions of the Rebels, even into those parts which they had recovered
out of their hands; thought fit to take another course for the present: And
that the Custodiums allotted to the Soldiers.
Forces they had in Ireland might be ready for action, and in the mean time not
wholely unserviceable, they allotted (after no little opposition to the
contrary) to several Captains and other Officers of the Army, such convenient
Houses and Villages, as they had taken from the Rebels, giving them leave to
carry their several Troops and Companies under their Command to Quarter in
them; by which means they freed themselves from the present Charge of providing
Victuals for them, forcing them to live upon the spoils of their Enemies; which
they quickly found the way to do, and made themselves Masters of all the Cattle
and other Substance of those that lived within reasonable distance of them. By
which means, all the considerable Places belonging to the Rebels (within twenty
miles of Dublin) came to be in the hands of the Soldiers, as having them
granted by way of Custodium for the present unto them: an Expedient acceptable
to the Officers, and extremely prejudicial to the Rebels.

The 10th. of June, the Lords Justices and Council finding themselves much
prejudiced by their Protections they had given to many, who under pretext of
laboring at the Plow, had their Weapons hidden near them, to cut off straggling
Soldiers and Protestants, as they passed by them single. The State, to prevent
such inconveniences, withdrew their former Protections by a Proclamation of
that Date. A circumstance much insisted on by the Rebels; but the Reasons of
the State will best appear by their Proclamation, no Protection being ever
violated by the State with their Appendix 9.
privity, or revoked, but on time given.

And now that the State of Ireland might have the less charge upon The Lord
Mac-Guire and Mac-Mahon sent into England.
them, they thought it convenient to send the Lord Mac-Guire and Mac-Mahon into
England; whose Fates I shall here give you a particular account of, though they
suffered not till some years after.

Mac-Guire was one principally designed for the surprizal of the Castle of
Their Trial at Westminster.
Dublin, and the securing or murdering of the Lords Justices and Council, for
which intent he came purposely the day before to Dublin; but the Plot being
that night detected, he fled disguised from his usual Lodgings at one Nevils, a
Surgeon, in Castle-street, and secretly hid himself at one Kerns, a Tailor,
in Cook-street, where he was found in a Cock-loft by Mr. John Woodcock, one of
the Sheriffs of Dublin, standing with his Cloak wrapped about him in an obscure
place; in which posture he was apprehended, and brought before the Lords
Justices and Council, to whom he confessed sufficient to be committed to the
Castle the 23d. of October, about the time he intended to have perpetrated his
Villainy in that Place; from whence, the 12th. of June, 1642. (after several
Examinations had of his Guiltiness) he, with Hugh Oge Mac-Mahon, was sent into
England, where they both continued Prisoners some years in the Tower of London;
whence they made an escape the 18th. of August, 1644. and were retaken the
20th. of October following. Strange! that in such a time they could not secure
their Escape; but vengeance would not suffer them to live. Mac-Mahon, in
Michaelmass-Term, the 18th. of November that Mac-Mahon's Execution.
year, was tried at the Kings-Bench-Bar in Westminster Hall, and shortly after
executed at Tyburn: Whilst the Lord Mac-Guire made such a defense for himself,
as his final Trial was not till the 10th. and 11th. of February, 1644. in*
Hilary-Term, at which time he was brought to the King's Bench, where ( after his
Indictment read for conspiring to disinherit the Kings Majesty, to raise
Sedition, and breed a miserable slaughter amongst the Kings Subjects) he first
moved to have his Peers, (being Baron of Inskillin in Ireland, and forceably
brought to Westminster*) for that none ought to be condemned but by such; in*
pursuance of which, he pleaded the Statute, the 10th. of H. 7. whereby all the
Statutes made in England should from thence-forth be in force in Ireland. Upon
which, the King's Council (Sergeant Roll and Whitfield) beside Pryn and
Nudigate, demurred, and the Defendant joined in the Demurrer. At length, Judge
Bacon declared, that an Irish Baron was triable by a Jury in England, (so the
Lord Gray was tried for Acts done in Ireland) upon which an Order passed the
10th. of February, by the Lords and Commons for his Trial; at which he desired
respite for the summoning of his Witnesses; which, in consideration that his
Lordship had had long time to expect his Trial, and that no Witnesses could say
any thing against what the Witnesses (on the Kings side) could prove, was
denied. Afterward he made a general Challenge against 23 that were Empannel'd
for the first Jury; which peremptory Challenge was accepted, the Law allowing
it: And the Prisoner (for that time) was discharged, with a Command to be
brought again the next day; which was done accordingly. Then he moved, that his
Plea of Peerage might be referred to another Court, or to the Lords; but that
was denied, for that he had put himself on the Country: besides, the Lords and
Commons had ordered his Trial. Then another Jury was named, which his Lordship
accepted against, for that he conceived it not fit, that those who had bought
his Land, should pass upon his Trial. To clear which (after some heats in
arguing betwixt the Kings Council and the Defendant) the Judge consented, that
the Jury should be required upon Oath to answer, whether any of them had any
Adventure, or share of the Rebels Lands in Ireland: Which being answered in the
Negative, the Court proceeded; and he being in several Circumstances (besides
his Confession) found Guilty, the Judge demanded, why Sentence should not pass
against him, his Lordship (amongst other things, too tedious, and of little
concern to mention) desired to know by what Seal the Judge proceeded against
him? Who answered, By the Old, and Order of Parliament. To which the Lord
Mac-Guire replied, That (under favor) he conceived, that the Ordinance of
Parliament for a new Great Seal, made the old invalid. To which the Judge
replied, That he acted by the old Seal, being made a Judge at that time.
Besides, there is nothing (says he) done in this Court by the new Seal; the
Sheriffs are hereby a Charter that comes in from year to year, and there is no
other Seal in order of Execution. After which, the Judge proceeded to Sentence,
which he heard patiently, having doubtless long the Sentence of death in
himself; and The Lord Mac-Guire's end.
accordingly he was Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered, at Tyburn, the 20th. of
February, 1644.

But to return to the State, who, in the manner before mentioned, continued the
Army Quartered in several Custodiums, not being able (by reason of the want of
Money, Provisions, and other necessaries) otherwise to furnish any part of it
out in such manner, as might put them in a posture to undertake any great
Action abroad; some in the interim improving the present necessities to the
advantage of a Design then in the womb.

However we find, that though the Parliament in England wondered (as one in
eminent Place then heard) that the Army in Ireland did little, Yet it was to be
admired (writes he The 20th. of August, 1642.
) they did so much, considering the small means they had to effect so great
things: They did then abound only in sickness, and hurt men, which made the
Regiments and Companies very weak; Moneys came not in at all, and for Clothes
and Shoes few or none: notwithstanding they had hearts manifested by their
works; for no Enemy, but as soon as they looked on them, instead of using their
Arms, exercised their Heels; no Fort or Castle which they offered to keep,
which they ever deserted, or any that they attempted, but yielded to them. In
as much as that Noble Person (which observed this) in some passion could not
but take notice, That if all this were nothing, let it be so esteemed! The
Enemy in the interim having supplies of Men and Arms.

Indeed that Affairs proceeded with no currenter a pace, (this year) many
obstacles contributed thereunto. The Government was in the hands of Two, though
in the main entirely faithful and knowing, yet Causes why Affairs prospered no
better.
vastly differing in their tempers; one being of a sedentary, the other of an
active life; He allied to most of the leading Men of the Council, the other
only prevalent as his Reason and Gallantry, wrought on the generous. Besides,
some had such interest elsewhere, as all was not resented with such integrity
as was meant; That, in the management of Affairs at the Helm, Authority it self
was often Eclipsed; nor could any (who was necessitated to hold the Reins with
others) possibly evade the inconveniences they were then frequently enforced
upon, how well soever they had been versed in the Art of Government; some will
have it, that there was much artifice used to lengthen out the War: For at that
time, whether by the Governors of the City of Dublin's omission, or some other
Fate upon the Army, hard for me to determine, the Rebels on one side came often
to the Gates, giving frequent Alarms, and took away the Cattle from under the
Walls. And in Lowth, the most considerable Garrison was almost destroyed
through those Persons, who (having the Government of the County) protected
their Tenants; nor would those that had Power to force a Supply improve their
interest, being better able to disperse an Enemy, than disoblige a Neighbor.

The Scots General (the Earl of Leven) in the North, who with the recent and
veterate Soldiers made up 20000, did little, desirous rather it seems to keep
themselves safe in Knockfergus, and the Frontiers, than venture much abroad, as
appeared by their repulse at Charlemont, whence they retired with no Honor,
and admitted Dunganon to be re-taken by the Irish, after it had been bravely
recovered by the virtue of an English Gentleman. Indeed the English-Scots, who
joined with the English Regiments, did excellent service; and that the other
failed, may be imputed to the rawness of their Men, the want of Victuals, (of
which they stood in great need) and some hardship they endured, happily not
incident to their tenderness.

Now for Connaght, such was the carriage of some there, that two complete
Regiments, consisting of full 2000 Men, were in six months reduced, through
want, (though the Country thereabouts was stored with all manner of
Provisions, not having been harrass'd by an Enemy) to 600. Upon which, several
Articles were preferred by Persons of Honor, against those, who were charged
with that misfortune, and the business, referred to the Council of War; which
waved their Censure; and the main Parties concerned therein voluntarily
undergoing (afterward) a private Duel, (producing no ill to either Party) no
more was urged thereupon: Though as to the carriage of that business (in
reference to the Soldiers Clothes and Necessaries) it could not easily be wiped
of, nor the deserting of a Government without Orders, where there was more
store of Ammunition, Arms, and other Necessaries, than Soldiers to use them.

However, in August this year, 1642. the Lord Moor, Sir John Borlase jun. and
Colonel Gibson, with 500 Men apiece, went into the Counties of Lowth and Mead,
with two Pieces of Battery, and two Fieldpieces, with which they assaulted the
Castle of Sedan, obstinately defended thirty hours by Captain Flemming, thrice
stormed, who at last fought with them out of the Ruins. At which time the
Lords of the Pale were not so resolute, the Lord Gormanston flying from the
Fort of the Nabar, and the Lord Slane, from the Castle of Newtown, thereby
leaving Lowth and Mead cleared of the Enemy; who finding good heels lost 500
only at Sedan, whilst Captain Burrows, Pigot, and Grimes, with some others,
defeated 800 of the Rebels near Athy, and slew about 200.

And now in respect that the State found great inconveniences by the
Protections, the Commissioners (they had formerly given authority to,) gave,
the State of the Country being now far different from the Condition wherein it
stood, 27 of October, 1641. at the granting of the said Protections; and that
the Rebels of all Degrees and Conditions, had since with hateful and bloody
obstinacy declared their Purpose, to extirpate the British throughout the whole
Kingdom, without hope of reconcilement, other then by the strength of his
Majesty's Forces; They did the 19th. of August, 1642. revoke, repeal, make
void, and annul all such Protections, from and after ten days from the date
thereof, more at large to be seen in the Instrument it self in the Appendix,
carrying weighty reasons for that Act.

The 25th. of August, the Lords, in a Letter to Secretary Nicholas, sent a Copy
of the Rebels Petition, together with the Rebels of the Pales Letter to the
Earl of Ormond, in the answer to which, exceptions were taken, that they had
not sent the Original, and with all took notice, that as his Majesty would be
ready to punish the Rebels, so he would not shut up his mercy against those who
did unfeignedly repent; upon which the Original was sent, and his Majesty's
Pardon begged.

Soon after the Lord Lisle, with the men under his Command, marched The Lord
Lisle's Expedition into Westmeath, etc.
toward the Counties of Westmeath, and Cavan, where they arrived about the
middle of September, having destroyed all where they had passed, without
striking a stroke; the Rebels being (according to their usual Custom) retired
to Places of strength, (confiding more in their Walls then Valor) wherefore
passing into the County of Monaghan, he sat down before Carrickmacross, a
house of the Earl of Essex's, very well Fortified, where the Rebels having
endured the battery of two small Pieces of Cannon for one day, fled away the
next night (the outward Guards of the Besiegers, being remisly attended)
leaving their Provisions of all sorts behind them: The Lord Lisle, after this
success, better much then he could expect, with so small Forces, having put a
Garrison in the Place, returned to Dublin.

About one month after my Lord Lisle's return to Dublin, the State was informed
by the Lord Moore, that Carrickmacross was besieged by near 2000 Rebels, and
that if it were not suddenly relieved, not only the Place would be taken, but
our men lost; whereupon it was resolved to send away presently 1000 Foot, with
some Troops of Horse, under the Command of Sir Henry Tichborn and my Lord
Moore, to raise the Siege; And it fell into debate what should be done with the
Place, and upon a due consideration of all Circumstances, and an impossibility
on our part, to Man and Victual the Place; from hence an Act of Council was
made for the demolishing of the house, and bringing of our men back: before
this was put in execution, Letters came from Captain Vaughan Cap. Vaughan's
Resolution.
from Dundalk, to acquaint the State, that with 100 Foot and 50 Horse, he had
been to see in what state Carrick was; that he found the men well, Victualled
for 14 days, and that the Siege was raised; that there came upon him in his
return 2000 of the Rebels, who charged him, and (as Captain Martin said) shot
near 5000 shot at his men, who thereupon began to be somewhat in disorder, so
as he saw they could not well retire; Whereupon he charged them with his Horse,
routed them, killing 30 or 40 of them, and got some Arms: Yet the resolution
taken to demolish Carick was not altered.

The Summer being thus spent, the Winter apace drew on, and the Provisions of
the County failing, where the Soldiers lay in Garrison in the Custodiums, the
greatest part of them returned to Dublin, where they took up their Quarters, to
the great grievance of the Inhabitants: And now the differences between the
King and his Parliament in England were grown so high, and their preparations
(to encounter one another in a set Battle) so considerable, as upon that fatal
day, the 23. of October, 1642. They came to an Engagement at Edgehill, where
the encounter was so fiercely maintained on both sides, with so much courage
and resolution, (headed by the Earl of Lindsey for the King, and the Earl of
Essex for the Parliament, manfully discharging the parts both of Generals and
Soldiers) as the loss being (in a manner) equal, both reported themselves
Conquerors, but neither were thenceforth in a condition, to administer
sufficient relief, to the distressed Estate of the poor Protestants in Ireland,
whereby the Army (though but lately sent over out of England) was wholly
neglected, which made many of the Commanders take up thoughts of quitting that
service, and repairing to the King at Oxford, having (as it was said) secret
invitations thereunto: which being understood by the Parliament, and finding
that (from the Battle of Kilrush, which was fought in April 1642. till October
following) the Army in Leimster had not been so active, as reasonably might
have been expected. The Parliament to quicken the War, to inform themselves of
the wants and defects of the Army, and of all other things, that might enable
them the better to send thither and dispose of there, such Forces, Moneys,
Ammunition, and necessaries for that service (according to the Statute which
enabled the Lords and Commons in Parliament, from time to time to direct)
thought it very expedient, (though by Secretary Nicholas from his Majesty,
expressly commanded October, 14th.
to the contrary) to send into Ireland a Committy for that purpose (in the
depth of Winter, Members of the House of Commons, Mr. Robert Goodwin, and Mr.
Robert Reynolds, authorized from both Houses, called (by his Majesty In Declar.
22. October. 1642.
) their Ambassadors, to which the Citizens of London joined one Captain Tucker,
who carried with them 20000 l. in ready money, besides 300 Barrels of Powder,
ten Tun of Match, and other Ammunition. They arrived at Dublin the 29th. of
October by long Sea, and upon the 2d. of Goodwin and Reynolds arrive in Ireland.
November, presented them to the State, producing the Ordinance of Parliament,
together with their instructions to be read. The Lords Justices and Council
ordered their Reception with respect, which they improved to the voluntary
putting on of their Hats, sitting behind the Council on a Form; nor could this
their carriage be reproved, though resented, Affairs at that time having
brought on those Exigencies, which their coming could only relieve, during
whose abode there (having Votes only in Military Affairs) they saw that
Parties were continually sent forth to encounter the Rebels, and when there was
a failing either in Money or Provisions, they engaged their own particular
Credits to make up the defect: Yet in respect of their being admitted, as they
were (consequently were thought to be spies on his Majesty's Ministers there)
His Majesty much disliked their Address, and in a Letter (delivered to the
Lords Justices and Council, the 10th. of February,) Ordered their removal,
which was done with much content by the Board, but some regreets to the
Commissioners; who resolved presently to quit Ireland; and to speak truth, it
soon appeared (by the Index of some men's spirits) what hazard they might have
run, should they have been obstinate therein: though many suspected (as it fell
out) their return would certainly slacken the relief of the Protestant Army
against the Irish.

There were three main things principally intended by this Committee, during
their stay in Ireland.

1. They used their utmost endeavors to satisfy the Officers of the Army, of
the great care the Parliament took to provide their Pay, and to send over
money, and in the mean time to furnish the Army with all manner of Provisions
and Ammunitions, that should be thought necessary, for the carrying on the War
against the Rebels.

2. They made a Book, wherein they desired, that all the Officers of the Civil
List, as well as the Army, should subscribe, and declare their free consent,
that some part of their Pay and Arrear, due to them for their service there,
should be satisfied out of the Rebels Lands, when they were declared to be
subdued: Upon which many great sums were underwritten; (but upon information of
his Majesty's dislike thereof) the Commissioners (being sharply threatened)
returned the Book, so that See H^^b. Collect. fol. 248.
most struck out their Names, frustrating thereby a Design, which would
infinitely have obliged others to have subscribed: In reference to which, the
Kings Commissioners at Uxbridge ascertained, That his Majesty never sent any
such Letter, to divert the course of the Officers subscribing, but the
Soldiers were merely discouraged from the same, by discerning that for want of
Supplies, they should not be able to go on with that War.

3. They finding that most of the Officers of the Army had lodged their Troops
and Companies in their Custodiums, which were most of them Places of strength,
enough at least to keep them from being surprised suddenly by the Rebels, and
that there were 7 or 8000 of the Army quartered in Dublin, who consumed all the
Provisions sent over for their supply, lying idle there, and oppressing the
poor English Inhabitants, and such English as had taken sanctuary there; Or
else making but small expeditions abroad, wasting not the Enemy so much as they
did their own Provisions: It was moved therefore, and furthered by this
Committee, that a considerable Force should be sent forth; Whereupon it was
resolved, 4000 men should be sent out to take Ross, or some other Town
thereabouts, where they might Winter, and live in part upon what they could
take from the Enemy; whereupon many difficulties being found in the Design, the
Lord Lisle, General of the Horse, accepted of it, with Colonel Monk, and
others, who made ready to go; the Lieutenant General of the Army, the Earl of
Ormond, being then much indisposed: But as soon as his Lordship recovered, he
came to the Council Board, and there declared, that he could not in Honor
permit such a considerable part of the Army, to go out upon such an important
Service, under any other Command then his own; and so undertook the leading out
of the Army himself, and carried it to Ross, of which you shall hear more in
its due place. The Parliaments Committee They leave Ireland.
embarked for London by long Sea, the 27th. of February, 1642. the difference
of whose Carriage was observable; so much Integrity, Discretion, and Humility
appeared in the one, and so much Pride, Arrogance, and Intemperancy in the
other; as the one went away highly valued, and well esteemed, and the other
extremely hated and despised. As for Tucker, he was the City's property, which
every one improved to their own humor.

During their continuance in repute, hearing that Balanokil was Besieged by
Preston, the most reputed Captain amongst the Rebels, Colonel Monk, was sent
forth with 600 Foot, and two Troops of Horse, the 5th. Colonel Monk relieves
Balanokil.
of December, 1642. to relieve it, which he soon did, the Enemy raising the
Siege upon his reproach; but in his return he met Preston with 3000 men, in a
disadvantagious Place; and though he saw evident danger in so unequal a Fight,
yet he thought there would be more in a Retreat. Wherefore having entrenched
himself, so as to fear no attack but in the Front, he resolved to receive them
bravely; and taking care that his Musketeers should not spend their shot in
vain, he saluted the Rebels, in their approach, with such a shower of Bullets,
as killed the boldest of them, and made the rest begin to give way, which the
English perceiving, came hotly upon them. But the Fight was soon ended, by the
cowardliness of the Irish, who with much more shame than slaughter, losing not
above 60 Men there, betook themselves to the next strong Place, and Colonel
Monk, without the loss of one Man, returned to Dublin.

The Committee of Parliament (whilst they remained at the Council) interposed
in many things: Amongst the rest, it being desired by the Officers of the Army,
that Major Wodowes might repair to his Majesty, to express their service; the
Committee demonstrated, that the Parliament would certainly withdraw their
Supplies, on notice of such an Address: Upon which the Ships were stayed; yet
the Business was so argued, as the Major had license to proceed in his Journey.

And now the Committee being discharged the Council, where the prosecution of
the War was to be managed, the Parliament took it ill, inasmuch as the want of
all things afterward was exceeding great, and the Necessity of all things in
Dublin, upon the withdrawing of the Parliaments Committee.
main part of the remaining Army was quartered within the City and Suburbs of
Dublin, upon the poor Inhabitants, altogether unable to bear the Necessities of
their Families, much less support 7 or 8000 Men. In alleviation of which, the
Lords Justices and Council, the 31st. of December, 1642. published a
Proclamation, That all Custodiums should send to his Majesty's Granaries, or
Stores of Corn, half the Wheat gathered there, at 10 s. the Barrel, in ready
Money, etc. to the Relief of that and the adjoining Garrisons. Yet small
Supplies coming in thereupon, the Lords Justices and Council ordered by another
Proclamation, the 15th. of January, That all Corn-Masters, and others, should
sell their Corn at a lower rate, than was proposed the 28th. of December, 1641.
and that Bakers accordingly should size their Bread.

About the 20th. of January, 1642. Sir Richard Greenvile, with a Sir Richard
Greenvile relieves Athlone* The Battle at Raconnel.
Party of 200 Horse and 1000 Foot, with 600 Suits of Clothes, and Money,
relieved Athlone. In his return, he was encountered at Raconnel by 5000 Rebels,
which he routed, took their General Preston's Son Prisoner, killed many, gained
11 Colors, and surprised many Prisoners; for which service, Captain William
Vaughan was by the Lords Justices (to whom he brought the News) Knighted. The
Irish thought much of this Victory; for that there was an old Prophecy, That
who got the Battle of Raconnel, should conquer all Ireland. The Army returned
to Dublin the 10th. of February, with the remnant of Sir Michael Earnley's
Regiment, and others, who for their better Accommodation, would have had some
of these Clothes, which was denied, and they laid up in the Castle, where (with
others) they afterward proved unserviceable to his Majesty's Forces, much in
want of them in the depth of Winter.

The Lords Justices being driven to great strait, and left without hopes of
Relief from England, and the Inhabitants of Dublin being no longer able to
support the Necessity of their Families, and relieve the Soldiers, their
Insolences being high, the State entertained a Design of sending the greatest
part of the Army (then quartered in Dublin) into some Parts distant from that
City, where they might live upon the Rebels; and for this end, coined their own
Plate, encouraging others to the same Advance The Lords Justices coin Plate
with his Majesty's Stamp.
of the State's service, whereupon (at first) they ordered Pieces of Money
marked to their Weight.

Many brought in freely; those indeed who (considering their employment, and
what was expected from them) had least reason to do it, whilst others issued
only out their Warrants and Receipts, never yet discharged: Yet by the help of
what came in, and some supplies out of England, (which had not wholly deserted
Ireland) the Army marched out 2500 Foot and 500 Horse, under the Command of the
Marquess of Ormond, whose carriage in that Business, and his success at the
Battle of Ross, we shall leave to the Lords Justices and Council's Letter, to
the Speaker of the House of Commons in England, the 4th. of April, 1643. where
(besides the Account of that Battle) they present a true state of their
Affairs, Civil and Military. SIR,
OUr very good Lord, the Marquess of Ormond, having in his March, The Lords
Justices Letter to the Speaker of the House of Commons in England touching
Ross, etc.
in his last Expedition, consulted several times with the Commanders and
Officers of the Army, in a Council of War, and so finding that subsistence
could not be had abroad, for the Men and Horses he had with him, or for any
considerable part of them, it was resolved by them, that his Lordship with
those Forces should return hither, which he did on the 26th. of March.

In his return from Ross, (which in the case our Forces stood, he found
difficult to be taken in, as though our Ordnance made a breach in their Walls,
it was found necessary to desert the Siege) he was encountered by an Army of the
Rebels, consisting of about 6000 Foot and 650 Horse, well armed and horsed; yet
it pleased God so to disappoint their Councels and strength, as with those
small Forces which the Lord Marquess had with him, being of fighting Men 2500.
and 500 Horse, not well armed, and for the most part weakly horsed, (and those,
as well Men as Horse, much weakened, by lying in the Fields several nights in
much Cold and Rain, and by want of Man's Meat and Horse Meat) the Lord Marquess
obtained a happy and glorious deliverance and victory against those Rebels,
wherein were slain about 300 of them, and many of their Commanders, and others
of Quality, and diverse taken Prisoners; and amongst those Prisoners, Colonel
Cullen, a Native of this City, who being a Colonel in France, departed from
thence, and came hither to assist the Rebels, and was Lieutenant General of
their Army, in the Province of Leimster; and the Rebel's Army was totally
routed and defeated, and their Baggage and Ammunition seized on by his
Majesty's Forces, who lodged that night where they had gained the Victory, and
on our side about 20 slain in the Fight, and diverse wounded.

We have great cause to praise God, for magnifying his Goodness and Mercy to
his Majesty, and this his Kingdom, so manifestly, and indeed wonderfully, in
that Victory.

However, the joy (due from us upon so happy an occasion) is, we confess,
mingled with very great distraction here, in the apprehension of our
unhappiness to be such, as although the Rebels are not able to overcome his
Majesty's Army, and devour his other good Subjects, as they desire, yet both
his Army and good Subjects are in danger to be devoured, by the wants of
needful Supplies forth of England: For as we formerly signified thither, Those
Forces were of necessity sent abroad, to try what might be done for sustaining
them in the Country, so as to keep them alive till Supplies should get to us.
But that Design now failing, those our hopes are converted into astonishment,
to behold the unspeakable Miseries of the Officers and Soldiers for want of
all things, and all those wants made the more insupportable in the want of
Food, whilst the City (being all the help we have) is now too apparently found
to be unable to help us, as it has hitherto done. And diverse Commanders and
Officers in the Army, do now so far express the sense of their Sufferings,
(which indeed are very great and grievous) as they declare, That they have
little hope to be supplied by the Parliament, and press with great importunity
to be permitted to depart this Kingdom, as it will be extreme difficult to keep
them here.

By our Letters of the 23d. of March, we signified thither the unsupportable
burden laid on this City, for victualling those of the Army left here, when
the Marquess of Ormond, with the Forces he took with him, marched hence; which
burden is found every day more heavy than other, in regard of the many
Housekeepers thereby daily breaking up House, and scattering their Families,
leaving still fewer to bear the burden. We also by those Letters, and by our
Letters of the 25th. of February, advertised thither the high danger this
Kingdom would incur, if the Army so sent abroad, should by any distress, or
through want, be forced back hither again, before our Relief of Victuals should
arrive forth of England.

When we found that those Men were returning back hither, although we were (and
are still) full of distraction, considering the dismal consequences threatened
thereby in respect of our Wants: Yet we consulted what we could yet imagine
feasible, that we had not formerly done, to gain some Food for those Men; and
found, that to send them or others abroad into the Country we cannot, in
regard we are not able to advance Money* for procuring the many Requisits
incident to such an Expedition. In the end therefore, we were enforced to fix
on our former way, and to see who had yet any thing left him untaken from him,
to help us; and although there were but few such, and some of them poor
Merchants, whom we have now by the Law of Necessity utterly undone, and
disabled from being hereafter helpful to us, in bringing us in Victuals, and
other needful Commodities, yet were we forced to wrest their Commodities from
them. And certainly there are few here of our selves and others, that have not
felt their Parts in the enforced rigor of our Proceedings, toward preserving
the Army; so as what with such hard dealing, not less grievous to us to do,
than it is heavy to others to suffer, and by our descending (against our
hearts) far below the Honor and Dignity of that Power we represent here, under
his Royal Majesty, we have with unspeakable difficulty prevailed, so as to be
able to find Bread for the Soldiers for the space of one Month.

We are now expelling hence all Strangers, and must instantly send away for
England, thousands of poor dispoil'd English, whose very eating is now
unsupportable to this Place.

And now again, and finally, We earnesty desire, (for our Confusions will not
now admit the writing of many more Letters, if any) That his Majesty, and the
English Nation, may not suffer so great, if not irrecoverable, prejudice and
dishonor, as must unavoidably be the consequence of our not being relieved
suddenly; but that yet (although it be even now at the point to be too late)
Supplies of Victuals and Munition in present to be hastened hither, to keep life
until the rest may follow, there being no Victual in the Store, nor will there
be a 100 Barrels of Powder left in store, when the out-Garrisons (as they must
be instantly) are supplied, and that remainder, according to the usual
necessary expense, besides extraordinary accidents, will not last above a
month. And the residue of our Provisions must also come speedily after, or
otherwise England cannot hope to secure Ireland, or secure themselves against
Ireland, but in the loss of it, must look for such Enemies from hence, as will
perpetually disturb the Peace of his Majesty, and his Kingdom of England, and
annoy them by Sea and Land, as we often formerly represented thither; which
Mischiefs may yet be prevented, if we be yet forthwith enabled from thence with
means to overcome this Rebellion.

We hope that a course is taken there, for hastening thither the Provisions of
Arms and Munition, mentioned in the Docquet, sent in our Letter of the 20th. of
January, and the 600 Horses, which we then moved might be sent hither for
recruits, and that the 7893 l. 3 s. for Arms to be provided in Holland,
(besides those we expect in London) has been paid to Anthony Tierens in
London, or to Daniel Wibrants in Amsterdam; and if that Sum had been paid, as
we at first desired, we might well have had those Provisions arrived here by
the 10th. of March, as we agreed. However, we now desire, that that Money, if
it be not already paid, may be yet paid to Mr. Anthony Tierens in London, or
Mr. Wibrants in Amsterdam, that so those Provisions may arrive here speedily,
which (considering that Summer is now near at hand) will be very necessary,
that when our Supplies of Victuals, Munition, Clothes, Money, and other
Provisions, shall arrive, we may not, in the public Service, here lose the
benefit and advantage of that Season. And so we remain.

From his Majesty's Castle of Dublin, the 4th. of April, 1643.



This Letter, as you see, was writ some weeks after the Battle of Ross; The
Marquess of Ormond's Expedition against Ross.
however, in brief, it gives you a faithful Account: Yet that a more particular
one may also be committed to Posterity, accept of the following, from the Pen
of a chief Officer in that Expedition.

March the 2d. 1642. the English Army marched forth from Dublin toward
Kilkenny, consisting of about 2500 Foot and 500 Horse, together with two Pieces
of Battery, and four small brass Pieces, the Marquess of Ormond being
Lieutenant General of the Army, and my Lord Lisle General of the Horse.

The 3d. the Army being come nigh Castlemartin, the Rebels then possessing it,
gave it up to the Lieutenant General, upon his promise of fair Quarter, which
they accordingly had, to march away thence with the safety of their Lives, they
being in number above 400 Men and Women; and the same day 3 Divisions of Foot
were sent to Kildare, and a Castle called Tully, which the Rebels then quitted,
and left unto us.

The 4th. the Army came to Tymolin, where finding two Castles possessed by some
Rebels, our Cannon compelled them to submit to mercy, very few of them escaping
with their Lives, there being about 100 of them slain; and also of the English
Army was slain Lieutenant Oliver, and about 12 Soldiers.

The 11th. my Lord Lisle marched from the Army at Temple-soul before day
toward Ross, having with him Sir Richard Greenvile, Sir Thomas Lucas, and
about 400 Horse, and also Sir Foulk Huncks, with about 600 Foot. Being come
within two miles of Ross, our Horse took 4 Horsemen of the Rebels, Prisoners,
who informed us, that the Army of the Rebels lay then about 3 miles distant
thence, being near 4000 Men. Shortly after my Lord Lisle came before the Town
of Ross, and by a Trumpeter he sent to the Town, to have some one of Quality
therein to come to treat with him, concerning the surrender of the same to the
King's use, which they refused to do. Then Sir Thomas Lucas, fearing the safety
of the Army, (by reason he understood that the Rebel's Army lay the last night
within 2 miles of the English Army) importuned my Lord Lisle to march back with
all his Horse, to secure the Army, leaving Sir Foulk Hunks with his Division of
Foot, to guard a Pass in that way. And then after a few miles riding further,
the English Army appeared at hand, which marched on toward Ross, nigh before
which that night a great part of our Horse and Foot lodged. And the next
morning our Cannon were drawn and planted against the Town, and continued
battering with two Pieces, on a part of the Town-Walls, about two days
together, which made a fair breach therein, which Sir Foulk Huncks undertook to
assault with his Men, and attempted it, but were beaten back with some loss,
which so much dis-heartned the Soldiers, that they would not be drawn on
again; and finding that the besieged had both daily and nightly very many Men,
and much Ammunition, and other Recruits, conveyed by Boats into the Town, and
understanding that the Rebel's Army was grown very strong within few miles of
ours, and our Lieutenant General finding Bread to be grown scarce in our Army,
resolved to leave Ross as it was, and gain Honor by a Battle with the Irish.

The 18th. our Army being marched away, about 2 miles distant from Ross, the
Irish Army appeared fairly in view, who hastened their Forces into Battalia, on
a Ground of some advantage, nigh the way our Army was to pass. Whereupon our
Commanders endeavored with all diligence to draw their Forces into Battalia,
to confront the Rebels within the distance of Cannon-shot, our Cannon being
placed at the Front of our Infantry, which was winged by our Horse-Troops, and
advanced forwards before our Army, within Musket Shot of the Enemy's
fore-Troops; Sir Richard Ross Battle.
Greenvile (having that day the Vauntguard of the Horse) had his Division for
the right Wing of the Army; likewise my Lord Lisle's Division (having the
Battle) had the left Wing of the Army; Sir Thomas Luca's Division (having the
Rearguard of the Horse) had the one half of his Division, appointed to stand
for Reserves for both the Wings of Horse. Both Armies being ordered against one
another, Sir Richard Greenvile sent forth toward the Rebels a forelorn Hope of
60 Horse, commanded by Lieutenant White, which advancing toward 2 Troops of
the Rebels, they seemed to shrink from. Then (our Cannon beginning to play)
Captain Atkins, commanding a forelorn Hope of about 100 Musketeers, marched
forwards directly before our Foot-Army toward the Rebels, who had manned a
Ditch in a Highway, lying right before their Army, with a great number of
Musketeers; during which time, certain other Divisions of the English Foot
followed orderly their forelorn Hope, Captain Atkins with his shot excellently
performing his part, by exchanging shot with the Rebels that lay in ambush. Sir
Richard Greenvile, with his Division on the right Wing, advanced to begin the
Battle; in the interim whereof, Sir Thomas Lucas (being Major General of the
Horse) came and took upon him the chief Command thereof; and so leading those
Troops on toward the Enemy, being come past a deep Highway, that lay between
both Armies, presently (at hand) advanced toward those Horse, a Division of
Horse and Foot of the Rebels. Sir Richard Greenvile being then in the head of
his own Troop, (which had the right hand of that Division) commanded his Men to
keep together and charge home without wheeling; which was no sooner spoken, but
immediately Sir Thomas Lucas called aloud to our Troop, to wheel to the left
hand, which they presently performing, were gotten into a Lane in some
disorder, and before they could get out of the same, and come into any good
order again, a Troop of above 100 of the Rebel's Horse, all Gentlemen of
Quality, and Commanders, led by Cullen, their Lieutenant General, charged our
Horse on the left Flank. Whereupon Sir Richard Greenvile encouraged several of
his Troops, by his example, to charge the Enemy, where meeting with Colonel
Cullen in the head of his Troops, diverse blows passed betwixt them; mean while
my Lord Lisle with his Troops, gallantly charged Cullen's Troop, on his Flank
and Rear, whereby they were so routed, that the Troops were all intermixed one
with another, and the execution of both Parties continued violent, until about
20 of the Rebel's Horse escaped away together, leaving the rest of their
Company to be killed and taken Prisoners, (as they were;) during which time,
the Foot and Cannon performing well their parts, drove the Enemy to shift away
to save themselves, which Captain Hermon seeing, pursued their Rear with some
Horse, with which he did notable good execution; and, to say the truth, it is
probable that most of the Rebels had that day been cut off, had not the
un-passable deep Highway betwixt both Armies, hindered our left Wing of Horse
from giving on upon their side, and also the disorder that happened to the right
Wing of the Horse, by their unhappy wheeling to the left hand. But so soon as
the Officers of those Troops could reduce their Men again into order, my Lord
Lisle and Sir Richard Greenvile presently pursued the Enemy with 2 Troops, and
sent Sir William Vaughan with 2 Troops more to pursue others, flying away to
the right hand. And having followed the chase of them about 2 or 3 miles
distant from the Army, (the Rebels having made their escape over Bogs, and
un-passable Grounds for Horse) our Horse were fain to leave them, and return to
the rest of the Army, where the Cannon stood. In which service were 300 of the
Rebels slain, amongst which were a great number of their best Gentry and
Commanders: There were of the Rebels taken Prisoners, Colonel Cullen their
Lieutenant General, Major Butler, besides diverse other Captains, and some of
their Ensigns; of the English Forces were slain not full 20 Men: in which
service, Sir Thomas Lucas unhappily received a very sore wound in his head.
That night, the English Army lodged at Ballybeggan. After which time, the Army
marched without molestation of any Enemy, until they returned to Dublin,
whether the Rear of the Army came safe on Monday the 27th. of the same month,
1643.

Where they were again Quartered, even to the undoing and great desolation The
Army from Ross return and quarter in Dublin, to the further burden of that
City.
of that poor City, which had now suffered so much, and so long, under the
burden and insolences of unpaid, wanting Soldiers, as they were unable to bear
it longer, and with loud cries and complaints made known their Grievances to
the Lords Justices and Council, wholely unable to relieve them. And indeed,
such was the posture of the present affairs at that time, as every thing tended
to bring on a Cessation; yet for the present, the Lieutenant General (that the
Soldiers might be quieted) published a strict Edict, Prohibiting all Soldiers
to offer the least violence to any who brought Provision to the Market, or any
Inhabitants of the Town, under the severest Penalties of the Marshals Court;
which, for a time, begat an obedience. But the Army being ill Clothed, meanly
Victuall'd, worse Paid, and seldom employed in service, necessity enforced them
to those outrages Humanity could not take notice of, many of them being the
effects of a very pinching want; though the Lords Justices and Council (to the
great dislike of the Army) pursued some of the Offenders with exemplary
Justice: A sense of which, with the Meagre return which Sergeant Major Warren
brought out of England, on his solicitation for the Soldiers Pay, and the
dissatisfaction that thence arose; some of the Officers, not all, (there was a
Party that presumed they might have gone through with the work, had there not
been another in the Loom) afterward presented the State, the 4th. of April,
1643. with a Paper, in such a style, threatening so much danger, as the Lords
Justices and Council remitted the Copy of it to the Parliament of England,
which here follows. My Lords,
AT our first entrance into this unhappy Kingdom, we had no other design, The
Armies Remonstrance.
than by our Swords to assert and vindicate the Right of his Majesty, which was
here most highly abused, to redress the wrongs of his poor Subjects, and to
advance our own Particulars in the prosecution of so honest undertakings. And
for the rest of these, we do believe they have, since our coming over,
succeeded pretty well; but for the last, which concerns our selves, that has
fallen out so contrary to our expectations, that instead of being rewarded, we
have been prejudiced; instead of getting a Fortune, we have spent part of one:
And though we behave our selves never so well abroad, and perform the actions
of honest men, yet we have the Reward of Rogues and Rebels, which is Misery and
Want, when we come home. Now (my Lords) although we be brought to so great an
Exigence, that we are ready to rob and spoil one another; yet to prevent such
outrages, we thought it better to try all honest means for our subsistence,
before we take such indirect courses. Therefore if your Lordships will be
pleased to take us timely into your considerations, before our urgent wants
make us desperate, we will, as we have done hitherto, serve your Lordships
readily and faithfully. But if your Lordships will not find a way for our
preservations here, we humbly desire, we may have leave to go where we may have
a better being: And if your Lordships shall refuse to grant that, we must then
take leave to have our recourse to that first and primary Law, which God has
endued all men with, we mean, the Law of Nature, which teaches all men to
preserve themselves.




Hence (with what countenance some gave it) it was thought, the Rebels (as to
the bringing in of the Cessation, and their further Aims) prevailed more, than
in all their Battles, Treacheries, and Surprizals.

About Easter, the Rebels, under Preston, besieged Baranokil; at which time
(even the 11th. of April) Colonel Crafford marched forth of Dublin with 13000
Foot, and 130 Horse, a Culvering and a Saker Drake, toward Monastar-Even, that
with his Party he might there live; and (if he should be advised by the
Garrisons thereab outs) he had Orders to set upon Preston, who had with him
4000 Foot, 500 Horse, three Pieces of Battery, and four Fieldpieces.

But here we must acquaint you, that about November, 1642. the Lords The
Confederates Petition sent to his Majesty.
Justices sent his Majesty, then at Oxford, a short Petition, in the name of
the Roman Catholics of Ireland, which they had received from them, desiring,
that his Majesty would appoint some persons to hear what they could say for
themselves, with many expressions of Duty and Submission. Shortly after which,
Sir James Mountgomery, Sir Hardress Waller, Knights and Colonels, Colonel
Arthur Hill, and Colonel Audley Mervin, a Committee for Ireland, in behalf of
themselves and other Commanders in his Majesty's Army, there attended his
Majesty at Oxford, setting forth by their Petition as follows. May it please
your Sacred Majesty.
WE your Majesty's most humble Subjects, being entrusted from considerable The
Protestant Committe's Petition to his Majesty.
parts of your Majesty's Forces in the Kingdom of Ireland, to petition your
Majesty, and your Parliament for Supplies; and finding that your Majesty had
committed the care and managing of that War to your Parliament here, we
addressed our selves unto the same, whose sense of our miseries, and
inclination to redress, appeared very tender unto us. But the present
distempers of this your Majesty's Kingdom of England (to our unspeakable grief)
are grown so great, that all future passages, by which comfort and life should
be conveyed to that gasping Kingdom, seem totally to be obstructed; so that
unless your Gracious Majesty, out of your singular Wisdom, and Fatherly Care,
apply some speedy Remedy, We your distressed and loyal Subjects of that Kingdom
must inevitably perish. Our condition represents unto your Majesty the estate
of all your Majesty's faithful Protestant Subjects in Ireland; the influence of
Princely favor and goodness so actively distilled upon your Kingdom of
Ireland, before the birth of this monstrous Rebellion there, and since the
same, so abundantly expressed in Characters of a deep sense, and lively
presentment of the bleeding condition thereof, gives us hope, in this our
deplorable extremity, to address our selves unto your Sacred Throne, humbly
beseeching, that it may please your Gracious Majesty, amongst your other
weighty cares, so to reflect upon the bleeding condition of that perishing
Kingdom, that timely relief may be offered; otherwise your Loyal Subjects there
must yield their Fortunes a Prey, their Lives a Sacrifice, and their Religion a
Scorn to the merciless Rebels, powerfully assisted from Abroad. Whilst we live,
we rest in your Majesty's Protection; if our deaths are designed in that Cause,
we will die in your obedience; living and dying, ever praying for your
Majesty's long and prosperous Reign over us.

Montgomery, Hard. Waller, Arth. Hill, And. Mervin.



Unto which his Majesty, by his Principal Secretary, the Lord Faulkland,
returned this Answer, from the Court at Oxford, the 1st. of December, 1642. His
Majesty has expressly commanded me to give this Answer to this Petition.
THat his Majesty has, since the beginning of that monstrous Rebellion, His
Majesty's Answer.
had no greater sorrow, than for the bleeding condition of that his Kingdom;
and as he has by all means labored, that timely relief might be afforded to
the same, and consented to all Propositions (how disadvantagious soever to
himself) that have been offered him for that purpose; and at first recommended
their condition to both his Houses of Parliament, and immediately of his own
mere motion sent over several Commissions, and caused some proportion of Arms
and Ammunition (which the Petitioners well know to have been a great support to
the Northern parts of that Kingdom) to be conveyed to them out of Scotland, and
offered to find 10000 Volunteers to undertake that War; but has often since
pressed by many several Messages that sufficient Succors might be hastened
thither, and other matters of smaller importance laid by, which did divert it;
and offered, and most really intended, in his own Royal Person, to have
undergone the danger of that War, for the defense of his good Subjects, and the
chastisement of those perfidious and barbarous Rebels; and in his several
Expressions of his desires of Treaty and Peace, has declared the miserable
present condition, and certain future loss of Ireland to be one of his
principal Motives, most earnestly to desire, that the present Distractions of
this Kingdom might be composed, and that others would concur with him to the
same end: So his Majesty is well pleased, that his Offers, Concurrence,
Actions, and Expressions, are so rightly understood by the Petitioners, and
those who have employed them, (notwithstanding the groundless and horrid
Aspersions which have been cast upon him) but wishes, that instead of a mere
general Complaint (to which his Majesty can make no return but of Compassion)
they could have digested and offered to him any such desires, by consenting to
which, he might convey (at least in some degree) comfort and life to that
gasping Kingdom, preserve his distressed and Loyal Subjects of the same from
inevitably perishing, and the true Protestant Religion from being scorned and
trampled on by those merciless and Idolatrous Rebels. And if the Petitioners
can yet think on any such, and propose them to his Majesty, he assures them,
that by his readiness to consent, and his thanks to them for the proposal, he
will make it appear to them, that their most pressing personal sufferings,
cannot make them more desirous of relief, than his care of the true Religion,
and of his faithful Subjects, and of that Duty which obliges him to his Power
to protect both, renders him desirous to afford it to them.

Faulkland.



Upon the Petition of the Confederates of Ireland, his Majesty granted a
Commission to the Marquis of Ormond, to meet, and hear what the Rebels could
say or propound for themselves; by virtue of which, the Earl of St. Albans and
Clanrickard, the Earl of Roscommon, Sir Maurite Eustace, and other his
Majesty's Commissioners met at Trim, to whom the Confederate Catholics of
Ireland Commissioners (the Lord Viscount Gormanston, Sir Lucas Dillon Knight,
Sir Robert Talbot Baronet, and John Walsh Esquire) produced a Remonstrance the
17th. of March, 1642. The Irish Remonstrance.
to be presented to his most Excellent Majesty, by the name of, The
Remonstrance of Grievances, presented to his Majesty in the name of the
Catholics of Ireland. Yet though (as you see) this Remonstrance was solemnly
received by his Majesty's Commissioners, and by them transmitted to his
Majesty; as before had been the presumptious Propositions from The Parl.
Declaration concerning the Rise of the Rebels. Husb. Collect. fol. 248.
Cavan, the Letter of the Farrals to the Lord Costilough, Dr. Cale's Agency
from the Rebels, the United Lords Letter to the Earl of Castlehaven, and the
Lord Mountgarret's to the Lieutenant General, and all other Addresses to the
State; as afterward the Propositions of the Roman Catholics of Ireland, even
to his Majesty (by their Agents) to himself at Oxford: Yet the bleeding
Iphigenia abounds in so much Impudence, as to affirm, that to this day, (the
23d. of December, 1674.) they were not heard to speak for themselves. Shameless
Soul! The Commission from his Majesty, that the Rebels might be heard, was
brought over, and confidently delivered at the Council Board, the 22. of
January, by Thomas Bourk Esquire (a Contriver of the Rebellion) to the amazement of
All not acquainted with the Plot. In the Remonstrance there are pieced together
(says that excellent and judicious Person Sir J. T. Hist. Irel. the Pref.
, who knew as well their Sophistry, as the States Interest) so many vain
inconsiderable fancies, many subsequent passages acted in the prosecution of
the War, and such bold, false, notorious Assertions, without any the least
ground or color of truth, as without all doubt they absolutely resolved,
first, to raise this Rebellion, and then to set their Lawyers and Clergy on
work to frame such Reasons and Motives, as might with some color of
justification serve for Arguments to defend it. It is indeed, to speak plainly,
a most infamous Pamphlet, full fraught with scandalous aspersions cast upon the
present Government, and his Majesty's Principal Officers of State within this
Kingdom: it was certainly framed with most virulent intentions, not to present
their condition and present sufferings to his Majesty, but that it might be
dispersed to gain belief amongst Foreign States abroad, as well as discontented
Persons at home, and so draw assistance and aid to foment and strengthen their
Rebellious Party in Ireland. Of which, if any desire to be more fully
satisfied, each Particular is clearly answered (by a Person then at the Helm,
very faithfully, though not with that vigor the truth required) in a Book,
entitled, The false and scandalous Remonstrance of the Inhumane and Bloody
Rebels of Ireland Printed by Edw. Husb. 1644.
. And upon the 8th. and 9th. of April following, it came to be considered in
the Commons House of Parliament in Ireland, seemingly disliked by all, though
with that artifice by some, as the Remonstrants themselves could not have
insinuated more in its defense; in as much as these (not finding they gained on
the Anti-Remonstrants) at last brought into discourse the Solemn League and
Covenant, the more colourably to take off the dispute concerning the
Remonstrance; whereby the business growing hot, the House was Prorogued till
the 6th. of May.

All things being now in that condition, as the necessities of the Army daily
increased, a Cessation grew generally to be spoke of; his Majesty having
imparted his Commands therein to the Lords Justices by the following Letter. C.
R.

RIght Trusty and Well-beloved Counselors, We greet you His Majesty's first
Letter of the 23d. of April, touching the Cessation.
well. Whereas considering the present Condition of Our Affairs, as well in
this as that Our Kingdom, through the famous Plots and Practices of Persons,
disaffected to Our Person and Government, We have given Command and Authority
to Our Right Trusty, Entirely, and Well-beloved Cousin and Counselor, the
Marquis of Ormond, Lieutenant General of Our Army and Forces in Ireland, to
Treat with Our Subjects, who in that Kingdom have taken up Arms against us; and
to agree with them upon a Cessation of Arms for one Year; which, as it is a
Service of very great Concernment to Us and Our present Affairs, both here and
there; so We Will and Command, that you therein give your most effectual
assistance and furtherance to advance the same, by your Industry and
Endeavors, as there shall be occasion.

Given at Our Court at Oxford, the 23. of April, 1643.



About the 1st. of May, 1643. the Lord Inchequin (since the death of An
Abbreviate of the War in Munster.
his Father-in-law, Sir William St. Ledger, as yet Commander in Chief in the
Province of Munster) marched forth with his Army, divided into two Parties; one
Commanded by himself, into the West of the County of Cork, doing excellent
service there, without resistance: and the other under the Conduct of Sir
Charles Vavasor, with select Numbers, respectively gathered from the Garrisons
of Toughall, Talloe, Castle Lions, Lismore, Mogily, and Cappaquin; the whole
number consisting of about 1200 Musketeers, and 200 Horse, besides Volunteers
and Pillagers. In which Expedition, Major Appleyard, May the 2d. near the
Castle of Cosgrave, was assigned to fall on Ballykeroge, (Sir Nicholas Walsh's
Town and Lands) that he might burn and spoil them: And Sir Charles Vavasor
undertook the Passage to the Comroe; upon the left hand whereof there stands an
exceeding high Mountain, and under the brow a large Wood, through which the
Army was necessitated to pass, an unpassable Bog being on the right hand. The
Enemy (never wanting intelligence) against Sir Charles came, had cast up a
Trench breast high, with spike holes along the side of the Wood, from the
Mountain to the Bog, with a strong Barricado, and two Courts of Guards for
Musketeers to lodge in, more artificially done than they were accustomed to:
But by the help of a Fog (our Guide proving faithful) the Rebels were not aware
of us till our Horse were upon them, at which they shot, and we retreated
leisurely (our Foot not being come up) through Providence, without harm; and
Sir Charles commanded some Dragooners, of Captain Pynes Company, to alight,
which they did, soon entering the Enemies Trenches, and, before the Foot came,
gained the Pass; and the Horse and Foot marched within Musket Shot of Dermod O
Brian's (Lord of the Country) Castle, where they made a stand, till the
Soldiers had fired the Country, and took away their Cattle, the Enemy not
daring to rescue them, firing (as they marched away) by Comroe-Castle, a good
House of Peter Anthony's, an English Papist, with many other Thatched Houses
thereunto belonging. The same day the whole Army Rendezvousing on a Hill near
Kilmac-Thomas, resolved that night to have advanced to Stradbally; but marching
by Mac-Thomas's Castle, they within gave fire upon us; 60 of our Soldiers,
being not able to endure such an affront, ran out of the Main Body to the
Castle, without either Captain, Lieutenant, Ensign, or other Officer; and
recovering a Ditch upon the South Side of the Castle, (the Wind blowing
Southerly) they set the Thatched Houses on fire, and assaulted the Castle by
the help of the smoke, (blinding the Warders) upon which the Besieged cried, A
Drum, a drum; at which, many who had flown thither for safety inconsiderately,
ran out, and were by our Soldiers knocked on the head; whilst the Warders
(delivering the Castle on some Terms) had Quarter, as the other might have had
too, had they staid in the Castle; from amongst which, six or seven that were
thought dead rose up, which (the Soldiers would have killed) but in pity, Sir
Charles Vavasor suffered to go with the Warders to Ballykeroge. After which
service, Ensign Boughton and 40 Musketeers took in a House, built by James
Wallis Esquire strongly fortified by John Fitzgerald, Son and Heir to Mac-Thomas;
the Warders and the rest being on Terms also conveyed to Ballykeroge: And so
facing Clonea (belonging to Tibbot Fitz-Gerrard) and Cosgrave Castles, and
passing by Dungarvan, some of the Rebels issued out of Town; but the English
Forces drawing into a Body to oppose them, they retired without the least
Encounter, our Forces marching to their own Garrisons.

About the 27th. of May, the Lord Inchequin compleats an Army of 4000 Foot, and
400 Horse, which Rendevouz'd at Buttevant; out of which he sent 200 Horse,
under the Command of Captain Bridges, (a resolute active man) and 1200 Foot,
under the Conduct of Lieutenant Colonel Story, (no ways backward of the
Employment) into the County of Kerry; a dangerous Journey, considering the
length of the way, and scarcity of Provision they had with them, the Enemy
having wasted and fired Trally, (a Place as well accommodated with good Land
for Corn and Cattle, as any other Place in Munster) lest the Lord Inchequin
should quarter there. Whereupon the Lord Inchequin (considering the danger of
the Journey) to divert the Enemy, laid a pretended Siege to the Town of
Kilmallock, (a Place of great consequence, and a Key to Limerick) whereby, the
Rebels eyes being fixed on Kilmallock's relief, the Expedition was much
facilitated; Bridges and Story bringing away a great Prey of Cattle, some
Prisoners, and fetched off many English from the Castle of Ballybeggan without
any resistance, save a loose Skirmish, wherein the Enemy lost four men, and
were routed.

The Lord Inchequin, the 28th. of May, having sent Colonel Mine to Patrick
Purcel of Croe, Governor of Kilmallock, to acquaint him, he came forth only
to meet an Enemy in the Field, not to Besiege the Town. He released the Lady
Humes and her Son, Prisoners at Kilmallock, for one Burget, a Prisoner at Cork,
whether the Lord Inchequin marched, whilst Sir Charles Vavasor, after a well
regulated Dispute (stoutly defended by the Rebels) took in Cloghleigh,
commanded by one Condon, wherein was 20 Men, 11 Women, and about 7 Children,
some of which the Soldiers stripped, in readiness to kill them; but Major Howel
drawing out his Sword, defended them; and whilst he went to Colonel Vavasor,
(then at Ballyhindon, Mr. Roche's House, where he was invited that day to Dine)
committed them to Captain Wind, who leaving them to a Guard of Horse, they
stripped them again, and afterward fell upon them with Carbines, Pistols, and
Swords: a cruelty so resented by Sir Charles Vavasor, that he vowed to hang him
that commanded the Guard; and had certainly done it, had not the next days
action prevented it, which was the most considerable loss the English ever
received from the Rebels, a mischief they might have avoided had they been less
confident, and given greater credence to their Intelligence.

The 4th. of June, being Sunday, early in the morning, before break of day
quarter, Mr. Hill, with a Squadron of Horse, was sent to Scout about Cloghline
and Castlegrace, in the County of Tipperary; and before daylight he was
encompassed by the Enemies Horse; so that he, with his Company, with great
difficulty escaped, and bringing word to the Leaguer at Cloghleigh, the Alarm
was up, and presently our Foot drew themselves into two Divisions in a Field
next the Mountain, where the Enemy came down, when presently two or three
Bodies of the Enemies Horse appeared on the side of a Hill, (a mile and a half
from us.) In the mean time Sir Charles Vavasor (lying the night before at
Castle Logons) was sent for, and he (without delay) came away as fast as his
Horse could carry him: but before he came, a Party of Musketeers, to the number
of 200, under the Command of Captain Philip Hutton, and a Troop of Horse
commanded by Captain Freek, drew up nearer to the Enemy by half a mile, and
there stood for the space of two hours; some of the Horse in the interim
advanced further, founding their Trumpets on both sides. At length, Christopher
Brian (the Lord Inchequin's Brother) desired to Parle with Quartermaster Page,
and after some Complements and Discourses past, they parted; as did afterward
Captain Richard Fitz-Morris (the Lord of Kirries Brother) with the said
Christopher Bryan. Presently after notice was given, that the Enemy was
advancing; but we could discover no Foot all this while, (their management of
this business being very close.) Whereupon Sir Charles Vavasor demurred upon
it, and took order for what was needful, and called back the said Hutton and
the Horse from the Mountain. In the interim, Captain George Butler (a Native of
this Kingdom, a man of undanted spirit, and well experienced in Martial
Discipline) came to Sir Charles from the Lord Inchequin with a Letter,
importing, That the said Butler's Company and Sir John Brown's were marching
from Moyalloe toward him, and now within a mile and half to him, were at his
disposal. Upon that, Sir Charles and the rest of the Officers consulted what
was best to be done, and concluded, such a Body of Horse could not be without a
considerable Body of Foot, and therefore fully resolved to make good a Retreat,
giving order, that all the Carriages with the Artillery (that were now at a
stop on the Manning Water) should have away, till they recovered the Black
Water at the Ford of Farmoy, to help to make good that Pass, in case he should
be hard put to it. After this, Sir Charles staid a while, so long as he might
well conceive the said two Companies, Carriage and Ordnance to be at the Ford,
and then presently marched on to Castle Lions, the Front led by Lieutenant
King, the Body by Major Howel, and the Rear by Sir Charles himself, a
Forlorn-hope of about 160 Musketeers in the Rear was commanded by Captain
Pierce Lacy, Captain Hutton, and Lieutenant Stardbury, and all our Horse in the
Rear likewise; who no sooner came over the Manning Water, and recovered the top
of the Hill, but the Enemies Horse were at our heels: From this Hill to the
Ford there is a dangerous Passage of a Narrow Lane, which the Enemy knew full
well, and so did our Men too: And the Enemy perceiving that most of our Men
were marching within this Lane, (excepting the Forlorn-hope and the Horse)
charged us in the Rear, coming on as the Moorish and Getulian Horse, mentioned
by Salust in Jugarth's War, not in Order and Warlike manner, but by Troops and
scattering Companies at adventure, that the Fight rather resembled an Incursion
than a Battle; and so hemmed in and pressed on our Horse, (being but 120) that
they were able to move no way, but fall into that Lane amongst the Foot, which
they did, thereby routing our whole Foot. The Ordnance by this time was not
carried ^^er the Black Water, The English Army routed.
nor the two Companies as yet come to make good the Passage, so that all our
Colors (save one brought off by Dermot O Grady, Ensign to Captain Rowland St.
Ledger, who gallantly saved It and himself) were taken, our two Pieces of
Ordnance surpised, and Sir Charles himself (together with Captain Wind,
Lieutenant King, Ensign Chaplain, Captain Fitz-morris, and diverse others) taken
Prisoner; besides those that were killed in the Place, ( viz.) Captain Pierce
Lacy, Captain George Butler, Lieutenant Walter St. Ledger, (three Natives of
this Kingdom) Lieutenant Stradbury, Lieutenant Rosington, Lieutenant Kent,
Ensign Simmons, with diverse other Lieutenants and Ensigns, besides common
Soldiers, to the number of 300, some affirm 600.

Upon which success, they boldly attempted Cappaquin, which more The Irish
worsted before Cappaquin.
gallantly withstood them, in as much as after all their attempts, the
Assailants were shamefully beaten off toward the end of June, and forced to
retreat, having lost upon the first Assault 62 men; afterward, attempting it
again, they were repulsed, and fearing the Lord Inchequin's approach, marched
away, having lost in that enterprise Lieutenant Colonel Butler, (Brother to the
Lord of Armally,) Captain Saint John of Saint Johnstown, Captain Pierce Butler
of Ballypaddin in the County of Tipperary, Captain Grady desperately hurt, one
Ensign killed, as were four Sergeants, and two hurt, besides several Prisoners
taken: one of their Horsemen completely armed ran to us, who (amongst other
passages) discovered the particular losses of the Enemy, their chief Gunner was
likewise slain in this service: Upon the retreat and marching away, a Party of
our Horse commanded by Sir John Brown sallied out of the Town after them, and
killed some of their Men and Pillagers in the Rear of their Army, who found 25
graves after them in the Camp, wherein they buried their dead by 4 and 5 in a
grave, as by veiw appeared.

Yet though the Enemy had no success in taking in Cappaquin, we by Colonel Mine
Colonel Mine after the Cessation, went into England with his Regiment,
oftentimes encountering Massy (who jointly expressed much valor) And in a
conflict near Hartpury-fields in Glocestershire was slain by Massies Forces,
1644. and by reason of his Gallantry, buried at Gloucester, with the loss of the
English Regiment he brought from Ireland. Sanders H. C. 1. Fol. 731. The
transactions in Connaght. Galloway Fort taken by the Irish.
took in the Castles of Timolege, Roscarby, and Rathbarry in the West, and
Lismore nobly defended it self under Captain Barderoe, whilst the Lord
Inchequin appearing with 2500 Horse and Foot, raised the Siege, whose Army upon
news of the Cessation, drew off, then ready to give Battle.

In Connaght, after the Battle of Raconnel, till Midsummer, there was not any
considerable service done by our Soldiers; and the Enemy either kept close in
Garrisons, or was drawn off to the Siege of Galloway's Fort; And now the
Enemies finding that without the Command of some experienced General, and the
uniting of their Forces, they were able to do little, yea, not to defend
themselves; they got for Commander John Bourk (or as they more commonly called
him, Shane O-Tlevij) descended from the Bourks of Castle Bar, or if you please
of the Mac Williams: His first exploit was against the Fort of Galloway, to the
taking and demolishing of which, the Townsmen contributed both with Bodies and
Purse very largely; they wanted good battering Guns, and therefore resolved to
take it by Famine, it being but poorly provided by such as the Parliament
appointed to bring timely supplies by Sea, knowing that in it they should get
battering Guns, to take in the rest of the English Garrisons in that Province.
To this end, they made a Chain of Masts, Casks, and Iron, across that part of
the Harbor next to the Fort, and planted strong Guards at each end of it; They
prepared some few Ship-Guns, and a Morter-Piece, which was well cast by a
Runnagate out of the Lord Forbes Ships, which afterward they made use of at
the Siege of Castle Coot; so that with much Industry rather then Gallantry,
they at length got the Fort by Composition, its Relief coming too late into the
Harbor; The event of which so much struck the Governor, as he did not many
months after survive the loss.

Upon the taking of the Fort, the Irish were overjoyed to be Masters of so many
brave Guns, and thought that the Reputation of this and the help of the Guns,
would reduce suddenly all Connaght; they resolved first to fall on Castle
Coot, the most painant thorn in their side, Castle Coot Besieged.
being confident that upon their success there, they might in all probability
expect to have the rest, not because it had any great strength in its Walls,
but was well manned, and vigilantly attended; though with 4000 Horse and Foot,
and answerable Accommodations of War, they questioned not but to Master it
soon, having Preston's Engineer, Monsieur La Loo (an expert Low Country
Soldier) to manage their Works, who upon the knowledge of the situation of the
Place, questioned not its surrender, Galloway having (for Fireworks, and
fitting expedients for that service) furnished him with 300 l. However, though
they had made as regular and handsome a Fortification about the Castle, as ever
was attempted in Ireland, yet the Garrison so nobly attacked each Redoubt, that
thence ensued many brave Attempts, much certainly to the prejudice of the
Besieged; the Garrison maintaining their own against all the Attempts the
Besiegers ever adventured, which in truth were many, not without Skill as well
as Courage maintained; in as much as the Governor Captain Richard Coot, since
Lord Baron of Coloony, having sent forth a private Messenger to Major Ormsby,
(who before with the help of the English Garrisons, had very successfully
beaten Owen Roe-O-Neal out of the Province with great loss, coming to set upon
Boil, Jamestown, Carrickdrumzoosh, and Elphin,) at Tulsol, to inform him of
his wants, very carefully consulted with Boil and Roscommon, who jointly
agreed (upon a private Sign) to relieve them of Castle Coot; which the Enemy
having notice of by one, whom the Garrison had familiarly entertained, the
Treachery (on the Enemies side) was carried on, as they set forth two parties,
as if one had made to the Castles Relief, whilst the other opposed it; to the
countenance of which, the Governor being (from the Walls) encouraged by the
Soldiers (though against his own suspicions) adventured forth with 60
Musketeers, but soon found the deceit of the business; The Enemy all this while
having skirmish with themselves as two Parties, who now jointly fall upon the
Governor with those he drew out, who so gallantly opposed them, though (in
compute) not less then 700 Men, as they retired to their Camp, and he secured
his Retreat (with much Honor) to his Castle; The Enemy in the Interim, making
a bold assault on the other part of the Castle, which he came time enough to
relieve, beating off the Enemy with a considerable loss, and having slain many
of their men, caused them decently to be laid out (not beheaded as the Irish
barbarously are accustomed to do) for which their General sent him a Present of
Tobacco, (then very acceptable;) However, afterward he beat them to
inaccessible Places, in Bogs and Woods (their usual Refuge) and recovered at
that time store of Tobacco, Clothes, and 11 weeks Pay, newly come, to satisfy
their Soldiers; Yet they hearing of the Cessation, but not yet having an
Express from the Marquess of Ormond, more violently (then ever) shot at the
Castle; and having now a Messenger of the Cessation, they so far suspected him
as a spy, as they imprisoned him, The Irish break the Cessation.
endeavoring still to gain the Castle; but finding their attempts vain, Forces
from Boil, Roscommon, etc. faithfully having relieved the Castle, all jointly
gallantly set on the Rebels, which their General perceiving, grew so much
enraged against his Soldiers, as to profess he had rather be Captain of the
200 in the Garrison, then General of the 3000 he had; so as at length the
Governor as well as Bourk, having an Express from the Marquess of Ormond, both
acquiess'd therein.

Thus his Majesty's Forces (where they were unanimous) vigorously proceeded;
nay should I adventure to recount all their actions, time would fail, we are
obliged to be brief, though in omitting any, injuries may be done excellent
Persons, whose pardons I beg, whilst they had no better supplies then other
Places.

However, the necessities of the Army were daily aggravated, yet they (in some
men's opinion) not seeming sufficient to bring on a Cessation, such as were
principal opposers of it, were thought requisite to be removed; And the 23. of
April, 1643. Sir Francis Butler arrived from England with a Supersedeas for the
Lord Parson's Government, and a Commission to the Lord Borlase, and Sir Henry
Tichborn, Sir Jo. Borlase, Sir Hen. Tichborn, Lords Justices.
to be Lords Justices; who accordingly the first of May, were instituted in the
Government; Who (betwixtthe unpaid and Refractory Soldiers, and the
difficulties that arose about the Cessation, which they were to consent to, but
acted little in) encountered no small difficulties in their Government, whatever
censure it has since met with: Soon after their admission, fresh hopes of a
more plentiful Supply exceedingly cheered the Soldiers; but that failing,
Murmures, Mutinies, and a discontented Spirit raged every where, highly
fomented, that necessity might be a main plea for the Cessation; of which his
Majesty being daily informed, writes this Letter. C. R.

RIght trusty and Right well beloved Cosen and Councellor, His Majesty's
second Letter about the Cessation.
we greet you well, by our Letters of the 23. of the last month: We gave you
our Command to Treat and Agree upon a Cessation of Arms for one year, with
those our Subjects in that our Kingdom, who have taken up Arms there against
our Authority; and having since seen the Propositions, which you and the rest
of our Commissioners sent us from our said Subjects, We find the same to be of
such great importance, and many things therein alleged, so necessary to be
further examined and inquired into, as we have been the rather induced to have
such a Cessation, as we have formerly written unto you, so as it may be with
Honor to us, and without prejudice to our Interest and Service; This Bearer
Mr. William Brent, is a Person whom we have purposely sent over, to give us an
account of your proceedings in a Business of this Consequence, to whom you may
give credit, and by him we shall desire to hear from you, when you shall have
any Matter of moment to send over unto us.

Given at our Court at Oxon, the 3d. of May, 1643. To our right trusty and
entirely beloved Cosen and Counselor, James Marquess of Ormond, Lieutenant
General of our Army in Ireland.



This (upon the Treaty) the Confederates Commissioners acknowledge to have
seen, but insisted upon one (formerly mentioned) of the 23. of April, (more
important they conceive) which upon promise (that upon the agreement of the
Treaty perfected,) they should have a Copy of the Treaty, went on: though as to
his Majesty, that there might be a further evidence of his Intentions, to
subdue the Rebellion in Ireland, he (being presented the 5th. of May, 1643. by
Sir Robert King, William Jephson, and Arthur Hill Esquires, from the
Parliament, with a Bill entitled, An Act for the speedy payment of Moneys,
subscribed See Husbands Collect. Fol. 160.
toward the reducing of the Rebels in Ireland, which yet remained unpaid) was
so far from denying to pass the said Act, (though driven from his Parliament,
with far the Major part of both Houses) that he inclined to pass the Act, if he
might be assured to have it employed to no other purpose, then the Reducing of
the Rebels, etc. Which Conditions not being answered, no more was attempted by
that Bill, a defect not resting in his Majesty, but those that sent it; whereby
the straights in Ireland still increasing, the Lords Justices writ to his
Majesty (as a little before they had done to the Parliament) the ensuing
Letter. May it please your Most Excellent Majesty.
AS soon as we your Majesty's Justices entered into the charge of this
Government, we took into our consideration at this Board, the state of The
Lords Justices Letter to his Majesty of the present state of Ireland*
your Army here, which we find suffering under unspeakable extremities of want
of all things, necessary to the support of their Persons, or maintenance of the
War; here being no Victuals, Clothes, or other Provisions requisite toward
their sustenance, no Money to provide them of any thing they want, no Arms in
your Majesty's Stores, to supply their many defective Arms, not above 40
Barrels of Powder in your Stores, no strength of serviceable Horses being now
left here, and those few that are, their Arms for the most part lost or
unserviseable, no Ships arrived here to guard the Coasts, and consequently no
security rendered to any, that might (on their private Adventures) bring in
Provisions of Victuals, or other necessaries, toward our subsistence, and
finally, no visible means by Sea or Land of being able to preserve for you this
your Kingdom, and to render deliverance from utter destruction, to the Remnant
of your good Subjects yet left here.

We find that your Majesty's late Justices and this Board, have often and fully
by very many Letters, advertised the Parliament in England, of the extremities
of Affairs here, and besought relief with all possible importunity, which also
have been fully represented to your Majesty, and to the Lord Lieutenant, and to
Mr. Secretary Nicholas, to be made known to your Majesty: And although the
Winds have of late for many days (and often formerly) stood very fair, for
accessions of supply forth of England hither, and that we have still with
longing expectations, hope to find Provisions arrive here, in some degree
answerable to the necessities of your Affairs: yet now (to our unexpressible
grief) after full 6 months waiting, and much longer patience and
long-suffering, we find all our great expectations answered in a mean and
inconsiderable quantity of Provisions, ( viz.) 75 Barrels of Butter, and 14 Tun
of Cheese, being but the fourth part of a small Vessels Lading, which was sent
from London, and arrived here on the 5th. of this Month, which is not above 7
or 8 days Provision for that part of the Army which lies in Dublin, and the
out-Garrisons thereof, no Money or Victuals (other then that inconsiderable
proportion of Victual) having arrived in this Place, as sent from the
Parliament of England, or any other forth of England for the use of the Army,
since the beginning of November last.

We have (by the blessing of God) been hitherto prosperous and successful in
your Majesty's Affairs here, and should be still hopeful, by the mercy of God,
under the Royal Directions of your Sacred Majesty, to vindicate your Majesty's
Honor, and recover your Rights here, and take due vengeance on these Traitors,
for the innocent blood they have spilt, if we might be strengthened or supported
therein by needful supplies out of England: But these supplies having hitherto
been expected to come from the Parliament of England, (on which if your Majesty
had not relied, we are assured, you would in your high Wisdom have found out
some other means to preserve this your Kingdom) and so great and apparent a
failer having happened therein, and all the former and late long continuing
Easterly winds, bringing us no other Provisions then those few, Cheese and
Butter; And no advertisement being brought us of any future supplies to be so
much as in the way hither, whereby there might be any likelihood, that
considerable means of support for your Majesty's Army, might arrive here in any
reasonable time, before that we be totally swallowed up by the Rebels, and your
Kingdom by them wrested from you; we find our selves so disappointed of our
hopes from the Parliament, as must needs trench to the utter loss of the
Kingdom, if your Majesty in your high Wisdom ordain not some present means of
preservation for us.

And considering, that if now by occasion of that unhappy and unexpected
failing of support from thence, we shall be less successful in your Services
here against the Rebels, then hitherto (whilst we were enabled with some means
to serve you) we have been, the shame and dishonor may, in common construction
of those who know not the inwards of the Cause, be imputed to us, and not to
the failing that disabled us: And considering principally and above all things,
the high and eminent trust of your Affairs here, deposited with us by your
Sacred Majesty, we may not forbear in discharge of our Duty, thus freely and
plainly to declare our humble apprehensions, to the end your Majesty thus truly
understanding the terribleness of our Condition, may find out some such means
of support, to preserve to your Majesty and your Royal Posterity, this your
ancient and rightful Crown and Kingdom, and derive deliverance and safety to
the Remnant of your good Subjects yet left here, as in your excellent Judgment
you shall find to be most to your Honor and Advantage.

And so praying to the King of Kings to guide and direct you for the best, in
this high and important Cause, and in all other your Councels and Actions, we
humbly remain,

From your Majesty's Castle at Dublin, the 11th. of May, 1643. Your Majesty's
most Loyal and most Faithful Subjects and Servants.




The 12th. of May, the Lord Taaffe, Roch, and Fitzwilliams arrived out of
England, and that morning Major Warren, and Sir Francis Butler came to the
Council, the Lords sitting, and presented a Petition to the Lords Justices,
accusing the Lord Parsons of high Misdemeanors, and other Treasonable Matters;
requesting that his Person and Goods might be secured, though (in conclusion)
nothing was ever filed against him: an Evidence to most, that there was more of
a Design, then Crime, in the Accusation.

And having (as before) presented you with the Lords Justices Letter to his
Majesty, we should now give you the Declaration of the Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament the 16th. of June, 1643. concerning the present
lamentable estate and miserable condition of Ireland; In answer to what, the
Lords Justices and Council had faithfully acquainted them withal, that it may
appear how sensible they were of the information they had received of the
straights and exigencies of the Protestant Forces in Ireland; which certainly
is very Emphatical, resenting (with a just aggravation) the miserable condition
of that Kingdom; but being legible in Husbands Collections, Fol. 216.
we shall refer you thither, not busing our selves how far it prevailed.
Certainly the Exigencies of the Soldiers, and State of Ireland were then very
considerable, in as much as his Majesty not being able (by any other expedient)
to remedy (as he was persuaded) their complaints, then by a Cessation, he (to
that end) sends this Letter to the Lords Justices. C. R.

RIght trusty and well beloved Counselors, and right His Majesty's third
Letter concerning the Cessation.
trusty and entirely well beloved Cosen and Counselor, we greet you well: The
present Distractions here have rendered us as unable, as by experience we find
the remaining part of the two Houses, are unwilling to supply or relieve our
Army in Ireland; and if the Money we consented should be raised in this our
Kingdom for the Relief of Ireland, had not been diverted by them, and
Rebelliously employed against us here in England, we should not have been
constrained to have hearkened to a Cessation of Arms now on that side; But since
we see no other hope, during the unhappy distempers here, to settle the Peace
of that our Kingdom, but by a Cessation of Arms between us and the Irish, now
in Arms there, and doubt very much, how our Forces now in that our Kingdom will
be there maintained, if we shall admit of a Cessation: We have thought it
expedient by these our Letters, to recommend it to your care and industry to
consider seriously how our Forces on that side, may be enabled to subsist
during the Cessation: and if there may be means found for that, we do then
hereby Authorize, and require you, to agree to a Cessation of Arms there for a
year, and in our Names to assure the said Irish, that we are graciously
inclined to dissolve the present Parliament, and call a new one between this
and the 10th. of November next, and to take a course, to put all those that
shall be chosen Members of the said Parliament, into such a condition, as they
shall not be prejudiced of their Liberty of Assisting, Sitting, and Voting in
the said Parliament; for better effecting whereof, we do hereby further
authorize and require you, to give License to such Commissioners, as the said
Irish shall appoint to come over hither to us, to treat of that Business, and
such other Particulars (to be proposed by way of Petition) as shall necessarily
conduce, not only to the satisfying of the said Cessation, but to a
preparation of what shall be requisite, for the settling of a just, honorable,
and perfect Peace in that our Kingdom: And we further require, in case the said
Irish now in Arms, shall agree to such a Cessation and Treaty, to advertise us
of some such able and fitting Ministers, or Servants of ours on that side, as
you conceive fit to be sent over hither to assist in the Treaty here, when
Commissioners shall come over from the said Irish. In which Business we require
you to use all convenient expedition, and to give us a speedy Account, for
which these our Letters shall be your Warrant.

Given under our Signet at our Court at Oxford, the second day of July, in the
19th. year of Our Reign, 1643. To our right trusty and wellbeloved Counselors,
Sir John Borlase, and Sir Henry Tichborn, Kts. Lords Justices of our Kingdom of
Ireland, and to our right trusty and entirely beloved Cosen and Counselor,
James, Marquess of Ormond, Lieutenant General of our Army there.



But before this Letter came to the Lords Justices, the means to a Cessation
The Treaty toward a Cessation.
were thought of: Yet the day before the Marquess of Ormond proceeded to the
Treaty, which was the 22. of June, the chief Protestants of the City of Dublin
were called before the Council, to know if they would give 10000 l. or have a
Cessation; the latter they were very unwilling The Irish Commissioners, the 23.
of June, 1643. first presented themselves to the Lieutenant General.
to, and the former they could not advance; indeed it was well known, though it
served (as an Argument) to evidence the necessity the State was put to: And the
Irish Commissioners, the 23. of June, presented themselves unto the Marquess of
Ormond, in his Tent near Castle Martin, in the County of Kildare, in the
presence of diverse Colonels, Captains, and Officers in his Majesty's Army, his
Lordship sitting in his Chair covered, and the Irish Commissioners standing
bare: after several passages betwixt them, (all tendered in writing) the Irish
Commissioners gave his Lordship a Copy, of the Authority they had received from
the supreme Council of the Confederate Catholics of Ireland at Kilkenny, in
these words. WHereas his Majesty's most faithful Subjects, the Confederate
Catholics Their Commission from the Supreme Council.
of Ireland, were enforced to take Arms, for the preservation of their
Religion, for the defense of his Majesty's just Prerogatives and Rights, and
the maintenance of the Rights and Liberties of their Country, labored to be
destroyed by the Malignant Party. And whereas his Majesty in his high Wisdom,
and Princely Care of his said Subjects Welfare and Safety, and at their humble
Suit, That his Majesty might be graciously pleased to hear their Grievances,
and vouchsafe Redress therein, did direct, there should be a Cessation of Arms,
and thereupon did Authorize the Right Honorable the Lord Marquess of Ormond,
to treat and conclude the said Cessation, with the said Confederate Catholics.
Know ye, that the said Council, by the express Order and Authority of the said
Catholics, by them conceived, and granted in their General Assembly at
Kilkenny, on the 20th. day of the last Month of May, and in pursuance of the
said Order and Authority, reposing special Trust and Confidence in the Wisdom,
Circumspection, and provident Care, Honor and Sincerity, of our very good
Lords, Nicholas Lord Viscount Gormanston, Donnogh Lord Viscount Muskery, and
our well-beloved Sir Lucas Dillon Knight, Sir Robert Talbot Baronet, Tirlagh O
Neal Esquire Geoffry Brown Esquire Ever Mac-Gennis Esquire and John Walsh Esquire have
constituted, appointed and ordained, and by these presents do constitute,
appoint and ordain, the said Nicholas Lord Viscount Gormanston, etc. our
Commissioners, and do by these presents give and grant unto our said
Commissioners, or any five, or more of them, full Power and Authority to treat
with the said Lord Marquess of Ormond, of a Cessation of Arms, for one whole
year, or shorter, and to conclude the same for the time aforesaid, upon such
Terms, Conditions, and Articles, as to the said Commissioners, in their
Judgments, Conscience and Discretion, shall be thought fit and expedient; by
these presents ratifying and confirming, whatsoever Act or Acts our said
Commissioners as aforesaid, shall do or execute, concerning the said Cessation.

Given at Kilkenny, the 20th. of June, 1643. Montgarret, Castlehaven Audley,
Malachias Arp. Tuamen, Fr. Thom. Fleming, Arch. of Dublin, Primate of Ireland,
Maurice de Rupe and Fermoy, Nettervile, Nich. Plunket, Edm. Fitz-Maurice,
Patrick Darcy, Rob. Linch, R. Bealing.



Upon which both sides proceeded, the Marquess not admitting the Title or Name,
attributed by the Irish Commissioners unto them, in behalf of those for whom
they treated; as likewise not admitting the Cause for which they took up Arms,
as in the Protestation is expressed: Whereas the Irish Commissioners, on the
other side, still proposed all in the behalf of the Catholics of Ireland, with
protestation, that the said Catholics took Arms in defense of their Religion,
his Majesty's Rights and Prerogatives, and the Liberties of Ireland, and no
ways to oppose his Majesty's Authority; so as (say they) neither the Title, or
Protestation, (being justly due to them) were to be excepted against, being the
same they always used in their immediate applications to his Majesty. Against
which, though there were exceptions, the Treaty still proceeded, they owning
the premises: And at Sigginstown the Treaty went on, not without Debates of
great concern, and much difficulty, and then The Treaty deferred, against which
the Commissioners excepted.
was deferred from the 1st. of July, to the Thursday next come seven-night; at
which time the Marquess of Ormond could not meet, in respect, That the
necessity of his attendance otherwise upon the public Service of his Majesty
would not permit; which the Irish Commissioners seemed much to resent, writing
to his Lordship from Kilkenny, the 19th. of July, 1643. That although we
conceive this Treaty to be of the greatest consequence of any Service, to be
effected for his Majesty within this Kingdom, yet we are not apt to give an ill
construction to the laying of it by for the present, until we do know of that
Service that takes place of it, which (being for the advantage of his
Majesty's Interests) we heartily wish may have good success: Yet your Lordship
will give us leave to take notice, that we meet in these, as in all other
Proceedings, (whereby we may have any expectation to enjoy the benefit of his
Majesty's Grace and Favor) some interruption and slackness, in conveying any
part of his good Intentions, to his faithful Subjects the Catholics of
Ireland, which we add to our other Grievances, and will endeavor (in discharge
of the many harms which may ensue by reason of this Protraction) to have it
rightly presented to his Majesty. In Answer to which, the Marquess of Ormond
replied, the 21st. of July, That whereas they had no pretense of unaptness, to
give an ill construction to the laying by of the Treaty, until they could know
of what Service took place, he acquainted them, That he was not accountable to
them, with the knowledge of his Majesty's Services, wherewith he had the Honor
to be entrusted, or to any but to his Majesty, and to those to whom he had
entrusted the government of the Kingdom. And for what they said, They would
endeavor to have rightly presented to his Majesty, he doubted not but to
acquit himself as became him, as in other Commands, so in this Particular; and
that they should find, when the other Occasions of his Majesty were over, the
deferring of the Treaty at present, was not such a laying aside of the Matter,
as their Letters inferred.

Thus at present, (more than by Letters, and the private Actings of some Men)
there was nothing further attempted in the Treaty, till the 26th. of August
following: In the interim, we must take notice of the Insolence of these Men,
then expecting his Majesty's Favor. By the Lords Justices and Council.
Jo. Borlase. Henry Tichborn.
WE the Lords Justices and Council do declare, That if Captain John Farrer be
forthwith released by the Rebels, and safely sent hither, that forthwith upon
his coming, so released, we will give Order for the releasing Synnot, lately
employed as Captain amongst the Rebels, out of Prison, the Jaylor's just Dues
being first paid, and will then permit him freely to depart without
interruption.

Given at his Majesty's Castle of Dublin, July 8. 1643. La. Dublin, Ormond,
Roscommon, Bramston, Ant. Midensis, Tho. Rotheram, Jo. Temple, Fra. Willoughby,
Ja. Ware.

We do not know to whom this Certificate is directed, and we will avow our The
Insolences of the Irish, in Reply to a Warrant of the State.
selves in all our Actions, to be his Majesty's loyal Subjects; neither shall
it be safe henceforth for any Messenger, to bring any Paper to us containing
other Language, than such as suits with our Duty, and the Affections we bear to
his Majesty's Service, wherein some may pretend, but none shall have more real
desires to further his Majesty's Interest, than his Majesty's loyal and
obedient Subjects.

Montgarret, Muskery, Fr. Tho. Dublin, Malachias Tuamen, Castlehaven Audley, R.
Bealing, Torlo O Neile, Patr. Darcy.




Who reads this, may well think their Confidence built on other Grounds than
appeared. What! Shall such as fought in opposition to his Majesty's
Proclamation, be thought loyal Subjects, whilst the State (owning his Majesty's
Interest, Honor and Service) are said to pretend to what they really were?
Surely so impudent a Reply, never before (without chastizement) escaped the Pen
of suppliant Rebels; nor indeed (could some then have had the freedom of their
just scorn and indignation) should such expressions have been swallowed.

During the respite of the Treaty for the Cessation, ( viz. the 29th. of July)
7 or 800 of the Rebels gave us at midnight, (by whose neglect I know not) an
Alarm, even in the streets of Dublin, who were gallantly repulsed by Colonel
Crafford's Men, killing 20 of them, the Rebels by that means doing no more
hurt, than plundering and firing some few thatcht Houses.

All things tending to a Cessation, the State held it their best policy not to
retain their Forces wholly in their Garrisons; and therefore (though they had
slender Provisions, and less Treasure to encourage the Soldiers abroad) the
27th. of June, 1643. Colonel Monk, with 1300 Foot, and 140 Horse, was sent
against Preston, strengthened by Owen O Neal, whom Colonel Monk against Preston.
he encountered near Castle Jordan, at a Pass upon the River Boine, being 5 or
600 Horse, and 6000 Foot, putting his Foot to rout, and killing many of his
Men: Yet for want of Provision, he was forced to leave Clancurry, and turn to
Wickloe, where he got store of Cattle. But thence he was soon recalled, to face
the Rebels in Mead; and hearing of Owen O Neal's Forces about Port Leicester
Mill, (a great and secure Fastness) near 5 miles Westward from Trim, he, with
the Lord Moor, vigilantly attended their motion: But so it fell out, that the
Lord Moor observing O Neal's encamping there, had some notice of his levelling
a Piece of Cannon toward his Army; yet was so little concerned at the advice,
(danger in that Cause being never apprehended) as after that the Bullet had
once (if not twice) grazed, he, with other Gentlemen, (who were not without of
what might ensue, and intimated their suspicions) still traversed the Ground,
till most unfortunately the Bullet forced its passage The Lord Moor killed.
through his Armor into his Body, but was not of strength sufficient to go
through, however it there slew him; upon whose Fall, one readier to show some
sallies of Wit, than Skill, obtrudes this Distich: Contra Romanos Mores res
mira Dynasta,
Morus ab Eugenio canonizatus erat.


In Answer to which one readily writes this: Olim Roma pios truculenta morte
beavit,
Antiquos mores jam nova Roma tenet.


This Noble Gentleman was the first that adventured in this Cause, and the last
Victime under his Majesty's Commission; a Gentleman of clear Spirit, and
Integrity. He fell not many days before the Cessation, which Read Husband's
Collect* fo. 340.
by several (even of the Privy Council themselves) was much disliked; nor
indeed (till some of those were removed from the Council Board, the Reasons
they gave in being un-answerable) could the Cessation be brought on without
opposition; and then not so easily as some thought, many difficulties, and
those not easy to reconcile, (in reference to his Majesty's Exigencies, and
the Interest of the distressed Protestants) pressing in on every Dispute. Now
the Parliament in England (conceiving themselves much interess'd in the Affairs
of Ireland, (as already has been said) to advise, order, and dispose of all
things concerning the Government and Defense of that Kingdom) made, the 30th.
of September, 1643. (not knowing that the Cessation had been then 15 days
before concluded) a Declaration against any Cessation, or a Treaty of Peace
with the Rebels in Ireland, for that (amongst many other Reasons) the Cessation
would be for the preservation of the Rebels and Papists only, who under
pretexts of civil Contracts, would continue their Antichristian Idolatry.
Besides, several Commissioners of both Houses of Parliament, who by the Broad
Seal, (the public Faith of the State) were entrusted with the Irish Affairs,
would by the Cessation be further dis-enabled to Act; and the Adventurers (who
had so many Acts for their Security) would by a Cessation be disappointed, as
the exiled Protestants (turned out of their Habitations) be thereby continued
in misery and want.

Whilst these things were thought on in England, the People of Ireland (who
took a liberty at the uncertainty of Affairs) were strangely divided, whether
the Cessation should be concluded or no. Some (who were sensibly touched with
the Injuries and Cruelties of the Rebels) could not brook it; others (hoping
for their advantage by the Change) daily expected it, whilst the City (in
general) being burdened with Taxes, quartering of Soldiers, etc. having no
hopes of Relief from abroad, willingly hearkened to their Freedom: so as now the
strong Affections which had been commonly born against the Rebels, began to
wither into an indifferency, and the course which had been then took to weather
out the resolute, either for despair or terror humbled many, and as Interest
lay, several resolved what Party to take in England, upon the conclusion of the
Cessation. And that the Cessation might be put forward, his Majesty writ to the
Lords Justices, and the Marquis of Ormond from his Court at Matson, the 25th.
of August, the 19th. year of his Reign, which came not to them till the 26th.
of September, eleven days after the Cessation was concluded; Authorizing them,
or any two of them, to treat and conclude for him, and in his name, with his
Subjects then in Arms in that his Kingdom, for a Cessation of Arms for one
whole year. But before this Letter arrived, the Treaty at Sigginstown began
with the Confederates Commissioners, by virtue of the Letter the Marquis had
formerly received from his Majesty, dated at Oxford the 31. of July, 1643. who
to that purpose ordered a Commission, dated at Dublin under the Broad Seal, the
last of August, 1643, in the 19th. year of his Majesty's Reign, to conclude the
Cessation with the Irish Commissioners; who, the 26th. of August, 1643. having
met the Marquis of Ormond (Lieutenant General of his Majesty's Army) there,
where insisting upon the Name, Title, and Protestation which at first they had
assumed (not permitted of by the Marquis of Ormond) they proceeded: The Enemy,
in the interim, besieging The Rebels very audacious and active upon the very
point of the conclusion of the Cessation.
Tully, and afterward taking it, even whilst his Majesty's Commission of Grace
was not far thence in execution; and in all places they showed themselves most
active, endeavoring either to surprise, force, or gain by allurements what
they could, exceedingly animated with hopes of a Cessation, that upon its
conclusion, what was in their power might be peaceably possessed. During which
Treaty, many difficulties arose; one (whether in this or the former Treaty, I
am not certain) was much insisted on, ( viz.) How the several Indictments and
Outlawries against the Irish might be repealed? After some dispute, at length
Plunket (one of the Irish Agents) told them, He had found a Remedy; the Judges
before whom they were Indicted might be summoned to the Star Chamber, and there
be Fined. And there replied one (who is seldom found to sign any Act of State
till the Cessation was concluded) all that are concerned may be confident to
find reparation. This the Lord Chief Justice Shurley thought reflected upon
him, who thereupon expressed much courage and integrity. And the Dispute fell:
And the 15th. of September, 1643. the The Cessation concluded.
Cessation was concluded by the Marquis of Ormond, who for his Courage,
Affection, and Loyalty, his Majesty had made his Lieutenant General of his Army
in Ireland, and who (having gotten so many notable His Majesty's Motives to the
Cessation, fol. 355. October. 19. 1643.
Victories over the Rebels) was very well approved of by the two Houses of
Parliament in England. The publication of which, with the Articles, and his
Majesty's Motives thereunto, you may read in his Majesty's Works, from fol.
353. to 365. In confirmation of which, the Lords Justices and Council issued
out a Warrant to the Lord Chancellor, to draw Letters of Confirmation under the
Great Seal of Ireland, which accordingly bore date the 26th. day of September. in
the 19th. year of his Majesty's Reign: And to express the necessity thereof,
many Persons of Quality signed, the said 15th. of September. 1643. a Writing,
therein concluding it necessary for his Majesty's Honor and Service, that the
Lord Marquis of Ormond should assent to a Cessation of Arms; though some of
these afterward (joining with the Parliaments Forces) resolved to die a
thousand deaths, rather than to descend to any Peace with the perfidious
Rebels; but stuck not at length to that Protestation, altering as the Scene
changed.

Whilst the Cessation was in agitation at Sigginstown, the Consequences of
dissolving the Parliament were not the least in consideration at the
Council Board, nor was there any thing more desired by the Rebels, who thereby
hoped to be re-seated in a new Parliament, which they questioned not to manage
to their own ends and advantage. Wherefore that the State might still steer by
the same Compass they had hitherto done, they committed the Case to the Judges;
who unanimously agreed upon the following Reasons for its continuance. May it
please your Lordships,
ACcording to your Lordships Order of the xi. of September, 1643. we Reasons
given in by the Judges for the continuance of this Parliament, against a free
one sought by the Rebels, Sept. 13. 1643.
have considered of such inconveniences, as we conceive may arise to his
Majesty, and his Service, as Affairs now stand, if this present Parliament
should be determined, and have reduced the same to writing, which we humbly
present to your Lordships further consideration.

The greatest part of the Freeholders of this Kingdom are now in actual
Rebellion, whereby his Majesty ought to be justly entitled to all their
Estates, both Real and Personal; this cannot be done but by their Conviction
and Attainder, either by course of Common Law, or by Act of Parliament. By
course of Common Law it will be very difficult to be effected, for these
Reasons following.

First, Those who are indicted in most of the Counties of this Kingdom cannot
be Attainted by Outlawry, by reason that the Sheriffs of those Counties, by
occasion of the present Rebellion, cannot keep their County-Courts, to
Proclaim, and make due Return of the Exigence: Nor can they be Attainted by
Verdict for want of Jurors, most of all the Freeholders in the Kingdom being
now in Rebellion.

Secondly, Those that are not Indicted, or those that are already Indicted, and
in Prison, or upon Bonds, cannot be proceeded against Legally at the Common Law
for want of Jurors; because, as aforesaid, most of the Freeholders are in
Rebellion.

Therefore of necessity, those Persons must either not be Attainted at all, or
only by Act of Parliament, which is scarce possible to be effected, if this
present Parliament be Dissolved, or Discontinued; for that upon a new
Parliament to be Summoned, the Knights and Burgesses must be Elected by the
Freeholders and Inhabitants respectively, most whereof are in Rebellion. And
yet the present Parliament will be discontinued, unless a Commission under the
Great Seal of England to the now Lords Justices, or other the Chief Governor
or Governors for the time being, be here before the 13th. of November next,
being the day of Prorogation, for the beginning of the next Session of
Parliament, to enable them to continue this present Parliament; the last
Commission for the continuance thereof being only to the Lords Justices, one
whereof is since removed.

Unless the Parties now in Rebellion, being Legally Attainted, which cannot be
here, as is aforesaid, as the case now stands, but by Act of Parliament, his
Majesty cannot have power to dispose of their Estates, as in his wisdom he
shall think fit, either for the increasing of his Revenues, or for the
Peaceable establishment of this Commonwealth, and indifferent Administration
of Justice therein.

Rich. Bolton Cancel. Geo. Shurly, Gerrard Lowther, Ja. Donnalon, Sa. Mayard.




The Cessation as yet not being known to his Majesty, the Lords Justices and
Council received a Letter from him at the Camp at Matson near Gloucester, of
the 4th. of September. passionately resenting the sufferings and complaints of
the Officers, who (upon all occasions) had a tender affection in his breast.
And to the end they might not be frustrated of their Arrears, he commands their
Debentors should be respectively signed, that they might take an effectual
course to be paid the same by the Two Houses of Parliament that engaged them.

And left there should be any defect in acknowledging of their Merits, who had
so faithfully ventured their lives for his Majesty's Service, he is yet further
pleased to provide for their Encouragement and Entertainment, who, upon the
Cessation, were now free to serve him, though as yet he knew not of its
conclusion, but (by the Contents of the following Letter) seemed to expect it,
giving particular Orders for the management of Affairs upon that occasion. C. R.

RIght Trusty and Well-beloved Counselors, and right Trusty His Majesty's
fourth Letter touching the Cessation, and his care of his Army.
and entirely Beloved Cousin and Counselor, We greet you well. Whereas not
only the great neglect of the Affairs of that Our Kingdom, by the remaining
part of our Houses of Parliament, who pretended so great care of it, but their
impious preventing all Supplies destined to their Relief by Our Authority,
(which did ever most readily concur to any Levy of Men, Money, or any other
Work, in order to the Assistance of Our Protestant Subjects there) and
employing the same in an unnatural War against Us their Liege Lord and
Sovereign, has reduced our Army in that our Kingdom into so heavy straits,
that out of Our Care of the preservation of them, who so faithfully ventured
their Lives for Our Service, We were brought to condescend to a Treaty for a
Cessation of Arms: Our Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby Charge and
Command you, that in case, according unto the Authority given unto you by Us,
you have agreed upon a Cessation, or as soon as you shall agree thereupon, you,
or any two of you do immediately consider of, and put in execution these Our
following Commands.

1. That you agree upon what number of Our Army will be necessary to be kept in
Garrison there, for the maintenance of the same during the time of the
Cessation, and what Soldiers they shall be, and what Persons shall command the
same; and that you settle them accordingly in that Command, as shall appear to
your discretion to be most conducing to our Service.

2. That you do consider and advise of the best means of Transporting the rest
of Our Army in that Our Province of Leimster, (excepting such as are to be kept
in Garrison in Our Kingdom of Ireland) and to that end We do hereby give you,
or any one of you, full Power and Authority, to hire all Ships, Barques, or
Vessels whatsoever, and to treat with any Persons whatsoever for the Loan,
Hire, or Sale of any Ships, Barques, or Vessels, upon such Conditions as you,
or any one of you, shall agree upon with them.

3. That in such time and manner as to you shall seem meet, you communicate to
the Officers and Soldiers of that Our Army this Our intention, to make use of
their known Courage and Fidelity in the defense of Our Person and Crown,
against the unnatural Rebellion raised against us in this Our Kingdom, and
against the like labored by the Rebels here, to be raised against Us out of
Our Kingdom of Scotland.

4. That you signify unto them, that We are the more moved and necessitated
unto this course, for as much as it is resolved by some ill affected Persons in
that Our Kingdom of Scotland, to call over the Army of Our British Subjects out
of Our Kingdom of Ireland, to the end to make use of them for the Invasion of
Us, and of Our Good Subjects of England. And for as much as this Rebellion
against Us, under color of the humility of Our two Houses of Parliament, has
exhausted the Means appointed, by the concurrence of Our Royal Authority, for
the sustentation of that Our Army there, and by force has stayed and taken
from Us all those Our Revenues, which might have enabled Us to have supplied
them in that Our Kingdom, so that we ought in reason (besides the Bond of their
Allegiance) to expect their ready concurrence against those Persons, who are as
well the Causers of all the Miseries they have endured, as of all the Injuries
We have suffered.

5. That you assure them, both Officers and Soldiers, that upon their Landing
here, they shall immediately receive Our Pay, in the same proportion and manner
with the rest of our Army here. And you are to assure the Soldiers, that all
care shall be taken, that Clothes, Shoes, and other Necessaries be forthwith
provided for them, after they are Landed here; and that care shall be taken for
the Provision of such as shall happen to be maimed here in Our Service; and for
the payment of all their Arrears that shall be due to any of them that shall
happen to be killed in the same, to their Wives, Children, or nearest Friends.
And you are to assure both Officers and Soldiers, that we will take special
care to reward all such according to their Merit and Quality, that shall do us
any eminent Service in this Our War, against this odious and most unnatural
Rebellion.

6. We will and require you, and do hereby authorize you, to use your utmost
Interest and Industry, for the speedy Transportation of this forementioned part
of Our Army, with their Arms, Horses, and such Ammunition, and the like, as you
shall think fit, into Our Kingdom of England; and particularly, if it may be,
to our Fort of the City of Chester, or to the most commodious Haven in
North Wales. And for Our obedience in this, and every other of these Our
Commands, this shall be to you, and every of you, sufficient Warrant.

Given at Our Court at Eudely-Castle, 7th Sept. in the 19th year of Our Reign.
Superscrib'd as before, For the Lords Justices, and the Lieutenant General of
the English Army.


To what Party the Cessation was happy, will be hard to determine; that thereby
the Rebels had an opportunity (which they improved) to provide themselves of
Arms and Ammunition, may easily be conceived; in as much as the Parliament of
England concluded, the Cessation in Ireland was of advantage to none, but to
the bloody Rebels of that Kingdom: Agreeable to what Camd. Annals Eliz. Anno
1595.
well observes, for as much as in that (space wherein a Cessation is allowed to
the Rebels) the Rebels enjoy free liberty to digest all their secret Plots and
Machinations, to strengthen their Sides by The Cessation begat great heats
betwixt* the King and his Parliament.
new Confederacies abroad, and to increase them at home with new Forces; whilst
all this while the English lay at a costly idleness, feeding on the fruits of
their Friends, and faithful Well-willers; when by reason of the Cessation they
might not prey upon the Enemy. Certain it is the Parliament improved the
Cessation to a very specious pretense, in as much as no estate (say they) of
the Rebels was to be disposed of (consequently no Cessation or Peace to be
made) till the Lords and Commons of the Realm of England should, in Parliament,
by order, declare, that the said Rebels were subdued, and this present
Rebellion appeased and ended. But on the contrary, his Majesty showed the
necessity of his good Protestant Subjects, and the Army (being not longer able
to subsist for want of Supplies) enforced that Cessation; though he is told
again, That many (since the Cessation) have, and do subsist: And that one end
for which the Cessation was made, was, that the Forces might be brought out of
Ireland into England, and employed against the two Houses: Which, in Answer,
his Majesty shows the reason of, when the Scots Army before was made use of
against him. The whole Scene is excellently stated in his Majesty's Answer to
the two Papers concerning Ireland, at the Treaty at Uxbridge: How passionately
soever the Parliaments Commissioners conclude, That whatsoever becomes of us,
(say they) if we must perish, yet let us go to our graves with that comfort,
that we have not made Peace with the Enemies of Christ, yea, even Enemies of
Mankind, declared and unreconciled Enemies to our Religion and Nation. And
(indeed, to give the Parliament their due) when they had reduced the Affairs of
England to their own Module, the Rebels of Ireland were frequently chastised,
and so affectionately pursued, that neither Men, Money, or Courage was wanting
to that service. Of the first part of which Paragraph, his Majesty seems most
sensible, expressing (in his Answer beforementioned) That he would be glad,
that either a Peace in England, or any other Expedient, might furnish him with
Means and Power to do Justice upon them; if this cannot be, we must not
desperately expose our good Subjects there to Butchery, without means or
possibility of Protection: God will, in his due time, avenge his own quarrel.
In the mean time, his Gospel gives us leave, in case of War, to sit down and
cast up the cost, and estimate our power to go through with it; and in such
case, where Prudence advises, it is lawful to propose Conditions of Peace,
though the War otherwise might justly be pursued. This wrought much on many.
But the Parliament (who persisted resolutely to have his Majesty disclaim the
Cessation) would not allow any necessity for it, alleging, that though some of
great estimation with the Parliament (whom his Majesty's Commissioners produced
as principally interessed in the managing of Affairs in Ireland, and the War
there) had pressed for Supplies, as in all likelihood to perish speedily without
them; yet they were assured (even by some who were at the Council at that time
when those Letters were written) that the same was done only to press for
Supplies out of England, without the least intention in them of inducing a
Cessation; which is granted. But as the necessities were there laid open, so
they were considered by his Majesty, and no other Expedient remaining for the
Protestants safety, save a Cessation, thereupon it was concluded His Majesty's
Answer to the Commissioners last Paper at Uxbridge, fol. 557.
; though to this day some will have it, that his Majesty's expectation to be
supplied thence, and the preservation of the Irish, almost swallowed up by his
Forces, were the principal Motives to that Cessation. And it must be
acknowledged, from the series of Affairs since, that the Irish (in concluding
the Cessation) had a respect to their greater security and designs, those being
thereby withdrawn to his Majesty's service in England, which otherwise would
certainly have opposed them.

And here I cannot but observe, that the Irish afterward acquired much
confidence, by a Bull of Pope Urban's the 8th. dated at Rome the 25th. of May,
1643. commending their forwardness against the Protestant Heretics, which they
published even after the Cessation of Arms was agreed on; to what intent may be
easily conceived, considering their subsequent frequent violation of Compacts
and Agreements with the State. Though the bleeding Iphigenia (who, in pleading
their Cause, grossly betrays it) would not have it thought, that this charitable
Bull cherished the Catholics in Rebellion, but was only an Indulgence to so
good and just a Quarrel, not any dis-respect to the King, to whom (says he)
his Holiness advised them, by their Agents, to be Loyal; as if that, and the
breach of his Majesty's Commands to lay down Arms, could rationally agree.
Before which Bull, an Indulgence had been sent, Dilecto filio Eugenio Onello,
the 8th. of October, 1642, in the 20th. year of his Papacy.

The Cessation now concluded, Obedience was expected from all parts; but
instead of an absolute compliance from the Scots in Ulster, their Officer in
Chief returned this Letter. Right Honorable,
YOur Lordships of the 21. I received at Ardmagh the 29, together Monro's
Letter to the Lords Justices in dislike of the Cessation.
with the Printed Cessation, which was very displeasing unto this Army, who
being sent Auxiliary for supply of the British Forces in distress, were
promised by his Majesty, and the Parliament of England,* Pay and Entertainment
from three months to three months; nevertheless, in eighteen months time, they
have endured (both Officers and Soldiers) unparalled miseries: And now a
great part of the Service being done, they are rewarded with the conclusion of
a Cessation, without assurance of entertainment for the time, or any certainty
of the payment of their Arrears, and they must conform to the Treaty. This kind
of usage and contempt would constrain good Servants, though his Majesty's Loyal
Subjects, to think upon some course which may be satisfactory to them, being
driven almost to despair, and threatened to be persecuted by the Roman
Catholic Subjects, as they are now called. Nevertheless, of the foresaid
Contempt (for obedience to his Majesty's Command) I have moved the Army for the
time to cease any hostile Act against our Enemies, till such time as your
Lordships will be pleased to consider better of our present condition, and
grant us time to acquaint the General, who has only Commission over the Army,
to advise us how to behave our selves in this Exigency; since I (as Governor
of Carigfergus) can give your Lordships no positive Answer to this Cessation in
the name of our Army, having not absolute Power over them: And immediately
after receiving the General's resolution, your Lordships shall be acquainted
therewith; which is the least favor your Lordships can vouchsafe upon us, in
recompense of our Bygan Service. And so I remain,

Ardmagh, 29 Sept. 1643. Received the 2d. of October. Your Lordships humble and
obedient Servitor, Robert Monro.
To the Right Honorable, the Lords Justices and Council.



Upon this Answer of Monro's, the Supreme Council at Kilkenny, maintaining
their Umpire in the Empire, visits the Lords Justices and Council with this
Letter. Our very good Lords.
WE whom his Majesty's Catholic Subjects of this Kingdom, did entrust The
Supreme Council's Letter from Kilkenny, to the Lords Justices, touching the
Scots breach of the Cessation.
in the management of their Affairs, have by their public Act, ratified and
confirmed the Articles of Cessation, concluded upon by our Commissioners,
willingly and cheerfully, hoping in the quiet of that time assigned for it, by
the benefit of the access which his Majesty is graciously pleased to afford us,
to free our selves from those odious Calumnies, wherewith we have been branded,
and to render our selves worthy of Favor, by some acceptable service, suiting
the expression we have often made, and the real affections and zeal we have to
serve his Majesty; and in as much as we are given to understand, that the Scots
(who not long since in great numbers came over into this Kingdom, and by the
slaughter of many Innocents without distinction of Age or Sex) have possessed
themselves of very large Territories in the North, and since the notice given
them of the Cessation, have not only continued their former cruelties upon the
Persons of weak and unarmed Multitudes, but have added thereunto the burning of
the Corn, belonging to the Natives within that Province of Ulster.
Notwithstanding which outrages, we hear that they have (although but faintly)
and with relation unto the consent of their General, after some days
consultation, whether it were convenient for their Affairs, desired to partake
in the Cessation, intending, as is evident by their proceedings, so far only
to admit thereof, as it may be beneficial for their Patrons, the Malignant
Party, now in Arms against his Majesty in England, by diverting us from
assisting his Majesty, or of advantage to their desire, of eating further into
the bowels of our Country: We who can accuse our selves of no one hollow
thought, and detest all subtle Practices, cannot think of serving two Masters,
or standing Neuters, where our King is Party: And we desirous, none should
reside in this Kingdom, but his Majesty's good Subjects, we beseech your
Lordships therefore, that these who have other ends then his Majesty's Service
and Interest, and are so far from permitting the Natives, to enjoy three parts
of what they have sown, as they may with no security look upon their former
habitations, and do absolutely deny to restore their Prisoners, contrary to the
Articles of Cessation, may by the joint power of all his Majesty's good
Subjects, within this Kingdom, of what Nation soever, be prosecuted, and that
while these Succors are in preparation, our Proceedings against them, may no
way be imputed unto us, a desire any way to violate this Cessation: And we do
further pray your Lordships, that for our justification therein, you will be
pleased to transmit unto his Majesty these our Letters, and to send unto us the
Copy of those directed unto your Lordships, from Sergeant Major Monro,
concerning this Matter. Thus with the remembrance of our heartiest wishes unto
your Lordships, we rest,

Kilkenny, 15. October. 1643. Received 25. Your Lordships loving Friends,
Mountgarret, Castlehaven Audley, H. Armach, Jo. Clonfert, Th. Fr. Dublin, R.
Beling, N. Plunket, Gerrard Fennel.
To the Right Honorable the Lords Justices and Council.



And now many of those Officers who had served his Majesty most signally in
Ireland, were treated with, to recruit his Forces in and about Chester; to
which end all the encouragement (that his Majesty had given in his Letters of
the 4th. and 7th. of September) were faithfully imparted to them, and what
could possibly be raised for their Transportation, was effectually done:
Whereupon several Regiments, as Sir Mich. Earnely's, Sir Rich. Fleetwoods,
Colonel Gibson, Colonel Monk, Colonel Several Regiments transported into
England.
Warren, and others hasted over, but with such Reluctance of the Common
Soldiers, as the sharpest Proclamations (of which there were several) hardly
restrained them from flying their Colors, both before and after their arrival
in England: To prevent which, and that the Soldiers might be secured in their
Loyalty to his Majesty, the Lieutenant General composed this Oath. I Resting
fully assured of his Majesty's most Princely Truth and Goodness, The Oath
imposed upon the Soldiers going for England.
do freely and from my heart promise, vow, and protest, in the presence of
Almighty God, that I will to the utmost of my Power, and with the hazard of my
Life, maintain and defend the true Protestant Religion, established in the
Church of England, his Majesty's sacred Person, his Heirs, and lawful
Successors, and his Majesty's just Powers and Prerogatives, against the Forces
now under the Conduct of the Earl of Essex, and against all other Forces
whatsoever, that are or shall be raised, contrary to his Majesty's Commands and
Authority.

And I will do my best endeavor to procure and re-establish the Peace and
Quietness of the Kingdom of England.

And I will neither directly or indirectly divulge or communicate any thing to
the said Earl of Essex, his Officers, or any other, to hinder or prejudice the
Designs of his Majesty, in the Conduct or Employment of his Army.



Which that it may be taken by every Soldier, follows the Precept. By the
Lieutenant General of his Majesty's Army.
WHereas his Majesty has been pleased to command the present transportation of
a part of his Army here into England, I do think fit, and hereby Order, that
every Officer and Soldier, to be transported hence, do take the Oath,
above-written, before they depart this Harbor.

Given at his Majesty's Castle of Dublin, 13. of October. 1643. Ormond.




And in respect, that upon their going, many Soldiers listed themselves under
other Officers, the Lord Lieutenant (besides other Courses) published, the 13.
of November, an Edict, that no Soldiers, under penalty of death, should depart
from their former Commanders and Officers; and that no Commanders and Officers,
on pain of displeasure, should dare to entertain any Soldiers so offending:
And the 4th. of Feb. 1643. the Lord General published a Proclamation, That if
any Soldier should stay behind, that was commanded to go over, or should,
after he was transported over into England, run away from his Colors, he being
afterward apprehended, should presently suffer death without mercy.

Upon which (as you see) many came over into England, and at Hawerden Castle,
Beeston Castle, Bartomley Church, Dedington House, Acton Church, and Durtwich,
improved their time; but the main body, the 25. of January, 1643. was utterly
defeated by Sir Thomas Fairfax, raising the Siege of Namptwich, 1500 common
Soldiers besides Officers being there taken Prisoners, besides those that were
slain; so that what advantage accrewed to the Regal Army by their coming over,
many believed was not very considerable, unless those, who came out of Munster,
were more successful. The general (if not all those who came to his Majesty's
assistance out of Ireland) were his own Forces, which he See his Majesty's
Message from Oxford, the 24. of Jan. 1645. Fol. 227.
had sent against the Rebels, from whom I cannot yet learn (after all their
professions of having no one hollow thought, or subtle practice to serve two
Masters, or standing Neuters, whilst their King was Party View their Letter
again of the 15th. of October. 1643.
) that any formed Regiment, or considerable, Party reached England, no! it will
hereafter appear, how shamefully they deserted his Majesty's Affairs, even in
Ireland it self, when their Interest might have united them in Loyalty and
Obedience.

Some months after the arrival of these and other Forces out of Ireland, the
Parliament of England made an Ordinance October. 24. 1644.
, against the giving of any Quarter to any Irish man, or to any Papist born in
Ireland, taken in Hostility against the Parliament, by Sea or Land, which his
Majesty thought very severe, they being called to the service of their Natural
Prince.

The coming over of the English made several (that were not so forward)
suspected in their Loyalty; though (in truth) never any Prince had an Army more
entirely affecting his Person, then the generality of his Militia of Ireland;
who being sent thither, or raised there, were not yet weaned from the Justice
of that Cause, hardly matchable in any example, the War being (said, long
since, a great Instrument of State) not an ambitious War of Foraigns, but a
recovery of Subjects (and that after Lenity of Conditions often tried) not
only to obedience, but to Humanity and Policy, from more then Indian
Barbarism: whereas the Affairs of England imbrued Relations in one another
blood, and the Concerns of Ireland were as much his Majesty's as the other; and
the Cause undoubtedly Gods.

The Lords Justices and Council (this while) had a great task, and not so much
as straw to the Work, the Confederates paying in the Money, ( viz. 30800 l.
they promised the 16th. of September, toward the maintenance of his Majesty's
Army, this Cessation) very uncertain, The Irish break the Cessation.
as their Cows and Cattle of the worst, taking within three days after the
Cessation, near 369 head of choice English Cattle from the suburbs of Dublin,
acting besides many other violencies on diverse Castles, Forts, and Houses; so
as this agreement with the Rebels seemed rather a Protection, then a Cessation,
of Acts of Hostility: That in this extremity the Lords Justices Providence and
Care (how great soever) could remedy little, being their business now was to
proceed in another course then formerly they had: the Election of which grew
hourly the heavier upon them, by reason of the discontents which constantly
arose from the Inhabitants, and the Protestants (now, more then ever, sensible
of their Condition, the Irish Agents making all the speed they could to repair
(with their Propositions) to his Majesty then at Oxford, according to an
Article in the Cessation, and his Majesty's Proclamation thereupon, by which
they were allowed to send Agents to his Majesty; of which, the Protestants in
and about Dublin being very apprehensive, lest his Majesty should be
pre-possessed of the Rebels sense, they thought it most convenient to dispatch
Agents presently to his Majesty; and to that end Agents being to go from the
Rebels to Oxford, the Protestants Petition the State, that they might have some
to attend (at the same time) his Majesty's Pleasure.
about the 6th. of October, 1643. they meeting at the Earl of Kildare's house,
framed a Petition to the Lords Justices and Council, humbly beseeching their
Lordships for their License unto such, as they should appoint to attend his
Majesty in their behalf, whereunto the Lords Justices and Council, the 12. of
the same month, expressed their forwardness, declaring how his Majesty, had
been graciously pleased to put them in mind, that thence they should send some
of his Majesty's Ministers to assist in the Treaty, when the Irish should
repair to him; and when they had acquainted his Majesty with the Petitioners
request, they should be certified of his Pleasure with convenient speed: But
the Petitioners (not conceiving this a satisfactory answer) again Petitioned
the Lords Justices and Council, the 14. of the same month, sending them
therewithal a Copy of their Petition they had agreed on to his Majesty;
whereunto the Lord Justices and Council, the 19th. of October, returned an
Answer; That such was their care of the Petitioners, that the same day they had
given them an Answer to their former Petition; they enclosed in their Letters
to Secretary Nicholas their first Petition to them, requesting his Majesty's
gracious Pleasure thereupon, and further they could not now proceed, though if
they would repair to his Majesty, they would not hinder them, but could not
accompany them with their recommendation, till they knew his Majesty's Pleasure
to have them come over; much artifice there was used, to have had some
protested against the Petition they had framed to his Majesty, but none of
those who had signed it (save Major Morris) was wrought upon; and the 17. of
Febr. 1643. the Petition was so well approved of in the House of Commons in
Ireland, as it had their concurrence: And about the beginning of January, a
Letter of his Majesty's to the Lords Justices, and Lieutenant General of the
Army (dated the 6th. of November, 1643.) arrived at Dublin, Licencing the
Protestant Agents to repair to Oxford; of whose further Proceedings with the
management of that business, you shall have speedily. Motions made upon the
Cessation, that some of the Confederates should be admitted unto their
dwellings.


Not long after the Cessation, one moved at the Council Board by way of
Petition, That such of the Irish (as would constantly pay contribution to the
Army) might have freedom to return to their Castles: and the motion took with
some, but was strongly opposed by others, considering how many gallant men (as
Sir Simon Harcourt, and others) had been lost in the regaining of those
Castles; and that (it being uncertain on what terms there might be Peace,) it
might be taken ill by the King, that those Castles (the price of so much blood)
should be surrendered without his Privity, upon which the motion was laid aside;
I will not say, all Reflections afterward on them that opposed it: Nor indeed
was the event of this motion so suppressed, but that in a short time after, some
(through the Importunity of the Irish Agents) were restored to their Estates,
who had from the beginning been in Rebellion; notwithstanding their Estates had
been given in Custodium, and those who had them (not accepting of mean and
sinister proffers) had little else to subsist by, or pay the Arrears of their
Service.

So as Affairs of different natures hourly increasing, subject to
constructions, beyond the management of the Prudentest and most Loyal thoughts,
it could not but be a great ease to be freed of that Government, which an
Illustrious Person (whose Interest was Principally involved in the present
Intrigues) had a Regal Call thereunto; whereupon these Lords Justices were
removed, not without considerable Repose, difficulties daily flowing in upon
them, remediless by any but his Excellency James Marquess of Ormond, who the
21. of January, The Marquis^ of Ormond made Lord Lieutenant the 21. of Jan.
1643.
1643. was solemnly, in Christchurch, Dublin, sworn Lord Lieutenant with
general acceptance: At which time Robert Sibthorp, Bishop of Limerick, chose
for his Text the 77. Psalm, and the last verse, Thou leadest thy People like a
Flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron; upon which he paraphrased exceeding
elegantly; But, (as Sir James Ware observes in his Life) never received a
Farthing of his Bishopric.

The Marquess of Ormond being now seated in the Government, one The Lord
Lieutenant regulating of the Army.
of the first things he began to regulate (after he had sent the designed Army
into England) was the standing Army, at that time much straightned through want
of Pay and other Extremities; he therefore reduced the Troops about Dublin to
Five and twenty apiece, besides Officers, all but his own, which was continued
40. and Sir Thomas Lucas's and Armestrong's 30. besides Officers, and to pay
these (which made up 150 Horse besides 2000 Foot) he raised money by an The
Establishment of which, with the rates set on each Commodity, (according to an
Act of Council made at the Council Board the 4th. of December) was by
Proclamation at the Castle of Dublin, published the 9th. of December, 1644. As
the 12th. of Oct. preceding, there had passed one of the same nature, though
this more large.
Excise, Taxes on the Town, and 3d. an Acre inhabited within the English Pale,
besides enquiry what was owing (by Debts) unto the Londoners; so as thence*
with what Tobacco they had, a considerable sum was weekly raised, and
accordingly disbursed for the Relief of the Soldiers, and other necessaries,
which he having retrench't (according to the Exigence) he kept to due Musters
and observance: And by reason of diverse Robberies and Murders daily committed
by the Soldiers, on such as brought Provision for the Relief of the City, the
Lord-General the 16th. of March, 1643. strictly prohibited all such outrages,
under the utmost Peril of the Martial Laws. And the Parliament there meeting at
Dublin the 17th. of April, the Speakers of both Houses, the 18th. of the same,
1644. by a Letter, prohibited the Commanders, and Officers of his Majesty's
Armies, and others, in the Kingdom of Ireland, to take the Solemn League and
Covenant, according to a Proclamation by the Lords Justices and Council, the
18th. of December, 1643. set out with great Wisdom and Reason, highly
commending their deep Judgment therein; which his Excellency then also
commanded to be Reprinted, at the request of the Commons House of Parliament,
1644 Appendix 10. 11.
. In pursuance of which, an Oath afterward was hammered; but some of the
Judges dis-agreeing, it was never formed. Great were his Excellency's Affairs
indeed, the contrary Parties (he was necessarily obliged to deal with) would in
any (but one so resolute and entire) have betrayed to Effeminacy and Disorder.
The Irish on one hand, confident in their Address to his Majesty, and the
Protestants oppressed with their sufferings and straights, both he quitted to
his Majesty's Justice, after that he had had his Majesty's License for their
Repair to him. The Confederate Catholics thereupon, sent their Agents The Lord
Viscount Muskery, Sir Robert Talbot, Dermot Mac Trag O Bryan, etc. The
Confederates sent their Agents to Oxford.
, authorized by them to attend his Majesty at Oxford, but indeed with such
Desires and Propositions as (weighed but in an indifferent Balance) make too
lively a Representation, how in-competent Considerers they were of the way to
their own Repose and Happiness, and how unlikely they were to prevent the
destroying Calamities which hung over their heads, and so closely pursued them.

At the same time, and so long as the Treaty lasted, the King was likewise The
Lord Lieutenant from the Council Board sent others.
attended by a Committee Sir William Stewart, Sir Gerard Lowther, Sir Philip
Percival, Justice Donnelon, to whom were added, being resident at Oxford, Sir
George Radcliffe, Sir William Sambach.
from the Council Board of Ireland, in pursuance of his Commands, to inform his
Majesty of all matters of Fact which had passed, and of all the Laws and
Customs there necessary to be weighed, upon what the Catholics should demand
or propose.

And by the Parliament then sitting in Dublin, several Captain William Ridgeway
Esquire, Sir Francis Hamilton, Sir Charles Coote, Captain William Parsons, the
Insolencers of the Confederates. Appendix 12. The Protestant Committee of the
Irish Parliament, pressed the execution of the Laws against the Rebels, etc.
were authorized to present to his Majesty the Grievances, of his Protestant
Subjects in Ireland, that nothing might be granted in that Treaty, to the
prejudice of their Interest and security.

Each Party arrived at Oxford near the midst of April; the Confederate Agents
got thither soonest, having less Remora's in their dispatch.

The Confederates, as men who thought themselves possessed of the whole
strength and Power of the Kingdom, and the Kings condition in England so weak,
as he would buy their assistance at any rates, demanded upon the Matter, the
total alteration of Government, both in Church and State, the very form of
making and enacting Laws, which is the foundation of Government, and which had
been practiced, ever since the Reign of King H. 7. must be abolished; and
instead of Liberty or Toleration for the exercise of the Romish Religion, they
insisted on such Privileges, Immunities, and Power, as would have amounted at
best, but to a Toleration of the Protestant Religion, and that no longer then
they should think fit to consent to it.

On the other hand, the Committee of Parliament (as men who too much felt the
smart and anguish of their late sufferings, undervalued and condemned the
Irish, as inferior to them in Courage and Conduct, and as possessed of much
greater Power by the Cessation, then they could retain in War,) very earnestly
pressed the execution of the Laws in force, Reparation for the damages they had
sustained, disarming the Irish in such manner, and to such a degree, as it
might not be hereafter in their Power to do more mischief, and such other
Conditions, as People (who are able to contend) are not usually persuaded to
submit unto, which the Committee The Lord Cottington, Earl of Bristol,
Portland, Lord George Digby, Sir Edward Nicholas, Sir John Culpeper, Sir Edward
Hide, etc. These of the Council much troubled betwixt the contests of the
Rebels and Protestants.
at Oxford for Irish Affairs, insisted on with powerful Reasons and Arguments.

In these so different and distant Applications, they who were sent as moderate
Men from the Council, knew not how to behave themselves, but enough discovered,
that they had not the confidence in the Irish, as to be willing that they
should be so far trusted, that the performance of their Duty should depend
only on their Affection and Allegiance; But that there should be a greater
Restraint upon them, then they were inclined to submit to; otherwise that the
Protestant Religion, and English Interest, would be sooner rooted out by the
Peace they proposed, then it could be by the War.

It is very true, that the Irish Agents demeaned themselves to his Majesty, The
Irish Agents seemingly moved, at what they were from the Confederates enforced
to stand upon.
with great show of Modesty and Duty, (they were Men that lacked neither Art
nor Behavior) and confessed, that they believed that the Demands they were
enjoined to insist upon, were such as his Majesty could not consent unto; and
that the present condition of his Affairs was not so well understood by them,
or by those who sent them, before their coming out of Ireland, as it now was;
which if it had been, they were confident they should have had such
Instructions, as would better have complied with their own Desires, and his
Majesty's Occasions; and therefore frankly offered to return and use their
utmost Endeavors, to incline the Confederate Council, (whose Deputies they
were, and who then exercised the supreme Power over the Confederate Catholics
of that Kingdom) to more Moderation, and to return their full submission and
obedience to his Majesty, upon such Conditions as his Goodness would consent
unto for their security. But how little of this was performed, you shall find
in the sequel of the Story; however, the King sent his Command the 16th. of
Feb. 164. to the Marquess of Ormond, to continue and renew their Cessation for
another year; and likewise a Commission under the Great Seal of England, to
make a full Peace with his Catholic Subjects, upon such Conditions he found
agreeable to the public Good and Welfare, and might produce such a Peace and
Union in that Kingdom, as might vindicate his Regal Power and Authority, and
suppress the Rebels in England and Scotland. And so his Majesty dismissed the
Catholic Agents, with demonstration of much Grace and Confidence with this
good Council, which he most pathetically poured out to them at their departure.
That they should not forget, the preservation of The King's Admonition to the
Irish Agents at their departure.
the Nation, and Religion which they professed, and were so zealous for in
Ireland, depended upon the preservation of his just Rights and Authority in
England: That they saw his Subjects of Scotland, contrary to all Obligations,
had invaded England, and joined with those Rebels against him, who without that
assistance would have been speedily reduced to their obedience. And therefore
if his Catholic Subjects of Ireland made haste, upon such Conditions as he
might then grant without prejudice to himself, and which should be amply
sufficient for the security of their Fortunes, Lives, and Exercise of their
Religion, to assist him, whereby he might be enabled by God's Blessing to
suppress that Rebellion, they might confidently believe, he would never forget
to whose Merit he owed his Preservation and Restoration, and it would then be
in his absolute Power to vouchsafe Graces to them, to complete their happiness,
and which (he gave them his Royal Word) he would then dispense in such manner,
as should not leave them disappointed of any of their just and full
Expectations. But if (by insisting on such Particulars, as he could not in
Conscience consent to, and their Consciences obliged them not to ask, or on
such, as though he could himself be content to yield to, yet in that Juncture
of Time, would bring such great damage to him, that all the Supplies they could
give or send to him, could not countervail, and might be as beneficially
granted to them hereafter, when he might better do it) they should delay their
joining with him, and so look on, till the Rebel's Power prevailed against him
in England and Scotland, and suppressed his Party in those Kingdoms, it would
then be too late for them to give him help, and they would quickly find their
Strength in Ireland, but an imaginary Support for his or their own Interest,
and that they who with much difficulty had destroyed him, would without any
considerable Opposition, ruin their Interest, and root out their Religion with
their Nation, from all the Dominions which should be subject to their
exorbitant Jurisdiction. How much of this proved a Prophecy, their sad
Experience knows, and the World cannot but take notice of.

Soon after the Confederate's Agents were dismissed, the Protestant's Committee
of Parliament (who had managed their Scene with much Courage and Integrity)
drew off, with the King's Favor and Promise to do the utmost he could for them.

In the managing of which Affairs, if they had not been very resolute, armed
with much Truth, they would certainly have fallen under many Inconveniences:
For, besides what they met with at Oxford, they had still Correspondence, and
accordingly acted, as they were animated by a Party of the Protestant Committee
of the Parliament of Ireland, then resident in Dublin, who (that they might
decline the height of what those at Oxford proposed) were tempted by an Order
of the Council Board to certify, Whether the 24 Propositions Appendix 13.
of his Majesty's Protestant Agents of Ireland, (presented to his Majesty the
18th. of April, 1644.) did agree with their sense, in order to the present
condition of the Kingdom: Whereby it is thought, that if it had been said, that
the 24 Propositions had been agreed to by the Protestants in general, there
would have been an Endeavor, to have got some to have signed an Instrument
against the Agent's Proceedings; and therefore their Proceeding was
acknowledged to be according to their Instructions, and their Correspondent's
Advice in Town: As in the Answer. May it please your Lordships.
IN Obedience to your Lordship's Commands, signified in your Order of the 5th.
of June, 1644. directed to us the Persons under-named, requiring us to certify
your Lordships, Whether the 24 Propositions of his Majesty's Protestant Agents
of Ireland, presented to his Majesty, do agree with our sense, in order to the
present condition of this Kingdom. We the said Persons do humbly certify, That
we have perused the Propositions in the said Order mentioned, and do humbly
conceive them, to be in substance pursuant to the humble Petition of his
Majesty's Protestant Subjects, as well Commanders of his Majesty's Army here,
as others, (a Copy of which Petition has been formerly presented to your
Lordships, and from that Honorable Board transmitted to his Sacred Majesty,
and by him graciously received, as may appear by his Majesty's Letters of the
6th. of November last, whereof your Lordships were pleased to grant the
Petitioners a Copy.) And that the said Propositions are, as we humbly conceive,
in substance pursuant unto certain Instructions, entitled, Instructions for
the Agents, who are to attend his most Sacred Majesty, on the behalf of his
Majesty's Protestant Subjects of Ireland: Which Instructions were also
presented at that Honorable Board, and there (upon serious Debate, according
to the Pleasure of your Lordships in some things) altered, and so a Copy
thereof was delivered to your Lordships. And we humbly conceive, that the said
Propositions, are such in substance, as if way may be found, (whereby his
Majesty may bring to pass the Particulars therein conceived) they would conduce
to the Establishment of the true Protestant Religion, the Honor and Advantage
of his Majesty, and the future Security of his Highness, his Royal Posterity,
this his Kingdom, and the Protestant Subjects therein. But how these
Propositions stand, in order to the present condition of this Kingdom, is a
thing far above us to resolve: All which we humbly leave to your Lordship's
Grave Considerations. Signed,

Will. Cooley, Will. Usher, Hen. Jones, Anth. Dopping, Will. Plunket, Theod.
Schoute, Peter Wybrants.




When the Irish Confederates Agents returned into Ireland, most of them (as far
as acted in view) performed their Promise and Engagements to the King, so as
many of the Nobility and Gentry, and most of The Irish Agents Behavior on
their Return into Ireland.
the Persons of considerable Fortune, together with the moderate Clergy, (who
are easy to be numbered) were convinced of the necessity of submitting
themselves entirely to the King, till he was able to grant them more, that they
might not be glad to accept of less. But the evil Genius of that People,
(condemned to wilful ruin and misfortune) soon evidenced how unripe they were
for mercy, and that it was not so easy to allay the Spirits they had conjured
up, as to foment and irritate them. The Nobility, and Men of known Fortune,
(whom self-Interest (by this time) had taught Loyalty) found that they had lost
their Power, and the Reverence they had parted with to the Clergy, had much
Influence on he common People, who, devoting themselves solely to their
Clergy's Dictate, opposed all Conclusions, which (according to Wisdom and true
Policy) were to be the Ingredients of a happy and lasting Peace. And so above 2
years were spent, (after these Agent's departure from the King) in fruitless
and in-effectual Treaties, the Earl of Glamorgan, in the interim, The Earl of
Glamorgan's unjust Management of the King's Affairs in Ireland. Legible in his
Message, dated at Oxford, 29. Jan. 1645.
treating in that wild order with the Rebels, as under a pretended sufficient
Authority from the King, (utterly disowned) he blew them up to such a
pernicious Expectation, by the feigned Articles he signed to them, the 25th. of
August, 1645. so destructive both to Church and State, and so repugnant to his
Majesty's public Professions, and known Resolutions, as the Treaty of Peace
(proceeding on more agreeable Terms by the Lord Lieutenant) found many rubbs
and impediments. Whilst the Strength and Power of the Parliament's Forces in
England exceedingly increased, and his Majesty's Forces were defeated, and
himself (for want of Succors promised out of Ireland) was compelled to deliver
up himself to his Scottish Subjects, and was shortly after by them given into
the hands of the Parliament of England, who being (at last) split into several
Factions, so varied Councils, as (in conclusion) he was betrayed, and suffered,
to the astonishment of the World.

But that I may not o're-slip the Series of this Story, which, through a
conflux of Matter, will sometimes unavoidably be disturbed, I must take notice,
that the first Cessation being near determined, the 5th. of Sept. 1644. there
was a new Cessation agreed on by the Lord Lieutenant, and the Irish
Commissioners, to begin on the 15th. of September, and continue till the 1st.
of December following. And in respect that the Treaty of Peace had several
Matters of weight and consequence, which necessarily required further time to
be prepared, and drawn into writing, it was agreed on at the Castle of Dublin,
the 2d. of October. anno praedict. that the Treaty should be adjourned to the
4th. of November ensuing, the Irish Agents, in the interim, to have liberty to
continue in, or come to Dublin, as often as they should think fit; which time
they improved, and Affairs were so managed, as there was never any other
Cessation till the Peace.

About which time, the Earls of Thomond, Clanrickard, and St. Albans, the Lord
Rannelagh, Fitz-williams, Taaff, and Dillon, who had never receded from his
Majesty's Commands, writ to him, That betwixt two Parties, one, if they were
disposed to make Invasion upon them, and the other, who sticking to the
Covenant, dis-obey'd the Cessation, they were like to be ruined; and therefore
implored his Majesty, to reconcile the Difference betwixt those, who were too
high, either of the Confederates or Protestants, in their Demands, and declare
against the Scots, who would make little distinction (were it in their power)
between them, and those whom they now assaulted.

In treating of Peace, we must not forget, that the Lord Inchequin (having been
easily wrought on to agree to the Cessation) carried over many of his Munster
Forces to the King, who in memory of his service, bestowed on him a noble
Wardship, and would have made him an Earl: But the Presidency of Munster
(pre-dispos'd of to the Earl of Portland) being his aim, he returns again into
Ireland, and from Cork, the 17th. of July, 1644. he and other Officers there
writes to his Majesty, That no Peace could be concluded with the Irish Rebels,
which would not bring unto his Majesty, and the English in general, a far
greater prejudice, than the show of a Peace there would bring them an
advantage, etc. And thereupon besought him, that he would not so much regard so
inconsiderable a handful of People as they were, as to purchase but a seeming
security, by leaving thereby the Protestant Religion in all likelihood to be
extirpated, and his Majesty obnoxious to the loss of that Kingdom: Further
beseeching his Majesty, that he would be pleased to Proclaim again the Irish to
be Rebels, and not to pardon those who have committed so many barbarous Crimes
that they are as far above description, as they are short of honesty,
professing they had his Majesty's Commission for what they did; the true sense
of which devilish aspersion cast upon his Majesty, with other reasons, made
them resolve to die a thousand deaths, rather than condescend to any Peace;
referring themselves in other things to their Declaration.

And from the same place, the day July 18. 1644
following, these The Lord Inchequin, The Lord Broghil, Sir Will. Fenton, Sir
Percy Smith, Lieut. Col. Will. Brocket, Lieut. Col. Tho. Serle, Sergeant Major
Muschamp
write to both Houses of Parliament in England, (much to the same effect)
importuning their Agreement with his Majesty, without which, the War could not
be prosecuted as it ought; offering (for the securing of their Garrison to
their Service) whom they pleased: Concluding, That they hoped such a wise
Assembly would distinguish betwixt the effects of Necessity (the Cessation) and
Dishonesty: Including, in their Letter to both Houses, their Declaration, which
I had thought to have abbreviated, but it is so significant, that we shall find
it unravels many Secrets then to come, and declares such Truths, as without
injury to their Merits we could not smother. The unanimous Declaration of His
Majesty's Protestant Subjects of the Province of Munster.
IF in the undertaking of a just Design it were only requisite, that the
Hearts and Consciences of the Undertakers were satisfied, we should not need to
publish this Declaration; but lest our Enemies should traduce the candor of
our Actions and Intentions, we have made this manifestation of them, which will
acquaint the World with their Malice, and our Innocence.

We are confident, that all Christendom has heard of the bloody Rebellion in
Ireland; and we are as confident, the Rebels and Popish Clergy have so
palliated and disguised it, that many are fully persuaded, they had reason for
what they did: But we believe, all men of Judgment will change that opinion,
when they shall know, That though they were a Conquered People, yet the Laws
were administered unto them with as much equity, as to the English; That they
enjoyed their Religion, though not by Tolleration, yet by Connivance; That
their Lords (though Papists) sat in Parliament; And that the Election of the
Knights of the Shire, and Burgesses, was free, and though of a contrary
Religion, were admitted into the House of Commons. yet for all these, and many
other vast Favors and Privileges, when every one was sitting under his Vine
and Fig Tree, without any provocation, they resolve upon a general extirpation,
both of the Protestants and their Religion, which, without doubt, they had
effected, had not God been more merciful than they were wicked, and by a
Miracle discovered this devilish Design; whereof, though we had notice just
time enough to secure our main Magazine at Dublin, yet we could not prevent the
butchery of multitudes of innocent Souls, which suffered at the first in the
Province of Ulster; and since they have continued this Rebellion with such
perfidiousness and bloodiness, that though we had been as guilty as we are
innocent, yet the prosecuting of the War with that barbarousness, had rather
been a sin than justice. But by Gods great providence, when the Rebellion brake
out first, the Parliament of England was sitting, unto whom his Majesty
communicated so much of his Power over this Kingdom, as we shall hereafter
mention, and gave them great encouragement to prosecute the War against the
Rebels, by granting Lands unto such as should adventure Money for the
maintenance of the War. Whereupon the Parliament (who were most willing to
advance so good a Cause) sent us at first large Supplies, which had so good
success, that the Divine as well as Humane Justice did proclaim them Rebels;
for indeed God Almighty (since the deliverance of the Children of Israel from
the Egyptians) never appeared so visibly as in this War. But the unhappy
misunderstanding between the King and Parliament did so hinder the continuance
of those Supplies for this Kingdom, that all we received in nineteen months,
amounted not to five weeks entertainment; so that the Army which was sent to
relieve us, lived upon us. And truly we may with Justice profess, that the
Forces of this Province did feed as miraculously as fight, being never able to
prescribe any certain way of subsistence for one month together; but when the
poor Inhabitants were almost beggared, and no means for the Forces to subsist
on left, a Cessation of Arms was made for a twelvemonth with the Rebels, which
our necessity (not inclination) compelled us to bear with; and the rather out
of a firm hope, that the Almighty, out of his infinite goodness, would, within
that year, settle a right understanding between the King and Parliament, that
then they would unanimously revenge the crying blood of so many thousands of
innocent Souls; and until God blessed us with the sight of that happy Union, we
might keep our Garrisons (which otherwise we could not) the better to enable
them to prosecute so just and honorable a design. But this Cessation was as
fatal to us, during the time of Treaty, as afterward it was ill observed; for
they (knowing what agreement they would enforce us to condescend unto) did
privately send one or two persons to every Castle that we had demolished, which
under pretense of being by that means in their possession, they ever since
detain, though it be contrary to the Articles. And which is more injurious,
they have at all times since entered upon what Lands they have thought fit, and
detained them also; and their devilish malice having no bounds, they did place
Guards upon the Highways to interrupt our Markets, and punished diverse of
their own Party for coming with Provisions to us, thereby to deter all from
bringing any relief to our Garrisons, that so they might starve us out of those
Places, that neither their fraud or force could get from us; which that they
might the better accomplish, they murdered diverse of the poor English, that
presuming on the Article of free Commerce, went abroad to buy Victuals; which
certainly would have caused them to have declined that course of seeking Food,
if hunger, threatening them with more certain death, had not forced them
thereunto. And whereas we trusted, that these notorious infidelities in them,
and infinite sufferings in us, would have been so visible to his Majesty, that
nothing could have induced him to make a Peace with so perfidious a People, who
through their fawning and insinuating with his Majesty, and by the counsel of
some, who represent, that there is no way left for the securing the remainder
of English, but by a Peace. We find his Majesty (being deluded by the first,
and believing the last to be conducing to the preservation of his Majesty's
Protestant Subjects) is concluding of a Peace, which will again admit those
Irish Rebels to be Members of Parliament; so that that Court which should
afford relief for our Grievances, will, by their over-swaying Votes, be our
greatest Grievance.

Moreover, we are too truly informed by diverse of their own Party, (whose names
if we should publish, would be as great an ingratitude as folly; the first, in
betraying those that obliged us; the last, in depriving our selves of all
future Intelligence by them) that they have vowed never to submit to an English
or Protestant Government, except they have liberty to exercise their Religion
in Churches; That the Forces of the Kingdom may be Train'd-Bands of their Men;
and that likewise those of their own Religion may be admitted to Places of
Trust in the Commonwealth, which they call modest and moderate demands; though
we hope they cannot seem so to any but themselves, and their Clergy, who, we
find, do not think them enough, being they may not have all their
Church Livings. For we have certain intelligence, that they have made a strong
Faction, as well among my Lord of Castlehaven's Soldiers, as in all other parts
of the Kingdom, so that they are five parts of six who will fly out into a new
action, when they see a convenient time to execute their design, which as yet
they determine to forbear, until they see a Peace concluded; supposing, that
then the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland will intermix Irish and English without
distinction, to oppose the Scots, and that by that means there will be a
sufficient number of their Party in our Garrisons to master them, which, when
they find an opportunity for, they will certainly seize into their own hands;
upon notice whereof, the Faction abroad will, with all expedition, apprehend
the English in all parts; and having accomplished this part of their design,
they will manifest that they are weary of the King of England's Government, and
that they will trust none of his Protestant Subjects among them; for we are
certainly informed, that they will invite a Foreign Prince to take them into
his protection, unto whom they will deliver possession of what he pleases, and
will become his Subjects.

And lest that Princes Treasure should be exhausted by Wars in other places,
the Clergy have, with the Pope's assistance, raised amongst those of their own
Calling, and diverse of the Gentry in Italy, one hundred thousand pounds in
money, and a quantity of Arms and Ammunition, that are now ready to be sent
hither; and they have employed one Doctor Duyer to go forthwith thither for it;
as also to get his Holiness to settle a course for the raising of more Money,
to be employed for the advancement of that which they call the Catholic Cause.

Therefore out of a true sense of our injuries already suffered, and
un-redressed, with a right apprehension of inevitable ruin, not only to our
Lives and Estates, but likewise to the English Nation and Protestant Religion,
we have re-assum'd our Arms, according to our Duty to God, our King and
Country, with inviolable resolution to die, or frustrate this devilish design.

And since those that die acting for the Gospel, are as perfect Martyrs, as
those that die suffering for it; we cannot but with joy embrace any effect,
that proceeds from so glorious a Cause.

Neither can this act be esteemed a crime in us, since his Majesty, upon the
Rebels first Insurrection, his Treasure being exhausted, gave his Royal assent
for the passing of an Act of Parliament, wherein he granted (to all his
Subjects that would adventure money toward reducing of the Rebels) Lands
proportionable to the sum adventured, which would fall to the Crown, when the
Conquest should be finished. And the better to secure the Adventurers, his
Majesty obliged himself to make no Peace with the Rebels, but with the advice
and approbation of the Parliament of England; and by that Act, communicated to
the Parliament that Power, which before was solely in himself. So that they not
condescending to this Peace, our employing of their Aids, and re-assuming of
those Arms put into our hands by King and Parliament jointly, cannot be
esteemed contradictory to his Majesty, in regard that their joint Act is so
absolutely binding, that neither of them severally can annull it, as is evident
in the Laws of the Realm.

Therefore if this War were only Offensive, yet even slander it self must
acknowledge us innocent, having so just a Cause, so pious an Intention, and so
lawful an Authority; much more it being Defensive, and the Law both of God and
Nature allowing every one to defend himself from violence and wrong.

Moreover, the King must never expect any obedience from the Irish, but what
proceeds either from their Interest, or Fear. Through the first of these,
neither his Majesty or we can hope for assurance; for not granting them all
their desires, their Interest (which is more powerful with them than their
Loyalty) will make them throw off their subjection, and to become absolute, not
scruple to destroy us: Then to expect any security by their fears, were
frivolous; for though we have found their Hearts as ill as their Cause, yet
they cannot be apprehensive of 2 or 3000 ill armed and unprovided men, having
all things necessary, and so numerous a People at their devotion.

And lest our Enemies should scandalize us with breach of Faith, in violating
the pretended Cessation; or with Cruelty, in expelling the Irish Papists from
our Garrisons, who hitherto seemed adhering to us.

Concerning the first, we declare, That although our necessities did induce us
to submit, supposing the Cessation would have produced other effects, as is
before mentioned; yet we had no power (without Authority from King and
Parliament jointly) to treat or yield to it; or if it had been in our powers,
yet by the Rebels daily breaches of it, we are disengaged from it.

Concerning the second, we declare, That our Garrison cannot be secured, whilst
so powerful and perfidious Enemies are in our bosoms; Powerful, being four to
one in number more than the English; Perfidious, in their constant designs to
betray us, some whereof we will instance, to convince their own Consciences,
and satisfy the World of our just proceedings.

One Francis Matthews, a Franciscan Friar, (being wonderfully discovered in an
Enigmatical Letter, and as justly executed) before his death confessed, that he
had agreed to betray the City of Cork to the Lord of Muskery; which must
necessarily infer, that the chiefest and greatest part of that City were
engaged in this Conspiracy, for otherwise he could not so much as hope the
accomplishment: And if this had taken effect, it had consequently ruined all
the Protestants in the Province of Munster, that being our chief Magazine, and
greatest Garrison. Besides, upon this occasion, other Friars being examined
upon Oath, confessed, that in their daily Masses within that Town, and all
other of our Garrisons, (where Papists did inhabit) they prayed for the
advancement of the Catholic Cause, which they believed the Rebels fought for.

And lastly, we have lately discovered, that the now Major and Corporation had
combined with the Rebels to betray the Town to them; and for that purpose an
Army was drawn to all the parts adjoining to our Garrisons; in the three
chiefest whereof, we are confident, the Rebels had their Party; but by Divine
Providence, before the Plot could be executed, the Major presuming on his
speedy success, contemned the Lord of Inchequin's Authority, by opposing the
levying of the Moneys granted by the English, for the maintenance of the
Soldiers, just about the nick of time that the Treachery was to be effected.

And he being committed upon this occasion, the Rebels apprehending their
design to be discovered, withdrew their Forces. And lest this should be judged
as an act of the Major only, as a private person, we desire the World to take
notice, that as soon as our Army, which forced their obedience, was removed
into England, the Papists generally resisted what ever could be propounded for
our security, and would have dis-enabled us to continue our Garrisons, had not
the poor stripped English taken all that burden upon themselves.

Nay, they were so insolent, that they labored to get Arms into their hands,
and to cause us to disband our Soldiers, which they affirmed to be kept as an
unnecessary charge upon the King, that so they might with more facility receive
the Irish, and ruin us.

In a word, since they pretend the ground of this War to be for Religion, and
that this is confessed by those who seemed to adhere to us; what faith can be
expected from such a People, whose Religion permits them to hold none with us?

By this preceding Relation, it is evidently seen, that unless we reassume our
Arms, we betray the trust committed to us by God, the King and Parliament, and
become slaves both of bodies and souls. And therefore we have resolved to
perform our duty, though with apparent hazard of our lives; and likewise
maintain that, which is a thousand times more dear unto us, our Religion, and
also defend our Garrisons for the Kings just use.

These, we take God to witness, are our intentions, and we beseech him to
punish us as strangely, as hitherto he has preserved us, if we decline at all
from these Loyal and Religious resolutions; and we firmly hope, that the World
will, by this Declaration, be as fully satisfied of the justness of our
proceedings, as we our selves are; then though we all lose our lives in this
Cause, we shall give our Friends occasion to rejoice, and our Enemies to envy
at so blessed an end.



This return of the Munster Forces to the Parliament, was not so welcome to
them, as it was strange to the Lord Lieutenant, who thereupon expostulated the
business with the Lord Inchequin, who the 2d. of August writ to his Excellency,
That on suspicions of another intended surprisal by the Irish, and out of a
care to protect the English, he had cleared Cork, Toughall, and Kinsale, of the
Irish, and put himself into a posture of safety, which, with his return from
England, was the worse resented, for that he was the first man who moved the
King to send for the The Lord Inchequin's revolt to the Parliament after the
Cessation.
Forces of Ireland into England. Upon his revolt to the Parliament, he dreamed
of sudden Supplies, but they were at that time so imbroil'd in business, as
they had little leisure to consider of Ireland, and less means to help them, so
as little was sent to him for eight or ten months after; but they made him Lord
President of Munster. Nor had the Scots much more relief in the North; however,
the new and old Scots (under Monro) The Scots preserve themselves against the
incursions of the Rebels.
joining themselves together unanimously, made a shift to preserve themselves
against the incursions of the Rebels; and about Midsummer, 1644. they gathered
an Army of 10000 Horse and Foot, and came into the County of Cavan, and sent a
Party into Longford, and spoiled much of that Country, and marched to Owen Roe
and the Earl of Castlehaven, who lay with their Army about Tonrages, where they
encompassed them, and (had they been sufficiently vigilant) might certainly
have defeated the Rebels; who, through the favor of a close night, escaped,
though pursued, and at Finagh-Bridge met with a severe slaughter; Nugents house
of Carlestown they burnt, and hanged him. In the interim, Duncannon (one of the
strongest Forts in Ireland, under the Command of the Lord Esmond) submitted not
to the Cessation; but, being strongly besieged by Preston, was surrendered about
March, 1644. before Sir Arthur Loftus (who was to have been Governor of the
Fort under his Lordship) arrived there with a competent Supply, who (finding
himself disappointed thereof) carried his Provisions into Munster, and the Lord
Esmond soon after died. What difference soever there was between some Towns and
the Lord Lieutenant, yet for the encouragement of any that should bring
Commodities to Dublin, Tredagh, Dundalk, Carlingford, Cork, Kinsale, or
Youghal, for the relief of his Majesty's Army and good Subjects there; a
Proclamation passed at Dublin the 20th. of May, 1644. to free them for six
months from all Customs and Impositions, in pursuance of a Proclamation from
his Majesty at Oxford, the 17th. of March, 1643. In April after, the Committee
of both Kingdoms in England (to whom the affairs of Ireland were, from the
Parliament, committed, finding the business of Ireland grow very heavy upon
them) got themselves quit thereof; and the Houses instituted another to sit at
the Star Chamber, of 13 Lords, and 28 Commoners; but few in it that understood
the business of Ireland, besides two Gentlemen, whose Interest leading them to
several Provinces, much injured the equal management of the whole; and he (to
whom the Provisions were entrusted) ordered them at that rate, as the complaint
was great. About May, 1645. there were appointed Commissioners 1645.
for Ulster, Arthur Annesly Esquire Sir Robert King, and Colonel Beale, a Citizen
of London, who were to carry with them 20000 l. in Money, besides Provisions
and Ammunition; but the dispatch was so slow, as they Landed not there till
October; besides, some Commissioners should have joined with them from
Scotland, who never came upon the Place: so nothing could be orderly done, in
that the Scots by a late Treaty pretended a Right in the Government of Ireland,
which his Majesty in his Papers took just Exceptions against, they long
certainly having it in their Design, to make themselves Masters of the North of
Ireland, since they failed of retaining any Interest in the Government in
England. But Troubles increasing in Scotland, through Montross and Colonel
Kitto^'s joining together, who had certainly taken Edinburgh, but that the
Plague was violent there: several of the late Scotch Regiments were drawn from
Ulster, that more than what garrisoned Carickfergus, Belfast, Colrain, and some
other Places near the Seacoast, where they committed the most notorious
Extortions and Oppressions ever laid upon a People, were not there left; and
the Commissioners for the Parliament beforementioned acted in their own Place.
Not long after whose settlement in Ireland, the Irish growing insolent in
Connaght, taking their Garrisons, and turning out many English, and others,
who, by the Articles of Cessation, should have been better used, there came to
them (by one Mr. Galbreth) Offers, tending to compose the Differencies betwixt
the Greatest then in Power, and them: But the Offer being found a Design, to
draw the British Army under another Command, the fruit of that Expectation soon
withered, and Galbreth by Bonds was secured.

And that Affairs (more probably) might succeed, a general Assembly of the
Confederate Catholics, (which consisted of all the Peers of that Party, and of
all the Gentlemen and Burgesses of Corporation Towns, which was as lively a
Representation of the whole Nation, as they could make) toward the end of the
year, viz. the 6th. of March, 1645. appointed and authorized a select number of
that Body, (of the Persons of eminent Quality, and most eminent Ability, and
such, as through all the Troubles had been employed and entrusted by them, in
Places and Offices of highest Trust and Concernment) to treat and conclude with
the Marquess of Ormond, his Majesty's Lieutenant of that Kingdom, a firm and
full Peace. For the expediting of which, his Excellency had had many and
serious Invitations from his Majesty, as the most visible means then left to
revive the Hopes he was reduced to: To which end, in June, before he had sent
Mr. Daniel O Neal (Groom of his Bedchamber) into Ireland, a Person by reason
of his Relations there much confided in; who, amongst other things entrusted to
his charge, had it in his Instructions, the 27th. of June, to acquaint the
Marquess of Ormond, That his Majesty would be glad he could frame such a Body
there to send over, as might be worthy of his own coming to command it. And in
a Letter from an Honorable Person then at Denbigh, the 26th. of September,
1645. his Excellency was again acquainted, That his Majesty persists in his
earnest desire to have him in England, for that, without flattery, they were
likely to be in more want of such a General, than of an Army; so as nothing was
wanting to value his Fidelity and Courage. And yet the Impatiency of some Men
were such, (not considering how that would be a scandalous Peace, that would be
unavoidable) that they writ to their Friends, That if the Peace were not
concluded, that it was not like that ever it would be by those that managed it
then; so as they would have had the Queen Regent of France, to have concluded
it with such as the Catholics from Ireland should appoint. In such sort was
his Excellency censured, who having discharged his Trust, could not (at those
Men's time) reduce the Irish to a credible compliance, the fault of their
several Ruptures amongst themselves, not his remissness. Inasmuch as The Lord
D. principal Secretary.
one (better versed in the Subtilties of the Irish, than most of that Age,
having, through the Eminency of his Employment, the knowledge of their Councils
and Intrigues) writes to an Honorable The Lord I. from Ascot, 27. Aug. 1645.
Person, That the truth of it was, that the Irish had proceeded thitherto, as
if they had had no good intention, having not been contented with the effects
of more than their Agents did profess to expect, but in effect, capitulated for
the Protestant Churches through Ireland: A Concession so detestable, as the
King In a Letter printed at Oxford, page 3.
taking notice (to Secretary Nicholas) of the Earl of Glamorgan's Agreement
with the Rebels, declares, That were the condition of his Affairs much more
desperate than it is, he would never redeem them by a Concession of so much
wrong, both to his Honor and Conscience: It is (writes he, in that clear
discovery of his Soul) for the defense of his Religion, that he had undergone
the Extremities of War here, and he will never redeem his Crown by sacrificing
it there: Lines so august and pious, that methinks none should dare read them,
who should presume to offer Incense, otherwise than he has paid his: The
Treaty for the Peace however went on, though by many cautious and un-easie
steps. You have seen what Doubts some raised of his Excellency's Proceedings
herein, and by Col. Fitz-Williams's Letter to Lord D. 16. July, 1645.
one (employed with much credit in that Business) it is manifest, That the
Marquess was resolved never to condescend to the Demands of the Irish, who
(writes he) resolved to have them, or perish; such their Insolency! And we find
through the whole Scene, they wrought upon the Necessities of the King, their
Demands, as his Straights, ever increasing; however, In his Letter from
Caerdiff, 3. August, 1645
he assured the Queen, the Irish should not cheat him, though it was possible
they might cozen themselves.

But before we proceed, it will be necessary to take notice of an un-usual
Guest, the Pope's Nuncio, John Baptist Rinuccini, Archbishop and Prince of
Fermo, introduced by the first Legate, from the Confederates to Rome, to Pope
Urban the 8th. and other Princes of Italy, Rich. Bealing Esquire a leading Member
of, and chief Secretary to their supreme Council, by whose means only he was
sent into Ireland, even whilst the Treaty of Peace (the utmost Grace his
Majesty could vouchsafe his People) was set on foot; an acceptable and loyal
service! as you will hear in the sequel of this Story. He arrived at the River
of Kilmare, in a Frigate of 21 Pieces, and 26 Italians, of his Retinue, besides
diverse regular and secular Priests, the 22. of October, 1645. And amongst the
Accounts of those Times, there is a List given in of some Arms, Ammunition, and
Spanish Gold; but not hearing as yet of the Blessing they produced, we shall
(as to those Particulars) confine our Pen, yet give you here the supreme
Council's Address to his Holiness, in acknowledgement of the Nuncio's Arrival.
Per supremum Consilium Confederatorum Catholicorum, in Regno Hiberniae, ad
beatum Patrem nostrum Innocentium Papam.
Beatissime Pater,
QUod in ipso limine sui Pontificatus rebus nostris consulere voluerit, and
Illustrissimum Virum Archiepiscopum Fermanum, Praelatum vestrae sanctitatis
Domesticum, and assistentem sedis Apostolicae extraordinarium Nuncium ad nos
miserit, gratias quas possumus humillime reddimus; illum si non qua decuit
magni scientia, certe insuperabili amore, and gaudio recipimus, illum etiam de
vestrae sanctitatis in nos nostramque causam animi effectu and sollicitudine
discurrentem avide audivimus, speramusque nos Apostolica benedictione, quam
nobis vestrae sanctitatis nomine impertivit suffultos, and subsidiis
ulterioribus, quae tanto bello necessaria duxerit paterna sanctitatis cura,
tanti etiam and tam prudentis viri adhortationibus and consiliis, eo res
nostras promovere posse, ut de stabilita in Hiberniam Catholica Religione
triumphare posset Innocentius Christissimus, quam and vestrae sanctitati and
nobis victoriam a Deo exercituum humili and confidenti cord implorant demisse
benedictionem obsecrantes,

Kilkenniae, 7. Jan. 1645. Vestrae Sanctitatis ad Pedum Oscula.



But to proceed to the Peace, in which all the Particulars, which might concern
the Interest and Security of either Party, being maturely weighed and
considered, and then every Article being first read, debated, and approved, in
the general Assembly, without one dissenting voice, the whole was concluded,
and the Confederate Catholics obliged to transport (within a very short time)
an Army of 10000 Men into England, for the Service and Relief of the King; as
by the succeeding Propositions with Colonel Fitz-Williams, is fuller evident.
Fitz-Williams's Propositions about the Treaty with the Queen, to bring Irish
into England.
Col. Fitz-Williams humbly prays and propounds as follows,
THat your Sacred Majesty will vouchsafe to prevail with his Majesty, to
condescend to the just Demands of his Irish Subjects, the Confederate
Catholics in Ireland, at least in private. That upon the consideration
thereof, Colonel Fitz-Williams humbly propounds and undertakes, with
approbation of Mr. To whom, and the Irish Agents, the King in his Letter to the
Queen, Jan. 30. 1644. advises not to give much Countenance.
Hertogen, now employed Agent for the said Confederate Catholics in Ireland,
to bring an Army of 10000 Men, or more, of the King's Subjects, in his Kingdom
of Ireland, for the King's Service, into England.

That Colonel Fitz-Williams undertakes, for the sum of 10000 l. sterling, to
levy Ships, and arm the 10000 Men, and so proportionably for more or less; and
that the said Moneys may be paid into such hands, as may be safe for your
Majesty, as well as ready for the said Colonel, when it shall appear the said
Army shall be in readiness to be transported into England.

That upon the Landing of the said Men, there shall be advanced to the Colonel
one months Pay for all the Army, according to the Muster, for the present
support of the Army. That Colonel Fitz-Williams may be Commander in Chief
thereof, and dispose of all the Officers, and only be commanded by the King,
Prince, and -- and qualified with such Benefits, as have been formerly granted
unto your Majesty's Generals, that have commanded Bodies apart from the King's
own Army, as the Earl of Kingston, and others, whereby the better to enable him
in the Levies, as well as in the general Conduct of the Business. And in
respect the Order gives no Power to the Irish, therefore that the said Forces
shall not by any Order whatsoever be divided, at least that the Colonel may be
supplied with a Body of -- 2000. to be ready at the Place of Landing. That the
Colonel may be provided with Arms and Ammunition, or with Money requisite for
himself, to provide necessary Proportions for to bring with him. That the Army
shall be paid as other Armies of the King.

Having taken these Propositions into Consideration, We have thought fit to
testify our Approbation and Agreement thereunto, under our Sign Manual,
assuring, what has been desired of us therein, shall be forthwith effectually
endeavored, and not doubting, to the satisfaction of the Confederate
Catholics of Ireland, and of the said Colonel; so that we may justly expect an
agreeable compliance and performance accordingly from all Parties, in their
several Concernments. Henriette Marie.



All things thus stated and settled, the Commissioners (who had treated in the
Peace) were sent by and in the Name of the Assembly, to Dublin, where the Lord
Lieutenant resided, to sign the said Articles, and to receive his Lordship's
Confirmation of them: And accordingly the Articles 1646.
were, the 30th. of July, 1646. interchangeably signed and perfected, The first
Peace concluded.
with all formality requisite, (notwithstanding his Majesty's Letter from
Newcastle, the 11th. of June, 1646. to treat no farther with the Rebels;) and
shortly after, they were (with great Solemnity and Ceremony) published and
proclaimed by the King at Arms at Dublin, and at Kilkenny, where the Supreme
Council and the Assemblies of all the Confederate Catholics were held, and
then Printed by their Authority: The Archbishop of Firmo, manifesting his
approbation of all that had been done, giving his blessing to the
Commissioners, when they were sent to Dublin to conclude the Treaty, and other
Ministers from Foraign Princes being present, consenting to, and witnessing the
Conclusion. By the Lord Lieutenant and Council.
Ormond.
WHereas Articles of Peace are made, concluded, accorded and agreed upon, by
and between Us, James Lord Marquess of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant General, and
General Governor of his Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, his Majesty's
Commissioner, to Treat and Conclude a Peace with his Majesty's Roman Catholic
Subjects of the said Kingdom, by virtue of his Majesty's Commission under the
Great Seal of England, bearing Date at Buckingham on the 24th. day of June, in
the Twentieth year of his Reign, for and on the behalf of his Most Excellent
Majesty of the one part; and Donogh Lord Viscount Muskery, and others,
appointed and Authorized by his Majesty's said Roman Catholic Subjects, by
virtue of an Authority of the said Roman Catholic Subjects, bearing Date the
sixth day of March, 1645. and in the 21. year of his Majesty's Reign, of the
other part, a true Copy of which Articles of Peace is hereunto annexed, We the
Lord Lieutenant and Council do by this Proclamation, in his Majesty's Name,
Publish the same, And do, in his Majesty's Name, strictly charge and command
all his Majesty's Subjects, and all others Inhabiting or Residing within his
Majesty's said Kingdom of Ireland, to take notice thereof, and to render due
Obedience to the same in all the parts thereof.

And as his Majesty has been induced to this Peace, out of a deep sense of the
Miseries and Calamities brought upon this his Kingdom and People, and out of a
hope conceived by his Majesty, that it may prevent the further effusion of his
Subjects blood, redeem them out of all the miseries and calamities, under which
they now suffer, restore them to all quietness and happiness, under his
Majesty's most gracious Government, deliver the Kingdom in general from those
slaughters, deprecations, rapines and spoils, which always accompany a War,
encourage the Subjects and others with comfort to betake themselves to Trade,
Traffic, Commerce, Manufacture, and all other things, which un-interrupted,
may increase the wealth and strength of the Kingdom, beget in all his Majesty's
Subjects of this Kingdom, a perfect Unity amongst themselves, after the too
long continued Division amongst them: So his Majesty assures himself, that all
his Subjects of this his Kingdom (duly considering the great and inestimable
benefits, which they may find in this Peace) will with all duty render due
obedience thereunto. And We, in his Majesty's Name, do hereby Declare, That all
Persons, so rendering due Obedience to the said Peace, shall be protected,
cherished, countenanced, and supported by his Majesty and his Royal Authority,
according to the true intent and meaning of the said Articles of Peace.

Given at his Majesty's Castle of Dublin, the Thirtieth day of July, 1646. Ri.
Bolton, Canc.
Roscomon. Dillon.
Cha. Lambart.
Gerrard Lowther.
Fr. Willoughby.
Robert Forth.
La. Dublin.
Geo. Cloyne.
Arthur Chichester.
Hen. Tichborn.
Tho. Lucas.
Ja. Ware.
God save the King.
An Abreviate of the Articles of Peace concluded by the Marquess of Ormond,
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, Commissioner for the King; and the Lord
Mountgarret, President of the Supreme Council, the Lord Muskery, Sir Robert
Talbot, Dermot O Brian, Patrick Darcy, Jeffery Brown, and John Dillon,
Esquires, Commissioners for the Irish.
1. THat the Professors of the Roman Catholic Religion, in the Kingdom of
Ireland, or any of them, be not bound or obliged to take the Oath of Supremacy,
expressed in the second of Queen Elis. commonly called, the Oath of Supremacy.

2. That a Parliament may be held on or before the last day of November next;
and that these Articles agreed on, may be transmitted into England, according
to the usual Form, and passed, provided that nothing may be passed to the
Prejudice of either Protestant or Catholic Party, other then such things as
upon this Treaty shall be concluded.

3. That all Acts made by both or either Houses of Parliament, to the Blemish
or Prejudice of his Majesty's Roman Catholic Subjects, since the 7th. of
August, (1641.) shall be vacated by Acts of Parliament.

4. That no Actions of Law shall be removed before the said Parliament, in case
it be sooner called then the last of November; And that all Impediments which
may hinder the Roman Catholics to sit in the next Parliament, shall be removed
before the Parliament sit.

5. That all Debts do Stand in state, as they were in the beginning of these
Troubles.

6. That the Plantation in Connaght, Kilkenny, Clare, Thomond, Tipperary,
Limrick, and Wickloe, may be revoked by Act of Parliament, and their Estates
secured in the next Sessions.

7. That the Natives may erect one or more Inns of Court, in or near the City
of Dublin, they taking an Oath; as also one or more Universities to be
Governed, as his Majesty shall appoint; as also to have Schools for Education
of Youth, in the Kingdom.

8. That Places of Command, of Forts, Castles, Garrisons, Towns, and other
Places of Importance, and all Places of Honor, Profit, and Trust, shall be
conferred with equal Indifferency upon the Catholics, as his Majesty's other
Subjects, according to their respective Merits and Abilities.

9. That 12000 l. Sterling, be paid the King yearly, for the Court of Wards.

10. That no Peer may be capable of more Proxies then two. And that no Lords
Vote in Parliament, unless in 5 years, a Lord Baron purchase in Ireland 200 l.
per anum, a Viscount 400 l. and an Earl 600 l. or lose their Votes till they
purchase.

11. That the Independency of the Parliament of Ireland, on the Kingdom of
England, shall be decided by Declaration of both Houses, agreeable to the Laws
of the Kingdom of Ireland.

12. That the Council Table, shall contain itself within its bounds, in
handling Matters of State, as Patents of Plantations, Offices, etc. and not
meddle with matter, betwixt Party and Party.

13. That all Acts concerning Staple or Native Commodities of this Kingdom,
shall be repealed, except Wool, and Woollfels; and that the Commissioners, the
Lord Mountgarret, and others named in the 26 Article, shall be Authorized under
the Great Seal, to moderate and ascertain the rates of Merchandise, to be
exported and imported.

14. That no Governor be longer Resident, then his Majesty shall find for the
good of his People, and that they make no purchase, other then by Lease for the
Provision of their Houses.

15. That an Act of Oblivion may be passed, without extending to any who will
not accept of this Peace.

16. That no Governor, or any other Prime Minister of State in Ireland, shall
be Farmers of his Majesty's Customs.

17. That a Repeal of all Monopolies, be passed.

18. That Commissioners be appointed, to regulate the Court of Castle-Chamber.

19. That Acts, Prohibiting Plowing by Horse-tails, and burning of Oats in the
Straw, be repealed.

20. That Course be taken against the Disobedience of the Cessation and Peace.

21. That such Graces as were promised by his Majesty in the Fourth year of his
Reign, and sued for by a Committee of both Houses of Parliament, and not
expressed in these Articles, may in the next ensuing Parliament be desired of
his Majesty.

22. That Maritine Causes be determined here, without Appeal into England.

23. That the increase of Rents lately raised upon the Commission of defective
Titles, be repealed.

24. That all Interests of Money due by way of Debt, Mortgage, or otherwise,
and not yet satisfied since the 23. of October. 1641. to pay no more than 5l. per
Cent.

25. That the Commissioners have power to determine all Cases within their
Quarters, until the perfection of these Articles by Parliament, and raise 10000
Men for his Majesty.

26. That the Lord Mountgarret, Muskery, Sir Dan. O Bryan, Sir Lucas Dillon,
Nich. Plunket, Rich. Bealing, Philip Mac-Hugh O Rely, Terlogh O Neal, Thomas
Flemming, Patrick Darcy, Gerald Fennel, and Jeffery Brown, or any five of them,
be for the present Commissioners of the Peace, Oyer and Terminer, and
Jail-deliver, in the present Quarters of the Confederate Catholics; with
power of Justice of Peace, Oyer and Terminer, and Jail-deliver, as in former
times of Peace they have usually had.

27. That none of the Roman Catholic Party, before there be a Settlement by
Parliament, Sue, Implead, or Arrest, or be Sued, Impleaded, or Arrested, in any
Court, other than before the Commissioners, or in the several Corporations, or
other Judicatures within their Quarters.

28. That the Confederate Catholics continue in their Possessions until
Settlement by Parliament, and to be Commanded by his Majesty's Chief Governor,
with the advice and consent of the Commissioners, or any Five of them.

29. That all Customs, from the perfection of these Articles, are to be paid
into his Majesty's Receipt, and to his use; as also all Rent due at Easter
next, till a full Settlement of Parliament.

30. That the Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, and Jail-deliver, shall have
power to hear and determine all Offenses committed or done, or to be committed
or done, from the 15th. day of September, 1643. until the first day of the next
Parliament.



Thus the Marquess having performed all on his part, that could be expected
from him, and was in his power to do, and having received from other Parts all
the assurance he could require, there being no other way of engaging the
public Faith of the Nation, than that to which they had so formally engaged
themselves to him in, he intended nothing then, but how his Majesty might
speedily receive some fruit of that Peace and Accommodation he thence expected,
by sending assistance to him: And to that purpose, with advice, and upon
invitation of several Persons, who The Lord Lieutenant, upon Agreements on all
sides, repaired to Kilkenny, expecting there to receive Advance for his
Majesty's Service.
had great Authority and Power amongst the Confederate Catholics, the Lord
Lieutenant took a Journey himself to Kilkenny, where he was received with that
Respect and Reverence, as was due to his Person, and to the Place he held, and
with such expressions of Triumph and Joy, as gave him cause to believe, the
People were glad to be again received into his Majesty's Protection.

A Protection his Majesty evidences, (to his Commissioners at Uxbridge In his
Works* fol. 320.
) That it was as inevitably necessary, that they should not consent to hinder
him therein, as he had strong Reasons for the Cessation before, unless they
could show, how his Protestant Subjects in Ireland, may probably at least
defend themselves, and that he should have no more need to defend his
Conscience and Crown, from the Injuries of this Rebellion.

At this Peace the Irish seemed exceedingly enlivened; but the show thereof
quickly vanished, and a cloud of Jealousy began again to cover the Land. The
Pope's Nuncio, and the titular Bishops, who depended on him, envied that Nation
the happiness and glory they foresaw it would be possessed of by the execution
of that Agreement, and so (without any color of Authority, either by the old
established Laws of that Kingdom, or those Rules they had prescribed to
themselves since the Rebellion) they convened a Congregation of the Clergy at
Waterford, a Town A Congregation of Clergy are summoned, contrary to his
expectation, to Waterford.
most at their devotion, where the Titular Bishop of Ferns was in the Chair,
and refided: And therefore it will not be amiss to take a short view of their
proceedings, that the unhappy, oppressed, and miserable Ireland may clearly
discern to whom it owes those Pressures and Grievances it is now overwhelmed
with, and whether that Bishop be to be reckoned in the number of those, who
suffer at present for his Zeal to Religion, his Allegiance to the King, and his
Affection to his Country; or whether his name be to be inserted in that
Catalogue, which must derive to Posterity the Authors and Fomentors of so
odious and causless a Rebellion, in which such a Sea of Blood has been let
out, and the Betrayers of the Honor and Faith of that Country and Nation, and
who are no less guilty of extirpation of a Religion (they so much glory of) in
that Kingdom, than Ireton, or Cromwell, or that impious Power, under which they
have perpetrated all their Acts of Blood, Cruelty, and Desolation.

At that time, the Parliament of England having accommodated the Spaniard with
2000 Men; he, in lieu thereof, so tempered the Irish, (ever devoted to that
Nation) that the Spaniard having then an Agent in Ireland, he took them off
from doing any thing effectual in our King's business.

And the Congregation of the Clergy was no sooner assembled, then They inveigh
against the Peace they had lately consented to.
(instead of prescribing Acts of Charity and Repentance to the People, for the
ill they had formerly done, and then inflaming their hearts with new Zeal, and
infusing pious Courage into them, to relieve and succor the King from those
who oppressed him, according to their particular Obligation, by their late
Agreement, which had been the proper Office of Prelates, and a Christian
Clergy) they began to inveigh against the Peace, (which themselves had so
lately approved, and so formally consented unto) as if it had not carefully
enough provided for the advancement of Religion, and would not suffer it to be
proclaimed in Waterford; and sent their Emissaries and their Orders to all
considerable Towns and Cities to incense the People against it, and against
those who wished it should take effect; insomuch that when the King at Arms was
Proclaiming the Peace at Limerick, (with that solemnity and Ceremony, as The
King of Arms barbarously used at Limerick.
in such cases is used throughout the World, with his Coat of Arms, the Ensign
of his Office, and accompanied with the Mayor and Aldermen, and the most
substantial of the Citizens, in their Robes, and with all the Ensigns of
Magistracy and Authority) one Molife, a seditious Friar, stirred up the
multitude against him; which being led on by one Fanning, a person notorious
for many outrages and acts of Blood and Inhumanity in the beginning of the
Rebellion, violently assaulted them, and after many opprobrious speeches, in
contempt of the Peace and the Authority of the King, and tearing off the Coat
from the Herald, beat and wounded him, and many of the Magistrates of the City,
and some of them almost to death: And least all this might be excused, and
charitably interpreted to be the effect of a Popular and Tumultuous
Insurrection, the Lawful Mayor and other principal Officers who assisted him
(in the discharge of his Duty) were immediately displaced, and Fanning, the
impious Conductor of that Rabble, was made Mayor in his place; who, by Letters
from the Nuncio, was thanked for what he had done, and encouraged to proceed in
the same way, and had the Apostolical Benediction bestowed on him, for
committing such an outrage upon the Privileged Person of an Herald, who in the
name of the King came to proclaim Peace: As by the Law of Nations must have
been adjudged barbarous, and unpardonable in any part of the World where
Civility is planted, if he had come to have denounced War. And yet all this
while, the design it self was carried with so great secrecy, that the Lord
Lieutenant (proceeding in his Progress for the settling and composing the
humors of the People, which he understood to have been in some disorder by the
infusions of the ill-affected Clergy) never heard of any Force of Arms to
second and support those mutinous disorders, till being near to the City of
Cashell, he was advertised by Letters from the Mayor, that Owen O Neal's Army
was marching that way, and had sent terrible threats to that City if it
presumed The Confederates treachery to cut off the Lord Lieutenant*
to receive the Lord Lieutenant. And shortly after he found, that Owen O Neal
used all possible expedition to get between him and Dublin, that so he might
have been able to have surprised and destroyed him; whereupon the Marquis found
it necessary to lose no time in returning thither, yet resolved not only to
contain himself from any Acts of Hostility, but even from those Trespasses
which are hardly avoidable upon Marches, and paid so precisely for whatsoever
was taken from the Inhabitants throughout all the Catholic Quarters,
presuming, that those Persons of Honor, who had transacted the Treaty, would
have been able to have caused the Peace to be observed in despite of those
clamorous undertakers.

But when the Unchristian Congregation of Waterford had made this The
Congregation at Waterford declared Peace void.
Essay of their Power and Jurisdiction, they made all possible have to
propagate their Authority, and declared the Peace to be void, and inhibited all
Persons to submit thereunto, or to pay any Taxes, Imposition, or Contribution
which had been settled by the said Agreement; and without which, neither a
standing Army (which was to be applied to the Reduction of those Towns and
Provinces, which had put themselves under the Protection of the Parliament of
England, and never submitted to the former Cessation, nor could be comprehended
in the Peace) could be supported, or the 10000 Men raised to be transported
into England for the succor of the King, as had been so Religiously
undertaken; which inclination of theirs, the People so readily obeyed and
submitted unto, That they committed and delegated the entire and absolute Power
of The Nuncio's exorbitant carriage.
Governing and Commanding, as well in Secular as Ecclesiastical Matters, to the
Popes Nuncio, who began his Empire with committing to Prison the Commissioners
who had been Instrumental in the Treaty, and making of the Peace by order of
the general Assembly, and issued out an Excommunication against all those who
had or should submit to the Peace, (which comprehended all the Nobility and
almost all the Gentry, and some of the Clergy) which Excommunication wrought so
universally upon the minds of the People, that albeit all Persons of Honor and
Quality received infinite scandal, and well foresaw the irreparable damage
Religion it self would undergo, by that unwarrantable Proceeding, and used
their utmost Power to draw the People to obedience and submission to the said
Agreement, and to that purpose prevailed so far with General Preston, that he
gave them reason to hope that he would join with them, for the vindication of
the public Faith, and the Honor of the Nation, and compel those that opposed
it to submit to the Peace; Yet all these endeavors produced no effect, but
concluded in unprofitable Resentments and Lamentation: In the mean time, Owen O
Neil (when he found himself disappointed of his Design, to have cut off the
Lord Lieutenant before he should reach Dublin) entered into the Queens-County,
and committed all Acts of Cruelty and Outrage that could be imagined, took many
Castles and Forts which belonged to the King, and put all (who resisted) to the
Sword, and his Officers in cold blood caused others to be murdered, to whom
they had promised Quarter, as Major Pigot and others of his Family: About the
latter end of June this year, Major General Monro received a severe defeat from
Owen Roe O-Neil at Benburgh, alias Benburge near Charlemont in the County of
Ardmagh, whereby the whole Province was exposed to the Rebels fury, in as much
as if they had had the Courage or Policy to have prosecuted it, they might have
destroyed all the Scotch Quarters, and endangered their Towns: but Owen Roe
instead of prosecuting the Victory, went presently with the Prisoners and
Colors in Triumph to Kilkenny, so gave our Forces a breathing, whilst the
Parliament suspecting his union with Preston, immediately ordered 50000 l. out
of the Excise, for the raising of more men for Ireland, and some Horse besides
Foot, were presently sent over with Ammunition and other necessaries; these
called at Dublin, but the Design being not then fit for their Reception, they
were otherwise disposed of. And shortly after the Nuncio prevailed so much,
that he united General Preston to his Army, at which time he took this Oath. I,
A. B. Swear and Protest that I will adhere to the present union of The Oath
taken by General Preston.
the Confederate Roman Catholics, that reject the Peace lately agreed, and
proclaimed at Dublin, and do nothing by Word, Deed, Writing, Advice, or
otherwise to the Prejudice of that Union, and will to the uttermost of my Power
advance, and further the Good and Preservation of it, and of his Majesty's
Rights, and the Privileges of freeborn Subjects, to the Natives of this
Kingdom.



And then the Nuncio (as Generalissimo) lead both Armies toward The Nuncio
besieges the Lord Lieutenant in Dublin, and the Consequences thereof.
Dublin, where the Lord Lieutenant was so surprised with their Perfidiousness,
that he found himself in no less straights and distresses from his Friends
within, then from his Enemies without, who totally neglected those Forces,
which (being under the obedience of the Parliament of England) had always waged
a sharp and bloody War with them, and at present made inroads into their
Quarters to their great damage, and entirely engaged themselves to suppress the
Kings Authority, to which they had so lately submitted.

Lest so prodigious an alteration, as is now set forth, may seem to be wrapped up
in too short a discourse, and it may appear almost incredible, that an
Agreement so deliberately and solemnly entered into by the whole Nobility and
Gentry of the Nation, in a Matter that so entirely concerned their own
Interest, should in such an instant be blasted and anihilated by a Congregation
of Clergy, assembled only by their own authority; And therefore, without the
vice of curiosity, all men may desire to be informed by what Degrees and Method
that Congregation proceeded, and what specious Pretenses and Insinuations they
used toward the People, for the better persuading them to depart from that
Peace, they were even again restored to the Possession of: It will not be
impertinent therefore to set down some important particulars of their
Proceedings, and the very forms of some Instruments published by them, that the
World may see the Logic and Rhetoric that was used to impose upon, and delude
that unhappy People, and to entangle them more in that Labyrinth of Confusion,
wherein they were long involved.

They were not content not to suffer the Peace not to be proclaimed in
Waterford, and to dissuade the People from submitting to it: But by a Decree
dated the 12 day of August, 1646. (which they commanded to be published in all
places, in the English and Irish Tongue) they declared by the unanimous consent
and votes of all, even none contradicting (as they say) That all and singular
the Confederate Catholics who should adhere or consent to the Peace, or to the
Fautors thereof, or otherwise embrace the same, should be held absolute
perjured; especially for this cause, that in those Articles there is no mention
made of the Catholic Religion, or the security thereof, or any care taken for
the Conservation of the Privileges of the Country, as had been promised in an
Oath formerly taken by them, but rather all things referred to the Pleasure of
the most renowned King, from whom in his present state (they said) nothing of
certainty could be had: And in the Interim the Armies, and Arms, and Fortunes
(even the Supreme Council it self) of the Confederate Catholics were subjected
to the Authority and Rule of the Council of State, and Protestant Officers of
his Majesty, from whom that they might be secured, they had taken that Oath.

And the next day, being informed, that the Lord Viscount Mountgarret, Some of
the Supreme Council being appointed to confer with the Lord Lieutenant, the
Nuncio admonishes them not to proceed.
and Lord Viscount Muskery, were appointed by the Supreme Council at Kilkenny,
to go to Dublin, to confer with the Lord Lieutenant, upon the best way to be
pursued, for the execution and observation of the Peace: they made an Order in
Writing, in which were these words; We admonish in our Lord, and require the
Persons who are departed to Dublin, that they forbear and abstain from going
thither for the said end, or if they be gone, that they return, and this under
pain of Excommunication, commanding the Right Honorable the Bishop of Ossory,
and other Bishops, as well assembled as not assembled here, and their Vicars
General, as also Vicars Apostolical, and all Priests, even Irregulars, that
they intimate these Presents, or cause to be intimated, even by affixing them
in public places; and that they proceed against the disobedient, in denouncing
of Excommunication, as it should seem expedient in our Lord.

When the Supreme Council, notwithstanding these new Orders and Injunctions,
continued still their desire to observe the Peace; The titular Bishop of
Ossory, published this extraordinary Writing. WHereas, we have in public and
private meetings at several times, declared to the Supreme Council, and others
whom it might concern; That it was, and is unlawful, and against conscience,
the implying Perjury (as it has been defined by the special Act of the
Convocation at Waterford) to both Commonwealths, Spiritual and Temporal, to do
or concur to any Act, tending to the approbation or countenancing the
Publication of this unlawful and mischievous Peace, so dangerous (as it is now
Articled) to both Commonwealths, Spiritual and Temporal; And whereas,
notwithstanding our Declaration, yea the Declaration of the whole Clergy of the
Kingdom to the contrary, the Supreme Council and the Commissioners, have
actually proceeded to the Publication, yea, and forcing it upon the City, by
terror and threats, rather then by any free consent or desire of the People: We
having duly considered and taken it to heart (as it becomes us) how enormous
this Fact is, and appears in Catholics, even against God himself, and what a
Public Contempt of the Holy Church it appears, beside the evil it is like to
draw upon this poor Kingdom, after a mature Deliberation and Consent of our
Clergy, in Detestation of this heinous and scandalous Disobedience of the
Supreme Council, and others who adhered to them, in matter of conscience to the
Holy Church, and in hatred of so sinful and abominable an Act, do by these
Presents, according to the Prescription of the Sacred Cannons, pronounce and
command henceforth a general Cessation of Divine Offices, throughout all the
City and Suburbs of Kilkenny, in all Churches, Monasteries, and houses in them
whatsoever.

Given at our Palace of Nova Curia, the 18th. of August, 1646. Signed, David
Ossoriensis.




This extravagant Proceeding, did not yet terrify those of the Confederate
That nothing yet might be ill resented of by the Lord Lieutenant, the Supreme
Council wins on his Patience.
Catholics, who understood, (as they pretended) how necessary the observation
of the Peace was, for the preservation of the Nation; But as they desired the
Lord Lieutenant, to forbear all acts of Hostility, upon how unreasonable a
Provocation soever; So they sent two Persons of the Supreme Council, (Sir Lucas
Dillon, and Dr. Fennel) to the Congregation at Waterford, to dispose them to a
better temper, and to find out some Expedient, which might compose the minds of
the People, and prevent those Calamities, that would unavoidably fall upon the
Nation, upon their declining and renouncing the Peace, (which you must
understand in them, to be very real;) But after they had attended several days,
and offered many Reasons and Considerations to them; The Congregation put a
Period to all the Hopes and Consultations of that nature, by issuing out a
Decree of Excommunication, which they caused to be Printed in this Form, and in
these Words, and with these Marginal Notes. By John Baptist Rinuccini,
Archbishop and Prince of Firmo, and by the Ecclesiastical Congregation of both
Clergies of the Kingdom of Ireland.
A Decree of Excommunication against such as adhere to the late Peace, and do
bear Arms for the Heretics of Ireland, and do aid or assist them.
NOt without Cause (says the Oracles of Truth) does the Minister The Nuncio's
Excommunication.
of God carry the Sword, for he is to punish him that does Evil, and remunerate
him that does Good; hence it is that we have by our former Decrees, declared to
the World our sense, and just Indignation against the late Peace, Concluded and
Published at Dublin, not only in its nature, bringing prejudice, and
destruction of Religion and Kingdom, but also contrary to the Oath of
Association, and withal against the Contrivers of, and Adherers to the said
Peace: In pursuance of which Decrees, being Matthew. 16. 18, 19. John 20. 23.
forced to unsheath the Spiritual Sword, We (to whom God has given power to
bind and loose on Earth) assembled together in the Holy Ghost, tracing herein,
and imitating the Examples of many Venerable, and holy Prelates, who have gone
before us, and taking for our Authority, the Sacred Canons of Holy Church,
grounded on Holy Writ, Ut tollantur emedio nostrum qui hoc opus faciunt Domini
nostri Jesu deliver over such Persons to Satan, (that is to say,) We
Excommunicate, Execrate, Anathematize, all such as, after the Publication of
this our Decree, and notice either Privately or Publicly given to them hereof,
shall defend, adhere to, or approve the Justice of the said Peace: and chiefly
those, who bear Arms, or make, or join in War with, for, or in behalf of the
Puritans, or other Heretics of Dublin, cork, Youghall, of other places within
this Kingdom, or shall either (by themselves, or by their appointment) bring,
send, or give any Aid, Succor, or Relief, Victuals, Ammunition, or other
Provision to them; or by advice, or otherwise, advance the said Peace, or the
War, made against us; Those, and every of them, by this present Decree, We do
declare, and pronounce Excommunicated, ipso facto, ut non circumveniamini a
Satana, non enim ignoramus Cogitationes 2 Cor. 2. 11.
ejus.

Dated at Kilkenny, in our Palace of Residence, the 5th. day of October, 1646.
Signed. Johannes Baptista, Archiepiscopus Firmanus, Nuncius Apostolicus, de
Mandato Illustrissimi Domini Nuncij and Congregationis Ecclesiasticae
utriusque, Cleri Regni Hiberniae, Nicholas Firmence Congregationis Cancellarius.



The Nuncio having thus fortified himself, made great preparations to march
with two Armies to Dublin, which (consisting of 16000 Foot, and as many hundred
Horse) he believed, or seemed to believe, would take the Town by Assault as
soon as he should appear before it; and in this confidence (that we may not
interrupt the series of this Discourse by any intervening action) when the
Armies were within a days march of the City, the two Generals sent this Letter,
with the Propositions annexed, to the Lord Lieutenant. May it please your
Excellency,
BY the Command of the Confederate Catholics of this Kingdom, who offer The
two Generals, Preston and O Neil, being with the Nuncio, engaged to sit down
before Dublin, sends a Letter with Propositions.
the enclosed Propositions, we have under our Leading two Armies; our thoughts
are best to our Religion, King and Country; our ends to establish the first,
and make the two following secure and happy: It is the great part of our care
and desires to purchase your Excellency to the effecting of so blessed a work.
We do not desire the effusion of blood; and to that purpose, the enclosed
Propositions are sent from us; we pray to God your consideration of them may
prove fruitful. We are commanded to pray your Excellency to render an Answer to
them by two of the Clock in the afternoon on Thursday next, be it War or Peace.
We shall endeavor in our Ways to exercise Faith and Honor; and upon this
thought we rest.

From the Camp, 2. March, 1646. Your Excellencies most humble Servants, J.
Preston, Owen O Neile.


1. That the exercise of the Romish Religion be in Dublin, Tredagh, and in all
the Kingdom of Ireland, as free and as public, as it is now in Paris in
France, or Bruxels in the Low Countries.

2. That the Council of State, called ordinarily the Council Table, be of
Members true and faithful to his Majesty, and such of which there may be no
fear or suspicion of going to the Parliament Party.

3. That Dublin, Tredagh, Trim, Newry, Catherlagh, Carlingford, and all
Garrisons within the Protestant Quarters, be Garrisoned by Confederate
Catholics, to maintain and keep the said Cities and Places for the use of our
Sovereign Lord King Charles, and his Lawful Successors, for the defense of this
Kingdom of Ireland.

4. That the present Council of the Confederates shall swear truly and
faithfully to keep and maintain, for the use of his Majesty and his lawful
Successors, and for the defense of the said Kingdom of Ireland, the above
Cities of Dublin and Tredagh, and all other Forts, Places, and Castles, as
above.

5. That the said Council, and all General Officers and Soldiers whatsoever, do
swear and Protest to fight by Sea and Land against the Parliamentarians, and
all the Kings Enemies: And that they will never come to any Convention,
Agreement or Article with the said Parliamentarians, or any the Kings Enemies,
to the prejudice of his Majesty's Rights, or of this Kingdom of Ireland.

6. That according to our Oath of Association, we will, to the best of our
power and cunning, defend the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, the Kings
Rights, the Lives and Fortunes of the Subjects.

His Excellency is prayed to make Answer to the above Propositions, at furthest
by two of the Clock in the afternoon on Thursday next.

J. Preston, Owen O Neile.



Let all dis-passionate men now consider what could the Marquis do, The Lord
Lieutenant in great straits at the approach of the Nuncio to Dublin.
his Quarters were so strait and narrow, that they could yield no support to
the few Forces he had left; all his Garrisons besieged; without, an Enemy;
being destitute of all Provisions within: all the Army he had for the Field and
Garrisons amounted not to 5000 Foot and 1100 Horse; without Clothes, Money, or
Fixed Arms; and with so inconsiderable a Store of Ammunition, that when the
Nuncio was upon his march toward Dublin, he had not in that most important
City (the Metropolis of the Kingdom) more than 14 Barrels of Powder: So that
not only the Inhabitants, but the Soldiers themselves, grew impatient of the
distresses they were in, and which inevitably they saw must fall upon them; and
they who had before presumed in corners and whispers, to tax the Marquis of not
being zealous enough of the English Interest, and too credulous of what was
promised and undertaken by the Irish, had now the boldness to murmur aloud at
him, as if he had combined with the Irish to put all into their hands: They who
from the beginning of the Troubles had been firm and unshaken in their Duty and
Loyalty to the King, and cheerfully suffered great losses, and undergone great
hazards for being so, and been of the most constant affection to, and
confidence in, the Marquis, and resolved to obey him in whatsoever he should
order for the King's Service, for the conducting whereof, he was solely and
entirely trusted by his Majesty, could not yet endure to think of being put
into, or falling under the power of the Irish, who, by this new breach of
Faith, had made themselves utterly incapable of any future Trust; for what
security could they publicly give for performance of the Contract, which Upon
the Irish breach of faith, the Lord Lieutenant made a show of delivering all
into the Parliaments hands.
they had not lately given for the observation of that, which so infamously
they had receded from? Whereupon he found it absolutely necessary to make a
show of inclining to the English; and sent to the Ships then riding in the Bay
of Dublin, that they would transport some Commissioners from him to the
Parliament, to treat about the surrender of the City, and the other Garrisons
under his Command. Which Proposition was embraced by them, and the Persons
deputed Sir Gerr. Lowther, Lord Chief Baron* Sir Francis Willoughby, Sir Paul
Davis, Knights.
accordingly conveyed into England: By this means the Marquis was forthwith
supplied with 20 Barrels of Powder, which the Captain of those Ships delivered
to him the 10th. of March, by the permission of the Lord Lisle, the Parliaments
Lord Lieutenant, without which, he could have made no defense against the
Nuncio: whereby the Irish had a fair warning to bethink themselves (in time) of
returning to their Duty, since they might discern, that if they would not
suffer Dublin, etc. to continue in the Kings obedience, it should be delivered
to them who would deal less graciously with them, and had power enough to
punish those indignities which had been offered. And the Marquis was still
without other Engagement, than to do what he should judge most conducing to his
Majesty's Service. However, the Rebels persisted in their intentions against
Dublin, where for a while we must leave them, and see what course the
Parliament took to infest their Quarters: much they were concerned, that
affairs went not on so successfully there as they expected, where that they
might have one Governor (answerable to the exigencies of that Kingdom) they
The Parliament of England Voted Philip Lord Lisle Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.
Voted Philip Viscount Lisle Lord Lieutenant, passing thereupon, in April,
1646. a Patent to him for one year, allotting him 40000 l. with what else was
requisite for his dispatch; in raising which, they were so slow, (many of the
House being of an opposite Party) as he could not get away from London till the
1st. of Febr. 1646. arriving at Bristol. the 6th. where he found several of his
own Troops, and his Brother Colonel Algernoon Sidney's in readiness to be
transported for Ireland: But Money being not come, he was forced to Quarter
them thereabouts till its arrival; and himself with 30000 l. 7 Pieces of
Battery, 1000 Muskets, 100 Barrels of Powder, embarked the 18th. at Minhead,
and landed near Cork the 20th. He arrives in Ireland.
and came thither the day following, where he was altogether unexpected,
(especially by the Lord Inchequin) he found things in great disorder, the Army
filled with Officers disaffected to him, the Custodiums and Contributions no
way managed to the public advantage; thereupon reformed the defects, and
marching the 15th. of March to visit Talloe, Lismore, Toughall, Fermoy, and
other Places, found the Country protected even to the Walls of the Protestant
Garrisons, so as no mischief could be done by them to the Rebels; and about the
20th. of March, Knockmohun was delivered to him. He ordered all things for the
best advantage Knockmohun, a strong Garrison, Sir Rich. Osborn Governor.
of the Interest he was put upon; and finding his Commission was near expired,
the General Officers petitioned, that in case his Lordship were not continued,
the Command of the Army might rest in them: which the Lord President with
others opposed. The Lord Lieutenant's His Expedition with his Commission soon
determined, being opposed by those who afterward were accused.
Commission determind' the 15th. of April, 1647. And shortly after such
animosities arose betwixt the Parliaments Commissioners and the Lord Inchequin,
as doubtless (if some Privy Counselors had not interposed) great
inconveniences would certainly thence have risen. The Lord Lisle (accompanied
with the Lord Broghil and Colonel Sidney) went presently for England, and
arrived at London about the beginning of May following, taking the first
occasion to give the House an account 7th. of May.
of his Journey; which may be looked on as a Dream more than a Truth,
(considering the shortness of the Expedition) though none could more prudently
have acted, whilst he was upon the Place; nor was there any whom the Soldiers
would more readily obey, such was his Courage, so great his Integrity. The Lord
Broghil and Sir Arthur Loftus, at the same time preferred Articles against the
Lord Inchequin: But the Parliament was so imbroil'd about the Disbanding the
Independent Army, (then mutinous) and Inchequin had so many (to favor
themselves) countenanced him, as little, if any thing, became of the
Impeachment.

But to return to the Confederates, who (when they saw the Ships returned The
Confederates (upon Recruits out of England) piece again with the Lord
Lieutenant.
from England with Supplies of Soldiers, Money, and great store of Provisions,
and the Commissioners to treat with the Marquis for putting all into the
Parliaments hands) raised the Siege, seeming less united amongst themselves,
and desirous to make Conditions with the Lord Lieutenant; whilst General
Preston and his Officers frankly entered into a Treaty with the Marquis of
Clanrickard, whom the Lord Lieutenant authorized to that end, and with deep and
solemn Oaths undertook and promised to stand to the Peace, and from thenceforth
to be obedient to his Majesty's Authority, and to join with the Marquis of
Ormond against all those who should refuse to submit unto them. On the other
side, the Commissioners from the two Houses of Parliament Sir Thomas Wharton,
Sir Rob. King. Sir John Clotworthy, Sir Rob. Meredith, Knights. Rich. Salway
Esquire.
, who were admitted into Dublin to treat with the Lord Lieutenant, observing
the very ill condition the Town was in, besieged by two strong Armies, by whom
they within expected every hour to be assaulted, concluded, that the want of
Food, and all necessaries for defense, would compel the Marquis, with the
importunity and clamor of the Inhabitants and Soldiers, to receive Supplies of
Men, Money, and Victuals, which they had brought upon any terms; and therefore
stiffly insisted on their Propositions, refusing to consent, that the Marquis
should send any Messenger to the King, that, upon information how the case
stood, he might receive his Majesty's The Lord Lieutenant not being admitted to
send to the King, the Treaty with the Parliaments Agents broke off.
direction what to do. And how the Parliament in Ireland, then in being, might
be continued, which, by the delivering of the Sword, without his Majesty's
pleasure imparted, could not be secured from being dissolved; and without
which, he then resolved not to proceed to any conjunction with them, and so had
privately dispatched several Expresses to the King (as soon as he discerned
clearly, that the Irish were so terrified by the Nuncio and his
Excommunication, that there was little hope of good from them) with full
information of the state of Affairs, and expected every day a return of some of
the said Messengers, with signification of his Majesty's Pleasure.

Thus the Treaty with the Marquis not succeeding, the Commissioners from the
Two Houses of Parliament returned again to their Ships, about the end of
November, and carried all the Supplies they had brought to the Parliaments
Garrisons in the Province of Ulster, being much incensed against the Lord
Lieutenant for declining an entire union with them, and inclining (as they said
he did) to a new confidence in the Irish: Yet they found but cold entertainment
amongst the Scots.

At which time, Dr. John Maxwel, formerly Bishop of Ross in Scotland, now
Archbishop of Tuam in Ireland, hearing of Commissioners from the Parliament of
England, grew so envenomed thereat, (suspecting the Covenant, which he had ever
abhorred, should be imposed) as sicercely imprecating it; and being broken with
the calamities of the Times, he di'd the 14th. of Febr. 1646. and was buried in
Trinity Church, Dublin, at the munificence of the Marquis of Ormond.

By this time the Marquis of Clanrickard had an entire trust (answerable to
what he had begun to treat of with General Preston) from the Lord Lieutenant,
as a Person superior to all temptations, which might endeavor to lessen or
divert his Affection and Integrity to the King, or The Marquis of Clanrickard's
fidelity.
his Zeal to the Romish Catholic Religion, in which he had been bred, and to
which he had most constantly adhered; he had taken great pains to render the
Peace, which had been so long in consultation, effectual to the Nation, and had
both by Discourse and Writing endeavored to dissuade the Nuncio from
prosecuting those rough ways, which he foresaw were like to undo the Nation,
and dishonor the Catholic Religion: He found General Preston and the Officers
of his Army less transported with passion, and a blind submission to the
Authority of the Nuncio than the other, and that they professed greater duty
and obedience to the King, and that they seemed to be wrought on by two
Conclusions, which had been speciously infused into them: The first was, that
the Lord Lieutenant was so great an Enemy to their Religion, that though they
should obtain any Conditions from the King to their advantage in that
particular, he would oppose, and not consent unto the same. The other, that the
King was now in the hand of the Scots, who were not like to approve that Peace
had been made, all that Nation in Ulster refusing to submit to it. And if they
should be able to procure any Order from his Majesty to disavow it, the Lord
Lieutenant would undoubtedly obey it. These specious infusions the Marquis of
Clanrickard endeavored to remove, and undertook upon his Honor to use all the
Power and Interest which he had in the King, Queen, and Prince, on behalf of
the Romish Catholics, and to procure them such Privileges, and Liberty for
the free exercise of their Religion, as they could reasonably expect: And
undertook, that the Lord Lieutenant would acquiesce with such directions as he
should receive therein without contradiction, or endeavor to do ill Offices to
the Catholics. He further promised, that if any Order should be procured from
the King during the restraint he was then in, to the disadvantage of the
Catholics, then He would suspend any obedience thereunto, until such time as
his Majesty should be at liberty, and might receive full information on their
behalf. And upon the Marquis of Clanrickard's positive undertaking these
particulars; and the Lord Lieutenant having ratified and confirmed all that the
Marquis had engaged himself for, General Preston, with all the Principal
Officers under his Command, signed this ensuing Engagement. WE the Generals,
Nobility, and Officers of the Confederate Catholic Upon the Marquis of
Clanrickard's free dealing with the Confederates, General Preston and others
sign an Engagement.
Forces, do solemnly bind and engage our selves, by the Honor and Reputation
of Gentlemen and Soldiers, and by the Sacred Protestation upon the Faith of
Catholics, in the presence of Almighty God, both for our selves, and, as much
as in us lies, for all Persons that are, or shall be under our Command, that we
will from the Date hereof forward submit and conform our selves entirely and
sincerely to the Peace concluded and proclaimed by his Majesty's Lieutenant,
with such additional Concessions and Securities, as the Right Honorable, Ulick
Lord Marquis of Clanrickard has undertaken to procure and secure to us, in
such manner, and upon such terms, as is expressed in his Lordships
Undertakings, and Protestation of the same date hereunto annexed, and signed by
himself: And we, upon his Lordships undertaking, engage our selves, by the Bond
of Honor and Conscience abovesaid, to yield entire obedience to his Majesty's
Lieutenant General, and General Governor of this Kingdom, and to all deriving
Authority from them by Commission to command us in our several Degrees: And
that according to such Orders as we shall receive from them, faithfully to
serve his Majesty against all his Enemies or Rebels, as well within this
Kingdom, as in any other part of his Dominions, and against all Persons that
shall not join with us upon these terms, in submission to the Peace of this
Kingdom, and to his Majesty's Authority: And we do further engage our selves,
under the said solemn Bonds, that we will never either directly or indirectly,
make use of any advantage or power wherewith we shall be entrusted, to the
obliging of his Majesty or his Ministers, by any kind of force, to grant unto
us any thing beyond the said Marquis of Clanrickard's undertaking, but shall
wholely rely upon his Majesty's own free goodness, for what further Graces and
Favors he shall be graciously pleased to confer upon his faithful Catholic
Subjects in this Kingdom, according to their Obedience and Merit in his
service: And we do further protest, that we shall never esteem our selves
disobliged from this engagement, by any Authority or Power whatsoever; provided
on both Parties, that this engagement and undertaking be not understood, or
extend to debar or hinder his Majesty's Catholic Subjects of this Kingdom,
from the benefit of any further Graces and Favors which his Majesty may be
graciously pleased to concede to them, upon the Queen's Majesty's Mediation, or
any other Treaties abroad.



This was done about the end of November, 1646. at Sir Nicholas Upon this there
seemed to be some Agreement betwixt the Lord Lieutenant and Confederates, they
taking Commissions from the Lord Lieutenant.
White's Castle of Leixleap; the Nuncio, with the other Army under Owen O Neal,
having been about the same time compelled to raise their Siege from Dublin, and
to retire for want of Provisions. Hereupon the Marquess of Clanrickard was made
by the Lord Lieutenant, Lieutenant General of the Army, and was accordingly
received by General Preston's Army, being drawn in Battalia: And General
Preston at the same time received a Commission from the Lord Lieutenant, to
command as Sergeant Major General, and immediately under the Marquess of
Clanrickard. And shortly after, General Preston desired the Lord Lieutenant, to
march with as strong a Body as he could draw out of his Garrisons, toward
Kilkenny, where he promised to meet him with his Army, that so being united,
they might compel the rest to submit to the Peace.

And here, that you may have some Divertisement, you shall see in what
condition Heretics are to be buried; to which end, we shall present you with a
Copy of a Censure, under the Hand of Nicholas, Bishop of Ferns, against Francis
Talbot, who died a Protestant. The Body of Francis Talbot, who died an
obstinate Heretic, and finally therein impenitent, is to be buried in Poenam
Haereseos, and finalis Impenitentiae, nec non in terrorem aliorum, with only
one Candle at the Grave, at Nine of the Clock by Night, without a Bell in the
Church or Street, without Priest, Cross, Book, or Prayer; the Place of his
Burial is to be in the Alley of St. Mary's Churchyard, near to the Garden of
the Parsonage. All which, concerning the said Burial, we have ordered to be
done with the advice of Men learned in Divinity; and who shall exceed this
Manner of the said Francis's Burial, is to incur Church Censures; no Wax Taper,
or Candle, or Torch, is to be used.

Given at the Friars Monastery, the last of December. 1646. Nicholaus Episcopus
Fernensis.



When the Marquess was come within less than a day's March, of the Yet after
all the Officers of General Preston being not Excommunication-proof, the Lord
Lieutenant was again disappointed.
Place assigned by General Preston, for the meeting and joining their Forces
together, the Marquess of Clanrickard, who attended upon the Lord Lieutenant,
received a Letter from Preston to this effect: That his Officers being not
Excommunication-proof, were fallen from him to the Nuncio's Party, and
therefore he wished, that the Lord Lieutenant would proceed no further, but to
expect the issue of a General Assembly, that would be shortly convened at
Kilkenny, where he doubted not but that Things would be set right by the
Consent of the whole Kingdom, which he said would be much better for his
Majesty's Service, than to attempt forcing the Peace upon those who were averse
to it.

Upon this new violation of Faith, the Marquess of Ormond was compelled (after
some weeks stay in his Quarters) to return again to Dublin, where the
Commissioners, who had been lately there from the two Houses The Lord
Lieutenant returns to Dublin, which being not able to supply his Soldiers,
they were forced to be quartered on the Country, where nothing but Victuals
were taken by them.
of Parliament, had sowed such seeds of Jealousy and Discontent, as the
Inhabitants refused to contribute further to the payment and support of the
Army, (being in truth so far exhausted by what they had paid, and impoverished
by their total want and decay of Traffic and Commerce, as they were not able
much longer to contribute) so that the Marquess was forced in the cold and wet
Winter, to draw out his half starved and half naked Troops, only to lie in the
Enemy's Quarters, where yet he would suffer no Act of Hostility to be
committed, or any thing else to be taken, but Victuals for the subsistence of
his Men. And in this un-easie posture, he resolved to expect the result of the
next General Assembly, which he supposed could not be so constituted, but that
it would abhor the violation of the former Contracts and Agreements, and the
in-excusable Presumption and Proceedings of the Congregation of the Clergy at
Waterford; and that it would vindicate the Honor and Faith of the Nation, from
the Reproaches it lay under, and from the exorbitant and extravagant
Jurisdiction which the Nuncio had assumed. But he quickly found himself again
disappointed; and, to the universal wonder of all, the new Assembly published a
Declaration of a very new Nature: For whereas the Nuncio and his Party had
committed to Prison those Noblemen and Gentlemen, who had been Commissioners in
treating and concluding the Peace, and had given out threats and menaces, that
they should lose their Heads for their Transgression; the Assembly presently
set them at liberty, and The Assembly at Kilkenny justify the Commissioners,
yet agreed with the Congregation at Waterford.
declared, That the Commissioners and Council had faithfully and sincerely
carried and demeaned themselves in the said Negotiation, pursuant, and
according to the Trust reposed in them: And yet, in the same Declaration,
declared, That they might not accept of, or submit unto the said Peace, and did
thereby protest against it, and did declare the same invalid, and of no force
to all intents and purposes. And did farther declare, That the Nation would not
accept of any Peace, not containing a sufficient satisfactory Security for the
Religion, Lives, Estates and Liberties of the said Confederate Catholics. And
what they understood to be sufficient and satisfactory for Religion, etc.
appears by the Propositions published before by the Congregation at Waterford,
which they had caused the People to swear that they would insist upon; and
which, instead of providing a Toleration of the Romish Catholic Religion, had,
in truth, proved for the extirpation of the Protestant, when they should think
fit to put the same in execution. Nor was the only Argument and Excuse, which
they published for these Proceedings, more reasonable, than the Proceedings
themselves, which was, That the Concessions and Promises made unto them, by the
Earl of Glamorgan, were much larger, and greater security for their Religion,
than those consented to by the Marquess: Whereas, in truth, those Concessions
and Promises made by the Earl, (as we have took notice) were dis-avowed and
dis-own'd by the Lord Lieutenant, before the Peace was concluded, and the Earl
committed to Prison for his Presumption; which though it produced some
interruption in the Treaty, yet was the same after resumed, and the Peace
concluded, and proclaimed upon the Articles formerly mentioned; so that the
Allegation, of what had been undertaken by the Earl of Glamorgan, can be no
excuse, for their violating the Agreement afterward concluded with the
Marquess. Whereby it appears, (let the most favorable Fucus imaginable be put
upon it) that though they released the Commissioners for the Treaty, as
justifiable, yet Herod and Pilate were then made Friends, each Party consenting
to dam the Peace.

This last wonderful Act put a period to all Hopes of the Marquess of Ormond,
which Charity and Compassion to the Kingdom and Nation, and his discerning
Spirit, would fain have cherisht, in that in-evitable ruin and destruction
both must undergo, from that distemper of mind that possessed them, and had so
long boy'd them up, against his experience and judgment. And now those whose
Natures, Dispositions, and Interest, made them most averse to the Parliament of
England, grew more The Irish being in all things sound treacherous, those who
were most averse to the Parliament, yet now wished the Lord Lieutenant might
conclude with them.
affrighted at the thoughts of falling under the Power of the Irish; so that
all Persons of all humors and inclinations, who lived under his Government,
and had dislikes and jealousies enough against each other, were yet united and
reconciled in their opinions against the Irish. The Council of State besought
the Lord Lieutenant to consider, whether it were possible to have any better
security from them, for the performance of any other Agreement he should make,
than he had for the performance of that, which they now receded from, and
disclaimed. And since the Spring was now coming on, (whereby the number, power,
and strength of their Enemy would be increased on all sides, and their hopes of
Succors was desperate, and so it would be only in his election into whose
power he would put those, who had deserved as well from his Majesty by doing
and suffering as Subjects could do) whether into the hands of the English, who
could not deny them protection and justice, or of the Irish, who had not only
dispoil'd them of all their Fortunes, and prosecuted them with all animosity
and cruelty, but declared by their late carriage, that they were not capable of
security under them) they therefore entreated him to send again to the two
Houses of Parliament, and make some agreement with them, which would probably
be for their preservation; whereas, with the other, whatever could be done, it
was evident it would be for their destruction. That which amongst other things
of importance made a deep impression in the Marquess, was the knowledge, that
there had been from the beginning of these Troubles, a Design, in the The Lord
Lieutenant's Conviction, that the Irish intended to renounce the Crown of
England.
principal Contrivers of them, entirely to alienate the Kingdom of Ireland,
from the Crown of England, to extirpate not only the Protestant, but all the
Catholics, who were descended from the English, and who, in truth, are no less
odious to the old Irish, than the other, and to put themselves into the
protection of some foreign Prince, if they should find it impossible to erect
some of the old Families. And how impossible and extravagant soever this
Attempt might reasonably be thought, in regard, not only all the Catholics of
the English Extraction, who were in Quality and Fortune much superior to the
other, but many Noble, and much the best and greatest Families of the ancient
Irish, perfectly abhorred and abominated the same, writ some. Yet it was
apparent, that the violent Part of the Clergy, that now governed, had really
that intention, and never intended more to submit to the King's Authority,
whosoever should be entrusted with it: And it had been proposed in the last
Assembly by Mr. Anthony Martin, and others, That they should call in some
foreign Prince for protection, from whom they had received Agents; as from his
most Christian Majesty, Monsieur de Monry, and Monsieur de Molin; from his
Catholic A Motion to call in a foreign Prince.
Majesty, Don Diego de Torres, his Secretary; from the Duke of Lorrain,
Monsieur St. Katherine; and from Rome they had Petrus Franciscus Scarampi; and
afterward Rinuccini, Archbishop and Prince of Fermo, Nuncio Apostolic for
Ireland, whose exorbitant Power was Earnest enough, how little more they meant
to have to do with the King, and (as it would be thought) gave no less an
umbrage, offense and scandal, to the Catholics, of Honor and Discretion, than
it incensed those, who bore no kind of Reverence to the Bishop of Rome; to whom
(as their public Ministers) they sent their Bishop of Ferns, and Sir Nicholas
Plunket, as before, Mr. Richard Bealing; to Spain they sent Fa. Hugh Bourk; to
Paris, Fa. Matthew Hartegan; and to the Duke of Lorrain, by general Commission,
Theobald, Lord Viscount Taaff, Sir Nich. Plunket, and Mr. Geoffry Brown; some
of whose Instructions we shall here give you, that the Temper of that Council,
and the Affections of those Men, (what pretense soever veils their Designs) may
appear from the Instruments themselves. Kilkenny, 18. Jan. 1647. By the Supreme
Council, and others, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, here under-Signing, and
the Commons of the Confederate Catholics of Ireland.
Instructions to be observed, and by the Lord Bishop of Fernes, and Nicholas
Plunket Esquire Commissioners, appointed and authorized by, and in the behalf of
the Confederate Roman Catholics of Ireland, in the Court of Rome.
1 Imprimis. YOu are to represent unto his Holiness, the deplorable Condition
wherein the Confederate Catholics are; and for your better information, to
take with you, the Draught of the Representation of the present Condition of
the Country, which you are to enlarge and second by your own Expressions,
according to your knowledge; and therefore desire, in regard Ireland and
Religion in it, is (humanely speaking) like to be lost, that his Holiness, in
his great Wisdom and Piety, will be pleased to make the Preservation of a
People, so constantly and unanimously Catholic, his, and the Consistory of the
Cardinals, their Work. And you are to pray his Holiness, to afford such present
effectual Aids, for the preservation of the Nation, and the Roman Catholic
Religion therein, as shall be necessary.

2. You are to let his Holiness know, That Application is to be made to our
Queen and Prince, for a settlement of Peace and Tranquillity in the Kingdom of
Ireland: And that for the effecting thereof, the Confederate Catholics do
crave his Holiness's Mediation with the Queen and Prince, as also with the King
and Queen Regent of France, and with the King of Spain, and all other Christian
Princes, in all Matters tending to the Avail of the Nation, either in point of
settlement to a Peace, or otherwise.

3. The Confederate Catholics, having raised Arms for the freedom of the
Catholic Religion, do intend in the first place, that you let his Holiness
know their resolution, to insist upon such Concessions and Agreements in
Matters of Religion, and for the security thereof, as his Holiness shall
approve of, and be satisfied with; wherein his Holiness is to be prayed, to
take into his Consideration, the imminent danger the Kingdom is in, according
to the Representations aforesaid to be made by you, and so to proceed in
Matters of Religion, as in his great Wisdom and Piety may tend best, and prove
necessary to the preservation of it, and the Confederate Catholics of Ireland.

4. You are to represent to his Holiness, That the Confederates think fit to
insist upon, as security for such Agreements in Religion, as his Holiness will
determine, that the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Deputy, or other Chief Governor or
Governors of the Kingdom, from time to time, should be Roman Catholics,
unless his Holiness, upon the said Representation of State Affairs here, or for
some other Reason, shall think fit to wave that Proposition.

5. You are to represent to his Holiness, That the Confederate Catholics
desire, that all the Concessions to be made, and agreed on, for the settling of
the Catholic Religion in this Kingdom, be published at the same time with the
Temporal Articles of the Settlement, if his Holiness, on representation of the
State of Affairs here, or for some other Advantages, shall not think fit to
determine, or suspend the publishing of those or some of them for a time.

6. You are to represent to his Holiness, That no change or alteration is to be
in any part of the present Government of the Confederate Catholics, until the
Articles of Peace, or Settlement, pursuant to the present Authority and
Instructions, you, and the Commissioners to the English Court in France, have
been concluded, and expected, and published in this Kingdom, by those entrusted
in Authority over the Confederate Catholics.

7. You are to take notice, That the resident Council now named, are the
Persons to serve for the interval Government, until the next Assembly of the
Confederate Catholics, and the Assembly is at liberty to name others, if they
please; and that no less than eight of the said Residents concurring, during
the said interval, shall make any Act or Order, obliging, and according as it
is provided in the former Articles for the interval Government, in the late
rejected Peace, the Forts, Cities, Towns, Castles, and Power of the Armies of
the Confederate Catholics, to remain and continue in their hands, during the
said interval Government.

8. You are to take notice, That the Persons to be employed into France to the
Queen and Prince, are to finish their Negotiation with the Queen and Prince,
pursuant to their Instructions, with all possible speed, after they shall
receive his Holiness's Resolution from you out of Rome, in the Matters referred
as aforesaid to his Holiness; and you are to use all possible diligence, in
procuring and sending his Holiness's said Resolution unto our said
Commissioners, employed to the Queen and Prince.

9. In case his Holiness will not be pleased to descend to such Conditions, as
might be granted in Matters of Religion, then you are to solicit for
considerable Aids, whereby to maintain War, and to ascertain and secure the
same, that it may be timely applied to the use of the Confederate Catholics.
And in case a Settlement cannot be had, nor considerable Aids, that may serve
to preserve the Nation without a Protector, you are to make application to his
Holiness, for his being Protector to this Kingdom, and by special instance to
endeavor his acceptance thereof at such time, and in such manner, as the
Instructions sent by our Agents to France, grounded on the Assembly, does
import, whereof you are to have a Copy.

10. Though Matters be concluded by his Holiness's Approbation with the Prince
and Queen, yet you are to solicit for Aids, considering our distress, and
setting before him, that notwithstanding any such Aids, we have a powerful
Enemy within the Kingdom, which to expulse, will require a vast charge.

11. You are to take with you for your instruction, and the better to enable
you to satisfy his Holiness of the full state of Affairs here, the Copies of
the Instructions at Waterford, the Articles of the late rejected Peace, and
Glamorgan's Concessions, and the Propositions from Kilkenny, to the
Congregation at Waterford, in August, 1646.

12. If Moneys be received in Rome by you by way of Gift, Engagement, or
otherwise, you are to bring, or send the same hither, to those in Authority,
and not to dispose the same, or any part thereof, otherwise than by Order from
the general Assembly, or supreme Council; and for all sums of Money so by you
to be received, you are to give account to the Authority entrusted here over
the Confederate Catholics.

13. You are to manage the circumstance of your Proceedings upon the
Instructions, according as upon the Place you shall find most tending to the
Avail of the Confederate Catholics.

Tho. Dublin.
Tho. Cashell.
Thom. Tuamen Electus, Ewerus Clougherensis, David Ossoriens. Joha. Episc.
Roscotensis Fr. Edmundus Laglensis, Franc. Ardensis Episc. Robert. Elect. Coses
and Cluomer, Francis. Patricius Ardack. Electus, Rob. Dromore Elect. Henry O
Neal, Rich. Bealing, J. Bryan, Robert. Devereux, Gerald Fennel, Farren.

By the Command of the General Assembly, N. Plunket.



These having been solicited, we shall now present you with their further
Instructions, to importune other Princes. Instructions for France, Jan. 18.
1647.
YOu are to present your Letters of Credence, to his most Christian Majesty,
and the several Letters you have with you, to the Queen, the Prince and
Cardinal Mazarine, declaring the special affection of the Confederate
Catholics, to his Majesty's service, upon all occasions, wherein they may
serve him.

You are to desire his most Christian Majesty, the Queen Regent, and Cardinal
Mazarine, their Favorable and Friendly regard of the Affairs of the
Confederate Catholics, and to direct their assistance in what they may, to
further the settling of the happy Peace of this Kingdom, with advantageous, and
honorable Conditions, Commissioners being now sent, to conclude the same, if
they may.

You are to let his most Christian Majesty, the Queen Regent, and Cardinal
Mazarine know, That there be a considerable Enemy, in the heart of the several
Provinces of this Kingdom; that yet we have many Cities and Parts, of the
greatest consequence in our hands, and have sufficient stock of Men, to defend
the Nation, and expel the Enemy, but do want aids of Money and Shipping,
without which, we shall be in danger, the next Summer-service; and therefore to
solicit for considerable Aids in Moneys, to be sent timely, the preservation
of the Catholic Religion in this Kingdom, depending thereon.

If you find upon the place, that a settlement of Peace cannot be had,
according to the several Instructions, that go with the Commissioners to his
Holiness, and Christian Majesty, and Prince of Wales, nor such considerable
Aids, that may probably prove for the Preservation of the Nation; then you are
to inform your self, by correspondence with our Commissioners employed to Rome,
whether his Holiness will accept of this offer, of being Protector to this
Nation; and if you find he will not accept thereof, nor otherwise send such
powerful and timely Aids, as may serve to preservation, then you are by advice
of other the Commissioners employed to his Majesty, and Prince of Wales, and by
correspondence had with the Commissioners employed to Rome, and by
correspondence likewise with our Commissioners employed since, if it may be
timely had, to inform your self, where the most considerable Aids for
preserving this Nation may be had, by this offer of the Protectorship of the
Nation, in manner, as by other Instructions into France, grounded on the same
of the Assembly is contained, and so to manage the disposal of the
Protectorship, as you, and the rest of our said Commissioners, shall find most
for the advantage of the Nation.

The like Instructions for Spain, bearing the same Date.


Upon these, and other considerations, ever in his view, the Marquess thought
it much more prudent and agreeable to the Trust reposed in him, to deposite the
Kings Interest, and Right of the Crown of Ireland, into the hands of the Lords
and Commons of England, who still made great profession of Duty and Submission
to his Majesty, from whom it would probably return to the Crown in a short
time, then to trust it with the Irish, from whom less then a very chargeable
War, would never recover it, in what state soever the Affairs of England should
be; and how lasting, and bloody, and costly, that War might prove, by the
intermedling and pretenses of Foraign Princes, was not hard to conclude: In
that such Auxiliaries, many times prove dangerous Assistance, not being
overtender, or much distinguishing betwixt the Party they come to assist, and
that they come to subdue, when they are made Umpires in such Quarrels; as may
be guessed by the Account in the 14th. Appendix: of which the Lords and Commons
of the Parliament of Ireland, being very sensible, they thus in March expressed
themselves, and their condition, to the Parliament of England. The Declaration
of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, assembled in Ireland, of the present
Estate, and distressed Condition of the Protestants in the said Kingdom, and
their Address unto the most Honorable, the Parliament of England, for Relief.
WE, the Lords and Commons of the Parliament of Ireland, having by the Mercy of
God, your Care of us, and the Industry of those entrusted by his Majesty, with
the Government here, preserved unto us, the means of sitting together, and of
delivering freely our thoughts, concerning the condition of this miserable
Kingdom, whereof we are the representative Body, and finding withal the
Government, our Selves, and indeed the Protestants in the Kingdom, reduced to
that final point of Extremity, that if not very speedily supported and
preserved, all in these Parts must become a Prey unto the bloody and inhumane
Rebels, and this City of Dublin, the chief Seat and Citadel of this Kingdom,
with the other Garrisons depending thereupon, be turned into the prime Seats
and Strengths of those, who have given evident proof, that they aim not at
less, then the extirpation of all Protestants, and the setting up the
abominable Idol of the Mass, and Superstition, and at the shaking off of all
Loyalty and Subjection to the Crown of England: We therefore hold it our duty
(as being also perhaps the last, which we by reason of the near approach of a
powerful and pernicious Enemy, may have the means to discharge in this
Capacity) to make the present Address, and Representation of our miserable
Condition, to the most Honorable the Parliament of England, which, as it has,
in all times of common Danger, been the Fountain, from whence the Power and
Luster of the Crown of England in this Kingdom, has sprung, so it is now the
only Sanctuary, unto which (in behalf of our selves, and the distressed
Interest thereof) we can fly for Succor and Preservation. We hold it
un-necessary to particularize our present Wants, and Miseries, and
Imposibilities of further subsistence of our selves, since they are too well
known, even to our Enemies, in so much as it may be feared, that the benefit
which we confidently expect, by the great diligence and Wisdom of the most
Honorable, the Parliament of England, may not arrive timely, for our Relief
and Preservation; nor can we so misdoubt the Wisdom, Justice, and Piety, of
those Honorable Houses (whereof we have had heretofore, very real and great
experience, which we do here with all thankfulness acknowledge) as to fear that
they will suffer the Protestant Religion, the Interest of the Crown of England,
and of the Protestants in these important Garrisons, and Quarters, to be
sacrificed unto the fury of the merciless Rebels; But on the contrary, as we do
earnestly desire, so are we most confident, that the Goodness and Wisdom of the
most Honorable, the Parliament of England, will so seasonably send over a
sufficient Power, as well to subdue and suppress these merciless and bloody
Rebels, as to maintain these places, accompanied with an assurance from the
most Honorable, the Parliament of England, for enjoying those Conditions of
Honor, subsistence and safety, which have been lately offered by their
Commissioners, for, and in the name of the most Honorable, the Parliament of
England, to those who have hitherto governed and preservd them, and to his
Majesty's Protestant Subjects, and those who have faithfully and constantly
adhered unto them, unto which they may be pleased to join such further
additions of Grace and Bounty, as to their Wisdoms and Goodness, shall be
thought fit, as that they, and all the Protestants, and such others, as have
faithfully and constantly adhered unto them, may find Security and Preservation
therein, whereby we may heartily join under those, whom the said most
Honorable, the Parliament of England, shall appoint, in prosecuting so Pious a
War, and being Gods Instruments, for the bringing just Vengeance upon such
Perfidious Rebels, and in restoring the Protestant Religion, and Interest of
the Crown of England, in this Kingdom, to its due and former Luster, which we
will ever strive (with the hazard of our Lives and Fortunes) to maintain.



While the Marquess was in this deliberation (being privy to the Parliaments
actions) he received information, that the King was delivered by the Scots, to
the Commissioners of the two Houses of Parliament, who were then treating with
him, for the settling of Peace in all his Dominions; and at the same time,
several Persons of Quality, arrived at Dublin, having been privately dispatched
by his Majesty, with signification of his Majesty's Pleasure, upon the
advertisement he had received of the Condition of Ireland, to this purpose;
That if it were The Kings Answer to the Lord Lieutenant, upon his signification
of his Streights in Dublin.
possible for the Marquess to keep Dublin, and the other Garrisons, under the
same entire Obedience to his Majesty, they were then in, it would be acceptable
to his Majesty; But if there were, or should be, a necessity of giving them up
to any other Power, he would rather put them into the hands of the English,
then of the Irish; which was the Rule, the Marquess was to guide himself by,
who had likewise his other very important considerations, which, if all the
rest had been away, had been enough to have inclined him to that resolution.
The King was now in the Power, and hands of those, who raised a War against
him, principally, upon the credit of those reproaches and scandals, that had
persuaded the People to a belief of his inclinations to Popery; and of his
contriving, or, at least, countenancing the Rebellion in Ireland, in which so
much Protestant Blood, had been so wantonly and cruelly let out: The Cessation
formerly made, and continued with those Rebels, though prudently, charitably,
and necessarily entered into, had been the most un-popular Act the King had ever
done, and had wonderfully contributed to the Reputation of the two Houses of
Parliament, if, according to the general opinion then current, there should a
Peace ensue, between the King and them; so that his Majesty would lose nothing
by the Parliament being possessed of Dublin, and those other Towns, then in the
disposal of the Lord Lieutenant: On the contrary, if they intended to pursue
his Majesty, with continued and new reproaches, and thereby to make him so
odious to his Subjects, that they might with more facility and applause,
execute their horrible Conspiracy against his Life, there could The Lord
Lieutenant delivers Dublin to the Parliaments Commissioners, though upon his
inclination, the Irish endeavor to delude him.
be nothing so disadvantagious to his Majesty, as the surrender of Dublin, to
the Irish Confederates; which being done by the Kings Lord Lieutenant, would
easily be interpreted, to be by his Majesty's direction, and so make a
confirmation of all they had published of that kind; and, amongst the ignorant
seduced People, might have been a countenance to, though nothing could be a
justification of their unparalleled Dealings.

Hereupon the Marquess took a Resolution, since he could not possibly keep it
himself, to deliver it into the hands of the English; and to that purpose sent
again to the two Houses of Parliament at Westminster, that he would surrender
Dublin, and the other Garrisons to them, upon the same condition they had
before offered; who quickly dispatched their Ships with Commissioners, Arthur
Annesly, Esquire. Sir Robert King, Sir Robert Meredith, Colonel John Moore, Colonel
Michael Jones, who carried over a Regiment of Horse, and 1000 Foot, and was
made Commander in chief of all the Forces, within the Province of Leimster, and
Governor of Dublin, who upon his entrance, upon the Place, found 11 old
Regiments of Foot, which he reduced to 7. viz. The Earl of Kildare's, the Lord
Moor's Sir Henry Tichburn, Sir John Borlase, Jun. Colonel Francis Willoughby,
Colonel Baily, and Flowers, in all about 4000. no Recruit being sent to any of
them.
Men, and Money, and all other Provisions necessary to take the same into their
possession. The Confederate Catholics were no sooner informed of this, but
they sent again to the Lord Lieutenant an overture of Accommodation (as they
call it) yet the Messengers entrusted by them, were so wary, lest indeed by
accepting what they proposed, they might be obliged to a Conjunction, that they
refused to give their Propositions in Writing; And when, upon their Discourse,
the Lord Lieutenant had writ what they had propounded, and showed it to them,
albeit they could not deny but that it was the same, yet they refused to Sign
it: whereby it was very natural to conclude, that the Overture was made by
them, only to lay some imputation upon the Marquess, of not being necessitated
to agree with the two Houses of Parliament, rather then with any purpose of
submitting to the Kings Authority. At last (being so far pressed, they found it
necessary to let the Marquess know in plain terms what he was to trust to) they
sent him a Message in Writing, in which they declared, That they must insist
upon the Propositions of the Clergy, formerly mentioned to be agreed at
Waterford, and to which they had sworn; and that if he would have a Cessation
with them, he must promise not to receive any Forces from the two Houses of
Parliament in 6 or 7 months: Not proposing in the mean time any way how his
Majesty's Army should be maintained, but by a full submission unto all their
unreasonable Demands: Notwithstanding all which, the Parliament failing to make
that speedy performance of what they had promised, and their Commissioners not
having (as it was agreed on) brought Bills sufficiently drawn to be accepted
of, for 10000 l. and the Marquess having it thereby in his Power, fairly to
comply with the Irish, if they had yet recovered the temper and discretion that
might justify him; He sent again to them, as well an Answer to their Overtures
of accommodation, as an offer not to receive any Forces from the two Houses,
for the space of three weeks, if they would, during that time, consent to a
Ceassation, that a full Peace might be treated, and agreed upon. To which
Motion, they never vouchsafed to return any Answer; about the same time Owen O
Neil (wisely foreseeing, that the Nuncio, or the Supreme Council, did not
enough consider, or foresee the evil consequences, that would undoubtedly
attend the Lord Lieutenant's being compelled to leave the Kingdom, and to put
Dublin, and the other Garrisons into the possession of the English Rebels) sent
his Nephew Daniel O Neil, to the Marquess of Ormond, that if the Marquess would
accept of a Cessation for two months, which he believed, the Assembly, or
Supreme Council, would propose (with what mind soever) he would promise, and
undertake, to continue it for a Twelvemonth; and in the mean time, he would use
his utmost power, to procure a Peace. Owen O Neil was a man of an haughty, and
positive humor, and rather hard to be inclined to submit to reasonable
Conditions, then easy to decline them, or break his word, when he had
consented; therefore the Lord Lieutenant returned this Answer; that if he would
give him his word, to continue the Cessation for a full year, he would accept
it, when proposed from the Supreme Council, for two months; and he would in the
mean time, wave any further Treaty with the Parliament; yet sent him word, he
would not hold himself by this promise, longer then fourteen days engaged, if
he did not in that time receive such a positive effect of his Overture, as he
expected. Owen O Neil accepted of the Condition, and with all possible speed,
dispatched his Nephew Daniel, to the Supreme Council at Clonmel, with a Letter
containing his Advice, and another to the Bishop of Clogher, his chief
Confident; to whom he sent Reasons at large, which ought to induce the Nation
to desire such a Cessation. When the Council received the Letter, and knew that
the Lord Lieutenant expected an Answer within 14 days, they resolved to return
no Answer, till those days were expired, and during that time, committed Daniel
O Neil to Prison, that he might not return to his Uncle; and when the time was
passed, they released him, on condition that he should come no more into their
Quarters.

In the interim, the Parliament of Ireland, then sitting at Dublin, finding
into what straights the Kingdom was brought, and how his Excellency had
strugled with the greatest difficulties imaginable, for his Majesty's and their
Interest; they, the 17th. of March, sent this Remonstrance, in acknowledgment
of great Care and Indulgence. The Remonstrance of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in Parliament assembled, declaring the Acknowledgment of
their hearty thankfulness to the most Honorable, James Marquis of Ormond, Lord
Lieutenant General of Ireland, his Excellency.
WE the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament in our whole Body, do present
our selves before your Lordship, acknowledging with great sense and feeling
your Lordships singular goodness to us the Protestant Party, and those who have
faithfully and constantly adhered unto them, who have been preserved to this
day (under God) by your Excellencies providence and pious care, which has not
been done without a vast expense out of your own Estate, as also to the
hazarding of your Person in great and dangerous difficulties: And when your
Lordship found your self (with the strength remaining with you) to be too weak
to resist an insolent (and upon all advantages) a perfidious and bloody Enemy,
rather than we should perish, you have in your care transferred us into their
hands, that are both able and willing to preserve us; and that not by a bare
casting us off, but by complying so far with us, that you have not denied our
desires of Hostages, and amongst them, of one of your most dear Sons: All which
being such a free Earnest of your Excellencies love to our Religion, Nation,
and both Houses, do incite us here to come unto you with Hearts filled with
your love, and Tongues declaring how much we are obliged to your Excellency,
professing our resolutions are with all real service (to the utmost of our
power) to manifest the sincerity of our acknowledgment and affections unto you,
and to perpetuate to posterity the memory of your Excellencies merits, and our
thankfulness. We have appointed this Instrument to be entered into both Houses,
and under the hands of both Speakers to be presented to your Lordship.

Rich. Bolton, Canc.
17 die Martii, 1676. intr. per Val. Savage Dep. Cler. Parl.
Maurice Eustace, Speaker.
Int. 17. die Martii, 1676. per Philip Fernely Cler. Dom. Com.


What effect this made upon his Excellency, you will here see. My Lords and
Gentlemen,
WHat you have now read and delivered has much surpised me, and contains
matter of higher obligation laid upon me by you, than thus suddenly to be
answered; yet I may not suffer you to depart hence, without saying somewhat to
you: And first, I assure you, that this Acknowledgment of yours is unto me a
Jewel of very great value, which I shall lay up amongst my choicest Treasures,
it being not only a full confutation of those Calumnies that have been cast
upon my actions, during the time I have had the Honor to serve his Majesty
here, but likewise an Antidote against the virulency and poison of those
Tongues and Pens, that, I am well assured, will be busily set on work, to
traduce and blast the Integrity of my present Proceedings for your
preservation. And now, my Lords and Gentlemen, since this may perhaps be the
last time that I shall have the Honor to speak to you from this Place; and
since that next to the words of a dying man (those of one ready to banish
himself from his Country for the good of it) challenge credit, give me leave
before God and you here to protest, That in all the time I had the Honor to
serve the King my Master, I never received any Command from him, but such as
spoke him a Wise, Pious, Protestant Prince, zealous of the Religion he
professes, the welfare of his Subjects, and industrious to promote and settle
Peace and Tranquillity in all his Kingdoms; and I shall beseech you to look no
otherwise upon me, than upon a ready Instrument set on work by the Kings wisdom
and goodness for your preservation; wherein if I have discharged my self to his
Approbation and Tours, it will be the greatest satisfaction and comfort I shall
take with me, wherever it shall please God to direct my steps. And now (that
I may dismiss you) I beseech God long, long, to preserve my Gracious Master,
and to restore Peace Rest to this afflicted Church and Kingdom.




But to return. In conclusion, the Commissioners from the two Houses of
Parliament having performed all that on their part was expected, the Marquis of
Ormond delivered up Dublin and the other Garrisons into their hands the 17th.
some write the 18th. of June, 1647. on condition 1647*
to enjoy his Estate, and not to be subject to any Debts contracted for the
support of his Majesty's Army under his Command, or for any Debts contracted
before the Rebellion: That he, and all such Noblemen and Officers as desired to
pass into any part of that Kingdom, should have traveling Arms, and free
Passes, with Servants for their respective Qualities: That he should have 5000
l. in hand, and 2000 l. per Annum for five years, till he could receive so much
a year out of his own Estate: And that he should have liberty to live in
England without taking any Oaths for a year; he engaging his Honor to do
nothing in the interim to the prejudice of the Parliament. However, he
delivered not up the Regalia till the 25th. of July, at which time he was
transported (with his Family) into England; where they admitted him to wait on
the King, and to give his Majesty an account of his Transactions: who received
him most graciously, as a Servant who had merited highly from him, and fully
approved all that he had done. The straits his Excellency was then put to, were
great, and (in consideration into whose hands the Government might fall) his
surrender of Dublin to the Parliament seemed extreme hazardous: yet Providence
so steered his Resolution in that act, as doubtless the ground of his Majesty's
Sovereignty, and the English preservation (how many Channels soever it past
through first) proceeded thence. Before He came away, the Soldiers had received
such a tincture of Mutiny, as Mr. Annesly and Sir Robert King, for fear of
violence, privately quitted the Kingdom, before which, they (with Sir Robert
Meredith, Colonel Michael Jones, and Colonel John Moore) took notice of the
insolency of the Soldiers, to exact Contribution and free Quarters at their
pleasure, forbidding them so to do, etc. by a Proclamation at Dublin the 20th.
of June, 1647.

Soon after the Parliaments Commissioners were warm in the Government (having*
regulated their Militia) they put their Sickle into the Service of the Church,
where they found many Edw. Parry, Laonensis, Jac. Margetson nunc temporis
Armachanus, Ben. Culme, Anibr. Anngier, Ja. Sybald, Godf. Rhodes, Hen. Hall,
(exin. Episc. Acadensis) Jos. War. Jo. Brookbank, Gilbert. Dean, Dud. Boswell,
Rob. Parry, Joan. Creighton Can. Edw. Sing, (exin. Ardfertensis) Rob. Dickson,
Rand. Ince, Hen. Byrch, Rich. Powell.
so ten^cious to the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and their Vows to
their Ordinaries, as they could not be weaned from the Liturgy of the Church of
England, in which Ministry they desired to finish their Course with joy; and
the 9th. of July, 1647. they unanimously published a Declaration to that end,
exactly drawn up with great Reason, Perspicuity, and Eloquence.

The time that the Marquis of Ormond agreed with the Parliaments Commissioners,
was near the time that the Army had gotten the King into their hands, having
taken him from Holmbey, out of the custody of the Commissioners, to whom the
Scots had delivered him: And the Marquis of Ormond, at his arrival in England,
found so many specious pretenses and professions published by that Party, which
then had the whole Power of the Army, and consequently of the Kingdom, that
very many believed his Majesty's Affairs to be in no ill condition; more
seeming respect was paid to his Person, and less restraint upon the resort of
his faithful Servants to him, than had been from the time that he first put
himself into the Scots power. The Army took upon them the Government of the
Kingdom, having solemnly declared, That there could be no reasonable hope of a
firm and lasting Peace, if there were not an equal care to preserve the
Interest of the King, Queen, and Prince, as of the Liberties of the People, and
that both should be with equal care provided for together. In this time of
freedom, and hypocritical compliance, the Marquis had free liberty of repairing
to the King, where he gave him an account of all his actions, and of the course
he had taken for the reviving and preserving The Marquis of Ormond having free
access to the King, acquaints him of the Impression he had made in many for his
Service.
his Majesty's Interest in Ireland, by settling a Correspondence with many
Persons of Honor there, who would keep the two Houses of Parliament (how great
an advantage soever he had given them, by the delivery up of Dublin, etc. into
their power) if they refused to return to his Majesty's obedience, from
obtaining any absolute Dominion* in that Country; and who were most like to
reduce the Nation from the Distemper with which they were transported, and to
incline them to that submission that was due from them to the King; with all
which, his Majesty was very graciously and abundantly satisfied, and gave the
Marquis direction, in case the Independent Army should proceed otherwise than
they pretended, how he should behave himself, and comply with the Irish, if he
could reduce and dispose them to be instrumental toward his or their own
delivery. And when his Majesty discovered (by the double dealing, and
hypocritical demeanor of the Officers of the Army, of whom he had earlier
jealousy than other men, as seeing farther into their dark Design the little
good they meant him, he found it fit to receive some Overtures from the
Scottish Commissioners, who were still admitted to reside at London, and to
bear a part in the Managery of the Public Affairs; and now plainly saw, that
the Independent Army, which they had so much despised, was grown superior to
them, and meant to perform nothing less, than what they had so Religiously
promised before the King was delivered up at Newcastle. The King hereupon
commands the Marquis of Ormond to confer with the principal Persons of that
Commission, who seemed very sensible of the dishonor their Nation had
incurred, and resolved, by uniting the power of that Kingdom for his Majesty's
Service, to undo some of the mischief they had wrought: And desired, that the
Marquis of Ormond would likewise transport himself into Ireland, to try once
more if he could compose the humors of that Some of the Scots being convinced
of what they had done amiss in his Majesty's Service, better resolve, and
encourage the Marquis of Ormond to return into Ireland.
People to his Majesty's obedience; that so those two Kingdoms, being entirely
reduced to their duty, might, with that assistance they were like to find in
England, persuade the violent Party to comply with those moderate and just
Conclusions, which would establish the Peace and Tranquillity of the whole in a
full happiness to Prince and People. And from hence was that first Engagement
designed, which was afterward so unfortunately conducted by the elder Duke
Hamilton, and concluded with the ruin of himself, and of many Worthy and Noble
Persons.

When the Army had by their civil and specious carriage and professions
disposed the Kings Party to wish well to them, at least better than The
subtilty of the Independent Army.
to the Presbyterians, (who seemed to have erected a Model of a more formid and
insupportable Tyranny, and were less endu'd with the appearances of Humanity
and good Nature) and had (by shuffling themselves into new shapes of
Government, and admitting Persons of all Conditions to assemble, and make
Propositions to them in order to the public Peace) given encouragement to most
men to believe, that all Interests would, in some degree, be provided for; and
so had brought themselves into an absolute Power over all Interests, they began
to lessen their outward Respects and Reverence to the King, to inhibit some of
his Servants absolutely to resort to him; and more to restain the frequent
access of the People, who out of their innate Duty and Affection, delighted to
see his Majesty, they caused reports to be raised and scattered abroad of some
intentions, in desperate persons, of violence upon his Majesty's Person; and
upon this pretense doubled their Guards, and put Officers of stricter vigilance
and more surly disposition about him; so that whatsoever he said or did, or was
said unto him, was more punctually observed. The Marquis of Ormond was looked
upon with a very The Marquis now suspected by the Army*
jealous eye, and was forbid to continue his attendance on him, or to come
within 25 miles of London; and that Article in the Agreement at the delivery of
Dublin, ( viz. That he should engage his Honor not to act any thing to the
prejudice of the Parliament in a twelvemonth) there was an intention to put him
in mind of, by a Letter from the Committee at Derby-house; but before the
Messenger came where he had been near Bristol, he (knowing of the King's being
close Prisoner in Carisbrook-Castle, and that it would be to little purpose to
contest his Articles with the Parliament) privately shipped himself away for
France, where he arrived safely about the end of the year 1647. having spent in
England little more than six months.

For a time we must leave the Marquis in France, and return to Colonel Jones in
Dublin, who (with those Forces that were left there by the Marquis of Ormond,
and such as he brought and received out of England, amounting in all to 3000)
marched against Colonel Preston, approaching with his Leimster Forces to infest
Dublin, and met him about Genesis Preston routs Colonel Jones.
12 miles from Dublin; who having gotten great advantage of ground, routed
Jones, killed many of his men, and took not a few Prisoners, Jones himself
escaping with much difficulty to Dublin.

Whether upon this accident, or otherwise, I cannot determine; but great
divisions then arose betwixt the old English, who had Preston for their
General, and the old Irish, who had Owen Roe O Neal for theirs: The old English
had a gallant Army, consisting of near 10000 Foot and Horse, well Armed, and
well Disciplined, who thought, that if they would offer themselves Instruments
to destroy the old Irish, they might at any time have good Conditions from
England; therefore under confidence thereof, they went on with great
resolution, determining to do what they could to make themselves Masters of
Dublin, and of all the English Quarters thereabouts, the easier afterward to
facilitate their design against Owen Roe and his Confidents. Preston thus
fleshed with his late Victory, brought up his Army, possessed himself of most
of the Out-Garrisons, even within eight miles of Dublin, and thence went with
Preston's advance on a design to Dublin.
a resolution to take in Trim, a Garrison of some strength, under Colonel
Fenwick, wherein there lay a Regiment of Foot, and some Troops of Horse. Upon
which, Jones seeing himself in this condition, marched about the 17th. of July,
with 1000 Foot and 400 Horse, to Sigginstown, burning by the way, Castle
Martin, taking good Prey from Castle Bawn, and was over-took by the Enemy near
Johns-town, who falling on his Rear, cut off many; where Captain Adam Meredith
gallantly maintaining the Pass, was killed: a Gentleman of clear valor, and
greater hope.

In the interim, the distractions of the Soldiers (daily mutinous) were very
great, the Soldiers threatening to deliver up the Town to the Rebels, if they
were not speedily and better supplied with money and other necessaries.
However, in this high distemper, Colonel Jones drew out, the first of August,
3800 Foot, and two Regiments of Horse, besides Artillery, to the relief of
Trim, besieged by Preston; who upon his approach quitted the Siege, intending
to follow the advice of a Person The Lord Digby.
then at Leixlip (a Castle 10 miles from Dublin) of great trust and abilities,
that whilst Jones relieved Trim, he might attempt Dublin. Whereupon Jones
follows, being assisted by Sir Henry Tichburn from Tredagh, Colonel Moor from
Dondalk, with the Newry, Carlingford Forces, as Colonel Conway, with a Party of
the Northern old British, making up in all 700 Horse, and 1200 Foot; and joined
Battle with Preston, effectually 7300 Foot, and 1047 Horse strong, besides what
the Lord Costolough and the two Nugent's brought, at Dungans-Hill, the 8th. of
August, 1647. Dungan-hill Battle, the 8. of Aug. 1647. by some termed
Linch-Knock Battle.
where by plain valor Jones gained the greatest and most signal Victory the
English ever had in Ireland; there was slain upon the place 5470, besides those
afterward which were gleaned up, which were many; amongst the slain, there
were 400 of Colonel Kitto's Redshanks: There were taken Prisoners, 5 Colonels,
4 Lieutenant Colonels, 6 Serjeant-Majors, 32 Captains, 23 Lieutenants, 27
Ensigns, 2 Cornets, 22 Sergeants, 2 Quarter Masters, 2 Gunners, the Clerk of
the Store, 13 Troopers, and 228 common Soldiers: Preston hardly escaped with
the Horse; he lost his Carriages and Cannon, being 4 demi-Culverings, each
carrying 12 pound Bullet, and 64 fair Oxen, attending the Train, which were of
very great use. Of ours some were wounded, but not above 20 slain: Of Note, we
lost only 2 Cornets, and one Captain Gibbs, who, overheated in the Service,
died in drinking Ditch-Water. After this Victory the Enemy quit and burnt the
Naas Sigginstown, Harristown, Collanstown, Castlewarding, and Moyglare. Nor had
the effect of this Victory ended thus, but that Pay and Provision for the Army
were so scant, as necessity enforced them to return to Dublin, where they were
met with the News of 1500 l. newly arrived, a Supply incompetent to furnish
them forth immediately, though it satisfied them there was some care taken for
their Relief. And upon the certainty of this great Victory in England,
considerable Supplies were hastened, and 1000 l. sent Colonel Jones for his good
Service. A little after which the Lord Inchiquin took in Cahir Castle, the Town
and Castle of Cashel, and 11 other Castles, in the County of Tipperary, which
was exceeding well taken by the Parliament, no small Causes of Defection,
having (a little before) been insinuated to them, of his Fidelity.

About the beginning of October Colonel Jones took the Field again, and Jones's
and Monk's good Service.
having joined with the Ulster Forces, under the Command of Colonel Monk, they
marched out near 2000 Horse and 6000 Foot, taking in Portleicester, Abboy, and
several of the Rebels Castles and Garrisons; and so having got great Prey of
Cattle, and other Pillage, they returned to Dublin, and Colonel Monk went back
into Ulster with that Party he carried thence.

And in Munster the Lord Inchiquin was so active, as the Lord Taaff, appearing
with a considerable Force, (as General of the Irish) advancing toward the
English Quarters, he nobly encountered him (though with much dis-advantage both
of Men and Ground) at Knocknones, the 13th. The Battle of Knocknones, or
Knockness.
of November; where, after a sharp dispute, excellently carried, with much
Gallantry and true Soldiery, as to the order of the Battle, he totally routed
him and his Forces; amongst whom fell Sir Alexander Mac Donel, alias Colonel
Kilkittoth, the Rebels Lieutenant General, and his Lieutenant Colonel, besides
some 4000 of their Infantry and Horse were slain, 6000 Arms recovered, 38
Colors of Foot, some Cornets of Horse, Ammunition, Taaff's Cabinet, besides
his Tent, and many Concerns of importance, were also taken. We lost Sir William
Bridges, Colonel of Horse, Colonel Gray, Major Brown, Sir Robert Travers, the
Judge Advocate, and some other Officers, upon the routing of our left Wing, who
gallantly however sealed the Cause with their blood. They were 7464 Foot, and
1076 Horse, besides Officers; we not 4000 Foot, and 1200 Horse. Upon the
arrival of this News, the House of Commons voted 10000 l. for Munster, and 1000
l. with a Letter of thanks, to the Lord Inchiquin.

Things thus succeeding, it might be thought rational, that the Lord Inchiquin,
who had obtained so great a Victory over the Rebels, and thereupon was highly
caressed by the Parliament, should now have had Inchiquin meditates the
Alteration of his Party.
no Design to have altered his Party. But he (having been dealt with by those,
who best knew how to wean him off) sets forth a specious Declaration against
the Parliament, overawed by Independents and the Army; and hearing of
Laughorn's Insurrection, and the Scots Invasion, grew thence more encouraged,
that amongst the Presbyterians he went for a Patron; and distributing a little
Money amongst the Soldiers, won so upon them, as afterward he carried his
Design (for some time) un-discovered, sending to the Parliament this
Declaration. Mr. Speaker,
IT is not without an un-answerable proportion of Reluctance, to so heavy an
Inconvenience, that we are thus frequently put upon the asserting of our own
Fidelities, to the Services of the Honorable Houses; whereunto, as we have by
several Evidences (the mention whereof we make without vainglory) manifested
our selves sincerely faithful, so has it pleased the divine Providence, to
prosper our Endeavors with very many improbable Successes; to the attainment
whereof, though we have strugled through all the difficulties, and contended
with all the sufferances, that a People, un-supply'd with all necessaries and
secondary means, could undergo, yet have we encountered nothing of that
dis-affection, or dis-couragement, as we find administered unto us, by a
constant observation, that it is as well in the power, as it is in the
practice, of our malicious and indefatigable Enemies, to place and foment
Differences upon us, not only to our extreme scandal and disgrace, (which we
should the less resent, if their malice could terminate in us) but to the
obstructing of the Supplies ordered and designed for public Service, and to
the irreparable prejudice thereof, which our Enemies can value at so low a
rate, as to put it into that bargain, they are in hand to make for our
destruction. It being very approvable by us, that several Persons in power
there, do interpose their endeavors, to continue us (by the impeding of
Supplies) in a desperate, languishing, and perishable condition upon the Place,
and in a despicable and doubtful esteem with the Honorable Houses. Whereof
there will need no other Instances, than that, after the several promises made
by Letters, from the Honorable Committee at Darby-house, and Votes passed for
transmitting Supplies unto us, especially in case of Major General Starling,
his being sent to attend the Pleasure of the Houses, the only Remora then
alleged to make stay of 7000 Suits of Clothes, and 10000 l. in Money, being
before designed for our relief, there is no more than 2700 l. sent unto us in
Money, and thereof but 1500 l. designed for the feeding of us, and the
Soldiers under our Command. And that notwithstanding the signal Testimony
given of our real intentions and affections, to that Cause and Service, in a
late Engagement against the Rebels at Knockness, which we touch at, without any
affection of vainglory, the Votes then renewed for our Relief, and the Order
for our Indemnity, (which was conceived would not have found so much
hesitation, with those whose Service we had only professed) are laid aside, and
nothing effectual or advantageous done in order thereto, for our avane, save
the transmittal of 2700 l. but on the contrary, new jealousies and distrust of
us are re-embrac'd and fomented.

It is not therefore so insupportable a dis-comfort to us, to observe our own
Lives exposed a sacrifice, to the malice of our now potent public Enemies, who
by the conjunction of three several Armies, are not more encouraged to confront
us in the Field, than we, by the art and practice used to withold those just
and necessary Supplies from us, dis-abled to join Battle with them, as to
observe our honorable Reputation and Integrity, (dearer to us than our Lives)
brought into such frequent question, and unworthily mangled, depraved and
slaughtered, by the calumnious aspersions of our powerful and prevailing
Adversaries, in despite of all our zealous and cordial Endeavors, to give
indubitable testimony and evidence of our Fidelities. What if we be beyond any
common measure afflicted and dismayed? We are confident, that all Persons of
Honor will acknowledge, that we have much more than common cause.

And now that our Adversaries have prevailed to deprive us, not only of all
hopes of subsisting here in your Service, but have proceeded for to provide,
that we may not live hereafter but out of your Favor. So having intercepted
and perverted the comfort, we well hoped to have received from other
testimonies of our sincerity, they have only left us this Expedient, to
testify our mindfulness of our duty by, which is, to give humble intimation to
that Honorable House, that we are involved in so great and extreme exigencies
of distress and universal want, with the pressure of three joint Armies, upon
our weak and naked Forces, that there remains no humane means discernable
amongst us, to subsist by any longer in this Service, unless it shall stand
with the pleasure and piety of those, in whose Service we have exhausted both
our blood and livelihoods, to send us some seasonable and considerable
Supplies, or that we should be enforced to entertain such terms, as the Rebels
will give us, which of all things we abominate, as knowing our necessities will
render them such, as must be both obstructive and dishonorable, and therefore
shall resolve of making that the last Expedient, to preserve our own and many
thousands of poor Protestants Lives by, or that it shall please the Honorable
Houses to send Shipping to fetch us off. And so in discharge of our duties both
to God and Man, we humbly offer to consideration, and remain.

Subscribed-by the Officers under the Lord Inchiquin.


This Remonstrance begat some Heats: Upon which many of the Subscribers were
sent for over, and committed; but upon submission, soon released, and an
Ordinance for their Indemnity published.

But to return to the Marquess of Ormond, whom, not long since, we left in
France; where finding himself at liberty, and out of the reach of his Enemy, he
then projected again to visit Ireland, having made the The Marquess of Ormond
provides to return into Ireland, pre-possessing the Marquess of Clanrickard,
and the Lord Taaff, with the Design.
Marquess of Clanrickard, and the Lord Taaff, who (without any pause) had
preserved their Allegiance entire, privy to what might best advance his
Majesty's Interest, amongst those, who, opposing the Nuncio, seemed resolute
for his Majesty. And they (one in Connaght, the other in Munster) accordingly
disposed the People to a ready compliance, whilst the Forces under the Nuncio
were much weakened, partly by the defeat of General Preston, whose Army was
routed and destroyed by the Parliament's Forces, within less than a month after
they had compelled the Marquess to leave the Kingdom, and partly by the dislike
the great Council of the Confederate Catholics had, of the demeanor of the
Nuncio, and the experience they now had of his ill conduct, and the miseries he
had brought them into, by forcing them to decline the Peace, which would have
been so advantageous to them, and against which, the general Assembly at
Kilkenny, the 2d. of March, 1647. published a Proclamation, The Lord Inchiquin,
of the same Party.
conformable to what the Congregation of the Clergy before had passed at
Waterford the 12th. of August, 1646.

The Lord Inchiquin had likewise held correspondence with the Marquess of
Ormond, while he was in England; and as soon as the Marquess came into France,
desired him to make what haste he could into Ireland, where he should find the
Army, and all the important Towns of that Province, under his Command, ready to
submit to him, and to be conducted by him in the King's Service, any way he
should command. And in the mean time he made an Agreement with the Irish, under
the Command of the Marquess of Clanrickard, and the Lord Taaff, with the
Approbation of the supreme Council of the Confederate Catholics, from May,
1648. to November following, and sent them 500 Horse, under 1648.
the Command of Major Doily, to assist them in an Expedition they were then
entered upon against the Nuncio, and Owen Roe O Neal, in which they prevailed so
far, that Owen O Neal found it necessary to retire to the great Towns, and they
drove the Nuncio himself into the Town of Gallway, where he summoned a National
Synod the 15th. of July, and they besieged him so close, that they compelled
the Town (after near two The Nuncio pursued close, and then quits the Kingdom.
months siege) to pay a good sum of Money, to be distributed amongst the
Soldiers, and to disclaim any further subjection or submission to the Nuncio's
unlimited Jurisdiction, which, in effect, had put all Ireland in confusion. And
when he had (with less success than formerly) issued his Excommunication, the
27th. of May, 1648. against all those, who complied with the Cessation with the
Lord Inchiquin, he was compelled in the end (after so much mischief done to the
Religion he was obliged Viz. 23. of Feb. 1648/9.
to protect) in an obscure manner, to fly out of the Kingdom; and coming to
Rome, had an ill Reception of the Pope, Temerarie te gessisti, said he; with
which, and the Fate of Fermo, in his absence, he soon after died. Nor indeed
had any of those Apostolic Nuncios in Ireland, much better Fate: Nicholas
Sanders, an Englishman, An. 1579. was sent Nuncio by Gregory the 13th. who
wandered in the Mountains of Kerry, and was there starved under a Tree. Owen
Mac Egan, alias Eugenius O Hegan, of Irish Birth, Vicarius Apostolicus under
Clement the 8th. was slain, leading a Troop of 100 Horse against the Loyalists,
An. 1602/3.

And because the impudent Injustice, and Imprudence of the Nuncio, and the lame
Subjection of the People, to his immoderate Pride and Haughtiness, was, in
truth, the real Cause, or rather Fountain, from whence this torrent of
Calamities flowed, which has since overwhelmed that miserable Nation; and
because that exorbitant Power of his, was resolutely opposed by the Catholics,
of the most eminent Parts and Interests, and in the end (though too late)
expelled by them; it will be but Justice to the Memories of those noble
Persons, briefly to collect the sum of that unhappy Person's Carriage and
Behavior, from the time that he was first designed to that Employment. And in
doing hereof, no other Language shall be used, than what was part of a
Memorial, delivered by an honorable and zealous Catholic, who was entrusted
to complain of the in-sufferable Behavior of the Nuncio to the Pope himself,
which runs in these very words, speaking of the Nuncio. He declared before he
left Rome, That he would not admit either in his Company or Family; any Person
of the English Nation. In his Voyage, before An Express of the Nuncio's
Behavior.
he arrived at Paris, he writ to his Friends in Rome, with great joy, the News,
(though it proved after false) that the Irish Confederates had treacherously
surprised the City of Dublin, while they were in truce with the Royal Party,
and treating about an Accommodation and Peace. Arriving at Paris, (where he
shut himself up for many months) he never vouchsafed (I will not say) to
participate with the Queen of England, any thing touching Nunciature, or in the
least degree to reverence or visit her Majesty, save only one time upon the
score of Courtesy, as if he had been sent to her Enemies, not Subjects. Being
arrived in Ireland, he employed all his Power to dissolve the Treaty of Peace
with the King, which was then almost brought to perfection; and his diligence
succeeded, of which he valued himself, rejoiced, and insulted beyond measure.
In his Letters he writ to Paris, which were after showed to the Queen, and he
may truly say, that in that Kingdom, he has rather managed the Royal Scepter,
than the Pastoral Staff, and that he aimed more to be held the Minister of the
supreme Prince of Ireland, in Temporalibus, than a Nuncio from the Pope, in
Spiritualibus; making himself President of the Council, he has managed the
Affairs of the supreme Council of State; he has, by his own Arbitrament,
excluded from it those, who did not second him, though by Nobleness of Birth,
Allegiance; Prudence, and Zeal to Religion, they were the most honorable; of
these he caused many to be imprisoned, with great scandal, and danger of
sedition; and, in short, he assumed a distributive Power both in Civil and
Military Affairs, giving out Orders, Commissions, and Powers, under his own
Name, subscribed by his own Hand, and made Authentic with his Seal, for the
government of the Armies, and of the State, and Commissions for Reprizals at
Sea. He stroke in presently after his Arrival in Ireland, with that Party of
the Natives, who are esteemed irreconcilable, not only to the English, but to
the greatest and best part of the Irish Nobility, and of the same People, to
the most civil and most considerable of that Island. And the better to support
that Party and Faction, he has procured the Church to be furnished with a
Clergy and Bishops of the same temper, excluding those Persons who are
recommended by the Queen, who, for Doctrine and Virtue, were above all
exceptions, all which is contrary to what your Holiness was pleased to promise.
The Queen was not yet discouraged, but so labored to renew the Treaty of Peace
already once broke, and disordered by Monsieur Rinuccini, that by means of her
Majesty, it was not only reassumed, but, in the end, after great disputes and
oppositions on his part, the Peace was concluded between the Royal Party and
the Confederate Catholics, and warranted not only by the King's Word, but also
by the retention of Arms, Castles and Forts; and of the Civil Magistrates, with
the possession of Churches, and of Ecclesiastical Benefices, and with the free
exercise of the Catholic Religion. And all this would have been exhibited by a
public Decree, and authentic Laws, made by the three Estates assembled in a
free Parliament: By this Peace and Confederacy they would have rescued
themselves, from the damages of a ruinous War, have purchased security to their
Consciences, and of their temporal Estates, honored the Royal Party, and the
Catholics in England, with a certain restitution and liberty of the King,
whereon depended absolutely the welfare of the Catholics in all his Kingdoms,
the Catholic Chair had quitted it self of all Engagements and Expense, with
Honor and Glory. This Treaty of Peace on all sides so desirable, Monsieur
Rinuccini broke with such violence, that he forced the Marquess of Ormond, the
Viceroy of Ireland, to precipitate himself (contrary to his inclination and
affection) into the arms of the Parliament of England, to the unspeakable
damage of the King, and of the Catholics, not only of Ireland, but also of
England. He incensed the greatest and best part of the Catholic Nobility, and
rendered the venerable Name of the holy Apostolic Chair, odious to the
Heretics, with small satisfaction to the Catholic Princes themselves of
Europe, as though it sought not the spiritual good of Souls, but a temporal
Interest, by making it self Lord over Ireland. And when the Lord Digby and the
Lord Byron endeavored, on the Marquess of Ormond's part, to incline him to a
new Treaty of Peace, he did not only disdain to admit them, or to accept the
Overture, but understanding, that the Lord Byron, with great danger and
fatigue, came to Town, in the County of Westmeath, where he was to speak with
him, he forced the Earl that was the Lord of it, to send him away (contrary to
all Laws of Courtesy and Humanity) in the nighttime, exposed to extraordinary
inconveniences and dangers amongst those distractions, protesting, that
otherwise he himself would immediately depart the Town. By this Proceeding,
Monsieur Rinuccini has given the World an occasion to believe, that he had
private and secret Commission to change the Government of Ireland, and to
separate that Island from the Crown of England. And this Opinion is the more
confirmed, since that one Mahony, a Jesuit, has printed a Book in Portugal,
wherein he endeavors to prove, that all the Kings of England, have been either
Tyrants or Usurpers of Ireland, and so fallen from the dominion of it;
exhorting all its Natives to get thither, and to use all Cruelty against the
English, (with expressions full of Villainy and Reproach) and to choose a new
King of their own Country. And this Book, so barbarous and bloody, dispersed
through Ireland, is yet credited by the Catholic and Apostolic Chair: And the
Continuation of the History of Cardinal Baronius, was published at the same
time, under the Name of Olderico Raynaldo, in which he endeavors to establish
the supreme Right and Dominion in the Apostolic Chair, even in Temporalibus,
over England and Ireland. I leave to every Man to consider, whether all these
Actions are not apt enough to beget Jealousies, and naughty Blood, and whether
I ought not, out of great respect to the public Good, to represent, with some
ardency to your Holiness, the Actions of Monsieur Rinuccini, so unpleasant, and
directly contrary to those Ends, for which, it was supposed, he was employed.
And I beseech your Holiness, if any King, not only Protestant but Catholic,
had seen an Apostolic Nuncio to lord it in his Dominions, in such a manner as
Monsieur Rinuccini has done in Ireland, what Jealousies, what Complaints, and
how many Inconveniences would thereby follow? Thus as to the Nuncio, from the
Confederates themselves.



Though he gives this account of himself: For the better understanding of this,
(says he) Recourse must be had to the first rising of the Irish, which was
upon this occasion: The Parliament of England, having entered into an Agreement
with the Kingdom of Scotland, called the large Treaty; in which there was a
clause to join against the common Enemy, wherein the Catholics of Ireland, as
well as others (if not chiefly) did apprehend themselves comprehended; to
balance which, or to prevent the misery that might fall upon them thereby,
being sensible of the Earl of Stafford's death, which purported some to be sent
as Governor, that was not like to carry so fair to them, as he had done, the
same being to be approved (at least) by the Parliament then sitting. For better
security, they endeavored the supplanting all Protestants within that Kingdom,
and though (at that time) without Arms or Ammunition, got possession of most
part of the Kingdom; whereupon was established a Council of 24, part of Civil,
and part Ecclesiastical Persons, of which 12 were to reside in Kilkenny, or
other place; as occasion and need called, with this Resolution, agreed to hold
a Parliament every year, by, or in which, the said Council should be changed or
continued. By this it was resolved, and after sworn by all the Catholics,
never to lay down Arms, until the Roman Church was settled, as of old in
Ireland, and the King secured in all his Privileges, that of calling, and
putting period to Parliaments at pleasure, with a Negative voice, being chiefly
meant, and then in great hazard to be lost. The Earl of Ormond, and Inchequin,
Protestants, fearing the issue of this League, and foreseeing the in-ability
to oppose it, treated with the Earl of Clanrickard, Lord Muskery, and other
Lords Catholics, that possessed many Church-Benefices; a way erected by Queen
Elizabeth, thereby to extinguish the Catholics; and advertised them, that the
Restitution of the Catholic Discipline, would out them of all the said
Profits, gained them to the other side; though they continued still of the
Council, in which they were a prevalent party, taking to them such (when any
went out) as were of Ormond's mind and design: by which means a Peace was
suddenly concluded, upon supposition, that the Affairs of the Catholics
required it, although there was no mention of the Interest of that Church in
the Accord. About that time, the King sent to this Council, the Earl of
Glamorgan, with full power to accord to the Catholics, as they desired, if
they should send him 10000 Men, as they had offered, Ormond then at Dublin
(under pretext of Treating) drew Glamorgan thither, took from him his
Commission, and made him Prisoner, and certified the King, that himself could
make a far better and more advantageous Peace, with the Catholics, which he
did in 30 Articles. This breach of Oath, made by the Council, gave occasion to
the Nuncio, John Baptist Rinuccini, Archbishop and Prince of Firmo, who had
brought some succors of Money and Arms into Ireland, to assemble the Clergy in
Waterford, and Excommunicate all such as should adhere to the Peace: Which
notwithstanding, the said Marquess advanced to Kilkenny, to execute the same;
but O Neil returning victorious from the defeat of 20000 Scots, in two Battles
at Benburgh, and Tirconnel, Ormond goes back without doing of any thing;
whereupon were imprisoned the 7 that signed the Peace. Ormond seeing himself
out with the Catholics, both because he had ill treated them, and by the
violence exercised by his Army, no sooner returned to Dublin, but he treated
with the Parliament of England, for the delivery of the Towns he held; which
was done accordingly. Coming after to London, where he expected to be gratified
by the Parliament of England, proportionable to the service done them; but
finding there no such disposition, he went secretly to the Queen at St.
Germains, to justify himself, and persuade her, That his rendering Dublin, and
other Towns, were serviceable to the King her Husband, then Prisoner to the
Parliament, because (said he) it is better that they have them, then the
Catholics, whom he affirmed to have failed in their Fidelity to their King,
although they renewed the abovementioned Oath yearly. About this time, another
Assembly of Catholics, sent to the Queen, and the Princes her Children, to
desire certain concessions in the absence; and because of the Detention of the
King her Husband, deputing others to Rome, with Instructions to the former
Deputies, to act jointly with these; but contrary, those to the Queen (not
waiting the Resolution, or Concurrence of them at Rome) Muskery, and Brown, two
of those Deputies, (notwithstanding the opposition of the Marquess of Antrim,
who was chief) proposed, and obtained of the Queen, that she send into Ireland,
the Marquess of Ormond, as formerly to be Lord Deputy, or Viceroy: Who being
brought into that Kingdom, by the support of the said Supreme Council, of which
7 always favored him, they again concluded a Cessation of Arms with Inchequin,
then reduced to such necessities, that he was ready to fly into Holland,
whither then he had dispatched part of his Goods, with good store of Money,
picked up there; The Suspension not to be hindered by the Nuncio,
notwithstanding the offers of Money, to satisfy the pressing necessities,
declared by the Council, together with Owen Roe O Neal's offer, to drive
Inchequin quite out of Munster, at his own charge, and at the charge he would
force out of those parts, by his Soldiers: But at this time Inchequin was in a
deeper Correspondence with the Scots Nation, which way, Ormond was also to
biass his Designs. The Nuncio thus disappointed, called a new assembly of his
Clergy, composed of Hugh O Rely, Primate of Ireland, Thomas Fleming, Archbishop
of Dublin, Thomas Welsh, Archbishop of Cassel, John de Bourk, Archbishop of
Tuam, and ten Bishops, who unanimously declared, That this Cessation of Arms,
was much prejudicial to the Catholic Religion, and could not be embraced in
Conscience, and so Excommunicated all that adhered thereto. Hitherto the
Council had born it self with some respect toward the Catholic Church,
remembering the Clemency used by the Nuncio, in delivering some of them from
Prison; but upon this last Excommunication, they so threatened him, that he was
forced to go privately from Kilkenny, to a Castle, where Preston (by order of
the Council) following, he fled to Gallway, and called there a National
Council, to pacify the Troubles of the Kingdom, which the aforesaid Council
endeavored to hinder, forbidding the appearance of the Clergy, taking hold of
diverse Ecclesiastical Persons of his household, imprisoning them: So that the
Nuncio despairing of re-establishing of the Affairs of the Catholics, and
having information, That Ormond had resolved (with all his Forces) to advance
the Protestant Religion, and to destroy all opposers, and that the Supreme
Council of Catholics, had declared their departure from the League, with their
Confederates; he departed, arriving in France. In the interim, Owen Roe,
judging, that he could not in conscience, join his Armies any longer with a
Party, that called it self Catholic, and yet chased away the Nuncio, declared
his separation from them, until they recall the Nuncio, and endeavor to obtain
a Catholic Viceroy, and execute (in all other points) the Oath they had
taken. This was taken very ill by the Marquess of Ormond, and his Council, who
charged O Neal with a Design (under color thereof) to oppose the Affairs of
the King, which occasioned him to object to them, not the aforesaid Oath, but a
particular Declaration, which he had published; where he, with all his Officers
profess, That they intend only to re-establish the Catholic Religion, the
Liberties of the Kingdom, and the Prerogatives of the King, in their former
Glory and Splendour: The Ormond Party Catholic, being in such perplexity, by
reason of these differences, and their sleighting the Nuncio, appealed to his
Holiness; but from Rome, it is certified, That the Pope (well understanding
their deportment) refused to give Audience, before he had heard his Nuncio; Who
in the end, rather received a Check (as before is mentioned) then an
Approbation from his Holiness, for what he had done in Ireland.

And now, as to the difference betwixt their Generals, and our Proceedings
thereupon.

Colonel Jones finding the Distractions amongst the Rebels, to grow Jones
(finding Clanrickard active) stirs forth, and takes in someCastles.
very high, and that the old English, under the Marquess of Clanrickard, had
taken the Castle of Athlone, and other Places from Owen Roe, and that Athy was
besieged by Colonel Preston, and Owen Roe, came up to Relieve it, and burnt and
spoiled the Country thereabouts, thought it high time, to be stirring out
amongst them; and thereupon sent out some of his Forces, which took in the
Garrisons of the Nabber, and Ballihoe, formerly surprised by the Rebels; But
yet (not having his Provisions come from England) durst not himself stir forth,
till he had sufficiently secured Dublin; which in the first place, he began
more strongly to Fortify, that it might receive no prejudice in his absence.
About which time, Flemming (an active Officer among the Rebels) took in Cruces
Fort, and Killaloe, two Garrisons in Pudsonbyes Quarters.

Next, Jones secured Sir Maurice Eustace, Colonel Gifford, Capron, Several
suspected to be for the Marquess of Ormond, sent into England.
Flower, Willoughby, and several others, who, continuing their affection to the
Marquess, he suspected, and (by Order of the Committee of Derby-House) sent
them to the Castle of Chester, detaining Colonel Byron, and Sir Thomas Lucas,
Prisoners at Tredagh, suspecting these would deliver him, and the City, to the
Marquess of Ormond, then every day expected, Lord Lieutenant out of France. The
Scots Army under Duke Hamilton, about this time, entered England, to whose
Proceedings, Major General Monro, sent over into Scotland, his Son or Nephew
George Monro, with 2000 Foot, and 600 Horse, as Sir Robert Stewart, his Son,
with a Troop, and Sir Fred. Hamilton his, with a Regiment, and several others,
disaffected to the Parliament of England, in hope to settle (with advantage)
there; By which means, Belfast, Carrigfergus, and Colrain, were left very weak,
and much un-guarded, which Colonel Monk finding, and understanding how contrary
to all compact, Monro had dealt with the Parliament of England, in sending over
the Forces (maintained by them in Ireland) to fight against them in England; he
began to think of some means, to make himself master of those Towns; he was at
present at Lisnegarvy, and prepared a Party to go out to make an inroad into
the RebelsQuarters; he marched away in the morning; but having sent some
Persons of trust, to remain near Carigfergus, to attend his advance thither, he
returned in the night over the mountains, and came at break of day to the Gates
of Carigfergus, which he found open, and so entered Colonel Monk seizes on
Carickfergus.
without resistance; he seized upon Major General Monro, and sent him Prisoner
into England, where he was by the House of Commons committed to the Tower.
Colonel Monk having thus seized upon Carigfergus, caused some Horse to march
presently away to Belfast, which was surrendered into his hands by the Governor,
and so was likewise Colrain, so as he presently became Master of all those
Towns, disbanding, and sending away most of those Forces into Scotland, which
opposed the Parliament, and hindered those broken Troops of George Monro's,
(which fled out of England, upon Duke Hamiltons defeat at Preston in
Lancashire) from returning into Ireland, and did use all means to settle the
Country in such a posture, as that the Interest of the Parliament, might be
secured there. He planted Garrisons upon the Frontiers of Ulster, to hinder the
incursions of the Rebels, and he gave the Quarters the Scots had, to such of
the British as he found faithful to the service. This was about September,
1648. a Service very acceptable in England; in manifestation whereof, the
Parliament sent him 500 l. and made him Governor of Carigfergus, by an Order of
the 4th. of October, and sent over Clothes for some of those Scottish Regiments
which came into him, and 5000 l. in Money, for the two Provinces, of Ulster and
Connaght, to be equally divided. Sir Charles Coot there being very active, not
long after took in the strong Fort of Culmore, near Londonderry, seizing on (at
the same time) Sir Robert Stewart, whom he sent Prisoner to the Parliament;
upon which, the Scots Mutinied; but by a Letter from Sir Robert Stewart, they
were pacified, and all the Affairs of that Province, managed by Sir Charles
Coot, Sir Robert Stewart being at Liberty upon his Parole.

Before this, Townsend, and Doily, two Colonels under Inchequin in Munster,
sent over to the Committee at Derby-House, some Propositions, for the surrender
of the Towns in Munster, upon Condition of indemnity, and receiving part of
the Arrears for the whole Army; this was pretended to be acted by the consent
of Inchequin, and that he with his own hand, had approved and interlin'd them
in several Places. Hereupon, the Committee at Derby-House, sent back Colonel
Edmond Temple, with an Some suspicions that the Lord Inchequin would have
submitted to the Parliament. The Lord Inchequin taken off his inclinations, by
hopes of greater Honor.
Answer to those Colonels, and Power withal to Treat with the Lord Inchequin,
about somewhat more certain and more reasonable, to be propounded by him. But
before his arrival there, Sir Richard Fanshaw, the Princes Secretary, was come
from the Prince to Inchequin, with a Declaration of the Princes Design, to send
the Duke of York into Ireland, with such of the revolted Ships as remained in
Holland, and to let him know the hopes he had, that by his assistance, and the
Army under his Command, both he and his Father might be restored: This so puffed
up Inchequin, as that he would hear of no Overtures, and made him absolutely
dis-avow to have had any knowledge of the Propositions sent over, and thereupon
imprisoned Townsend, and Doily, thereby putting an issue to that Negotiation:
Fortifying, besides all the Harbors against the Parliaments Forces, placing
and displacing their Officers, as he thought most convenient, to introduce the
Kings keeping a Correspondence with the West of Ireland, as yet free to all
Trade, and holding frequent intelligence with Jarsey, where the Prince, was
said, would keep his Court; Thus the Interest of the Parliament was wholly lost
in Munster, where Sir William Fenton, Colonel Fair, Captain Fenton, and other
Officers (for their affections to the Parliament) being imprisoned, were
exchanged in December, for the Lord Inchequin's Son, imprisoned in the Tower,
about October, 1648.

Near this time Owen Roe attempted to rescue Fort-Falkland, besieged by the
Lord Inchiquin and Colonel Preston joined; but he was repulsed with the loss of
many men, as his Lieutenant General Rice Mac-Guire, and Lewis More, dangerously
hurt; which put Owen to such straits, as he made an Overture to Colonel Jones,
by his Vicar General O Rely, to surrender Athy, Mary-burrough, and Rebban, and
lay down his Arms, if he and his Confederates might have the privileges they
had in King James's time: But Jones could better improve the Offers to a
beneficial delay, than ascertain any thing. Though afterward Owen Roe and his
Council of Officers, further offered, That if he, nor the new expected Army
from England, would not molest him in his Quarters, but give him leave to
depart with his Forces into Spain, he would not join with Ormond, Preston, or
Inchiquin.

And here we must resume our account of the Marquis of Ormond, who after he had
in vain solicited supplies of Money in France, to the end that he might carry
some Relief to a Kingdom so harrassed and worn, and be the better thereby able
to unite those, who would be sure to have temptation enough of Profit, to go
contrary to the Kings obedience; his Excellency was at last compelled being
with great importunity called by the Lord Inchiquin and the rest, who were
resolved to uphold his Majesty's Interest to transport himself, unfurnished of
Money sufficient, Arms or Ammunition considerable, and without any other
Retinue than his own Servants, and some old Officers of the Kings: And in this
Equipage The Marquis of Ormond's return into Ireland.
he Embarked from Haure de Grace in a Dutch Ship, and arrived about the end of
September, 1648. at Cork, where he was received by the Lord Inchiquin, Lord
President of Munster, and the Irish, with much contentment; soon after whose
arrival (even the 6th. of October) he published the ensuing Declaration. By the
Lord Lieutenant General of Ireland.
ORMOND,
TO prevent the too frequent prejudices, incident through jealousies,
distrusts, and mis-constructions to all undertakings, We account it not the
least worthy our labor, upon the instant of our arrival, to prepare this
People, whose welfare we contend for, with a right understanding of those
intentions in us, which, in order to his Majesty's Service, we desire may
terminate in their good.

To enumerate the several Reasons by which we were induced (for preservation of
the Protestant Religion, and the English Interest) to leave the City of Dublin,
and other his Majesty's Garrisons then under our Power in this Kingdom, in the
hands of those entrusted by his two Houses of Parliament, were to set forth a
Narrative in place of a Manifest. It may suffice to be known, that those
Transactions had for one main ground this confidence, That by being under the
Power of the Houses, they would upon a happy expected composure of Affairs in
England, revert unto, and be revested in his Majesty as his proper right.

But having found how contrary to the inclinations of the well-affected to his
Majesty's restoration in England, the Power of that Kingdom has unhappily
devolved to hands, employed only in the art and labor of pulling down, and
subverting the Fundamentals of Monarchy, (with whom a pernicious Party in this
Kingdom do equally sympathize and cooperate.) And being filled with a deep
sense of the Duty and obligations that are upon us, strictly to embrace all
opportunities of employing our endeavors, toward the recovery of his
Majesty's just Rights, in any part of his Dominions. Haing observed the
Protestant Army in the Province of Munster (by special providence discovering
the Arts and practices used to entangle the Members thereof, in engagements as
directly contrary to their Duties toward God and Man, as to their intentions
and resolutions) to have found means to manifest the Candor and Integrity
thereof, in a disclaimer of any obedience to, or concurrence with those Powers
or Persons, which have so grossly vari'd even their own professed Principles of
preserving his Majesty's Person and Rights, by confining him under a most
strict Imprisonment, his Majesty also vouchsafing graciously to accept the
Declaration of the said Army, as an eminent and seasonable expression of their
fidelity toward him, and in testimony thereof, having laid his Commands upon us
to make our repair unto this Province, to discharge the duties of our Place.

We have as well in obedience thereunto, as in pursuance of our own duty, and
desire to advance his Majesty's Service, resolved to evidence our approbation
and esteem of the proceedings of the said Army, by publishing unto the World
our like determination in the same ensuing particulars. And accordingly we
profess and declare,

First, to improve our utmost endeavors for the settlement of the Protestant
Religion, according to the example of the best Reformed Churches.

Secondly, to defend the King in his Prerogatives.

Thirdly, to maintain the Privileges and Freedom of Parliament, and the
Liberty of the Subjects; that in order hereunto we shall oppose, to the hazard
of our lives, those Rebels of this Kingdom, who shall refuse their obedience to
his Majesty, upon such terms as he has thought fit by us to require it; and we
shall endeavor to the utmost, the suppressing of that Independent-Party, who
have thus fiercely labored the extirpation of the true Protestant Religion,
the ruin of our Prince, the dishonor of Parliament, and the Vassalage of our
Fellow Subjects, against all those who shall depend upon them, or adhere unto
them. And that this our undertaking might not appear obnoxious to the Trade of
England, but that we desire a firm Union and Agreement be preserved betwixt us,
we do likewise declare, that we will continue free Traffic and Commerce with
all his Majesty's good Subjects of England; and that we will not in the least
manner prejudice any of them that shall have recourse to our Harbors, either
in their Bodies, Ships, or Goods; nor shall we take any thing from them,
without payment of ready money for the same. And now that by his Majesty's said
Command, we have proceeded to re-enter upon the work of his Service in this
Province, We conceive no higher testimony can be given of his Majesty's
acceptance, or of the estimation we bear about us toward their Proceedings,
than by resorting unto them in Person with his Majesty's Authority, and
exhibiting unto them the encouragement and satisfaction they may receive in
this assurance, That as we bear an especial regard to their present
undertakings and performances, accompanied with a real sense* of their former
sufferings; so lest there should any advantage be derived unto those, who
endeavor to improve all opportunities of sowing sedition and distrust by this
suggestion, that the former differences in Judgment and Opinion, which have
induced persons to serve diversely under his Majesty, and the Parliament, will
occasion prejudice, or ill resentments to arise toward such Persons, as have
not formerly concurred in Judgment with others in his Majesty's Service. We do
declare, that we are qualified with special Power and Authority from his
Majesty, to assure them, that no distinction shall be made in any such
Consideration, but that all Persons now interested and engaged in this Cause,
shall be reflected upon with equal fervor and regard; and that we shall make
it our endeavors so to improve and confirm his Majesty's Gracious disposure
toward them, as that we will never call to memory any past difference in
Opinion, Judgment, Action, or Profession, to the prejudice of any Member of
this Army, or any Person relating to it; but on the contrary, shall be very
ready to attest our good affections toward them, in the discharge of such good
Offices as shall be in our power; in return whereof, we shall only expect
their perseverance in their present Engagements for his Majesty's Service, with
such alacrity, constancy, and affection, as may suit with their late public
Declaration and Professions. To whom we desire this assurance also may be
inculcated, That as we shall in the future use our utmost care and diligence to
provide for their preservation from the like hardships, to those they have
formerly undergone; so we have already employed our best industry and
endeavors for the settlement of such a course, as we may (with most reason)
hope, will, in these uncertain times, produce a constant and competent
Subsistence for them, enabling them to make such a progress in their present
undertakings, as may, with the accomplishment of the great ends thereof,
establish their own Honor and Content. Thus much we have thought fit to
publish unto the World* to furnish it with an evidence of strong conviction
against us, if we ever swerve (to the best of our power) from the just ways of
maintaining the true Protestant Religion, the Honor and Interest of his Sacred
Majesty, the just Rights of Parliament, the Liberties of the Subjects, and the
safety, quiet, and welfare of the People entrusted to our Care.

At Cork, 6. October. 1648.


Here it must not be forgotten, that during the time the Marquis was in France,
and after the Parliaments Forces had, upon so great inequality of number,
defeated the Irish, and in all Encounters driven them into their Fastnesses,
the Confederate Catholics had easily discerned the mischiefs they had brought
upon themselves, by forcing the Kings Authority out of the Kingdom, and
introducing another, which had no purposes of mercy toward them: And therefore
they had sent the Lord Marquis of The Marquis of Antrim and the Lord Muskery
sent to the Queen and the Prince in France, to consider the Confederates
Condition.
Antrim, who from the beginning had passionately served them in their most
intimate Concerns, the Lord Viscount Muskery, and others, as their
Commissioners to the Queen of England, and to her Son the Prince of Wales, who
were both then at Paris, to beseech them (since by reason of the King's
imprisonment they could not be suffered to apply themselves to his Majesty) to
take compassion of the miserable condition of Ireland, and to restore that
Nation to their protection; making ample professions and protestations of Duty,
and of applying themselves for the future to his Majesty's Service, if they
might be once again owned by him, and countenanced and conducted by his
Authority. And thereupon the Queen and Prince answered those Persons, That they
would shortly send The Queen and Prince's Answer.
a Person qualified to treat with them, who should have power to give them
whatsoever was requisite to their security and happiness. With which Answer
they returned well satisfied into Ireland: So that as soon as the Lord
Lieutenant was Landed at Cork, he wrote, the 4th. of October, to the Assembly
of the Confederate Catholics then at Kilkenny, That he was, upon the humble
Petition which they had presented to the Queen and Prince, come with full power
to conclude a Peace with them, and to that purpose desired, that as little time
might be lost as was possible; and that Commissioners might be sent to him at
his House at Carrick, whither he would go to expect them; within 14 miles of
the Place where the Assembly then sat, who were so much gladder of his
presence, by the obligation which they had newly received from the Kings
Authority: For when the Nuncio and Owen O Neil had thought to have surprised
them, and to have compelled them to renounce the Cessation, the Lord Inchequin
being sent unto by them for his protection, had marched with his Army to their
relief, and forced O Neal over the Shannon, thereby restoring them to liberty
and freedom, so that they returned a message of joy and congratulation to the
Lord Lieutenant for his safe arrival, and appointed Commissioners to treat with
him at the place appointed.

A Copy of the Marquis of Ormond's Letter to the Supreme Council
afore-mentioned, was gotten by Colonel Jones, and sent over to the Committee of
Derby-house; and being read in the House of Commons, it was Voted to be sent
down into the Isle of Wight, to the Commissioners then Treating there with the
King, to know if he would avow it; and in case he did disavow it, that then he
would declare against the Marquis: Whereupon his Majesty signified, That in
case other things were composed His Majesty's Answer to the Parliaments Message
touching the Lord Lieutenant.
by the Treaty, the Concerns of Ireland should be left wholely to the
management of the Houses. And in the interim writes to the Marquis of Ormond
this Letter. C. R.

RIght Trusty and Well-beloved Cousin and Counselor, We greet you well.
Whereas We have received several Informations from Our two Houses of
Parliament, concerning your proceedings with the Confederate Roman Catholics
in the Kingdom of Ireland, (the several Votes and Extracts whereof We do
herewith transmit unto you) and forasmuch as We are now engaged in a Treaty of
Peace with Our two Houses, wherein We have made such large Concessions, as We
hope will prove the foundation of a blessed Peace. And We having consented by
one Article (if the said Treaty take effect) to entrust the Prosecution and
Management of the War in Ireland to the Guidance and Advice of Our two Houses;
We have therefore thought fit hereby to require you, to desert from any further
Proceedings upon the Matters contained in the said Papers: And We expect such
Obedience unto this Our Command, that Our Houses desires may be fully satisfied.

Given at Newport in the Isle of Wight, the 25th of November, in the 24th Year
of Our Reign. To Our Right Trusty and Wellbeloved Cousin and Counselor, James
Marquis of Ormond.



As soon as the Parliament received this Letter, some were of opinion that it
should be immediately sent to the Marquis of Ormond; yet others (aiming at what
afterward was brought upon the Stage) laid it (as it is said) aside: We find by
the event it produced nothing, for the Treaty proceeded, a Peace ensuing;
though (as yet) Owen Roe was so far from being reconciled to the Supreme
Council, or any that adhered thereunto, as he fell most violently (in the end
of November) upon the Earl of Clanrickard's Party, gaining Jamestown by
Composition, and Drumrusk by the Sword, Rory Mac-Guire (the prime Instrument
herein) with several other Officers and Common Soldiers, to the number of 4 or
500 being there slain; Owen Roe's Party afterward putting all to the Sword,
save Major Bourk his Wife and Children, cruelly harassing the whole County of
Roscommon.

The 19th. of October, the Confederate Catholick's Commissioners came The
Confederates Commissioners come to the Lord Lieutenant at Carrick.
to Carrick, an House of the Marquis's, where he continued about twenty days,
which they spent principally in matters of Religion; in treating whereof, they
were so bound and limited by their Instructions, and could make so little
progress of themselves, being still to give an account to the Assembly of
whatsoever was proposed or offered by the Lord Lieutenant, and to expect its
Direction or Determination before they proceed; that for the husbanding of time
(which was now very precious, the prevailing Party in England every day more
discovering their bloody purposes toward the King) the Assembly thought it fit
to desire the Marquis to repair to his own Castle at Kilkenny, which they
offered to deliver into his hands, and that (for his Honor and Security) he
should bring his own Guards, who should have the reception due to them: And
upon this invitation (about the middle of November) he went to Kilkenny; before
the entry into which, he was met by the whole Body of the Assembly, and all the
Nobility, Clergy, and Gentry, and in the same Town was received with all those
requisite Ceremonies by the Mayor and Aldermen, as such a Corporation use to
pay to the Supreme Authority of the Kingdom; so that greater evidence could not
be given of an entire union in the desire of the People of returning to the
Kings obedience, or of more affection and respect to the Person of the Lord
Lieutenant, who by his steady pursuing those professions he had always made, by
his neglect and contempt of the Parliamentarians, and their prodigious Power
whilst he was in England, by his refusing all Overtures made by them unto him
for his particular benefit, if he would live in the Kingdom, and by their
declared manifest hatred and malice toward him, was now superior to all those
Calumnies they had aspersed him with: and confessed to be worthy of a joint
trust from the most different and divided Interests and Designs: However, there
were so many Passions, and Humors, and Interests to be compli'd with, and all
Conclusions to pass the Approbations of so many Votes, that it was the middle
of January before all Opinions could be so reconciled, as to produce a perfect
and entire Contract and Agreement, which about that time passed with that
miraculous consent and unity, that in the whole Assembly, in which there were
Catholic Bishops, there was not one dissenting Voice: So that on the 17th. of
January, 1648. the whole Assembly repaired to the Lord Lieutenant in his Castle
at Kilkenny, and there with all solemnity The Peace of 1648. concluded.
imaginable presented him, by the hand of their Chairman or Speaker, the
Articles of Peace, as concluded, assented, and submitted unto by the whole Body
of the Catholic Nation of Ireland; which he received, and solemnly confirmed
on his Majesty's behalf, and caused the same that day to be Proclaimed in that
Town, to the great joy of all who were present, and it was with all speed
accordingly Proclaimed, and as joyfully received, in all the Cities and
Incorporate Towns which professed any Allegiance to the King throughout the
Kingdom; and for the better reception thereof amongst the People, and to
manifest the satisfaction and joy they took in it, the Catholic Bishops sent
out their Declarations and Letters, that they were abundantly satisfied in
whatsoever concerned Religion, and the secure practice thereof: Certainly well
they might, for unless it had been at such a time that his Majesty had been
reduced to the utmost extremity, a Prince could be compelled to such
disingenious and hard terms, could never have been stood upon with a free and
generous Prince; in as much as his present Majesty, in his Declaration for the
settlement of Ireland, there takes notice, That no body could wonder that he
was desirous ( though upon difficult conditions) to get such an united Power of
his own Subjects, as might have been able ( with Gods blessing) to have
prevented the infamous and horrid Parricide intended. But how ineffectual this
his Indulgence after proved, will appear, by these Wretches foolishly
forfeiting all the Grace which they might have expected from him. But to
proceed. When the Articles of Peace were presented (in that solemn manner to
him by the Assembly, after a Speech made by the Chairman Sir Richard Blake
Knight.
) The Lord Lieutenant expressed himself in these words. My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Shall not speak to those expressions of Duty and Loyalty, so eloquently The
Lord Lieutenant's Speech upon the presenting of the Articles of Peace.
digested into a Discourse, by the Gentleman appointed by you to deliver your
sense; you will presently have in your hands greater and more solid Arguments
of his Majesty's Gracious acceptance, than I can enumerate, or perhaps you your
selves discern: For besides the provision made against the remotest fears, fear
of severity of certain Laws, and besides many other Freedoms and Bounties
conveyed to you and your Posterity by those Articles, there is a door, and that
a large one, not left, but purposely set open to give you entrance, by your
future Merit, to whatsoever of Honor and Advantage you can reasonably wish: So
that you have in present fruition what may abundantly satisfy, and yet there
are no bounds set to your hopes; but you are rather invited, or (to use a new
phrase, but to another and better end) you seem to have a Call from Heaven to
exercise your Arms and uttermost Fortitude, in the Noblest and Justest Cause
the World has seen; for let all the Circumstances incident to a great and good
Cause be examined, and they will be found comprehended in that which you are
now warrantably called to defend, Religion, not in the narrow circumscribed
definition of it, by this or that late found out name, but Christian Religion
is our Quarrel, which certainly is as much and fatally struck at (I may say
more) by the blasphemous License of this Age, than ever it was by the rudest
Incursions of the most barbarous and avowed Enemy to Christianity; the
Venerable Laws and Fundamental Constitutions of our Ancestors are trodden under
Impious, and, for the most part, Mechanic feet.

The Sacred Person of our King (the Life of those Laws, and Head of those
Constitutions) is under an ignominious Imprisonment, and his Life threatened to
be taken away by the Sacrilegious hands of the basest of the People, that owed
him obedience; and (to endear the Quarrel to you) the Fountain of all the
benefits you have but now acknowledged, and which you may further hope for by
this Peace, and your own Merit, is endangered to be obstructed by the execrable
murder of the worthiest Prince that ever Ruled these Islands.

In short, Hell cannot add any thing to the desperate Mischiefs now openly
projected: and now judge if a greater and more glorious Field was ever set open
to Action, and then prepare your selves to enter into it, receiving these few
advices from him, that is thoroughly Embarked with you in the Adventure.

First, let me recommend to you, that to this, as unto all holy Actions, (as
certainly this is) you will prepare your selves with perfect Charity, a Charity
that may obliterate whatever Rancor the long continued War may have contracted
in you, against any that shall now cooperate with you in so blessed a Work;
and let his Engagement with you in this, whoever he is, be (as it ought to be)
a Bond of Unity, of Love, of Concord, stronger than the nearest Ties of Nature.

In the next place, mark and beware of those, who shall go about to renew
jealousies in you, under what pretense soever, and account such as the infernal
Ministers, employed to promote the black design on foot, to subvert Monarchy,
and to make us all slaves to their own avaritious lusts. Away (as soon and as
much as possible may be) with distinction of Nation and Parties, which are the
fields wherein the seeds of those Rancour-weeds are sown by the great Enemy of
our Peace.

In the last place, let us all divest our selves of that preposterous and
ridiculous ambition and self-interest, which rather leads to our own threatened
general ruin, than to the enjoyment of advantages unreasonably desired.

And if at any time you think your selves pinched too near the bone by those
Taxes and Levies that may be imposed for your defense, consider then how vain,
how foolish a thing it will be to starve a righteous Cause for want of a
necessary support, to preserve your selves fat and gilded Sacrifices to the
rapine of a merciless Enemy.

And if we come thus well prepared to a Contention so just on our Parts, God
will bless our Endeavors with success and victory, or will crown our
Sufferings with honor and patience; for what honor will it not be, if God
has so determined of us, to perish with a long glorious Monarchy? and who can
want patience to suffer with an oppressed Prince? But as our Endeavors, so let
our Prayers be vigorous, that he may be delivered from a more unnatural
Rebellion, than is mentioned by any Story, now raised to the highest pitch of
Success against him.

I should now say something to you as to my self, in Retribution to the
advantageous mention made of me and my Endeavors, to the bringing this
Settlement to pass: But, I confess, my thoughts were taken up with those much
greater Concernments. Let it suffice, that as I wish to be continued in your
good Esteem and Affection, so I shall freely adventure upon any hazard, and
esteem no trouble or difficulty too great to encounter, if I may manifest any
Zeal to this Cause, and discharge some part of the Obligations that are upon
me, to serve this Kingdom.



It will not here be necessary to insert the Articles of Peace at large, The
LordLieutenant, by the Commissioners of Trust, infinitely abridged in his
Office.
which are publicly known to the World, though we shall sum them up in brief.
It is sufficient that the Lord Lieutenant granted all that was enough, in the
Judgments of the Romish Catholic Bishops, and even of the Bishop of Ferns,
(that Incendiary, and still waspish Prelate) requisite to a peaceable and
secure profession of that Religion, with such countenancing of, and support to
it, as from the first planting of it, it had never (in some respects) been
possessed of in that Kingdom; but was likewise compelled so far to comply with
the Fears and Jealousies of diverse, (who by often breaking their Faith, and
from a greater guilt were The Commissioners of Trust.
apprehensive, that all that was promised to them, might not be hereafter
observed) as to divest himself of that full and absolute Power, that was
inherent in his Office, and was never more fit to be exercised, than for the
carrying that Design, in which they seemed all to agree, and to make 12
Commissioners Thomas Lord Viscount Dillon of Costeloe, Lord President of
Connaght, Donnogh Lord Viscount Muskery, Francis Lord Baron of Athunry,
Alexander MacDonnel Esquire Sir Lucas Dillon Knight, Sir Nicholas Plunket Knight;
Sir Richard Barnwal Baronet, Geoffry Brown, Donnogh Ocallagham, Tirlagh O Neal,
Miles Reily, Gerald Fennel, Esquires.
, (named and chosen by the Assembly, to look to the observation and performance
of the said Articles, until the same should be ratified, in a full and
peaceable Convention of Parliament) joint sharers with him in his Authority: So
that he could neither levy Soldiers, raise Money, or so much as erect
Garrisons, without the approbation and consent of the major part of those
Commissioners; the danger and mischief of which limitation and restraint he
foresaw enough, but found the uniting that People, and composing them to an
entire confidence in the Peace, (which could be compassed no other way) was so
necessary, that he could not sacrifice too much to it: And then the abilities
and the affections of the Commissioners, were so well known and approved by
him, that having most of them (in appearance) the same good Ends with him, he
presumed, he should with less difficulty be able to persuade, which were the
nearest and most natural ways that conduced thereunto. The Heads of the
Articles of Peace, 1648.
1. THat the Roman Catholics of Ireland have free Exercise of Religion, all
Penalties taken off, not obliged to the Oath of Supremacy, to enjoy all
Churches and Church Livings they have in present possession, and the Exercise
of Jurisdiction therein.

2. That a Parliament be had within 6 months, or when after the Roman
Catholics shall desire.

3. That all Laws made in the Parliament of England since 1641. in blemish of
the Catholics, are at the next Parliament to be vacated.

4. All Indictments against any Catholics since 1641. be vacated.

5. All Impediments to be taken away, that Catholics be elected in Parliament.

6. All Debts to remain as they were Feb. 8. 1641. notwithstanding any
Attainder.

7. The Estates of the Knights, Gentlemen, and Freeholders of Connaght, Clare,
Thomond, Limerick, and Tipperary, be secured by an Act.

8. All Incapacities of the Natives in Ireland be taken away by Act.

9. All Honors, Trusts, Employments, or such like, be conferred as well upon
Catholics as Protestants.

10. That the King take 12000 l. per annum, in lieu of the Court of Wards.

11. No Noblemen to have more Proxies than two in Parliament, and all Blanks to
be null.

12. That the depending of the Parliament of Ireland upon England, shall be as
both shall agree and stand with the Laws of Ireland.

13. That the Council Table meddle only with Matters of State.

14. That all Acts forbidding the Transport of Wool, be nulled by the next
Parliament.

15. That if any have been wronged by Grants from King James, or since, they
may Petition, and have Relief in Parliament.

16. That diverse particular Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, who have been (as
they conceived) wronged, shall now be righted.

17. That all who had their Estates taken from them in Cork, Toughall, and
Dungarvan, have restoration or Rent.

18. That in the next Parliament an Act of Oblivion pass to all in Ireland, and
that adhered to them.

19. That no Officer of Eminency in Ireland farm the Customs.

20. An Act to pass against Monopolists.

21. That the Court of Castle-Chamber be regulated.

22. That the Acts for prohibiting plowing with Horses by the Tayls, and
burning Oats in the Straw, be null.

23. An Act for taking off the Grievances of the Kingdom.

24. That Maritime Causes be determined in Ireland.

25. That no Rents be raised upon the Subjects, under pretense of defective
Titles.

26. That Interest-Money be forgiven from 1641.

27. That all this be acted, and be of force, till a Parliament agree the same.

28. The Commissioners for the Catholics that treated, agree upon such as
shall be Commissioners of the Peace, and hear all Causes under 10 l.

29. That all Governors of Towns, Castles and Places, made by the King, be
with the Approbation of the Catholic Commissioners.

30. That none of his Majesty's Rents be paid, until a full Settlement in
Parliament.

31. That the Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer do try Murders, Stealing, and
all inferior Trespasses of that nature.

32. That hereafter such Differencies as shall arise between Subjects, be
determined by a Court in Ireland, not transferred to England.

33. That the Roman Clergy, that behave themselves according to the Agreement,
be not molested.

Lastly, That his Majesty please to grant whatever else is necessary for the
Roman Catholics.



Upon which Peace, the Marquess of Ormond, the Lord Taaff, and that Party,
engaged to raise for Munster, 4000 Foot and 800 Horse; the supreme Council and
Preston for Leimster, 4000 Foot and 800 Horse; Inchiquin, 3000 Foot and 600
Horse; the Lord of Clanrickard for Connaght, proportionable to the first: In
all, 15000 Foot and 3000 Horse, besides what Owen Roe (upon his uniting
afterward) might bring in, computed to be 5000 Foot and 500 Horse, that in the
whole, a gallanter Army (had they been unanimous) could scarce have been
marshalled.

With what Consent and Unity soever this Peace was made, by those who had any
pretense to Trust, or to whom there was the least Deputation of Authority and
Power by the Nation, yet Owen O Neal (with whom Owen O Neal and Antrim refuse
to submit to the Peace
the Earl of Antrim joined) had the greatest Influence upon the Humors and
Inclinations of the old Irish, who had given themselves up to the Nuncio, and
who indeed had a better disciplined, and consequently a stronger Army at his
Command, than the Confederates thought he could have gained to his Devotion,
still refused to submit to it. So that the Lord Lieutenant, (as soon as the
Peace was concluded) was as well to provide against him, to remove some
Garrisons he held, which infested those who obeyed the Acts of the Assembly,
and to prevent his Incursion, as to raise an Army against the Spring, to march
against the English, who were possessed of Dublin, and all the Country, and
important Places of that Circuit, and who, he was sure, would be supplied with
all assistance of Shipping, Men, Money, Victuals and Ammunition, which the
Parliament of England (who had now murdered their Sovereign, and incorporated
themselves under the Name and Title of a Commonwealth) could send them. And he
was in a worse condition to prevail against both these, by the unhappy Temper
and Constitution of the Scots in Ulster, who, being very numerous, and
possessed of the strong Towns, (though in profession they abhorred the
Regicides, and were not reconcilable to Owen O The Scots not yet willing to
join in the Peace.
Neal and his Party) were (as yet) as un-inclined to the Peace made with the
Confederates, and far from paying an obedience and full submission, to the
Orders and Government of the Lord Lieutenant, maintaining, at the same time,
the Presbyterian Form in their Church, and an utter Independency in the State,
and out of those contradictory Ingredients, compounding such a peevish and
wayward Affection and Duty to the King, as could not be applied to the bearing
any part, in the great Work the Marquess was incumbent to.

As soon as he heard of the Murder of the King, he proclaimed our present
Sovereign, Charles the 2d. King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, at
Carrick, the 16th. of Feb. 1648.

And being (by a Clause in his late Commission from his Majesty) qualified with
special Power and Authority, to make no distinction (in difference of
Judgment) betwixt any who should subject their Assistance to his Majesty's
Service, he soon won the Scots to a compliance, though under the shackles of
their Covenant, who immediately used the most favorable Arguments they could,
to win Sir Charles Coot to their Party. And to that end, (from the Congregation
of the Presbytery at Belfast, the 15th. of Feb. 1648.) they tempt him (by
several Representations) with their Sense: To which, the 7th. of March ensuing,
Sir Charles Coot, and the Council of War, (held at Londonderry) returned these
Reasons, for their Dis-agreement.

First, We find no part of God's Word authorizing us, being but a Branch of a
subordinate Kingdom, to declare against the Parliament of England, under whom
we serve, who are the visible Authority of both Kingdoms, and against an Army,
acting by their Power, before we receive from themselves a Declaration, and
Grounds of those Proceedings, wherewith they are aspersed.

Secondly, For the Covenant we have taken, on which your Representations seem
to be grounded, we cannot find, we have sworn to act, according to the
Principles you now declare: For, in some things, if we admit of your
Representation, we shall be necessitated to act, against what we have sworn
unto in the Covenant. For,

The first Article, wherein we are bound to a preservation of the present
Discipline in Scotland; we are in the same Article obliged, to a Reformation of
the same in England and Ireland, according to the Word of God, and the Example
of the best Reformed Churches, which (no doubt) the Parliament will in due time
establish: In the interim, we are un-satisfied with any Power, that acts in
this Case, without their Direction.

For what you speak in relation to the King's Person, we have yet no certainty
out of England, concerning that Matter, and it is an action of so transcendent
degree, that till we receive some positive Resolution concerning it from
England, we ought not to proceed in giving our Sense of it.

In the 5th. Article of the Covenant, we are sworn to endeavor the continuing
the Kingdoms in Union, in which we desire your selves to be Judges, if the
publishing of your Representations, be a probable way to observe the Oath.

In the 6th. Article, we are sworn to defend those joined with us in this
Covenant, and not to suffer our selves directly or indirectly to combine
against them: Now, till we receive a full Declaration of their falling from
those Principles of this Covenant, how can we with safety to our own
Consciences, declare a War against them, without breaking the Covenant in this
Particular?

In the next place, We find some things in your Representations, wherein (as we
conceive) you are not rightly informed.

First, In that you say, The Parliament has broken the Covenant, in opposing
the Presbyterial Government; which can no ways appear, since the same
Government, by their appointment, is observed throughout England, and that the
Covenant obliges them to establish the Government no further, than is
agreeable to God's Word.

Secondly, You say, That you have deeply sworn in the first Article, to
maintain the Church Government, as it is in the Church of Scotland; which they
have not sworn, the part of the Oath, for preservation of the Government,
relating only to the Kingdom of Scotland, and the Reformation of Religion, to
the Kingdoms of England and Ireland.

Thirdly, It Is affirmed, That the Power now governing in England, does labor
to establish by Law an universal toleration of all Religions; which yet was
never done by them.

Lastly, The sad Consequences which will un-avoidably follow, if we pursue the
Intention of the Representations, are these:

First, By declaring such an open War against the Parliament, we should deprive
our selves of all Succors and Supplies out of England, which have been
hitherto a great part of our subsistence.

Secondly, The pursuing of such a War, will un-avoidably sow such Divisions
amongst us, who, in these Parts, are of such different Principles and
Practices, that we shall soon become instruments of our own ruin.

Thirdly, It will compel us, for our own preservation, to join with the Rebels,
or desert this Kingdom.

And lastly, It will, without any lawful Call, engage us in a War against an
Army, who have, under God, been the instruments of redeeming England out of
thraldom, and was not long since acknowledged to have been so instrumental, in
settling Scotland in the Peace and Quietness it now enjoys, and this at the
Charge of England, as the Declaration of the Kingdom of Scotland does
thankfully witness.

These things therefore being duly weighed, we desire you, in the fear of God,
seriously to take this our Answer into your Considerations, and to remember on
whom the guilt of innocent blood will fall, if you enforce a War; and to set
before your eyes, the punishment from Heaven, which has still attended the
Endeavors of all, who have deserted the Quarrel in this Kingdom, to engage
against the Parliament of England. From visible Judgments, we are resolved, by
God's assistance, to take so good warning, as we will not be guilty of
destroying the Cause, we have so long labored into countenance for your
Representations, till we be better satisfied in our Consciences, though we will
not directly or indirectly countenance any Sectaries or Schismatics, who-ever
is truly so called, contrary to our Solemn League and Covenant; but we will,
to the utmost of our Endeavors, continue faithful in the prosecution of the
Rebels in this Kingdom, and their Abettors, wherein we shall not doubt of the
Blessing and Protection of the Almighty, upon our lawful and just Endeavors.
And for furtherance hereof, we desire, in the last place, that we should all
declare against the Peace last made by the Lord Marquess of Ormond, as that
which will (if not protested against) ruin and destroy your Service of this
Kingdom, against the Rebels.

Here it is evident, that Sir Charles Coot could by no ways be brought on; yet
the Peace being settled, his Excellency endeavored to work over Lieutenant
General Jones to his Party; to which end his Excellency vouchsafed to write to
him many Letters from Thurles, the 27. of March, 1649. all answered without the
least compliance on Jones's side. He, by his Reply the 31. of March, 1649.
charging the fatal and inhumane Act The Lord Lieutenant treats with Jones to
come in.
(perpetrated on his Majesty) to his Excellency's arrival in Ireland, during
the Treaty at Carisbrook, whereby the sincerity of that Treaty was questioned,
occasionally (writes he) producing what thereupon followed; so as in conclusion
he professed, That were there neither King or Parliament, 1649.
he should yet stand firm to his Principles, to preserve the English Interest
in Ireland, that being a Cause alien from what was acted in England, Foraign to
his Work and Trust, which if he should not perform; would not easily be
expiated by a slender or lean Manifest: upon which no more Letters passed
betwixt them; though the Lord Inchequin in June, Inchequin does the like, but
in-effectually.
from the Camp at Finglass, 1649. renewed the Attempt, and was answered with
the like Resolution, and some Reflections on his Lordship.

About which time, Ireland came again to be seriously thought of by the
Parliament, though hitherto it was (in some respects) made a Stale for several
Designs then on foot. Jones was much confided in; but it was thought requisite,
the weight of that Business should lie on other shoulders, not his; Cromwell
therefore (about the 28 of March) was voted General of Ireland, Skippon (under
the Title of Martial General) having refused the Command; and these ensuing
Votes passed thereupon.

1. That such Regiments as should be alloted for the Irish Service, should have
their Arrears audited, stated, and Debentors given for their respective
Services. 2. That visible Security should be given, so that any Friend (or
other, being entrusted with a Debentor) might receive it at a time prescribed
by the Parliament. 3. That those who go for Ireland, should be first satisfied
for their Arrears, since 1645. 4. That out of the 120000 l. per mensem, for
England and Ireland, three months Pay should be given to those that go. 5. That
private Soldiers, and non-Commission-Officers, should receive 2 Months Pay of
Arrears; and Commission-Officers, under a Captain, one Months Pay. 6. That
Magazines for Provisions be settled at Bristol, Chester, Liverpool, Beaumaris,
and Milford. 7. That a sufficient Squadron of Ships be appointed for the Irish
Coast. 8. That Ships should be Victuall'd at Dublin, Liverpool, and Beaumaris,
and a Court of Admiralty should be erected at Dublin, to prevent their coming
into England, to dispose of Prizes, and so neglect the Service. 9. That the Pay
of the Officers and Soldiers, should be according to the Irish Establishment,
only the Officers to receive for the present, the same Pay as here. 10. That
an Hospital for sick and maimed Soldiers, should be erected at Dublin. 11.
That the Parliaments Forces already in Ireland, and those then ready to go
over, should be in one Army, and one Establishment. 12. That 5000 Quarters of
bread-Corn, 200 Tun of Salt, 200 Tun of Cheese, should be transported with
those who now go over. 13. A Competent Train of Artillery, with Arms,
Ammunition, etc. should be sent, and a care to be taken to send over Recruits
of Horse, as there should be occasion. Lastly, That there be Recruits of Horse,
Foot, Arms, Saddles, etc. ready to supply the Service of Ireland, to be sent
over, as need shall require.
Thus provided, Cromwell prepares for his Journey; though to accommodate him
with an Army of 8000 Foot, and 4000 Horse, no small difference arose betwixt
the Presbyterian and Independent at that time, undermining each other, the
Levellers being pragmatick; He, however, carried over some of the discontented
Persons on each side, finding them there work enough against a common Enemy:
And so prepared for his Journey, 120000 l. being borrowed of the City, upon the
Credit of the Ordinance of 90000 l. a month. In the interim, he gets Sir
Theophilus Jones, (who was sent to the Parliament from his Brother) dispatched
for Ireland with 1500 Quarters of Corn, and 10000 l. in Money, little enough to
hearten the Soldiers, frequently then deserting the Parliament, and flying to
the Marquess of Ormond; yea, the Regiment the Parliament (sent under Colonel
Tuthil, being made up of Volunteers, most of those engaged in Colchester
Design) mutinied, being sent over without Money, Provisions, or Clothes,
thereby indangering the City more then the Marquess.

The Scots, in the interim, in a Remonstrance and Declaration, (to which, on
the least Motive, they are naturally inclined) of the general Assembly of the
Church of Scotland, concerning present and eminent danger, the 13th. of Febr.
1649. declared, amongst other things, as Grievances, That the standing Armies
in Ireland, under the Marquess of Ormond, the Lord Inchequin, and the Lords of
Ards, and George Monro, forgetting all the horrible cruelty that was exercised
by the Irish Rebels, upon many thousands of the English and Scottish Nations in
that Land, have entered into a Peace and Association with them, that they may
the more easily carry on the old Designs of the Popish, Prelatical, and
Malignant Party; and the Lords of Ards, and George Monro, have by treachery and
oppression, brought the Province of Ulster, and Garrisons therein, under their
Power and Commands; which urging (with much violence) afterward produced a
Declaration from the King, in dislike of the Peace, 1648. much insisted on by
the Irish, and indeed (as you will hear) begat the grounds of a future distaste.

So that whosoever will wisely revolve and consider this wild Conjuncture of
Affairs, and that to the subduing the Power, Strength, and Wealth, of the
Parliament, and the equal malice and headiness of Owen O Neal, and his Party
(as much, or in truth, more contracted against the Confederate Irish, then the
Kings Authority) and the forming and disposing the useless, and unprofitable
pretenses of affection in the Scots, and reducing them to obedience, the
Marquess brought over with him neither Men nor Money, considerable, nor any
advantage, but that of his own Person, Wisdom, and Reputation, and was now
(upon the Peace) to constitute an Army, not only of several Nations, and
Religions, and of such Passion, and Superciliousness in these Opinions, which
flowed from their several Religions, but of such men, who had for about the
space of eight years, prosecuted a sharp War against each other, with all the
Circumstances of Animosities, Rapine, and Revenge; and who were now brought
into this Reconciliation and Conjunction, rather by the wonderful Wisdom, and
Dexterity of the Principal Commanders, then by their own Charity and
Inclination; And that in the forming of this Army, he had not above 6 or 7
Officers, upon whose skill in Martial Affairs, and affection to him, he could
with any confidence depend; but was to make use of very many, who were utterly
unknown to him, and such who either had no experience in the War, or who had
been always in the War against him; I say, whosoever without passion considers
all this, will rather wonder, that the Marquess did not sink under the weight
The difficulty the Lord Lieutenant encountered in forming his Army.
of the first Attempt, nay, that he could proceed with success, in any one
Enterprise, then that an Army so made up, should upon the first mis-adventure
be dissolved into jealousies and prejudices, amongst themselves; and that all
confusions should follow, which naturally attend such Compositions.

As soon as the Peace was thus concluded, proclaimed and accepted, the Lord
Lieutenant took a survey of the Stores of Arms, Ammunition, and other
Provisions necessary for the Army, which was to be brought together in the
Spring, and found all very short of what he expected, and The Lord Lieutenant
finds Arms and Money no ways answerable to his expectation.
what was absolutely necessary to the Work, and ways for raising of Money, with
which all the rest was to be supplied, in no degree to be depended upon; The
Cities, and Incorporate Towns, where, upon the matter all the Wealth was,
having never submitted further to the General Assembly, then by declaring
themselves to be of their Party; but like so many Commonwealths, ordered all
Contributions, and payments of Money, by their own Acts and Determinations; nor
would upon the most Emergent occasions, suffer any Money to be raised in any
other proportion, or in any other manner, then best agreed with their Humors
and Conveniences. So that the Commissioners, advised and besought the Lord
Lieutenant, to make a Journey in Person, to such of those Corporations, as were
best able to assist him, and by his own Presence, Assistance, and Interest,
endeavor to persuade them, to express that affection to the Peace, they had
professed; And thereupon he went with a Competent number of the Commissioners,
to Waterford, which gave 8000 l. and 3000 Barrels of Corn; and from thence he
went to Limerick, and then to Gallway, and Kilkenny, from which several Places,
he procured the Loan of more Money, Corn, and Ammunition, then the General
Assembly had ever been able to do, for most of which last, he was forced to
bargain with Patrick Archer, and other Merchants, for a Supply thereof,
engaging the Kings Customs, and the tenths of Prizes, for payment; and by this
means, which cost him much labor and time, he found himself in a condition, to
draw several Forces together; which he did about the beginning of May, having
made the Lord Inchequin, Lieutenant General of the Army; the Earl of
Castlehaven, Lieutenant General of the Horse; and the Lord Taaff, Master of the
Ordnance, at the General Randezvouz at Cashol, whilst the Scots reduced Ulster,
and Connaght; and it being thought fit, to lose as little time as might be, in
marching toward Dublin, as soon as any considerable number of men were once
together; The Lord Lieutenant constitutes the Officers of the Army, to march
against Dublin.
he sent the Earl of Castlehaven with some Forces, to take in several
Garrisons, which were possessed by Owen O Neal in the Queen's County, which was
the way he intended to march, and so would have no Enemy in his Rear; And the
Earl of Castlehaven, accordingly took the Fort of Maryborrough, and other
Places in that County, and Athy, and Reban, in the County of Kildare, whereby
their passage was open for the further March.

Having thus began the Campania, the Lord Lieutenant appointed a The Lord
Lieutenant begins the Campaign in May, but was forced to use his own Credit to
begin the service, some write but with 8000 Foot, and 2000 Horse.
General Randezvouz for the whole Army, at Cloghgrenan, alias Glaughgrenan, an
house of his upon the River Barrow, near the Castle of Caterlaugh, where he
made a Conjunction of all the Forces, Protestant and Irish; Who by the Wisdom
and Temper of the Principal Officers, mingled well enough, and together about
the end of May, made a Body, as (it is generally reported) of 3700 Horse, and
14500 Foot, with a Train of Artillery, consisting of four Pieces of Cannon; But
when they were thus met, all the Money which could be raised by the
Commissioners, or which had been raised by the Corporate Towns, was so near
spent in drawing the Forces out of their Quarters, and in those short
Expeditions into the Queen's County, and County of Kildare, that they could not
have advanced in their March, if the Lord Lieutenant had not upon his own
Private Credit, borrowed 800 l. of Sir James Preston, by means whereof, he gave
the Common Soldiers four days Pay; and so about the beginning of June, marched
from Cloghgrenan, and the same Evening, appeared before Talbots Town, a strong
Garrison of the Enemies, which together with Castle Talbot, two miles distant
from the other, was within 3 days surrendered to the Marquess, upon promise of
Quarter, which they had; and then he marched to Kildare, which Town was
likewise surrendered unto him; as were Castle Sallogh, and Castle Carby, at
Kildare; He was compelled to stay 3 or 4 days, both for want of Provision, and
for a Recruit of 2000 Foot, which by the Lord Inchequin's Care and Diligence,
was then upon their March, and being joined, he was in hope by a sudden and
speedy Motion, to have engaged Jones, (who at that time, viz. 12. of June, was
marched from Dublin, as far as Johnstown, with his Army, consisting of 1000
Horse, and 3000 Foot,) and so having encouraged his Soldiers with 3 days Pay,
(which he was likewise compelled to borrow on his Credit, out of the Pockets of
Persons of Quality, attending on him, and of the Officers of the Army) he
passed the River of Lifly; and Jones having upon intelligence of his Motion, in
great disorder raised his Camp, and retired into Dublin; after that Major
Cadogan, by his Command, had done notable and severe Service about Tecroghan,
burning the Country, not in 5 years before Visited, and had beaten a part of
the Marquess's Forces, though he got not so much by his Victory (though
considerable) as Jones afterward lost by Treachery, the Garrison of Allan
being delivered up for 200 l. The Marquess encamped his whole Army at the Naas,
twelve miles from Dublin, that he might maturely deliberate what was next to be
undertaken, being now the middle of June.

That which appeared worthy of debate was, whether the Army should first make
an Attempt upon Dublin, in which it was believed there were very many both
Officers and Soldiers, and other Persons of Quality, well affected to the
Kings service, and who had formerly served under the Marquess, and esteemed him
accordingly, who might make that work more easy; Or whether the Army should be
first employed in the taking in of Trim, Tredagh, and other out-Garrisons, from
whence the City received much Provisions of all kinds, and from whence
Provisions to the Army would be cut off, and much other prejudice might arise.
But upon full consideration, the Council of War, which consisted of the General
Officers, inclined to the former; concluding, Dublin resolved to be first
attempted.
that if they could take Dublin, all other places would quickly fall into their
hands; and if they should delay it, and waste their Provisions in those lesser
Attempts, there might probably arrive out of England, such supplies of Men,
Money, and other necessaries to Jones, which were daily expected* as might
render that important work almost impossible: Hereupon, the Lord Lieutenant
marched the very next morning toward Dublin, and that afternoon, re-passed the
whole over the River of Liffy, by the Bridge of Lucan, and encamped near that
place, to rest his men a few hours: He marched very early in the morning, being
the 19th. of June, and appeared by nine of the Clock at a place called
Castleknock, in view of the City; and hearing that Jones had drawn out all his
Horse into the Green, not far from the Walls, he sent a Party of Horse and
Musketeers to face them, while he drew his whole Body, within less then
Cannon-shot of their Gates, hoping thereby to give some countenance to those in
the Town, to raise some Commotion therein; The Lord Lieutenant appears before
Dublin.
and having spent some part of the day in this posture and expectation, after
some slight skirmishes between the Horse, writes one; others say considerable,
where the Earl of Clanrickards Regiment of Horse was sorely beaten, though they
ralli'd twice; He found it necessary to draw off, and encamped that night at a
place two miles from the Town, called Finglas, whither great multitudes of
Roman Catholics, whereof most were aged Men, Women, and Children, whom Jones
had turned out of the City, repaired to him, whom he sent with all due Order,
for their Reception, into Quarters adjacent.

The Marquess was no sooner in his Quarters, then he received sure
intelligence, that Jones had sent his Horse to Tredagh, from whence they would
have been able to have distressed his Army several ways, and to have
interrupted Provision which came out of the Country, out of the Magazines,
which were at least 30 miles distant; And several Officers were of opinion;
upon the view they had taken that day of the Enemy, and the countenance they
had observed of their own men, that they were not presently provided for a
formal Siege, and as ill to attack the Town by a brisk attempt; and therefore
he resolved to remain encamped at that place for some time, whereby he might
take the advantage of any opportunity, that within the Town would administer
unto him: and presently sent the Lord Inchequin, Lieutenant General of the
Army, with a strong Party of Horse, to pursue Jones his Horse, which were sent
for The Lord Inchequin defeats a Party of Jones's Horse sent to Tredagh.
Tredagh; which he did so successfully, that he surprised one whole Troop, and
afterward encountered Colonel Chidley Coot, in the head of 300 Horse, whereof
he slew many, and routed the rest, who in great disorder fled to Tredagh. The
Lord Inchequin presently sent advertisement of this success, and that he had
reason to believe, that if he pursued this advantage, and attempt the Town,
while this terror possessed that Party, he should make himself Master of it;
whereupon (in respect of the great importance of the Place, the reduction
whereof would produce a secure correspondence with, and give encouragement to
the Scots in Ulster, who made great professions (in which they were ever free)
of Duty to the King, and had now under the conduct of the Lord Viscount
Montgomery of Ards, driven Sir Charles Coot into the City of Londonderry, and
upon the matter beleagu'd him there) the Lord Lieutenant by the advice of the
Council of War, approved the Lord Inchequin's Design, and to that purpose sent
him two Regiments of Foot, and two Pieces of Artillery, and such Ammunition and
Materials, as could be spared; wherewith he proceeded so vigorously, that
within 7 days, he compelled the besieged to yield to honorable Conditions, so
reduced The Lord Inchequin takes in Tredagh.
Tredagh to the Kings Obedience, after he had been twice beaten off; the Town
having not above 600 Men, who had spent all their Ammunition, left to defend so
large a circuit, some of which afterward revolted to the Marquess; and Colonel
Coot, with 150 Horse, and near 400 Foot, marched to Dublin.

There was now very reasonable ground for hope, that the Parliaments Party
would quickly find themselves in notable streights and distresses, when it was
on a sudden discovered, how very active and dexterous, the spirit of Rebellion
is to reconcile and unite those, who were possessed by it, and how contrary
soever their Principles and Ends seem to be, and contribute jointly to the
opposing and oppressing that Lawful Power, they had both equally injured and
provoked. The Parliament Party, who had heaped so many Reproaches and Calumnies
upon the King, for his Clemency to the Irish, who had founded their own
Authority and Strength upon such foundations, as were inconsistent with any
toleration of the Roman Catholic Religion, and some write (so bitter are their
Pens) even with Humanity to the Irish Nation, and more especially to those of
the old Native Extraction, the whole Race whereof they had (upon the matter)
sworn to an utter extirpation; And Owen O Neal himself was of the most ancient
Sept, and whose Army consisted only of such, who avowed no other cause for
their first entrance into Rebellion, but Matter of Religion; and that the Power
of the Parliament, was like to be so great and prevalent, that the King himself
would not be able to extend his Favors and Mercy toward them, which they
seemed to be confident, he was (in his gracious disposition) inclined to
express; and therefore professed to take up Arms against the exorbitant Power
only of them, and to retain hearts full of Devotion and Duty to his Majesty;
and who at present, by the underhand and secret Treaties with the Lord
Lieutenant, seemed more irreconcilable to the Proceedings of the General
Assembly, and to the Persons of those whom he thought governed there, then to
make any scruple of submitting to the Kings Authority, in the Person of the
Marquess, to which and to whom, he protested all Duty and Reverence. These two
so contrary and dis-agreeing Elements, had, I say, by the subtle and volatile
spirit of Hypocrisy and Rebellion (the Arts of the time) found a way to
incorporate together; and Owen O Neal had promised and contracted with Owen O
Neal, and the Parliaments Party agree.
the other, that he would compel the Lord Lieutenant to retire, and draw off
his Army from about Dublin, by his invading those Parts of Leimster, and
Munster, with his Army, which yielded most, yea, all the Provisions and
subsistence to the Marquess, and which he presumed the Marquess would not
suffer to be spoiled and desolated by his Incursions: for the better doing
whereof, and enabling him for this Expedition, Colonel Monk, Governor of
Dundalk, (who was the second Person in Command, amongst the Parliaments Forces)
had promised to deliver to him, out of the stores of that Garrison, a good
quantity of Powder, Bullet, and Match, proportionable; for the fetching
whereof, Owen O Neal had sent Farral (Lieutenant General of his Army) with a
Party of 500 Foot, and 300 Horse. At that time Tredagh was taken by the Lord
Inchequin; who, being there advertised of that new contracted friendship,
resolved to give some interruption to it, and made so good have, that within
few hours after Farral had received the Ammunition at Dundalk, he Inchequin
routs Farral.
fell upon him, routed all his Horse, and of the 500 Foot, there were not 40
escaped, but were either slain, or taken Prisoners, and got all the Ammunition,
and with it so good an Account of the present state of Dundalk, that he
immediately engaged before it, and assisted by the Lord of Ards, (who a little
before, had been chosen by the Presbyterian Ministers, their Commander in
Chief, thereby possessing himself of Carrigfergus, and Belfast) in two days
compelled Monk (who would else have Takes in Dundalk.
been delivered up by his own Soldiers) to surrender the Place, where was a
good Magazeen of Ammunition, Cloth, and other Necessaries for War; most of the
Officers and Soldiers, with all alacrity engaging themselves in his Majesty's
service; though the Governor Shipped himself for England, and landing shortly
after at Chester, he went immediately to Bristol, where Cromwell (the
Parliaments Lord Lieutenant) was then to come for Ireland; who received him
very courteously; but, after he had remained some days there, advised him to go
up to the Parliament, to give them satisfaction, in the Cessation he had made
with Owen Roe O-Neal, the 8th. of May, 1649. which he did; And the business of
that Cessation being brought into the House, it was much resented; and after
some debate, (more then ordinarily had on other occasions) several severe Votes
passed against it; only Colonel Monk, being conceived to have made it out of a
good intent, for preserving the Interest of the Parliament, was held to be
clear, and not thought fit hereafter to be questioned: But this was taken as a
fair way of laying him Colonel Monk dismissed the Parliaments Service.
aside; whereupon Colonel Monk retired to his own Estate, unhappy only in
being the Instrument of their preservation, who were not sensible of his Merits.

And now that all Parties might be kept entire, the Marquess of Ormond
publishes a Declaration, upon Instructions from the King, designed purposely
for Ulster. AFter my hearty Commendations, upon some Representations, that have
been lately made unto us, we have thought fit, to send you down the ensuing
Instructions:

First, That so far as your Power extends, you cause every Person, without
distinction, who have submitted to his Majesty's Authority, and to the Peace of
this Kingdom, to be put into the actual possession of his Estate, he paying,
and contributing to the maintenance of the Army, and necessary burdens of the
Country, proportionable to the rest of his Neigbours.

2. That you cause the Articles of War to be put in execution, amongst all the
Forces under your Command, whereof we send you down herewithall a Copy.

3. Whereas it is well known to belong to us, as General of the Army, in this
Kingdom under his Majesty, to dispose of all Military Offices and Commands,
whether in Chief or Subordinate, which Right we cannot in Honor suffer to be
lost from the Sword; and whereas some Commissions lately have been Procured,
giving Power to other Commanders, to name and place all sorts of Military
Officers, under the respective Commands; in which Commissions nevertheless, and
much more in the Instructions, there is an express reference to us, and to our
Approbation, from which they are to receive their validity. We do therefore
Order and Declare our Pleasure thereby, That no Commander whatsoever, within
the Province of Ulster, do assume to themselves, the nomination of Military
Officers, as Colonels, Lieutenant-Colonels, Majors, Captains, Lieutenants,
Cornets, or Ensigns, upon pretense of any late Commission, but leave them to
our discretion, as in this Kingdom has ever been accustomed.

4. If any Person shall speak or act to the prejudice of his Majesty's
Authority, or Affairs, let him upon proof be forthwith Imprisoned, and his
Estate secured, and an Information sent up to us of the nature of his Crime,
that we may give further Order therein. And if any Ecclesiastical Person in his
Prayer or Sermon, shall presume to exercise the People to Sedition or
Disobedience, or shall intermeddle in Pulpit or Consistory with the managery of
Civil Affairs, or shall derogate from the present Government or Governors of
this Kingdom, or shall teach, that his Majesty is not to be admitted to the
possession of his Crown, until he has given satisfaction to his Subjects, or
until he have taken such Oaths and Covenants, as are imposed upon him, without
his Consent, without Law, contrary to the Dictates of his own Conscience; upon
proof thereof, without further Circumstance, let his Estate be confiscated to
the use of the Army, and himself be either imprisoned, or banished, or tried
for his Life, as the Enemy shall deserve.

5. If there be any Person whose Loyalty is suspected, let the Chief in Command
upon the Place, administer unto him the Oath of Allegiance; and if he refuse
it, let them secure both his Person and Estate, and send up an information to
us, that we may cause proofs to be made against him.

6. Although we cannot now take notice of the Scotch Army in this Kingdom, or
of any, distinct from that which is committed into our hands by his Majesty; we
expecting a joint obedience of all Forces, English, Scotch, and Irish,
indifferently, as branches of the Army under our Command; yet in respect your
old Quarters are straightn'd by the Garrison of Belfast, by our very good Lord,
the Lord Vicount Montgomery of the Ards; we are well pleased in lieu thereof,
to assign unto you for the enlargement of your Quarters, so much of the
Countries of Antrim, as was possessed or enjoyed by Sir John Clotworthie's
Regiment, now disbanded of themselves; and because we cannot but judge, that
this dissolution of them proceeds from the aversness to his Majesty's Service,
and therefore we require that none of them be admitted into any Troops, as
Horsemen, or Dragooners.

7. For Answer to your other Proposition; if any Postage shall be sent down
from them, or from the other Provinces of the Kingdom, into Ulster, for his
Majesty's Service upon any occasion: it is our Pleasure, they have their
Quarter and Provision for the present in these Quarters, through which they
pass; but the whole Province of Ulster is to contribute proportionably toward
the Charge.

8. Let the Siege of Derry be prosecuted by the common advice of the Lord
Vicount Mountgomery of Ardes, Robert Stewart, Sir George Monro, and Colonel
Audley Meryin.

9. We desire the said four Persons last mentioned likewise to consider and
certify, what fit Augmentation of Quarter and further Provision, may be
assigned to the Regiment and Troops of Esteline without prejudice, or with the
least prejudice to any other of his Majesty's Forces.

ORMOND.



Upon the Lord Inchiquin's success at Dundalk, the lesser Garrisons of Newry,
Narrow-water, Green-Castle, and Carlingford, were easily subjected; and the
Lord Inchiquin, in his return, being appointed to visit the Town of Trim, the
only Garrison left to the Parliamentarians in those parts, except Dublin, in
two days after he had besieged it, he made himself Inchequin takes in Trim.
Master of it, and so returned with his Party (not impaired by the Service) to
the Lord Lieutenant in his Camp at Finglass. Owen O Neil still continued his
affection to the Parliamentarians; and when he found that his design of drawing
the Marquis of Ormond's Army from Dublin could not prevail, he hastened into
Ulster, and upon the payment of 2000 l. in Owen O Neal (in behalf of the
Parliament) raises the Siege of Londonderry.
money, some Ammunition, and about 2000 Cows, he raised the Siege of
Londonderry the 8th. of August, the only considerable Place in that Province,
which held for the Parliament under Sir Charles Coot, and which was even then
reduced to the last extremity, by the Lord Viscount Mountgomery of Ardes, Sir
George Monro, Sir Robert Stewart, Colonel Audley Mervin, and others, and must
in few days have submitted to the Kings Authority, if it had not (in that
manner) been relieved by the Irish under O Neil, with whom Colonel Richard
Coal, in the behalf of Sir Charles Coot (Lord President of Connaght) had made
Articles of Cessation, (as Colonel Monk had done before) on the grounds of
necessity, the 22. of May, 1649. the benefit of which he acquainted the State
with, desiring that the Propositions presented by him might be accepted; which
was thought by them a demand so extravagant, and of such dangerous consequence
Sir Charles Coot censured for his compliance with Owen O Neil.
to the whole Kingdom, as it was ill resented ( Owen Roe and his Party having
been first engaged in those horrid Massacres) and presently rejected: And
though Sir Charles Coot was not censured, because it was presumed he did it out
of necessity; yet several Votes passed against him as to that Cessation, though
he was continued in his Employment; and having received the pleasure of the
Parliament concerning the Cessation made by him with Owen Roe, presently
acquainted him therewith, who, according to Articles betwixt them, did soon
retire, and, as we shall see afterward, came to an agreement with the Marquis
of Ormond, finding he could not by any means (he could use) draw himself or his
Party to be accepted of by the Parliament, an attempt he earnestly solicited,
engaging to maintain their Interest with the hazard of his Life and Fortune
against all opposers whatsoever; with whom joined the Lords, Gentry, and
Commons of the Confederate Catholics of Ulster: though many were of opinion,
that all that was done both by Sir Charles Coot and Colonel Monk, was
transacted by the privity (if not consent) of the Grandees in England; but the
Grounds to fasten this upon them could never be found, though the business has
been narrowly searched into: Known it was, that there was a Person sent over,
and many Overtures made by a Priest O Rely to the Committee of Derby-house, but
with whatreception, the certainty yet remains in the Clouds. However, Sir
Charles Coot having by this means delivered himself from the straitness of a
Siege, and having received some new supplies of Men and Provisionsout of
England, (Colonel Hunks being sent from Cromwell with Forces to his Relief)
presently marched out, and cleared the Country about him; and afterward in
October got such a strength together, as he went to Colerain, and took in that
Town by Anslat, and so went on to the Siege of Carigfergus. However, he so
resents the Parliaments slow supplies, as (in June this year) there is
exhibited his complaint, truly a sad one, in reference to their neglect, and in
conclusion desires either to be supplied answerable to his condition, or to be
discharged from his Employment.

But to look backwards. All the Places of Moment near Dublin being (as we have
showed) reduced by the Marquis Ormond's Party, who on the The Lord Lieutenant,
upon the view of his Army, found it considerable rather to Block up the City,
than make a Regular Siege.
24th. of July took a view of his whole Army, and found it to consist of no
less than 7000 Foot and about 4000 Horse, others write more; which though a
good Force, was not equal to the work of forming a Regular Siege of so large
and populous a City as Dublin, and as unfit to storm it; therefore it was
resolved still to continue the former design of straitning it, until the
necessities within abated the obstinacy of that People; for the better doing
whereof, the Lord Viscount Dillon of Costiloe, was appointed to remain still on
the North-side of the Town, with a Body of 2000 Foot and 500 Horse, to block it
up, having two or three small Places of strength to retire to upon occasion;
and that the Sea (as far as his Power might extend) might not be unprovided,
his Excellency granted Letters of Mart, the 6th. of July, signed by Secretary
Lane, to Captain Joseph Contain of Waterford, and others. And then the Lord
Lieutenant marched with the remainder of the Army over the River of Liffy to
the South Side, to a Place called Rathmines, where he resolved to Incamp, and
from whence, by reason of the narrowness of the River, he might discourage an
attempt of sending Relief into the Town by Sea from England. And in truth, if
he had come time enough to have raised a Work upon the Point, some interruption
might have been given to that Enterprise; but it pleased God, that that very
same day (the 25th. of July) the Marquis marched thither, in sight of his Army;
a strong gale of Wind from the East brought into Dublin Harbor Colonel
Reynolds, Colonel Reynolds, Hunks, and Venables, arrive at Dublin.
Colonel Hunks, and Colonel Venables, with a good supply of Horse, viz. 600,
and 1500 Foot, Money, and all other necessaries whereof the Garrison stood in
need, which marvellously exalted the spirits of those, who were devoted to the
obedience of the Parliament, and depressed the minds of them, who watched all
opportunities of doing service to the King. There were then in Dublin 5000
Soldiers, besides Inhabitants. However, the Marquis pursued his resolution, and
encamped that night at Rathmines, and the next day made himself strong there,
till, upon information, he was sure to receive an account of the state and
condition of the Enemy, that he might better conclude what was next to be done.

There were many men within the City who found means to send the Marquis still
advertisement of what was necessary for him to know, and some Ships (which
brought Supplies for the Parliaments Forces there) brought likewise
intelligence from those that wished well to the Kings service, unto the Lord
Lieutenant, and unto other Persons of Honor that were with him, and from
several Persons of known Integrity, and who were like enough to know what was
transacted in the Councils of the Parliaments Party: It was informed, that this
Supply, which was already landed at Dublin, was all that was intended for that
Place, and believed it to be sufficient to defend it against any Army the
Marquis could bring to attaque it; and that Cromwell (who was known to be ready
in England to Embarque with a great Army) meant to land in Munster, a Country
but lately fallen from their Devotion, and where there were still many inclined
Cromwell accepts of the Lieutenantship.
to him, and thereby to compel the Lord Lieutenant to rise from Dublin. And it
is very true, that at that time Cromwell was resolved to have proceeded in that
manner, after he had with much seeming difficulty been brought to accept of the
Place, the Presbyterians laying Wagers he would never come, and the
Independents sought to divert him from it by their unexpected Mutinies, on a
Tenent, That all were to enjoy their own Principles. Yet upon this joint
intelligence of Cromwell's advance (for it came from some Persons to the Lord
Lieutenant, and from others to the Lord Inchiquin) it was, upon consultation
with the General Officers, concluded absolutely necessary, that the Lord
Inchiquin, being Lord President The Lord Inchequin (suspecting Cromwell might
land in Munster) went thither.
of Munster, should immediately, with a strong Party of Horse, repair into that
Province, whereby at least the Garrisons there might be supported against any
sudden attempt of the Enemy, if they should land there; and that, the Army
being thus weakened by the Quality, as well as the Number of this Party, who
were the best Horse of the Body, the Lord Lieutenant should retire to Drumnagh,
being a Quarter of greater strength and security than that of Rathmines was, or
could be made, and was at such distance, as might as well block up the Enemy as
the other; and from thence, an interrupted Communication might be held with
that Party, which encamped on the North side of the River. And upon this
Conclusion, the Lord Inchiquin departed toward Munster. When it was known that
his Excellency was to retire, the Officers and Soldiers expressed much trouble,
and seemed to believe the reducing of the Town not to be a matter of that
difficulty as was pretended, if they could hinder the Parliamentarians Horse
from grasing in the Meadows near the Walls, (which was the only Place they
were possessed of to that purpose) they could not be able to subsist five days;
and it would be in their power to take that benefit from them, if they
possessed themselves of the Castle of Baggatrath, very near adjoining to that
Pasture, which was already so strong, that in one night it might be made
sufficiently fortified. And this discourse (which was not indeed unreasonable)
got so much credit, that the Council of War entreated the Marquis to decline
his former resolution of retiring to Drumnagh, the Earl of Castlehaven, General
Preston, Sir Arthur Aston, and Major General Purcel, having viewed Baggatrath,
and assured the Lord Lieutenant, that it might be possessed and sufficiently
fortified in one night.

It is no wonder that in an Army thus constituted and composed, the Marquis
thought not fit, by his Authority, to restrain it from pursuing an Enterprise
of so much Gallantry, and which had so much possibility of success: and indeed,
he still retained some hope of advantage by the affection of that City, and
that (even in these last Supplies that were sent over) there were many that
laid hold of that opportunity to transport themselves, for the advancement of
the Kings service, and with purpose quickly to change their Masters, so that he
was contented to recede from his former resolution, and on the first of August
at night sent a strong Party, viz. 1500 Foot, under Major General Purcel, to
possess themselves A Party sent to fortify Baggatrath under Purcel.
of Baggatrath, with Engineers, and such other Materials as were necessary to
fortify it: and because he concluded, that the Enemy would immediately
discover what they were doing, and would use their utmost endeavors to prevent
the execution of a Design, which would bring such irreparable damage to them,
he gave strict order for drawing the whole Army in Battalia, and commanded,
that they should stand in Arms all that night, himself continuing in the Field
on Horsback till morning; as soon as it was day, he went to visit the Place
that was to be fortified, which he found not in that condition he expected; the
Officer Major General Parcel.
excusing himself, by having been misguided in the night, so that it was very
late before he arrived there, though it was not an English mile distant from
the Camp; wherewith the Marquis being unsatisfi'd, displaced the Officer who
commanded the Party, and put another of good Name and Reputation into the
Charge, and appointed him to make his men to work hard, since it appeared, that
in four or five hours it might be so well fortified, that they need fear no
attempt from the Town; and that they might be sure to enjoy so much time, he
commanded the Army to remain in the same posture they had been all night; and
about 9 of the Clock, seeing no appearance of any Sally from the Town, which he
had so long expected, he went to his Tent to refresh himself with a little
rest, which he had not obtained for the space of an hour, when he was awakened
by an Alarm from the Enemy, and putting himself immediately upon his Horse,
quickly found, that his Officers and Lieutenant General Preston had not been so
punctual in their Duty as they ought to have been, but had quitted their Posts
(out of an unhappy The Lord Lieutenant's Forces routed at Rathmines.
confidence, that the Besieged would not adventure, at that time of the day, to
make any Sally) as soon as the Marquis went to repose himself; so that a strong
Party out of the Town, about 10 of the clock in the morning, the 2d. of August,
1649. marched directly to Baggatrath, and (with less opposition than ought to
have been made) beat, roated, and dispersed the Party that possessed it; who,
finding their Horse not so ready to assist them as they expected, quitted the
Place with all imaginable confusion; which encouraged Jones's Party (who were
seconded immediately by the whole Power in Dublin) to advance further toward
the Army (which they discerned to be in high disorder) than at their coming out
they intended. The Lord Lieutenant used all means to put the Horse in order,
sending the Lord Taaff to command the Foot: But Sir William Vaughan (Commissary
General of the Horse) being in the first Charge killed, they who followed him
were immediately routed, notwithstanding that the Forces from Dublin marched
only in single Troops and Companies, having not time to draw together in
Battalia; whereupon so great a consternation seized upon the spirits of all the
rest, that the Marquis could prevail with none to stand with him, but the
Regiments of his Brother, Colonel Butler and Colonel Grady, some write Miles
Reylye, with which he charged the Enemy, wherein (Colonel Grady being slain,
and his Brother sore wounded and taken Prisoner) that Body was entirely broken;
and from that time, it was not in his power, by all the means he could use, to
rally any Party of Horse, and to make them so much as stand by him; so that
(when he was environed by the Enemy, attended with very few of his own
Servants, and two or three Gentlemen) he was forced to make his way through
them, and to quit the Field; when a small Body of Foot, under Colonel Gifford
(which still kept the ground, and valiantly defended themselves) finding that
they were deserted by their Horse, were compelled to surrender their Arms to
Jones; the Lord Taaff making his own way so prosperously, that he got to the
North-side, where he found that Body (composed of the Lord Dillons, Sir Thomas
Armstrongs, the Lord Moors, and Lieutenant Colonel Purdons Regiments of Horse;
Colonel Warrens, Colonel Walls; and Colonel Mich. Byrns Regiments of Foot)
which had been left at Finglass in Arms, and which had not seen the Enemy that
day; upon which, the Lord Taaff used all possible endeavors to persuade them
to attempt a Recovery of what was lost, which, in so great disorder of the
Enemy (which such success usually produces) was not reasonably to be despaired
of: But the apprehension, jealousies, fright and terror, was so universal,
that he could not incline them to it, nor to do more than (and that in great
confusion) to provide for their own security: Whilst the Marquis directed his
Letters to them, ordering therein the one half of them to go to Tredath, and
the other half to Trym, for the security of those Places, whilst himself went
to Kilkenny to rally what he could of the Army, and to raise what new Forces he
should be able. This was the unhappy, and indeed fatal Defeat at Rathmines, by
the Bishops at Jamestown, 1650, thought so improvident and unfortunate, as
nothing happened in Christianity more shameful. Yet in his Excellencies Letter
from Kilcolgan the 2d. of December, 1650. to the Assembly at Loghreogh so
Answered, as hitherto no Reply has been attempted. The news of which, and the
consequences thereof, was received and proclaimed (writes Walsh, fol. 583.)
with much gladness and excess of joy in Rome, as that which made for the
Nuncio's Party. It was the first and only loss that fell upon any Army or
Party of which the Marquis had the Name and Title, (and here he had no more
than the name) of the Supreme Commander, and these the whole Circumstances of
it. In this Battle were slain on the place, and in the Chase, about 4000. and
2517 taken Prisoners, and two whole Cannon, three Demi-cannon, one long square
Gun carrying a Ball of 12 Pound, one Saker-drake, one Mortarpiece, all these
Brass; besides 200 Draught-Oxen for the Train, and the richest Camp of
Commodities an Enemy could well be Master of. But not to speak further of the
sad misfortune of this great Commander, than whom, no man was more justly
magnified for his Courage, confided in for his Loyalty, relied on for his
Wisdom, trusted in for his Care to prevent ill Accidents, and Dexterity to take
advantages; he was indeed looked upon as the Restaurator of his Country, and
as the only Person, by whose management of the Irish War, the injured King was
like to arise out of his Fathers ruins to the Glory and Greatness he was born
to; though upon this Defeat, those (whose Crimes were no otherwise to be veiled
than by this misfortune) cast the miscarriage thereof solely upon him; a Fate
incident to great Men, to be extremely magnified on Success, and upon any
notable Disaster to be as much depressed, and peradventure neither justly.

Soon after this Defeat, Jones was writ to by his Excellence, to have a List of
the Prisoners he had taken from him. To whom it was replied, My Lord, since I
routed your Army, I cannot have the happiness to know where you are, that I may
wait upon you.

Michael Jones.




This Defeat at Rathmines altered the result of Counsels at Court, till The
Defeat at Rathmines altered Consultations.
then very strong for his Majesty's repair into Ireland, the Scots having given
ill proofs of their Integrity and Faith: And certainly the Irish were at that
time so disposed, as probably they would have submitted to his Majesty,
whatever afterward might have been the result of their compliance: And for
the Parliament, they had at that time so inconsiderable a footing in Ireland,
(possessing not a Garrison in Munster or Connaght, and in Ulster none but
Londonderry and the Fort of Culmore, as in Leimster little but Dublin and
Ballishannon) as his Majesty's Presence (it was thought) would have wrought on
some, reduced others, and brought in All.

When the Marquis (as we have said before) found the Consternation The Lord
Lieutenant from Rathmines retires to Kilkenny.
to be so great in his Soldiers, as they could not be contained from
dispersing, and had sent Orders to those on Finglass-side to march to Tredagh
and Trim, for the strengthening of those Garrisons, which he believed Jones
might, upon the pride of his late success, be inclined to attack; whilst
himself went to Kilkenny, as the fittest Rendezvous to which he might rally his
broken and scattered Forces, and from whence he might best give Orders and
Directions for the making of new Levies: And in his March thither, the very
next day after the Defeat at Rathmines, he made an halt, with those few Horse
he had rallied together, and summoned the strong Fort of Ballishannon, which he
had before left blocked up by a Party of Horse and Foot, and (having found
means to persuade the Governor to believe that Dublin had been surrendered, and
that his Army was returning) he got that important Place into his hands,
without which Stratagem, Jones would have pursued his Conquest even to Kilkenny
it self, which he had found in a very ill condition to defend it self: For in a
whole weeks time after the Marquis's coming to Kilkenny, Colonel Jones
besieging Tredath, was raised by the Lord Lieutenants coming to Trim.
he could draw together but 300 Horse, with which he found it necessary that
day sevennight after the Defeat, to march in Person to the relief of Tredath,
which was besieged by Jones, and defended by the Lord Moor; but upon the
approach of the Marquis no nearer than Trim, the Siege was raised, and Jones
returned to Dublin, and his Lordship entered Tredath, whether he resolved to
draw his Army as soon as might be, and issued out his Orders accordingly,
hoping in short-time, (if no other misfortune intervened) to get a Body of Men
together able to restrain those of Dublin, from making any great advantage of
their late Victory: But he had been there very few days, when he received sure
advertisement, that Cromwell himself was landed with a great Army of Horse and
Cromwell lands at Dublin.
Foot, and with vast Supplies of all kinds, at Dublin, where he arrived within
less than a fortnight, ( viz. on or about the 15th. of August) after the
unfortunate Defeat at Rathmines.

The Scene being now altered, and the War the Lord Lieutenant was to make could
be only Defensive, until the Parliamentarians should meet with a Check in some
Enterprise; and his own Men by Rest, Discipline, and Exercise of their Arms,
might again recover their Spirits, and forget the fears they had contracted of
the Enemy. He in the first place therefore took care to repair the Works and
Fortifications of Tredath, as well as in so short a time could be done, and got
as much Provision into the Town as was possible; and then with a full
approbation of all the Commissioners, he made choice of Sir Arthur Aston, a
Roman Catholic, and a Soldier of very great Experience and Reputation, (one at
Reading and Oxford formerly confided in by his Majesty, a Gentleman of an
Ancient and yet flourishing Family in Cheshire) to be Governor thereof, and
put a Garrison into it of 2000 Foot, and a good Regiment of Horse, all choice
Men, and good Soldiers, with very many Gentlemen and Officers of good Name and
Account, and supplied it with Ammunition and all other Provisions, as well as
the Governor himself desired; and having done so, he marched with his Horse
and small remainder of Foot to Trim, from whence he had sent to the Lord
Inchiquin to bring up as many Men to Tecroghan the Rendezvous as he could out
of Munster; now the apprehension of Cromwell's Landing there was over, and
endeavored from all parts to recruit his Army, hoping (that before the
Parliamentarians could be able to reduce any of his Garrisons) he might be
empowered to take the Field.

The 24th. of August, 1649. the Commons assembled in Parliament set forth a
Declaration, declaring all Persons who had served the Parliament of England in
Ireland, and had betrayed their Trust, or adhered to, or aided and assisted his
late Majesty, or his Son, to be Traitors and Rebels, and accordingly to be
proceeded against by a Court-Marshal; whereby some were Sentenced, others sent
into England, some Imprisoned there, and many disbanded, though they had served
against the Rebels from the first Discovery.

Upon Friday the 30th. of August, Cromwell marched out of Dublin, (having settled
the Affairs of that City, Civil and Military, instituting Sir Theophilus Jones
Governor in his absence) with an Army of 9 or 10000 Men, (chosen out of the
General Muster, where appeared a complete Body of 15000 Horse and Foot) came
before Tredath, Monday the 2d. of September; of which the Marquess of Ormond
was no sooner advertised, than he came to Trim, to watch all opportunities to
infest the Enemies Quarters; and having full confidence in the Town, and in the
Experience of Sir Arthur Aston, (who had sent him several Advices to
precipitate nothing, for that he doubted not to find Cromwell play a while) the
goodness and number of the Garrison being such, that Cromwell would not be able
to get the Town by any Assault: But here again he found his expectations
disappointed, for the Enemy resolved not to lose their time in a Siege; and
therefore as soon as they had sent their Summons the 9th. of September, and it
was rejected, they made a Breach the next day with their Cannon, and stormed
the Place; and though they were for some time stoutly resisted, and twice
beaten off, yet at the third Onset Cromwell gains Tredath by Storm, etc.
(led by Cromwell) they entered, and pursued their Victory with so much cruelty,
that they put the whole Garrison in Arms to the Sword, not sparing those upon
second thoughts, to whom (in the heat of the Action) some of Cromwell's
Underofficers promised and gave Quarter; a crime, writes one (then in the
Action) themselves were most guilty of, they again resuming Arms when they had
engaged to lay them down: So that, except some few who (during the time of the
Assault) escaped at the other side of the Town, and others, who mingling with
the Rebels as their own men, disguised themselves, that they were not
discovered, there was not an Officer, Soldier, or Religious Person belonging to
that Garrison left alive, besides those (after Decimation) sent to Barbados;
and all this within the space of nine days after the Enemy appeared before the
Walls; and when very many Royalists as well as Irish were glad that they were
engaged before the Place, that was likely to be so well defended, and to stop
their further progress for that season of the year.

This indeed was a much greater Blow than that at Rathmines, and totally
destroyed and massacred a Body of near 3000 Men, with which, in respect of
Experience, and Courage of the Officers, and Goodness and Fidelity of the
common Men, the Marquis would have been glad to have found himself engaged in
the Field with the Enemy, though upon some disadvantages: And he had not now
left with him above 700 Horse and 1500 Foot, whereof some were of suspected
Faith, and many new raised men: And though the Lord Inchiquin was ready to
march toward him with a good Party of Horse and Foot, and the Lord Viscount of
Ardes with the like of Scots; yet he had neither Money to give them one days
Pay, or Provision to keep them together for 24 hours: The Commissioners were
either dispersed, or their Orders for collecting Money not executed or
regarded; and when in those straits the Lord Lieutenant issued out Warrants for
raising of Men and Money, they complained of the breach of Articles of the
Treaty, and talked amongst themselves of Treating with the Enemy. That which
was most conciliable, and which all men saw was fittest to be practiced, was,
to put all their Men into Garrisons, and thereby secure the most considerable
Places, and therewithal (Winter now approaching) to have prosecuted their
Levies, and by good Discipline and Exercise of their Men, recover their Spirits
against the Spring: But this was not at all in the Marquis's power to do, he
was restrained by the Articles of the Treaty from making any new Garrison, and
from changing any old Governors, without the approbation of the Commissioners;
and he and the Commissioners together had not credit and power enough with the
Chief Cities and Incorporate Towns, which were most worth keeping, and
consequently most like to be attempted by the Rebels, to force or persuade them
to receive Garrisons. So Wexford, Waterford, Limerick and Gallway, the most
considerable Ports of the Kingdom, declared, they would admit of no Soldiers;
nor indeed did they further obey any other Orders which were sent to them than
they thought fit themselves. If this fatal distemper and discomposure had not
been discovered to be amongst them, it is not to be believed that Cromwell (what
success soever he had met with) would have engaged his Army, which with being
long at Sea, change of Air, and long Duty, was much weakened, and had
contracted great sicknesses in the Sieges after the beginning of October; yet
being encouraged, and, in truth, drawn on by the knowledge of this humor and
obstinacy of the Irish, against all Remedies that could preserve them, he
withdrew his Forces from Tredagh, (having taken in first Trim, Dundalk,
Carlingford, Newry, and other smaller Garrisons thereabouts) and returned to
Dublin, having sent Colonel Venables down with some Forces to oppose George
Monro, (who had a good Strength with him) and to relieve Londonderry, but was
not able to keep the Field: In his March, he was set upon in his Quarters by
Colonel Trevor, who had 5 or 600 Horse with him, and gave him a desperate
Attack; but the morning appearing, he was beaten out by Captain Meredith and
his Troop, who was appointed by Colonel Venables to charge him; this was upon
his march toward Belfast, which was surrendered unto him upon Conditions from
the Scots: And while he was here, he sent out a Party under Lieutenant Colonel
Conally, who was encountered as he marched to Antrim by George Monro, and a good
strength of Horse, and routed; Conally was there slain by Colonel John
Hamilton. Such are the Dispensations of the Almighty, as he did not live to
receive the fruit of so great service as he had done to that Kingdom, in
discovering the Plot. Moses saw the good Land, but never entered.

At Dublin Cromwell refreshed his Soldiers a few days, and (intending to fish in
troubled Waters) resolved presently to appear before Wexford; which the Marquis
of Ormond suspecting, (upon Cromwell's return from Tredagh to Dublin) removed
his Army from Castle Jordan down toward the Counties of Wexford and Kilkenny,
there not only to lie secure till Owen O Neil's Army should come up to him,
(according to agreement, as you shall hereafter hear) but also ready to be
drawn into either Wexford or Kilkenny, as there should be occasion. Cromwell
(according to his resolution) the 27th. of September, marched from Dublin; but
before he marched thence, (or presently after) he Cashiers the seven old
Regiments which Jones had continued at Dublin, allowing the Colonels (for a
little time) a small Pension, which he soon took off; though they were the
first who (to that instant) had served against the Rebels. And then he marched
toward Wexford through the County of Wickloe, (taking the People into
protection, and not suffering the Soldiers in his Army to commit any spoil as
he went, but to pay for all Provisions) in his march he took in several Castles
and Garrisons, as Killingkerick, Arcklo, Little Limerick, Iniscorphen, alias
Eniscorvy, Ferns Castle, and the Fort of Wexford Near Eniscorfy there was a
Monastery of Franciscans, which, upon the approach of the Army, quitted the
Place, and their Provisions very considerable.
; and the first of October with his Army he sat down before Wexford, the
Inhabitants whereof appeared willing (under Colonel David Synnot their
Governor) to make defense, albeit they had too long neglected the means
thereof, and were at last (when part of the Enemies Army was lodged within
half-Musquet-shot of their Walls) contented to receive an assistance of Men
from the Lord Lieutenant, which (upon the first intimation) his Excellency
hastened to them, of the choicest of those he had left, all Catholics, (for
that was still insisted upon) under the Command of his Cousin Sir Edmond
Butler, with near 1500 Men) who with some difficulty passed the River into
Cromwell takes in Wexford.
that part of the Town which the Parliaments Army could not infest; but he had
not been two hours in the Town, before Captain James Stafford, Governor of the
Castle (whom the Lord Lieutenant would have removed from that Charge, not as
being unfit for it, but because he was a Catholic, and had exercised that
Charge during the time that the Confederates were in Arms against the King)
gave up that Place to Cromwell, and took Conditions under him: Cromwell having
thus gained the Castle, advanced his Flag upon the Castle, and turned the Guns
against the Town; which the Townsmen perceiving, their hearts failed them, and
the Soldiers in confusion quitted the Walls, not expecting the return of their
Commissioners, who treating with Cromwell, had procured the safety of the
Inhabitants of the Town, and the preservation of it from Plunder, as leave for
the Soldiers to depart every one to their own homes, (they engaging not to bear
Arms any more against the State of England) and lastly, of life to the
Officers. Yet in great consternation (fear having surprised the Townsmen and
Soldiers before their Commissioners return) they endeavored to pass over the
Water for the safety of their lives: Which Cromwell's Soldiers perceiving, about
14. of October, presently clapped Scaling Ladders to the Walls, and entered the
Town without any resistance, wherein all found in Arms were put to the Sword,
to the number of 2000, amongst which was Sir Edmond Butler, endeavoring (when
he discovered their Treachery) to escape, was killed, before he had been two
hours in that City: Cromwell, in the interim not losing 20 men in the whole
Siege, though (as you may see) Colonel David Synot, Governor of the Town and
Castle of Wexford, had confidence by the Propositions he sent, (1.) That the
Inhabitants of the Town should exercise (without disturbance) the Roman
Catholic Religion. (2.) Their Religious Orders and Priests should enjoy their
Monasteries and Churches. (3.) The Bishop Nicolus Ferns, and his Successors
should have their undisturbed Jurisdiction of their Diocese. (4.) Their
Officers and Soldiers should march out with flying Colors, and the other
punctilio's of Honor. (5.) Whosoever of the Inhabitants hereafter should
desire to depart the Town, should have whatever was theirs with them. (6.)
That all Freemen should have their Immunities and Liberties hitherto enjoyed,
they adhering to the State of England. (7.) None to be disturbed in their
Possession. (8.) Who-ever afterward should desire to depart, may have safe
Conduct into England, or elsewhere. (9.) That all enjoy a full liberty of
Freeborn English Subjects, in what Port soever they should Traffic in
England. (10.) That no memory remain of any Hostility or distance betwixt the
Parliament and those that kept the Town and Castle. All which, Cromwell
accounting impudent, had no effect.

From this Torrent of Success and Corruption, no body will wonder, That Cromwell
marched thence without control, and took in Ross, a strong Town situate upon
the Barrow, and far more considerable for Navigation than Wexford, the River
admitting a Ship of 7 or 800 Tun to ride by the Walls; of this Place Major
General Lucas Taaff was Governor, who had with him a strong Garrison,
re-enforced by 1500 Men, even in the fight of Cromwell's Army, who (when he came
before it) to save Blood, sent a Summons to the Town; which was answered
suitable to his mind by the Governor: but the Great Guns sending in the next
Summons, the Town was surrendered on condition the 19th. of October, That they
within should march away with Bag and Baggage. Capitulating for which, Taaff
demanded Liberty of Conscience for such as should stay. To which Cromwell
replied, That he meddled not with any man's Conscience; but if by Liberty of
Conscience was meant a Liberty to exercise the Mass, he judged it best to use
plain dealing, and to let him know, where the Parliament of England had power,
that will not be allowed.

The Marquis of Ormond, out of a too deep sense of the stupidity, nay The Lord
Lieutenant sought all opportunities to fight Cromwell.
madness and ingratitude of that People, (for whose Protection and Defense he
had embarked himself, his Fortunes, and his Honor) and whose jealousy and
fond obstinacy, made the work of their own preservation more difficult and
impossible, than the Power of their Enemy could do, about this time desired
nothing so much as an opportunity to fight Cromwell, and either to give some
check to his swelling Fortune, or to perish (gloriously) in the action; and to
that purpose drew all his Friends to him, then about the Graige and Thomastown,
with an intention to fight him, his Excellency's Army being exceedingly
increased, by the conjunction of Inchiquin's and Owen Roe's Armies, had he not
been diverted by a false Alarm of the Enemy's, being gone as far as
Bennets-bridge toward Kilkenny, whereby he was drawn thither for the defense
of that City, otherwise he had engaged them before their getting to Carrick.

Ross being now in Cromwell's possession, he caused a Bridge of Boats to be made
(under protection of the Town) over the River Barrow, and the Army to sit down
before Duncannon, a strong Fort commanded by Colonel Wogan; but the Place being
so well provided of all Necessaries, it was judged convenient not to lose time
about it. And presently after Colonel Abbot reduced Enisteoge (a little walled
Town, about 5 miles from Ross) to the Parliaments obedience. And about the same
time, Colonel Reynolds, with 12 Troops of Horse, and 3 of Dragoons, marched
toward Carrick, having divided his Men into two parts; whilst the Besieged
Carrick taken in.
were amused with the one Party, he entered a Gate with the other, taking the
Place, and about 100 Prisoners, without the loss of one Man. But to look back.

From the time that the Peace was concluded at Kilkenny, the Lord Lieutenant
well discerned the mischief he should sustain, by being to provide The Means
the Lord Lieutenant took to reduce O Neal.
against the Attempts of General Owen O Neal, as well as against the English
Forces, and that at least he could hope for no assistance from the Scots in
Ulster, as long as they feared him. And therefore he sent Daniel O Neal, Nephew
to the General, to persuade him to be included in the same Peace; but he was so
un-satisfied with the Assembly, that he declared he would have nothing to do
with them, or be comprehended in any Peace they should make: But if the
Marquess would consent to some Conditions he proposed, he would willingly
submit to the King's Authority in him. The Marquess was content to grant him
his own Conditions, having indeed a great esteem of his Conduct, and knowing
the Army under his Command to be better disciplined, than any other of the
Irish. But the Commissioners of Trust would by no means consent to those
Conditions, The Commissioners of Trust dissent from the Lord Lieutenant.
whereby it is evident, (though these would be thought to adhere to the
Marquess) that they had alien thoughts to his Majesty's Happiness, and
declared, if the Lord Lieutenant should proceed thereupon to an Agreement, it
would be a direct breach of the Articles of Peace. And thereupon Owen O Neal
made that Conjunction with Monk, as is before spoken of, and, about the very
time of the Defeat at Rathmines, relieved Sir Charles Coot in Londonderry, and
thereby kept the King, from being entirely possessed of the Province of Ulster,
which, but for that Action, would have been able to have sent strong Supplies
of Men and Provisions, to the assistance of the Marquess. And it is well known,
that while the Lord Lieutenant was in a hopeful condition to prevail against
the Parliament, the Commissioners of Trust, and the principal Persons of
Interest, had no mind to agree with General O Neal, out of animosity to his
Person and Parts, and in confidence that the Work would be done without him:
And others, who were of his Party, had as little mind that he should be drawn
into a Conjunction with the Marquess, because they knew, if he was once engaged
under him, they should no more be able to seduce him, to join with them in any
Actions of Sedition. And upon these Reasons, the Persons, who were deputed by
the Commissioners to treat with him, and were known to have an Interest in him,
on the one side persuaded Owen O Neal, that the Lord Lieutenant had broken the
Articles of Peace, and that he could have no security, that what should be
promised, should be performed to him; and on the other side informed the
Marquess, that Owen O Neal insisted on such extravagant Propositions, that the
Commissioners of Trust would never yield to them. But after the Arrival of
Cromwell and his success against Tredagh, the Commissioners of Trust thought it
high time to unite to him: And Owen O Neal himself discerned, how unsafe he
should be, by the prevailing of the English Party, who, notwithstanding the
signal Service performed by him to them, had publicly dis-avowed the Agreement
which their Officers had made with him. And thereupon, by the Interposition of
Colonel Daniel O Neal, (at that time Governor of Trim) all Particulars were
agreed betwixt the Lord Lieutenant and him, the 12th. of October, 1649. with
the Consent of the Commissioners of Trust; the management of which was
committed to Sir Nicholas Plunket Knight, and Sir Richard Barnwel Baronet,
authorized by the Lord Lieutenant, to conclude with General Owen O Neal, for
whom there was the Bishop of Clogher, and Tirlagh O Boil, who agreed in 18
Articles, about the time Cromwell was before Wexford: Insomuch that he promised
to bring his Army within a few days, and join with the Lord Lieutenant, which
(though himself lived not to accomplish, dying at Cloughoter-Castle, in the
County of Cavan, about the beginning of O Neal dies.
December) was shortly after performed. So that about the time that Wexford was
taken, the Lord Lieutenant was not without hope, by the advantage of a Pass,
and by cutting off his Provisions, to have made Cromwell return to Dublin very
hard, without losing a good part of his Army; when on a sudden, and all
together, all the considerable Places in the Province of Munster, as Cork,
Toughal, Kinsale, Bandonbridge, Moyallo, and other Garrisons, revolted to the
Parliament, and thereby gave them a The Garrisons in Munster revolt to the
Parliament.
safe Retreat, and free Passage, and necessary Provisions of all that they
wanted, and Harbors for Ships, to bring all to them that they could desire.

The Lord Inchiquin being so totally betrayed by those Officers whom he trusted
most, and had most obliged, and (that after he had in vain tried to reduce them
by force) he could not, without much difficulty, obtain the liberty and
re-delivery of his Wife and Children to him, which when he had procured, he
fled for safety into Thomond, to his Kindred.

This Defection, in so fatal a Juncture of time, (when the straits Cromwell was
in, by the Winter, and want of Provisions, had raised the Spirits of all Men,
and when they looked upon themselves, as like to have at The Revolt of the
Munster Garrisons begot a Jealousy in the Irish Army.
least some hopeful Encounter with him) was not a loss, or a blow, but a
dissolution of the whole Frame of their Hopes and Designs, and introduced a
Spirit of Jealousy and Animosity in the Army, which no Dexterity or Interest
of the Lord Lieutenant could extinguish or allay.

From the first hour of the Peace, the English and Irish had not been without
that prejudice toward each other, as gave the Marquess much trouble, and they
were rather incorporated by their obedience and submission, to the Authority
and Pleasure of their chief Commander, than united by the same Inclinations and
Affections, to any public End. Insomuch as before the Defeat at Rathmines,
there were many of the Irish, who much feared the swift success of the Army,
and apprehended, the Lord Lieutenant's speedy reducing of Dublin, would give
him such Power, and make him more absolute, than they desired to see him, and
therefore were not sorry for that Mischief. On the other side, the English were
much troubled, to see the Authority and Jurisdiction of the Marquess so
restrained and limited by the Articles, and that the Army was neither
recruited, disciplined, nor provided, as it ought to be, solely by his want of
Power; and they had a very low opinion of the Spirit and Courage of the Irish.
But now upon this Defection in Munster, there was a Determination of all
Confidence and Trust in each other; the Irish declaring, That they suspected
all the English Nation, and made the Treachery of those, who so infamously had
betrayed their Trust, an unreasonable Argument for jealousy, of those who
remained in the Army, who being a handful of gallant Men, and of most un-shaken
Fidelity to the King, were indeed, in respect of their Courage and Experience
in the War, the Party to be principally depended upon in any Action or
Encounter, and of which the Enemy had only an apprehension.

Though the Season of the year, for it was now toward the end of November,
Cromwell makes his Attempt upon Waterford, but draws off to his Winter Quarters.
and the Sickness that was in Cromwell's Army, made it high time to betake
themselves to their Winter Quarters, and such was their resolution; yet hearing
of the gaining of Carrick, and of the present Distemper amongst those, who had
the whole Strength the Lord Lieutenant was to trust to, and knowing all the
Clergy had the full Dominion, in all incorporate Towns and Places of
Importance, and would keep the People from submitting to those Expedients,
which could only preserve them, he resolved to make an Attempt (with his Army,
consisting of about 2000 Horse and 5000 Foot) upon Waterford, hoping to reduce
that important Place, before the Army should draw into Winter Quarters, knowing
well enough, that the Marquess could not keep the small Body he had together,
many days, which was true: For he, having not Money to give them half a Weeks
Pay, or Provision to serve half so long, was compelled to suffer part of them,
viz. the Scots, to go to their Quarters; who, upon the Plains of Lisnegarvy,
(being joined with Sir George Monro, to relieve Carickfergus) were, upon the
6th. of December, met with by Sir Charles Coot, who gave them such a blow, as
they were afterward never able to make head in Ulster. However, the Marquess
was resolved not to leave Waterford to the Enemy, though the Inhabitants had so
obstinately and disobediently refused to receive a Garrison, which would have
prevented their present pressures; whereas they were now closely besieged to
their Walls, on all that side of the Town which lay to Munster; the other being
open, and to be relieved by the River Sure, which there severs Leimster and
Munster, and washes the Walls of the Town on that side. The Inhabitants seeing
Destruction at their Door, abated so much of their former Madness, as to be
willing to receive a Supply of Soldiers; yet under a condition, that they
might be all of the old Irish of Ulster, who (under the Command of Owen O Neal)
had long opposed the King's Authority, and were now newly joined with the
Marquess, and in express terms refused any of their Neighbors and Kindred, the
Confederate Irish Catholics of Munster or Leimster, to the great offense and
scandal of that Part of the Nation, which had been as zealous for their
Religion as any. However, since there was no other way to preserve them, the
Lord Lieutenant was content to comply even with that Humor; and so choosing a
strong Party of near 1500 Men, and putting them under the Command of Lieutenant
General Farral, who was the most acceptable to them, his Excellency himself
marched with them, and put them into the Town; which he had no sooner done,
than Cromwell thought it convenient to raise his Siege, (having taken in
Passage-Fort, Cromwell draws off from Waterford, goes to Dungarvan.
within 2 miles of Waterford) and marched to Dungarvan, delivered up the 3d. of
December, where he found the Lord Broghal, who (partly by his own Interest, and
the dis-affection in the Soldiers to the Lord Inchiquin) had gotten in all the
Towns in Munster, that had formerly been under the Parliament: A Service most
considerable, and such as was of very great advantage to Cromwell, who was now
in great straits where to take up his Winter Quarters, for his sick and
distressed Regiments, his Army, partly by sickness, partly by leaving Garrisons
in the several Places he had taken in, being so much weakened and impaired, so
as he brought not, of all the Men he carried over with him, above 5000 Horse
and Foot, to Dungarvan; where Colonel Jones, who sickned in Colonel Jones dies
about the 18th. of December.
his way thither, died, about the 18th. of December, 1649. of a Purple Fever; a
Person certainly of much Gallantry, and one in the Discipline of the Army
(whereof he was Lieutenant General) very exact, carrying his Victories oftener
more by the dint of his Sword, than the number of his Men: And though he passes
not, in the History of our Age, without some Reflections, as too obstinately
adhering to Cromwell, whom he used to call, Companion in Labors, yet those who
were intimate with him, had that certainty of his Worth, as nothing so much
steered him in the Service of Ireland, as a just Reflection on the Murders and
Insolences committed by the Irish on the Protestants, not otherwise to be
pacified, than by a due Revenge: And had he survived this Service, it is
confidently believed, Cromwell (how well soever he spoke of him) would have
found some Expedient to have laid him aside. Cromwell having thus gained
Dungarvan, shortly after betook himself to his Winter Quarters, garrisoning at
Bandonbridge, Colonel Ewer, and his Regiment; at Kinsale, Colonel Stabber; at
Cork, Colonel Phaier; and Colonel Cook at Wexford; and Youghal, and other
adjacent Places, was assigned the Headquarters. Whilst the Marquess of Ormond,
(sensible of what might be the product of so un-controul'd a Success, having
left Waterford, in his thoughts full of the sense of the late benefit and
preservation, which, by his vigilance, that City had received) in December, (a
season much colder than usually had been observed in that Country) cast all
ways imaginable to hinder the Enemy's future Attempt upon that Place, and to
reduce Passage, Wexford, and other Places, weakly* manned and provided by
Cromwell. And accordingly he drew his Forces together, and, leaving them on the
other The Lord Lieutenant's Endeavor to impede Cromwell.
side of the River Sure, himself with a Train only of 40 or 50 Horse,
consisting of his Friends and Servants, went into the Town, presuming he should
be able to persuade them to submit to join, in whatsoever should manifestly
appear for their own benefit or advantage. When he came into the Town, he found
Lieutenant General Farral engaged in a Design to take Passage, a Place seized
on by Cromwell, when he had retired from Waterford, and which was an
in-convenient Neighbor to that City. Colonel Wogan (who had been seasonably
sent by the Marquess into Duncannon, even when the first Governor placed
thereby the Confederate Catholics, was ready to deliver it up to the Enemy,
and who had with notable courage defended it against Cromwell, and in the end,
after the loss of a great number of his Men, compelled him to retire) had
agreed to meet Lieutenant General Farral, Commander of the Ulster Forces, at a
Place and House appointed, and together to fall on Passage. Though the Marquess
had not been informed of the contrivance of the Design, yet he knew well
enough, what interpretation would be made of his Interposition, or Command, or
Wariness, should he declare against it, therefore he was very willing it should
proceed: The Matter was well laid, and carried with secrecy, being hopeful
enough. Lieutenant General Farral had not been marched from the Town many
hours, when the Marquess discovered (from some Place of prospect in the Town) a
strong Party of Horse, marching in good order, the way that led to Passage,
which belonging to the Enemy, made him conclude, that they had notice of the
Design. Whereupon he presently sent for the Mayor of the Town, and showing him
the in-evitable danger their whole Party was in, (which was the only Srength
against any Enterprise of the Enemy) if they were not instantly relieved,
required him presently to send some Body over the Water, for the transporting
(from the other side of the River) of a Regiment or two of Horse, with which he
would himself endeavor to rescue them. How apparent soever the danger and
mischief was, and how visible and natural soever the remedy, all the Commands
and Entreaties he could use, could not prevail to get one Body, or their
Consent, that any of his Horse should be suffered to march through the Town,
without which they could not go to their Relief. When he had in vain tried all
the means he could invent, to convince and persuade them to so natural an
Action, he caused all his Friends and Servants aforementioned, The Lord
Lieutenant's gallant Attempt to relieve the Party that went to take in Passage.
to mount their Horses, and with all imaginable haste himself led them toward
Passage, that he might at least discover (though he was not like to prevent)
the loss that was to ensue. When he came within sight of the Town, he could
discern a Party of Foot, marching in great haste and disorder toward him,
being pursued by the Enemy's Horse, who had even over-taken them, having fallen
upon the remainder, and either killed them upon the Place, or taken them
Prisoners. Though the company which attended the Marquess, was too few to
encounter the Enemy's Horse, with any considerable hope, yet he drew them up in
that manner, on the side of an Hill, that the Enemy imagining their number to
be more considerable, thought fit to lessen their pace, and to send small
Parties to discover them; which being again entertained by the like number in
like skirmishes, the Foot as much improving their March, they were in the end
(by the Marquess's frequent opposing of his own Person, to retard the Enemy's
pursuit) preserved; and so brought back with him into the Town, about half of
those who had marched thence, (the rest being killed or taken Prisoners by
Colonel Zanckey) which also had been infallibly destroyed, if the Marquess had
not taken that desperate course to redeem them, as he might in hope have
recovered all the others, who were made Prisoners, and defeated all that Body
of the Enemy, and consequently have taken Passage, if the City would have
permitted his Horse to have been transported over the River, and to have
marched through it. The Lord Lieutenant disappointed in retaking of Carrick,
and good Service done by Colonel Milo Power.
His Excellency's Forces had not better success in their Attempt to re-take
Carrick, (governed by Colonel Reynolds) merely through the want of Pick-axes
and Spaces* though his confidence of the Design, (built on the brittle
assurance of his Commanders) had brought him almost thither, where (if it had
not been for Colonel Milo Power, who acquainted him of his Armies being
baffled, and of its removal thence) he had been surprised by the Enemy. And the
Lord Inchiquin's, Lieutenant Colonel Trevor's, Sir Thomas Armstrong's
Expeditions against Wexford and Ross, ended in the like loss and misfortune.
The Marquess however leaves nothing un-attempted to fortify Waterford, what
dis-couragements soever he had received by the Insolency of some Men,
instigated by the Violence and Opiniastrise of the Clergy; In as much as he
knew, Passage or the other Places could not be regained, without he might bring
his Army over the River, which they would not admit of, nay! desiring that his
Army might for a little time be but hutted under their Walls, where they should
receive their Provisions and Pay, duly out of the Country, and so should be a
Security and Benefit to the Town, without the least damage in any Degree. This
Proposition also found no more regard then the former, and instead of
consulting, with what Circumstances to comply with so just and necessary a
Demand of the Kings The Treachery of Waterford against the Lord Lieutenant.
Lieutenant, it was proposed in the Council of the Town, To seize on his
Person, and to fall on all who belonged to him, as an Enemy; Which Advice met
with no other Reprehension, then that for the present, the major part did not
consent unto it. Of all which, when the Marquess was fully informed, he thought
it time to depart thence, and to leave them to their own Imaginations; and so
marched away with his Army, which after this Indignity, it was a thing
impossible to keep them together; And (because the Principal Towns refused to
admit them in) he was fain in the depth of Winter, to scatter them over all the
Kingdom. The greatest part of the Ulster Forces were sent into their own
Province, there to choose a new General, according as their Conditions allowed
them; for Owen O Neal was dead; And Luke Taaff with his Men, were sent back
into Connaght, to my Lord of Clanrickard; The Lord Inchequin, with the
remainder of such as belonged unto him, went over into the County of Clare; The
Lord Dillon, with his, into Mead, and toward Athlone; all the rest were
scattered several ways; Only Major General Hugh O Neal, was admitted with 1600
Ulster Men into Clonmel, as Governor, whilst the Marquess went to his Castle of
Kilkenny; From His Account of the State of Ireland to the King.
thence he dispatched the 24th. of December, an Account to the King, (who was
then in the Isle of Jersey) of the true Estate of his Affairs in that Kingdom;
By which his Majesty might see, how much Cromwell's Forces, who disclaimed any
Subjection to him, prevailed against his Authority; And how it was equally
contemned, deluded, or dis-regarded by his Subjects, who made all the
Professions of Obedience and Duty to him; which was a Method, these ill times
had made his Majesty too well acquainted with. And from this time, which was
toward the end of December, 1649. the Marquess never did, or could draw
together into one Body, a number of 500. what endeavors he used to do it, will
be mentioned in order hereafter.

As Soon as the Lord Lieutenant came to Kilkenny, he consulted with the
Commissioners of Trust, without whose approbation and consent he could do no
act, that was of importance; what remedy to apply to the disorder and
confusion, which spread it self over all their Affairs; they had been still
Witnesses of all his actions, of his unwearied pains and industry, and of the
little fruit that was reaped by it* how his Orders and Commands, and their own,
had been neglected and dis-obeyed in all those Particulars, without which an
Army could not be brought or kept together; how those places which the Rebels
had possessed themselves of, had been for the most part lost by their own
obstinate refusal, to receive such assistance from him, as was absolutely
necessary for their preservation; and yet that they had raised most
unreasonable Imputations and Reproaches on him, as if he had failed in their
Defense and Relief. They had seen the wonderful, and even insupportable wants
and necessities the Army had always undergone; and knew very well how all
Warrants had been disobeyed for the bringing in of Money and Provisions, for
the supply thereof. And yet their Country was full of clamor and discontent,
for the payment of Taxes, and being exhausted with Contribution; He desired
them therefore, to examine where any mis-demeanors had in truth been, and that
they might be punished; and from whence the Scandal and Calumnies proceeded,
that the minds of the People might be informed and composed. The Commissioners
for the most part had discharged the Trust reposed in them; yet there were some
amongst them, (too able and dexterous in Business) who always malign'd the
Person of the Marquess, or rather his Religion, and the Authority he
represented; And what professions soever, they made of respect to him, still
maintained a close Intelligence and Correspondence with those of the Clergy,
The Clergy, the Fomentors of all mis-conceits against the Lord Lieutenant.
who were the most disaffected to his Majesty's Interest; and who from the
misfortune at Rathmines, had underhand fomented and cherished all the ill
humors and jealousies of the People. The Commissioners advised the Marquess,
as the best expedient to satisfy the Country; that Orders might be sent to
them, to elect some few Persons amongst themselves, to send to Kilkenny, as
Agents, to represent those Grievances which His desire to clear their
suspicions, being (by their Orders only) met at Kilkenny.
were most heavy upon them, and to offer any desires which might promote their
security, alleging, that they could by this means be clearly informed, how
groundless those jealousies were, and the Artifices would be discovered, which
had been used to corrupt their affections: though the Marquess well saw how
tedious and inconvenient this course might prove, and rather advance all the
scandalous and seditious Designs, then suppress them; Yet he foresaw as well,
that if it were declined by him, he should be un-avoidably reproached, with not
being willing to be informed of the just Grievances of the People, and
consequently not to remedy them; And therefore without giving countenance to
any such irregular Convention, by any formal summons of his own, he gave way
that the Commissioners should write their Letters to that purpose, and
accordingly the Agents did come thither from the several Countries, to
communicate and present their Complaints and Desires together, in January
following; And the Lord Lieutenant received them with good Countenance, and
wished them freely to consult together as soon as they could, to present
whatsomever they had to say to him; to which, they should be sure to receive a
speedy Answer.

About which time, Colonel Barry (who through the whole Scene had been
entrusted by the Supreme Council, to negotiate with the King, and was not ill
thought of by the Marquess of Ormond) had then license from Cromwell, to visit
his Wife and Family at Castlelions, under the Parliaments obedience, where he
transacted (through the Mediation of a noble Person) many Concerns, to the
composing of Differencies with the greatest; though what tended to an Agreement
with Inchequin, would never in the least be indulged; and the rest then spoke
of had a fate, not seasonably to be composed.

In the mean time, the Bishops and Clergy of themselves, and without any
Authority, received or desired from the Lord Lieutenant, Assembled at
Cloanmacnoise, upon the River Shannon, upon whose Councils and Conclusions, The
Clergies Assembly at Cloanmacnoise, whence they entitle their Merits.
all men's eyes were more fixed, then upon what the Agents should represent at
Kilkenny; it being very evident, that many of the Catholic Noblity of the
Kingdom, and some principal Persons of Quality and Interest, formally concurred
with the Marquess; And the Commissioners of Trust, were for the most part, as
zealous for the execution and observation of the Articles of Peace, and that
the same might be rendered useful to the Nation: Yet the Clergy and Religious
Persons, had found means to obstruct that Union, which was necessary for the
carrying on the Work; and especially had that influence upon the Corporate
Towns, that no Garrisons would be admitted therein, or such Submission paid to
the Lord Lieutenant, or the Commissioners Orders, as were essential to their
own defense, and to the making War against the Enemy; So that all men were in
suspense, what would be the issue of that Meeting. And it cannot be denied, but
that those Bishops, and that part of the Clergy which were best affected, and
knew the ways which were most conducing to the happiness of their Country,
prevailed so far, that the Conclusions which were made there, seemed full of
respect for the Kings Service, and wholesome Advice and Council to the People;
They declared how vain a thing it was, to imagine that there would be any
security for the exercise of their Religion, for the enjoying of their
Fortunes, or for the preservation of their Lives, by any Treaty with, or
Promise from the Parliament. That they abhorred all factious Animosities, and
Divisions, which raged amongst themselves, to the hindrance of the Public
Service; And therefore enjoined all the Clergy, of what Quality soever, and
Ecclesiastical Persons, by Preaching, and all other means, to incline the
People unto an union of Affection; and to the laying aside of all jealousies of
each other, and unanimously to concur in opposing the Common Enemy; And
appointed the Bishops and other Persons, to proceed with greater severity
against those Religious and Spiritual Persons, who should underhand cherish
and foment those Jealousies and Divisions. In a word, they said so much, and so
well, that when the Lord Lieutenant was informed of it, and when he saw the
Extract of their Determinations, he conceived some hope, that it might indeed
make good Impression on the People, and produce a very good effect: The
Particulars of which here follows. The Copies of Acts and Declarations, by the
Ecclesiastical Congregation of the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Prelates,
met at Clonmacnoise, the fourth day of December, 1649. And since Concluded.
By the Ecclesiastical Congregation of the Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Prelates.
WHereas heretofore many of the Clergy and Laity, did in their actions and
proceedings, express much discontents and divisions of mind, grounding the same
on the late difference of Opinion, happened amongst the Prelates and the Laity;
by which the Nation was not so well united, as was necessary in this time of
great danger, wherein all, as with one heart and hand, ought to oppose the
Common Enemy. We the Archbishops, Bishops, and Prelates of this Kingdom, met
motu proprio, at Clonmacknose 4. Decembris, 1649. having removed all
differences among us, (not entering into the merits of diversities of former
Opinions) thought* good for removing of all jealousies from our own thoughts,
hearts, and resolutions; and from others, who had relation, or were adherent to
the former diversity of Opinions, to manifest hereby to all the World, that the
said Divisions and Jealousies grounded thereupon, are now forgotten, and
forgiven among us on all sides, as aforesaid. And that all and every of us, of
the above Archbishops, Bishops, and Prelates, are now, by the blessing of God,
as one body united, And that we will, as becomes charity and our Pastoral
charge, stand all of us as one entire Body, for the Interest and Immunities of
the Church, and of every the Prelates and Bishops thereof; and for the Honor,
Dignity, Estate, Right, and Possession, of all and every the said Archbishops,
Bishops, and other Prelates. And we will as one entire and united Body, forward
by our Councils, Actions, and Devices, the advancement of his Majesty's Rights,
and the good of this Nation in general and in particular occasions, to our
Power; and that none of us in any occasion whatsoever, concerning the Catholic
Religion, or the good of this Kingdom of Ireland, will in any respect single
himself, or be, or seem opposite to the rest of us, but will hold firm and
entire in one sense as aforesaid; hereby detesting the actions, thoughts, and
discourses of any, that shall renew the least memory of the differences past,
or give any ground of future difference among us, And do in the Name of Jesus
Christ, exhort all our flock to the like brotherly affection and union, and to
the like detestation of all past differences or jealousies as aforesaid,
arising hitherto among them. And we desire that this our Declaration be
Printed, and Published in each Parish, by Command of the respective Ordinaries.
Ut videant opera vestra bona, and glorificent Patrem vestrum qui in Coelis est.

Datum apud Clonmacnose, 13. December. 1649. Signed by, Hugo Ardmachanus, Fr.
Thomas Dublin, Thomas Casshel, Joan. Archiep. Tuam. Fr. Boethius Elphyn, Fr.
Edmundus Laghlinensis and Procurator Waterfordiensis, Emerus Clogher, Robertus
Corcagiensis and Cluanensis, Nicholaus Fernensis, Edmundus Limericensis, and
Procurarator Episcopi, Ossoriensis, Franciscus, Aladensis, Andraeus
Finiborensis, Joan. Laonensis, Fr. Oliverus Dromorensis, Fr. Antonius
Clonmacnosensis, Fr. Hugo Duacensis, Fr. Arthur Dunensis, and Connerensis, Fr.
Terentius Imolacensis, Fr. Patr. Ardagh, Oliverius, Deis Procurator Episco.
Medensis, Dr. Joa. Hussy Procurator Episco. Ardfertensis, Fr. Joannes Cantwel
Abbas, S. Crucis, Dr. Thadeus Clery Episcop. Rapo. Procurator, Fr. Gregorius o
Ferraile Provin. Ordinis Praedicatorum Provin. Hiber. Fr. Thomas Mackeyernane
Provin. Fratrum Minorum Provin. Hiber. Walterus Clonfortensis Congregationis
Secretar.

By the Ecclesiastical Congregation of the Kingdom of Ireland.
WE the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ordinaries, and Prelates of the Kingdom
of Ireland, having met at Clonmacnose propria Motu, the fourth day of December,
in the year of our Lord God, 1649. to consider of the best means to unite our
Flocks, for averting Gods wrath fallen on this Nation, now bleeding under the
evils that Famine, Plague, and War, bring after them, for effecting a present
Union, Decreed the ensuing Acts.

1. We Order and Decree as an Act of this Congregation, That all Archbishops,
Bishops, and other Ordinaries, within their respective Diocesses, shall enjoin
Public Prayers, Fasting, General-Confession, and Receiving, and other works of
Piety, toties quoties, to withdraw from this Nation Gods Anger, and to render
them capable of his Mercies.

2. We Order and Decree as an Act of this Congregation, That a Declaration
issue from us, letting the People know, how vain it is for them to expect from
the Common Enemy commanded by Cromwell, by Authority from the Rebels of England,
any assurance of their Religion, Lives, or Fortunes.

3. We Order and Decree as an Act of this Congregation, That all Pastors and
Preachers, be enjoined to Preach amity. And for inducing the People thereunto,
to declare unto them the absolute necessity that is for the same, and as the
chief means to preserve the Nation, against the extirpation and destruction of
their Religion and Fortunes, resolved on by the Enemy. And we hereby, do
manifest our detestation, against all such Divisions between either Provinces
or Families: or between old English, and old Irish, or any the English or Scots
adhering to his Majesty. And we Decree and Order, that all Ecclesiastical
Persons, fomenting such Dissentions, or un-natural Divisions, be punished by
their respective Prelates, and Superiors, Juxta gravitatem excessus, and (si
opus fuerit) suspendantur beneficiali and Pastores a beneficio and officio ad
certum tempus, Religiosi autem a Divinis juxto circumstantias delicti. Leaving
the Laity offending in this kind, to be corrected by the Civil Magistrate, by
Imprisonment, Fine, Banishment, or otherwise, as to them shall seem best, for
plucking by the root so odious a Crime; The Execution whereof, we most
earnestly recommend to all those having Power, and that are concerned therein,
as they will answer to God for the evils that thereout may ensue.

4. We Decree and Declare Excommunicated, those Highway Robbers, commonly
called the Idle-Boys, that take away the Goods of honest men, or force me to
pay them Contribution; and we likewise declare Excommunicated all such as
succor or harbor them, or bestow, or sell them any Victualing, or buy Cattle,
or any other thing else from them wittingly; Likewise all Ecclesiastical
Persons, Ministering Sacraments to such Robbers, or Idle-Boys; or burying them
in Holy Grave, to be suspended ab officio and beneficio, si quod habent, by
their respective Superiors, juxta gravitatem delicti. This our Decree is to
oblige within fifteen days after the Publication thereof, in the respective
Diocesses.

Signed by, Hugo Ardmachanus, Fr. Thomas Dublin, Thomas Casshel, Joan. Archiep.
Tuam. Fr. Boethius Elphyn, Fr. Edmundus Laghlinensis and Procurator
Waterfordiensis, Emerus Clogher, Robertus Corcagiensis and Cluanensis,
Nicholaus Fernensis, Edmundus Limericensis, and Procurator Episcopi
Ossoriensis, Franciscus Aladensis, Andreas Finiborensis, Joan. Laonensis, Fr.
Oliverus Dromorensis, Fr. Antonius Clonmacnosensis, Fr. Hugo Duacensis, Fr.
Arthurus Dunensis, and Connerensis, Fr. Terentius Imolacensis, Fr. Patric.
Ardagh, Oliverius Deis Procurator Episco. Medensis, Dr. Joannes Hussy
Procurator Episcop. Ardfertensis, Fr. Joannes Cantwel Abbas, S. Crucis, Dr.
Thadeus Clery Episcop. Rapo. Procurator. Walterus Clonfortensis Congregationis
Secretar.

By the Ecclesiastical Congregation of the Kingdom of Ireland.
WE the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ordinaries, and Prelates of this
Kingdom of Ireland, having met at Clonmacnose propria Motu, on the fourth day
of December, in the year of our Lord God, 1649. taking into our consideration,
among other the Affairs then agitated and determinated for the preservation of
the Kingdom, that many of our Flock are mislead by a vain opinion of Hopes,
that the Commander in Chief of the Rebels Forces, commonly called, the
Parliamentaries, would afford them good Conditions, and that relying thereon,
they suffer utter destruction of Religion, Lives, and Fortunes, if not
prevented. To undeceive them in that their ungrounded expectation, We do hereby
Declare as a most certain Truth, that the Enemies Resolution is, to extirpate
the Catholic Religion, out of all his Majesty's Dominions, as by their several
Covenants does appear, and the Practice wherever their Power does extend, as
is manifested by Cromwell's Letter of the 19th. of October. 1649. to the then
Governor of Ross. His words are: For that which you mention concerning Liberty
of Religion, I meddle not with any man's Conscience, but if by Liberty of
Conscience, you mean a Liberty to exercise the Mass, I judge it best to use
plain dealing, and to let you know, where the Parliament of England have Power,
that will not be allowed of. This Tyrannical Resolution they have put in
execution in Wexford, Drogheda, Ross, and elsewhere. And it is notoriously
known, that by Acts of Parliament, called, The Acts of Subscription, the
Estates of the Inhabitants of this Kingdom are sold, so as there remains now
^o more, but to put the Purchasers in possession, by the power of Forces drawn
out of England. And for the common sort of People, toward whom if they show
any more moderate usage at the present, it is to no other end but for their
private advantage, and for the better support of their Army, intending at the
close of their Conquest (if they can effect the same as God forbid) to root out
the Commons also, and plant this Land with Colonies to be brought hither out of
England, as witness the number they have already sent hence for the Tobacco
Island, and put Enemies in their places.

And in effect this banishment, or other destructions of the common People,
must follow the Resolution of extirpating the Catholic Religion, which is not
to be effected, without the Massacring or Banishment of the Catholic
Inhabitants.

We cannot therefore in our Duty to God, and in discharge of the Care we are
obliged to have, for the preservation of our Flocks, but admonish them, not to
delude and lose themselves with the vain expectation of Conditions to be had
from that merciless Enemy. And consequently we beseech the Gentry, and
Inhabitants, for Gods glory, and their own safety, to the uttermost of their
Power, to Contribute with patience, to the support of the War against that
Enemy, in hope that by the blessing of God, they may be rescued from the
threatened Evils, and in time be permitted to serve God in their Native
Country, and enjoy their Estates, and fruits of their Labors, free from such
heavy Levies, or any other such Taxes, as they bear at present: Admonishing
also, those that are in-listed of the Army, to prosecute constantly according
to each man's charge, the Trust reposed in them, the opposition of the Common
Enemy, in so just a War, as is that they have undertaken for their Religion,
King, and Country, as they expect the blessing of God to fall on their
Actions. And that to avoid Gods heavy judgment, and the indignation of their
Native Country, they neither plunder nor oppress the People, nor suffer any
under their charge, to commit any extortion or oppression, so far as shall lie
in their power to prevent.

Signed by, Hugo Ardmachanus, Fr. Thomas Dublin, Thomas Cashel, Joan* Archiep.
Tuam. Fr. Boetios Elphyn, Fr. Edmundus Laghlinensis and Procurator
Waterfordiensis, Emerus Clogher, Robertus Corcagiensis and Cluanensis, Nicclaus
Fernensis, Edmundus Limericensis, and Procurator Episcopi Ossoriensis,
Franciscus Aladensis, Andreas Finiborensis, Joan. Laonensis, Fr. Oliverus
Dromorensis, Fr. Antonius Clonmacnosensis, Fr. Hugo Duacensis, Fr. Arthurus
Dunensis, and Connerensis, Fr. Terentius Imolacensis, Fr. Patric. Ardagh,
Oliverus Deis Procurator Episco. Medensis, Dr. Joannes Hussy Procurator
Episco. Ardfertensis, Fr. Joannes Cantwel Abbas, S. Crucis, Dr. Thadeus Clery
Episcop. Rapo. Procurator. Walterus Clontfertensis Congregationis Secretar.



But the People weary of the War, the Plague increasing, and ill provided to
endure those Extreamities, Cromwell forced daily upon them, they flocked from
all Places unto him, and lived under Contribution, whilst the Marquess of
Ormond finding it in vain, to qualify the Discontents at Kilkenny, went about
the end of Christmas to the Marquess of Clanrickards, in Connaght, who
consulting together, found nothing effectual to compose the differences, the
Clergy still irritated amongst them; whereupon his Excellency returned to
Kilkenny, where the Agents spent some time in preparing Heads of such
Grievances, as they thought fit to present to the Lord Lieutenant, who called
still upon them to dispatch; But (upon Conference with the gravest of the
Commissioners) they found how groundless all those Slanders were, which they
had believed before they came thither, and so could not agree of any Particular
to complain of; Besides they met with some Disturbance there, for Cromwell (well
knowing how the Marquess' s small Forces were scattered abroad) marched with a
strong Party toward that Town; with which the Agents were so alarmed, that
they would stay no longer there, but desired the Marquess of Ormond to let them
adjourn to Juni, in the County of Clare, The Deputies of the Counties adjourn
to Juni.
which they did; and though they met there, yet they never agreed of any
draught of Grievances to be presented, though they made ill use of their
Meeeting, to propagate the Scandals and Imputations which had been groundlessly
raised, and to inflame the People with the same untruths; Notwithstanding this
Alarm and Danger the Lord Lieutenants Person, and the City were really in, all
the Power and Authority he had, could not in ten days draw 500 Men together, to
resist the Enemy; However the Townsmen appeared ready, and prepared for their
defense, and the Marquess putting all his own Friends and Servants on
Horseback, with which (making a Troop of about 100) he looked with so good a
Countenance upon the Enemy, that he retired; And shortly after the Lord
Lieutenant committed the Charge of the Place, and the Country adjacent, to the
Earl of Castlehaven; and went himself upon a more important Business to
Limerick.

Cromwell (having continued in his Winter Quarters in Munster scarce two months)
finding the Weather prove very favorable in the end of February, his Soldiers
much recovered from the Distempers, which the change of Air had caused in them
at their first coming over, marched out with a Body of 3000 Horse and Foot, and
(having received all necessary Supplies from England) divided his Forces into
two Parties, the one he led, the other was committed to Ireton's care, who
marched away to Carrick, there to reinforce himself by the conjunction of
Colonel Reynolds. 1650.
These Forces were to march into the Enemies Quarters two several ways, (the
better to amuse the Enemy) and to meet together at a Rendezvous near Kilkenny.
Cromwell in his March took in Cahir-Castle, Kiltenan, Goldenbridge, Clogheen,
and Roghil Castles, and seating himself before Callan, joined with the other
part of the Army under Ireton, enforced by the addition of the Forces under
Colonel Reynolds and Colonel Zanckey, which, in their way, had took in Arkenon,
Dundrum, Knoctover, Bullinard, and other Castles. The Forces being joined,
Callan, Cashel, Featherd, Graige, and St. Thomastown, with the Castles and
Garrisons thereabouts, were easily subdued: And Cromwell resolving to besiege
Kilkenny, (knowing it was strong) sent for Huson (Governor of Dublin) to march
speedily to him with all the Forces he could conveniently draw together; which
he did, and (by the way taking in Ballisannon, Kildare, Leighlin, and other
Places) joins with Cromwell's Army near Goram, which was presently taken: From
hence Cromwell with his Army, consisting of 16000 Foot and 6000 Horse, marches
against Kilkenny; upon whose approach, the General Assembly fled to Athlon, and
from whence the Earl of Castlehaven was drawn out with his Forces, by reason
the Sickness raged so, having left Sir Walthar Butler and Major Walsh, with
about 50 Horse and 400 Foot to defend the Place; where a Breach being made, and
assaulted by Cromwell's Soldiers, they were beaten back with the loss of some
Men, and about 600 Arms; though he had it surrendered to him shortly after upon
these terms: 1. To deliver up the City and Castle to him, ( viz. Cromwell) with
all the Arms, Ammunition, and public Store. 2. That the Inhabitants should be
protected in their Persons, Goods, and Estates, from the violence of the
Soldiery, and they that would remove, to have three months after the date of
the Articles. 3. That the Governors, Officers, and Soldiers might march away
with their Bag and Baggage. 4. That the City should pay 2000 pounds to Cromwell.
From hence Cromwell (having well refreshed his Army after the Siege of Kilkenny)
approaches Clonmel, The Siege of Clonmel.
Garrisoned by 2000 Foot and 120 Horse, under the Command of Hugh O Neal, who
behaved himself so discreetly and gallantly in its defense, that Cromwell lost
near 2500 men before it, and had gone away without it, had not the Powder been
spent, which forced the Governor and Soldiers in the night to forsake the
Town, and go to Waterford, leaving the Townsmen to make Conditions for
themselves; which they did, as to the safeguard of their Lives and Estates.
Whilst these things were agitating, the Lord Lieutenant, the Marquis of
Clanrickard, Castlehaven, and the Bishop of Clougher, held a Council at
Baltimore in West-Meath, to consult the security of the Nation; which Cromwell
hearing of, sent Colonel Reynolds and Sir Theophilus Jones, with 2500 Horse,
Foot, and Dragoons, against them, with which they dispersed them, and those
Forces which the Marquis of Clanrickard and the Earl of Castlehaven had brought
out of Connaght to the Relief of Tecrogham, (within 20 miles of Dublin) and
being joined with the Dublin Forces, took in Trim, Balahuse, Finagh, and other
Places. In the time that Clonmel was Besieged, the Bishop of Ross with 4000
Foot and 300 Horse endeavors its Relief, but is overcome by the Lord Broghil
near Bandon-Bridge, and himself taken Prisoner, and hanged in the sight of
Caringdred; which Castle thereupon yielded to the Lord Broghil. In this Hurry,
the Forces in Ulster being (besides) much shaken by reason of several
Interresses, the Nobility, Gentry, and Commanders for the King scattered a
Declaration, that none who would submit to his Authority should suffer either
in Religion, or State; but it prevailed little. During the Leaguer of Clonmel,
absolute Orders were brought to Cromwell from the Parliament for his sudden
return; as also two Expresses from the Council of State to that purpose, which
(after the compleatment of that Siege) he fulfilled, leaving the Kingdom about
the end of May, 1650. having made Colonel Ireton his Deputy.

Here we cannot but take notice, that there were several Precepts by the
Archbishop of Ardmagh and others, to pray for the success of Oliver's Forces;
whilst Dominick Dempsy, a Franciscan, (esteemed a grave and holy man, and
therefore a leading Person) and Long the Jesuit, asserted, that (the King being
out of the Roman Catholic Church) it was not lawful to pray for him
particularly, or publicly in general on any other day than on Good Friday, as
comprehended amongst the Infidels, alias, Jews, Mahometans, Pagans, and
Heretics; and then for the Spiritual welfare of his Soul, not for his Temporal
prosperity.

Though the Parliamentarians, by the Faction and obstinacy of the Irish, who
could not hitherto be induced to make reasonable provision for defense, had
prevailed far, and possessed themselves of many good Places without
considerable opposition, yet there remained a good part of the Kingdom free
from their Power; the whole Province of Connaght was still entire, and the
Cities of Waterford, Limerick, and Galway in possession of the Catholics,
which might be made so strong, as not to fear any strength Ireton could bring
before them, and are so situated for all advantages of Sea, that they might,
being well supplied, maintain a War against the whole Kingdom: they had also
the Forts of Duncannon and Sligo, as also the strong Castles of Caterlough,
Athlone, Charlemont, Carlo, and Neanagh, from whence the Confederates might
bring into the Field twice the number of Men which the Enemy had; so that there
wanted only Unity, Order, and Resolution to preserve themselves; to improve
which, the Marquis of Ormond resolved to begin with Limerick, and if he could
have disposed that City unto a full obedience, and to receive a Garrison, he
made no question not only to fortify it against any attempt of the Enemy, but
under the countenance of it, and by the security of the River Shannon, to
Quarter his Troops, raise Contribution for their support, Discipline his Men,
and, in effect by the Spring so to recruit his Army, that he might not suspect
to prevail against the Enemy wherever he should engage: And to this purpose
he went himself thither from Kilkenny, in January, hoping that the good
resolution of the Bishops of Cloanmacnoise had well prepared the People to
comply with him; but when he came thither, albeit he was received with outward
demonstrations of respect, he found the temper not such as he desired,
whatsoever the Bishops had declared; The Clergy had observed none of those
Directions, nor were any in so much credit as they who behaved themselves quite
contrary to those Determinations. And if no way could be found to allay this
Spirit, all his endeavors he saw would be without any fruit: Hereupon he
resolved to try, whether that part of the Clergy which wished well to the
Kingdom, could use as efficacious means to preserve, as the other, who desired
confusion, did to destroy it: And upon advice with the principal Persons of the
Catholic Nobility, and with the Commissioners of Trust, he did by his Letters
of the 27th. of February, 1649. desire as many of the Catholic Bishops as were
within convenient distance, to meet him at Limerick; which they accordingly did
the 8th. of March following.

When they came thither, he conferred with them in the presence of ^he
Commissioners of Trust with all frankness, upon the distracted and disjoynted
state of Affairs, and freely told them, That without the People would be
brought to have a full confidence in him, and yield perfect obedience to him;
and without the City of Limerick might be persuaded to receive a Garrison, and
obey his Orders, it was not to be hoped that he could be able to do any thing
considerable against the Enemy: He desired them therefore, if they had a mist
rust of him, or a dislike of his Government, that they would as clearly let him
know it; assuring them, that such was his desire of the Peoples preservation,
that there was nothing within his Power consistent with his Duty to the King,
and agreeable with his Honor, that he would not do at their desires for that
end: Withal letting them see, that his continuance with the Name, and not the
Power of the Lord Lieutenant, could bring nothing but ruin upon the Nation, as
well as dishonor on him. So that again he propounded to them in plain terms,
Either that they would procure a due obedience to be yielded to him, or propose
some other way by his quitting the Kingdom, how it might be preserved. After
consultation together, they returned with many expressions of respects and
affection to his Person, and faithfully promised to endeavor all that
obedience he desired; withal presenting (the 13th. of March) to him a Paper of
Advice, which contained, as they said, certain Remedies, for removing the
discontents and disgusts of the People, and for the advancing of his Majesty's
Service: Amongst which they proposed, That a Privy Council might be framed by
the Peers, and other of the Natives of the Kingdom, as well Spiritual as
Temporal, to sit daily with him, and determine all the weighty Affairs of the
Country by their Council; and many other Particulars, concerning the raising
of Men, and conducting the War. To every one of which, his Excellency, from
Limerick, gave them (sitting at Loghreogh) an Answer in writing, amongst which
he told them, That he could not understand how the present distresses of the
Kingdom could proceed from the want of a Privy Council, or how the framing of
such a Council could advantage the management of the War, which by the Articles
of Peace was to be done by the Commissioners of Trust, with whom he did always
communicate all matters of importance; and therefore he could not think it fit
unnecessarily to presume upon doing a thing, for which he had neither Power nor
President, the Nomination of all Persons to be of the Privy Council being
always reserved by the King to himself: Yet rather than he should be wanting in
any thing that was in his power to satisfy the People in, he wished, that the
particular Acts which the Privy Council had heretofore done, and were now
necessary to be done, might be instanced, and as far forth as should appear
necessary and fit, he would qualify Persons, free from just exceptions, with
such. And so answered all their Propositions, that they seemed to be well
satisfied therewith; and thereupon published a Declaration, (dated at Loghreogh
the 28th. of March, 1650.) in which they professed, That they did and would
endeavor to root out of men's hearts all jealousies and finister opinions,
conceived either against his Excellency or the present Government; and that
they entreated him to give them further Instructions, declaring that they were
not deterred from the want of the expected Success in the Affairs of the
Kingdom, but rather animated to give further Onsets, and to try all other
possible ways; and did faithfully promise, that no Industry of Care should be
wanting in them, to receive and execute his Directions.

When the Marquis first proposed to the Commissioners of Trust, that Limerick
and other Places might be Garrisoned, he offered to them the names of three
Persons of the Roman Catholic Religion, and of eminent Quality, Reputation,
and Fortunes, that out of them they might choose one for the Command of
Limerick: But resolving afterward to call this Assembly of Bishops thither,
and to be there himself in Person, he deferred the proceeding further in it,
till then, that with their own advice such a Person might be chosen for that
important Charge, that should be beyond any possibility of a just exception
from that Corporation. Now he took all imaginable pains, and descended to all
the Arts of Persuasion to satisfy those Citizens, who, he perceived, were the
most leading men, of the necessity of their speedy receiving a Governor and a
Garrison, for the preservation of their Interest, and whatsoever could be of
any value with any People: But he was so far from prevailing with them, That
they performed not those outward Civilities and Respects Limerick so far from
complying, as it performed not outward Civility.
to him, which had been in no other Place denied. The Officer who Commanded the
City Guards, neither came to him for Orders, or imparted them to him; no
Officer of the Army, or any other Person, could, without special leave from the
Mayor (which was often very hardly obtained) be admitted to come to his
presence, to receive his Commands and Directions for the resisting and opposing
the Enemy, who at that very time prevailed in the County of Limerick: And to
publish more the contempt they had of the Kings Authority, they committed to
Prison the Lord Viscount Kilmallock, a Catholic Peer of the Realm, and an
Officer of the Army, (the Lord Lieutenant being on the Place) for no other
reason than for Quartering, for one night, some few Horsemen under his Command
(by the Marquis of Ormond's Order) within the Liberties of that City: All this
being done so contrary to the Injunction which the Bishops had published for
the direction of the People, and at a time when they were assembled there. And
when the Marquis of Ormond despaired (their contempts being so high) of
persuading them, to what absolutely concerned their proper Interest, he thought
it not agreeable to the Honor of his Master to remain any longer in the Place,
where such affronts and contempts were put upon his Authority; and yet being
willing still to expect some good effects from the observation and discretion
of the Bishops, who could not but discern what ruin must immediately The
Assembly appointed at Loghreogh.
attend such license and disobedience, he appointed all the said Bishops, and
as many more as could be persuaded to come thither, and the Commissioners, to
meet him at Loghreogh; where, about the 19th. of March, they attended him at
Loghreogh.

When they appeared at Loghreogh, the Marquis represented to their memories
what they had before been themselves witnesses of, and observed at Limerick,
and the neglects he had born there; Desired them to remove those causless
distrusts, which being maliciously infused into the Peoples minds, did slacken,
if not wholely withdraw their obedience from his Majesty's Authority; and
wished them to consider how impossible it was for him, with Honor, or any hope
of success, to contend against a powerful, absolutely obeyed, and plentifully
supplied Enemy; himself under such domestic disadvantages of distrust and
disobedience; and concluded, that if the consequence of the Service could not
induce them to be all of one mind, in putting a Garrison into Limerick; or, if
being all of one mind, they could not induce the City to obedience and
submission to such their determination, he could no longer entertain a hope of
giving any check to the Enemy, and would thereupon consider how otherwise to
dispose of himself. Both the Bishops and Commissioners were really (or at least
seemed so) and entirely convinced of the necessity of erecting that Garrison,
and of putting that City into a better posture of defense than it then appeared
to be in: The Commissioners, in whom that Trust was reposed by the Articles of
Peace, ordered it to be done, and sent two of their own Members ( viz. Sir
Richard Everard Baronet, and Dr. Fennel) with their Order to Limerick, and with
a Letter to the Mayor to conform thereunto; and the Bishops writ to the
Archbishop of Cashel and the Bishop of Limerick (both then at Limerick)
desiring them to use their utmost endeavors to incline the City to submit to
the direction of the Lord Lieutenant, and the Commissioners. And having done
this, they departed to those Places they thought fit to dispose the People (as
they professed) to all acts of conformity and obedience. But the Commissioners
in short time returned from Limerick, without having in any degree prevailed
with them to receive either a Governor or Garrison, or to conform themselves
to any Orders the Lord Lieutenant, or the Commissioners should send to them,
otherwise than as they agreed with their own inclinations: in stead of making
choice of any of those three who were nominated to them for their Governor,
they upon the matter declared, That they would keep that Power in their own
hands; and for receiving of a Garrison, they proposed some particulars, what
men of the Irish Catholics, and what they would not, what course should be
taken for the support of them, and through what hand it should pass, and many
other things, directly contrary to the Articles of Peace which had been with
solemnity proclaimed in that City, and unto which they had professed all
submission.

All this perverseness, obstinacy, and ingratitude, could not yet extinguish the
affections and compassion the Marquis had toward them; and he clearly
discerned, that it proceeded not from the Spirit that was included and confined
within the Walls, but that it was the same that was generally working in other
places: He was well enough satisfied, that they who were most passionately
possessed with it, had no correspondence with the Parliament, nor had a mind to
be subjected to their Power; he was willing therefore to believe, that they had
fancied and imagined to themselves some expedient for their own preservation,
which could not fall within his comprehension; and that they might have
contracted a prejudice to his Person, or to his Religion, which might keep them
from such an union and confidence as they might be reduced unto under some
Catholic, who might be as zealous to preserve his Majesty's Interest, and
recover the Kingdom to his obedience; and he was the more confirmed in this his
apprehension, by revolving the several passages which had happened at his being
at Limerick, during the time that they seemed to pay him all respect when the
Lord Inchiquin had been then with him, toward whom they had observed the
Marquis had a great confidence The Citizens of Limericks animosity against the
Lord Inchiquin.
and friendship, as he well deserved: at which time* some principal Persons of
the City, and with them some of the Bishops, had, under a show of great
confidence and trust, repaired to the Lord. Lieutenant, and declared unto him,
That all that indisposition and waywardness of the People, proceeded from the
prejudice they had against the Lord Inchequin, who had always (they said)
prosecuted the War against them with the most rigor and animosity; and the
Places and Persons which had been most at his devotion, having treacherously
revolted to the Parliament, the People were not confident of him, and jealous,
that the Marquis had too great a confidence in him; so that if he would dismiss
that Lord, and discharge the Troops that yet remained under his Command, of
which, some frequently ran away to the Parliament, not only that City, but the
whole Nation would, as one man, be at his disposal. While these insinuations
were thus proposed to the Lord Lieutenant, other Persons (and those as leading
men) with an equal number of Bishops, applied themselves to the Lord Inchequin,
and told him, That The Citizens of Limerick insinuate to the Lord Inchiquin as
much against the Lord Lieutenant, as before they did against him.
whilst the affairs were conducted by the Marquis of Ormond, they expected no
good fortune; that they looked upon him as not of their Nation, and one so
solicitous for the English Interest, and all Englishmen, that he was nothing
regardful of them and theirs: But that his Lordship was of the most ancient
Extraction of Ireland, and under that notion looked upon with great affection
and reverence by the Irish; and if the Government and Command were exercised by
him, there would be such an Obedience paid to him, that he would in short time
grow strong enough to oppose the Enemy, and recover his Country. When these
two Lords had communicated each to other (as they quickly did) the excellent
Addresses which had been made to them, and agreed together how to draw on, and
encourage the Proposers, that they might discover as much of their purposes as
was possible, they easily found their design was to be rid of them both: And
when they perceived (by the continuance of the same Friendship) that they had
communicated with each other, they less dissembled toward both, but proceeded
with those disrespects which are mentioned before.

The Marquis having sadly considered all this, and that nothing might The
second Assembly at Loghreogh.
remain unattempted by him, that he could possibly imagine might tend in any
degree to the recovery or preservation of the Kingdom, he appointed another
meeting to be at Loghreogh the 25th. of April, and summoned thither all the
Catholic Bishops, as many of the Nobility as could with any security come
thither, the chief Gentlemen of Quality of the Parts adjacent, and several
Officers of the Army; where being met together, he gave them in the first place
an Answer in writing to a Paper he had received from the Archbishop of Tuam,
the first of April, entitled, The Grievances presented by the Congregation of
Prelates, assembled, propria motu, at Cloanmacnoise; in which he made it
evident, how much they were mistaken in the matter of Fact, and that which was
really amiss proceeded from themselves, and their not observing the Orders and
Rules they were bound by, and could not be prevented by him; and consented to
all the good and practicable ways proposed by themselves for remedying the like
for the future. He remembered them of the pains he had taken, of the
Propositions he had made, of the Orders he had given, and of the Neglects,
Disobedience, and Affronts he had received, by which alone the Enemy made that
progress in their Successes: He showed them a Letter he had received lately
from his Master the King, bearing date on the 2d. of February, from Castle
Elizabeth in the Isle of Jersey, in answer to one writ from Kilkenny in
December, in which his Majesty signified his gracious pleasure to him, That in
case of the continuance of that disobedience in the People, and contempt of his
Authority, he should withdraw himself and his Majesty's Authority out of The
Lord Lieutenant had license from the King (on the disobedience of the Irish) to
withdraw.
that Kingdom. Whereupon he told them, (having received so little effect of all
the pains he had taken, and so ill returns for all the affection he had showed
to them) he was resolved to make use speedily of the liberty the King had given
him, as to his own Person, which he found was rendered so unacceptable to the
People; yet if they could propose to him any way how he might deposite the
Kings Authority in such manner, as it might not be exposed to the same affronts
it had received in him, and might be applied to the preservation of the People,
and recovery of the Nation, he would gladly gratify them, and would heartily
wish, that they might receive that happiness by his absence, which they could
not receive in his presence; and to that purpose desired them to consult
seriously and maturely among themselves.

Upon this, all the Bishops, Nobility, and Commissioners of Trust, with the
principal Gentlemen, expressed very much trouble at the resolution the Marquis
had taken, and on the last day of April (from Loghreogh) 1650, made an Address
to him in writing under their several hands, in which, amongst other things,
they told him, That they conceived themselves in duty bound for his better
information of the inclination The Assembly at Loghreogh address to the Lord
Lieutenant, upon his resolves to leave the Kingdom.
of that Nation, humbly to present to him, That however his Excellency might
not have met with a ready concurrence to some Proposals made, for the advancing
his Majesty's Service, occasioned through some misunderstanding in some few
Persons and Places, yet the Country generally, and the Nation in it, as they
had already (by expending their Substance in an extraordinary measure, and
their Lives upon all occasions) abundantly testified their sincere and
irremovable affections, to preserve his Majesty's Rights and Interests entire
to him; so they would for the future, and with like cheerfulness, endeavor to
overcome all difficulties which the Enemies power and success had laid in their
way, and that they who were there met (doubting not but the same was the
general sense of the Nation) would with all care and earnestness endeavor, not
only to conserve in the People such their good Inclinations, but if any Person
or Place should be refractory, or decline that obedience which is due to his
Majesty's Authority, they would contribute their best endeavors to reduce
them, and make them conformable to the same. And after many other specious
professions and protestations of their zeal to obey his Excellency, They humbly
besought him to appoint Commanders in the several Provinces, to whom those of
his Majesty's Subjects (who by the excitement of the Clergy, ready with all
alacrity to undergo, that care should be encouraged to take up Arms) might
repair for the opposing the Power of the Rebels. How respective soever this
Address was, and how solemnly soever it was represented (as neither the one or
the other could be more formal) the Lord Lieutenant was resolved not to be
longer satisfied with those general Declarations of their good desires and
purposes; and therefore the very next day he sent them a Letter, containing
what he would expect from them, which for the more clear manifestation of the
whole Proceedings, shall be here faithfully inserted, and was in these words.
AFter our hearty Commendations, in Answer to your Letter of the last of April,
we think fit to mind you, That upon our communicating unto you his Majesty's
Letter of the 2d. of Febr. we then acquainted you at large with what had passed
at Waterford, (which being by us represented to his Majesty, occasioned his
sending the said Letter) as also, that we found the City of Limerick had taken
example thereby to affront and contemn his Majesty's Authority placed in us,
and from us, by consent of the Representative of the Confederate Catholics at
the conclusion of the Peace, derived to the Commissioners; both which you pass
over with an extenuation of those disobediences, and by attributing them to
some mis-understandings, you seem in a manner to excuse them: Whereas we had
reason to expect, that (suitable to your general professions) you would have
resented the particular deportment of those Places, and proposed unto us how
the Contrivers thereof might be brought to Justice, and the Places reduced to
perfect obedience: For as for your professions of care, and earnestness to
endeavor, not only to conserve in the People the good inclinations you find
in them; but that if any Person or Place shall be refractory, or decline that
perfect obedience due to his Majesty's Authority, you will contribute your best
endeavors to reduce them, and make them conformable to the same, cannot be
evidenced or made good by you, but by applying those your endeavors, where we
give you particular undeniable instances of refractoriness and disobedience; so
there can be no instance thereof more pregnant, nor (if it be persisted in)
more destructive to his Majesty and the Nation, than that of Limerick, to the
immediate reducing whereof, we therefore thought, and do now expect you would
effectually apply your selves. We are well satisfied, that the generality of
the Country and Nation, who have given the proofs you mention of their sincere
affections to preserve his Majesty's Rights entire to him, will persevere
therein, if those upon whose example and advice they very much fix their
resolutions be active and industrious to lead and exhort them thereunto. But we
must withal let you know, that we cannot hope that those their good
affections, and alacrity in defense of his Majesty, and their own Interests,
can be successful, if the City of Limerick, and all other Cities and Towns, be
not in perfect obedience, and immediately be put under a Military Government
for Military matters, and thereby into a condition of defense and offense:
Which to conceal from the People, were, toward them as great a treachery, as
it would be in us a vain rashness, without such obedience first gained, to
attempt the opposing the strength and power of the Rebels. And therefore we
must, and do declare, that as the particular refractoriness of the City of
Waterford, has more than any humane means contributed to all the successes of
the Rebels in those parts, since our being at Waterford: And as the want of a
strong Garrison in Limerick, (which we long since desired might be received
there, but could not prevail) has been the greatest visible means, whereby the
said Rebels have with small or no resistance gained or destroyed the County of
Limerick, and other parts adjacent; so the entire loss of the Kingdom to his
Majesty, and the destruction of the Nation, (which we have no hope to prevent,
but by strongly and presently Garrisoning and Fortifying the said City) must be
imputed to the obstinacy of that City, if it shall perfist therein.

As to those Distrusts and Jealousies of the People, occasioned (as you say)
for want of success in Services, the sense of their sufferings, and their
apprehensions for want of redress of their Grievances: We answer, That both the
want of success, and the sense of their sufferings, whether from the Enemy, or
the Soldier, cannot so reasonably be attributed to any humane Cause, as to the
want of garrisoning the Army in principal Towns and Cities, wherein we cannot
yet prevail, nor ever could, till by the Enemy's lying at one end of a Town, we
were not, without articling and conditioning, permitted to put such Men as we
could then get, in at the other end. For, for want of garrisoning the Army, and
by being forced to quarter it at large, it was not possible to have them
exercised, their Arms kept in order, nor they under necessary discipline;
which, when they were to be brought together, rendered them worse than so many
new raised Men, by how much they had contracted a licentious liberty, and habit
of rapine and disobedience. Nor could we prevent the Fraud in Muster, or
reasonably exact a strict Account from Officers of Men so scattered, who, when
they should be employed upon Service, were forced (or pretending a necessity,
wherein we could not disprove them) to range the Country, to get in the Means
that should enable them to serve. As to their Apprehension, for want of redress
to their Grievances, we understand not what Grievances are thereby meant,
unless those delivered unto us by the Archbishop of Tuam, on the first of
April. For other Grievances, (though we long expected and desired them) we
never saw, save a Paper given unto us on the 13th. of March, at Limerick, which
for the Forgery, false Calumny, and other mis-becoming Passages contained in
it, was (as such) dis-avowed by the Clergy then met; and to those given us on
the first of April, we returned herewith such Answers, as (considering the
generality of them) is possible for us to give.

We have already, with the Advice of the Commissioners, and (as we believe)
with the Approbation of such of the Bishops as were present, appointed the Earl
of Castlehaven to command the Forces in Leimster; and in Munster, with like
Advice and Approbation, we have employed Colonel David Roch to command for a
necessary Expedition; besides, there is always upon the Place, one general
Officer, that will readily receive and employ any, that shall be prevailed with
to take Arms, as is promised; and in case we find fitting Obedience and
Reception from the City of Limerick, we shall in Person be ready to receive and
conduct such Forces in the said Province.

In Ulster, we have, in pursuance to an Agreement made with that Province,
given Commission to the Bishop of Clogher; and in Connaght, the Lord Marquess
of Clanrickard commands the Army.

We know no use to which any Money raised upon the People has been employed,
but to the maintenance of the Forces; if you do, we shall desire to be therein
informed, to the end, that any past mis-application thereof may be examined and
punished, and the like prevented in future.

To conclude, We seriously recommend to your Consideration, the ways of
procuring such Obedience to his Majesty, and his Authority in the general, and
particularly from the City of Limerick, as may enable and encourage us with
Honor, and hope of Success, according to our desire, to use our utmost
industry, and encounter all hazards, for the defense of this Kingdom and
Nation, against the Tyranny that will certainly be exercised upon them, and the
unsupportable Slavery they will be subject unto, if the Rebels prevail. And so
we bid you heartily farewell. For the Archbishops, Nobility, Bishops, the
Commissioners authorized by us, in pursuance of the Articles of Peace, and
others assembled at Loghreogh.

These.

From Loghreogh, May 1. 1650. Your very loving Friend, ORMOND.




Upon the receipt of this Letter, they made another Address to the Marquess,
(in writing) in which they said, They were very far from intending by any
expressions they had used, to excuse that Deportment of the City of Limerick;
nor could any Man (they said) more feelingly than they, resent their personal
Dis-respects toward his Excellency, while he was lately in that City, whereof
they had in their Letters, then ready to be sent by a Committee, employed by
them to that Corporation, taken notice: And they did hope, that they would by
their Deportment, hereafter merit to have it understood, that it proceeds from
ignorance rather than malice; and that concerning the garrisoning of the City,
the Clergy that had met lately there, and the Commissioners of Trust, had
written very effectually to them, and employed two of the Commissioners of
Trust thither, to solicit their compliance to his Excellency, and to represent
to them the danger and prejudice that would ensue their refractoriness: And
though it had not taken that effect with them which was expected, yet they
humbly offered his Excellency, that a second Essay was to be made, and his
Excellency's further positive Commands to be sent thither, whereunto if they
would not listen, they promised in as much as in them lay, that they would in
their respective Degrees and Quality and according to their respective Powers,
so far as should be thought fit and necessary, upon consideration had of what
had been proposed hitherto between his Excellency, the Commissioners of Trust,
and them, concerning the garrisoning of that City, cooperate to reclaim them,
and bring them to a perfect obedience; humbly desiring, that what resolution
soever should be taken by that City, yet that his Excellency would be pleased
not to impute it to any Dis-affection in them, or want of Zeal in the Nation,
to advance his Majesty's Service. And in regard the transacting of that
Business might take up some time, it was humbly desired his Excellency would be
pleased, to apply his immediate Care for the forwarding of the Service, and
settling of Affairs in other Parts of the Kingdom, answerable unto the present
dangers and condition wherein it was, that there might be some visible
opposition to the growing Power of the Enemy. At the same time that they sent
this Address to the Marquess, signed by the Names of the Bishops and
Commissioners, which was the 2d. of May, 1650. they likewise sent the
Archbishop of Tuam, and Sir Lucas Dillon, to Limerick, with as reasonable and
pressing Letters to that Corporation, for receiving a Garrison, and obedience
to the Marquess's Orders.

This demeanor in the Assembly, and all the visible Results of their
Consultation, together with so deep professions of Loyalty to the King, and of
respect to his Lieutenant, prevailed so far with the Marquess, that he again
declined his purpose of quitting the Kingdom, and thereupon dismissed a Frigate,
which he had bought and fitted for his own Transportation; and though the
Archbishop of Tuam and Sir Lucas Dillon returned from Limerick, without that
entire submission from the City which was expected, yet he was willing to make
the best interpretation of their general professions of Duty, and to believe
that they would by degrees be induced to do what they ought; and that he might
be the nearer to them, to encourage any such inclination, he removed to Clare,
12 miles from Limerick, and gave Orders to the Troops, which for convenience of
Quarters were scattered at a greater distance, to be ready to draw to a
Rendezvous. And he was shortly after very reasonably induced to be almost
confident, that the City was well disposed; for having one day (about the 11th.
of June) visited some Troops, which he had assembled within 4 miles of
Limerick, and returning at night to Clare, the next day 2 Aldermen of the City
came to him with this following Letter, from the Mayor of that Corporation. May
it please your Excellency,
THe City Council have given me Command to signify, and humbly to offer to
your Excellency, That it was expected by them, that you would (being so near
the City yesterday,) bestow a Visit upon it, which is no way doubted had been
done by your Excellency, if your greater Affairs had not hindered you from the
same, and yet do expect when those are over, your Excellency will be pleased to
step hither, to settle the Garrison here, the which without your Presence,
cannot be (as is humbly conceived) so well done, or with that expedition, as
our necessity requires, the Particulars whereof we refer to Alderman Piers
Creagh, and Alderman John Bourk, their Relation, to whom we desire Credence may
be given by your Excellency, and humbly to believe that I will never fail to be

Limerick, 12 June, 1650. Your Excellency's most humble Servant, For his
Excellency the Lord Lieutenant General, and General Governor of Ireland. John
Creagh, Mayor of Limerick.




This Letter might very well have raised an expectation and assurance, that
there would be no more scruples of receiving a Garrison; yet the Aldermen who
brought it, made such pauses in answering some necessary Questions, that the
Marquess returned them the same night with this Answer. AFter our hearty
Commendations, We have received your Letter of this days date, by the
Conveyance of Alderman Piers Creagh, and John Bourk, and heard what John Bourk
and the other had to say, as from that Corporation. In Answer whereunto, we
imparted some Particulars unto them, wherein we expected satisfaction, which if
you send us to the Rendezvous to morrow, (where we intend to be) we shall visit
that City, and employ our utmost Endeavors in settling the Garrison necessarily
desired there, both for the defense and satisfaction of that City. And so we
bid you heartily farewell.

From Clare, June 12. 1650. To our very loving Friend the Mayor of Limerick.
These. Your loving Friend, ORMOND.




The Particulars he proposed to them were, (1.) To be received in like manner,
and with such respect, as the Lord Lieutenants heretofore had always been. (2.)
To have Command of the Guard, giving the Word and Orders in the City. (3.) That
there might be Quarter provided within the City, for such Guards of Honse and
Foot as he should carry in, which should be part of the Garrison, and whereof a
List should be given at the Rendezvous. The next day when the Marquess came to
the Rendezvous, two Aldermen met him there, and informed him, that the City had
consented to all that he had proposed to them, except only the admittance of
his Guards, which they were unwilling to do; whereupon he sent Messengers back
with this Answer, That he intended not the drawing in of his Guards, out of any
mistrust he had of the loyalty of the Magistrates of that City to his Majesty,
or of their affection to himself, but for the dignity of the Place he held, and
to prevent any popular Tumult that might be raised by desperate interested
Persons against him, or the Civil Government of that City, whereunto he had
cause to fear, some loose People might by false and frivolous suggestions be
too easily instigated. And to take away all possibility of suspicion from the
most jealous, he told them, The Guards he meant to take with him, should
consist but of 100 Foot and 50 Horse, and even those too to be of their own
Religion, and such as having been constantly of their Confederacy, were
interessed in all the Benefits of the Articles of Peace. And so, not imagining
that they could refuse so reasonable an Overture, he went toward the City; but
when he came very near the Gates, the same Aldermen came again to him, to let
him know, That there was a Tumult raised in the City by a Franciscan Friar,
called Father Wolf, and some others, against his coming into the Town, and
Wolf's Insurrection.
in opposition to the desires and intentions of the Mayor, and the principal
Citizens, and therefore dissuaded his Excellency's going thither, until the
Tumult should be quieted. So that the Lord Lieutenant was compelled, with that
Affront, to return, and rested that night at Shanbuoly, three miles from the
City, from whence he writ to them the sense he had of the Indignity offered
him, And wished them to consider, not only by what Power they had been made a
Corporation first, and by whose Protection they had since flourished, but also
what solid Foundation of safety (other than by receiving the defense he had
offered them) was or could be proposed to them, by the present Disturbers of
their Quiet: And desired their present Answer, That in case he might be
encouraged to proceed in the way he had laid down, of serving the King, and
preserving that City from the Tyranny of the Rebels, he might immediately apply
himself thereunto, or failing in his Desires therein, he might apply himself,
and the Forces he had gathered for that purpose, to some other Service. But
neither this, nor all he could do, upon subsequent Treaties and Overtures,
moving from themselves, could not at all prevail with them, No! not his offer
of putting himself into the City, and running the Fortune of it, when Ireton
was encamped before it: But they Limerick still refractory and contemptious.
continually multiplied and repeated their Affronts toward him, with all
imaginable Circumstances of Contempt; and in the end, (that we may have no more
occasion of mentioning the seditious Carriage of this unfortunate City) broke
open his Trunks of Papers, which he had left there, seized upon the Stores of
Corn laid up there for the supply of the Army, when he believed that Place
would have been obedient to him, and some Corn belonging to himself, and
disposed of all according to their own pleasure, and received some Troops of
Horse into the City, which contrary to the Marquess's Order left the Army, and
with those Troops levied and raised Contribution in the Country adjacent, upon
those who had honestly paid the same for the use of the Army, according to
those Orders which they were to obey. And when the Marquess sent to the Mayor,
to deliver the Officer of the said Regiment as a Prisoner, to the Guard
appointed to receive him, he could receive no other Answer, (and that not in a
week) than that the Government of that City was committed to Major General Hugh
O Neal, and therefore he the Mayor would not meddle therein. And when the like
Orders were sent by the Marquess to Hugh O Neal, he returned Answer, That he
was only a Cipher, and not suffered to act any thing, but what the Mayor and
Council thought fit. So that, in truth, that City was no less in Rebellion to
the King, than the Army under Ireton was, though it did for a time resist that
Army, and could never have been subdued by it, if it had ever been in that
obedience to the King, as by their obligation it ought to have been, and
therefore must have less peace of Conscience to support them, in the Calamities
they have since undergone.

In the Letter formerly inserted from the Marquess, of the first of May, it is
said, That in pursuance of a former Agreement, he had granted a Commission to
the Bishop of Clogher, for the Command of the Province of Ulster; It will be
therefore necessary to express what that Agreement was, and the Proceedings
thereupon: Amongst the Articles which had been made with General Owen O Neal,
it was provided, that in case of the said O Neal's death, or removal by
Advancement, or otherwise, before any settlement in Parliament, to which all
the Articles of Peace related, that the Nobility and Gentry of the Province of
Ulster, should have Power to name one to the Lord Lieutenant, or chief Governor
for his Majesty, to Command in the place of the said O Neal; and the said
Command, was to be conferred accordingly upon the Person so to be named, and
according to his Power: Owen O Neal being dead, the Nobility, Bishops, and
Principal Gentry of that Province, made choice of the Bishop of Clogher to
succeed him in the Charge, and having signified such their Election under their
hands to the Lord Lieutenant, the first of April, he granted such a Commission
to him as he was obliged to do.

James Marquess of Ormond, the Earl of Ormond and Ossory, Vicount Thurles, Lord
Baron of Archlo, Lord Lieutenant General, and General Governor of the Kingdom
of Ireland, Chancellor of the University of Dublin, and Knight of the most
Noble Order of the Garter. To our Trusty and Well-beloved Bishop, Ever Mac
Mahon.
ORMOND.
WHereas upon the Treaty with General Owen O Neal, deceased, it was (amongst
other Particulars) Concluded and Agreed upon, that in case of death or removal
of him, such other General or Commander in Chief, should be authorized by
Commission from us, to Command his Majesty's Forces of the Province of Ulster,
Natives of the Kingdom; as should be by general consent of the Gentry of that
Province elected, and made choice of for the same. And whereas in a general
Meeting lately held by the Gentry for that purpose, it was agreed upon, and so
represented unto us, that you should exercise that Command over the said
Forces. We therefore upon the Consideration thereof, and of the Care, Judgment,
Valor and Expedience, in Martial Affairs, as also of the readiness and good
affections of you, to do his Majesty's Service, have nominated and appointed,
and we do hereby nominate and appoint you, the said Bishop Ever Mac Mahon, to
be General of all his Majesty's said Forces, of Horse, and Foot, of the
Province of Ulster, Natives of the Kingdom. Giving thereby unto you, the said
Bishop Ever Mac Mahon, full Power and Authority, to take the said Charge and
Employment upon you, and the said Forces, and every of them, to Lead and
Command according to the use and discipline of War, and such further Order and
Instructions, as you shall from time to time receive from us, or other his
Majesty's chief Governor or Governors of this Kingdom, the time being, in that
behalf, willing and hereby requiring all the Officers, Troopers, and Soldiers,
of the said Forces, to obey you, as their General, and to be at, and perform
your Commands, as they shall issue unto them upon all occasions of his
Majesty's Service, as they will answer the contrary.

In witness whereof, we have Signed this our Commission, and caused our Seal of
Arms to be thereunto affixed, at Loghreogh, the first day of April, 1650.


In execution of which, the Bishop with great activity and courage proceeded,
in infesting the English Garrisons and Army in that Province, as much as was in
his Power; And having an Army, consisting of about 5000 Horse and Foot, about
the 20th. of June, 1650. (when the Lord Lieutenant himself could not draw 1000
men together, or keep them, if together the space of 48 hours) he encountered
not far from Londonderry, with Sir Charles Coot, who Commanded the Parliaments
Forces in Chief in that Quarter, and was then inferior in Foot to the Bishop,
though otherwise he had a great advantage of him, by having near treble The
Bishop of Clogher defeated. His Character.
the number of Horse; Notwithstanding which inequality, the Irish (for a while)
behaved themselves handsomely, but in the end, were totally defeated; so that
the Bishop was compelled after he saw the day was irrecoverably lost, to quit
the Field with a small party of Horse; The next day in his flight, he had the
misfortune near Eniskelin, to meet with the Governor, Major King of that Town,
in the Head of a Party, too strong for him, against which however, the Bishop
defended himself with notable courage, though after he had received many
wounds, he was taken Prisoner, and soon after, by the positive Order of Sir
Charles Coot (whom within less then a year, he had relieved, when in great
extremity) hanged. This was a most happy Victory for the Parliament, in that
3000 of the Rebels were there slain, all mere Irish, out of an opinion they
could not prosper, as long as they had any English joined with them, and for
that end, had thoroughly purged their Army, which (being styled by them, the
Confident Victorious Army of the North) had a full return of Gods Vengeance,
they being the first Incendiaries and Actors in those barbarous Cruelties,
which ensued their Insurrection: This was the unfortunate end of that unhappy
Prelate, of whom since he bore so great a Part in the Troubles of Ireland, and
was much superior in Parts, to any man of that Party, it will not be
impertinent or uncharitable to mention some Passages of his Life, that thereby
his nature and disposition may be the better collected, and indeed the spirit
and temper of mind, which those kind of men were possessed with, who had the
greatest abilities to do hurt. Some few years before the Rebellion, this Ever
Mac Mahon, being then an Arch Priest, and residing for the most part, in or
near Dublin, repaired (as you have heard) to a Prime Instrument of State, and
discovered to him the Contrivances abroad, in reference to bring Troubles upon
that Kingdom, who being thereupon Pardoned, still (as any thing of that nature
proceeded) informed the State thereof: And though (according to the formality
of Law) he should have sued out his Pardon, yet that he might still be confided
in by the Confederates, (who knew not who the Discoverer was) he merely trusted
to the Kings Mercy and Clemency, and through the Government of the Earl of
Strafford, he proved faithful to the Crown. From the beginning of this
Rebellion, his Power was very great with those that were opposite to any
Reconciliation, upon the first and 2 Conclusion of Peacy by the Confederate
Catholics, continuing firm to that Party which followed Owen O Neal, or rather
Governed Owen O Neal, who commanded that Party; and over and above those
demands which concerned Religion, (to which they seemed to adhere with more
then ordinary zeal, and thereby drew a dependency of that Clergy to them,) they
insisted upon the Restitution of the great Estates in Ulster, which was not in
the Power of the Crown to make, without violation of several Acts of
Parliament, and defeating many descents and purchases, which had passed without
any interruption or claim for the space of 150 years. This impossible
expectation kept both Owen O Neal, and the Bishop of Clogher, from concurring
with the Confederate Catholics, in the Peace they made with his Majesty, 1648.
and the Animosity they contracted against the Confederates, inclined them to
relieve Londonderry, when (as is remembered before) it was even ready to be
reduced by his Majesty's Forces, rather then to submit to the Peace made by
them with the Lord Lieutenant: To whose Divisions, the State of England (says
Rely Archbishop of Armagh) ows their present Possession of Ireland, and
therefore infers that that Party of the Irish Natives, ought to be not only on
that account Favored and Trusted, but because also, they never had affection
for the King or his Family: Yet after they had found it necessary to make that
agreement with the Marquess, in 1649. (being neglected by the Parliament) it
must be acknowledged, that the Bishop performed and observed it very justly,
(as he was punctual in what he promised) and applied himself with all dexterity
and industry to the advancement of his Majesty's Interest; so that during his
time, he restrained the Clergy from making any Acts, which might discourage the
People from their Obedience to the Kings Authority. And the Duke of Ormond
acknowledges, that for these 20 years he had to do with the Irish Bishops, he
never found any of them, either to speak the Truth, or to perform their Promise
to him, only the Bishop of Clogher excepted, who during the little time he
lived after his submission to the Peace, and Commission received from him, he
could not charge. And therefore, how inconvenient soever his Service had been
to the Peace and Happiness of that Nation, his Death was very unseasonable*

Upon the news of the Bishop of Clogher's defeat, the 26 of June, the Lady
Fitzgarret (after a well-regulated defense) surrendered up her Castle of
Tecrochan, to Colonel Reynolds, and Colonel Huetson (who had taken in
Kilmallock, Harristown, Naas, Ballymole, Rabridge, Tallo, Athy, Maryborrough,
Dermots Castle, besides the Places mentioned before.) And on the 19th. of
August, followed the surrender of Carlow, (which, by the care of Ireton,
together with Waterford, and Duncannon, had since the beginning of June, been
close blocked up) which Preston understanding, surrendered also Waterford
within few days, on Conditions, which brought with it the delivery of the
strong Fort of Duncannon: about the same time, Charlemont and Caterlagh, were
surrendered to Sir Charles Coot, and Colonel Venables, after they had took in
Culmore, Londonderry, Eniskillen, (which was delivered by Sir George Monro, to
Sir Charles Coot, for 500 l. though a little before, he had received 1200 l.
from the Marquess of Clanrickard, for to secure it,) Colrain, also Ardmach,
Carrickfergus, Knockfergus, Belfast, Cloughouter, Castle Jordon, Carlingford,
Margrave, Monaghan, Liskelaghan. In the mean time, Colonel Henry Ingolsby, (who
was sent to block up Limerick at a distance) overcame 3000 Rebels coming to its
Relief, whereof 900 were slain, the rest routed and taken Prisoners. In August,
the Lord Inchequin (gathering Forces in Kerry) was disturbed by Colonel Phaer,
who in his return thence, took in the Castle of Kilmurry, and thence went
against the Lords, Roch and Muskery, who headed the Rebels in the West. The
Army having refresht it self at Waterford, Ireton from thence intended for
Limerick, yet wanting Provision for such a Siege, takes his Journey through the
County of Wicklow, which afforded him 1600 Cows, besides Sheep, and other
Provisions; From thence Sir Hardress Waller, with an equal share of the Booty,
was sent with a considerable Force to straighten Limerick, (who in his way near
Limerick, took in Bally-Glaughan, Bally-Cubbain, and Garrygaglain, three strong
Castles) whilst Ireton, and Sir Charles Coot, (joining Forces) appeared before
Athlone, to try if they could gain that Garrison; but finding the Bridge broke,
and the Town on this side burnt, Sir Charles Coot staid there to straighten it,
whilst Ireton taking two Castles in Mac Colcohe's Country, and the Burr, (which
the Enemy had left and burnt) presently seated himself before Limerick, where
he had certain Intelligence, that the Marquess of Clanrickard (who upon notice
of the Enemies being at Athlone, marched with considerable Forces toward its
Relief, if any thing should have been attempted) had retaken the two Castles,
and laid Siege to the Burr, to whose Relief Colonel Axtell, Governor at
Kilkenny, (having made a conjunction at Rocrea, with the Wexford and Tipperary
Forces) resolutely marched; whereupon the Marquess of Clanrickard's Forces
under their chief Commander, (he being gone with the other part of his Army
toward Limerick) retreated to Meleake Island, (a strong Fastness) but were
beaten thence the 25. of October, with the loss of near 1500 Men, 200 Horse,
Wagons, and Baggage: Upon this success, the Irish quitted all their adjacent
Garrisons, and Ireton (the Winter coming hard on) drew off from Limerick,
(having settled the Garrisons round about it) with about 1200 Men, and took in
Neanagh, (a strong Castle) in Low Ormond, upon whose surrender, Castleton and
Dromaneer, yielded also, whence (endeavoring to gain Killalough Pass, though
without effect) he went to his Winter Quarters about the 10th. of November, at
Kilkenny. To provide for whom, and the Forces in Ireland, the Parliament was at
a great stand, (the Prosecution of the War in Scotland, having exercised the
uttermost Force they could raise) so as they now began to cast about, which way
might be most likely to disburthen themselves of some part of that Charge; And
for this purpose, they appointed Commissioners to be sent into Ireland, which
were four Members of Parliament, Mr. Corbet, Colonel Ludlow, Colonel Jones, and
Mr. Weaver; The main Errant they went upon, was, to find out some means in that
Kingdom, for the raising of certain sums of Money yearly, toward the
maintenance of the Army; These were designed about the beginning of October,
and were to be in readiness to imoark at Milford-Haven, by the midst of
December, 1650.

But to return to the Marquess of Ormond, (whose endeavors could not work the
Confederates to any reasonable resistance, though they saw their Cities and
Towns won on every side,) who toward the end of July, received a Letter
subscribed by two Persons, who Styled themselves Archbishops of Dublin and Tuam
in these words. May it please your Excellency.
THis Nation (become of late the Fable and Reproach of Christianity) is brought
to a sad Condition, notwithstanding the frequent and laborious Meetings and
Consultations of Prelates; we find jealousies and fears deep in the hearts of
men, thorns hard to be plucked out; we see most men contributing to the Enemy,
and rendering their Persons and Substance useful to his malice, and destructive
to Religion, and the Kings Interests: This Kind of men (if not timely
prevented) will betray ir-remediably themselves and us. We find no Stock or
Subsistence ordered for maintaining the Soldiery, nor is there an Army any way
considerable in the Kingdom, to recover what is lost, or defend what we hold;
So, as humanely speaking, if God will not be pleased, for his Mercies sake, to
take off from us the heavy Judgment of his Anger, we are fair for losing Sacred
Religion, the Kings Authority, and Ireland; The four Archbishops, to acquit
their Consciencies in the eyes of God, have resolved to meet at Jamestown about
the 6th. day of the next month, and The Confederate Clergies Resolution, to
meet at Jamestown.
to bring along as many of the Suffragans, as may repair thither with safety.
The end of this Consultation is, to do what in us lies for the amendment of all
Errors, and the recovery of this afflicted People; if your Excellency shall
think fit in your Wisdom, to send one or more Persons to make Proposals for the
safety of the Nation, we shall not want willingness to prepare a good Answer,
nor will we despair of the Blessings of God, and of his Powerful Influence, to
be upon our Intentions in that Place: Even so we conclude, remaining,

Your Excellencies most humble Servants, Fra. Tho. Dub. Joh. Archbishop Tuamen.
24. July 1650. For his Excellency the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.



Whosoever reads this Summons or Intimation, will believe it to be Satis pro
Imperio; and that such a Direction, To send one or more Persons to make
Proposals unto them, for the safety of the Nation; and such a negligent
expression, That we shall not want willingness to prepare a good Answer, could
not proceed but from a Superior to an Inferior Dependant: However as the
Marquess knew it would be to no purpose to inhibite their Meeting, so he
thought fit to write to them in this manner. AFter our hearty Commendations, we
received yours of the 24th. of The Lord Lieutenants Reply to the Clergies
insolent Letter.
July, on the first of this month, and do, with much grief acknowledge, that
this Nation is brought into a sad Condition, and that by such means, as when it
shall be known abroad, and by story be delivered to Posterity, will indeed be
thought a Fable; For it will seem incredible* that any Nation should so madly
affect, and violently pursue the Ways leading to their own Destruction, as this
People will appear to have done; And that, after the certain ruin they were
running into, as evidently and frequently discovered unto those, that in all
times and upon all occasions, have had Power to compel or persuade them to
whatever they thought fit; and it will be less credible, when it shall be
declared, as in truth it will be, that the Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal
Interest, and Safety, even of those that had this Power, and that have been
thus forewarned, did consist in making use of it to reclaim the People, and
direct them into the ways of Preservation. To be plain, it cannot be denied,
but the Disobedience we have met with, (which we at large declared unto many of
you, who with diverse others of the Nobility and Gentry, were assembled at
Loghreogh, in April last) were the certain ready ways to the Destruction of
this Nation, as by our Letters of the first of May, to that Assembly, we made
apparent. Ancient and late experience has made evident, what Power those of
your Function have had, to draw the People of this Nation to what they thought
fit; whether your Lordships have been convinced that the Obedience which we
desired, should be given to his Majesty's Authority, in us, pursuant to the
Articles of Peace, was the way to preserve the Nation, we know not; or whether
your Lordships have made use of all the means at other times, and upon other
occasions, exercised by you, to procure this necessary Obedience, we shall not
now determine: Sure we are* that since the said Assembly, not only Limerick
has persisted in the like Disobedience, for want of due Compliance from those
Places, but principally from Limerick, it has been impossible for us to raise
or employ an Army against the Rebels, for to attempt it any where on the other
side of the Shannon; but near Limerick, and without the absolute command of
that City to secure it, could be no other then the certain Ruin of the Design,
in the very beginning of it, the Rebels Power being such, as to dissipate with
ease, the foundation that should be laid there; and to have done it on the
other side of the Shannon, was impossible, since the groundwork of the Army
must be raised and supported from thence, which while it was in forming, would
have exhausted all the substance of those Parts, and not have effected the
work, for want of such an Army, (which with Gods assistance) might certainly
have been raised long since, if Limerick had obeyed our Orders. The Rebels have
without any considerable Resistance from abroad, taken in Clonmel, Tecroghan,
Catherlagh, and reduced Waterford, and Duncannon, to great, and we fear
irrecoverable Distress; The loss of these Places, and the want of any visible
Power to protect them, have doubtlesly induced many to contribute their
Substance, and personal assistance to the Rebels; from which, whither they
might have been withheld by Church censures, we know not, but have not heard
of any such which issued against them; and lastly, for want of such an Army,
the Rebels have taken to themselves the Contribution, which might considerably
have assisted to support an Army, and preserve the Kingdom. If therefore the
end of your Consultation at Jamestown, be to acquit your Consciencies in the
eyes of God, the amendment of all Errors, and the recovery of this afflicted
People, as by the Letter, giving us notice of your Meeting, is professed, we
have endeavored briefly to show, that the spring of our past losses, and
approaching Ruin, arises from Disobediencies, and it will not be heard to
show, that the spring of those Disobediencies arises from the Forgeries
invented, the Calumnies spread against the Government, and the incitement of
the People to Rebellion, by very many of the Clergy. That these are Errors
frequently practiced, and fit for amendment, is no more to be doubted, than
without they be amended, the affection of the People will continue, and (as it
is to be feared) end in their utter Destruction; which if prevented, by what
your Consultation will produce, the happy effect of your Meeting will be
acknowledged, without questioning the Authority by which you meet, or expect
Proposals from us, which other then what we have formerly, and now by this our
Letter made, we hold not necessary. And so we bid your Lordships heartily
farewell. From Roscommon, the 2d. of August, 1650.

To our very good Lords, the Archbishops, and Bishops, met at Jamestown. Your
Lordships very loving Friend, ORMOND.




Upon the Receipt of this Letter the several Bishops who met at Jamestown, sent
the Bishop of Dromore, and Doctor Charles Kelly, to the Lord Lieutenant with
this Letter of Credit. May it please your Excellency.
WE received your Letter of the second Current, where to our grief The Clergies
Answer.
and admiration, we saw some expressions, that seem meant for casting a blame
upon us of the present sad Condition of the Kingdom, which we hope to Answer to
the satisfaction of your Excellency, and the whole Nation; In the mean time we
permit this Protestation, as we are Christian Catholic Prelates, that we have
done our Endeavors with all Earnestness and Candor, for taking away from the
hearts of the People, all Jealousies and Diffidencies, that were conceived the
occasion of so many disasters that befell the Nation: And that in all occasions,
our Actions and Co-operations were ready to accompany all your Excellencies
Designs, for the preservation of all his Majesty's Interests in this Kingdom;
whose State being in the present desperate Condition, we thought it our Duty to
offer unto your Excellency our sense, of the only possibility we could devise
for its Preservation; And that by the Intervention and Expression of my Lord of
Dromore, and Doctor Charles Kelly, Dean of Tuam, who shall clearly deliver unto
your Excellency, our thoughts and good intentions, as to this effect: Praying
your Excellency to give full Credit, to what they will declare in our Names in
this Business, which will be still owned as our Command laid upon them, and the
Declaration of the sincere hearts of

Your Excellencies most humble Servants, H. Ardmagh, Jo. Archiep. Tuam, Jo.
Rapotensis, Nico. Fernensis and Procurator Arch. Dublin, Eug. Kilmore, Walt.
Clonfert and Procurator Leghlin, etc.
Jamestown 10. Aug. 1650.



When ( viz. the 12. of the same) the two Persons had delivered their
Credential Letter to the Lord Lieutenant, he wished them, in regard of the
importance of the Matter they were instructed with, to set down what they had
in Command in Writing; whereupon they presented him the 13th. with this
following Letter. May it please your Excellency.
WE being entrusted by the Clergy met at Jamestown, to deliver a The Bishop of
Dromore, and Doctor Kelly's Negotiation with the Lord Lieutenant.
Message unto your Excellency, importing their advice, what the only means is,
as they conceive, that may serve to free the Nation from the sad Condition,
whereunto it is reduced at present, do in obedience to your Excellencies
Commands, signified for giving in the Substance of the said Message in Writing,
humbly present the same as follows. That whereas they doubt not your
Excellency has labored by other hands, to bring the best Aids that possibly
could be had from abroad, for the Relief of this gasping Nation, yet finding
now in their Consciencies no other expedient Remedy for the preservation
thereof, and of his Majesty's Interests therein, more prevalent then your
Excellencies speedy repair to his Majesty, for preventing the Ruin and
Dissolution of all, and leaving the Kings Authority in the hands of some Person
or Persons faithful to his Majesty, and trusty to the Nation, and such as the
affection and confidence of the People will follow, by which the Rage and Fury
of the Enemy may receive Interruption; They humbly offer this important Matter,
of the Safety or Destruction of this Nation, and the Kings Interest, to your
Wisdom and Consideration, hoping the Kingdom by your Excellencies Presence with
his Majesty, and intrusting safely the Kings Authority, (as above) may with
Gods blessing, hold out until relieved with Supplies from his Majesty; The
Prelates will in the mean time, do what lies in their Power to assist the
Person or Persons so entrusted. The great Trust his Majesty does repose in your
Excellency, the vast Interest in Fortune, Alliance, and Kindred, you have in
this Nation, and your experience in the management of Affairs of greatest
Consequence, will, (we doubt not) added to other the Reasons proposed by us,
induce you to embrace this Advice, as proceeding from our pious Intentions,
that look only on the preservation of the Catholic Religion, the support of
his Majesty's Authority, and the Estates, Liberties, and Fortunes, of his
Subjects of this Kingdom, which we humbly offer, as

Your Excellencies most humble Servants, Fr. Oliver Dromore, Charles Kelly.
Aug. 13th. 1650.



Though the Marquess did not expect, that the Meeting of the Bishops and Clergy
in that manner at Jamestown, would have produced any better effect, than their
former Meetings in other Places had done, yet he could not imagine, that their
Presumption would have been so great, as it appeared by this Message to be. And
when he communicated it to the Commissioners of Trust, they were no less
seemingly scandalized at it, and believed, that upon serious Conference with
the Bishops, they should be able to reform their Understandings and their
Wills, and therefore desired the Marquess, that instead of sending a particular
Answer to the Matter of the Message, he would write to them, To give him a
Meeting at Loghreogh, The Message from the Bishops being justly resented by the
Lord Lieutenant, he writes to them to meet him at Loghreoh, but they augment
their Contempts.
on the 26th. of the same month, to the end, that upon a free Conference, they
might be induced to understand how pernicious a thing they had advised, in
order to their own security. And the Bishop of Dromore, and Dr. Kelly, returned
with this Proposition, and the Marquess, making no doubt of their Compliance,
so far as to meet at the Place appointed, went thither at the day assigned; but
they, instead of meeting him themselves, sent their Bishops of Cork and
Clonfert, (no otherwise entrusted then) to receive his Answer to the
Proposition they had made, for his leaving the Kingdom: To which, when he saw
he could not draw them to a Conference, he, the 31. of August, returned, That
they might well remember, that upon the Disobediences he had formerly met with,
he had obtained leave from his Majesty to have departed the Kingdom, and that
if themselves the Bishops, Nobility and Gentry, met together, had not in April
last, in Writing and Discourse, given him assurance, that they not only desired
his stay, but would endeavor to procure such obedience to him, as might enable
him with hope of success to have gone on in the War, he would have made use of
the liberty given unto him by his Majesty, to have freed himself from the
vexation which he had since endured, and the dishonor which he foresaw he
should be subject to for want of Power, without which (as he then told them) he
should be able to do nothing considerable for the King or the Nation: That he
had transmitted those Assurances to his Majesty, with his own resolution to
attend the Effects: That he plainly observed, that the Division was great in
the Nation under his Government, yet it would be greater upon his removal, of
which, in a free Conference, he would have given them such pregnant Evidence,
as he held it not fit to declare to them by writing. For these and other
Reasons he told them, That unless he was forced by in-evitable necessity, he
was not willing to remove out of the Kingdom, and desired them to use all means
within their Power, to dispose the People to that Dutifulness and Obedience
that became them.

This wrought nothing on the Temper of those Men, who were resolved not to be
satisfied with any thing the Marquess could say unto them: Insomuch that
(within few days after they had received his Answer from Loghreogh, at the time
when the Parliamentarians were strong in the Field, and had then passed the
Shannon, if they had not been restrained by The Bishops of Jamestown (instead
of what might have been offered with Respect to the Lord Lieutenant) insolently
published an Excommunication.
the few Troops the Marquess still kept on foot) they published an
Excommunication against all those, of what Quality soever, who should feed,
help, or adhere unto the Lord Lieutenant; in which, this Circumstance is
observable, That though they did not publish this Excommunication until the
15th. of September, it was enacted in their Assembly at Jamestown the 12th. of
August, which was within two days after they had sent the Bishop of Dromore,
and Dr. Kelly, to persuade the Marquess to leave the Kingdom, and the day
before they delivered their Message: So that they thought any thing that the
Lord Lieutenant should return to them, would be impertinent to the Matter in
hand; or if they were not so delighted with their own Proceedings, that they
have themselves carefully published to the World in Print, would it be
believed, that Persons, who in the least degree pretended the care of the
Peoples welfare and security, could at such a time, when a potent Enemy was in
the Field, set all Men loose from all Government, Civil and Martial, and not
direct them whom they should follow and obey: For if it be said, That they were
advised to return to their Association, and until a General Assembly of the
Nation could be conveniently called, unanimously to serve against the common
Enemy, since no Persons were named or appointed to conduct them, it must be
acknowledged, that they were left without any direction at all, to the rage and
fury of those, who intended nothing but their Reduction.

Together with their Excommunication, they published, in the head A malicious
Declaration from the Bishops of Jamestown, with Animadversions thereupon.
of the Army, a Declaration, entitled, A Declaration of the Archibishops,
Bishops, and other Prelates and Dignitaries of the Regular and Secular Clergy
of the Kingdom of Ireland, against the continuance of his Majesty's Authority
in the Marquess of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, for the mis-government
of the Subjects, and the ill conduct of his Majesty's Army, and violation of
the Articles of Peace.

If the Archbishops, Bishops, and Secular and Regular Clergy of Ireland, will
take upon them to declare against the King's Authority, where his Majesty has
placed it, and will make themselves Judges of his supreme Minister, for the
government of the Subjects, and the ill conduct of his Majesty's Army, they
assume an Authority to themselves, that no other Christian Clergy ever
pretended, and sufficiently declare to the King, how far they are from being
Subjects, or intending to pay him any Obedience, longer than they are governed
in such Manner, and by such Persons, as they think fit to be pleased with. If
the Marquess of Ormond had mis-govern'd the People, and conducted his Majesty's
Army amiss, the Clergy are not competent Judges of the one or the other. And
for the violation of the Articles of Peace, the Commissioners, nominated and
appointed to provide for the due execution of them, were the only Persons who
could determine and remedy such Violation, and who well knew there was no cause
for their complaint. But on the other hand, (as has been before mentioned)
these Men obstructed that concurrence and obedience in the People, without
which those Articles could not be observed, or the security of the People
provided for.

The Preface of that Declaration (according to their usual method) justified
and magnified their Piety and Virtue, in the beginning and carrying on the War,
extolled their Duty and Affection to their King, in submitting to him, and
returning to their Allegiance, when they said, they could have better, or as
good Conditions from the Parliament of England, intimated what a vast sum of
Money they had provided, near half a Million of English pounds, besides several
Magazines of Corn, with a fair Train of Artillery, great quantity of Powder,
Match, Ammunition, with other Materials for carrying on the War, and many other
Particulars of that nature, the monstrous untruths whereof does sufficiently
appear, in what has been said before. The Marquess having been forced to
borrow those little sums of Money, out of the Pockets of his Friends, (and to
spend all that he raised upon the sail of a good quantity of his own Land; for
the support of his Wife and Children) to enable the Army to march, which was
not then (whatever has been since) re-paid to him. And the Magazines of Corn
and Ammunition, and other Materials for War, being so absolutely un-furnished,
that it was not possible for him to reduce those small Forts of Maryburrough
and Athy, held by Owen O Neal's Party, till he had by his own Power and
Interest, procured some Supplies before clearly mentioned, so far were these
Men from making that Provision they brag of. What Conditions they might have
had from the Parliament of England, may be concluded by the usage they have
since found, (nor if they were put to it, would they be able to prove their
Assertions) divine vengeance having made that Party more merciless toward
them, whose forwardness, obstinacy, and treachery against the King's Authority,
contributed most to their Service, than those who worthily opposed them, and
were most enemies to their Proceedings.

They endeavored by all imaginable Reproaches and Calumnies, to lessen the
Peoples Reverence toward the Lord Lieutenant, laying such Aspersions on him in
the said Declaration, as might most alienate their Affections, though
themselves knew them to be un-true, and without color. They complained that he
had given Money, Commissions for Colonels, and other Commands, unto
Protestants, and upon them consumed the substance of the Kingdom, who most of
them either betrayed or deserted the Service; whereas they knew well, that
there was not one Protestant Officer, to whom the Lord Lieutenant gave a
Commission, who betrayed any Place committed to him, or otherwise treated in
order to their support, than all the other Officers of the same condition in
the Army; nor did they quit the Service, until many of them had gallantly lost
their Lives, and that the Clergy had so far incensed the People against them,
only for being Protestants, that the Marquess was compelled to give them leave
to depart the Kingdom, or otherwise to dispose of themselves; and the
Parliament Commanders gave Passes to such as would depart the Kingdom, and
gladly entertained such as went over to their Party.

They accused him of Improvidence in conducting the Army, after the defeat at
Rathmines, of not relieving Tredath, of permitting Play, Drinking, and
Licentiousness in the Camp, and as bold Aspersions, as, without
Excommunication, might gain credit with the People, and reflect upon his
Honor, where he was not enough known. Whereas the Action at Rathmines is
before set down at large, and the taking of Tredath by a Storm, when it was
scarce apprehended: And it is notoriously known, that in his Person he was so
strict and vigilant, that he gave not himself freedom and liberty to enjoy
those Pleasures, which might very well have consisted with the Office and Duty
of the most severe General; and that in above three months time, (which was
from his first drawing the Forces to the Rendezvous, till after the misfortune
at Rathmines) he never slept out of his Soldier's Habit. So that the malice
and craft of those unreasonable and senseless Calumnies, are easy enough to be
discerned, and can only make an impression upon vulgar minds, not well informed
of the Humor and Spirit of the Contrivers.

They magnified exceedingly the Merit of the Prelates, the Declaration they had
made at Cloanmacnoise, their frequent expressions of their Sincerity; and most
blame the Marquess, for not making use of their Power and Diligence, toward the
advancing the King's Interest; but rather, for suspecting and blaming them by
his Letter to the Prelates at Jamestown, (beforementioned) and they said,
words were heard to fall from him, dangerous as to the Persons of some of the
Prelates. To all which, little need be said, since there is before so just and
full mention of their fair Declarations, Professions and Actions, which
accompanied them: And for the danger the Persons of some Prelates were in, they
will be ashamed to urge, when it is known, that their Bishop of Killalough was
brought to him in custody, even after he had signed this Declaration and
Excommunication, and set at liberty by him, and whom the Bishops themselves, in
their Letter (of the 12th. of September, 1650.) to the Earl of Westmeath, etc.
do acknowledge to be preserved by the Marquess; and for which many will rather
expect an Apology, than for any Jealousy he could entertain of the Persons,
who behaved themselves in that manner toward the King's Lord Lieutenant.

They charge him with having represented to his Majesty, that some Parts of the
Kingdom were dis-obedient, which absolutely deny any Dis-obedience by them
committed; and that thereby, he had procured from his Majesty a Letter, to
withdraw his own Person, and the Royal Authority, if such dis-obedience was
multiplied, and so leave the People without the Benefit of Peace. This was the
Reward his Excellency (out of his Envy to a Catholic Loyal Nation) prepared
for their Loyalty and Obedience, sealed by the shedding of their blood, and the
loss of their substance. Whether the obstinate and Rebellious carriage of
Waterford, Limerick, and other Places, (which brought destruction upon
themselves) did not deserve and require such a Representation to be made unto
the King, may be judged by all men, upon what has been before truly set down
of those Particulars; and if the Places themselves had not acknowledged that
dis-obedience, yet the Prelates seemed to lament those Acts of Dis-obedience,
and most earnestly dissuaded him from leaving the Kingdom, promising all their
endeavors to reduce the People to Obedience, (which was only in their Power
to have done) else the Marquess would not so long have exposed Himself and his
Honor to those Reproaches, or suffered his Person with the Impotent Title of
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, to have remained in that Kingdom; and every day to
hear of the rendering and betraying of Places to the Enemy, which he could no
more remedy, then he could infuse a Spirit of Obedience, Unity, and
Understanding, into that unhappy infatuated Nation; Yet he was so far from
wishing, that his Majesty should absolutely withdraw his Royal Authority from
them, (how unworthy soever they made themselves of it) that he offered to leave
the Kings Power, in the Person of the Marquess of Clanrickard, as he afterward
did, hoping, that since their great exception was to him for being a
Protestant, they would with all Alacrity have complied with the other, who is
known to be a most zealous Roman Catholic, yet a great Royalist.

They reproached him, That while he was an Enemy to the Catholics, he had been
very active in unnatural executions against them, and shedding the blood of
poor Priests and Churchmen: But since the Peace, he had showed little of
action, keeping himself in Connaght, and Thomond, where no danger was, or the
Enemy appeared not. Here you see, they would neither suffer him to have an Army
to oppose the Enemy, nor be content that he should retire into those Places
where the Enemy could least infest him, and from whence with those few Troops
which remained with him, he defended the Shannon, and kept the Enemy from
getting over the River, while he staid there. And for the former activity and
success against them, which they were content to impute to him, it was when he
had a free election of Officers, an absolute Power over his Garrisons, where he
caused the Soldiers continually to be exercised, their Arms kept in order, and
from whence he could have drawn his Army together, and have marched with it to
what place he would: which advantages he was now without, and the Enemy
possessed of; and therefore it was no wonder, that they now obtained their
Victories, as easily as he had done formerly; But since they were so
disingenious and ungrateful, (there being many amongst them, whose lives he had
saved, not without suspicion of being favorable to them, when he should have
been just) to charge him with being active in unnatural executions against
them, and in shedding the blood of poor Priests and Churchmen; and for the
Improvement and Propagation of Calumny, it has pleased some Persons, to cause
that Declaration to be Translated in Latin, and Printed, thereby to make him
odious to the Roman Catholics, and have named two Priests, who they say were
by his order Executed, and put to death in cold blood, and after his promise
given to save their lives, whose names were Mr. Higgins, and Mr. White. It will
not be impertinent to set down at large the Case of these two Persons, that
from thence, men who have no mind to be deceived and mislead, may judge of the
Candor and Sincerity of those Persons, who would obtrude such Calumnies to the
World.

It must therefore be known, that when these two Priests were put to death, the
War was conducted and carried on by the two Houses of Parliament; that the
Government of Ireland was in the hands of the two Lords Justices, who upon the
inhumane and barbarous Cruelties first practiced by the Irish Catholics, in
the beginning of the Rebellion, had forbidden any quarter to be given to those
whom they found in Arms, and principally against all Priests, known Incendaries
of that Rebellion, and prime Actors in exemplary Cruelties; and the Marquess of
Ormond was then only Lieutenant General of the Army, and received all Orders
from the Lords Justices and Council, who having intelligence that a Party of
the Rebels intended to be at such a time at the Naas, ordered him to draw some
Troops together, with hope to surprise them; And the Lieutenant General
marching all night, came early in the morning into the Town, from whence the
Rebels (upon notice) were newly fled; In this Town some of the Soldiers found
Mr. Higgins, who might it is true have easily fled, if he had apprehended any
danger in the stay; When he was brought before the Marquess, he voluntarily
acknowledged that he was a Priest, and that his Residence was in the Town, from
whence he refused to fly away with those that were guilty, because he not only
knew himself very innocent, but believed he should not be without ample
Evidence of it, having by his sole Charity and Power, preserved very many of
the English Protestants, from the rage and fury of the Irish, and therefore he
only besought the Marquess to preserve him from the violence of the Soldiers,
and to put him securely into Dublin, to be tried for any Crime; which the
Marquess promised to do, and performed it, though with so much hazard, that
when it was spread abroad amongst the Soldiers, that he was a Priest, the
Officer into whose Custody he was entrusted, was assaulted by them, and it was
as much as the Marquess could do to relieve him, and compose the mutiny. When
he came to Dublin, he informed the Lords Justices and Council of the Prisoner
he had brought with him, of the good Testimony he had received of his peaceable
Carriage, of the pains he had taken to restrain those with whom he had Credit,
from entering into Rebellion, and of very many charitable Offices he had
performed, of which there wanted not Evidence enough, there being many then in
Dublin, who owned their Lives, and whatever of their Fortunes was left, purely
to him, so that he doubted not, but that he would be worthy of their
Protection: Within few days after, when the Marquess did not suspect the poor
man to be in danger, he heard that Sir Charles Coot (who was Provost Martial
General) had taken him out of Prison, and caused him to be put to death, in the
morning before or as soon as it was light; of which Barbarity, the Marquess
complained to the Lords Justices, but was so far from bringing the other to be
questioned, that he found himself to be upon some disadvantage, for thinking
the proceeding to be otherwise then it ought to have been: This was the Case of
Mr. Higgins, and this the Marquess's part in it; and the poor man was so far
from complaining of his breach of Promise at his death, (how confidently soever
it be aver'd) that he exceedingly acknowledged the Favor he had received from
his Lordship, prayed for his Prosperity, and lamented his want of Power to do
that, which the World saw his inclination prompted him to.

The proceeding against Mr. White, was very different, and in this manner; The
Marquess being upon his march with his Army, he quartered one night at Clonin,
an house of the Earl of West-Meaths, who was residing there with his Wife and
Family; when he was at Supper, (many of the Officers being at the Table) the
Lady of the House (upon some whisper she received from a Servant) expressed
some trouble in her Countenance, which the Marquess (who sat next her)
perceiving, asked her what the matter was, she told him in his ear, that she
was in great apprehension of an honest man who was in her house, and much
feared the Soldiers, confessing he was a Priest; The Marquess replied, that if
he was in the house, and kept himself there, he was in no danger; for, as the
Soldiers would attempt nothing while the Marquess stayed there, so he would
leave a Guard at his departure, that should secure it against Straglers, or any
Party that should stay behind; which he did accordingly. In the morning when he
was ready to march, he received information, that the Rebels were possessed of
a Pass, by which he was to go; whereupon he sent some Troops to get a Foard,
three miles from the way the Army was to march, and by that means, to come upon
the Rear of the Rebels by the time the Army should come to the Pass; which
being done, after a short Encounter, in which many were killed, the Rebels were
put to flight, and the Pass gained: In this action, Mr. White was taken on
Horseback with a Case of Pistols, who desired to be brought to the Marquess,
which being done, he told him he was the Person, for whom the Countess of
West-Meath had besought his favor the night before, and that his Lordship had
promised that he should be safe; The Marquess told him, if he were the same
Person? it was his own fault that he was not safe, if he had staid in the house
he was in, this had not befaln him? that it was now out of his Power to
preserve him, himself being bound to pursue those Orders which the Lords
Justices had given him; Nevertheless, he did endeavor to have saved him, at
least till he might be brought to Dublin: But the whole Army possessed with a
bitter spirit against the Romish Clergy, mutinied upon it, and in the end
compelled the Marquess to leave him unto that Justice, which they were
authorized to execute, and so put him to death. Who can now upon these two
Instances, and no other can or have been given, reasonably and honestly say,
that the Marquess has had his hands defiled with the blood of Priests? And
from the time that he had the chief Power committed to him, there was not one
Priest (how Maliciously, Rebelliously, or Treacherously soever, they behaved
themselves against the Kings Service, and the Person of the Lord Lieutenant)
who suffered death, but also all other acts of Blood and Rage, which are not
necessary, though hardly avoidable in the most just War, were declined and
discountenanced by him; nay! for his Respect to affairs of this nature, (that
they might be evenly, and without passion carried on) did he not often undergo
(even with his own Party) a suspicion of not being sufficiently faithful? The
Consequences of which had many Censures: The truth is, the Rebellion was odious
to him, yet his desire (often to reclaim the Irish by Mercy) palliated, what
otherwise might have finished (some thought) the War, sooner then it had its
Determination.

I shall pass over the many Tautologies, and impertinent Calumnies in the said
Declaration, all which are sufficiently answered and cleared, by what is
already contained in this Narrative, and shall In that Walsh is at large in his
Append. of Instruments, Fol. 99.
only insert their conclusion in their own words, as follows. -- For the
prevention of these Evils, and that the Kingdom may not be utterly lost to his
Majesty, and his Catholic Subjects, this Congregation of Archbishops, Bishops,
and other Prelates and Dignitaries of both Clergies of this Kingdom, found our
selves bound in Conscience (after great deliberation) to declare against the
continuance of his Majesty's Authority, in the Person of the Lord Marquess of
Ormond, having by his Misgovernment, ill Conduct of his Majesty's Army, and
breach of Public Faith with the People, in several Particulars of the Articles
of Peace, rendered himself incapable of continuing that great Trust any longer,
being questionable before his Majesty, for the aforesaid Injuries and ill
Government, to which effect, we will join with other Members of this Kingdom,
in drawing a Charge against him: And we hereby manifest to the People, that
they are no longer obliged to obey the Orders and Commands of the said Marquess
of Ormond, but are, until a General Assembly of the Nation can be conveniently
called together, unanimously to serve against the common Enemy, for the defense
of the Catholic Religion, his Majesty's Interest, their Liberties, Lives, and
Fortunes, in pursuance of the Oath of Association, and to observe in the mean
time the form of Government the said Congregation shall prescribe, until
otherwise ordered by an Assembly, or until upon Application to his Majesty, he
settle the same otherwise. And we do Fulminate the annexed Excommunication of
one date, with this Declaration against all opposers of the said Declaration.

Here we are arrived at one of the most fatal Conclusions of a desperate The
obstinate obedience of the People to the Clergy, and the miserable result
thereupon.
People any History ever mentioned; yet (as the case stood) it was not possible
for his Excellency to chastise their folly and madness; such a reverence and
esteem this unhappy Nation has ever had of their Clergy, that a seditious
Friar (and he happily none of their highest Order neither) could take the
Colors in the head of a Regiment, and (pronouncing damnation to those who
should presume to march) contrary to the General's command, caused the Soldiers
to throw down their Arms, and disband, as fell out in an Expedition at
Kilkenny. Nor was it possible for the Marquis of Ormond to procure Justice to
be inflicted in a Civil or Martial way upon an Ecclesiastical Person, let his
crime be what it would: since even they whose zeal and affection to his
Majesty's Service was unquestionable, and who were as highly offended at the
intolerable carriage and proceedings of the Bishops and Clergy as they ought to
be, and whose duty was not in the least degree shaken by their Declaration and
Excommunication, were yet so tender of those Immunities and Privileges which
were said to belong to the Church, and so jealous of the behavior of the
People in any case, which should be declared a violation of those Privileges,
that they would by no means have an hand in inflicting capital punishment upon
any Churchmen, without the approbation and cooperation of the Bishops, who
were not like to be so hard-hearted as to consent unto any judgment upon the
Accessories in those crimes, in which themselves were the Principal: So that he
must not only have determined by his own single will and judgment, what was to
be done in those Cases, but he must have executed those determinations with his
own hand. And this consideration obliged the Marquis to all those
condescensions and sufferings, and upon all occasions to endeavor to dispose
and persuade those Prelates from any obstinate and ruinous resolutions, rather
than to declare them to be enemies, whom he could neither reform or punish.

The Excommunication was no sooner published by the Congregation, and consented
and approved by the other part of the Bishops and Clergy, Upon the
Excommunication, People (being absolved from the Lord Lieutenant) think of
agreeing with the Parliamentarians.
sitting at Galway, but they quickly discerned how imprudently, as well as
unwarrantably they had proceeded in order to their own ends; and that they had
taken care only to dissolve and disband all their Forces, without making any
kind of provision for the opposition of the Parliaments Forces, who had quickly
notice of their ridiculous madness, and were thereupon advancing with their
whole Power upon them; the people generally, who foresaw what must be the issue
of that confusion, thought of nothing but compounding with the Enemy upon any
condition; the Nobility, prime Gentry, and the Commissioners of Trust, who saw
their whole Power and Jurisdiction wrested from them, and assumed and exercised
by the Congregation, continued their application to the Lord Lieutenant, and
desired him not to leave them exposed to the confusion which must attend his
departure. The gravest and most pious Clergy lamented the unskilful spirit of
the rest; and even some of the Bishops, and others, who were present at the
Congregation, and subscribed to the Excommunication, disclaimed their having
consented to it, though they were obliged to sign it for conformity: So that
they found it necessary within less than three days after the publishing it, to
suspend that dreadful Sentence; and yet that it might appear how unwillingly
they did those acts of sobriety and gentleness, it will not be amiss to set
down the Letter it self, which the Titular Bishop of Clonfert, and Doctor
Charles Kelly writ to the Officers of the Army, under the Command of the Lord
Marquis of Clanrickard to that purpose, which was in these words. SIRS,
YEster day we received an Express from the rest of our Congregation at The
Bishop of Clonfert and Dr. Kelly's Letter to the Officers of the Army, giving
them reasons why the Excommunication should be suspended.
Galway, bearing their sense to suspend the effect of the Excommunication
proclaimed by their Orders, till the service at Athlone be performed, fearing
on the one side a dispersion of the Army, and on the other side have received
certain intelligence of the Enemies approach unto that Place, with their full
force and number of fighting men, and thereupon would have us concur with them
in suspending the said Excommunication* As for our part, we do judge that
suspension to be unnecessary, and full of inconveniences, which we apprehend
may ensue, because the Excommunication may be obeyed, and the service not
neglected, if the People were pleased to undertake the service in the Clergies
name, without relation to the Lord of Ormond: Yet fearing the censure of
singularity in a matter of so high a strain against us, or to be deemed more
forward in Excommunicating then others; also fearing the weakness of some
(which we believed the Congregation feared) we are pleased to follow the major
Vote, and against our own opinion concur with them, and do hereby suspend the
said Censure as above; provided always, that after the Service performed, or
the Service be thought unnecessary by the Clergy, or when the said Clergy shall
renew it, it shall be presently incurred, as if the said Suspension had never
been interposed. And so we remain,

Your assured loving Friends in Christ, Walter Bish. of Clonfert, Charles Kelly.
Corbeg. Sept. 16. 1650.



If this Authentic Truth (of which there is not room for the least doubt) were
not inserted, who could believe it possible, that men endu'd with common
understanding, and professing the Doctrine of Christianity, and Allegiance of
Subjects, could, upon deliberation, publish such Decrees? And who can wonder
that a People, enslaved to, and conducted by such Spiritual Leaders, should
become a Prey to any Enemy, though supplied with less power, vigilance, and
dexterity, than the Parliaments Forces always were, who have prevailed against
them, and who by all kind of reproaches, rigor, and tyranny, have made that
froward and unhappy Congregation pay dear Interest, for the contempt and
indignity with which they prosecuted their Sovereign and his Authority.

His Majesty that now is, being about this time in Scotland, in prosecution of
the recovery of his Kingdoms, was by the Kirk Party, which possessed His
Majesty's Declaration (beingthen in Scotland) against the Peace of 1648*
concluded with the Rebels, they being infamous
the Power of that Kingdom forced to sign a Declaration, By which the Peace
concluded with the Irish Catholics in 1648. by Authority of the late King of
ever glorious memory, and confirmed by himself, was pronounced and adjudged
void, and that his Majesty was absolved from any observation of it: And this
not grounded upon those particular Breaches, Violations, and Affronts, which
had been offered to his Majesty's Authority, and contrary to the express
Articles, Proviso's, and Promises of that Treaty; but upon the supposed
unlawfulness of concluding any Peace with those Persons, who were branded with
many ignominious reproaches. And though this Declaration in point of time
issued after the Excommunication at James-town, yet the notice of it came so
near the time of the August 12.
publication of the other, that the Clergy inserted it in their Declaration, as
if it had been one of the principal Causes of their Excommunication, thereby
deluding the People, as if that expedient of their Excommunication had been the
only foundation of security to the Nation, and their particular Fortunes.

When the Marquis first heard of that Declaration in Scotland, he did really
believe it a Forgery, contrived either by the Parliament, or the Irish
Congregation, to seduce the People from their Affection and Loyalty to the
King; but soon after, viz. the 13th. of October, being assured of its
authentickness, he immediately (with the advice of the Commissioners The Lord
Lieutenant (upon the certainty of the Kings Declaration) summons an Assembly at
Loghreogh, to clear the doubts arising on the King's Declaration.
of Trust) issued his Orders, ( viz. the 24th. of October) for the meeting of
an Assembly at Loghreogh, on the 15th. of November. and in the mean time, on the
23d. of October. for the better composing of the minds of men, and preventing
those distempers and jealousies which might be infused, he writ from Enis to
the Commissioners of Trust, and took notice of that Declaration which was
published in Scotland, and told them, That however the affronts put upon his
Majesty had been many, and were obstinately persisted in to that day, and in
such Places, whereupon evidently depended the preservation or loss of the whole
Kingdom, whereof he had several times given notice to them, and followed the
ways advised by them for the reclaiming the said Places without success; yet
considering the Declaration gained from his Majesty, was without hearing what
could be said by the Nation in their own defense, and such as involved it
generally (without exception) ^n the guilt of Rebellion; he thought it fit to
let them know, That (since the Declaration was by undue means obtained from his
Majesty) he was resolved, by all the means it should please God to offer unto
him, and through all hazards in the behalf of the Nation, to insist upon, and
insert the lawfulness of the conclusion of the Peace, by virtue of the
aforesaid Authority, and that the said Peace was still valid and of force, and
binding unto his Majesty and all his Subjects: And herein he told them he was
resolved, by the help of God, to persist, until both himself, and such as
should in that behalf be entrusted and authorized by the Nation, should have
free and safe access to his Majesty; and until, upon mature and unrestrained
consideration of what might on all sides be said, his Majesty should have
declared his Royal pleasure upon those Affronts that had been put upon his
Authority. Provided, that in the mean time, and immediately, First, That all
the Acts, Declarations, and Excommunications issued by the Bishops (met at
James-town in August last) against his Majesty's Authority in him, and the
Peoples giving obedience thereunto, should be by them revoked; and such
assurance given, as should be agreed by him and the Commissioners of Trust,
that they nor any of them should attempt the like for the future; and that they
should contain themselves within the bounds prescribed by the Articles of
Peace, whereof they are Parties. Secondly, That it should be immediately
declared by the Commissioners of Trust, that the said Declaration,
Excommunication, and other Proceedings of the said Bishops, was an
unwarrantable usurpation upon his Majesty's just Authority, and in them a
violation of the Peace: And that in case the Bishops should not give the
assurance before expressed, or having given it, should not observe the same,
that they would endeavor to bring the offenders to condign punishment,
pursuant unto, and as is prescribed by the Laws of the Kingdom, as disturbers
of the Peace of the Kingdom, and obstructors of the means of preserving the
same. Thirdly, That the like Declaration should be made by all that derive
Authority from his Majesty, Civil or Martial, and by the respective Mayors,
Aldermen, Common-Councils, Burgesses, and other Magistrates in all the
Corporations of the Kingdom. Fourthly, That the Lord Lieutenant should be
permitted to make his free and safe Residence in any Place he should choose,
within the Limits not possessed by the Parliament. Fifthly, That he should be
immediately suffered to Garrison such Places, and in such manner, according to
the Articles of Peace, as he should find necessary for the defense of the
Kingdom. In the last place he wished them, That some present course might be
taken for his support, in some proportion answerable to his Place, yet with
regard to the Kingdom; which last, he said, he should not have proposed, but
that he was deprived of all his own Fortune, whereupon he had wholely subsisted
ever since his coming into the Kingdom.

The Commissioners of Trust received this Letter with all demonstrations The
Commissioners reply to the Lord Lieutenant's preceding Letter.
of respect and satisfaction, and the very next day return him an Answer, in
which, after they had lamented the issuing out of that Proclamation in
Scotland, they said, It greatly comforted them to understand, that his
Excellency was resolved through all hazards in behalf of the Nation to insist
upon, and assert the Peace, and persist in so doing, until he, or such as
should be entrusted and authorized by the Nation, should have free and safe
access unto his Majesty: And as to those Proviso's which were expressed as
necessary Conditions for the continuing amo^^st them his Majesty's Authority,
which (notwithstanding the Declaration they said, they did still reverence and
embrace (beside their general profession to act what lay within their power in
the ways of his Majesty's service) for his Excellencies satisfaction, they
returned these ensuing Answers. As to the first, concerning the revocation of
those Acts, Declarations, and Excommunications issued by the Bishops, and
assurance demanded, that nothing in that kind should be attempted for the
future. They said, That his Excellency, to whom they had often expressed their
resentment of their proceedings, might be confident, they would labor as far
as in them lay to see his Excellency satisfied in that particular; and to that
end they would all, or some of them, with his allowance, and as he should think
fit, repair to Galway to treat with the Prelates on that Subject. Unto the
second, they answered, That albeit they knew by those Censures of the Bishops
his Majesty's Authority was invaded, and an unwarranted Government set up,
contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom, and that they were assured, no Subject
could be justly warranted by that Excommunication, to deny Obedience to his
Majesty's Authority in his Excellency; yet being of opinion, that a public
Declaration of that kind in that conjuncture of Affairs, ought properly, and
would with more countenance and Authority move from an Assembly than from them;
and that by such a public Declaration than from themselves, they should
wholely obstruct the way to prevail with the Prelates to withdraw those Acts,
which was desired by the former Proposition, and likewise endanger the Union
that was necessary at present in opposing the common Enemy, and prejudice the
hopes of a more perfect Union for the future, wherein the preservation of the
Nation would principally consist. They did therefore humbly beseech his
Excellency to call an Assembly of the Nation, from whom such a Declaration as
might be effectual in that behalf, and might settle those Distractions could
only proceed: Tet if in the mean time, and before the meeting of that
Assembly, those Censures then suspended should be revived, they would endeavor
to suppress their influence upon the People by such a Declaration as should
become Loyal Subjects, and men entrusted to see all due obedience unto his
Majesty's Government over the whole Kingdom. To the third they answered, That
they would, at all times, and in such manner as his Excellency should think fit
to prescribe, invite all his Majesty's Roman Catholic Subjects to such a
Declaration, which yet, until they should understand the Clergies sense upon
the first Proviso, they said, they did humbly as fit for a time to forbear. To
the fourth, they answered, That whatsomever his Excellency should find to be
within their power, and would direct to be done concerning the Place of
Residence for his Person, they would readily obey his Lordships command
therein. To the fifth they answered, That upon conference with his Excellency
of the Places fit to be Garrisoned, and the number of Men fit to be put in
them, they would, according to the Articles of Peace, use their utmost
endeavors to have such Garrisons, so agreed upon, admitted. And to the last
they said, They had at all times been ready and willing, that his Excellencies
Charge should be supported out of the Revenue of the Kingdom; and that they
were now ready to concur in assigning any of the Dues already accrued, or such
as should grow due hereafter, or to impose any new Allotment upon the Subject
toward his maintenance.

When the Lord Lieutenant perceived, that the temper and desire of the
Commissioners of Trust was so different from that of the Congregation, and that
in truth they were afflicted and scandalized at the exorbitancy of the other;
and that they thought they should be able to reduce them from the destructive
Counsels they were engaged in: He would not, upon any experience or judgment of
his own, restrain them from attempting what was not impossible to compass, and
which many The Commissioners of Trust go to the Committee of the Congregation
at Galway, but could not reduce them to reason.
would have concluded would be compassed if attempted, and which, what other
effect soever it had, would make evident, that there was not a concurrence in
the Nation in those Acts which were likely to destroy the Kingdom: And
therefore he willingly consented, that the Commissioners should go to Gallway,
where the Committee of the Congregation resided, whereof the Bishop of Ferns
was one, to whom they showed the Letter they received from the Lord Lieutenant,
and desired them to consider the state of the Kingdom, and to know from them
what they conceived remained, that might best tend to the preservation of the
Nation, without keeping the Kings Authority amongst them; for that many of the
most considerable would instantly make their conditions with the Enemy, if the
Kings Authority were taken away; and that there was no hope of keeping or
leaving that Authority, but by revoking the Excommunication and Declaration:
For the Lord Lieutenant would not stay to keep it, nor would he leave it, nor
the Marquis of Clanrickard undergo it, but on these terms: And hereupon they
used all those Reasons and Arguments which cannot but occur to all men, who are
not blinded with Passion and Prejudice, to induce them to such a Retraction, as
could only advance the happiness, or indeed the subsistence of the Nation.

But the Bishops were inexorable, and instead of abating any of that The
Bishops grew high, alleging the Lord Lieutenant had suggested the grounds for
his Majesty's late Declaration. Motions to return to their former Confederacy.
fury they had formerly expressed, (that added new contumelies and reproaches
to all the Authority of the King they said, They observed by the Lord
Lieutenants Letter, that he had informed his Majesty of the Disobediences and
Affronts that had been put upon his Authority, and consequently, that he had
suggested matter unto his Majesty, for making that Declaration against the
Peace: That they had perused the Declaration which had been published in
Scotland, disavowing the Peace: And that they were of opinion, for ought
appeared to them, That the King had withdrawn his Commission and Authority from
the Lord Lieutenant: That in the said Declaration, the Irish Nation (as bloody
Rebels) were cast from the protection of the Kings Laws and Regal Favors. And
therefore it might be presumed, that he would not have his Authority kept over
such a Nation to govern them; whereas they had been of opinion, (and all their
endeavors had been employed) to keep the Kings Authority over them: But when
his Majesty throws away the Nation as Rebels from his protection, (withdrawing
his own Authority) they could not understand the mystery of preserving the same
with them, or over them, nor how it could be done: That they believed the best
remedy (the Kings Authority being taken away by that Declaration) of meeting
the Inconveniency, of the Peoples closing with the Parliament, is the returning
to the Confederacy, as they said was intended by the Nation, in case of the
breach of Peace on his Majesty's part; that, they said, would keep an union
amongst them, if men would not be precipitately guilty of the breach of their
Oath of Association, which Oath, by two solemn Orders of two several
Assemblies, was to continue binding, if any breach of the Articles of Peace
should happen on his Majesty's part: That the Kings Authority and the Lord
Lieutenants Commission being recalled by that Declaration, they were of
opinion, that the Lord Lieutenant had no Authority to delegate his Authority to
any other. And if they must expose their Lives and Fortunes to the hazard of
fighting to the making good of that Peace, seeing the danger was alike to
defend that, or get a better Peace, why should they bind themselves within the
limits of those Articles so disowned? And so with several Tautologies, urged
the Declaration in Scotland, as a ground and excuse for all their proceedings,
when what they had done (as we have before took notice of) was before the
issuing forth of that Declaration. In fine, they concluded, they could not
consent with safety of Conscience to the revoking their Declaration and
Excommunication demanded by the Lord Lieutenant, nor to give assurance to him,
or the Commissioners of Trust, for not attempting the like for the future. And
to manifest their inveterate malice against him, being in Galway) the Captain
of the Guard of the Town, commonly called, The Captain of the Guard of the
young men, did make search for him in the said Town as after a criminal person,
or a fugitive, thereby endeavoring to bring contempt and scorn upon him, and
his Majesty's Authority placed in him.

And now you must know, they would not make this Declaration in The Committee's
Reasons why they pursued their Declaration against the Lord Lieutenant, etc.
and his reply.
case of Conscience of so vast an extent and importance, without (forsooth)
setting down their Reasons under their hands, which (for the Doctrine sake) I
would not conceal from the world, that it may better judge of those Spiritual
Guides, who made themselves guilty of that mass of mischief and ruin that
flowed from thence.

Their first Reason was, Because the Kings Authority was not in the Lord
Lieutenant, nor was then (they said) power in them to confer a new Authority on
him, which would be destructive to the Nation if it continued in him, and
preservative in another; and that, they said, was their sense when they
declared against the Kings Authority in his Person; so that though they had
presumption enough to take the Kings Authority out of his Lieutenants hands by
their Declaration and Excommunication, and to inhibit all men to submit unto
it, they had now modesty to confess, they had not power to confer any new
Authority on, their Faculty of destroying being more prevalent than that of
preserving.

Their second Reason was, They feared they should lose the few Churches
remaining under his Government, as they had lost under him all the Churches in
the Cities of Waterford, Kilkenny, Wexford, Ross, Clonmel, Cashel, Featherd,
Kilmallock, and the rest; in which, they said, they agreed with the Maccabees,
Maximus vero and primus pro sanctitate timor erat Templi: By whose ill
Government those Cities were lost, appears by what has been said before, and
how well the few that were then left were kept, after they had forced the
Marquis to depart the Kingdom, is well known to the World.

The third Reason they thought fit, was, Because the Lord Lieutenant had
declared at Cork, that he would maintain, during his life, the Protestant
Religion, according to the example of the best Reformed Churches; which might
be the same with the Covenant for ought they knew. They said, They could not
expect from him the defense of the Catholic Religion, which was a strange
objection against a Protestant Lieutenant of a Protestant King, under whose
Government they pretended to be desirous to live: And whatsoever had been
declared by the Lord Lieutenant at Cork in that particular, before the
conclusion of the Treaty of Peace, and Published and Printed the 6th. of
October, 1648. and well known to the Bishops, who after the same, and
notwithstanding that Declaration, with all demonstrations of cheerfulness gave
their consents to that Peace, which they now think fit to break, because of
that Declaration.

The fourth Reason was cast in the same mould, The scandal over the World, to
make choice of one of a different Religion, especially in Rome, where his
Holiness expected, that a Catholic Governor should be placed over them,
(according to his Agreement or Articles (as it was reported) with the Queen of
England, which the Marquis knew to be an aspersion) and they said, They did
fear the scourges of the War, and the Plague that had fallen so heavy upon them,
were some evidence of Gods anger for putting Gods Cause and the Churches under
such an hand; whereas that trust might have been managed in a Catholics hand,
under the Kings Authority. Which Reason indeed had most ingenuity in it; and
whenever they digested their malice and their prejudice in those Personal
Reproaches and Calumnies, which they knew to be most untrue, if they had
frankly declared and excepted against him for being a Protestant, they had more
complied with the dictates and integrities of their hearts. And yet it might
appear a very unskilful and imprudent suggestion, to make the humor of the
Court of Rome, the Rule of obedience to their Sovereign, and to discourse of
choosing a Person of what Religion they thought fit to be his Vicegerent; as
if they, not he, were to be consulted in it, which would administer much cause
of jealousy unto a Protestant King, and to his Protestant Subjects, if it were
not well known to them, that some of the Catholic Nobility and Gentry of the
Nation were Enemies (at least seemingly) to those resolutions, that unhappy
part of the Catholic Bishops did broach and propagate, which alone have
reduced that Nation to the calamities it then and since underwent.

The fifth Reason, that they should find no favor nor countenance, but
reproach and disgrace from any Catholic Prince, Church, or Laity, while the
Marquis Governed; when in truth, since that time, and that their proceedings
have been taken notice of, the Catholic Princes have looked upon them as
incapable of any succor or countenance, and have accordingly left them to the
rage of their Persecutors. Their other Reasons were more Vulgar, and too often
before recited; exceptions to his Person, in respect of the ill success of his
Conduct, and the prejudice the People had to him in regard of the same: And the
too considerable Corporations remaining (which were Limerick and Galway) were
at so great distance with the Lord Lieutenant, that they were resolved to
appear (as in their intentions and actions they conceived they were) faithful
to the Crown, and obedient to the Kings Authority, if placed in another Person.
To which suggestions, nothing need to be added to what has been said in this
Discourse, of the demeanor of those particular Places; nor can the observation
be avoided, That it was the natural practice of this Congregation, to use all
their industry and artifice to infuse jealousy and sedition into the People,
and distrust and obstinacy into the Corporations; and then to urge that
jealousy, prejudice, and indisposition of the People and Corporations, to
countenance any thing they thought fit to do or oppose. They concluded, that
the event of War being uncertain, if the Nation should be reduced to a
condition of agreeing with the Enemy, the Lord Lieutenant would not be a fit
man to agree for the exercise of their Religion, for their Churches, Altars, or
any thing concerning the same. And therefore they said, That the best way that
occurred to them in this pressing exigency, for the union of the Nation, and
keeping them from agreeing with the Enemy, was, That the Marquis of
Clanrickard, (in whom, according to the sense of the Congregation at
James-town, they desired the Kings Authority should be left) that he might
Govern the Nation, with the consent of all Parties, and the Kings Authority be
taken away from the Lord Lieutenant until an Assembly: And to that end, that a
free and lawful Assembly might be made, to sit to judge upon the Peoples
preservation, and to decree and order what should be best and safest for the
defense of the Nation. Touching the Kings Authority to be kept over them, and
the Peace to be asserted and made good, or to renew the Association, or any
thing else they should find best and most expedient, and unto that they would
willingly submit; for they said, they never intended to hinder an Assembly, or
to give Laws to the People; all that they endeavored was, to defend the
Altars, and Souls entrusted to them: And as they were of opinion, that the
Soldiers would follow the Marquis of Clanrickard, and the People obey him, so
they would contribute their best endeavors to that effect. They further gave
assurance, that if any free and lawful Assembly (upon due consideration of
their own state and condition) should find it the best way, for their own
safety and preservation, to make an Agreement with the Enemy, as they intended
never* by the grace of God, to grant away from them by an Affirmative consent
to the Churches and Altars, (if forced from them, they were blameless) so would
they not hinder the People from compounding with the Enemy for the safety of
their Lives and Estates, when no way of offense was appearing, though, upon
such an Agreement, they saw, that they alone should probably be losers of
Lives, States, Churches, Altars, Immunities, and Liberties: But in such
Contracts with the Enemy, if any should happen (which they wished God would
avert) they should pray and conjure the Romish Clergy of England, that that of
the Maccabees might be recorded of them to future Ages, Erat pro uxoribus and
filiis pro fratribus and cognatis minor solicitudo, maximus vero and primus pro
sanctitate erat timor Templi. And this was the Answer delivered to the
Commissioners of Trust, upon the 5th. day of November, 1650. at Galway, by the
Bishops of Killala, Ferns, Kilmacduogh, Clonfert, Kilfinara, and Dromore,
(after several and long Conferences, with the Commissioners of Trust, who were
Authorized by the Nation) unto the Proposals presented by the Commissioners to
the Committee of the Congregation, the 29th. of October. 1650.

Here we cannot avoid observing, by the express words of the Conclusion, upon
their Reasons in their Conference with the Commissioners, that though they
seemed to desire, that the Marquis of Clanrickard (whose zeal to the Romish
Religion, and Interest in the Nation, was so notorious and confessed, that they
durst not publicly repine at his known affection and integrity to the King)
might govern the Nation with the consent of all Parties, and that the Kings
Authority in the Lord Lieutenant might be left in him; yet they declared, they
meant it should only be until an Assembly (which they well knew, by the
express terms of the Articles of Peace, could be only lawfully convened by the
Lord Lieutenant) and then that Assembly should judge of the Peoples
preservation, and to decree and order what should be the best and safest for
the defense of the Nation; touching the Kings Authority to be The Confederates
violent for an Assembly, that their Affairs might be ordered by them.
kept over them, the Peace to be asserted and made good, or to renew the
Association, or any thing else they should find best and most expedient: So
that they intended no other Honor to the Marquis of Clanrickard, than that by
his countenance and reputation they might persuade the Lord Lieutenant to leave
the Kings Authority behind him, and that he should call an Assembly (which they
would otherwise do themselves) which they were sure should be constituted, for
the most part, of such Men, as would follow their Dictates, by which himself
should be divested of that Power, and the King deposed from any further
Dominion over them, when they persuade any foreign Prince to take them into his
Protection; which practice they quickly set on foot. And for the further
manifestation of their Affection and Loyalty to the King, which they cannot
endure should be called yet in question, it is observable, that these Men, who
had so often contradicted and controuled the express Acts of every Assembly,
that had been convened since the beginning of these Troubles, and now commanded
the People, under pain of damnation, not to yield any obedience to the King's
Authority in his Lieutenant, and declared, that they could not (with the safety
of their Consciences) consent to the Propositions which he had lately made, for
the uniting the Nation in defense of the Peace, so advantageous to their
Liberty and Religion, which the Commissioners, entrusted by and for the Nation,
thought so reasonable: These Men, I say, made no scruple of professing and
declaring, that if an Assembly, upon due consideration of their state and
condition, should find it the best way for their safety and preservation, to
make an Agreement with the Enemy, they would not hinder the People from
compounding with them, for the safety of their Lives and States: After all, the
Confederates agree, that if compounding with the Enemy should be best for the
People, that should be consented to.
Which being seriously considered, we cannot sufficiently wonder, at the
strange stupid resignation of their Understandings, who believed (or rather at
the wonderful contempt of those Understandings, which would be persuaded to
believe) that this Congregation had loyal Purposes toward the King, or that
they never intended to hinder the Assembly, or give Law to the People, when
they cancelled all fundamental Laws broke through all Acts of their own
Assembly, and forbad the People to pay any obedience to the King's Vicegerent,
who had only the lawful Power of Government over them.

The more extravagant and unreasonable these Proceedings were of the
Congregation and Clergy, the more confident many honest and wise Men were, that
the Assembly of the Nation would regulate and control that il-limited Power,
and utterly dis-avow all that they had done; and therefore they who were
exceedingly offended and enraged against the Congregation, were solicitous and
importunate with the Lord Lieutenant to call an Assembly: And though he had too
much experience of the Nature and Temper of the People, and of the transcendent
Power the Clergy should still have over any Assembly, or at least over the
People, when the Assembly had done what it could, to hope for any good effect
from it: And though he saw, he should thereby the more expose his own Honor,
and (which he considered more) the Dignity of his Master, to new Insolences;
yet since he resolved to leave the Kingdom himself, and was only un-resolved,
whether he should leave the King's Authority behind him, liable to the same
Indignities and Affronts, in the Person of the Marquess of Clanrickard, which
it had been subject to in his own, and could have no kind of assurance that it
should not, but by the Professions and Protestations of an Assembly, he did
resolve to call one, and issued out his Letters for their meeting upon the
15th. of November, 1650. at Loghreogh, where they met accordingly. And the
Bishops, for removing The Assembly at Loghreogh, beforementioned, meets: the
Result thereupon.
(as they said) of any Jealousies that any might apprehend of their
Proceedings, declared and protested, That by their Excommunication and
Declaration at James-town, they had no other aim, than the preservation of the
Catholic Religion, and the People; and that they did not purpose to make any
visible Usurpation on his Majesty's Authority, nor on the Liberty of the
People, confessing, that it did not belong to their Jurisdiction so to do. With
which Protestation (so contrary to what they had done, and which in truth they
had so often made, even at the time they did all things contrary to it) the
Assembly was satisfied, and did not so much as make another Protestation, that
the Bishops had done what they ought not to do, nor exact a Promise from them,
that they would not do the like in time to come. So that the Lord Lieutenant
was resolved to look no more for satisfaction from them, nor expose the King's
Authority any further, by leaving any Deputy behind him, but prepared for his
departure.

When the Assembly understood his Resolution, and saw plainly that he was even
ready to depart, his Goods and many of his Servants being on Shipboard, they
sent four Members, the Lord Dillon, Clanrickard, etc. of their House, to him at
Kilcogan, with an Instrument in writing, (bearing date from Loghreogh, the 7th.
of December) in which they repeated, (concerning the Excommunication and
Declaration) what the Bishops had protested in that Assembly; and of his
Excellency's Letter; dated the 16th. of November last, recommending to them, as
the chief End for which that Assembly was called, the removing of all
Divisions, as the best way to their Preservation. They the said Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and the Gentry met in that Assembly, conceived, That there was
not a better Foundation or Ground for their Union, than the holding to and
obeying his Majesty's Authority, to which they owed and ought to pay all
dutiful Obedience: And they did thereby declare and protest, That their
Allegiance unto his Majesty's Authority was such, and so inherent in them, that
they would not be withdrawn from the same, nor was there any Power in the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, Gentry or People, Clergy or Laity of the Kingdom, that
could alter, change, or take away his Majesty's Authority, they holding that to
be the chief Flower of the Crown, and the support of the Peoples Liberty, which
they did thereby protest, declare and avow, and that they did esteem the same,
and obedience thereunto, essentially, inviolably, and justly due from them, and
the chiefest means under God, to uphold their Union and Preservation: And they
said, They did unanimously beseech his Excellency, in his great affection to
the advancement of his Majesty's Service, and his hearty desires of the Nations
Preservation, to which, they said, he had Relations of the highest Concernment
in Blood, Alliance, and Interest, to leave that Authority with them, in some
Person faithful to his Majesty, and acceptable to the Nation: To which Person,
when he should be made known to them, they would not only afford all due
obedience, but would also offer Though the Lord Lieutenant had been so used, as
not to be confident of the Confederates obedience to his Majesty's Authority,
he yet at their Request deputes the Marquess of Clanrickard Deputy, at the same
time charging their Crimes home.
and propose the best ways and means, that God would please to direct them to,
for the preservation of his Majesty's Rights, and the Peoples Interests and
Liberties, and for the begetting a ready obedience in all Places and Persons,
unto his Majesty's Authority.

This Advice (though it carried with it a particular Respect from the Assembly
unto the Lord Lieutenant, and an acknowledgement of the faithful and hearty
Affections he had always had, for his Majesty's Interest and Service in that
Kingdom, contrary to the scandalous Declaration) gave not the Marquess the
least confidence, that his Majesty's Authority could find more respect in the
Person of another, than it had met with in him: Therefore he writ to them by
the same Messengers, That he had sent the Authority to the Lord Marquess of
Clanrickard, to govern that his Majesty's Kingdom and People, provided, that
their Declaration might be so far explained, as to give the Marquess of
Clanrickard full satisfaction, that the expressions they made, touching the
obedience they owed and resolved to pay unto his Majesty's Authority, was
meant, the Authority placed in his Lordship, or any other Governor, deriving
or holding his Authority from his Majesty: And that they esteem it not in the
power of any Person, Congregation, or Assembly whatsoever, to discharge or set
the People free from obeying his Lordship, or any other such Governor, during
the continuance of the said Authority in him; without which, he said, he could
not (in Duty to his Majesty) leave his Authority, subject to be tossed to and
fro, at the uncertain Fancies of any Man or Men, and without any probability of
saving the Nation, which could be no otherwise effected, than by an absolute
cheerful obedience of the People, unto the Authority placed over them. And so
having directed the Marquess of Clanrickard, (who submitted to that Charge out
of pure obedience, and only that he might not decline the Service, which they
would say would have preserved the Nation) not to assume the Charge, except the
Assembly gave him full satisfaction in the Particulars required by him, the
Lord Lieutenant (followed The Lord Lieutenant departs the Kingdom, Lord
Inchiquin, etc.
by the Lord Inchiquin, Colonel Vaughan, Colonel Wogan, Colonel Warren, and
some 20 more Persons of Honor) about the middle of December embarked himself
at Galway, (in a small Frigate called the Elizabeth, of 28 Tuns, and 4 Guns) for
France, after he had refused to receive a Pass from Ireton, who offered it,
choosing rather the Seas and Winds, in that rough and blusterous season of the
year, than to receive an obligation from him, having upon the most abstracted
Considerations of Honor and Conscience, faithfully adhered to his Majesty and
the Crown of England, without any regard had to his own Estate and Fortune, as
in the Act of Settlement, fol. 99. is at large expressed. And after being tossed
at Sea for the space of some weeks, and his other Ships, in which his Servants
and Goods, and many other Passengers were lost, he arrived in January, at St.
Malos in Britany; from whence he went to Paris, and soon after into Flanders;
thence he was employed in a Service answerable to his Fidelity, touching the
Duke of Gloucester, (then in the Talons of the Jesuits) whom with singular
Prudence and Success he recovered: Afterward he was imbarqued in many Concerns
of the Crown, to the hazard of his Person; whilst the Lord Inchiquin, who had
run the Gantlet on all sides, retired into Holland, a Person certainly of much
Valor and good Conduct, showing both in an exemplary manner, whilst he engaged
for either Party: Nor can his change of Sides (to which some say he was too
mutable) be so properly imputed to any defect of Judgment, as the unhappy
Crisis of the Times; his own expressions making it clear, That had all things
been the same they were pretended to be, he would have continued as he was; but
Impostures being discovered, he thought it ill to persist in their Fellowship.
Afterward indeed he changed his Religion, and thereby gave a suspicion, that
though he fought against his Countrymen, he had a reverence for their Idea.
Certain it is, he affected much to be President of Munster, nor could any thing
have barred him of it, since his Majesty's happy Return, wherein his Servants
had the fruits of their Fidelity, but his change of Religion, which equally
prejudiced the Lord Dillon, in the Presidency of Connaght, truly observable in
them both.

We have before spoken of four Commissioners sent from the Parliament, who as
soon as they arrived in Ireland, (it is necessary to tell you) presently
applied themselves to the Work afore-mentioned; they set out some
Proclamations, and traveled into the several Provinces of the Kingdom, using
the best means they could to raise Moneys by Sequestrations, and other ways;
but by reason of the multitudes of Rebels which infested all the Garrisons, and
came up so continually about them, little was to be done in that way.

The Lord Lieutenant was no sooner under sail, than the Assembly applied The
Condition the Confederates were in, when the Marquess of Clanrickard accepts of
the Government.
themselves to the Marquess of Clanrickard, who was then at his House at
Loghreogh, and besought him to assume the Government, as Lord Deputy of
Ireland, according to the Power left with him by the Lord Lieutenant: But the
Marquess absolutely refused to do it, except they satisfied the Proviso that
was left in the Lord Lieutenant's Letter to them, and that he saw such an union
amongst them, as might free the King's Authority from the Affronts it had been
exposed unto. Hereupon the Assembly unanimously professed all obedience to his
Majesty's Authority, as it was vested in him, and petitioned him to assume it,
without which they said the Nation would be exposed to utter ruin. And the
Bishop of Ferns, (hitherto averse to the Royal Authority) more particularly
importuned him, in the Name of the Clergy, not to decline a Charge, which could
only preserve the King's Power in that Kingdom, and the Nation from
destruction, promising so entire a submission and cooperation from the whole
Clergy, that his Authority should not be disputed. In further assurance of
which, the General Assembly issue forth this Declaration. By the General
Assembly of the Kingdom of Ireland.
ALthough this Assembly has endeavored by their Declaration, of the 7th. of
this month, to give full testimony of their Obedience to his Majesty's
Authority, yet for further satisfaction, and for removal of all Jealousies, we
do further declare, That the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, Gentry, or People,
Clergy, or Laity of this Kingdom, shall not attempt, labor, endeavor, or do
any Act or Acts, to set free or discharge the People, from yielding due and
perfect Obedience to his Majesty's Authority, invested in the Lord Marquess of
Clanrickard, or any other Governor or Governors of this Kingdom.

And in case of any such Labor, Act, or Endeavor, by which any mischief might
ensue, by seducing the People, we declare, That no person or persons shall or
ought to be led thereby, but by their disobedience on any such grounds, are
liable and subject to the heavy censures and penalties of the Laws of the Land
in force, and practiced in the Reign of Henry the 7th. and other Catholic
Times.

Nevertheless it is further declared, That it is not meant or intended by any
thing herein contained, that this Nation will not insist upon the performances
of the Articles of Peace, and by all just ways and means provide against the
breach and violation of the same.

And inasmuch as his Majesty is at present (as we are informed) in the hands of
a Presbyterian Party of the Scots, who declared themselves Enemies to this
Nation, and vowed the extirpation of our Religion, we declare, That it is not
hereby intended to oblige our selves to deceive, obey, or observe any
Governors that shall come, and duly nominated or procured from his Majesty,
by reason of, or during his being in an un-free condition, that may raise a
disturbance in the present Government, established by his Majesty's Authority,
or the violation of the Articles of Peace.

Loghreogh, 23d. of December. 1650. Copia vera Joh. Common, Dep. Cler.



There was then in the possession of the Roman Catholics, the entire Province
of Connaght, in which they had the strong Castle of Athlone, the strong and
important Town and Harbor of Gallway, Sligo, and many other lesser Forts and
Places of strength. They had also a good part of the Province of Munster, and
in it the City of Limerick, which by the strong situation of it, and the
advantages it might have from Sea, could alone (with the help of Gallway) have
maintained War against all the Parliaments Forces in Ireland. They had many
Parties of Horse and Foot in Leimster, Munster and Ulster, under Clanrickard,
Castlehaven, Dillon, Muskery, the Earl of Westmeath, Hugh O Neal, Dungan, Moor,
Preston, and others, which being drawn together, would have constituted a
greater Army than the Enemies were Masters of. And the Marquess of Clanrickard
had argument enough of hope, if he could have been confident of the union of
the Nation; and that he might reasonably have promised himself, if he could
have been confident of the Affection and Integrity of the Clergy, which at
length they promised with that solemnity, that if he had not confided therein,
the fault would have been imputed to him, for they could do no more (on their
part) to create a belief in him. He was therefore content to take the Charge
upon him, and obliged them presently to consider of the way to keep all the
Forces together, when he should have drawn them together, and to secure the two
Towns of Gallway and Limerick with strong Garrisons, which was the first Work
concluded on all hands necessary to be performed.

Very few days had passed, (after the Lord Deputy had upon such their The
Confederates, notwithstanding the good Condition they were in, and their
Promises to the Deputy, think of treating with Ireton. Vide Carue Annal. Hib.
p. 339.
Importtunity and Professions, taken the Government upon him) when it was
proposed in the Assembly, (before their Condition was impaired by any other
progress, or new success of the Enemy) That they might send to the Enemy, to
treat with them, upon surrendering of all that was left, into their hands; an
Inclination the Nuncio was long before inclined to, persuading the supreme
Council (when there was but so much as a speech of Truce) to join rather with
the Parliamentary Scots, than the Royalists, and prayed for the success
thereof, in hopes, that thence much good might accrue to the Catholic
Religion. And when the same was opposed with indignation, by the major part of
the Assembly, the Bishop of Ferns himself who had so lately importuned the
Marquess of Clanrickard, to assume the Charge of Lord Deputy, and made such
ample promises in the Name of the Clergy) seemed to concur with those who were
against treating with the Enemy, but instead of it very earnestly pressed, That
they might (in order to their better defense) return to their ancient
Confederacy, and so proceed in their Preservation, without any respect to the
King's Authority. And this Motion found such concurrence in the Assembly, from
the Bishops, Clergy, and many others, that many of the Officers Others offer to
return to their Confederacy, without respect to the King. Some yet seemed
affectionate to the King.
of the Army, and some of the principalest of the Nobility and Gentry, found it
necessary to express more than ordinary passion in their contradiction: They
told them, They now manifested, that it was not their Prejudice to the Marquess
of Ormond, nor their Zeal to Religion, that had transported them, but their
dislike of the King's Authority, and their resolution to withdraw themselves
from it: That they themselves would constantly submit to it, and defend it with
their utmost hazard, as long as they should be able; and when they should be
reduced to Extremity, (that treating with the Enemy could no longer be
deferred) they would (in that Treaty) make no provision for them, but be
contented that they should be excluded from any benefit thereof, who were so
forward to exclude the King's Authority.

Upon these bold though necessary Menaces, to which they had not been
accustomed, the Clergy and their Party seemed to acquiesce, and promised all
concurrence; inasmuch as from this very time, all the Factions and Jealousies
which had been before amongst them, seemed (outwardly) quieted, though the
Irish (in all Quarters of which the Enemy were possessed) not only submitted
and compounded, but very many of them entered into their Service, and marched
with them in their Armies; and the Lord Deputy grew as much into their
dis-favour, as the Lord Lieutenant had been; and his being a Friend to the
Marquess of Ormond, destroyed all that Confidence, which his being a Papist had
merited from them.

The Lord Deputy hereupon, and in consideration of many resorting to the
Parliaments Quarters, issued forth this Proclamation. By the Lord Deputy,
General of Ireland.
CLANRICKARD.
WHereas diverse of the Tradesmen, and other Inhabitants, have formerly lived in
the Quarters, in obedience to his Majesty, within this Kingdom, have of late
withdrawn themselves from their respective Habitations there, and be-taken
themselves into the Garrisons and Quarters, under the Power of the common
Enemy, for their particular and private advantage, thereby to avoid
contributing to his Majesty's Army, to the great dis-advantage thereof, and the
support of the adverse Party, which probably might be destroyed, had it not
received this Relief.

For Reformation whereof, we do hereby publish and declare, That whosoever of
the said Inhabitants or Tradesmen, shall not within 14 days after publication
hereof, withdraw themselves and their Goods, from the Garrisons and Quarters of
the Enemy, wherein they now remain, to the Quarters in obedience to his
Majesty: And whosoever, after the time aforesaid, shall presume to live within
a Mile to any of the said Garrisons, shall be liable to the Confiscation of
their Goods and Chattels, and shall be prosecuted against, as adhering in all
respects to the Enemy, and Traitors to his Majesty.

And whereas many idle and desolate Persons, commonly called by the Name of
Tories, and others, under pretense of going about to his Majesty's Service, and
frequently exact Meat, Drink, and Money, from the Subjects, committing many
Outrages, and using their Will for Law, to the ruin and devastation of the
Kingdom.

For prevention whereof, we do hereby publish and declare, That any Person or
Persons, of that Condition or Nature, who within 14 days after publication
hereof, shall not in-list themselves in his Majesty's Army, shall be un-horsed
and dis-arm'd, where-soever taken or found, and in their Persons proceeded
against as Traitors. And we require and command the Commanders in chief of his
Majesty's Army, to take Order, that this our Proclamation receive due execution.

And to the end that no Man may plead ignorance thereof, we require all Mayors,
Sheriffs, Sovereigns, Portiffs, and Bailiffs, in whose hands these shall come,
on receipt thereof, within the respective Liberties, in the most public
Places, to cause it to be proclaimed. Given under our Hand and Seal at Arms,
the 2d. day of January, 1650.

God save the King.


But to return to the Parliaments Forces, who (whilst the Marquess of Ormond
was thus variously treated by the Confederates) took in the Castle of Carlow,
as the 27th. of July, Caterlagh, and the 10th. of Aug. Waterford, commanded by
General Thomas Preston, and the strong Fort of Dungannon, under Giles Smith,
the 14th. of Aug. as in the North, Charlemont, that nothing indeed they
attempted, but resigned to their Power.

Ireton this Winter continued at Kilkenny, because the Plague (which Ireton's
Service from Kilkenny.
the Summer before had so exceedingly raged at Dublin* as it is reported, there
died thereof, 17000 Persons) was not yet ceased, whence he caused several
Parties to be sent abroad, which did notable Service in diverse Parts of the
Country; as in taking in Balimoy, in the Kings County, and in chasing back
into Thomond, the Earl of Castlehaven, as also in frighting the Lord Muskery to
his Fastnesses in Kerry, who (whilst the Army was prosecuting the Earl of
Castlehaven) had burnt the Town and Parts near Mackrump, whilst the Rebels
surprised two Troops of Horse, and a Company of Foot, belonging to Colonel
Zanckey, about the midst of February.

About the 21. of February, Colonel Huson, with 1600 Foot and 700 Horse,
marched to the County of Westmeath, to reduce some Garrisons, and to prevent
the Rebels raising of Forces there. When he came to Tecrogham, he heard Colonel
Preston and Sir John Dungan had besieged a Castle of theirs, in the Kings
County, to whose Relief he marched as far as Terrills Pass, where he heard that
Colonel Reynolds had dispersed them; thence turning toward Mullingar, he took
in Kilbridge, wherein he found 200 Barrels of Corn, and the next day entered
Mullingar; whereupon the Enemy quitted Tuets-town, Ledwicks-town, and Disert,
where he heard that Colonel Reynolds had taken in Donore, in which was found
500 Barrels of Corn; and having garrisoned Ballimore, thence marched to
Ballimallock, (a Pass upon the Aine) and took it, and Sir Thomas Nugent's
Castle, in one day: Thence drawing toward Finagh, he encamped against Tough's
Castle, which (after the third shot) was delivered him, where hearing that
Phelim Mac Hugh with 1500 Foot, was marching on the other side of the River, to
the re-enforcement of Finagh, Finagh taken by Colonel Huson. Sir Theophilus
Jones's excellent Service.
he sent Sir Theophilus Jones with 400 Horse, and his own Regiment of Foot, to
encounter him, who fell upon them, killing O Cahan, and diverse considerable
Officers, with about 400 private Soldiers, and taking Prisoners Colonel Mac
Donel his Lieutenant General, 1 Major, 12 Captains, 12 Lieutenants, 15 Ensigns,
the Quartermaster, and about 376 private Soldiers, and non-Commission
Officers, Sir Theophilus performing in this, as in all other Expeditions,
excellent Service; whilst Colonel Huson stormed Finagh, but was repulsed with
some loss, though he had it surrendered the next day upon Conditions, bearing
date the 14th. of March, 1650. which Surrender brought in five adjacent Castles.

About May, 1651. Order was taken in England, for sending over Recruits 1651.
of Foot, and Money to pay and raise Men; but by reason of the numbers sent
into Scotland, there could not many or much be spared; but what could be
procured, came over very opportunely to reinforce the Army, then ready to
march to the Siege of Limerick; Ireton having appointed Sir Charles Coot with
2000 Horse, and as many choice Northerly Foot, to march into Connaght, by the
way of Sligo, which he did, seating himself before that strong Fort, as though
he would have besieged it; but perceiving that the Irish from all Parts were
drawing to its Relief, he drew off, and passing (not without difficulty) the
Curlew Mountains, entered Connaght, and had Athlone, (by the Lord Dillon)
Portumna, with some other Places of no great strength, delivered to him: whilst
Ireton, with the main Army, passed the River Shannon, about Killalow, where the
Rebels were gathered together, but made little resistance, Ireton sits down
before Limerick.
and presently fell down before Limerick, where he entrenched himself, and made
a formed Siege.

During which, he and others intercepted frequent Intelligence from the Bishop
and Mayor of Limerick, That unless they were effectually relieved (and that
speedily) the Commonalty would force them to deliver the City upon Conditions
to the Enemy; Upon which the Lord Broghil The Lord Broghil routs the Lord
Muskery, coming to relieve Limerick.
(by orders from Ireton) drew all the Forces of the County together, to impede
the Lord Muskery, then marching out of the County of Kerry, with a considerable
Force; and though he made many halts, (seeming as if he intended another
Design, then the Relief of Limerick) yet (being narrowly watched) the Scouts
brought certain Intelligence about the 22. of June, that his Body of Horse
marched from Dromagh, toward Castleliskin, one of the fastest Places in
Ireland, and directly in the way to Limerick; upon which the Lord Broghil
hastened toward them, and about midnight (in a horrid storm of rain and wind)
fell upon their Horse-Guards, and beat them in; upon which their Camp took so
hot an alarm, as he drove them soon to the Place from whence they came, thereby
securing the Army before Limerick; The Enemy in the interim getting over the
Blackwater, and afterward were pursued by the Lord Broghil, till (finding a
convenient ground to draw up their Battle in) they were faced by him, who kept
the Right Wing, Major Wally the Command of the Left, and Major Cuppage the
Foot, so happily on each part secured, that though indeed the Irish never more
resolutely, and in better order maintained their Station, they were at last
wholly routed; Bogs and Woods (usually their safety) being not near them. The
chief Prisoners that day taken, were Lieutenant Colonel Mac Gillacuddy,
Commanding young Muskeries Regiment, a man more Popular then Muskery himself,
Major Mac-Gillariagh, an old Spanish Soldier, Major Mac-Finine, and some
considerable Commanders of Horse.

But to return to the Marquess of Clanrickard; who (notwithstanding The
Marquess of Clanrickard thought to have engaged Sir Charles Coot, but by a
misfortune on the Earl of Castlehaven's men, he and his Army were scattered.
all the forementioned Discouragements, some whereof he expected not,) hearing
of Sir Charles Coot's intentions of entering Connaght, issued out his Orders to
all the Forces, (which for convenience of Quarter, and the more to infest the
Enemy, were scattered over the Provinces) that they should meet at the General
Rendezvous, at the time and place appointed; Resolving with as much expedition
as he could, to engage the Enemy; where hearing that Sir Charles Coot (to whom
Ireton had left the Care of that Province) was marched toward Athlone, he made
all possible haste to fall in his Rear, or to wait his Motion; but after he had
gone two days march toward that Place, he received certain Intelligence, that
Sir Charles had taken Athlone, and (being furnished with all necessary Guides)
was marched toward Gallway, to block it up; whereupon he made what haste he
could back the same way he came, and sent Orders to the Earl of Castlehaven,
(General of the Horse) to meet him with the Forces under his Command, at a
certain Village, where the Deputy would expect him. The Enemy being then within
less then a Mile, with their main Body, and only a narrow Pass between them,
which the Lord Deputy doubted not to defend, until all his Forces should come
up, and then resolved to sight them, which was the only thing he desired, and
thought himself to be in a very good posture to do it: But the Earl of
Castlehaven, before he would advance to the Lord Deputy, thought it convenient
to secure a single Pass over the River Shannon, whereby the Enemy might
possibly get over, that so the Enemy might be entirely engaged, where the Lord
Deputy was without any danger in the Rear; But by the time the Earl had marched
some miles, he heard the report of Muskets, and looking back, he saw the two
Troops of Horse he had left to secure that Pass, and the 60 Foot, running, and
dispersing, without being pursued; for the Enemy having Intelligence of the
Earl's march, sent over 2 or 3 Boats with Musketeers from the other side of the
River, and landed without opposition at the Castle situate on the Pass. Upon
which news (notwithstanding the Earl's Commands or Entreaties) his Army in that
Consternation, (without the sight of an Enemy) fled and disbanded; insomuch,
that of 4000 which in the morning the Body consisted of, the Earl brought not
with him to the Place where the Lord Deputy was, above 40 Horse; whereupon the
Lord Deputy saw he was in no case to engage the Enemy; that he should be
quickly attacked in the Rear, by that part of the Army which had already, and
speedily would pass the River; and that the same fright possessed his men, who
had hitherto kept the Bridge, and who now began to yield ground; and that in
truth, very many of his Soldiers had that night run away; And thereupon he
drew off, and marched away, both Horse and Foot: (when they were gotten out of
danger of the Enemies pursuit,) And from this time, the Lord Deputy could never
draw any considerable and firm Body into the Field, nor make any opposition to
the Enemies Progress; The Irish in all Places submitting to, and compounding
with them, murmuring as much now against the Lord Deputy, as they had before
against the Lord Lieutenant.

Before the Lord Lieutenant had left the Kingdom, he had sent the The Lord
Taaff intended to have gone to the King, but being prevented enters into a
Treaty with the Duke of Lorraign.
Lord Viscount Taaff, who had been an Eyewitness of all his Proceedings, and
had in vain labored to compose and dispose the minds of the Clergy to the
Kings Service, to give the King an Account of the Affairs of Ireland, and how
impossible it would be to preserve his Authority in that Kingdom, without some
more then ordinary Supplies from abroad; which joining with the most
considerable and Loyal Part of the Irish, might have kept the Refractory in
awe. His Lordship landed in Flanders, the King being then in Scotland, and
quickly understood how unlikely his Journey into that Kingdom was, to advance
the Business upon which he came, or indeed that he should be admitted to the
Presence of the King, from whom most were removed that attended him thither;
and thereupon he staid in Flanders, and found an opportunity to present the
Condition of the Papists of Ireland, in such manner, to the Duke of Lorrain,
(who being nearly Allied to the King always, professed singular affection to
his Majesty and his Interest) as in the end, he prevailed with him to send them
some Relief; And as soon as it was known that the Lord Lieutenant was landed in
France, the Duke sent a Person of Principal Trust about him (the Abbot of St.
Katharines) into Ireland, with a Credential, as his Ambassador to the Clergy,
and Catholic Nobility and Gentry of that Kingdom, to treat with them, in order
to their receiving Aid and Supplies from the Duke; and to the end, that his
Highness might in truth understand in what Capacity they were to be relieved,
and how much they could themselves contribute thereunto; it being not then
known that the Marquess of Ormond had left the Kings Authority behind him, but
rather conceived, that upon those many Provocations and Affronts which had been
offered to him, he had withdrawn (with his Person) the Countenance and
Authority they had so much undervalued, and so little deserved. When the Abbot
landed in Ireland, The Duke of Lorraign's Agent lands.
which was about the end of February, (and within little more then 2 months
after the Lord Lieutenant departed thence) he heard that the Marquess of
Clanrickard was the Kings Deputy, and thereupon he gave him presently notice of
his arrival, addressed himself to him, showed his Commission and Credentials,
and assured him, That the Duke his Master had so entire an Affection to the
King of England, (the preservation of whose Interest in that Kingdom, was the
chief Motive to him to offer his Assistance) that if he had known any Person
had been entrusted there with his Majesty's Authority, he would have addressed
himself unto him, and no other; And that he finding his Lordship invested with
that Power, did (what he knew his Master expected at his hands) apply himself
unto him, with, and by whose Direction, he would alone steer himself, through
that Negotiation: He told him the Duke had already disbursed 6000 Pistols, for
the supplying them with those things he heard they stood most in need of, which
were brought over by a Religious Parson who came with him, and that he was
ready to be informed, of what they would desire from his Highness, that might
enable them to resist their Enemy, and that The Lord Deputy impowers a
Committee to treat with Lorraign's Agent.
he would consent to any thing that was reasonable for him to undertake.
Hereupon, the Lord Deputy appointed a Committee of the Commissioners of Trust,
together with some Prelates, to confer with the Ambassador, to receive any
Overtures from him, and to present them with their Advice thereupon unto him.
They met accordingly, and received the Propositions from the Ambassador; but
they were so disagreeable to the professions he had made of respect to the
King, and indeed so inconsistent with the Kings Honor and Interest, as there
was great reason to suspect, that they proceeded rather from the Encouragement
and Contrivance of the Irish, then from his own temper and disposition; and
this was the more believed, when instead of returning the Propositions to the
Lord Deputy, they kept the same in their own hands, put out some of those who
were appointed by him to be of the Committee, and chose others in their Places,
and proceeded in the Treaty, without giving the Deputy an Account of what was
demanded by the Ambassador, or what they thought fit to offer unto him. Of all
which the Deputy took notice, and thereupon forbade them to proceed any further
in that way, and restrained them unto certain Articles which he sent them,
which contained what he thought fit to offer to the Ambassador, and gave them
Power only to Treat: Notwithstanding his positive Direction, they proceeded in
that Treaty with the Ambassador, and sent an Advice to the Lord Deputy to
consent unto the Articles proposed by him, since they said he would not recede
from what he had proposed, and that it was much better to submit to the same,
then that the Treaty should be broken off. The Lord Deputy as positively
declared, that what was demanded, was so derogatory to the Honor of the King
his Master, and destructive to his Interest, as he would never agree to it, and
resolved presently to leave the Town. And when the Ambassador sent to him to
desire to see him, and take his leave of him, he absolutely refused, and sent
him word, That he would never pay his Civility to, The Deputies honorable
Reply to the Agent.
or receive it from, a Person who had so much swarv'd from the Propositions
made by himself, and who had presumed to make Propositions so dishonorable to
the King his Master; and he believed so contrary to the good Pleasure of the
Duke of Lorraign; And that he would send away an Express to the Duke, to inform
him of his Miscarriage, and he presumed he would do Justice unto the King upon
him.

When the Prelates saw that no obstinacy in the Ambassador, nor Importunity
from them, could prevail with the Lord Deputy, to show what influence they had
upon that Treaty, they persuaded the Ambassador to consent to the same
Propositions he had formerly (no doubt by the same Advice) rejected; and
thereupon to make the sum formerly disbursed by the Duke at his coming out of
Flanders, full 20000 l. and the Lord Deputy sent a couple of Gentlemen Sir
Nicholas Plunket, Jeffrey Brown Esquires.
into Flanders, to Treat further with the Duke of Lorraign, according to such
Commissions and Instructions as he gave them. The Bishop of Ferns Nicholas
French.
about the same time left Ireland, and came likewise to Bruxels; and having
(without the Privity of the Lord Deputy) received some secret Trust and
Delegation from the Prelates of Ireland, and Credit from them, to the Duke of
Lorraign, he quickly interessed himself in that Treaty, and took upon him the
greatest part in it, and that which he said was the sense of the Nation: He
reproached the Persons employed and trusted by the Lord Deputy, with all the
Proceedings which had been in Ireland, by the consent of the Confederate
Catholics, inveighed against their opposing Part of the Bishop of Fern's
insolent Letter against the Lord Deputy.
the Nuncio, and appealing against the Excommunication issued out by him, he
told them (and all this by a Letter under his hand) that he was clearly of
opinion, That the Excommunication was just and lawful, and that the greatest
Statesmen, Soldiers, Citizens, and People disobeying, and now obstinate, are
and were delivered to Satan, and therefore forsaken of God, and unworthy of
Victory, and of his Holy Blessing; And thereupon he said, he did with all
sincerity and charity offer his own humble opinion what was to be done by them,
which was to the end, the Agreement they were making with his Highness the Duke
of Lorraign, might become profitable to the Nation, and acceptable in the eyes
of God, that they would immediately with humble hearts, make a Submission unto
his Holiness in the name of the Nation, and beg the Apostolical Benediction,
that the light of Wisdom, the Spirit of Fortitude, Virtue, Grace, Success, and
the Blessing of God, might return again to them: He told them the necessity of
doing this was the greater, for that the Person from whom they came with
Authority, (the Marquess of Clanrickard the Lord Deputy) was for several causes
Excommunicated, a jure and Homine, and that he was at Rome reputed the great
Contemner of the Authority and Dignity of Churchmen, and a Persecutor of the
Lord Nuncio, and some Bishops, and other Churchmen; And after many rude and
bitter reproaches against the Deputy, he used these words* Do you think God
will prosper a Contract grounded upon the Authority of such a man? and shortly
after, he said that if the Duke of Lorraign were rightly informed of the
Business, he would never enter upon a Bargain to preserve or rather restore
Holy-Religion in the Kingdom, with Agents bringing their Authority from a
withered cursed Hand: And then concluded for my part (upon the denial to hear
my humble Prayers, which I hope will not happen) I will withdraw my self as a
man dispairing of any fruit to come from an unfound Trunk, where there is no
Sap of Grace: And am resolved to communicate no more with you in that Affair,
but rather to let the Prince know, he was building his Resolutions of doing
good upon an unhallowed foundation, and that God therefore (unless himself will
undertake to obtain an Absolution for the Nation) will not give him the Grace
to lay down the Lapis Angularis of his own house again, in that Kingdom. This
Letter bare date at Bruxels the 20th. of July, 1651. the Persons to whom it was
directed, being then in the same Town.

What the issue of that Treaty was, and what regard there was had therein to
the King's Honor, we have (in the next Place) reason to mention; And the
rather for that those, whom the Marquess of Clanrickard authorized to Treat
with the Duke of Lorraign, had most perfidiously waved his Instructions,
resuming to themselves a Deputation and Authority from the People and Kingdom
of Ireland; An Insolency so great, as the Lord Deputy resents it with a just
Indignation. First we shall give you their Agreement, then his Letter. An
Agreement betwixt Charles the 4th. Duke of Lorrain, and Theobald Lord Viscount
Taaff, Sir Nicholas Plunket, and Jeffrey Brown, deputed and authorized by the
People and Kingdom of Ireland.
1. THe most Illustrious Duke is to be vested with Royal Power, under the Title
of Protector Royal of Ireland.

2. Because Religion is the prime End and Subject of the Treaty, all is to
begin with an Imploring Application to the Pope, for his Paternal Benediction
and Help, That he will not be wanting in things Spiritual or Temporal; in
consideration whereof it is Protested, that constant perpetual Obsequiousness
of Duty and Faithfulness, shall be paid to his Holiness, and the Apostolic See.

3. In consideration of this Royal Protector's Power granted, the Duke is by
War to prosecute the Kings Enemies, and afford him all possible Assistance.

4. The said Duke is to do nothing in Derogation of the Kings Authority or
Jurisdiction in Ireland, but rather to amplify it: And having restored the
Kingdom and Religion to its due pristine Estate, he is to resign cheerfully the
Kingdom to the King.

5. Before Resignation as aforesaid, the Duke is to be re-imbursed all by him
pre-impended in this Business; and for this Re-imbursment, a general and exact
Obedience to the Duke, in Faith and Fidelity from the Kingdom and People, is
made and to be observed, without reservation to any other Superiority
whatsoever.

6. The Duke is not to fail on his part, to expel out of Ireland, Heretics,
Enemies to the King and his Religion, and to recover and defend all things
belonging to the faithful Subjects of Ireland.

7. The Duke is Solely and Absolutely to exercise all Military Power for the
present and future in Ireland, as to the nomination of all Commanders, and
guiding all Martial Proceedings at his own Pleasure, and in his own Person,
unless he in his absence substitute some other Catholic Person.

8. The Duke is to introduce no Innovation in the Towns, etc. to him assigned,
repugnant to the Securities, Privileges, Immunities, Proprieties, Lands,
Estates, or ancient Laws of the Irish, reserving only to himself, Authority to
apply Remedies to any thing accruing, wherein public prejudice may be
concerned.

9. The Duke is not to interpose in Administration of Judicial or Civil
Affairs, but leave them to be proceeded in, according to the Fundamental Laws,
and public Form of the Kings chief Governor, and the Assembly instituted.

10. The manner of calling Assemblies to be as formerly, unless complaint arise
against their Government, or other extraordinary Emergencies hinder; And then
according to the ancient Laws, the cutting off the Assembly, is to be at the
Pleasure of his Highness.

11. When the work is done in Ireland, by consent of a General Assembly, the
Duke promises to afford Agents to the King against Rebelling Adversaries in
other Kingdoms.

12. In case the Duke cannot go in Person into Ireland, it is free in his
Choice and Pleasure to depute any other man of Catholic Piety, who shall be
independent on the Militia, and in Civil Matters shall be received to all
manner of Councils, in the same right as any other Counselor or Commissioner.

13. All Cities, Castles, Lands, taken from the English, shall revert to the
Owners, if Catholics, who have constantly persevered in the Catholic Quarters
under the Duke; Yet the Duke's Military Power shall be entire over the same, to
Garrison and dispose of them for public Security, at his Pleasure.

14. All Pay to the Soldiers, is to pass from the Duke, as well out of the
public Revenues, as the Duke's Coffers when that fails; Provided that the Duke
disburses of his proper Money for public uses, for the future to be repaid
him, as his former Disbursements.

15. All Goods of Enemies and Dilinquents, are to be converted to the public
Military Charges, and toward rewarding great Merits by the Duke, with advice
of the General Assembly.

16. The Duke, besides 20000 l. already contributed, promises all further
Accommodations and Supplements for War, together with his Power and Industry,
what is not above the reach of his Faculties, and beneath the necessities of
the War, toward the repayment whereof, as well principal as the annual
provenue and use thereof, the whole Nation of Ireland is to be liable until the
last penny be paid; And for Caution in the mean time, the Duke is to be seized
and possessed in his own hands, of Galway, Limerick, Athenry, the Castle and
Town of Athlone, and Waterford, and the Royal Fort of Duncannon, (when
recovered from the Enemy) and these are to remain to him and his Heirs until
full and entire satisfaction received, and to pay just Obedience, and be
garrisoned and commanded at his Pleasure.

17. In laying of public Taxes, and levying the same for the Dukes
satisfaction, the Duke do proceed by Advice of the General Assembly, and all
aggrieved Parties in case of inequality, to seek Redress from the General
Assembly.

18. For liquidating and stateing the Dukes Disbursements, a certain Method
shall be agreed on between the Duke and the said Transactors, but for the
Persons to be entrusted in that Charge, the General Assembly is to alter them
at their Pleasure.

19 The Duke shall make no Peace nor Cessation, without the Lord Deputy or
General Assembly.

20. The Lord Deputy and General Assembly, shall make no Peace without the
consent of the Duke.

July 22. 1651. Signed, Charles of Lorraign.

The Lord Marquess of Clanrickard, Lord Deputy of Ireland, his Letter to the
Duke of Lorraign, October. 20th. 1651.
May it please your Highness.
I Had the Honor on the 12th. of this instant, to receive a Letter from your
Highness, dated the 10th. of September, wherein you are pleased to express your
great zeal for the advancement of the Catholic Religion in this Kingdom, your
great affection to the King my Master, and your good opinion of this Nation,
and your compassion of their sufferings, and your great readiness to afford
them aid and assistance, even equal with your own nearest concernments; and
that your Highness received such satisfaction from the Queen and Duke of York,
as did much strengthen those resolutions, so as they might sooner appear, but
for the stay made here of Monsieur St. Catherin, and his long Northern Voyage
upon his return, and referred what concerned the agreement, to the relation of
those Commissioners I had employed to your Highness, to treat upon that subject
of Assistance and Relief for this Kingdom. I with much alacrity congratulate
your Highness pious intentions, for the preservation of the Catholic Religion,
your great and Princely care to recover his Majesty's Rights and Interests,
from his Rebel Subjects of England, and the high obligation you put upon this
Nation, by your tender regard of them, and desire to redeem them from the great
miseries and afflictions they have endured, and the eminent dangers they are
in; And it shall be a principal part of my ambition, to be an useful instrument
to serve your Highness, in so famous and glorious an enterprise. And that I may
be the more capable to contribute somewhat to so religious and just ends;
First, in discharge of my conscience toward God, my duty to the King my Master,
and to dis-abuse your Highness, and give a clear and perfect information, so
far as comes to my knowledge, I am obliged to represent unto your Highness,
that by the title of the Agreement and Articles therein contained, made by
those Commissioners I employed to your Highness, and but lately come into my
hands, They have violated the trust reposed in them, by having cast off, and
declined the Commission and Instructions they had from me, in the King my
Masters behalf, and all other Powers, that could by any other means be derived
from him, and pretend to make an agreement with your Highness, in the name of
the Kingdom and People of Ireland, for which they had not, nor could have any
warrantable Authority; and have abused your Highness, by a counterfeit show of
a private Instrument, fraudulently procured and signed (as I am informed) by
some inconsiderable and factious Persons, ill-affected to his Majesty's
Authority, without any knowledge or consent of the generality of the Nation, or
Persons of greatest Quality or Interest therein, and who under a seeming zeal
and pretense of service to your Highness, labor more to satisfy their private
ambitions, then the advantage of Religion or the Nation, or the prosperous
success of your Highness generous undertakings; And to manifest the clearness
of mine own proceeding, and make such deceitful Practices more apparent, I send
your Highness herewith an authentic Copy of my Instructions, which accompanied
their Commission, when I employed them to your Highness, as a sufficient
evidence to convince them. And having thus fully manifested their breach of
public Trust, I am obliged in the King my Masters name, to protest against
their unwarrantable proceedings, and to declare all the Agreements and Acts
whatsoever concluded by those Commissioners, to be void, and illegal, being not
derived from, or consonant to his Majesty's Authority, being in duty bound thus
far to vindicate the King my Masters Honor and Authority, and to preserve his
just and undoubted Rights from such deceitful and rebellious Practices; as
likewise with an humble and respective care, to prevent those prejudices that
might befall your Highness, in being deluded by counterfeit shows, in doing you
greater Honor; where it is apparent, that any undertaking laid upon such false
and ill-grounded Principles, as have been smoothly digested and fixed upon that
Nation, as their desire and request, must overthrow all those Heroic and
Prince-like Acts, your Highness has proposed to your self, for Gods glory and
service, the restoration of oppressed Majesty, and the relief of his
distressed Kingdom, which would at length fall into intestine broils and
divivisions, if not forceably driven into desperation; I shall now with a
hopeful and cheerful importunity upon a clear score, free from those deceits,
propose to your Highness, that for the advancement of all those great ends you
aim at, and in the King my Masters behalf, and in the name of all the Loyal
Catholic Subjects of this Nation, and for the preservation of those important
cautionary Places, that are security for your Highness past and present
disbursements, you will be pleased to quicken and hasten those aids and
assistances, you intended for the relief of Ireland; and I have with my whole
power, and through the greatest hazards, striven to defend them for you, and to
preserve all other Ports, that may be at all times of advantage and safeguard
to your Fleets, and Men of War, having yet many good Harbors left; but also
engage in the King my Masters name, that whatsoever may prove to your
satisfaction, that is any way consistent with his Honor and Authority, and
have made my humble applications to the Queens Majesty, and my Lord Lieutenant,
(the King being in Scotland) further to agree, confirm, and secure, whatsoever
may be of advantage to your Highness; and if the last Galliot had but brought
10000 l. for this instant time, it would have contributed more to the recovery
of this Kingdom, then far greater sums delayed, by enabling our Forces to meet
together, for the relief of Limerick, which cannot but be in great distress
after so long a Siege, and which if lost, (although I shall endeavor to
prevent it) will cost much treasure to be regained. And if your Highness will
be pleased to go on cheerfully, freely, and seasonably, with this great work, I
make no question, but God will give so great a blessing thereto, as that my
self, and all the Loyal Subjects of this Kingdom, may soon and justly proclaim,
and leave recorded to posterity, that your Highness was the great and glorious
restorer of our Religion, Monarch, and Nation; and that your Highness may not
be discouraged or diverted, from this generous enterprise, by the malice or
invectives of any ill affected, it is a necessary duty in me, to represent unto
your Highness, that the Bishop of Ferns (who as I am informed, has gained some
interest in your favor) is a Person, that has ever been violent against, and
malicious to his Majesty's Authority and Government, and a fatal Instrument in
contriving and fomenting all those divisions and differences that have rent
asunder this Kingdom, the introduction to our present miseries, and weak
condition: And that your Highness may clearly know his disposition, I send
herewithal a Copy of part of a Letter written by him Which was part of that
Letter mentioned before, giving his Character of the Lord Deputy.
, directed to the Lord Taaffe, Sir Nicholas Plunket, and Jeffery Brown, and
humbly submitted to your judgment, whether those expressions be agreeable to
the temper of the Apostolical Spirit, and considering whose Person and
Authority I represent, what ought to be the reward of such a crime. I must
therefore desire your Highness, in the King my Masters behalf, that he may not
be countenanced or entrusted in any Affairs, that have relation to his
Majesty's Interest in this Kingdom, where I have constantly endeavored, by all
possible service, to deserve your Highness good opinion, and obtaining that
favor to be a most faithful acknowledger of it, in the capacity, and under the
title of,

Your Highness most humble and obliged Servant, CLANRICKARD.
Athenree, 20th. October. 1651.



Thus the Lord Deputy very faithfully discharged his duty; and great cause
there was to protest against such proceedings of the Confederates, they putting
his Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland into the hands of a Foreign Prince, and in
that, assuming to themselves the name of The Kingdom and People of Ireland, as
if there had been no other Party or People in the Kingdom (or not considerable)
but themselves alone; and as if then in Ireland there had been no Power or
Government but theirs only, his Majesty's Authority in the hands of his Deputy
not regarded or consulted. They also (the Confederates) in that giving up the
Kingdom into the Power of a Stranger, coloring their Treason with a flattering
Clause, and an empty and insignificant Title to their Natural Prince in
Reversion, and by Resignation, when the new Protector, commanding all, should
please to do it; he being first satisfied of all Disbursments, Charges, and
Claims whatsoever, he himself being Auditor: A Concern of that importance, as
we seldom find, where others have been called in upon Assistance (especially on
such Encouragements) that they have quitted their hold without effusion of much
blood, or an absolute dis-inherizon of the right Owner: And therefore the Lord
Deputies foresight of such an Evil, does commend him faithful to his Prince,
and just to his Nation. Nor can it be doubted, that the Attestation of this
Peer (one that has run the hazard of his Countries safety) should be further
credited than what the Bishop of Ferns, or any obscure loose Friar (how
prodigal soever in their Calumnies) should or can publish in the bitterness of
their spirit, a crime incident to their Faculty, being ill affected to his
Majesty, worse to his Governors.

One of the principal Motives, which induced the Marquis of Clanrickard to
submit to that Charge, and to undertake a Province which he knew would be very
burdensome and grievous in several respects, was the joint promise, That the
City of Limerick, and the Town of Galway, would pay all imaginable duty to him.
The Clergy obliged themselves in that particular with all confidence, and the
Deputies of the Places promised all that could be desired: But when the Lord
Deputy found it necessary to settle that business, they would neither receive a
Garrison or Governor from him; and when he offered himself to stay in
Limerick, (when Ireton was drawing before it) and to run his Fortune with them,
they refused it, as peremptorily as they had done to the Lord Lieutenant. It is
true, both Limerick and Galway were contented to receive Soldiers; but they
must be such only as were of their own choosing, not such either in number or
quality as the Lord Deputy would have sent to them, or as were necessary for
their security: They chose likewise their own Governor, or rather kept the
Government themselves, and gave the Title to one, whom they thought least like
to contradict them; and, in a word, behaved themselves like two Commonwealths,
and obeyed the Deputy no farther than they were inclined by their own
convenience; they who compounded with the Enemy in the Country, corresponded
with them in the Town, and thereby gave the Enemy intelligence of all that
passed: Wonderful diligence was used to The Confederates cherished in a good
opinion of the Independents.
make it be thought, that the Independents were not uncharitable unto Papists,
and that they wished not any compulsion should be used in matter of Religion;
and when the acts of cruelty and blood, of putting their Priests and Prelates
to an ignominious death, (of which there were new instances every day) were
mentioned: It was answered, Those proceedings were carried on by the power of
the Presbyterians, very much against the Nature and Principles of the other
Party.

This license of Communication, and the evil consequences that must attend it,
was enough understood by the Lord Deputy, but could no more be prevented,
reformed, or punished, than he could infuse a new heart or spirit into the
People; one instance will serve the turn: There was in the Town a Friar,
Anthony Geoghean, who had always adhered Friar Geoghehan's carriage against the
State.
to the Nuncio, and opposed the King's Authority to the utmost of his power,
several Letters written by him into the Enemies Quarters were intercepted, and
brought to the Lord Deputy, in which, though there were many things in Cipher,
there appeared much of the present state and condition of the Town; and in one
of them, dated the 4th. of Febr. 1651. he thus writes, If the service of God
had been as deep in the hearts of our Nation, as that Idol of Dagon, ( a
foolish Loyalty) a better course for its honor and preservation had been taken
in time. The Lord Deputy believed the crime to be so apparent, and of such a
nature, that (what Accomplices soever he might have) none would have the courage
to appear in his behalf: And that he might give the Clergy an opportunity to
show their zeal in a business, that concerned so much their common safety, he
referred the examination of the Friar unto the Bishops (whereof there were
three or four in Town) and to some other of the principal of the Clergy, and
appointed them to require him to produce the Cipher which he had used, and to
examine him to whom the Letters were intended (they being directed to
counterfeit and suppositious names.) The Cipher was accordingly produced, and
thereby many expressions ( in the Letter) appeared to be full of neglect and
reproach to the King and others, of insolence and contumely toward the Lord
Deputy; they mentioned little hope was left of relief from the Duke of Lorrain;
and that they resolved to send one to treat with the Rebels, and had found
private means of conveying one to that purpose: The Friar promised to use all
his diligence to dispose the Catholics to have a good opinion of the
Independents, and made some request concerning himself. All that he alleged
for his defense was, That the Letters written by him were to one who was
employed by the Court of Rome; that he had no ill meaning against the King or
Deputy, and that he had himself a Trust from Rome, and Instructions from the
Secretary of the Congregation, De propaganda Fide, and the Bishops certifi'd
that they had seen the Instructions, and that they did not relate at all to the
Temporal State. And this was all the satisfaction and justice the Lord Deputy
could procure, though he writ several Letters of Expostulation to the Bishops
thereupon: Whether this be a part of the Privileges and Immunities of the
Catholic Roman Church, and enjoyed in any Catholic Country, and whether it
can be indulged to them in any other Country where the Authority of the Bishop
of Rome is not submitted unto, we must leave to the World to judge and
determine. In the interim, If Protestant Kings and Princes are provident and
severe for the prevention of such practices, and for the establishing their own
security, this must not be imputed to an unreasonable jealousy of, or a
prejudice to the Roman Catholic Religion, but to the confident presumption of
those men, (under the vizard of universal obedience) who have pretended
Religion for their warrant or excuse, for the most unlawful and unjustifiable
actions.

This was the obedience and submission they paid to the Kings Authority and
Government: Let us see now what Government they provided for themselves, and
what course they (who were still jealous of being betrayed by those who were
trusted by the King) took for their own security and preservation; and what
power the Bishops and Clergy had to support their own Interest and Dignity,
after they appeared to have enough to destroy or suppress that of the King. The
City of Limerick was entirely governed by the Clergy. We have shown you how the
Herald (in proclaming the Peace of 1646.) was affronted there; as also of their
contumelious behavior toward the Marquis of Ormond in 1650. We must now take
notice of their carriage to the Marquis of Clanrickard, to whom (contrary to
their obligation and solemn promise) they continued the same obstinacy,
refusing to receive such a Governor and Garrison as he thought fit to give
them, or to entertain him in the Town with the Power and Authority of Deputy,
after he had assumed that Place and Title upon their own importunity, and
promise of obedience; however, he sent thither such men, both Officers and
Soldiers, as they desired, and no other.

During the Siege of Limerick, (now straightly begirt by Ireton) Sir Walther
Dungan stormed Ross-town and Castle Jordan; and the notable Quarter-beater Nash
killed Colonel Cook, coming with a Party from Cork, but was slain in the onset,
though his Party was victorious; whilst at Limerick the Besieged made many
fierce Sallies, to the loss of the Assailants: for in one, of 1000 men, they
killed above 300 of the Besiegers; and upon Ireton's attempt against the Island
before the Town, the 15th. of July, 1651. an hundred and twenty of his men were
lost, with their Leaders, Major Walker, Captain Graves, and Captain Whiting:
Ireton notwithstanding resolved not to depart without it, though the Governor
( Hugh O Neal, who had so gallantly defended Clonmel) refused to hearken to any
Conditions, in hopes that the Winter would force him off, or that himself might
receive necessary Supplies from without: But shortly after he perceived what he
was to trust to; for before Ireton had close besieged it a month, and sooner
than the Inhabitants were pressed with wants, the Commonalty began to discourse
of Treating with the Enemy, all the considerations of what they might undergo
hereafter (through timerousness occurred to them, and the improbability of
their receiving any succors proportionable to their wants: Yet it was very
hard for them to Treat, it being notoriously known, that Ireton would except
very many principal Persons amongst them, to whom no mercy should be shown; nor
could they expect any Conditions for the exercise of their Religion they had
been hitherto so jealous of. The Governor had only the Title and power to set
Watch, but the Mayor kept the Keys, and had many of the principal Officers at
his devotion; so that upon the 23d. of October, a mixed Council of Officers,
and of those of the Civil Government, met in the Townhouse, to consult what
was best to be done in order to the Treaty with the Enemy, (contrary to the
intentions of the Governor, who was resolved to hold it out to the last) and
after a long debate, it was concluded by the major part, that they would
proceed to a Treaty, and that they would not break it off upon the exception of
any persons, for Quarter or Confiscation of their Goods: and the next day was
appointed for the choosing of the Commissioners to be sent unto the Enemy. The
result of the former days debate being known in the Town, they no sooner met
for the Election of the Commissioners for the Treaty, than the Bishops of
Limerick and Emly, with the Clergy, came to the Townhouse, and threatened them
to issue out an Excommunication against them, if they proceeded in those
Counsels, the effect whereof would be, to deliver up the Prelates to be
slaughtered; notwithstanding which, they proceeded to the naming the Persons
who should treat for them. Whereupon the Bishops published their
Excommunication, with a perpetual Interdict of the City, which was fixed on the
doors of all the Churches and Chapels in the Town. But alas! those
Fulminations had been too loosely and impertinently used to retain any virtue
in time of need; and as Catholic as the Town was, (and there was not one
Protestant in it) the Excommunication wrought no effect. That very night
Colonel Fennel, and the other Officers of the Combination that pressed on the
Treaty, possessed themselves of St. John's Gate, and Cluam's Tower, driving the
Guards from thence; and when the Governor came thither, and demanded by what
Authority they were there, (he having given them Orders to Guard another
Quarter of the Town) they answered, The best of the Town knew, and approved
what they did: And it was very true, the Mayor Thomas Strick was of their
Party, and delivered the Key of that Port to Colonel Fennel, though he denied
it to the other Party that opposed the Treaty. The Governor called a Council
of War, and sent for Colonel Fennel to appear before them, who refused to come;
and being supplied with Powder from the Mayor, he turned the Cannon upon the
Town, and declared, That he would not quit Hugh O Neal, M. G. Patrick Purcel,
David Roch, Sir Richard Everard, the Bishops of Limerick and Emly, Friar Wolf,
Dominick Fanning, Alderman Thomas Strick, etc.
the place that he was possessed of, till the City should be yielded to the
Enemy. The Commissioners were sent out to Ireton, who would give no other
Conditions than, That the Garrison should lay down their Arms, the Officers
retaining their Swords, and march to what Place they would, except those
exempted from mercy, (who of the Clergy, Soldiers, and Citizens amounted to the
number of 24.) The Inhabitants had three months time assigned them to transport
their Persons, and three months more to remove their Goods within any Place the
Kingdom appointed, in which they might live. In brief, these were their
Conditions; but in respect of many things very considerable in the Articles
themselves, we shall here give them at large. Articles agreed upon the 27th day
of October, 1651. by and between Henry Ireton, the Deputy General, on the one
Part; and Barthol. Stackpoll, Recorder of the City of Limerick, Dom. White
Alderman of the same, Nicholas Haly Esquire Lieutenant Colonel Piers Lacy,
Lieutenant Colonel Donnogh O Brion, and John Baggot Esquire Commissioners appointed
by, and on the behalf of the Governor and Mayor of the said City, to Treat and
Conclude for the Surrender thereof, on the other Part.
THat the City of Limerick, with the Castle, and all the Places of Strength in
the City, be surrendered into the hands of the said Deputy General of Ireland,
for the use of the Parliament and Commonwealth of England, upon or before the
29th. of October. instant at Noon, together with all the Ordnance, Arms,
Ammunition, and other Furniture of War therein, and all the Goods of any kind,
not allowed by the ensuing Articles, to be carried away, or kept by the Owners;
and this without waste, spoil, or imbezilment; and the full possession of John's
Gate and Priors Mill shall be delivered unto the said Deputy General, or such
Guards as he shall appoint, (not exceeding one hundred men for John's Gate) this
day by Sun-Jet; and for performance hereof, the abovenamed Lieutenant Colonel
Piers Lacy, Lieutenant Colonel Donogh O Brion, Alderman Dom. White, and
Nicholas Haly Esquires, shall remain as Hostages with the said Deputy General,
until the surrender of the said City.

2. That in consideration hereof, all persons now in the City, (except such as
are hereafter excepted) shall have Quarter for their Lives, liberty of their
Persons, their Clothes, Money, and other Goods; so as to be free from Pillage,
Plunder, or other hostile violence in their Persons or Goods, during their
continuance under the said Deputies safe conduct or protection, by virtue of
the ensuing Articles respectively. But whereas through the practices of some
Persons, more eminent and active than the rest, both amongst the Clergy,
Military Officers, and Citizens, and other sorts of men, which, in the large
Conditions formerly tendered for surrender, have been rejected, the subsequent
occasions or opportunities for timely making of Conditions, neglected and
avoided, the dispositions and desires of many Persons within, to that purpose,
opposed, resisted, and restrained, and the generality of the People partly
deluded and deceived, (to the keeping of them in vain expectations of relief,
from one time to another) and partly overawed, or enforced by their power, to
concur and contribute thus long to the obstinate holding out of the Place;
therefore the Persons hereafter named, with Major General Hugo O Neil the
Governor, Major General Purcel, Sir Jeffery Gallaway, Lieutenant Colonel Lacy,
Captain George Wolf, Captain Lieutenant Sexton, the Bishop of Emly, John
Quillen a Dominican Friar, David Roch a Dominican Friar, Captain Laurence Welsh
a Priest, Francis Wolf a Franciscan Friar, Philip O Dwine a Priest, Alderman
Dom. Fanning, Alderman Thomas Stretch, Alderman Jordan Roach, Edmond Roach
Burgess, Sir Richard Everard, Doctor Higgen, Maurice Baggot of Baggots-town,
and Jeffery Barron, (being, as aforesaid, the principal, appearing in such
practices in this Siege, and the holding out so long) as also Evan the Welsh
Soldier, who ran into Limerick, and all other persons that have been employed,
and come into the City as Spies since the fourth day of June last, shall be
excepted and excluded from any benefit of this Article, or any Article ensuing;
and such of them as can be found within the Garrison, shall be rendered up at
mercy upon the surrender of the City: And any such Person or Persons, as shall
be found to hide or conceal any of the said excepted Persons, or be privy to
their concealment or attempt of escape, and not discover or do their best
endeavor to prevent the same, shall thereby be understood to have forfeited
the benefit of these Articles to themselves; but otherwise, none shall lose
that benefit for other men's default, in their concealment or escape, or for the
not rendering them up as aforesaid.

3. That all Officers, Soldiers, and all other persons now in the City, (not
excepted in the last precedent Article) shall also have liberty to march away
with their Clothes, Bag and Baggage, Money, and all other their Goods, of what
kind soever, except Arms, Ammunition, and other Utensils of War, (carrying
nothing but their own) to what Place or Places they shall choose respectively
within the Dominion of Ireland, not being a Garrison for the Parliament, (all
the Field-Officers of Horse and Foot, and Captains of Horse, with their Horses,
Pistols and Swords, and other the Commissioned Officers with their Swords
only) and shall have three months time after the surrender, to remove any
Goods of their own, that they shall not think fit soever to carry with them:
And such of them as shall choose to go to any Garrison or Parties of the Enemy,
shall have Convoy or safe Conduct for that purpose, for such time as shall be
requisite for their march, at the rate of ten miles a day, and shall have
Carriages and Provisions allowed from the Country at the usual Rates.

4. That such of the Citizens and Inhabitants interested in the City, as are
not excepted in the second Article, and shall not presently march, as
aforesaid, but desire to continue longer in the City, shall (upon application
for that purpose to the said Deputy General, or the chief Officer commanding in
Limerick after the surrender) have license given them to stay, either for such
further time as the said Deputy General, or the said chief Officer present,
shall find convenient; or until further warning given them to depart: and in
case of such license given till further warning, shall have four months time
allowed from and after such warning, for the removal of themselves and their
Families, and six months for the removal of their Goods; and during such
further time limited, or in case of reference to further warning during their
continuance there to the time of warning given; and for the said four months,
and six months after respectively, shall be protected in their Persons,
Families, and Goods, from all injury and violence; and at any time as they
shall desire, which in the said space or spaces respectively, shall have
liberty and safe conduct for the removal of themselves, their Families, and
Goods, to any Place or Places within this Dominion, not being Garrisoned for
the Parliament, as aforesaid; and if they shall not be admitted to reside
elsewhere in protection within this Dominion, they shall have liberty for
themselves, their Wives, Children, and Goods, to pass beyond the Seas:
Provided, that they pay their due proportion of what Taxes, and other
Contribution, shall be charged upon the City, from the day of the surrender, to
the day of the removal, in due proportion with other Places in Ireland, and
behave themselves as becomes: And such of the said Citizens and Inhabitants (as
having not license to stay until further warning) shall, within a month after
the surrender, be ordered to depart, shall have the same benefit of the third
Article, as those that march away immediately upon the surrender.

5. That all such Persons now in the City, as shall desire to live peaceably,
and submit to the Parliament of England, (except the Persons excepted in the
second Article aforegoing, and except all Clergymen, Priests, and Friars of
any Order) shall, upon their application to that purpose, have protection to
live quietly, at any such Place or Places, within this Dominion, as they shall
desire, and the said Deputy-General find convenient to admit: But such
Protection shall not be understood to extend either to the assuring of them,
either in the enjoyment of their Lands or other Hereditaments, or to the
granting of other indemnity, or freedom from question, or prosecution to
Justice in a Judicial way, for any Crimes they may be guilty of, except to such
as shall be found fit to have that mercy and favor expressly granted to them,
or to others, for a certain time to be limited for that purpose; but to such as
shall have protection for a limited time, either Citizens or others, it is
intended they shall be freed from any Suit or Censure in the Civil Judicature,
for things done in relation to the War, during the time limited.

Memorandum, as to the fourth Article aforegoing, it is intended, That the
Citizens not excepted against within a month, may tarry (without particular
application) and have four months, after warning given, to remove themselves
and Families, and six months to carry away their Goods.

Memorandum also, That all Soldiers or other persons (not excepted in the
second Article) who through sickness are disabled to remove themselves at
present, shall have liberty to march away when they shall recover, and have
equal benefit with others in their conditions respectively. And that from
twelve of the clock this day, there shall be Cessation of all acts of Hostility
on either part. But the Persons besieged not to come without the Walls, except
into the Island, and the way leading to it; nor the Besiegers to come within
the Walls or Island, saving into St. John's Gate, until the time limited for
surrender, without license from the other Party respectively.

And lastly, it is agreed, That no Person shall be understood to forfeit the
benefit of any the Articles, for another man's breach thereof, unless he be
found to be consenting thereto, or privy to it, without discovering or
endeavoring to prevent it. Provided this extend not to indempnifie the
Hostages in case of fail or of surrender.

In testimony whereof, the Parties first abovementioned, have interchangeably
set their Hands and Seals to, the day and year first above mentioned.

Bar. Stackpoll.
Don. O Brien.
Dom. White.
Pierce Lacy.
Nich. Haly.
John Baggot.



It cannot be believed, that these unequal and severe Conditions would have
been accepted from any Army, not strong enough to have imposed upon a People
unwilling to submit to them, and in a season of the year that alone would have
secured a Place less provided for resistance; but that Colonel Fennel (the same
night these hard demands were sent into the Town) received in St. John's Gate
Tower 200 men from Ireton, and the other were removed into another Fort, called
Price's Mill, where after they had continued two days; and the People of the
Town not yet agreeing what they would do, a Drum was sent through the City,
commanding all manner of Soldiers in pay within the Town, to repair to our
Ladies Church, and there to lay down their Arms; which was presently obeyed;
and the Soldiers being bid forthwith to leave the Town, Ireton, the 29th. of
October, marched in, and receiving the Keys, was without any contradiction
quietly possessed thereof, causing as many of the excepted Persons as could be
found to be committed to Prison, and made Sir Hardress Waller Governor of the
City.

In this manner was Limerick defended by the Catholic Irish; and this
obedience did the Prelates and Clergy, in their need, receive from those, over
whom they had power enough to seduce from the Duty they owed to the King, and
from submitting to his Authority; and now was the Harvest that they gathered
the fruit of all their labors: The Instances of severity and blood which
Ireton gave upon his being possessed of this Place, were very remarkable:
Edmund O Duyr, the Bishop of Limerick, had the dexterity and good Fortune, that
either by marching out amongst the Common Soldiers, or by concealing himself
with some faithful Friend in the Town, (which is not so probable) to escape
their hands, and afterward died at Brussels, pursued with the malice of the
Nuncionist Zealots; whilst Ireton manifested what his portion would have been,
by the treatment they gave to Terlagh O Brien, the Bishop of Emly, whom they
took, and without any formality of Justice, and with all reproaches imaginable,
caused him to be publicly hanged. This unhappy Prelate had, from the
beginning, opposed with great passion the Kings Authority, and most obstinately
adhered to the Nuncio, and to that Party still which was most averse from
returning to their Allegiance, and was thus miserably and ignominiously put to
death, even in that City, whence he had been a principal Instrument to shut out
his Majesty's Authority.

It may be remembered in the former part of this Discourse, that when the King
at Arms proclaimed the Peace at Limerick in 1646. one Dominick Fanning (a
Citizen of the Town) raised a Mutiny, which Rabble affronted the Herald, and
wounded the Mayor, and was himself, by the Nuncio, (for that good service) made
Mayor in the former's place: This man continuing the same bitterness of spirit
against the King's Authority, always opposed the receiving of a Garrison from
the Lord Lieutenant. This Dominick Fanning being one of those 24 which Ireton
had excepted, found a way, amongst the Common Soldiers, to get out of the Town,
notwithstanding all the diligence that was used to discover him: When he was
free, and in safety, he returned to the Town to fetch some Money that he had
privately hid, and to make some provision for his subsistence, which he had not
time to do before: But going to his own house, his Wife refused to receive him,
or to assist him in any thing; whereupon he departed, and after he had walked
up and down the streets some time (the weather being extreme cold) he went to
the Main-guard, where was a good Fire, and being discovered to be a Stranger,
and asked who he was, voluntarily confessed that he was Dominick Fanning, for
whom such strict search had been made; he was thereupon apprehended, and the
next morning carried before the Governor, and immediately hanged. The same
Fate had Friar Wolf, and Alderman Thomas Strich, who (when the Lord Lieutenant
would have entered that Town in 1650. for its preservation) raised a Tumult, and
shut the Gates against him. And this very Colonel Fennel (who by possessing
himself of the Port, and turning the Cannon upon the Town, betrayed it to the
Enemy) though he had for the present the benefit of the Articles, was within
few months after taken by them, and (without any consideration of his last
merit) hanged as the rest had been. In a word, All those who had been the first
causers and raisers of the Rebellion, (or who with most malice and obstinacy
opposed their return to the Kings obedience) and had the misfortune to fall
into the Enemies hands, as the Bishop of Ross, (whose Fate we have before told
you) Jeffery Baron, (who kept Waterford from receiving the Lord Lieutenant,
taken afterward at Limerick and there hanged) and many others, were made
examples of the like nature.

About the same time that Limerick was surrendered, Sir Charles Coot defeated a
Party of the Fitz-Patricks and O Duyr's Forces, (who had regained Meleke Island
after the taking of it by Colonel Axtel) undergoing a resolute defense thereof
to the baffling of his Foot, which were worsted two or three times together;
but the Gallantry of his Horse recovered the Honor, making 300 resolute Irish
accept of Quarter for their Lives, some 300 being slain and drowned.

This business of Limerick being over, Ireton within a few days, without
drawing his Army nearer than the Castle of Clare, (which he and Sir Charles
Coot jointly took in) sent a Summons to the City of Gallway, offering therein
Limerick's first Conditions, wishing them withal to put him to no more
trouble, lest they fared as Limerick did through their stubbornness; adding
such other threats, as he thought most like to make impressions upon them; and
a great impression they did make. But Ireton dying at Limerick the 26th. of
November, having contracted a Fever through his continual Watching and
Services through the whole Siege of Limerick, they had a little respite; and
being united under the Command of General Preston, the Town of Gallway
addressed themselves to the Lord Deputy, and desired his assistance, promising
all obedience to his Majesty's Authority in him: Nor was he so much discouraged
by their former carriage, and their having accepted the Articles made with the
Duke of Lorrain, and their declaring him to be their Protector, without ever
communicating it to the Lord Deputy, as to decline having further to do with
them. But upon their first Address to him, he sent his Secretary to them with
some Directions, and shortly after went himself thither, having summoned such
of the Nobility, Prelates, and principal Gentry, as could with safety repair
thither, to consult what might yet be done for their defense, they having still
Men enough dispersed in several Parties to resist the Enemy, if they were drawn
together, and united amongst themselves; and the Town of Galway was so good a
Port, that any Supplies or Succors might come from abroad to them.

Upon Ireton's Death, the Commissioners (formerly mentioned to reside Ludlow
made Commander in Chief on Ireton's death
at Dublin) made Lieutenant General Ludlow Commander in Chief, till the
Parliament in England should take further Order about that Concern. In the
interim, Sir Charles Coot with his Party straightned Galway, blocking up their
Harbors, and approaching with his Fortifications nearer by Land, which wrought
so far upon the Assembly there, that in February they importuned the Lord
Deputy, to give them leave to send to Lieutenant General Ludlow, (who by this
time was come to aid Sir Charles Coot in the Siege) for a safe Conduct for
their Commissioners, to treat of Conditions for the settlement of the Nation;
upon which they would submit to the Government of the Parliament, professing to
the Lord Deputy, that they would in the mean time make such preparation for
their defense, that if the Parliament would not give them good and ample
Conditions, they would sell themselves at such a dear Rate, that should make
their Conquest of little use to their Enemy. Upon which, the Lord Deputy, the
Marquess Clanrickard, the 14th. of February, 1651. writes to the Commander in
chief of the Parliaments Forces, and in conclusion had no grateful Reply: Which
when the Irish found, that they could not have so much as a safe Conduct sent
for their Commissioners, nor could be admitted so much as to treat for the
Nation, but only that particular Places and Persons might be admitted to
compound for themselves, as others had done, their spirits failed them; and
after a very little deliberation, and before they put the Enemy to the trouble
of storming them, (without so much as consulting the Lord Deputy, or asking his
leave, though he was within less than half a days journey of the Town) they
entered into a Treaty, and in a short time after, viz. the 12th. of May,
surrendered the Town to Sir Charles Coot, for the use of the Parliament of
England, upon such Conditions, as would not be yielded to by the Commissioners,
or the Parliament: Though afterward this Difficulty was composed, and many
considerable Garrisons in Connaght followed the example, whilst many were
amazed, to see (upon what easy terms) they parted with their last important
Town, (a Place of great strength, and had they been resolute, invincible)
having still (in loose Parties over the Kingdom) more Men in Arms to have
defended it, than the English could have brought against the Town. Upon which
and other Circumstances, the Irish in Leimster and Munster* being reduced to
straights, meditate a Compliance, some under the Earl of Westmeath, others
under Muskery, but opposed by the Ulster Confederacy.

Ireton's Funerals being over, (which were performed with great Solemnity, on
the 6th. of February following, in Henry 7th's Chapel, since buried under
Tyburn) the Parliament consulted, whom they should make Deputy (as they called
it) in Ireton's room: And Major General Lambert (a Commissioner in Scotland)
was by Cromwell (the Parliaments Lord Lieutenant) nominated thereunto: Whereupon
he presently appeared, but seemed unwilling to accept of the Charge; a
Difficulty soon removed, making in a little time all things ready for his
departure, inasmuch as Wagons with his private Provisions, a recruit of
Soldiers, and Money, were in readiness to be sent away. But Cromwell's
Commission determining in the end of April, it came into debate in the House,
whether it should be renewed again; but he offering to lay it down, it was
accepted; so there being no Lord Lieutenant, they voted, there should be no
Lord Deputy, and that Major General Lambert should be only Commander in chief
of the Forces there: And about the 4th. of July, 1652. Colonel Charles
Fleetwood, (who had lately married Ireton's Relict) Lieutenant General of the
Horse, was made Commander in chief of the Forces in Ireland; he hastened his
Dispatch, and used great diligence to get over to his Charge.

In the mean time, several things were under debate in the House, for settling
of Ireland: That great Act for Confiscation of all the Rebels Lands, was passed
the 12th. of August; and another appointed to be brought in, for settling the
Adventurers Estates for Ireland, which passed the 26th. of September, 1653. and
was confirmed, 1656. But these requiring much time, the Commander in chief went
away about the midst of August, and left them to receive a Dispatch in his
absence. He had a very prosperous Passage, and arrived within few days after
his departure: He settled his Residence at Kilkenny, by reason Dublin and the
Parts adjacent were at that time much infected with the Plague. He found the
War of Ireland drawing on to a conclusion, the Rebels being Masters of few
considerable Forts and Castles, throughout the whole Country, Roscommon-Castle
and James-town having yielded the 3d. of April to Colonel Reynolds, as the
strong Hold of Ross in Kerry did, the 27th. of June, to Lieutenant General
Ludlow, and the strong Fort of Inchlough, the 1st. of August, to Colonel
Zanckey: And their Forces were so weak, as they were not able to keep the
Field, and so dispersed, as they had already in Parties come in, (as did the
Earl of Westmeath, the Lord Muskery, Colonel Connor, O Roe, Sir William Dungan,
Sir Francis Talbot, and many others, to the number of 800.) upon the Kilkenny
Articles, which were (in a manner) to submit unto discretion, and subject
themselves to a Trial, for the Murders committed in the beginning of the
Rebellion; all found guilty thereof were excepted from Pardon, their Estates
confiscated, and the others who had only assisted in the War, were to forfeit
two parts of their Estates, and be banished: And accordingly great numbers of
them were transported into Spain, the latter end of this Summer.

Yet the Marquess of Clanrickard did not leave the Kingdom in many months after
the Surrender of Galway, but endeavored by all means possible to draw the
scattered Forces together, that he might prosecute the War afresh, according to
his Majesty's Letters, (in the years 1650, and 1651.) encouraging him to his
continuance in Arms, as advantageous (by way of Diversion) to his then intended
progress of promoting his Design in Scotland, and coming into England. And to
that end, the 16th. of May, the Marquess of Clanrickard, with the Connaght
Forces, marched to Ballishannon, which he took by storm, and presently after
Dungal-Castle, where the Ulster Forces under Sir Phelim O Neal, the O Relie's,
and Mac Mahon's joined with him; but upon intelligence that Sir Charles Coot
and Colonel Venables were marched against him, he retired to Armagh, intending
for Raphoe: Whilst Sir Charles Coot (in his pursuit of him) retook Ballishanon
and Dungal-Castle, gaining also Sligo, Ballymote, and many other Garrisons; so
as the Marquess was forced to shelter himself in the Isle of Carrick.

And having received his Majesty's Command, to take care of his own security,
that he fell not into the Enemy's hands, he having no Port to friend, where he
might choose a Vessel, and being so betrayed by the Irish, as not securely to
stay 24 hours in a Place) was compelled to have a Pass from the Parliaments
Forces, not excepting any other Conditions for himself, than that he might for
some time remain secure in their Quarters, without taking the Oath usually
imposed by them, and have liberty to transport himself, and 3000 Irish more,
into any Prince's Country and Service, then in Amity with England; which was
granted; and in March, 1652. he was transported into England, in a Vessel
belonging to the Parliament, after he had born the Title of the King's Deputy
in Ireland, little more than two years, not with greater submission from the
Catholic Irish, than had before been paid to the Lord Lieutenant; and so
retired to London, where not long after he died, and was thence carried to
Summerhill, (a pleasant Seat of his own, which Bradshaw had in Custodium) near
Tunbridge in Kent, and was buried in the Parish Church. He was a Person much
respected for his Integrity, and, though of a contrary opinion to those then in
Usurpation, looked on as a Favourer of the English, and one that no ways
indulged the Cruelties and Pretensions of the Irish.

This was the Fate of that unhappy Nation, both under Protestant and Roman
Catholic Governors, neither having had the credit to be Masters of the Irish
Temper, fomented by the Insolences of the Priests, and whatever might
instigate them against the English Government.

Soon after the Marquess of Clanrickard's Departure, the lesser Concerns of
that Nation were (with little trouble and charge) brought in obedience to the
Parliament, who declared, the 26th. of September, 1653. That the Rebels were
subdued, and the Rebellion appeased and ended; and thereupon proceeded to the
Distribution of their Lands, in pursuance of the Act for Subscriptions, 17
Carol. 1. Some time before which, a High Court of Justice was settled in
Ireland, a Name we have reason not to mention, without horror and
astonishment, considering who was summoned to such a Tribunal, which certainly
would never have been, how vain, how ambitious, how prodigious soever some men's
Success was, (a Strumpet often leading one to Attempts above their first
thoughts) had not the Rebels of Ireland (for carrying on their pernicious
Practices) avouched the sacred Authority for their pretense and color; that
though these with Pilate, washed their hands from the Blood of this Righteous
One, yet they have, as the shame, so the guilt of that Royal Blood on
themselves, who originally gave the occasion of such a Discourse, which
afterward was made one of the pretended Causes, for the most barbarous and
inhumane Act ever perpretated: Inter tragicoe Fortunoe Exempla omnibus Hist.
nostr. Temp p. 348.
retro seculis memorandus. Upon which, eloquent Du Moulin, one of the clearest
Lights of the French Church, honoring me with a Letter on that Subject, thus
passionately discovers his Resentment; La Morte de vostre bon Roy d'une facon
si indigne, and si horrible par les Maims des Independans, M'outre le Coeur de
Douleur: C'est une action sans Example, and un opprobre ineffacable a nostre
Religion; vostre Nation tant Genereuse a elle perdu tout Courage? Les Escossoes
se taisent ils la dessue? Mais quoy! Il faut Mettre le doigt sur la bouche, and
adorer les Conseils de Dieu, qui sont Inscrutables.

It is observable, (let some foam as they please) that there were none, (who so
much as pretended to have a Reverence for the Church of England) that ever had
the least hand in this foul and ugly Business. An instance of that is in what
the Lord Chancellor Hide acquainted the Parliament with, in express words from
his Majesty, when he was employed in an Embassy to Spain; That the Horrid
Murder of his Royal Father, was not the Act of the Parliament, or People of
England, but of a very wretched and little Company of Miscreants in the
Kingdom, fol. 41. Upon which, Monsieur Moses Amiraldus, (the Excellent French
Divine) hearing of the Protestant Religion aspersed as seditious and
treasonable, writ a Piece in French, in vindication of the Protestant Religion,
and dedicated it to our King ( Charles the 2d.) in the time of his Exile, when
Militiere and others, would have enforced the barbarous Martyrdom of his Royal
Father, as a just Motive to his apostatizing, and not trusting his safety to
the Protestant Religion; whereas all these blustering Storms, (as the Bishop of
Derry observes in his excellent Tract against Militiere) radicated him deeper
in his Religion; that what these intended for his evil, proved his good. And
certainly whatsoever conspired to complete so execrable a Design, as the
Murder of the King, nothing contributed more than the Irish, deluding his
Sacred Majesty so long with their Promises of a competent Army, whereby he
relying on them, (too confidently assured of their Ability and Power to perform
it) deferred those Agreements, which else he might have seasonably composed at
home.

And could there ever be an equaller Distribution of God's Vengeance, than that
they by a parallel Court, should suffer the loss of their Estates, Lives and
Fortunes? Which, though un-usual, was the only Expedient; sufficiently set
forth in the ensuing Speech of the Lord Lowther's, a Person of that Gravity and
Worth, as whatsoever may be said by others, can never reach the State of the
Question, more fully (with less animosity, and greater truth) than he has
done, at the Trial of Sir Phelim O Neal, in February, 1652. The first Court of
this nature (whereof Justice Donnelan an Irish Native was President, and
Commissary General Reynolds, and Justice Cook, Assistants) was at Kilkenny, the
4th. of October, where the Supreme Council of the Rebels sat in 1642. The Lord
Lowther's Speech, at the Opening of the High Court of Justice, at the Trial of
Sir Phelim O Neal.
YOu have well understood, how that by this Commission which has now been
read, the Right Honorable the Commissioners of the Parliament, of the
Commonwealth of England, for the Affairs of Ireland, by virtue of the Power
and Trust committed to them, have here erected, constituted, and appointed, a
High Court of Justice.

And have constituted and appointed Persons therein nominated, or any 12 or
more of them, to be Commissioners and Judges of the said Court.

And have authorized them to make inquisition for Blood, and that in three main
Points.

1. To hear and determine all Murders and Massacres, of any Protestant
English, or other Person or Persons whatsoever, within this Nation, done or
committed by any Person or Persons whatsoever, (both principal and accessaries)
who since the 1st. day of October, 1641. have killed, slain, or otherwise
destroyed any Person or Persons in Ireland, which at the time of their being so
killed, slain or destroyed, were not publicly entertained and maintained in
Arms, as Officers or private Soldiers, for and on the behalf of the English
against the Irish.

2. To hear and determine the Charges, Crimes and Causes, of all and every
Person and Persons, (both principal and accessaries) who since the said 1st.
day of October, 1641. have killed or destroyed any Person or Persons,
entertained or maintained as Officers or private Soldiers, for and on the
behalf of the English against the Irish, the said Person so killing or
destroying, not being then publicly entertained and maintained in Arms, as
Officers or private Soldiers, under the Command and Pay of the Irish against
the English.

3. To hear and determine the Charges, Crimes, and Causes, of all such Persons,
that have killed or slain, or otherwise destroyed any Person or Persons, after
Quarter given, contrary to the Rules of War: And to bring to Trial, Judgment,
and condign punishment, the Principals and Accessaries to those Crimes, that is
to say, the Actors, Contrivers, Counselors, Advisers, Promoters, Abettors,
Aiders and Assisters, of any the said Murders, Massacres, or killing after
Quarter given, contrary to the Rules of War.

This Commission does likewise furnish the Commissioners, with all necessary
Powers requisite for this great Service, and necessarily conducing to these
Ends.

By this Commission we may well observe, for the comfort of all the good and
faithful People of this Land, the Justice and Wisdom of the High Court of
Parliament, of the Commonwealth of England, and of their Right Honorable
Commissioners here for the Affairs of Ireland:

1. Their Justice, in bringing these Crimes to Trial.

2. Their Wisdom, in ordering this honorable, just and equal form of Trial.

1. Their Justice and zeal of Justice appears in this, That in all their
Treaties and Articles concerning Ireland, they would never admit of any the
least hope of impunity, for these barbarous and cruel Murders and Massacres,
and breach of Quarter, nor of any thing that might give impediment, unto the
faithful and impartial inquisition after all that innocent Blood, which the
merciless Murderers have wickedly shed in this Land.

2. Their Justice and zeal of Justice appears, in that they have omitted
nothing too dear to them.

But have with admirable charge, resolution and contancy, overcome all hazards
and perils, and have with a vast expense of English Blood and Treasure,
prosecuted this War, (which was but an execution of Justice) to this
conclusion, and effected this fair and impartial inquisition for innocent
Blood, to put away innocent Blood from the Land; for our righteous God, the
righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, has revealed it in his holy Scripture,
that he will not have such wickedness to pass without condign punishment.

For there are three things which the Lord hates, viz. Oculos sublimes, Linguam
mendacem, Manus effundentes innoxium sanginem, Prove. 6. 17.

Their Wisdom appears in this:

1. In that, as good Husbandmen, they prepare the re-plantation of the Land, by
rooting out the noisome Weeds, that always would over-grow and destroy the good
Corn, as we have found by sad Experience.

And certainly both in Religion and Prudence, it is undoubtedly necessary to
clear the Land by Justice, of this innocent Blood, the innocent Blood of
Christians, most wickedly and cruelly shed upon the Land, against the Laws of
God and Man, of Nature and of Nations, the Laws of the Land, and the Rights and
Rules of War, and the Bonds of Humanity and humane Society.

2. In ordering this form of Trial by an High Court of Justice, for the
impartial inquisition, trial, and condign punishment, of these Murders,
Massacres, and breach of Quarter: For it is manifest to any Man of sound
judgment and right knowledge in the Law, That that ancient and excellent Trial
at the Common Law by Juries, Freeholders of the proper Counties and Hundreds,
or Baronies, where the Facts were done, was neither convenient nor possible for
the decision of these Causes, as the present Constitution of the Commonwealth
now is.

Where now can these numbers of indifferent Jurors be had, Liberi and legales
Homines, free from all exceptions and challenges, out of which the Juries may
be equally impannell'd, for the trial of the Prisoners, that are or shall be
charged with these Crimes?

How can all the effectual Forms, absolutely requisite to that Trial, be
observed in all these Cases, if we do but consider the legal Challenges, both
for the Commonwealth and for the Prisoners, to the Array, to the principal
Panel, to the Pales, the peremptory Challenges, the Challenges for Causes,
inducing favor or affection, hatred or enmity, or for Crime, and how in that
course could rightly be the Trial of the Articles of War: So that that course
of Trial, not being now apt for the decision of these Causes:

The Commissioners of Parliament have, in wisdom and prudence, erected and
constituted this Fair, Honorable, Equal, and Indifferent course of Trial, by
erecting an High Court of Justice, for the hearing and determining of these
Causes:

Wherein are Soldiers for the Articles, Rules, and Laws of War; Judges for the
knowledge of the National Laws; others that have Cognizance of the Civil Laws,
and other Men of great Experience, Reason, and Judgment; and all of them Men of
Honor and Integrity, to be the Triers and Judges in these Cases.

Having thus far opened the Commission, and manifested this form and course of
Trial to be Honorable, Just, and Equal, I conceive it requisite a little to
consider the Laws against Murder, which are to be as Landmarks and Guides, to
direct and lead us in the right way of Judgment in this great Work and Service.

Let us take a brief view of the Laws of God, held forth unto us in the holy
Scriptures; and of the other Laws against Murder. And herein consider, first,

The Law against Murder in the beginning, in the infancy of the.1
World, before the Flood, a general Deluge over the World.

The Law against Murder immediately after the Flood..2


The Moral Law of God..3


The Judicial and Political Law of the Jews..4


The Law under the Gospel..5


The Law of England..6


The Law of Ireland..7


Jus Belli, the Law of War..8


This same horrid sin of Murder, this Devil, crept into the World; it began in
the beginning, what can expulse this Devil?

We find in the holy Scriptures, that the Devil was the first Murderer.1
and Liar, and that he is the Father of Murderers and Liars. The unbelieving
Jews bragged they had Abraham to their Father, and yet they sought to kill
Christ; whereupon our Savior tells them, that they are of their Father the
Devil, and the lusts of their Father they will do: He was a Murderer from the
beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him: When
he speaks a Lie, he speaks of his own. So that from hence the Liars and
Murderers take their beginning, and from hence these inseparable Twins make
and derive their Pedigree and Descent from the Devil; ( viz.) He was a Liar and
a Murderer from the beginning; and he is the Father of Liars and Murderers.

The first and eldest of these in the Stock and Progeny, was Cain: 1 John 3. 12.
Non sicut Cain, qui ex maligno erat and occidit fratrem suum, and propter quid
occidit eum, quoniam opera ejus maligna erunt fratris, autem ejus justa.

And therefore John says, Not as Cain, who was of that wicked one, and slew
his brother; and wherefore slew he him, because his own works were evil, and
his brothers righteous.

Woe unto them, says he, for they have gone in the way of Cain. This Jude ver.
11.
way of Cain is chalked out unto us in the beginning of the holy Bible, Genesis 4.
8. that he talked with his brother Abel; and it came to pass when they were in
the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his Brother, and slew him. As soon as
this innocent Blood was shed upon the Earth, the cry thereof ascended up to
Heaven. And the Lord said to Cain, What have thou done? the voice of thy
Brothers blood cries to me from the ground* Genesis 4. 10, 11. And now thou art
accursed from the earth, which has opened her mouth to receive thy Brothers
blood from thy hand. When thou tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth
yield unto thee her strength; a fugitive and a vagabond shall thou be in the
Earth.

The Learned Divines observe upon the Text, that whereas our Translation is,
The voice of thy Brothers blood cries unto me; the Original is, The voice of
thy Brothers bloods, in the Plural Number; for in killing Abel, he did not
only kill him, but also all that posterity, the whole Line that should have
descended from Abel; and therefore thy Brothers bloods cries unto me from the
ground. It is not the single blood, as one of the murdered that cries for
vengeance, but even the blood of all that Posterity, as should have descended
from him, cries to Heaven for Vengeance against the Murderer.

We find this innocent blood of Abel, shed in the beginning of the World, still
in remembrance, uttering her voice in the highest strain, and crying against
Murderers even to the Worlds end.

Our Savior denouncing several woes against the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew.
23.
tells them, that they should kill the Prophets that should be sent unto them,
that on them may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, even from
the blood of righteous Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias son of Barachias, whom
they slew between the Temple and the Altar.

By faith Abel offered unto God a more acceptable Sacrifice than Cain, by Heb.
11. 4.
which he obtained witness that he was righteous, God testifying of his gift,
and by it he being dead yet speaks.

And we are come to Jesus the Mediator of the New Testament, and to Heb. 12. 24.
the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things than that of Abel.

The blood of righteous Abel is still in remembrance, and yet speaking. And in
the latter end of the Bible, Revel. 6. 9, 10. we find the Souls of them that
were slain for the testimony of Jesus under the Altar, crying with a loud
voice, How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not revenge our blood on them
that dwell on earth. So that the blood of righteous Abel, and all the innocent
blood shed on the Earth, yet speaks, and still cries for vengeance and
justice against the Murderers. And, to conclude the Case of Murder before the
Flood, we find, that one of the main causes which provoked Gods wrath, and
brought that great destruction of the whole World by Noah's Flood, was, because
the earth was filled with violence, Genesis 6. 11, 18. And will not that which
destroys the whole World, over-whelm these Nations, if they be not purged by
Justice?

The Law against Murder after the Flood.
2.
Now because the Old World perished through violence, God, in his new
re-establishment of the World, provided against violence, and for the
preventing of Murder ordered this to be one of his first Fundamental Laws.

Surely the blood of your lives will I require, at the hands of every beast
Genesis 9. 5.
will I require it, and at the hands of man, and at the hands of every man's
brother will I require the life of man. Ver. 6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by
man shall his blood be shed; for in the image of God made he man.

The Moral Law of God delivered upon Mount Sinai, and written 3.
by God himself in Tables of Stone, and by his Spirit engraven in every man's
heart, Thou shall do no murder, Exodus 20. 13.

The Judicial Law.
4.
Next to the Moral Law of God, I come to the Judicial and Political Law of the
Jews.

He that kills any man shall surely be put to death. Exodus 21. 12 and 24.
Levit. 17. Numb. 35.


There are several Cases of Murder put, and upon every of them the Law is
delivered, That the Murderer shall surely be put to death.

Moreover you shall take no satisfaction for the life of a Murderer which
Numb. 35. 31.
is guilty of death, but he shall surely be put to death.

Ye shall not pollute your Land wherein you are, for blood defiles the Ver. 33.
Land, and the Land cannot be cleansed of blood that is shed therein, but by
the blood of him that sheddeth it.

Thine eye shall not pity, but life shall go for life. Deuteronomy. 19. 21.


Upon these Laws, I will only put a case or two, which I conceive may be
useful to us upon these points, in the discharge of this service.

The case of Agag King of the Amalekites, whose life Saul spared, being 1 Samuel
15. 32.
brought before Samuel the great Judge in Israel.

And Samuel said unto him, As thy sword has made women childless, so Chap. 15.
3.
shall thy Mother be childless among women. And Samuel hewed Agag in pieces
before the Lord in Gilgal.

The next case is that of David; David writes to Joab, by Uriah; to 1 Samuel 11.
15.
set Uriah in the forefront of the hottest of the Battle, and to retire from
him that he may be smitten and die: Joab did so, and so Uriah was slain.

The Lord, by Nathan the Prophet, tells David, That he had killed 2 Samuel 12. 9,
10.
Uriah with the sword of the children of Ammon, and therefore the Sword shall
never depart from his house.

The case of Joab is remarkable.

Joab was a kinsman to David, and he was Captain of his Host, he 1 Kings 2. 5.
did many great Services, and grew old in his Service; yet for all this; David
charges Solomon, that he should not let his hoary head go down to the grave in
peace; because he had shed the blood of war in peace, in killing of Abner and
Amasa. And though Joab flies to the Tabernacle and took hold 2 Samuel 20. and 10.
of the horns of the Altar, yet Solomon commands him there to be slain, to take
way the innocent blood which Joab had shed, in killing Abner the son of Ner,
Captain of the host of Israel; and Amasa the son of Jether, Captain of the
host of Judah.

I will only add Ahab's case.

Ahab covets Naboth's Vineyard, his Wife Jezebel undertakes the business; Ahab
leaves the matter to her management, she writes Letters in Ahab's name, feals
them with his Seal, and so carries the business, that Naboth is stoned to
death, and Ahab takes possession of the Vineyard.

The Lord sends Elijah the Prophet unto Ahab, saying, Thus says the Lord, Have
thou killed, and also taken possession, etc. In the place where dogs licked the
blood of Naboth shall dogs lick thy blood; even thine. And of Jezebel also
says the Lord, The dogs shall eat Jezebel by the walls of Jezreel.

I have remembered these Cases and Presidents, because they may be useful to us
in this service.

That of Agag and Joab, to admonish us not to spare Murderers.

That of Ahab and David, to instruct us, that the Authors, the Contrivers, the
Counselors, and the Abettors, are guilty of the Murder as well as the Actors,
be their Plots and Devices never so subtly and secretly carried.

I come next to the Law under the Gospel.
5.
Those Laws against Murder are confirmed by our Savior in the Gospel, Matthew.
26. 52. Revel. 13. 10. He that kills with the sword, must be killed with the
sword.

Verily I say unto you, Till Heaven and Earth pass away, one jot Matthew. 5. 18.
or tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law till all be fulfilled. And in
Verse 21. approves the Law against Murder; and also reproves the narrow and
literal Gloss and Exposition of the Pharisees upon it, and gives us a larger
and more spiritual sense of it, ( viz.) that whosoever is angry with his
brother without cause, is in danger of judgment.

The Law of England.
6.
Murder, by the Law of England, is a Felony of death, without benefit of the
Clergy or Sanctuary; and by the Law it is esteemed so high and grievous a
Crime, that it is prohibited by many Acts of Parliament to grant any Pardon for
Wilful Murder. This Law of England answers to that of Deuteronomy, Thine eye
shall not pity, but life shall go for life.

The Laws of Ireland.
7.
By the Laws of Ireland Wilful Murder is High Treason, which is of a Temporal
offense, esteemed in Law to be the highest Crime, and has been censured with
the severest Judgment and Punishment; ( viz.) for a man to be drawn upon a
Hurdle to the Place of Execution, and there to be hanged by the neck, to be cut
down alive, his Intrals and Privy Members to be cut forth of his Body, and
burnt within his sight, his Head to be cut off, and his Body to be divided into
four Quarters or Parts, etc.

For a man to be drawn upon a Hurdle to the Place of Execution, and there his
Bowels to be burned.

It is considerable, why, and upon what grounds or reasons, Murder was made a
more horrid and execrable Crime in Ireland than in England, and punished with a
greater severity, ( viz.) both with Torture and with Death, the Statute Decimo
Hen. 7. in Ireland, which enacts it to be so, gave the reason of the difference.

Praying the Commons (says the Law) Forasmuch as there have been unusual
Murders, of malice prepense, used and had in this Land of Ireland, etc.
contrary to the Law of Almighty God, without any fear of due punishment in that
behalf: Therefore the Statute does enact Wilful Murder to be High Treason. That
sin was grown universal in Ireland, and therefore the punishment must be
extraordinary; the universality of the crime causes the increasing of the
punishment, or the severity thereof; Ut metus ad omnes poena ad paucos
perveniet. But it will admit another Quoere, How it came to pass, that Malice
and Murder was universal in Ireland more than in England? I conceive these two
Reasons may be given for it as new.

1. We have been these many years weltring in blood, by the frequent Rebellions
in Ireland, that have silenced the Laws.

2. Their was a main defect in their Irish Laws and Customs, ( viz.) their
Brehowne Law, which the Irish continued amongst themselves, and the degenerate
English embraced it, notwithstanding the introduction of the just and
honorable Laws of England. Now by their Irish Custom or Brehowne Law, Murder
was not punished with death, but only by Fines, or a pecuniary Mulct, which
they called an Errick. Therefore when Sir William Fitz-Williams, being Deputy,
told Mac-guire, That he was to send a Sheriff into Fermanagh, (being lately
before made a County) The Sheriff, said Mac-Guire, shall be welcome, but let me
know his Errick, the price of his Head aforehand, that if my People cut it off,
I may put the Errick upon the County.

Now for the reformation of these grievous abuses in the Land, in the 10th.
year of King Hen. 7. in the Government of Sir Edward Poinings Knight, then
Deputy of Ireland, there were three good and profitable Statutes made, which
were called Poinings Acts, (viz.) the Statute of 10 H. 7. cap. 8. for the
reviving, confirming, and putting in execution of the Statute of Kilkenny, held
before Lionel Duke of Clarence; by which Statute at Kilkenny, the Brehowne Law
was abolished, and decreed to be no Law, but a lewd Custom.

The Statute of 10 H. 7. cap. oct. by which it was Enacted, That if any person
took any money, or other amends, for the death of his Kinsman or Friend, then
the Law would permit (meaning the Law of England) the same shall be Felony by
this Law, the Errick was taken away.

The Statute of 10 H. 7. cap. vicessimo primo, by which Murder is made High
Treason in the Actor, Provoker, and Procurer of it. So that by these three
Statutes, their Brehowne Law and lewd Custom was abolished, their Errick taken
away, and Murder declared to be High Treason. And thus you see how it came to
pass, that Murder is a greater offense, and more severely punished in Ireland
than in England; and by these good Laws, that horrid and execrable Crime and
Monster of Blood and Murder was chained up, or at least fettered and restrained
in Ireland, until its breaking loose upon us in this last and most barbarous
and cruel Rebellion, with that inhumane violence, and unsatiable thirst of
innocent Blood, with the savage Butcheries of Men, Women, and Children, without
respect either of Age, or Sex, or Quality, as no History or Age can parallel.

It appears by a Cloud of Witnesses, the execrable Cruelties of the Murderers
were not satisfied with the variety of Tortures and cruel Deaths of the living,
by Striping, Starving, Burning, Strangling, Burying alive, and by many
Exquisite Torments put to death the living; so that a present dispatch by death
was a great Mercy: So cruel are the Mercies of the wicked.

But their hellish rage and fury stayed not here, but also extended it self
even unto the Babes unborn, ripping them out of their Mothers womb, and
destroying even those innocent Babes to satiate their savage cruelty. Nor staid
it here, but extended also to the ransacking of the Graves of the Dead,
dragging the dead Bodies of the Protestants out of their Graves, because they
might not rest in their Hallowed Ground.

Nor did yet their execrable malice stay here, but became boundless, not only
to the devastation and the destruction of the Houses, Castles, and whole
substance of the Protestants, and whatsoever tending to Civility, but also even
to the utter extirpation of the English Nation, and Protestant Religion out of
this Land of Ireland; all which the Murderers (for of them I speak) acted with
that brutish outrage, as though Infidels, or rather the wild Beasts of the
Wilderness, Wolves, and Bears, and Tigres, nay, Fiends and Furies, had been
brought into the Land.

If any think this Language too harsh, let them consider, how the holy Ghost
ranks and couples the Murderers with Dogs, Rev. 22. 15. For without the holy
City, the heavenly Jerusalem, are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and
Murderers, and whosoever loves and makes a lie.

No, no, Swans language to express either the woeful miseries which the
Protestants have suffered, or the abominable cruelties the Murderers have
committed, are here tolerable.

I have not words to declare, how the Murderers in this horrid Rebellion have
violated all Laws of God and Man, all Faith, all Bonds of Charity and Humane
Society, and how perfidiously they have broken all the Rules, and Rights, and
Laws of War.

The Laws of War. 8.

In republica maxim sunt observanda Jura belli.
By the Law, and Rules, and Rights of War, Quarter warrantably given, ought
inviolably to be observed; it is a Fundamental Law of War, That Faith is to be
kept with an Enemy, Fides cum host servanda; this has been observed among the
Heathens, Infidels have kept this Faith, the Turks observed it; but, by the
Popes Dispensation, the Christians once broke their Articles with the Turks,
whereupon the Lord gave a signal Victory to the Turks against the Christians;
the Story is well known: The practice of the Murderers in this Rebellion has
been according to the old Popish Tenent, Nulla fides cum Haereticis.

And so, contrary to the Laws of War, many Protestants were murdered after
Quarter given, (of which Crime, both are said to be guilty.) But, that which
exceeds all that can be spoken, makes their sin exceeding sinful, and their
wickedness most abominable, is, That they began this butchery and cruelty even
then, when the Protestants were in perfect amity with them, and joined to them
not only in peaceable Neighborhood, but even in those Bonds that they pretend
to hold most inviolable, ( viz.) Gossiprick, Fosterage, and such like Ties of
Friendship and Alliance.

When they enjoyed so licentious a freedom of their Romish Superstition, and
free use of their Mass, they had their Titular Archbishops for every Province,
their Titular Bishop, with his Dean and Chapter, for every Diocese, and their
Secular Priest for every Parish in the Land, besides a monstrous multitude of
their Votaries and Regular Clergy: They had their Abbots, Priors, Monks, Nuns,
Jesuits, Frieries, Monasteries, Nunneries, Religious Houses, and Convents, in
the principal Towns and Cities of the Land, even in this City of Dublin, the
residence of the State; so that Father Harris, a Secular Priest of their own,
published in Print, That it was as hard to find what number of Friars were in
Dublin, as to count how many Frogs there were in the second Plague of Egypt.

They did not only exercise all their Superstitious Rites and Ceremonies, but
also the Papal Jurisdiction, as by Law they had Vicars General, and kept their
Provincial Courts and Consistories, and Excommunicated the People, delivering
them to Satan: When they enjoyed the benefit of the same Laws with us; nay, the
end and force of the Law was in some cases abated as to them, which was not
dispensed withal as to the Protestants: The Popish Lawyers were permitted to
practice, and the Papists admitted to Sue forth their Liberties and Ouster
lemains* and to bear and execute the Office of Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace,
etc. without taking the Oaths of Allegiance or Supremacy, which was not
permitted to the Protestants. And these Popish Lawyers, Priests, Jesuits, and
Friars, have been the principal Incendiaries and Firebrands of all those
horrible Flames which have thus consumed the Land, and were the chief
Ringleaders of this horrid Rebellion, that the public Burdens and Charges of
the Commonwealth were born more by the Protestants than by them, consideration
being had to their numbers, and quality of Possessors of Inheritance.

And that of the Subsidy granted in Decimo Car. whereof they raised so great a
clamor both in England and Ireland, the Protestants paid above one third part
of the whole, besides the Clergy, though neither the Quantity or Quality of
Lands of Inheritance, then holden of them in the Land, did amount to more than
a fifth part; and besides all this* the Protestants had contributed to the
charge of their Committees, toward the obtaining of Grace in Bounties, in
sending Commissioners for them; and even then when the British and Protestants
had improved the Lands of the Irish Papists, and enriched their Estates, and
brought into the Land Husbandry, Trades, Manufactury, Traffic, Merchandise,
etc. by which means, increase of Wealth grew in the Land to that abundance,
that the Irish grew not only Rich but Honorable; also they were made Earls,
Viscounts, Lords, Baronets, Knights, etc. And when they enjoyed all this, and
much more (if time did permit to declare it) then, even then, without any
provocation, suddenly to rise up to this height of cruelty, to murder some
hundreds of thousands of these Protestants, that lived peaceably and friendly
with them, and that before they could take Arms in their hands for their
defense; these things, I say, makes the sins of Murder, Violence, and Cruelty,
unmeasurably sinful and detestable.

But I fear I have been too long and too troublesome, both to you and my self,
I will conclude. It is well known how the loud cry of innocent Blood of many
thousands of Christians ascending up to Heaven, and the devout and fervent
prayers of many of Gods dear Saints and Servants, have solicited the Throne of
Justice, that this happy and blessed day might come, wherein Justice might
impartially be executed against those Murderers, whose cruelties have made this
Land a Field of Blood.

And now since the high and righteous Providence of God, by those many and
signal Victories given to the Arms and Forces of Ireland, has sent down from
Heaven this day of Justice unto us in this Land; we ought to return him all
praise and thankfulness for this unspeakable mercy. And since the trust of this
great work, by the same Providence, is committed unto us, let us stir up his
Grace within us, and faithfulness of our minds and Souls, to the faithful
discharge and execution of this great trust. Seeds Judicanda est quasi Thronus
Dei, says old Bracton, that learned Chief Justice in Henry the Thirds time. I
well remember, and have often thought upon the counsel of Jethro to Moses,
Exodus 18. 2. Thou shall provide thee out of all thy people able men, such as
fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness; and set them to judge the people.
Whereupon Moses having constituted Judges over the People, gave them this
charge, ( viz.) Hear the causes between your brethren, and judge righteously
between every man and his brother, and the stranger that is with him. Ye shall
not respect persons in judgment, but ye shall hear the small as well as the
great. Ye shall not be afraid of the face of man, for the judgment is Gods.
Deuteronomy. 16. 17.

Give me leave likewise to mind you of Jehosaphat's charge to the Judges, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6, 7, 9, 11. Take heed what you do, for you judge not for man but
for the Lord, who is with you in judgment. Wherefore now let the fear of the
Lord be upon you, take heed and do it, for there is no iniquity with the Lord
our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts. This shall ye do in the
fear of the Lord, faithfully, with a perfect heart, and shall judge the cause
that shall come before you, between blood and blood, etc. Deal courageously,
and the Lord shall be with you.

There is also an excellent Rule for Judicature, put in the case of the
Gibeonites abuse of the Levites Wife, Judge. 19. 30. the Crime was horrid, the
Case extraordinary; There was never such a deed done, or seen before in Israel;
the Tribes were moved at it, and upon the Assembly, the Rule is given, ( viz.)
Consider of it, take advice, and speak your minds. This certainly is an
excellent Rule of Judicature, ( viz.) first,

1. Consider of it, consider well the Case, and consider all the Circumstances
of it; beware that no guilty person escape, nor innocent person be condemned:
For he that justifies the wicked, and condemns the just, even they both are
an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17. 15.

2. Take advice and consult with others; Lean not to thine own understanding,
says the wise Solomon, Prove. 4. 5. In the multitude of Counselors there is
safety. Be not rash, nor sudden, or hasty to give judgment. Qui festinat ad
judicium proper at ad poenitentiam, Prove. 11. 14.

And therefore right grave and ponderous are the Entries of the Judgments in
the Common Law, scil. Quibus lectis and auditis and per justiciarios his
before intellectis and matura deliberatione me praehabita, etc. adjudicatur,
etc.

When we have patiently heard, and fully understood the Parties, and Proofs,
the Witness, and whole Case, and have searched into all the Parts and
Circumstances of it, and when we have advisedly considered, debated, and
consulted of it, and taken mature deliberation thereupon; then according to the
charge of Jehosaphat, Let us deal courageously, give Sentence, and fear not the
face of man, for God is with us.

It is no less impiety to absolve the Guilty, than to condemn the Innocent.



Thus Sir Gerrard Lowther, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, one principally
employed in the weightiest Affairs at Oxford and Westminster, by the Marquess
of Ormond, with his Majesty's Approbation; that it cannot be said, we have here
presented you with the froth of a Fanatic, or one less interressed in the
State, then one to whom the greatest Concerns thereof had been frequently
communicated: Yet because his Speech (being spoke at the opening of the High
Court of Justice) may be thought Apocryphal, and so not to be admitted for
Doctrine, yet may be read for instruction of Manners, we shall soon present you
with some thing Orthodox.

Many at Kilkenny, Waterford, Cork, Dublin, and other Places, underwent the
Censure of the High Court of Justice, though the number of those that suffered,
exceeded not 200. for that the Sword, Plague, Famine, and Banishment, had swept
away vast numbers; amongst whom one Tool, a notable Incendiary of Wicklow, was
one, against whom Edmund Reily the Irish Priest, and Vicar General, (afterward
Archbishop of Ardmagh,) appearing in 1653. as a Witness, was there 1653.
accused for the chief Author of surprising and burning (in Cessation time) the
black Castle of Wicklow, and consequently too of murdering of all those were
in it, upon which he was seized and committed; Yet, for his service in
betraying the Royal Camp at Rathmines* suffered no further punishment.

In distributing of Lands, a course was thought of, how the English might enjoy
them freely, without disturbance of the Irish, (for the future) ever ready to
fall upon them; and therefore many of the Natives were transplanted into
Connaght, and, according to the Extenuation of their Crimes, had more or less
Land allotted them, which they enjoyed freely, and (in several respects) was a
great convenience to them, and not less security to the English; They (being
now in a Body) might be better watched then several, where they would have been
sure (on every opportunity) to have disturbed the Peace.

One of the last Commanders amongst the Irish, which bore up against the
Parliament, was Moitogh O Brian, who, being at last forced into his Fastnesses,
obtained in March, 1653. the usual Articles of Transportation; By the favor of
which, not less then 27000 Men, had that year been sent away; so as through the
numbers that had been killed, died of the Plague, Famine, and had been
Transported, the scarcity of People was very considerable; To supply which,
Fleetwood writ that several Colonies might be sent over, offering very good
Conditions to such Families that would Transport themselves; whereupon great
numbers of all sorts of Sex flocked into Ireland, which Fleetwood much
indulging; 1654.
Cromwell thought requisite (for the greater strengthening of his own Party) to
make his Son Harry Lord Deputy, which he did in 1655. 1655.
and soon after Lord Lieutenant, a Person who openly showed himself against the
Anabaptists, (then raging) and countenanced the University, then in a low Ebb,
bestowing upon it Bishop Usher's Library, composed of the choicest and best
picked Books, extant, carrying himself, so as some of the Rigor of his Father
was thereby taken off, and that disordered Nation brought into the Condition of
a flourishing State; Yet afterward, 1658.
(when he might have had many to have seconded him) he tamely yielded, in 1659.
the Government to Steel, the Parliaments 1659.
Lord Chancellor, and Miles Corbet, their Chief Baron of the Exchequer; his
Brother Richard having surrendered the Protectorship in England, very meanly,
with a submission (as he termed it) to Providence; So that Family expired.

And the Affairs of England growing every day full of change, Ireland
(understanding what Sir George Booth had nobly attempted in England) grew
thence early in its dutiful Address to his Majesty; And Sir Theophilus Jones,
(furthered by his Reverend Brother) Colonel Warren, Bridges, Thompson, Lisle,
Warder and Temple, seized Dublin Castle; Sir Charles Coot about the same time,
preferring an Impeachment of Treason against Ludlow, Tomlinson, Corbet, and
John Jones; and weighing the Consequences of the present Distempers, he
(together with the Council of the Officers of the Army, present at Dublin) the
16th. of February, 1659. made a Memorable Declaration concerning the
Readmission of the Secluded Members; about the same time, sending Captain
Cuffe, to attend Colonel Monk into England, a General Convention being the 7th.
of February, before Summoned by the Vigilance and excellent Contrivance and
Industry of Doctor Dudley Loftus, in which Sir James Barry (afterward Lord
Baron of Santry) was Chairman: Several Affairs (of greatest Consequence) came
there to be considered. First, the Arrears of the Soldiers, (they were to be
fastened to the Design, by their Interest, and by the discharge of what was due
to them) then what was most popular, (and looked least to the mark they aimed
at) came under consideration, in as much as they continued till May, 1660.
having readily accepted of the Kings 1660.
Declaration from Breda, of the 14th. of April, 1660. laying hold (by their
Declaration, of the 14th. of May,) of his Condescentions, as the fittest
expedient to cement the divided Interests in his three Kingdoms, which his
Majesty (in his Printed Declaration for the settlement of Ireland) takes
especial notice of, in these words, That our good Subjects, the Protestants
(not Usurpers, as the Irish in their Case entitle them,) in our Kingdom of
Ireland, have born a very good part in the Blessing of our Restitution, and
that they were early in their dutiful Addresses unto Us, and made the same
Professions of a Resolution, to return to their Duty and Obedience to Us,
during the time of Our being beyond the Seas, which they have since so
eminently made good, and put in practice. And here I cannot pass over, that
when the Irish Brigade came to assist Lambert, against Sir George Booth, (now
Lord Delameere) and were in the North with him at that time, advancing to know
what General Monk intended; they under Redman, and Bret, first drew back,
though some of their Officers (in their canting mood) thought to have wheedled
General Monk into a Compliance. The Convention gave his Majesty 20000 l. the
Duke of York 4000 l. and the Duke of Gloucester 2000 l. and in May adjourned to
the first of November, a standing Committee remaining in the interim. And the
18th. of December, 1660. his Majesty by his Letter, approved of this
Convention, which met again the 22. of January, and Sir William Dumvell was
appointed Chairman; it continued till May, 1661. Before they determined, they
had by a Committee, very sensible and gallantly defended (at Court) the English
Interest, against the Irish; who (by reason of the Peace which had been made
with them in 1646. and 48.) thought they had very much to plead for his
Majesty's favor, when upon the whole, it was proved, that if any of them were
afterward Loyal, the generality disobeyed whatever had been indulged them; and
the Contract was not to be understood to be made with a Party, but the
Community; of which more in its due place.

His Majesty was no sooner settled in England, but (upon both Houses of
Parliaments apprehension of the late Rebellion, and the Irish flocking at his
Return into England) he within few days published his sense of that horrible
Conspiracy, in the ensuing Proclamation. By the King. A PROCLAMATION Against
the Rebels in Ireland.
C. R.

CHarles, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To all Our loving Subjects of England and Ireland,
Greeting. We taking notice by the Information of the Lords and Commons, now
Assembled in Parliament, That after the vast expense of Blood and Treasure for
the suppressing of the late horrid Rebellion in Ireland, begun in October,
1641. There are yet many of the Natives of that Our Kingdom, deeply guilty of
that Rebellion, who have of late broke out into new Acts of Force and Violence,
some Murdering, Robbing, and Despoiling several of Our English Protestant
Subjects there planted, and others of them by force Entering upon, and
Disquieting the Possessions of several Adventurers and Soldiers there, to the
great and manifest disturbance and hinderance of Our English Plantation. And
being very sensible of the innocent blood of so many thousands of Our English
Protestant Subjects, formerly slain by the hands of those barbarous Rebels, and
of new mischiefs of the same kind, likely to fall out, as the sad issue and
consequents of so unhappy beginnings. Do therefore, by the advice of the said
Lords and Commons, now assembled, as well to testify Our utter abhorring of
the said late Rebellion, as to prevent the like for the future; and for the
present establishment of the Peace of that Our Kingdom, hold it Our duty to God
and the whole Protestant Interest, to Command, Publish, and Declare, and do by
this Our Proclamation, accordingly, Command, Publish, and Declare, That all
Irish Rebels (other than such as by Articles have liberty to reside in these
Our Dominions, and have not since forfeited the benefit thereof) now remaining
in, or which hereafter shall resort to England or Ireland, be forthwith
apprehended, and proceeded against as Rebels and Traitors according to Law. And
that the Adventurers and Soldiers, and other Our Subjects in Ireland, their
Heirs, Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, who on the first day of January
last past were in the Possession of any of the Manors, Castles, Houses, Lands,
Tenements, or Hereditaments, of any the said Irish Rebels, shall not be
disturbed in such their Possessions, until We, by the advice of the Lords and
Commons, now assembled as aforesaid, or such Parliament as We shall call in
England or Ireland, shall take further Order, or that they be Legally evicted,
by due course of Law: And all Our Justices of Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, and
other Officers, both Civil and Military, both in England and Ireland, are
hereby required to be aiding and assisting in the execution of this Our
Proclamation, as often as occasion shall require.

Given at our Court at Whitehal the first day of June, 1660. in the Twelfth
Year of Our Reign.


Afterward (as soon as such matters for so great a Business could be The Heirs
of Sir Lucas Dillon, Knight. Sir Robert Talbot, Baronet. The Heirs of Sir
Valentine Blake, Baronet. Sir Richard Blake, Knight. Doctor Gerrald Fennel.
Geffrey Brown. John Brown of the Neal. John Walsh, Thomas Terril, Edmund
Dillon, John Talbot of Mallahide. Francis Coghlan of Kilcolgan, in the Kings
County. Robert Nugent of Cartlanstown. Sir John Bourk of Derry Maclaghney.
Thomas Arthur Esquire, Doctor in Physic. Gerrald Flemming of Castle Flemming.
Luke Bath of Ackarn. Burtholomew Stackpoole, Esquires.
brought about) his Majesty, the 8th. of May, summoned a Parliament at Dublin,
in which passed the great Act of Settlement, after that his Majesty had
published, the 30th. of November, 1660. His Gracious Declaration for the
settlement of his Kingdom of Ireland, and satisfaction of the several Interests
of Adventurers and Soldiers, and other Subjects there; wherein as to the
Irish; first, such are considered, as came in upon the Cessation; secondly,
those who honestly and faithfully performed what they promised in the Peace;
and thirdly, such as being beyond Seas, cheerfully received and obeyed his
Majesty's Commands abroad; all which are comprehended in several Articles,
proceeding from these Heads; and the Soldiers and Adventurers, by themselves.
These also who had the Fortune (whether through Loyalty or Suspicion, that they
were not able to bear up against the English Interest) to withstand the Nuncio,
have in the Act of Settlement their Fortunes, and themselves secured memorable
to Posterity; who being fewer then those that bowed not their knees to Baal in
Israel, we cannot but mention, it being a Reward for their eminent Sufferings.

And because the voice of a Parliament, next to the delivery of the Law from
Mount Sinai, ought to impress the greatest Reverence on the heart and
affections of the People, I shall here present you with the Preamble to the
Bill of Settlement in Ireland, 1662. which in brief commits that to Posterity,
no Paint can ever Palliate. An Act, 14 Carol. 2.
WHereas an At the passing of which Act, his Grace the Duke of Ormond enlarged
so well and elegantly on the Subject, as his Speech cannot be ommitted without
a blemish to the History. Appendix 15.
unnatural Insurrection did break forth against your Majesty's Royal Father, of
ever blessed memory, his Crown and Dignity in this your Majesty's Kingdom of
Ireland, upon the 23. of October, in the year of our Lord God, 1641. and
manifest it self, by the Murders and Destruction of many thousands of your
said Majesty's good and loyal Subjects, which afterward universally spreading
and diffusing it self over the whole Kingdom, settled into, and became a formed
and almost National Rebellion of the Irish Papists, against your Royal Father
of blessed memory, his Crown and Dignity, to the destruction of the English and
Protestants inhabiting in Ireland; The which Irish Papists being represented in
a General Assembly chosen by themselves, and acting by a Council, called by
them, The Supreme Council of the Confederate Roman Catholics of Ireland, did
first assume, usurp, and exercise the Power of Life and Death, make Peace and
War, Levy and Coin Money, and many other Acts of Sovereign Authority; Treating
with Foreign Princes and Potentates, for their Government and Protection, and
afterward acted under a Foreign Authority, by all the said ways, disowning and
rejecting your Royal Fathers, and your Majesty's undoubted Right to this
Kingdom, even while they treacherously used his, and your Majesty's Names; in
the outward forms of their Proceedings; withal impiously seeming by words and
shows to swear unto that, which by the whole Series of their Deeds, they
denied; And moreover, presuming to pretend his late Majesty's Sacred Authority,
even for their worst actions; all which they did (amongst other their evil
Designs) to frighten his good Protestant Subjects from their Loyalty, to blast
his Majesty's Honor, and to widen the Breach between his said Majesty, and his
seduced Subjects in England; The which Ends, by their said wicked Stratagems,
they did too successfully and mischievously effect.



Before this Preamble (to the Act of Settlement) passed, the Irish (by their
Agents in England) had an unusual Favor of inspecting that Bill, and objecting
what they thought fit; which they did in the presence of the Commissioners sent
out of Ireland, by the Convention, and Lords Justices and Council, even before
his Majesty, his Council, and the Committee of Lords, for the Affairs of
Ireland, to that end especially appointed. The debate continuing (touching this
grand Instrument) from the 8th. of July, 1661. till March following, in which
the Irish most insisted against the Preamble, for that it seemed to involve the
whole Nation, in the first designing and raising of the late Rebellion in
Ireland, and in the barbarous Circumstance thereof: whereas they would pretend,
it was only the act of a few Persons of broken fortunes, followed with the
rude multitude, etc. Praying that nothing might be contained in that Preamble,
in Derogation to his Majesty's Articles of Peace, or the blemish of his
Majesty's Loyal Catholic Subjects, delivering in at the same time, their
Reasons against previous Reprisals, the variances between the Declaration, and
Act of Settlement, and their defense for their Articles of Peace: Insisting
much upon their Loyalty, after the Lord Lieutenants departure, the Catholics
unanimously (in their Assembly) joining (if you dare credit their reports?)
with the Lord Deputy, to oppose the Usurpers, as the best means to divert the
Parliament, from preventing the Kings Designs in England and Scotland; for
which his Majesty (as they say) returned them thanks, they rejecting then many
advantageous offers from Ireton, though they were in a low Condition; and so
continued faithful till the Lord Deputy was driven to the Mountains, and they
at liberty to compound for themselves, many of which went Beyond Sea to serve
his Majesty; All which they insist on, as a great test of their Loyalty;
whereas it can never be made evident, as is alleged, that Proposals were made
to that Assembly by the Usurpers, and refused by them, for the enjoyment of
their Rights, Privileges, and Inheritances, alike with others under their
Government; for indeed such Proposals were never made nor offered to them in
their most flourishing Condition; but it is confessed, such Terms were tendered
and refused by them, as were agreeable to a conquering Army to give, as that of
the Usurpers then was, and to a broken scattered Party to expect, as the other
was; being then reduced to Bogs and Woods, as their best Holts; and yet the
Terms so offered and rejected by the Assembly together, were soon after
embraced by all of them, divided into Parts, on which they submitted and laid
down Arms, having by their Conditions, liberty to transport themselves into
Foraign Parts, or to stay in the Kingdom: And therefore, it does no more
consist with their Honor, then with Truth to say, they were forced by
banishment, to an opportunity of serving his Majesty beyond-Seas, from whence
they date their Merits from him; which was more then his late Majesty of
blessed memory could obtain from them, although obliged thereunto by
Allegiance, and Articles, when his Distress and their Power were sublimated to
the highest Pitch, and his Prerogative lay at the stake, as he did often
complain of: The Commissioners from the Lords Justices and Council, besides
this, produced the Instructions of the Supreme Council, to their Agents for
Rome, France, Spain, (offering the Crown to either of them that would accept of
it) together with the Excommunication of the Marquess, now Duke of Ormond, and
the order of Publication thereof; whereupon Sir Nicholas Plunket (who
subscribed the said Instructions, and principally insisted on the forementioned
Particulars) was sent for by the Committee of Lords, who had the Examination of
that Affair, and acknowledging his handwriting, Report thereof was made to his
Majesty and Council, by whom it was ordered about the 14th. of March, 1661.
That no more Petitions or Addresses should be received by the Irish, to the
obstruction of the Settlement of that Kingdom; and that Sir Nicholas Plunket
should thence-forward no more presume to come into his Majesty's Presence, nor
to Court; Likewise there was produced an Oath previously taken by several of
the Popish Nobility, Clergy, and others of the Gentry of Ireland, before the
Articles of Peace, made in 1648. (which they so much insist upon) wherein they
swear and engage, That if those Articles of Peace were not in every particular
for their advantage performed, they would not be concluded by any thing
therein; Which appeared to be so damnable a Piece of Treachery, as it was
highly resented in Council, and the rather, for that his Grace stood up, and
justified that to his knowledge it was a Truth.

And lest the memory of so great a Deliverance should slip out of our thoughts,
I shall in the next place present you with the Anniversary Act, for its
observance, that this may be to us (not less then the Passover to the
Israelites) for a Memorial and a Feast to the Lord, throughout our Generations,
by an Ordinance for ever. AN ACT FOR Keeping and Celebrating the three and
twentieth day of October, as an Anniversary Thanksgiving in this Kingdom.
WHereas many Malignant and Rebellious Papists and Jesuits, Friars, Seminary
Priests, and other Superstitious Orders of the Popish pretended Clergy, most
disloyally, treacherously, and wickedly, conspired to surprise His Majesty's
Castle of Dublin, His Majesty's principal Fort of this Kingdom of Ireland, the
City of Dublin, and all other Cities and Fortifications of this Realm, and that
all the Protestants and English throughout the whole Kingdom, that would not
join with them, should be cut off, and finally by a general Rebellion, to
deprive our late Sovereign Lord of ever blessed memory, King Charles the First,
of this his ancient and rightful Crown and Sovereignty of this Kingdom, and to
possess themselves thereof; all which was by the said Conspirators, plotted and
intended to be acted on the three and twentieth day of October, in the year of
our Lord God, One thousand six hundred forty and one; a Conspiracy so generally
inhumane, barbarous, and cruel, as the like was never before heard of in any
Age or Kingdom; and if it had taken effect, in that fullness which was intended
by the Conspirators, it had occasioned the utter ruin of this whole Kingdom,
and the Government thereof. And however it pleased Almighty God, in his
unsearchable Wisdom and Justice, as a just punishment, and deserved correction
to his People for their sins, and the sins of this Kingdom, to permit then and
afterward, the effecting of a great part of that Destruction, complotted by
those wicked Conspirators, whereby many thousand British and Protestants have
been massacred, many thousands of others of them have been afflicted and
tormented, with the most exquisite torments that malice could suggest, and all
Men's Estates, as well those whom they barbarously murdered, as all other good
Subjects, were wasted, ruined, and destroyed; yet as his Divine Majesty has in
all Ages, shown his Power and Mercy, in the miraculous and gracious deliverance
of his Church, and in the protection of Religious Kings and States, so even in
the midst of his Justice, he was graciously pleased to extend Mercy to his
Majesty, and to this his Kingdom, and good Subjects therein, not only in
mercifully discovering to the then Lords Justices, by one Owen O Connelly, a
mere Irish Man, but trained up in the Protestant Religion, who out of a sense
of his Duty and Loyalty to his Majesty, and for the preservation of his good
People, and as an effect of that Religion he was trained up in, revealed that
hideous and bloody Treason, not many hours before the appointed time for the
Execution thereof, but also in preserving the said Castle and City of Dublin,
and some other Cities, Towns, and Castles, in the Kingdom, from the bloody
hands of the barbarous Conspirators, as also in thereby rendering deliverance of
the Lives of the said Lords Justices and Council, and of all the British and
Protestants in Dublin, and in the said other Cities, Towns and Castles
preserved, and of sundry other British and Protestants, fallen into the hands of
those rebellious Conspirators, and likewise in sending us Succors out of
England hither, by the Piety, Care, and Wisdom, of our late Sovereign Lord King
Charles the First, whereby with Gods blessing the good Subjects of this
Kingdom, have hitherto continued safe under his mighty Protection,
notwithstanding the unexampled rage and implacable malice of those merciless
Rebels. Wherefore as we do most humbly and justly acknowledge Gods Justice, in
our deserved punishments in those Calamities, which from the Councils and
Actions of those Conspirators, and their Adherents, have fallen upon us in this
Kingdom in general, so we do in like manner acknowledge, that even in
exercising of that his Justice, he remembered Mercy also, and magnified his
Mercies to us, in those great Blessings which we humbly confess to have
proceeded, merely from his infinite Goodness and Mercy, and therefore to his
most holy Name we do ascribe all Honor, Glory and Praise. And to the end this
unfeigned Thankfulness may never be forgotten, but may be had in a perpetual
Remembrance, that all Ages to come may yield Praises to his Divine Majesty for
the same, and have in memory that joyful Day of Deliverance, Be it therefore
Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, with the Assent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and
by Authority of the same, that the three and twentieth day of October shall be
kept and celebrated, as an Anniversary holy day in this Kingdom for ever, and
that all Persons do at that day forbear all bodily Labor, and the exercise of
their Trades, and that all and singular Ministers in every Cathedral and Parish
Church, or other usual place for Common Prayer, within this Realm of Ireland,
shall always upon the three and twentieth day of October, say Morning Prayer,
and give thanks to Almighty God, for that most happy and miraculous Deliverance
and Preservation, far above the expectations of those wretched Conspirators:
And that all and every Person and Persons inhabiting within this Realm of
Ireland, shall yearly upon the three and twentieth day of October, diligently
and faithfully resort to the Parish Church or Chapel accustomed, or to some
usual Church or Chapel, where the said Morning Prayer, Preaching, or other
Service of God shall be used, and then and there abide orderly and soberly,
during the time of the said Prayers, Preaching, or other Service of God, there
to be used and ministered. And because all and every Person may be put in mind
of his Duty, and be then the better prepared to the said holy Service, Be it
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every Minister shall give warning to
his Parishioners, publicly in the Church at Morning Prayer, the Lords day next
before every such three and twentieth day of October, for the due observation
of the said day, and that after Morning Prayer, or Preaching, upon every such
three and twentieth day of October, they read publicly, distinctly and
plainly, this present Act.



And, besides our private Thankfulness, that we may know what the Church is
enjoined by his Majesty's Command, (given at Whitehall, the 15th. of August, in
the 18th. year of his Reign, 1666.) I must refer you to the Office of the
Church.

Here one might well have thought this bloody Scene should have been fully
closed, the event of so horrid a Conspiracy, having by God and Man been
severely chastized: But as if Heaven were still to be dared, and Majesty
affronted, no sooner was this State settled in so wonderful a manner, as it drew
the whole world to look on it as a miracle; but the grand Incendiaries of the
late Rebellion, Archbishops, Bishops, and others of that Union, (openly owning
their Profession) appeared in public, in as much as the Parliament of England
was enforced to take notice of their Insolency, as an encouragement to Popery,
beseeching his Majesty, that Plunket, the Titular Archbishop of Ardmagh, and
Talbot, Archbishop of Dublin, should be apprehended, to answer what might be
objected against them: And as an Evidence of their Parties Activeness and
Insinuation, the Lord of Ossory, Lord Deputy, and the Council, by a
Proclamation, dated at the Council Chamber in Dublin, the 11th. of July, 1664.
show, Whereas information has been given unto us by diverse Gentlemen, and
others of the Popish Religion, that several pretended Chapters have been, and
are to be soon called in several Parts of this Kingdom, and Meetings appointed
by Persons disaffected to his Majesty's Government, and to the public Peace
and Quiet, who take opportunities from those Assemblies, to diffuse and spread
abroad ( amongst the People of that Religion Seditious Doctrines, to the great
dissatisfaction of all those, who are peaceably and loyally inclined, etc. They
therefore to the avoiding the Contagion, that by such Delusions might be
ingendered, and those Dangers, which by the continuance and seducement of the
said Persons, and other turbulent Spirits, are endeavored) cautioned and
forewarned, That none should presume to assist, abett, or countenance them; and
that those ( who were engaged therein) should, upon their Duty of Allegiance to
his Majesty, forbear any further Proceedings, etc. All which were afterward
blank'd over, as indeed they had the fortune to be strangely palliated,
together with what the Bishop of Ferns had discovered to the Earl of Sandwich,
(passing through Galacia to Madrid) of Edmond Reylie, Archbishop of Ardmagh's
purpose, to raise the Irish again into Rebellion; though some to delude the
Age, made a Loyal Formulary or Remonstrance of their Obedience, whilst being
admitted at Dublin, into a National Synod of their own, 1666. (an Indulgence
not yet fathomed) they there split themselves into Parties, and (the 15th. day
of their meeting) broke up, without the least satisfaction to the End they were
connived at; so as from their Principles its natural to conclude, That whatever
a Prince must expect from such men, it must be in subordination to the Popes
Approbation: A Reflection on the like made King H. 8. say, that he found the
Clergy of this Realm were but his half Subjects, or scarce so much, every
Bishop or Abbot, (at the entering upon his Dignity) taking an Oath to the Pope,
derogatory to that of their Fidelity to the King; which contradiction, he
desired his Parliament to take away, and it occasioned (writes my Lord Herbert,
Fol. 335) the final renouncing of the Popes Authority, about two years after.
The Clergies Oath is given at large, in Walshe's Epistle to his Loyal
Formulary, Fol. 19. which draws me into a further consideration of the late War.

A War in which were interessed (on several Principles) some of the greatest
Princes and States of Europe, the Pope, Emperor, France, Spain, Lorraign, and
others, who (professedly, or underhand) contributed Money, Arms, Council, or
Countenance.

A War many years in contriving, and (what makes it the more stupendous) so
secretly and unexpectedly carried on, (villainy hates the light) that
considering how far the Conspiracy was spread, and who were engaged in it, it
is scarce credible, that no apprehension of its event should in the least be
discovered, more then what Ever Mac Mahon imparted, 1631. The apprehension of
which soon passed over, as did also some other petty suspicions, raised I know
not from what improbable and confused Rumors, amusing, rather then convincing
the Judgment of such, as were most concerned in the notice of them; so as till
the 22. of October. 1641. late at night, (on the very point of the Plot being
acted) nothing seemed certain or infallible, that if God had not been very
merciful, all had been surprised, before any one had been suspected.

A War not confined to some Province, or parts of Provinces in Ireland, as
Tyrones, Desmonds, and the rest had been; but as if the Design were the joint
Act of the whole Kingdom, all seemed to have one head, few excepted, whose
Honor is the greater.

A War not arising from small beginnings, as some of the former, which from
private Interest, at last espoused greater; But this in its first appearance,
drove all before it, like some Infections, speedily diffusing its Venom
through the whole Body.

A War, for which the most diligent enquiry, could not have found within the
Nation, a Head (in Popularity or Parts) for such an undertaking: The occasion
doubtless of security in most, and whereby the State Politics of that time
were deluded, they having their eyes open only, on what might have been from
abroad suspected, not (much less feared) at home, the loud alarms of a
Massinello, a Person of none or of broken Fortunes, of little Power, or of less
Brain, (but any thing, even what is under foot, and next at hand, may easily be
taken up, and made by Divine Justice, a sufficient Scourge for a provoking
People) such was that Sir Phelim O Neal esteemed, till then generally a very
Buffoon in Converse, but after owned and Honored as a Principal in that
undertaking; Yet being therein rather the hand then the head, proving, however,
the Firebrand of his Country, that being the English of Phelim an Totan, or
smoking Phelimy, a Name (on this occasion) given him in way of Honor by his
Irish Rhimers, and wherein he himself after gloried.

Finally, a War dismal to the English and Protestants of Ireland, in its
beginning; so dismal, as no example through the World ever equaled it, in the
Circumstances that accompanied the Butcheries, Massacres, Cruelties, yea, the
mercy of the Rebels in that War; though in the end, fatal to the Irish
themselves, above any thing that ever befell that Nation, so as the greatness of
their Sufferings, may well testify the remarkableness of their Crimes, suitable
to the innocent blood they had barbarously shed, and the devastations they had
made of a most flourishing and well settled Kingdom.

APPENDIX, I. Fol. 10.
Questions wherein the House of Commons humbly desires, that the House of the
Lords would be pleased to require the Judges to deliver their Resolutions.
INasmuch as the Subjects of this Kingdom are Free, Loyal and Dutiful Subjects
to his Most Excellent Majesty, their Natural Liege Lord and King, and to be
governed only by the Common Laws of England, and Statutes of force in this
Kingdom, in the same manner and form, as his Majesty's Subjects of the Kingdom,
are and ought to be governed by the said Common Laws and Statutes of force in
that Kingdom; which of right, the Subjects of this Kingdom do Challenge and
make their Protestation to be their Birthright, and best Inheritance: Yet
inasmuch as the unlawful Actions and Proceedings of some of his Majesty's
Officers and Ministers of Justice, of late years Introduced and Practiced in
this Kingdom, did tend to the Infringing and Violation of the Laws, Liberties
and Freedom of the said Subjects of this Kingdom, contrary to his Majesty's
Royal and Pious intentions, Therefore the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in
Parliament Assembled, not for any doubt or ambiguity, which may be conceived or
thought of, for or concering the Premises, nor of the ensuing questions, but
for manifestation and declaration of a clear Truth, and of the said Laws and
Statutes already planted, and for many Ages past settled in this Kingdom, The
said Knights, Citizens and Burgesses do therefore pray, that the House of the
Lords may be pleased to command the Judges of this Kingdom, forthwith to
declare in Writing their Resolutions of, and unto the ensuing questions, and
subscribe to the same.

1. Whether the Judges of this Kingdom be a Free People, and to be governed
only by the Common Laws of England, and Statutes of force in this Kingdom?

2. Whether the Judges of this Land do take the Oath of Judges? And if so,
Whether under pretext of any Act of State, Proclamation, Writ, Letter, or
direction under the Great, or Privy Seal, or Privy Signet, or Letter, or other
Commandment from the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Deputy, Justice, Justices, or other
Chief Governor, or Governors of this Kingdom, they may hinder, stay or delay
the Suit of any Subject, or his Judgment or Execution thereupon? If so, in
what Cases, and whether if they do hinder, stay, or delay such Suit, Judgment,
or Execution thereupon, what punishment do they incurr for their deviation and
transgression therein?

3. Whether the King's Majesty's Privy Council, either with the Chief Governor
or Governors of this Kingdom, or without him, or them, be a place of
Judicature by the Common Laws; and wherein Causes between Party and Party for
Debts, Trespasses, Accounts, Portions, or Title of Lands, or any of them, and
which of them may be heard and determined, and of what Civil Causes they have
Jurisdiction, and by what Law, and of what force are their Orders and Decree in
such Cases, or any of them?

4. The like of the Chief Governors alone.

5. Whether Grants of Monopolies be warranted by Law, and of what, and in what
Cases, and how and where, and by whom are the pretended trangressions against
such Grants punishable, and whether by Fine, mutilation of Members,
Imprisonment, Loss and forfeiture of Goods, or otherwise, and which of them?

6. In what Cases the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Deputy, or other Chief Governor or
Governors of this Kingdom and Council may punish by Fine, Imprisonment,
mutilation of Members, Pillory or otherwise, and whether they may Sentence any
to such the same or the like Punishment, for infringing the Commands of or
concerning any Proclamation of and concerning Monopolies, and what Punishment
do they incurr that Vote for the same?

7. Of what force is an Act of State or Proclamation in this Kingdom, to bind
the Liberty, Goods, Possessions, or Inheritance of the Natives thereof; whether
they or any of them, can alter the Common Law, or the Infringers of them loose
their Goods, Chattels or Leases, or forfeit the same, by infringing any such
Act of State, Proclamation, or both; what Punishment do the sworn Judges of the
Law that are Privy-Councellors incurr, that Vote for such Acts and Execution
thereof?

8. Are the Subjects of this Kingdom subject to Marshal Law, and whether any
man in time of Peace, no Enemy being in the Field with Banners displayed, can
be sentenced to Death? If so, by whom, and in what Cases? If not, what
Punishment do they incurr that in time of Peace execute Marshal Law?

9. Whether voluntary Oaths taken freely before Arbitrators for affirmance, or
disaffirmance of any thing, or for the true performance of any thing be
Punishable in the Castle-Chamber, or any other Court, and why, and wherefore?

10. Why and by what Law, and by what rule of Policy is it, that none is
admitted to reducement of Fines, and other Penalty in the Castle-Chamber, or
Councel-Table, until he confess the Offense for which he is censured, when as
revera he might be innocent thereof, though suborned Proofs or circumstances
might induce a Censure?

11. Whether the Judges of the King's Bench, or any other Judge of
Jail-delivery, or of any other Court, and by what Law do, or can deny the
Copies of Indictment of Felony or Treason to the Parties accused, contrary to
the Law?

12. What Power have the Barons of the Court of Exchequer, to raise the respit
of homage arbitrarily to what rate they please, to what value they may raise
it, by what Law they may distinguish between the respit of homage, upon the
diversity of the true value of the Fees, when as Escuage is the same for great
and small Fees, and are approportionable by Parliament?

13. Whether it be Censurable in the Subjects of this Kingdom to repair into
England, to appeal unto his Majesty for redress of Injuries, or for other
lawful Actions? if so, why, and in what condition of Persons, and by what Law?

14. Whether Deans or other Dignitaries of Cathedral Churches, be properly, and
de mero Jure Donative by the King, and not* Elective, or Collative? If so, why,
and by what Law, and whether the Confirmation of a Dean de facto of the Bishops
grant be good and valid in Law, or no, if not, by what Law?

15. Whether the issuing of Quo warrantoes out of the King's Bench or Exchequer,
against Bourroughs that anciently and recently sent Burgesses to Parliament, to
show cause why they sent Burgesses to the Parliament be legal? if not, what
punishment ought to be inflicted upon those that are, or have been the
Occasioners, Procurers and Judges of and in such Quo warrantoes?

16. By what Law, are Jurors that give Verdict according to their Conscience,
and are the sole Judges of the fact, Censured in the Castle Chamber in great
Fines, and sometimes Pillored with loss of Ears, and boared through the
Tongue, and sometimes marked in the forehead with a hot Iron, and other like
infamous Punishment?

17. By what Law are men Censurable in the Castle-Chamber with the mutilation
of Members, or any other brand of Infamy, and in what Causes, and what
punishment in each Case there is due, without respit of the quality of the
Person or Persons?

18. Whether in the Censures in the Castle-Chamber regard be to be had to the
words of the great Charter ( viz.) Salvo continemento?

19. Whether one that steals a Sheep, or commits any other Felony, and after
flies the Course of Justice, or lies in Woods or Mountains, upon his keeping,
be a Traitor, if not, whether a Proclamation can make him so?

20. Whether the Testimony or Evidence of Rebels, Traitors, protected
Thieves, or other infamous Persons, be good Evidence in Law, to be pressed upon
the Trials of men for their lives, or whether the Judge, or Jurors ought to be
Judge of the matter in fact?

21. By what Law are Faires and Markets to be held in Capite, when no other
express Tenure is mentioned by his Majesty's Letters Patents or Grants of the
same Faires and Markets, although the Rent or yearly sum be reserved thereout.

Declarations of the Law made in Parliament upon the Questions propounded to
the Judges in a Sessions this present Parliament.
1. THE Subjects of this his Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, are a Declaration on
the 1st, Quaere. Voted upon Question.
free People and to be governed only according to the Common Law of England,
and Statutes made and established by Parliament in this Kingdom of Ireland; and
according to the lawful Customs used in the same.

2. That Judges in Ireland ought to take the Oath of the Justices or
Declaration on the 2d, Quaere. Voted upon Question.
Judges declared and established in several Parliaments of force in this
Kingdom, and the said Judges or any of them by color or under pretext of any
Act of State, or Proclamation, or under color or pretext of any Writ, Letter,
or direction under the Great-Seal, Privy Seal, or Privy-Signet from the King's
most Excellent Majesty, or by color or pretext of any Letter or Commandment
from the chief Governor or Governors of this Kingdom, ought not to hinder or
delay the Suit of any Subject or his Judgment or Execution thereupon: And if
any Letters, Writs or Commands from his Majesty or any other, or for any other
cause to the Justices, or other deputed to do the law and right according to
the usage of the Realm, in disturbance of the Law or of the execution of the
same, or of right to the parties, the Justices and others aforesaid ought to
proceed and hold their Courts and process where the Pleas and matters be
depending before them, as if no such Letters, Writs, or Commandments were come
to them; And in case any Judge or Judges, Justice or Justices be found in
default therein, he or they so found in default ought to incur and undergo due
punishment according to the Law and the former Declarations and Propositions in
Parliament, in that Case made and of force in this Kingdom, or as shall be
ordered, adjudged or declared in Parliament; and the Barons of the Exchequer,
Justices of Assize and Jail-delivery if they be found in default as aforesaid;
It is hereby declared, that they ought to undergo the punishment aforesaid.

3. The Councel-Table of this Realm, either with the chief Governor
Declaration on the 3d, Quaere. Voted upon Question.
or Governors, or without the chief Governor or Governors, is no Judicature
wherein any Actions real, personal, popular, or mixed, or any Suit in the nature
of the said Actions or any of them can or ought to be Commenced, heard, or
determined. And all proceedings at the Councel-Table in any Suit in the nature
of the said Actions, are void (especially Causes particularly provided for by
express Acts of Parliament of force in this Kingdom only excepted).

4. The proceedings before the Chief Governor or Governors alone Declaration
on the 5th. Quaere. Voted upon Question.
in any Action real, personal, popular, or mixed, or in any Suit in the nature
of any of the said Actions are voted upon Question coram non Judice, and void.

5. All grants of Monopolies are contrary to the Laws of this Declaration on
the 5th. Quaere. Voted upon Question.
Realm, and therefore void. And no Subject of the said Realm ought to be fined,
imprisoned, or otherwise punished for exercising or using the lawful liberty of
a Subject contrary to such Grants.

6. The Lord Lieutenant, Lord Deputy or other Chief Governor, or Declaration
on the 6th. Quaere. Voted upon Question.
Governors, and Council of this Realm or any of them, ought not to imprison
any of his Majesty's Subjects, but only in Cases where the Common Laws or
Statutes of the Realm do enable and warrant them so to do, and they ought not
to Fine or to Censure any subject in mutilation of Members, standing on the
Pillory, or other shameful punishment in any Case at the Councel-Table; and no
Subject ought to be Imprisoned, Fined or otherwise punished for infringing any
Commands or Proclamations for the support, or countenance of Monopolies. And if
in any Case any person or persons shall be committed by the Command or Warrant
of the Chief Governor or Governors, and Privy Council of this Realm, or any
of them, That in any such Case any person or persons so committed or restrained
of his or their liberty, or suffering imprisonment, upon demand or motion made
by his or their Council, or other employed by him or them for that purpose unto
the Judges of that Court of King's Bench or Common Pleas in open Court, shall
without delay upon any pretense whatsoever for the ordinary Fees usually paid
for the same; have forthwith granted unto him or them, a Writ or Writs of
habeas Corpus, to be directed generally unto all and every Sheriff,
Gaol-Minister, Officer, or other person in whose custody the party or parties
so committed or restrained shall be at their retorn of the said Writ or Writs,
and according to the Command thereof, upon due and convenient notice thereof
given unto him at the charge of the party or parties who requires or procures
such Writ or Writs, and upon security by his or their own Bond or Bonds given
to pay the charge of carrying back the Prisoner or Prisoners, if he or they
shall be remanded by the Court to which he or they shall be brought, as in like
Case has been used; such charges of bringing up and carrying back the Prisoner
or Prisoners, to be always ordered by the Court if any difference shall arise
thereabouts, bring or cause to be brought, the bodies of the said party or
parties so committed and restrained unto and before the Judges and Justices of
the said Court, from whence the said Writ or Writs shall issue in open Court,
and shall then likewise Certify the true cause of such his or their detainor or
imprisonment, and thereupon the Court after such retorn made and delivered in
open Court, shall proceed to examine and determine whether the cause of such
Commitment appearing upon the said Retorn be just or legal, or not, and shall
thereupon do what to Justice shall appertain, either by delivering, bayling, or
remanding the Prisoner or Prisoners.

7. An Act of State or Proclamation in this Kingdom cannot bind Declaration on
the 7th. Quaere. Voted upon Question.
the liberty, Inheritance, possession, or goods of the Subjects of the said
Kingdom, nor alter the Common Law; and the Infringers of any such Act or
Proclamation, ought not to forfeit Lands, Leases, Goods or Chattels, for the
infringing of any such Act of State or Proclamation; and the Judges of the Law,
who do vote for such Acts of State or Proclamation, are punishable, as breakers
and violaters of their Oaths of Judges.

8. No Subject of this Kingdom ought to be sentenced to death or Declaration on
the 8th, Quaere. Voted upon Question.
Executed by Martial Law, in time of peace; and if any Subject be so sentenced,
or executed by Martial Law, in time of peace, the Authors and Actors of any
such Sentence, or Execution, are punishable by the law of the Land for their so
doing, as doers of their own wrong, and contrary to the said law of the Land.

9. No Man ought to be punished in the Castle-Chamber, or in Declaration on the
9th, Quaere. Voted upon Question.
any other Court for taking a voluntary Oath before Arbitrators, for affirmance
or disaffirmance of any thing, or the true performance of any thing in Civil
Causes: Nor are the Arbitrators before whom such voluntary Oaths shall be
taken, punishable.

10. By the Laws and Statutes of the Realm no Man is bound, Declaration on the
10th. Qu. Voted upon Question.
or ought to be compelled to acknowledge the offense laid to his charge, or
the justness of any Censure past against him in the Castle-Chamber, or at the
Councel-Table, nor ought to be detained in Prison, or abridged of his liberty,
or the reducement of his Fine stayed or delayed until he do acknowledge such
offense, or the justness of such Censure. And it is further declared, That no
such enforced or wrested confession or acknowledgment, can or ought to debar,
or hinder any Subject from his Bill of Reversal or review of any Sentence, or
Decree past, or conceived against him in the Castle-Chamber, or in any other
Court.

11. The Judges of the Kings Bench, or Justices of Jail-deliver, Declaration
on the 11th, Quaer. Voted upon Question.
or the Judges of any other Court, ought not to deny Copies of Indictments of
Felony or Treason to the parties indicted.

12. The Barons of the Exchequer, ought not to raise the respit Declaration on
the 12th, Quaer. Voted upon Question.
of Homage above the usual rates appertaining in and by the course and
presidents of that Court, continued until the year of our Lord God 1637. And
the raising thereof since that time was Arbitrary and against the Law. And the
Barons of the Exchequer ought not to distinguish between the respit of Homage
upon any diversity of the true values of the Knight's Fees.

13. The Subjects of this Kingdom may lawfully repair into England Declaration
on the 13th, Quaer. Voted upon Question,
to repeal to his Majesty for redress of Injuries, or for other their lawful
occasions; And for their so doing, ought not to be punished or questioned upon
the Statute of 5. of King Richard the second, nor by any other Law or Statute
of force in this Kingdom (eminent Officers or Ministers of State, Commanders
and Soldiers of his Majesty's Army) The Judges and Ministers of his Majesty's
Courts of Justice, and of his Highness Revenues and Customs, whose attendance
is necessary requisite by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, only excepted.

14. Deaneries or other Ecclesiastical Dignities of this Realm, Declaration on
the 14th, Quaer. Voted upon Question.
are not de mero Jure Donative; but some are Donative, and some Elective, and
some are Collative according to their respective foundations. And the
confirmation of the Bishops grants by a Dean de facto, having actually stallum
in Choro and vocem in Capitulo, togegether with the Chapter, is good in Law.

15. The issuing of Quo warrantoes out of the Court of Kings Declaration on the
15th, Quaer. Voted upon Question.
Bench, Court of Exchequer, or any other Court against Borroughs that
anciently, or recently sent Burgesses to the Parliament, to show cause why they
sent Burgesses to the Parliament, and the proceedings thereupon are Coram non
Judice, illegal and void. And the right of sending Burgesses to the Parliament,
is questionable in Parliament only; And the occasioners, procurers and Judges
in such Quowarrantoes and proceedings are punishable, as in Parliament shall be
thought consonant to Law and Justice.

16. Jurors are the sole Judges of the matter in fact, and they Declaration on
the 16th. Quaer. Voted upon Question.
ought not for giving their Verdict to be bound over to the Court of
Castle-Chamber by the Judge or Judges before whom the Verdict was, or shall be
given.

17. No man ought to be censured in the Castle-Chamber in the Declaration on
the 17th. Quaer. Voted upon Question.
mutilation of Members, or any other Brand of Infamy, otherwise or in other
Cases then is expressly limited by the Statutes of this Realm, in such cases
provided.

18. In the Censures of the Castle-Chamber, especially regard Declaration on
the 18th. Quaer. Voted upon Question.
ought to be had to the words of the great Charter ( viz.) Salvo contenemento,
etc.

19. A Felon who flies the course of Justice, and lies in VVoods, Declaration
on the 19th. Quaer. Voted upon Question.
Mountains, or elsewhere upon his keeping, is no Traitor, and a Proclamation
cannot make him a Traitor.

20. The Testimony of convicted or protected Rebels, Traitors, Declaration on
the 20th. Quaer. Voted upon Question.
Felons, is no sufficient evidence in Law upon the Trial of any person for his
life; And the credit of the Testimony of persons accused or impeached and not
convicted of Felony or Treason, ought to be left to the Jury who are sole
Judges of the truth and validity of the said Testimony.

21. The King grants Lands to be held in free and Common Soccage, Declaration
on the 21th. Quaer. Voted upon Question.
as of a Castle or Manor by Letters Patents under the great Seal, and by the
same Letters Patents, or by other Letters, Patents, grants a Fair and Market,
reserving a yearly Rent, or sum without expressing any Tenure as to the said
Fair or Market, the said Fair or Market, is not held by Knights-Service, in
Capite, or otherwise in Capite.

FITZ GERALD's Edict manifesting the Cause of his Rebellion, relating to fol 15.
Edictum Illustrissimi Domini Jacobi Geraldini de Justitia ejus Belli, quod
Hibernia pro fide gerit.
SI ut bellum aliquod just geratur, tria requiruntur, Causa Justa, Potestas
Legitima, and Legitimus belli administrandi Modus: Haec tria in hoc Bello
concurrere jam planum fiet.

Causa enim hujus belli, est dei Gloria, Cui externum Sacrificii cultum, and
visibilem Sancti Altaris honorem ab Haereticis impie ablatum, nos restituendum
curamus: Gloria item Christi, Cujus Sacramenta gratiam confer, cum Haeretici
blaspheme negent, Christi Evangelium ejusdem infirmitatis accusant, ob quam lex
reprobata fuit: Gloria item Ecclesiae Catholicae, quam contra Scripturarum
veritatem Haeretici aliquot saeculis obscuram and mundo ignotam fuisse
mentiuntur. At in Dei Nomine, per Christi Sacramenta sanctificando, and in
Ecclesiae unitate servanda, omnium nostrum salus potissimum consistit.

Jam vero Potestas hujus belli sumpta est, primum a Jure Naturali, deinde ab
Evangelico. Jus Natural potestatem nobis facit defendendi nosmetipsos contra
Manifestissimam Haereticorum Tyrannidem, quia contra jus Naturae sub paena
Mortis cogunt Nos priorem Nostram de Pontificis Romani Primatu fidem abjurare,
novamque and plane contrariam Religionem invitos recipere ac profiteri. Quale
Jugum nec Christiani Judaeis aut Turcis, nec illi Nostris, unquam imposuerunt.
Deinde cum Christus in Evangelio Regni Caelorum claves (hoc est) summam
Ecclesiae suae administrationem Petro dederit, Hujus Apostolorum principis
legitimus in eadem Cathedra successor Gregorius decimus tertius in Ducem ac
Generalem hujus belli Capitaneum nos elegit, ut ex ipsius literis ac Diplomate
abunde constat; quod quidem tanto Magis fecit, quia Ejus Praecessor Pius
Quintus Elizabetham istarum Haeresium patronam omni regia Potestate ac Dominio
jam ante privaverat, quod ipsum Ejus Declaratoria Sententia, quam and ipsam
apud nos habemus, manifestissime testatur.

Itaque jam non contra legitimum Angliae Sceptrum and honorabile Solium
dimicamus, sed contra Tyrannam, quae Christum in Vicario suo loquentem recusans
audire, immo Christi Ecclesiam suo foemineo sexui etiam in fidei causis (de
quibus cum Authoritate nec loqui deberet) ausa subjicere, merito regiam
Potestatem amisit.

Porro, quod ad modum Ejusdam belli administrandi pertinet, nec bona Nostrorum
Civium invadere, nec privatas inimicitias, a quibus liberisumus, persequi, nec
summam regnandi potestatem nobis usurpare cogitamus: Imo, restituatur Deo
statim suus Honor, and nos continuo parati sumus gladium deponere, atque iis
qui legitime praeerunt obedire. Sin aliqui (quod absit) Haereses propugnare, ac
Deo suum honorem auferre deinceps pergant (nam quos de praeteritis paenitet,
iis nihil opponimus, nec unquam opposituri sumus) Illi utique sunt qui de
Hibernia veram pacem auferunt, illi sunt qui bellum patriae suae inferunt, and
non Nos. Quando enim Pax non cum Deo sed cum Diabolo habetur (uti nunc se res
habet) tunc non immerito una cum Servatore Nostro dicere debemus, Non veni
pacem in terram mittere sed Gladium. Si Ergo Bellum quod ob Pacem cum Deo
renovandam gerimus long Justissimum est, Qui nobis in hoc bello adversantur
damnationem sibi acquirent, habituri adversarios non solum omnes Sanctos,
quorum reliquias and sanctas Imagines Haeretici conculcant, sed etiam Deum
ipsum, Cujus Gloriam oppugnant. Atque haec sint satis hoc in loco. Nam si quis
before horum omnium rationem perspicere velit, Is perlegat aequitatem and
rationem hujus Edicti, quam alias before edendam Curavimus.

APPENDIX, II. Fol. 24.
The Relation of the Lord Maguire written with his own hand in the Tower, and
delivered by him to Sir John Conyers then Lieutenant, to present to the Lords
in Parliament.
BEing in Dublin Candlemass* Term last was twelve Month (1640.) the Parliament
then sitting, Mr. Roger Moore did write to me, desiring me, that if I could in
that spare time, I would come to his House (for then the Parliament did nothing
but Sit, and Adjourn, expecting a Commission for the continuance thereof, their
former Commission being expired) and that some things he had to say unto me,
that did merely concern me, and on receipt of his Letter, the new Commission
for continuing the Parliament landed, and I did return him an Answer that I
could not fulfill his request for that present; and thereupon he himself came to
Town presently after, and sending to me, I went to see him at his Lodging: And
after some little time spent in salutation^ he began to discourse of the many
Afflictions and Sufferings of the Natives of that Kingdom, and particularly in
those late times of my Lord Strafford's Government, which gave distaste to the
whole Kingdom. And then he began to cularlize the suffering of them that were
the more ancient Natives, as were the Irish; how that on several Plantations
they were all put out of their Ancestors Estates. All which sufferings he said,
did beget a general discontent over all the whole Kingdom in both the Natives;
to wit, the Old and New Irish. And that if the Gentry of the Kingdom were
disposed to free themselves furtherly from the like inconvenience, and get good
Conditions for themselves, for regaining their Ancestors (or at least a good
part thereof) Estates, they could never desire a more convenient time than that
time, (the distempers of Scotland being then on foot) and did ask me what I
thought of it; I made him answer that I could not tell what to think of it;
such matters being altogether out of my Element. Then he would needs have an
Oath of me of secrecy; which I gave him, and thereupon, he told me that he
spoke to the best Gentry of Quality in Lemster, and a great part of Connaght
touching that matter, and he found all of them willing thereunto, if so be they
could draw to them the Gentry of Ulster, for which cause (said he) I came to
speak to you; then he began to lay down to me the case that I was in there,
overwhelmed in Debt, the smalness of my Estate, and the greatness of the Estate
my Ancestors had, and how I should be sure to get it again, or at least a good
part thereof; and moreover how the welfare, and maintaining of the Catholic
Religion, which he said, undoubtedly the Parliament now in England will
suppress, does depend on it: For, said he, it is to be feared, and so much I
hear from every understanding man, the Parliament intends the utter subversion
of our Religion, by which persuasions he obtained my consent. And so I demanded
whether any more of Ulster Gentry were in Town, I told him that Phillip Reyly,
Mr. Jorilagh O Neal, brother to Sir Phelim O Neal, and Mr. Cosloe mac Mahone
were in Town, so for that time we parted.

The next day he invited Mr. Reyly, and I, to dine with him, and after dinner
he sent for those other Gentlemen, Mr. Neale, and Mr. mac Mahone, and when they
were come, he began the discourse formerly used to me, to them, and with the
same persuasions formerly used to me, he obtained their consent. And then he
began to discourse of the manner, how it ought to be done, of the feazability,
and easiness of the Attempt, considering matters, as they then stood in
England, the troubles of Scotland, the great number of able men in the Kingdom,
meaning Ireland, what succors they were (more then) to hope for from abroad,
and the Army then raised all Irishmen, and well armed, meaning the Army raised
by my Lord Strafford, against Scotland. First, that every one should endeavor
to draw his own friends into that Act. and at least those that did live in one
County with them; and when they had so done, they send to the Irish in the
Low-Countryes, and Spain, to let them know of the day, and resolution, so that
they be over with them by that day, or soon after with supply of Arms and
Ammunition, as they could; that there should be a set day appointed, and every
own in his own quarters should rise out that day, and seize on all Arms he
could get in his County, and this day to be near Winter, so that England could
not be able to send forces into Ireland before May, and by that time there was
no doubt to be made, but that they themselves should be supplied by the Irish
beyond Seas, who he said could not miss of help from either Spain, or the Pope,
but that his resolutions were not in all things allowed. For, first it was
resolved nothing should be done, until first they had sent to the Irish
over-Seas to know their advice, and what hope of success they could give, for
in them, as they said, all their hope of relief was, and they would have both
their advice, and resolution before any further proceedings, more than to speak
to, and try Gentlemen of the Kingdom, every one, as they could conveniently, to
see (in case they would at any time grow to a resolution) what to be, and
strength they must trust to; then Mr. Moore told them, that it was to no
purpose to spend much time in speaking to the Gentry. For there was no doubt to
be made of the Irish, that they would be ready at any time. And that all the
doubt was in the Gentry of the Pale, but he said that for his own part, he was
really assured, when they had risen out, the Pale Gentry would not stay long
after, at least that they would not oppose them in any thing, but be Neuters,
and if in case they did, that they had men enough in the Kingdom without them.
Moreover he said he had spoke to a great man (who then should be nameless) that
would not fail at the appointed day of rising out to appear, and to be seen in
the Act. But that until then he was sworn not to reveal him; and that was all
that was done at that meeting, only that Mr. Moore should the next Lent
following, make a journey down into the North to know what was done there, and
that he also might inform them what he had done, and so on parting, Mr. Phillip
Reyly, and I, did importune Mr. Moore for the knowledge of that great man, that
he spoke of, and on long entreaty, after binding us to new secrecy, not to
discover him till the day should be appointed, he told that it was the Lord of
Mayo, who was very powerful in Command of men in those parts of Connaght
wherein he lived, and that there was no doubt to be made of him, no more than
was of himself, and so we parted.

The next Lent following, Mr. Moore according to his promise came into Ulster,
by reason it was the time of Assizes in several Counties; there he met only
with Mr. Reyly, and nothing was then done, but all matters put off till the May
following, where we or most of us should meet at Dublin, it being both
Parliament and Termtime: In the mean time there landed one Neale O Neale, sent
by the Earl of Tyrone out of Spain, to speak with the Gentry of his Name and
Kindred, to let them know that he had treated with Cardinal Richelieu for
obtaining succor to come for Ireland, and that he prevailed with the Cardinal,
so that he was to have Arms, Ammution and Money from him on demand to come for
Ireland, and that he only expected a Convenient time to come away, and to
desire them to be in a readiness, and to procure all others, whom they could,
to be so likewise, which message did set on the proceedings very much, so that
Mr. Moore, Mr. Reyly, my brother, and I, meeting the next May at Dublin, and
the same Messenger there too; It was resolved, that he should return to the
Earl into Spain with their Resolution, which was that they would rise out
twelve or fourteen days before or after Allhallontide, as they should see
cause, and that he should not fail to be with them by that time: There was a
report at that time, and before that the Earl of Tyrone was killed, which was
not believed, by reason of many such reports formerly, which we found to be
false, and so the Messenger departed with directions, that if the Earls death
were true, he should repair into the Low-Countrys to Colonel Owen O Neale, and
acquaint him with his Commission from the Earl; whereof, it was thought, he was
not ignorant, and to return an Answer sent by him, and to see what he would
advise, or would do himself therein. But presently after his departure, the
certainty of the Earls death was known, and on further Resolution it was
agreed, that an express Messenger should be sent to the Colonel, to make all
the Resolutions known to him, and to return speedily with his Answer. And so
one Tool O Comely a Priest (as I think Parish Priest to Mr. Moore) was sent
away to Colonel O Neale: In the interim there came several Letters and News out
of England to Dublin, of Proclamations against the Catholics in England, and
also that the Army raised in Ireland, should be disbanded, and conveyed into
Scotland: And presently after several Colonels and Captains Landed, with
directions to carry away those men; amongst whom Colonel Plunkett, Colonel
Burn, and Captain Bryan O Neale came, but did not all come together; for
Plunkett landed before my coming out of Town, and the other two after, wherein
a great fear of Suppressing of Religion was conceived, and especially by the
Gentry of the Pale, and it was very common amongst them, that it would be very
inconvenient to suffer so many men to be conveyed out of the Kingdom; it being
as was said, very confidently reported, that the Scottish Army did threaten
never to lay down Arms, until an uniformity of Religion were in the three
Kingdoms, and the Catholic Religion suppressed. And thereupon both Houses of
Parliament began to oppose their going, and the Houses were divided in their
Opinions; some would have them go, others not; but what the definitive
conclusion of the Houses was touching the point, I cannot tell; for by leave
from the House of Lords, I departed into the Country before the Prorogation.
But before my departure I was informed by John Barnewall a Friar, that those
Gentlemen of the Pale (and some other Members of the House of Commons) had
several meetings and consultations, how they might make stay of the Soldiers
in the Kingdom, and likewise to arm them in defense of the King, being much
injured both of England and Scotland then (as they were informed) and to
prevent any attempt against Religion; and presently after I departed into the
Country, and Mr. Reyly being a Member of the House of Commons stayed the
Prorogation; and on his coming into the Country sent to me to meet him, and I
came to his House, where he told me that he heard for certain, that the former
Narration of Barnewall to me (for I did acquaint him with it) was true and that
he heard it from several there; also was Emar mac Mahone (made firmly privy to
all our proceedings at Mr. Reylys) lately come out of the Pale, where he met
with the aforenamed John Barnewall, who told him as much; and he formerly told
me, and moreover that those Colonels that lately came over, did proffer their
Service, and industry in that Act, and so would raise their men under color to
convey them into Spain, and then seize on the Castle of Dublin, and with their
Arms there to Arm their Soldiers, and have them ready for any occasion, that
should be commanded them, but that they had not concluded any thing, because
they were not assured how the Gentlemen of the remote parts of the Kingdom (and
especially of Ulster) would stand affected to that Act, and that assurance of
that doubt was all their impediment. Then we three began to think, how we might
assure them help and of the assistance of Ulster Gentlemen; It was thought that
one should be sent to them to acquaint them there with, and they made choice of
me to come; by reason, as they said, that my Wife was allied to them and their
Countrey-woman, and would believe me, trust me sooner than other of their
parts, they or most of them being of the Pale. And so (without as much as to
return home to furnish my self for such a Journey, Volens, nolens,) they
prevailed, or rather forced me to come to Dublin to confer with those Colonels,
(and that was the last August was Twelvemonth). Coming to Town, I met Sir
James Dillon accidentally before I came to my Lodging, who was one of those
Colonels: and after Salutations, he demanded of me where my Lodging was, which
when I told him, and parted; the next day being abroad about some other
occasions in Town, I met him (as he said) coming to wait on me in my Chamber;
but being a good way from it, he desired me to go into his own Chamber, being
near at hand; And then began to discourse of the present sufferings and
afflictions of that Kingdom, and particularly of Religion, and how they were to
expect no redress (the Parliament in England intending, and the Scots resolving
never to lay down Arms until the Catholic Religion were suppressed). Then he
likewise began to lay down what danger it would be to suffer so many able Men,
as was to go with them to depart the Kingdom in such a time: Neither (said he)
do their other Gentlemen that are Colonels and my self, affect our own private
profit, so as to prefer it before the general good of the Kingdom; And knowing
you are well affected thereunto; and I hope (said he) ready to put your
helping-hand to it upon occasion, I will let you know the resolution of those
other Gentlemen and mine, which is, if we are ready to raise our Men, and after
to seize on the Castle, where there is great great store of Arms, and arm our
selves there. This was the first motion that ever I heard of taking the Castle;
for it never came into our thoughts formerly, nor am I persuaded ever would, if
it had not proceeded from those Colonels, who were the first motioners and
contrivers thereof, for ought known to me; and then to be ready to prevent, and
resist any danger, that the Gentlemen of the Kingdom like thereof, and help us:
For we of our selves neither are able, nor will do any thing therein without
their assistance. I began according to the directions that were sent with me to
approve of their Resolution, and also to let him know, how sure he might be of
the assistance of those of Ulster. Then he told us, that for my more
satisfaction, I should confer with the rest of the Colonels themselves, as many
as are privy to the Action, and accordingly a place of meeting was appointed
that afternoon; and on the time and place appointed there met Sir James
himself, Colonel Bourne, and Colonel Plunket. And that former Discourse being
renewed, they began to lay down the Obstacles to that Enterprise, and how they
should be redressed. 1st. If there should War ensue, how there should be Money
had to pay the Soldiers. 2ly, How and where they should procure succors from
Foreign parts. 3dly, How to draw in the Pale Gentlemen. 4thly, Who should
undertake to surprise the Castle, and how it should be done.

To the first, it was answered; That the Rents in the Kingdom every where, not
having respect whose they should be, due to the Lords and Gentlemen thereof,
should be collected to pay the Soldiers. And moreover, they might be sure (nay
that there was no doubt thereof) to procure money from the Pope, who gave
several promises formerly to my Lord of Tyrone (in case he could make way to
come into Ireland) to maintain six thousand men yearly at his own charge; and
that notwithstanding, that my Lord of Tyrone was dead, yet that he would
continue the same forwardness now.

To the second, it was answered by Colonel Bourne, that help from abroad could
not fail them. For (said he) Colonel O Neal told me that he had, or would
procure in readiness (I do not remember which of those the Colonel spoke, or
whether he spoke positive, that Colonel O Neal had Arms, or would procure them)
Arms for ten thousand men. And moreover (said he) I make no great question,
that if we send into Spain, we shall not miss of aid; for I being in London the
last year in the Scots troubles, I was in conference with one of the Spanish
Ambassadors there then, and talking of their troubles then a-foot; he said,
That if the Irish did then rise too, and send to Spain, their Messengers would
be received under Canopies of Gold. These last words he told me, and some one
man of those that were present, privately, whose name I cannot call to mind;
(neither well remember I whether he spoke to them all, or no) then it was
thought, that when they were both in Arms for defense of the Catholic cause,
they would be succored by the Catholic Princes of Christendom.

To the third, it was answered by Colonel Plunket, That he was as morally
certain (for those were his words) as he could be of any thing, that the Pale
Gentleman would join with them, and assist them. For, he said, I have spoke to
several of them since my landing in the Kingdom, and I find them very ready and
willing; and withal I have at London spoke to some of the Committees, and
particularly to my Lord of Gormonstowne, to let them know his resolution, and
they approved it very well. All this was not done at the first meeting, but at
three or four meetings; And so on the last meeting, it was resolved to the last
doubt, touching seizing the Castle, that Colonel Plunket and Colonel Bourne
should undertake that Task, because they were nearer to it than any other, and
also seize on the Forts, Garrisons and other places, where they think any Arms
should be; and in particular, Londonderry, which should be undertaken by those
of Ulster, and then there was a set-day appointed for the execution thereof;
that was the fifth of the ensuing October, (this being the latter end of
August, or the beginning of September, Anno 1641. I do not know whether). And
every one should make provision to rise out that day; and they were named, that
should first succor them, that would take the Castle with men presently,
namely, Sir James Dillon, who did undertake to be with them within 3 (or at the
most) 4 days, with 1000 men, and so much more should come to them out of the
North. For these two Colonels did not intend to use above 100 men in the
surprizal, whereof they were to have twenty good able Gentlemen: For they made
account, that having the Castle, they with the Artillery would master all the
Town, until they were relieved by men from the Country; And because there was
a doubt made, how all this should be done in so short a time, they did appoint,
that all that were there present, should not fail to meet again there the 20th
of September, to give an account of all things, as well hopes as impediments.
And if on that interview all things should happen to be well, that they go
forward, or if otherwise, to prolong the Execution of it to a more convenient
time, and so we parted every man into the Country about his own Task. And I in
my way home came to Mr. Reylies house, and there I received a Letter from Sir
Phelim O Neal, that his Lady was dead, and to be buried on the Sunday
following, this being on the Saturday, and desiring me in all kindness to come
to the Burial; and Mr. Reyly having received another Letter to the same effect,
would needs have me go thither (whereunto I was very unwilling, being weary,
withal not provided to go to such a meeting) as well (said he) to prevent any
jealousy from the Ladies Friends; as also to confer with Sir Phelim touching
all those proceedings (for neither he nor I spoke to Sir Phelim concerning the
matters before) but to his Brother Jorilagh O Neal, and coming thither, we
found Captain Brian O Neal, lately come out of the Low Countries, sent over by
Colonel O Neal to speak to, and provoke those of Ulster to rise out in Arms,
and that he would be with them, on notice of their day, the same day, or soon
after it. And it was asked of the said Captain what Aid he could send or
procure, being but a private Colonel, or where he could get any. He replied,
That the said Colonel told him, that he had sent to several places that Summer
to demand Aid, and in particular to Cardinal Richelieu into France, (to whom he
had sent twice that year) and had comfortable, and very hopeful promises from
them, and especially from that Cardinal, on whom he thought the Colonel did
most depend, so that there was no doubt to be made of succor from him, and
especially when they had risen out, that would be a means to the Cardinal to
give Aid; we did the more credit him in regard of the former Treaty between the
said Cardinal and the Earl of Tyrone, as formerly is said. For my own part, I
did and do believe, that the Colonel does depend on France for Aid, more than
on any other place, as well for those reasons, as also that Ever mac Mahone,
formerly mentioned, told me, That presently after the Isle of Rees enterprise
(he being then in the Low Countries did hear for certain, that the Earl of
Tyrone together with the Colonel did send into France, to the Marshal of France
(that was General of the French Forces at the Isle of Ree) to deal with him for
procuring of Aid to come then for Ireland, and that he received an Answer from
the said Marshal, that he was most willing and ready to contribute his
endeavors for his furtherance therein, but that he could not for the present
answer my Lords expectations, by reason that the King had Wars in Italy, which
he thought would be at an end within half a year, or little more, and then my
Lord should not doubt of any thing, that he could do for his Assistance; but
these continued a great deal longer, so for that time that Enterprise failed.
So after the Burial was done, I gave those Gentlemen knowledge of what I had
done at Dublin, and how I was to retire thither; and then they began to think
how they should surprise Londonderry, they being near it, but could not then
agree in the manner; and so Sir Phelim desired me to take his House in my way
going to Dublin, and that I should have a resolution to carry with me touching
Londonderry, and thereon I parted home, but soon after came to Dublin to the
fore-appointed Meeting with those Colonels. But first I took in my way Sir '
Phelim O Neal's House, to be certain what he had done; and his Answer was, That
he knew that matter could not be put in Execution by the fifth of October, as
was appointed, and that they would make another longer day for it, And that he
would provide for the taking of Londonderry by that day, and so came to Dublin
to give an account of that was done, and also know what further should be done.
I was not two hours in my Lodging when Mr. Moor came to me (who knew what was
done by those Colonels formerly from Colonel Bourn)* and told me that the
Messenger sent to Colonel O Neal, was come with an Answer, desiring* us not to
delay any time in rising out, and to let him know of that Day beforehand, and
that he would not fail to be with us within fourteen days of that Day with good
Aid; also desiring us by any means to seize the Castle of Dublin, if we could;
for he heard that there was great provision in it for War: And Mr. Moor
moreover said, that time was not to be over-slipped, and desired me to be very
pressing with the Colonels to go on in their Resolution; But on meeting the
Colonels with them, they were fallen from their Resolution, because those of
the Pale would do nothing therein first; but when it was done, they would not
fail to assist us. Colonel Plunket did affirm, and so by several meetings it
was resolved on by them to desist from that Enterprise for that time, and to
expect a more convenient time: But before that their Resolution, Sir Phelim O
Neal, and the aforesaid Captain Bryan O Neal followed me to Dublin (as they
said) to assist, and advise me how to proceed with that Colonel, but neither
they nor Mr. Moor would be seen therein themselves to those Gentlemen, but
would meet me privately and know what was done at every Meeting; alleging for
Excuse, That I being first employed in that matter, it would not be expedient
that they should be seen in it. And moreover, they would not be known to be in
the Town but by a few of their Friends, until they were in a manner ready to
depart the Town, at least as long as I was in Town, for I left them there; But
when I made them acquainted with their determination of desisting from that
Enterprise, they thought it convenient, that we should meet with Mr. Moor and
Colonel Bourn to see what was further to be done, concerning the further
intention of their own, and according we did send to them that they should meet
us; and on that Meeting, it was, Where was only Sir Phelim, Mr. Moor, Colonel
Bourne, Captain Neal, and my self. After long debate, it was resolved, That we
with all those that were of our faction should go on with that determination
that was formerly made, concluded to rise out. Moreover, to seize on the Castle
(as the Colonels were purposed, for if it were not for their project, and the
advice sent by Colonel Neale, we would never venture to surprise it, neither
was it ever thought on in all the Meetings and Resolutions between us, before
those Colonels did resolve on it, but by reason, that the other Gentlemen that
were privy to these proceedings were not present, the certainty of the time and
the manner how to execute it was put off to a further meeting in the Country,
and this was resolved in Dublin on the Sunday at Night, being the twenty sixth
or twenty seventh of September, and the meeting was appointed on the Saturday
following at mac Colloe, mac Mahone's house in Farney in the County of
Monaghan. And thereupon we all left the Town, only Sir Phelim stayed about some
other his private occasions, but did assure his being there at that day; and by
reason, that at that meeting the Gentry of Lemster could not be, considering
the remoteness of the place from them; it was thought fit that Mr. Moore should
there meet to receive the final Resolution, and should acquaint them therewith:
And in the mean time Colonel Bourne, who had undertaken for Colonel Plunkett,
should inform them all the intention conceived, and dispose them in readiness
against that day that should be appointed. On Saturday I came to Mr. mac
Mahone's house; there met only Mr. mac* Mahone himself, Captain Neale, Ever mac
Mahone, and my self, and thither thatsame day came the Messenger that was sent
to Colonel Neale, and did report the Colonels answer and advice verbatim, as I
have formerly repeated from Mr. Moore; and by reason that Sir Phelim, his
Brother, or Mr. Phillip Reyly, that were desired to meet, did not meet; we
stayed that Night to expect them, and that Night I received a Letter from Sir
Phelim, entreating us by any means, not to expect him until the Monday
following; for he had, nor could dispatch some occasions merely concerning him,
but whatever became of them, he would not fail of the Monday: And the next day
after receipt of the Letter being Sunday (by Mr. Moors advice) we departed
from Colonel mac Mahones house to prevent (as he said) the suspicion of the
English there (many living near) to Loghrosse in the County of Ardmagh to Mr.
Torilagh O Neale's house (not Sir Phelim's Brother, but Son to Mr. Henry O
Neale of the Fewes, Son in Law to Mr. Moore) and left word, that if Sir Phelim,
or any of those Gentlemen did come in the mean time, they should follow us
thither (whether only went Mr. Moore, Captain O Neale and my self) and there we
expected until the Tuesday subsequent before any of those did come. On the
Tuesday came Sir Phelim, and Ever mac Mahone, all the rest failing to come, Mr.
mac Mahone's wife was dead the Night before, which was the cause that he was
not there, but I gave his assent to what should be concluded to win therein,
and execute what should be appointed him; and then we five ( viz.) Sir Phelim,
Mr. Moore, Captain O Neale, Ever mac Mahone, and my self, assuring our selves,
that those Gentlemen absent should both allow, and join to what we should
determine, did grow into a final Resolution, grounding all or most part of our
hope and confidence on the Succors from Colonel O Neale, to seize on the
Castle, and rise out all in one day, and the day was appointed on the 23th. of
that Month, this being the 5th. day of October, having regard therein to the
day of the week, whereon that day did fall, which was the Saturday, being the
Market day, on which day there would be less notice taken of people up and down
the streets; then began a question who should be deputed for the surprisal of
the Castle, and then Mr. Moore said he would be one of them himself, and that
Colonel Bourne should be another, and what other Gentlemen of Lemster they
could procure to join with them, and seeing the Castle had two Gates, the one
the great, the other the little Gate going down to my Lord Lieutenant's
Stables, hard by which Stables, without the Castle, was the Storehouse for
Arms, they of Lemster would undertake one Gate, and that should be the little
Gate, and the great Gate should be undertaken by those of Ulster, and (said he)
of necessity one of you both (meaning Sir Phelim and me) must be there, for the
mere countenance of the matter, it being the glory of all our proceedings, and
all that his Speech was well liked of all present: But Sir Phelim would be
exempted from that employment, and so would I; but then all of them set on me,
desiring me to be one, alleging for Reason, that their Proceedings and
Resolutions were very honorable and glorious, it being for Religion, and for to
procure more liberty for their Country, as did (say they) of late Scotland, and
that in taking the Castle consisted all the glory and honor of the said Act;
all which should be attributed to them which should be employed therein, and so
by consequence all, or most part to be there, being (as they said) the chief in
that Enterprise, and more, Sir Phelim said that he would endeavor to take or
procure others to take Londonderry the same day, and if he should be away, that
place would not be taken; with these and many other persuasions they obtained
my consent, and then the Captain offered himself: they began to think what
number should be employed in that Act; and they concluded on two hundred men,
one hundred from each Province, for those States which they seize on, of which
number Sir Phelim O Neale should send forty with an able sufficient Gentleman
to conduct them: And likewise Captain Neale twenty, Mr. mac Mahone, Mr. Reyly
ten more, and I should bring twenty two; then began a doubt how they should
raise those men, and convey them to Dublin without suspicion; and it was
answered that under pretense of carrying them to those Colonels that were
conveying Soldiers into the Kingdom, it might safely be done; and to that
purpose Sir Phelim O Neale, Mr. Moore, and the Captain had several blank
Patents with Deputations to make Captains to those Colonels, which they sent to
those that should send men to Dublin: for the more color, they bethought of
what was to be done in the Country that day, and it was resolved, that every
one privy to that matter in every part of the Kingdom should rise up that day,
and seize on all the Forts and Arms in the several Counties, to make all the
Gentry Prisoners, the more to assure themselves against any averse fortune, and
not to kill any, but where of necessity they must be forced thereunto by
opposition (and that those that were appointed for taking of the Castle should
observe) and in particular the Gentry: All their Army in Ulster to take that
day Londonderry, which Sir Phelim did undertake, and Knockfergus, which they
thought Sir Henry mac O Neale would do; and to that end Sir Phelim's Brother
Torilagh O Neale should be sent to them; and the Newry which should be
undertaken by Sir Conne Magennis, and his Brothers; for whom Sir Phelim, in
regard they were his Brothers in Law, his deceased Lady being their Sister, did
undertake. Moreover, it was agreed, that Sir Phelim, Mr. Reyly, Mr. Coll mac
Mahone, and my Brother should with all the speed they could after that day
raise all the forces they could, and follow us to Dublin; But to Arm the men,
and succor, and attend, and garrison the Town and Castle; And likewise Mr.
Moore should appoint Lemster Gentlemen to send like supply of men; then there
was fear of the Scots conceived, that they should presently oppose themselves,
and that would make the matter more difficult, and to avoid which danger, it
was resolved on, not to meddle with them, or any thing belonging to them, and
to demean themselves toward them, as if they were of themselves, which they
thought would pacify them from any opposition, and if the Scots would not
accept of that offer of amity, but would oppose them, they were in good hope to
cause a stir in Scotland that might divert them from them; and I believe the
ground for that hope was, that two years before, in or about the beginning of
the Scots troubles, my Lord of Tyrone sent one Torilagh O Neal (a Priest) out
of Spain, and that this, I take it, was the time that he was in Treaty with
Cardinal Richelieu, to my Lord of Argile, to Treat with him for help from my
Lord, for him to come into Ireland, as was said for Marriage between the said
Earl and my Lord of Argiles Daughter (or Sister I know not which) and this
Messenger was in Ireland, with whom Mr. Torilagh O Neale, Sir Phelim's Brother
had conference, from whom this Relation was had, that said Messenger went into
Scotland, as I did hear from the said Mr. Neale, or from Ever mac Mahone
aforenamed, I know not from which of them, but what he did there I could never
hear, by reason that my Lord of Tyrone was presently after killed, they were
the more confirmed therein, hearing that my Lord of Argile did say (near to the
same time as I guess, and when the Army was raised in Ireland, as I think) to a
great Lady in Scotland, I know not her name, but did hear, that she was much
imbarqued in the troubles of that Kingdom, there she questioning, how they
could subsist against the two Kingdoms of England and Ireland, that if the King
did endeavor to stir Ireland against them, he would kindle such a Fire in
Ireland, as would hardly or never be quenched; And moreover they knew my Lord
to be Powerful with the Highlanders, Redshanks in Scotland, whom they thought
would be prone, and ready to such Actions, they for the most part descended out
of Ireland, holding the Irish Language and Manners still, and so we parted. The
next day being Wednesday Leghrosse every man went about his own task, and so
when I came home I acquainted my Brother with all that was done, and what they
had appointed him to do, and did like according as they had appointed me, send
to Mr. Reyly to let him know as much, and the 18th of the same Month I began my
Journey to Dublin; and when I came to Dublin (being the day bofore the appointed
day for putting that Resolution in execution there) I met with Captain Conne O
Neale, sent out of the Low Countries by Colonel O Neal, who was sent, after the
Messenger sent by us formerly to the said Colonel was by him disappointed with
his Answer, to encourage us in our Resolution, and to speedy Performance, with
assurance of Succor, which he said would not fail of the Colonels behalf, and
for the more certainty of help from him, and to assure us that the Colonel had
good hopes to procure aid from others, he said that it was he himself, that was
employed from him to Cardinal Richelieu twice, that some men who gave very fair
promises to assure the Colonels expectations, with which he said, that the said
Colonel was really with himself assured of the Cardinals aid, and that he was
likewise commanded by the Colonel upon our Resolution of the day, to give
notice thereof to him, and that he would be within 14. days over with them with
aid; but he landed 9. or 10. days before, and meeting with Captain Brian O
Neal, who made him acquainted with what was Resolved; He did write all the
matter to Colonel O Neale, so as he was sure of his speedy coming: And so that
Evening he and I came to meet the other Gentlemen; and there were met Mr.
Moore, Colonel Bourne, Colonel Plunkett, Captain Fox, and other Lemster
Gentlemen, a Captain (I think of the Bournes, but I am not sure whether a
Bourne or Tool) and Captain Bryan O Neale, and taking an account of those that
should have been there; it was found that Sir Phelim O Neale, Mr. Collo mac
Mahone did fail of sending their men; and Colonel Bourne did miss Sir Morgan
Gavanagh, that had promised him to be there, but he said he was sure he would
not fail to be that Night or the next Morning in Town: And of the two hundred
men that were appointed, there were only eighty present, yet notwithstanding
they were resolved to go on in their Resolution, and all the difference was at
what time of the day they would set on the Castle, and after some debate, it
was resolved in the Afternoon, and the rather hoping to meet the Colonel there
then; for they said, if they should take Castle, and be enforced by any
extremity for not reciving timely succor out of the Country (having them they
could not want) and so parted that Night, but to meet in the Morning to see
further what was to be done, and immediately thereon, I came to my Chamber, and
about nine of the Clock, Mr. Moore and Captain Fox came to me, and told me all
was discovered, and that the City was in Arms, and the Gates were shut up, and
so departed from me: And what became of them, and of the rest, I know not, nor
think that they escaped, but how, and at what time I do not know, because I my
self was taken that Morning.

APPENDIX, III. Fol. 30.
By the Lords, Justices, and Council.
W. Parsons. Jo. Borlase.
WHereas We the Lords, Justices, and Council have lately found that there waas
a most disloyal, wicked and detestable Conspiracy intended and plotted against
the Lives of Us, the Lords, Justices, and Council, and many others of his
Majesty's faithful Subjects, especially in Ulster, and the borders thereof; and
for the surprising, not only of his Majesty's Castle of Dublin, his Majesty's
principal Fort, but also of other Fortifications in several parts, and although
by the great goodness, and abundant mercy of Almighty God to his Majesty, and
to this State and Kingdom, these wicked conspiracies are brought to light, and
some of the Conspiracies committed to the Castle of Dublin by Us, by his
Majesty's Authority, so as those wicked and damnable plots have not taken
effect in the chief parts thereof, yet some of those wicked Malefactors have
surprised some of his Majesty's Forts and Garrisons in the North of Ireland,
slain diverse of his Majesty's good Subjects, imprisoned some, and robbed and
spoiled very many others, and continue yet in those Rebellious courses, against
whom therefore some of his Majesty's Forces are now marching to fight against
them, and subdue them, thereby to render safety to his Majesty's faithful
Subjects: And whereas to color and countenance those their wicked Intendments
and Acts, and in hope to gain the more numbers, and reputation to themselves
and their proceedings in the opinion of the ignorant common people, those
Conspirators have yet gone further, and to their other high Crimes and
Offenses, have added this further wickedness, even to traduce the Crown and
State, as well of England as Ireland, by false seditious and scandalous
reports, and rumors spread abroad by them. We therefore to vindicate the Crown
and State of both Kingdoms, from those false and wicked calumnies, do hereby in
his Majesty's name publish and declare, that the said reports so spread abroad
by those wicked persons are most false wicked and triterous, and that We have
full Power and Authority from his Majesty, to prosecute and subdue those Rebels
and Traitors, which now We are doing accordingly, by the Power and Strength of
his Majesty's Army, and with the Assistance of his Majesty's good and Loyal
Subjects, and We no way doubt, but all his Majesty's good and faithful Subjects
will give Faith and Credit to Us, who have the Honor to be trusted by his
Majesty so highly, as to serve Him in the Government of this his Kingdom,
rather then to the vain, idle, and wicked Reports of such lewd and wicked
Conspirators, who spread those false and seditious Rumors, hoping to seduce a
great number to their party. And as We now believe that some who have joined
themselves with those Conspirators, had no hand in contriving, or plotting the
mischiefs intended, but under pretense of those seditious Scandals were deluded
by those Conspirators, and so are now become ignorantly involved in their
guilts, so in favor and mercy to those so deluded, We hereby charge and
command them in his Majesty's name, now from Us to take light to guide them
from that darkness, into which they were misled by the wicked seducement of
those Conspirators, and to depart from them, and from their wicked Counsels,
and Actions, and according to the duty of Loyal Subjects, to submit themselves
to his Sacred Majesty, and to his Royal Authority, entrusted with Us. But in
case those persons which were no Plotters, nor Contrivers of the said Treason,
but were since seduced to join with them, as aforesaid, lay not hold of this
his Majesty's Grace and Favor, now tendered unto them, then We do by this
Proclamation Publish and Declare, that they shall hereafter be reputed, and
taken equally guilty with the said Plotters and Contrivers, and as incapable of
Favor and Mercy, as they are.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of Dublin the 30. of October 1641. La. Dublin.
R. Ranelagh.
Ant. Midensis.
John Rophoe.
R. Dillon.
J. Temple.
P. Crosbie.
Ja. Ware.
Rob. Meredith.

APPENDIX IV. Fol. 32.
By the Lords, Justices, and Council.
A Proclamation for the discovery and present removal of all such as do or
shall continue in the City of Dublin, or places adjacent, Without just or
necessary cause.
W. Parsons. Jo. Borlace.
Whereas through the great concourse of people to this City of Dublin, the
Country is deprived of Defense, and left open to the rapine and depredation of
the Rebels now in Arms in this Kingdom, the poor of those parts are destitute
of Succor and Relief, and diverse other inconveniences do and may thence arise,
unless some timely remedy be applied thereunto. Wherefore We do hereby in his
Majesty's name, and under the pains and punishments hereafter mentioned,
command, That all and every person and persons whatsoever, not having necessary
cause of residing in this City of Dublin, and the Suburbs thereof, and the
places within two miles about the same, (as well within Liberties as without) to
be approved of by our very good Lord James Earl of Ormond and Ossory, who is
appointed Lieutenant General of His Majesty's Army in this Kingdom, and the
Council of War here for the time being, or by such other persons, as shall be
by them appointed for examination thereof, do within four and twenty hours
after publication hereof, repair to their respective homes and dwellings. And
also that no person or persons of what quality or condition soever, do keep
with him, or them, any more, or other then his, or their own domestic servants.

And that this Proclamation, and the service hereby intended be not in any wise
eluded or evaded, We do hereby in His Majesty's name, and under the pains and
punishments hereafter mentioned, charge and command, That all and singular the
Citizens, Inhabitants, and Residents of, and within this City of Dublin, the
Suburbs thereof, and all places within two miles about the same* do within four
and twenty hours after publication hereof* return under their hands unto the
next Alderman of the Ward, or Seneschall, or other chief Officer of Liberty
respectively, the names, sirnames, quality, and condition of all persons now
lodged, and remaining in their houses, and also that they, and every of them
for the future, until Declaration be made to the contrary, do within two hours
after the receipt or entertainment into his or their house or houses, of any
stranger or strangers, not being of his or their family or families, return
under his and their hand and hands, unto the next Alderman of the Ward,
Seneschall, or other chief Officer, as aforesaid, the names, sirnames, quality
and condition of all, and every stranger and strangers, so received or
entertained. And We do hereby in his Majesty's name, and under the pains and
punishments here after mentioned, command all. Aldermen of Wards to transmit
all Returns and Certificates, made by the Citizens, Inhabitants, and Residents
aforementioned, to the Major, or Recorder of the City of Dublin, within twelve
hours after receipt thereof, or sooner if they conceive any sinister suspicion
of the persons returned, together with the names of such of the said Citizens,
Inhabitants, and Residents, as shall not within the time before limited, make
such Returns unto them, And We do further in his Majesty's name, and under the
pains and punishments hereafter mentioned, command the said Major, and Recorder
of the said City of Dublin, and also the Seneschalls, or other chief Officers
aforementioned, to cause all Returns and Certificates that shall come to their
hands, to be delivered to the said James Earl of Ormond and Ossory within
twelve hours after receipt thereof, or sooner upon suspicion as aforesaid,
together with the names of such Aldermen of Wards, Inhabitants, and Residents,
as shall not make such Returns, and deliveries of Certificates as aforesaid
respectively. And if the said Major, or Recorder, or any Seneschall, chief
Officer, Alderman of any Ward, or any Citizen, Inhabitant, or Resident of, or
within this City, the Suburbs thereof, or two miles about the same, or any
other person or persons whatsoever shall offend, contrary to the tenor of this
Proclamation, in not repairing to their dwellings, in keeping any unnecessary
retinues, in not making any Return or Certificate, in making any false or
partial Return or Certificate, in not returning the names of those who shall
not, in not making delivery of the said Returns and Certificates to the persons
aforesaid, in manner, and within the times before limited respectively, they and
every of them shall respectively incur and suffer such pains of death, or such
other severe pains and punishments, as the said Earl, and the Council of War
for the time being, shall think fit to inflict and impose, and as the danger of
the persons, and times shall require.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of Dublin the 11. day of November. 1641. Ormond
Ossory,
R. Dillon.
Cha. Lambert.
J. Temple.
Cha. Coote.
P. Crosbie.
God save the King.
APPENDIX, V. Fol. 35.
A Copy of a Letter directed to the Lord Viceco. Cossilough from the Rebels of
the County of Longford in Ireland, which he presented to the State in their
behalf. November. 10. 1641.
Our very Good Lord,
OUR Alliance unto your Lordships Ancestors, and your self, and the Trial of
your and their performance of Trust unto their Friends in their greatest
Adversity, encourages us and engages your Honor to our fruition of your
future favors; The fixion of our Confidence in you before any other of the
Peers and privy Counselors of the Kingdom doubleth this Obligation. Your
Lordship may therefore be pleased to acquaint the Lords, Justices, and Council
(to be impanted unto his Sacred Majesty) with our Grievances, and the causes
thereof, the reading of which we most humbly pray, and the manner of it.

First, The Papists in the neighboring Counties are severely punished, and
their miseries might serve as Beacons unto us to look unto our own, when our
Neighbors Houses are on fire: And we and other Papists are, and ever will be
as loyal Subjects as any in the King's Dominions; For manifestation whereof we
send herein enclosed an Oath solemnly taken by us, which as it received
indeleble Impression in our hearts, shall be signed with our hand, and sealed
with our Blood.

Secondly, There is an incapacity in the Papists, of Honor and the Immunities
of true Subjects, the royal Marks of distributive Justice, and a dis-favour in
the Commutative, which raised Strangers and Foreigners, whose valor and virtue
was invincble, when the old Families of the English, and the major part of us
the mere Irish, did swim in blood to serve the Crown of England; and when
Offices should call Men of worth, Men without worth and merit obtain them.

Thirdly, The Statute of the 2. Eliz of force in this Kingdom against us and
they of our Religion, does not a little disanimate us and the rest.

Fourthly, The avoidance of Grants of our Lands and Liberties by Quirks and
Quiddities of the Law, without reflecting upon the King's Royal and real
Intention for confirming our Estates, his Broad Seal being the pawn betwixt his
Majesty and his people.

Fifthly, The restraint of purchase in the mere Irish of Lands in the Escheated
Counties, and the taint and blemish of them and their posterities does more
discontent them than that plantation Rule; for they are brought to that Exigent
of poverty in these late times, that they must be sellers and not buyers of
Land.

And we conceive, and humbly offer to your Lordships consideration ( Principiis
obsta) that in the beginning of this Commotion, Your Lordship, as it is
hereditary for you, will be a Physician to cure this Disease in us, and by our
Examples it will doubtless beget the like auspicious success in all other parts
of the Kingdom: For we are of opinion it is one sickness and one pharmach will
suffice, Sublata causa tollitur Effectus: And it will be recorded, that you
will do service unto God, King, and Country; And for salving every the
aforesaid Soars Your Lordship is to be an humble Suitor in our behalf, and of
the rest of the Papists, that out of the abundance of his Majesty's Clemency,
there may be an Act of Oblivion and general pardon without restitution or
Account of Goods taken in the time of this Commotion, a liberty of our
Religion, a repeal of all Statutes formerly made to the contrary, and not by
Proclamation, but Parliamentary way; A Charter free Denizen in ample manner for
mere Irish: All which in succeeding Ages will prove an Union in all his
Majesty's Dominions instead of Division, a Comfort in Desolation, and a
Happiness in perpetuity for an imminent Calamity. And this being granted,
there will be all things, Quae sunt Caesaris Caesari, and Quae sunt Dei Deo.
And it was by the Poet written (though he be profane in other matters, yet in
this) prophetically Divisum Imperium cum Jove, Caesar habet; All which for this
present we leave to your Honorable Care: And we will, as we ever did, and do
remain,

Your very humble and assured, ever to be Commanded, Hugh mac Gillernow Farrall.
James Farrall.
Bryan Farrall.
Readagh Farrall.
Edmond mac Cael Farrall.
John Farrall in Carbuy.
Garret Farral.
Lisagh mac Conel Farrall.
Bryan mac William Farrall.
John mac Edmund Farrall.
John Farrall.
Roger mac Bryne Farrall
Barnaby Farrall.
James mac Trig Farrall, his Mark.
Morgan mac Carbry Farrall.
Donnagh mac Carbry Farrall.
Richard mac Conel Farral.
William mac James Farrall.
James Farrall.
Taghna mac Rory Farrall.
Cormack mac Rory Farrall.
Conock mac Bryne Farrall.
Readagh mac Lisagh Farrall.
Connor Oge mac Connor Farrall.
Ed mond mac Connor Farrall.
Cahel mac Bryne Farrall.

APPENDIX VI. Fol. 65.
By the Lords, Justices, and Council.
W. Parsons. Jo. Borlasse.
IT is well known to all men, but more particularly to his Majesty's Subjects
of this Kingdom, who have all gathered plentiful and comfortable fruits of his
Majesty's blessed Government, how abundantly careful his Majesty has been in
the whole course of his Government, of the peace and safety of this his
Kingdom, and how graciously he has labored to derive to all his Subjects
therein, all those benefits and comforts, which from a most gracious King,
could be conferred on his Subjects, to make them a happy people, whereof he
has given many great testimonies. And as at all times he endeavored to give
them due contentment and satisfaction, so even then whilst the Rebels now in
Arms were conspiring mischief against Him, and his Crown and Kingdom, he was
then exercising Acts of Grace and benignity toward them, granting to his
Subjects here the fullness of their own desires in all things, so far as with
Honor or Justice he possibly could, and particularly when the Committees of
both Houses of Parliament here this last Summer attended his Majesty in
England, at which time (amongst many other things graciously assented to by
Him, he was content, even with apparent loss and disadvantage to himself, to
depart with sundry his Rights of very great value, which lawfully and justly he
might have retained; And as his continual goodness to his people, and his
Princely care of their prosperity and preservation shall (to the unspeakable
joy and comfort of all his good Subjects) render him glorious to all Posterity,
so the wicked ingratitude and treacherous disloyalty of those Rebels shall
render them infamous to all Ages: and utterly inexcusable even in the judgment
of those, who for any respect either formerly wished well to their persons, or
now pity them in their transgressions. And although the said persons now in
Rebellion were in no degree provoked by any just cause of public grief
received from his Majesty, or his Ministers, to undertake such desperate
wickedness, neither can justly assign any severity or rigor in the execution
of those Laws which are in force in this Kingdom against Papists, nor indeed
any cause at all, other then the unnatural hatred, which those persons in
Rebellion do bear the British and Protestants, whom they desire and publicly
profess to root out from amongst them. The more strange in that very many of
themselves are descended of English, whence is the original and foundation of
all their Estates, and those great benefits which they have hitherto enjoyed,
and whence their Predecessors, and others then well affected in this Kingdom,
have been at all times since the Conquest cherished, relieved, countenanced,
and supported against the ancient Enemies of the Kings people of England: many
of the Irish also having received their Estates and livelihood from the
unexampled bounty and goodness of the Kings of England. Yet such is their
inbred ingratitude and disloyalty, as they conspired to massacre Us the Lords,
Justices, and Council, and all the British and Protestants universally
throughout this Kingdom, and to seize into their hands, not only his Majesty's
Castle of Dublin, the principal Fort in this Kingdom, but also all other the
fortifications thereof, though (by the infinite goodness and mercy of God)
those wicked and devilish Conspiracies were brought to light, and some of the
Principal Conspirators imprisoned in his Majesty's Castle of Dublin, by Us by
his Majesty's Authority, so as those wicked and damnable plots are disappointed
in the chief parts thereof, His Majesty's said Castle of Dublin, and City of
Dublin being preserved, and put into such a condition of strength, as if any of
them, or their Adherents shall presume to make any attempt thereupon, they
shall (God willing) receive that correction, shame, confusion and destruction,
which is due to their treacherous and detestable disloyalty. And in pursuit of
their bloody intentions, they assembled themselves in Arms in hostile manner,
with Banners displayed surprised diverse of his Majesty's Forts and Garrisons,
possessed themselves thereof, robbed and spoiled many thousands of his
Majesty's good Subjects, British and Protestants, of all their Goods,
dispossessed them of their Houses and Lands, murdered many of them upon the
place, stripped naked many others of them, and so exposed them to nakedness,
cold and famine, as they thereof died; imprisoned many others, some of them
persons of eminent quality; laid Siege to diverse of his Majesty's Forts and
Towns yet in his Majesty's hands, and committed many other barbarous cruelties
and execrable inhumanities, upon the Persons and Estates of the British and
Protestant Subjects of the Kingdom, without regard of quality, age, or sex. And
to cover their wickedness, in those cruel Acts, so to deceive the World, and to
make way (if they could) to the effecting of their mischievous ends,; they add
yet to their wickedness a further degree of impiety, pretending outwardly that
what they do, is for the maintenance and advancement of the King's Prerogative;
whereas it appears manifestly, that their aims and purposes inwardly are (if it
were possible for them so to do) to wrest from him his Royal Crown and Scepter,
and his just Sovereignty over this Kingdom and Nation, and to deprive him, and
his lawful Ministers of all Authority and Power here, and to place it on such
persons as they think fit, which can no way stand with his Majesty's just
Prerogative; nor can any equal-minded man be seduced to believe that they can
wish well to his Royal Person, or any thing that is his, who in their actions
have expressed such unheard of hatred, malice, and scorn of the British
Nation, as they have done. And such is their madness as they consider not, that
his Sacred Majesty disdains to have his Name or Power so boldly traduced by
such wicked malefactors, Rebels having never in any Age been esteemed fit
supporters of the King's Prerogative, much less these, who (under countenance
thereof) labor to deface and shake off his Government, and extirp his most
loyal and faithful Subjects of his other Kingdoms and here, whose preservation
(above all earthly things) is and always has been his Majesty's principal
study and endeavor, which even these Traitors themselves have abundantly
found, with comfort, if they could have been sensible of it. And whereas diverse
Lords and Gentlemen of the English Pale preferred petition unto Us, in the
behalf of themselves and the rest of the Pale, and other the old English of
this Kingdom, showing that whereas a late conspiracy of Treason was discovered,
of ill-affected persons of the old Irish, and that, thereupon Proclamation was
published by Us; wherein (among other things) it was declared that the said
Conspiracy was perpetrated by Irish Papists, without distinction of any, and
they doubting that by those general words of Irish Papists, they might seem to
be involved, though they declared themselves confident, that we did not intend
to include them therein, in regard they alleged they were none of the old
Irish nor of their Faction or Confederacy; but (as they then pretended)
altogether averse and opposite to all their designs, and all others of like
condition. We therefore to give them full satisfaction (having indeed at that
time great confidence in their loyalty) did by Proclamation, dated the 29. of
October 1641. declare and publish, that by the words, Irish Papists, We
intended only such of the old mere Irish in the Province of Ulster, as were
then Actors in that Treason, and others, who adhered to them; and that We did
not any way intend or mean thereby any of the old English of the Pale, nor of
any other parts of this Kingdom, then esteemed good Subjects, We being then
(as we conceived) well assured of their fidelities to the Crown, and having
experience of the good affection and services of their Ancestors, in former
times of danger and Rebellion. And indeed, so believing were we in their
faithfulness and loyalty to the Crown, as we then also represented it into
England for their advantage; and thereupon in the Order of the Lords and
Commons in the Parliament in England concerning Ireland, His Majesty's loyal
Subjects of English Blood, though of the Romish Religion, being ancient
Inhabitants within several Counties and parts of this Realm are mentioned, as
those who have always in former Rebellions given testimony of their fidelity to
the Crown of England. And in further testimony of the good affiance we had in
their loyalty, We issued Arms to the several Counties of the English Pale,
the better to enable them to discharge their duties in defending those parts,
and His Majesty's good Subjects therein, against the Rebels, upon deep
professions of loyalty made by them, and their seeming detestation of the loath
somness of the crimes, and bloody guilts of the Rebels, which they for their
parts professed (with many Oaths and protestations) to abhor, and promised to
oppose and resist them with all their power. And we issued Arms also to many
Noblemen and Gentlemen of the Pale, and elsewhere, of the Romish Religion, for
the defense of their Houses against the Rebels. Yet much contrary to the
expectation of all equal-minded men, and in deceit of the trust reposed in them
by this State, and directly contrary, as to their loyalty and duty to His
Majesty, so to the great professions which they had so lately before made at
this Councel-Board, many of those, as well whole Counties, as particular
persons entrusted with those Arms, revolted to the Rebels, carried His
Majesty's Arms with them, and so the Arms which were trusted into their hands,
for the protection of His Majesty's good Subjects, they converted to the
annoyance and destruction (as much as in them lay) of those good Subjects they
were trusted to protect, and of this State and Government, and have not only
not resisted the Rebels, but have also joined with them, and they and the
Rebels assembled in Arms in hostile manner, with Banners displayed against his
Majesty, in besieging some of his Town, taking into their possession by force
or fraud many of his Majesty's Buroughs, walled and unwalled, and in
committing murders, spoils, robberies, and many detestable cruelties on His
Majesty's good Subjects. And although those of the Pale, pretended that they
were not able to assemble or Arm any strength against the Rebels, yet lately
they found means to assemble, and arm great multitudes to assist the Rebels
against His Majesty's Forces, and against His Majesty's Government, and this
State, and as well the persons who were the first Actors in this Rebellion, as
also many others in the English Pale, and several other parts of the Kingdom,
forgetting those duties which (by the Laws of God and man) are due from them to
His Sacred Majesty, are so ungrateful to His Majesty for the great and abundant
benefits and favors from Him, and His Royal Father, and Predecessors derived
to them, so insensible of the happiness which they (with all others in this
Kingdom) enjoyed by His blessed Government, and so improvident to themselves
and their posterity, as they have presumed most unnaturally to conspire, raise,
and act those abominable Treasons and Rebellion against His Majesty, as is
herein formerly mentioned. And forasmuch as those Rebels, and particularly Sir
Con Magenis of Newcastle in the County of Down, Knight; Patrick mac Cartan of
Loghnelan in the said County, Art oge mac Glasny Magenis of Ilandery in the
said County, Ever mac Phelim Magenis of Castlewelan in the said County, Rory
mac Brian oge Magenis late of Edenteecullagh in the said County, Philip mac
Hugh mac Shane o Rely of Ballinecarrig in the County of Cavan, Philip mac
Mulmorry o Rely of Lismore in the said County, Mulmorry mac Edmond o Rely of
Cavet in the said County, Hugh Boy mac Shane o Rely of Kilmore in the said
County, Owen mac Shane mac Philip o Rely of the same, Rory Magwyre of Hassets
Town in the County of Fermanagh, Brother to the Lord Magwyre, Donogh bane
Magwyre of Carrow in the said County, Uncle to the said Lord Magwyre, Brian mac
Cowconnaght Magwyre of Tempoe, in the said County, Sir Phelim o Neal of Kinard
in the County of Tyrone, Knight, Tirlagh Roe o Neal, brother to the said Sir
Phelim, Tirlagh Groom o Quin of Donoghmore in the said County, Cormock mac Owin
oge o Hagan of Mullinecor in the said County, Patrick Modder o Donelly of
Crosscanena in the said County, Art mac Tirlagh mac Henry o Neal of Davernagh
in the County of Armagh, Tirlagh mac Tirlagh o Neal of the Fues in the said
County, Hugh oge o Neal of Aghadamph in the said County, Donogh oge o Murchie
of Cashell in the said County, Collo mac Brian mac Mahowne of Balloghie in the
County of Monaghan, Neal mac Kena of the Trough in the said County, Coolo mac
Ever Mahowne of in the said County, Art Roe mac Patrick mac Art, Moyle mac
Mahowne of Fanahah in the said County, Captain Hugh mac Phelim Birne late of
Ballinecor in the County of Wickloe, Shane mac Brien mac Phelim Birne late of
Carrigocroe in the said County, Luke alias Feagh O Tool of Castlekuen in the
said County, Luke alias Feagh mac Redmond Birne of Kilcloghran in the said
County, Redmond mac Feagh Birne late of Kilvane in the said County, Phelim mac
Redmond Birne late of the same in the said County, Dermot mac Dowlin Cavenagh
of Ballidony in the County of Wexford, Lewis alias Lisagh mac Owny Dempsie of
Rahynne in the Kings County, Art O Molloy of Rathlian in the said County,
Hubert Fox of Kilcoursie in the said County, Owen O Molloy of Clonekeene in the
said County, Florence mac Shane Fitz-Patrick of Castle-Town in the Queens
County, Barnabie Dempsie of Knockardegur in the said County, Daniel Doine of
Tenehinche in the said County, Barnabie Fitz-Patrick of Raghdown in the said
County, James mac Fegus mac Donell of Taghnekilly in the said County, Francis
mac Faghny O Farrall of the Mote in the County of Lonford, William Farrall of
Ballingtobber in the said County, James mac Conell Farrall of Tenelecke in the
said County, Oliver Boy Fitz-Gerrald in the said County, Pierse Fitzgerald of
Ballysonan in the said County of Kildare, Maurice Eustace of Castle-Martin in
the said County, Nicholas Sutton of Tipper in the said County, Roger alias Rory
O More of Ballynah in the said County, William Fitz-Gerrald of Blackhall in the
said County, Robert Preston, Brother to the Lord Viscount Gormastown, James
Flemen late of Slane in the County of Mead, Brother to the Lord Baron of
Slane, Patrick Cusack of Gerrards-Town in the said County, Edward Betagh of
Monalty in the said County, Gerrald Leins of the Knock in the said County, Luke
Netervill of Corballies in the County of Dublin, Son to the Lord Viscount
Netervill, George King of Clontarfe in the said County, Richard Barnewall of
Lespopel in the said County, Colonel Richard Plunkett late of Dunsoghlie in the
said County, Matthew Talbot late of Kilgobban in the said County, John Stanley
of Mallets-Town alias Marletts-Town in the said County of Lowth, John Bellew of
Willets-Town in the said County, Christopher Barnewall of Rathaskett alias
Rathasker in the said County, and Oliver Cashell of Dundalk in the said County:
Instead of that Duty and Loyalty which His Majesty's good and gracious
Government might justly have wrought in them, have returned nothing but those
fruits of Treason and Rebellion, to the disturbance of the public Peace, and
happiness of this Kingdom, and to the destruction (as much as in them lay) of
this State and Government, and of the Persons and Estates of many thousands of
His Majesty's good and faithful Subjects therein, whereby they have showed
themselves to be most ungrateful, detestable, vile, and unnatural Traitors and
Rebels. We therefore according to the custom of this Council Board in cases
of this nature (though no former Rebellion can parrallel this for acts of
Cruelty and horrid Crimes) do by this present Proclamation in His Majesty's
Name, and by his Majesty's Authority, Declare, Publish and Proclaim them, the
said Sir Con Magenis, Patric mac Cartan, Art oge mac Glasny Magenis, Ever mac
Phelim Magenis, Rory mac Brien oge Magenis, Phillip mac Hugh mac Shane O Rely,
Phillip mac Mulmorry O Rely, Mulmorry mac Edmond O Rely, Hugh Boy mac Shane O
Rely, Owen mac Shane mac Phillip O Rely, Rory Magwire, Donogh Bane Magwire,
Brian mac Cowcannaght Magwire, Sir Phelim O Neale, Tirlagh Roe O Neale, Tirlagh
Groom O Quin, Cormock mac Owin O Hagan, Patrick Modder O Donnelly, Art mac
Tirlagh mac Henry O Neale, Tirlagh mac Henry mac Tirlagh O Neale, Hugh oge O
Neale, Donnogh oge O Murchie, Collo mac Brien mac Mahowne, Neale mac Kena,
Coolo mac Ever mac Mahowne, Art Roe mac Patrick Art Moile mac Mahowne, Captain
Hugh mac Phelim Birne, Shane mac Brien mac Phelim Birne, Luke alias Feogh O
Tool, Luke alias Feogh mac Redmond Birne, Redmond mac Feogh Birne, Phelim mac
Redmond Birne, Dermot mac Dowlin Cavenagh, Lewis alias Lisagh mac Owny Dempsie,
Art O Molloy, Hubert Fox, Owen O Molloy, Florence mac Shane Fitz-Patrick,
Barnabie Dempsie, Daniel Doine, Barnabie Fitz-Patrick, James mac Fergus mac
Donell, Francis mac Faghny O Farrall, Will. Farrall, James Conell Farrall,
Oliver Boy Fitz-Gerrald, Pierse Fitzgerald, Maurice Eustace, Nich* Sutton,
Roger alias Rory O More, Will. Fiz-Gerald, Robert Preston, James Fleming,
Patrick Cusake, Edw. Betagh, Gerald Leins, Luke Netervill, George King, Richard
Barnewall, Colonel Richard Plunkett, Matthew Talbot, John Stanley, John Bellew,
Christopher Barnewall and Oliver Cashel, and every of them, and all their and
every of their partakers, aiders, maintainers, comforters, confederates,
accomplices and associates, apparent, notorious, ungrateful, wicked, vile, and
unnatural Traitors and Rebels, against our most gracious Sovereign Lord
Charles, by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. His Royal Crown and Dignity of of this Realm, and
malicious oppugners of His Majesty's Royal Sovereignty, Preheminences and
Prerogatives, willing therefore, requiring, warranting and authorizing all His
Majesty's good and loving Subjects, to pursue and plague with Fire and Sword,
apprehend, destroy and kill, by all the ways and means they may, all the said
persons, their partakers, aiders, maintainers, comforters, confederates,
accomplices and associates, as apparent, notorious, ungrateful, wicked, vile,
detestable and unatural Traitors and Rebels.

And we do hereby make known to all men, as well good Subjects as all others,
that whatsoever he or they be that shall betwixt this and the five and
twentieth day of March next, kill and bring, or cause to be killed and brought
unto Us, the Lords Justices, or other chief Governor or Governors of this
Kingdom for the time being, the head of the said Sir Phelim O Neal, or of the
said Sir Con Magenis, or of the said Rory Magwire, or of the said Phillip mac
Hugh mac Shane O Rely, or of the said Collo mac Brien mac Mahon, who who were
of the Principal Conspirators, and have been the first and principal Actors in
this present Rebellion, he or they shall have by way of reward, for every of
the said last named persons, so by him to be killed, and his or their head or
heads brought to Us, the Lords Justices, or other chief Governor or Governors
of this Kingdom, as aforesaid, as follows: viz. for the head of the said Sir
Phelim O Neal one thousand pounds, for the head of the said Sir Con Magennis
six hundred pounds, for the head of the said Rory Magwire six hundred pounds,
for the head of the said Phillip mac Hugh mac Shane O Rely six hundred pounds,
for the head of the said Collo mac Brian mac Mahon six hundred pounds, and
Pardon for all his or their offenses, that shall kill, and so bring in, or
cause to be killed, and so brought in, the said head or heads.

And whosoever shall within the mean time by any means slay or kill, as
aforesaid, the said Sir Phelim O Neale, Sir Con Magenis, Rory Magwire, Phillip
mac Hugh mac Shane O Rely, and Collo mac Brian mac Mahone, or any of them,
though such person or persons, so slaying or killing the said Traitors, or any
of them, bring not, or cause not to be brought to Us the Lords Justices, or
other chief Governor or Governors of this Kingdom, the head or heads of the
said Traitor or Traitors; yet being justly proved, shall forthwith upon proof
so made, receive the reward, for the said Sir Phelim O Neal, eight hundred
pounds; for the said Sir Con Magenis four hundred pounds, for the said Rory
Magwire four hundred pounds, and for the said Phillip mac Hugh mac Shane O
Rely, four hundred pounds, for the said Collo mac Brien mac Mahowne, four
hundred pounds, and pardon for all his or their offenses, that shall kill the
said last mentioned persons, or any of them. And forasmuch as the other Rebels
above named, have most traitorously combined in the wicked and abominable
Councils of the said five other persons last above named, and have been
partakers with them in their most bloody design, for the extirpating of the
British and Protestants, and depriving his Majesty of the Sovereignty of this
His Kingdom of Ireland, many of which Rebels stand Indicted of High Treason.
We do therefore make known and declare to all men, as well His Majesty's loving
Subjects, as all others, That whosoever, under the degree of a Knight, other
than the said Phillip mac Hugh mac Shane O Rely, and Collo mac Brian Mahowne,
and other than the said Luke Tool, and other than the Children and
Grandchildren of the late traitorously descended Traitor, Feagh mac Hugh
Birne, and other than the said Rory alias Roger More, (We not holding it fit
that the most maglignant Conspirators should obtain pardon for so high and
heinous offenses, and the causeless destruction of so many thousands of
Innocents, upon the only service of cutting off persons of no greater
consideration) shall, betwixt this and the five and twentieth day of March
next, kill and bring, or cause to be killed and brought in to Us the Lords
Justices, or other chief Governor or Governors of this Kingdom, as aforesaid,
the head or heads of the said Patrick mac Cartan, Art oge mac Glasny Magenis,
Ever mac Phelim Magenis, Rory mac Brien oge Magenis, Phillip mac Hugh mac Shane
O Rely, Phillip mac Mulmorry O Rely, Mulmorry mac Edmond O Rely, Hugh Boy mac
Shane O Rely, Owen mac Shane mac Phillip O Rely, Rory Magwire, Donogh Bane
Magwire, Brian mac Cowcannaght Magwire, Tirlagh Roe O Neale, Tirlagh. Groom O
Quin, Cormock mac Owen O Hagan, Patrick Modder O Donnelly, Art mac Tirlagh mac
Henry O Neale, Tirlagh mac Henry mac Tirlagh O Neale, Hugh oge O Neale, Donnogh
oge O Murchie, Collo mac Brien mac Mahowne, Neale mac Kena, Coolo mac Ever mac
Mahowne, Art Roe mac Patrick mac Art Moile mac Mahowne, Captain Hugh mac Phelim
Birne, Shane mac Brien mac Phelim Birne, Luke alias Feogh O Tool, Luke alias
Feogh mac Redmond Birne, Redmond mac Feogh Birne, Phelim mac Redmond Birne,
Dermot mac Dowlin Cavenagh, Lewis alias Lisagh mac Owny Dempsie, Art O Molloy,
Hubert Fox, Owen O Molloy, Florence mac Shane Fitz-Patrick, Barnabie Dempsie,
Daniel Doine, Barnabie Fitz-Patrick, James mac Fergus mac Donell, Francis mac
Faghny O Farrall, Will. Farrall, James mac Conell Farrall, Oliver Boy
Fitz-Gerrald, Pierse Fitzgerald, Maurice Eustace, Nich. Sutton, Roger alias
Rory O More, Will. Fiz-Gerald, Robert Preston, James Fleming, Patrick Cusake,
Edw. Betagh, Gerald Leins, Luke Netervill, George King, Richard Barnewall,
Colonel Richard Plunkett, Matthew Talbot, John Stanley, John Bellew,
Christopher Barnewall and Oliver Cashel, or any of them, he shall have by way
of reward for every of the said last mentioned persons, so by him to be killed,
and his or their head or heads brought to Us, the Lords Justices, or other
chief Governor or Governors of this Kingdom, as aforesaid, four hundred pounds,
and pardon for all his or their offenses, that shall bring in, or cause to be
brought in, the said head or heads, and whosoever under the degree of a Knight,
as aforesaid, other than the said Phillip mac Shane O Rely, Collo mac Brien mac
Mahowne, Luke Tool, and the Children and Grandchildren of Feagh mac Hugh
aforesaid, and the aforesaid Rory alias Roger O More, shall by any means within
the said time, slay or kill the said Traitors, viz. Patrick mac Cartan, Art oge
mac Glasny Magenis, Ever mac Phelim Magenis, Rory mac Brien oge Magenis,
Phillip mac Mulmorry O Rely, Mulmorry mac Edmond O Rely, Hugh Boy mac Shane O
Rely, Owen mac Shane mac Phillip O Rely, Donogh Bane Magwire, Brian mac
Cowcannaght Magwire, Tirlagh Roe O Neal, Tirlagh Groom O Quin, Cormock mac
Owen oge O Hagan, Patrick Modder O Donnelly, Art mac Tirlagh mac Henry O Neale,
Tirlagh mac Henry mac Tirlagh O Neal, Hugh oge O Neale, Donnogh oge O Murchie,
Neal mac Kena, Collo mac Ever mac Mahowne, Art Roe mac Patrick mac Art Moyle
mac Mahowne, Captain Hugh mac Phelim Birne, Shane mac Brien mac Phelim Birne,
Luke alias Feagh O Tool, Luke alias Feagh mac Redmond Birne, Redmond mac Feagh
Birne, Phelim mac Redmond Birne, Dermot mac Dowlin Cavenagh, Lewis alias Lisagh
mac Owny Dempsie Art O Molloy, Hubert Fox, Owen O Molloy, Florence mac Shane
Fitz-Patrick, Barnabie Dempsie, Daniel Doine, Barnabie Fitz-Patrick James mac
Fergus mac Donell, Francis mac Faghny O Farrall, William Farrall, James mac
Conell Farrall, Oliver Boy Fitz-Gerrald, Pierse Fitzgerald, Maurice Eustace,
Nicholas Sutton, Roger alias Rory O More, William Fitz-Gerrald, Robert Preston,
James Flemen Patrick Cusacke, Edward Betagh, Gerrald Leins, Luke Netervill,
Geroge King, Richard Barnewall, Colonel Richard Plunkett, Matthew Talbot, John
Stanley, John Bellew, Christopher Barnewall, and Oliver Cashell, or any of
them, though such person or persons, so slaying or killing the said Traitors,
or any of them, bring not, or cause not to be brought to Us the Lords Justices,
or other chief Governor or Governors of this Kingdom, as aforesaid, the head or
heads of the said Traitor or Traitors, yet being justly proved, shall forthwith
upon proof so made, receive the reward of Three hundred pounds, for every of
the said last named persons so killed and proved, and shall have pardon for all
his or their offenses, that shall slay or kill the said Traitors, or any of
them.

Given at his Majesty's Castle of Dublin the 8. day of Febr. 1641. Ormond
Ossory.
R. Dillon.
Cha. Lambert.
Ad. Loftus.
Cha. Coote.
Tho. Rotheram.
Fra. Willoughby.
Rob. Meredith.
J. Temple.
God save the King.
Sir William St. Leiger's Letter to the Lord Lieutenant, the Earl of Leicester,
touching the Affairs in Munster, mentioned fol. 89.
Right Honorable, my very good Lord,
SIthence my last by my Lord of Dungarvan, my own indisposition and imbecility
has been such as in mine one person. I have not been able to attempt any
thing, but have by my Sickness been confined to my Chamber: but the forward
earnestness and zeal to the service in my Lord of Inchequin, Colonel Vavasor,
Captain Jephson, and the rest of the Officers of the small Army here has
accomplished some Exploits, whereof you may please to receive the ensuing
Relation.

I being besieged on the North side of the City by my Lord Muskry, Mr. Carty
Leath, and all the rest of the Western Forces, and having notice that my Lord
Roche, my Lord of Ikarne, Donboin, the Barron of Loghmay, Mr. Richard Butler,
and all the tipperary Forces were drawing up to beleager me on the South, I
dispatched away the two Troops then newly landed under the Command of my Lord
Inchequin, and Captain Jephson into the Lord Roches Country, in expectance to
divert him from his intended course hitherwards, which to so good purpose, as
that I since understand the tipperary Forces have forsaken him, and that he
remains himself upon his keeping in his own Country. During the stay of these
Troops there, they were desired to the relief of a Castle called Rathgogan by
one M. Meade, which M. Jephson having performed with a Squadron of each Troop,
and 80. Musketeers drawn out of his House and mine: In his retreat he was
encountered by two or three Companies from Kilmallocke, on whom he with a
Horse, and another Officer with a Foot charged in several places, and routed
them, slaying about 150. besides 50. slain in relieving the Castle. On the
thirteenth of this instant, my Lord of Muskry (who has kept his Camp a long
time at Rochforts Town three miles from this City) caused a part of his Army to
chase home our Scouts to the very Suburbs, where in a bravado they made a
stand, whereat my Lord Inchequin, Colonel Vavasor, and the rest of the Officers
being much incensed obtained my leave to issue forth immediately with three
hundred Musketeers, and two Troops of Horse; upon the sallying out they found
the Enemy retreated, and pursued him to his Quarters, where the main Body
consisting of thirty six Colors as they were numbered, forthwith appeared: and
after several parties sent from the main Body to skirmish with our men, had
been beaten back, they began to pack up their Baggage, and forsook their Camp,
after whom our men made all the speed they might; and having chased them two or
three miles, charged upon the rear, routed the whole Army, which betook it self
to flight over a Bog unpassable for our Horse, and took all their carriage and
luggage, whereof the Lord of Muskeries own Armor, Tent, and Trunks were a
part, slew about two hundred of their men that took to firm ground, and retired
without loss of a man. Whereby it is very easy to observe with what facility
the Enemy might now be dealt withal, before he can recollect himself anew, or
receive foreign supplies which they daily and hourly expect, and being once
come to their hands, it will not then be treble the charge and expense both of
blood and treasure that will suppress them, which now would reduce them to a
very great straight.

And therefore I do most humbly beseech your Lordship that speedy supplies of
Men, Moneys, Arms, Munition and Artilery, with all necessaries depending
thereon, as Conducters, Pioneers, Mattrosses, Carriages, Tackle, Horses and
Oxen for draught, and all other appurtenances that may either be sent over, or
Commission and means to raise and maintain them here, here being but one
Canoneer, and one Clerk of the store in this Province: without these your
Lordship knows that it is to no boot to march into the Field, where if the
Enemy be not too hard for us, he will certainly retire to his Holds, and so
secure himself against our Forces.

The necessary use of Firelocks and Dragoons, and of a competent supply of
Victual, the stock of this Country being totally wasted, will deserve serious
consideration: and if I had been so fortunate as to have received any succors
by those late Easterly winds, it would have so discouraged the Enemy now newly
routed, and animated the Protestant party, as that I am very confident by God's
assistance I should have given your Lordship a good account of the quiet of
these parts. Whereas they observing that this fair opportunity has conveyed us
no relief, do begin to muster up their Forces afresh, and to take heart at the
apprehension of our being deserted in England and left wholly to our selves,
wherein I cannot sufficiently express how miserable our condition is; for
having from the beginning of these troubles supported the Forces mentioned in
the enclosed list with Moneys gained upon several hard terms and engagements
(besides what I have impressed to the succor sent thence*) I was at last
constrained to seize upon four thousand pounds belonging to Sir Robert Tynte,
and ready to be transported out of the Kingdom (and which he refused to lend
upon the Publick-faith of this State, which nevertheless I gave him upon the
seizure) merely to preserve the Army from disbanding, which otherwise it must
have undoubtedly done. And therefore I humbly desire that money may be sent
over, not only to discharge that and other engagements, amounting to 4000
pounds more, but that there may be order taken for the entering of those men
into pay, and continuing them therein ever since the beginning of the present
troubles which I mentioned sol. 82.
raised at first (by direction from the Lords Justices) for this service, and
that the same course may be taken for them as for the rest.

The height of insolency and arrogance in the Enemy will appear by the
enclosed Remonstrance The Rebels Remonstrance here mentioned, as the Answer to
it (in the shuffling of Papers) are unhappily lost, though the one was not more
insolent then the other resolute and loyal.
which they sent me after a motion made for a Cessation, which in the condition
I was in, I had some inclination to condescend unto, in case it had been sought
for in befitting terms: to which purpose I willed them to address their humble
petition to his Majesty, and in case I did approve thereof, I would give way
thereunto, and to a cessation until his pleasure were known; whereupon they
transmit me that, whereof the enclosed is a Copy: at which I took (justly as I
conceive) such offense as caused me to return them the enclosed Answer, which I
should have seconded with such further testimony of my aversion to their
insolency as would tend much to their disincouragement were I enabled with any
reasonable strength so to do, which I earnestly desire I may be, and with
instructions what hand to carry in the prosecution of them, and how to manage
the War against them; for that every day they increase in insolency and riot,
hanging such prisoners as are not able to pay Ransom, ransoming others, hanging
old Women, and stripping all they can lay hold on. All that is left in this
Province is the City of Cork, the Towns of Kingsale, Youghall, and
Bandonbridge; the Cities of Limricke and Waterford being fallen into defection,
save that the Fort in the former is able to command the Town if provided with
Munition, wherewith I have sent to supply it.

For persons in Action, it is far less difficult to nominate those that adhere
to the Crown, which are the Earl of Barrymore, (an industrious servitour) the
Lord Viscount Killmallocke, Sir Andrew Barret, and Edmond Fitz-Gerrarld of
Ballmarter commonly called the Senescall of Imokilly, *by whose care and
countenance (joined with my Lord Barrimore's) that Barrony of Imokilly is kept
in due subjection, and the passage betwixt this City and Youghall thereby open.
But whilst we stand on these unable terms to stir out of these Walls, the Enemy
is at liberty to range and forage over all parts of the Country. And indeed
our wants of Money are so great and pressing, as that for defect of
entertainment and encouragement, the Officers both of Horse and Foot daily
flock unto me, and importune to be dismissed and left at liberty to seek their
preferment in England: and so soon as this little (which is left me to feed the
Soldiers with from hand to mouth) is spent, I know no way to prevent their
sudden disbanding: and therefore I do again beseech your Lordship to endeavor
that I may not be exposed to the dishonor and misery of being abandoned by the
King's Forces, and left my self single to the mercy of the Enemy; but that
Moneys may be speedily transmitted unto me with directions what pay to allow
the Horsemen, and Officers of the Foot, with an overplus of Money, as I have
always desired, for extraordinary and emergent occasions, about either the
Ordinance or Forts, whereas yet nothing is in a right posture, but things only
shuffled together for a shift by reason we had not wherewithal to the work as
it ought.

Your Lordships most humble Servant, W. Saintleger.
Cork, April 2. 1642
APPENDIX, VII. Fol. 95.
In the Name of the holy Trinity, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Amen.
Acts agreed upon, ordained and concluded in the General Congregation held at
Kilkanny the 10, 11, and 13 days of May, 1642. by those Prelates whose Names
are subscribed, the Proctors of such other Prelates as then were absent being
present, together with the Superiors of the Regulars, and many other
Dignitaries and learned Men, as well in Divine, as also in Common Law, with
diverse Pastors and others of the Catholic Clergy of all Ireland, whose Names
are likewise hereafter set down.
1. WHereas the War which now in Ireland the Catholics do maintain against
Sectaries, and chiefly against Puritans, for the Defense of the Catholic
Religion, for the maintenance of the Prerogative and the Royal Rights of our
gracious King Charles, for our gracious Queen so unworthily abused by the
Puritans, for the Honor, safety and Health of their Royal Issue, for to avert
and refrain the Injuries done unto them, for the Conservation of the just, and
lawful Safeguard, Liberties and Rights of Ireland; and lastly for the defense
of their own Lives, Fortunes, Lands and Possessions: Whereas I said this War
is by the Catholics undertaken for the aforesaid causes against unlawful
Usurpers, Oppressors and their Enemies, chiefly Puritans. And that hereof we
are informed as well by diverse and true Remonstrances of diverse Provinces,
Counties and Noblemen, as also by the unanimous consent and agreement of almost
the whole Kingdom in this War and Union. We therefore declare that War
openly Catholic to be lawful and just, in which War, if some of the
Catholics be found to proceed out of some particular and unjust Title,
covetousness, cruelty, revenge or hatred, or any such unlawful private
intentions. We declare them therein grievously to sin, and therefore worthy to
be punished and refrained with Ecclesiastical Censures if, (advised thereof)
they do not amend.

2. Whereas the Adversaries do spread diverse rumors, do write diverse Letters,
and under the King's Name do print Proclamations, which are not the King's, by
which means diverse plots and dangers may ensue unto our Nation; We therefore
to stop the way of untruth and forgeries of the Political Adversaries, do will
and command, That no such rumors, Letters, or Proclamations may have place, or
belief, until it be known in a National Council, whether they truly proceed
from the King, left to his own freedom, and until the Agents of this Kingdom
hereafter to be appointed by a National Council, have free passage to his
Majesty, whereby the Kingdom may be certainly informed of his Majesty's
intention and will.

3. Whereas no Family, City, Commonwealth, much less any Kingdom may stand
without union and concord, without which this Kingdom for the present stands
in most danger. We think it therefore necessary that all Irish Peers,
Magistrates, Noblemen, Cities and Provinces, may be tied together with the holy
bond of Union and Concord, and that they frame an Oath of Union and agreement
which they shall devoutly and Christianly take, and faithfully observe. And for
the conservation and exercise of this Union, We have thought fit to ordain the
ensuing Points.

4. We straightly command all our inferiors, as well Churchmen as Laymen to
make no distinction at all between the old and ancient Irish, and no
Alienation, comparison, or differences between Provinces, Cities, Towns or
Families; and lastly, not to begin, or forward any emulations, or comparisons
whatsoever.

5. That in every Province of Ireland there be a Council made up, both of
Clergy and Nobility, in which Council shall be so many persons at least as are
Counties in the Province, and out of every City or notable Town two persons.

6. Let one general Council of the whole Kingdom be made, both of the Clergy,
Nobility, Cities and notable Towns, in which Council there shall be three out
of every Province, and out of every City one, or where Cities are not, out of
the chiefest Towns. To this Council the Provincial Councels shall have
subordination, and from thence to it may be appealed, until this National
Council have opportunity to sit together, Again, if any thing of great
importance do occur, or be conceived in one Province, which by a negative Vote
is rejected in the Council of one Province, let it be sent to the Councels of
other Provinces; except it be such a matter as cannot be delayed, and which
does not pertain to the Weal-publick of the other Provinces.

7. Embassage sent from one Province to foreign Nations shall be held as made
from the rest of the Provinces, and the fruit or benefit thereof shall be
imparted, and divided between the Provinces and Cities which have more need
thereof, chiefly such helps and fruits, as proceed from the bountiful
liberality of foreign Princes, States, Prelates or others whatsoever; provided
always that the charge and damage be proportionably recompensed.

8. If there be any Province which may not conveniently send Embassage from it
self unto foreign Nations, let it signify it to another Province, which may
conveniently supply it, and ought in regard of their Union to supply it,
according to the instructions sent from the other Provinces concerning the
place, and Princes to which they would have their Embassage employed.

9. Let a faithful Inventory be made in every Province of the Murders,
Burnings, and other Cruelties, which are committed by the Puritan Enemies, with
a Quotation of the place, day, cause, manner, and persons, and other
circumstances subscribed by one of public Authority.

10. In every Parish, let a faithful and sworn Messenger be appointed, whereby
such Cruelties, and other affairs may be written and sent to the neighboring
places, and likewise from one Province to another; Let such things be written
for the comfort, instruction, and carefulness of the People.

11. Great men taken prisoners in one Province, may not be set at liberty for
any price, prayers, or exchange, without the consent of the Prelates and
Nobility of the other Province united, and let every Province be careful of the
Liberties of such Prisoners as are from the other Provinces, as far as it
conveniently may.

12. If any one stubborn, or dangerous be found in one Province, County, or
Town, Let him be sent to another Province, County or Town, where he may be
safely kept, (and with less danger, or loss of others) remain.

13. Whosoever shall be declared in one County or Province, Adversary or
Traitor of this Cause and Country, shall likewise be held and punished in other
Countries and Provinces, where he shall be found, and such as receive or favor
him, or be his Messengers knowing his misdemeanour, shall be liable to such
punishment as the Traitor himself.

14. We Command and Ordain as a main point pertaining to this Union, that no
Province, County, City, Town or Person whatsoever shall demand Peace, or submit
himself to the Enemies, without the consent of the general Council of the whole
Kingdom, and that under pain of Excommunication to be incurred ipso facto, and
for further force of this Statute to be observed; We will that in every
Province a firm Oath be taken by the Peers, Nobility, Corporation, and
commonalty of every Province, and thereupon a Public and Authentical
Instrument be made; And that every Province do send into every other Province
an Instrument subscribed, with the proper hands of such as have taken this
Oath, for the assurance of their Oaths, and whosoever shall refuse to take this
Oath, let him be held as Adversary of the common Cause, and of the Kingdom, and
let him be punished as such as hereafter shall be declared, except he be
excused for the Reasons hereafter to be set down.

15. The Ordinaries of every place, The Preachers, Confessors, Parish Priests,
and other Churchmen shall endeavor to see perfect peace and charity observed
between Provinces, Counties, Cities, and Families, as the obligation of this
Union requires.

16. Such Goods as well moveable as unmovable pertaining to Catholics, as
were recovered from the Enemies by this present War, shall be restored to their
former owners, Provided that such necessary and reasonable charges shall be
paid, as the next general or Provincial Council or Commitees of the County
where the Parties dwell, shall decree.

17. Whereas diverse persons do diversely carry themselves toward this Cause,
some with helps and supplies do assist the Adversaries, others with Victuals
and Arms, others with their Advice and Authority, supporting as it were the
contrary Cause, some also as Neuters behaving themselves, and others lastly
neglecting their Oath do forsake the Catholic Union and Cause. We do therefore
declare and judge all and every such as do forsake this Union, do fight for our
Enemies, accompany them in their War, defend or in any other way assist them,
as giving them Weapons, Victuals, Counsel, or Favor, to be Excommunicated, and
by these Presents do Excomunicate them; Provided that this present Decree shall
be first published in every Diocese respectively, and having received
admonition before hand, which shall supply the treble admonition otherwise
requisite, and we do hereby declare, so it be made in a place where it may
easiy come to the knowledge of those whom it touches. But as touching the
Judgment and Punishment of the Neuters we leave it to the Ordinaries of every
place respectively, so that the Ordinaries themselves be not contrary to the
Judgment and Opinion of this Congregation, in which cause, we Commit power to
the Metropolitans or Archbishops to proceed against such Ordinaries, according
to the common course of Law, wherein they are to be very careful and speedy,
and if the Metropolitans be found herein careless or guilty, let them be liable
to such punishment as is ordained by the holy Canons, and let them be accused
to the Sea Apostolic.

18. We Ordain and Decree that all and every such as from the beginning of this
present War, have invaded the Possessions of Goods as well moveable as
unmovable, spiritual or temporal of any Catholic whether Irish or English, or
also of any Irish Protestant being not Adversary of this Cause; and do detain
any such Goods, shall be Excommunicated, and by this present Decree we do
Excommunicate them if admonished they do not amend, and with the like censure
we do bind such as henceforward shall invade or detain such Goods, and not only
them, but also all and every such as shall keep Lands or Possessions against
public authority, as also such as favor or assist them therein. And we
declare involved in this censure all and every of them, who directly or
indirectly hinder or forbid to pay their due Rents unto such as have possessed
the said Lands, from the beginning of this War, and such likewise as without
the License of such Possessors, do take or extort Rents or equivalent payment
from the Tenants of such Possessors under color of paying Soldiers therewith,
or otherwise.

19. We command all and every the Churchmen, as well Secular as Regular, not to
hear the Confessions of the aforesaid Excommunicated persons, nor to Administer
unto them the Holy Sacrament, under pain of Excommunication ipso facto.

20. We will and declare all those that Murder, Dismember, or grievously
Strike, all Theives, unlawful Spoilers, Robbers of any Goods, Extortors,
together with all such as favor, receive, or any ways assist them, to be
Excommunicated, and so to remain, until they completely amend and satisfy no
less then if they were namely Proclaimed Excommunicated, and for satisfaction
of such Crimes hitherto committed to be enjoined, we leave to the discretion of
the Ordinaries and Confessors, how to absolve them.

21. Tradesmen for making Weapons or Powder brought into this Country, or
hereafter to be brought in, shall be free from all Taxations and Customs; as
also all Merchants, as shall transport into this Country, such wares as are
profitable for the Catholic Cause, as Arms and Powder, may lawfully traffic
without paying any Custom, for Commodities brought out of this Kingdom, or
transported hither of that kind, and let this be Proclaimed in all Provinces,
Cities, and Towns.

22. We think it convenient, that in the next National Congregation, some be
appointed out of the Nobility, and Clergy as Ambassadors to be sent in the
behalf of the whole Kingdom, unto the Kings of France and Spain, to the
Emperor and his Holiness, and those to be of the Church Prelates, or one of
the Nobility and a Lawyer.

23. We will and ordain, that Ordinaries, Dignitaries, and other Properietors
of Church livings, with the assistance of the Colonel, or some other prime
Gentleman of the County, Barony, or Parish, as the Ordinary, and Dignitaries,
or Proprietors shall appoint, do set unto Tenants, the Lands, Houses,
Tenements, and Tithes, and other Church livings, and let competent means be
appointed for the maintenance of the said Ordinaries, Dignitaries and
Proprietors, and the rest to be appointed for the Soldiers until it be
otherwise ordained.

24. Collectors and Receivers of the Rents of Church Livings, shall be
appointed by the Ordinaries, with the consent of the Proprietors in the
presence of the chiefest Gentlemen of every County, Barony, or Parish
respectively.

25. The Ordinaries and other Proprietors of Church Livings, may take unto
themselves, the Houses, Tenements and other Church Goods pertaing unto their
respective Titles, with obligations to pay proportionable Rent unto the
Soldiers as aforesaid, or his payment of their own competent maintenance, and
let the Houses, Tenements, and other Church goods be taken from the
Catholics, who heretofore had them as Tenements or otherwise.

26. It is committed to the will and disposition of the Ordinary whether and
when to enter into the Churches and celebrate Masses, therein we command all
and every the general Colonels, Captains and other Officers of our Catholic
Army to whom it appertains, that they severally punish all transgressors of
our aforesaid Command, touching Murderers, Maimers, Strikers, Thieves,
Robbers, and if they fail therein, we Command the Parish Priests, Curats or
Chaplains, respectively to declare them interdicted, and that they shall be
Excommunicated, if they cause not due satisfaction to be made unto the
Commonwealth, and the party offended. And this the Parish Priests, or
Chaplains shall observe under pain of Excommunication of sentence given ipso
facto.

27. To the end that these Acts, Propositions and Ordinances may have more
happy success; We thought it fitting to have recourse unto God Almighty by
Prayers, Fastings and Alms, We therefore will pray and as far as it is needful,
do command that every Priest, as well Secular, as Regular do celebrate one Mass
a week, and that all Laymen do fast upon Wednesday, Friday, and Saturday in one
week, and thence forward one day a week, and upon that Wednesday, or Saturday,
as long as the Ordinary shall please, and that they pray heartily unto God for
the prosperous success of this our Catholic War, for which they shall gain so
many days indulgences, as every Prelate shall publish in their several
Diocesses respectively after the Fast of the aforesaid three days in one Week,
having first confessed, and received the blessed Sacrament, and bestowed some
Alms to this effect.

28. In every Regiment of Soldiers, let there be appointed at least two
Confessors, and one Preacher, to be named by the Ordinaries and by the
Superiors of the Regulars, whose competent maintenance we commend and command
to every Colonel, in their respective Regiments. And to the end that all those
Ordinances and Statutes may effectually be put in Execution, We will and decree
that all Archbishops, Bishops, Apostolical Vicars, and Regular Superiors, as
well here present as absent, may be very serious and careful of the Execution
of the aforesaid, as they tender not to incur displeasure, wrath, and revenge,
and herewith we charge their Consciences.

29. Moreover, We pray and require, all Noblemen, Magistrates, and all other
Marshal Commanders, that with their helps and Secular forces, they assist and
set forward in Execution the aforesaid Statutes in their several Precincts
respectively as often as it shall be needful; If in any of the aforesaid
Statutes any doubt or difficulty may by chance arise, the explication thereof
we reserve to the Metropolitans in every Province respectively, and to the
Bishops in every their Diocesses, such of them as are no way contrary to this
Cause, no other person may presume to expound the aforesaid difficulties.

Haec dicta, acta, ordinata, and statuta, subscripta erant nominibus sequentium
Praelatorum.

All those Judgments, Sayings, Acts, and Covenants, We submit to the Judgment
of the Sea Apostolic.

Hugo Archiepiscopus Armachanus. Thomas Archiepiscopus Casselensis. Malachius
Archiepiscopus Guamenum. David Episcopus Osoren. Frater Boethius Episcopus
Elphinensis. Frater Patricius Episcopus Waterforden. and Lysmoren. Frater
Rochus Episcopus Kildaren. Johannis Electus Claunfarten. Emerus Electus Dunen.
and Conoren. Frater Josephus Everard, Procurator Archiepiscopi Dublinens.
Doctor Johannes Creagh Procurator Episcopus Lymeriten. David Bourck and
Willielmus O Connell Procurator Episcopi Imolacen. Donatus O Tearnan Procurator
Episcopi Laonen. Doctor Dionysius Hearty Decanus Laonensis. Doctor Michael
Hacket Vicar. gener. Waterforden. Gulielmus Devocer Vic. gener. Fernesen.
Thomas Roch Vicar. Generalis Ossoren. Frater Lucas Archer Abbas Sanctae Crucis.
Frater Anthonius de Rosario Ord. praed. Vicar. Provincial. Robertus Nugent
Societat. Jesu in Heb. Frater Thadeus Connoldus Ang. pro Provinc. Johannes
Wareinge Decanus Lymericen. Frater Patricius Darcye Guardian. Dublin. Frater
Thomas Strange Guardian. Waterford. Frater Joseph Lancton, Prior Kilkenny.
Frater Tho. Tearnon Guard. de Dundalk. Frater Johannes Reyly Guard. Kilkenny
Frater Boethius Egnanus Guard. Buttevant. Jordanus Boork Archidiaconus
Lymericensis.
APPENDIX VIII. Fol. 98.
Orders made and established by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the rest
of the general Assembly for the Kingdom of Ireland, met at the City of
Kilkenny, the 24th. day of October, Anno Dom. 1642. and in the Eighteenth year
of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord the King Charles, by the Grace of God King
of Great Britain, France and Ireland, etc.
1. IMprimis, That the Roman Catholic Church in Ireland, shall and may have
and enjoy the Privileges and Immunities according to the great Charter, made
and declared within the Realm of England, in the ninth year of King H. 3.
sometime King of England, and the Lord of Ireland, and afterward enacted and
confirmed in this Realm of Ireland, and that the Common Law of England, and all
the Statutes of force in this Kingdom, which are not against the Catholic
Roman Religion, on the Liberties of the Natives, and other Liberties of this
Kingdom, shall be observed throughout the whole Kingdom, and that all
Proceedings in Civil and Criminal Cases shall be according to the said Laws.

2. Item, That all and every person and persons within this Realm, shall bear
Faith and true Allegiance unto our Sovereign Lord King Charles, by the Grace of
God King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, His Heirs and Successors, and
shall uphold and maintain his and their Rights and lawful Prerogatives, with
the utmost skill and power of such person or persons against all manner of
persons whatsoever.

3. Item, That the Common Laws of England and Ireland, and the said Statutes
called the great Charter, and every Clause, Branch and Article thereof, and all
other Statutes confirming, expounding or declaring the same, shall be
punctually observed within this Kingdom, so far forth as the Condition of the
present times, during these times, can by possibilities give way thereunto, and
after the War is ended the same to be observed without any Limitation or
Restriction whatsoever.

4. Inasmuch as the City of Dublin is the usual and principal Seat of Justice
in this Kingdom, where the Parliament and ordinary Courts were held, and some
other places where principal Councils were sometimes kept, and as yet possessed
and commanded by the malignant party who are Enemies to God and their King, and
his Majesty's well-affected Subjects: The Assembly is necessitated during this
War in some formalities and circumstances to deviate from the proceedings
prescribed by the said Laws and Statutes; nevertheless retains the substance
and Essence thereof, so far-forth as the endless malice and cruelty of their
Enemies, the said malignant party, does permit, who shut up the said places and
other passages and ways to his Majesty's Justice and Mercy from his Majesty's
well-affected Subjects of this Kingdom; for the Exaltation therefore of the
holy Roman Catholic Church, for the advancement of his Majesty's Service, and
the preservation of the Lives, Estates, and liberties of his Majesty's true
Subjects of this Kingdom against the Injustice, Murders, Massacres, Rapes,
Depredations, Robberies, Burnings, frequent breaches of Quarter and public
Faith, and destruction daily perpetrated and acted upon his Majesty's said
Subjects; and advised, contrived, and daily exercised by the said malignant
Party; some of them managing the Government and Affairs of State in Dublin,
some other parts of this Kingdom to his Highness great disservice, and
complying with their Confederates, the malignant Party in England and
elsewhere, who (as it is manifest to all the world) do complot, and practice to
dishonor and destroy his Majesty, his Royal Consort the Queen, their Issue,
and the Monarchal Government, which is of most dangerous consequence to all the
Monarchs and Princes in Christendom.

The said Assembly does order and establish a Council by name A Supreme Council
of the Confederate Catholics of Ireland, who are to consist of the number of
24. to be forthwith named by the Assembly, whereof 12, at the least, to be
forthwith named shall reside in this Kingdom, or where-else they shall think
expedient; And the members of the said Council shall have equal Votes, and two
parts of the three or more concurring present Votes to conclude, and no fewer
to sit in Council than 9, whereof 7 at least are to concur; And of the 24 a
President shall be named of the Assembly, who is to be one of the twelve
resident; and if in case of his death, absence, or sickness, the rest of these
who shall be resident, may name a Vice President of the 24.

And the said Council shall have the Power and pre-eminence following, viz. The
Lords, Generals, and all other Commanders of Armies, and Civil Magistrates and
Officers in the several Provinces shall observe their Orders and Decrees, and
shall do nothing contrary to their directions, and shall give them speedy
advertisement and account of their proceedings and actions with as much
expedition as may be.

That the said Council shall have power to order and determine all such matters
as by this Assembly shall be left undetermined, and shall be recommended unto
them, and their Orders therein to be of force until the next Assembly, and
after until the same be revoked.

That the said Council shall have Power and Authority to do and execute all
manner of Acts and things conducing to the advancement of the Catholic Cause,
and the good of this Kingdom, and concerning this War, as if done by the
Assembly.

And shall have power to hear and determine all matters Capital, Criminal or
Civil, except the Right or Title of Land.

That the Generals and other Commanders of Armies, and all Governors and civil
Magistrates, and all other persons within this Realm shall obey the Orders and
Decrees of the said Council touching the present Service.

That the Council shall have for their Guard the number of 500 Foot and 200
Horse, to be equally extracted out of the Armies of the four Provinces.

5. Item, It is further ordered and established, that in every Province of this
Kingdom there shall be a Provincial-councel, and in every County a
County-councel: the Provincial-councel to be composed of the number of two of
each County, and the said Provincialcouncel shall choose a President for
themselves.

6. That the Provincial-councel shall sit four times a Year, and oftener if
there be cause for it. That they shall have power and Authority to renew or
reverse the Judgment of the County-councel, the party complaining, entering
Security De adjudicat' solvend'. And shall (during the trouble) have power to
hear and determine all matters of the Crown as Judges of Oyer and Terminer, and
Jail-deliver were wont to do, so that no Spiritual person be present at the
determining matters of blood. And shall have power to hear and determine all
civil Causes, and to establish Rents and Possessions, so that they meddle not
with the Title of Land, other than in case of Dower and Jointure. And the
Sheriffs, Provincial-generals, and all Commanders of the Armies in case of
Disobedience, are respectively required to execute the Decrees and Orders: And
in case of Debts and Accounts, great consideration is to be had of the
disabilities of Creditors occasioned by the War.

7. Item, In every County there shall be a County-councel, consisting of one or
two of each Barony at the Election of the County: and where there are no
Baronies, the Council of such County to consist of the number of 12.

And the said County-council shall have power and Authority in all points as
Justices of the Peace to hear and determine all the matters concerning the
Offices of the Justice of Peace, and all matters of the Crown happening within
every such County: and the Delinquent may, if he please, have his Trial in the
Province; and to hear and determine Debts, Trespasses, and personal Demands,
and to do all things as Justices of the Peace were accustomed to do; and to
restore and establish possessions taken by force or fraud since these troubles.
And likewise to take a special care that Tenants and Farmers be kept to their
Farms where they were used, and to be preserved from Extortion and Oppression.
And that Trades, Tradesmen, Manufactures, Agriculture, and Husbandry be
maintained and duly kept.

8. Item, In Cities and Towns Corporate, Justice is to be done, and the Laws
executed, as is accustomed.

9. Item, In every County there shall be Coroners, High-Sheriffs,
High-Constables, and petty-Constables and Gaolers, who are to do their
respective Offices as accustomed; the High Sheriff to be confirmed, or
nominated by the Supreme Council; and the High Sheriff is required to execute
the Commands, Orders, and Decrees of the Provincial and County-council.

10. Item, In every County the High Sheriff shall be Provost-Marshal, and shall
have power to execute a Layman not worth 5 l. and none other for Murder,
Manslaughter, Burglary, Theft, Robbery, or other capital Offense; provided,
the party to be executed may have 24 hours time to prepare his Soul: And that
the Supreme and Provincial-council, shall and may name more Provost-Marshals as
they shall think expedient, qualified with the like Authority.

11. Item, It is further ordered, that no Temporal Government or Jurisdiction
shall be assumed, kept, or exercised in this Kingdom, or within any County or
Province thereof, during these troubles, other than is before expressed, except
such Jurisdiction and Government as is or shall be approved by the General
Assembly or the Supreme Council.

12. Item, It is further ordered, that whosoever has entered since the first
day of October, 1641. or shall hereafter during the continuance of the War in
this Kingdom, enter into the Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments at or
immediately before the first day of October, either by himself or his
Under-tenants, or by receiving the Rents, Issues, or profits thereof, shall
immediately restore, upon demand, the said possession to the party or parties
so put out, with such reasonable damages as the Council-provincial shall think
fit. And if the party do refuse to restore the said possession as aforesaid
upon the Demand of the party so put out, his Heirs or Assigns, made to the said
possessor, his Servants and Adherents in the Premises, or publication of this
Order in the Parish, where such Land lies; that upon his or their denial
thereof, or default therein, he, his Heirs and Assigns shall be for ever after
debarred and secluded from all and every Right, Title, Interest or Demand which
he or they make, or pretend to all or any the said Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments. And if after such Denial or Default made, the said party, his
Heirs, or Assigns shall not immediately restore the possession of the said
Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments so gained to the party grieved, his Heirs or
Assigns, That he, they, or his Adherents, in the premises shall be declared and
proceeded with as Enemies: provided, and so it is meant, That if any of the
parties so put out, be declared a Neuter or Enemy by the Supreme or
Provincial-councel, then the party who gained the possession as aforesaid,
shall give up the possession to such person or persons as shall be named either
by the said Council-provincial, or Supreme Council to be disposed of toward
the maintenance of the general Cause upon the pain and penalty aforesaid: And
as for the Rents and mean profits of the said Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, and all kind of Rents, and the Goods or Chattels taken or
detained from any Catholic, as aforesaid, due satisfaction is to be made for
the same to the parties from whom the Rents, Goods or Chattles, were, or shall
be detained since these troubles begun, as the Provincial and County-council
shall respectively order.

13. Item, It is further ordered and established for the removal of evil
disorder and enmity, and to the end all Men may bend their thoughts and actions
to the common Cause, that all possessions of Lands and Hereditaments shall
continue and remain unto such as have already joined in this Union, as they
have been for three years past next before the beginning of these Troubles; And
that no Title of Lands shall be drawn into any Debate or Question until the
next Assembly, other than in case of Mortgages, Leases, and particular Estates
de facto determined or determinable, by Effluxion or other determination
thereof.

14. Item, For the avoiding of National distinction between the Subjects of his
Majesty's Dominions, which this Assembly does utterly detest and abhor, and
which ought not to be endured in a wellgovern'd Commonwealth; It is ordered and
established that upon pain of the highest punishment, which may be inflicted by
Authority of this Assembly, that every Roman Catholic, as well English, Welsh,
as Scotch, who was of that profession before the troubles, and who will come
and please to reside in this Kingdom and join in the present Union, shall be
preserved and cherished in his Life, Goods, and Estates by the Power,
Authority, and force (if need require) of all the Catholics of Ireland, as
fully and freely as any Native born therein, and shall be acquitted and eased
of one third part (in three parts to be divided) of public Charges or Levies
raised or to be raised for the maintenance of this holy War.

15. Item, And it is further ordered and established, that there shall be no
distinction or comparison made betwixt old Irish, and old and new English, or
between Septs or Families, or between Citizens and Townsmen and Countrymen,
joining in union, upon pain of the highest punishment that can be inflicted by
any of the Councils aforesaid, according to the nature and quality of the
Offenses, and Division like to spring thence.

16. Item, It is further ordered and established, that all new Converts born in
any of his Majesty's Dominions or elsewhere, without occasion given by the
persons converted to the contrary, and joining in this Cause, shall be
accounted Catholic Natives to all intents and purposes.

17. Item, It is further ordered and established, that all Artificers,
Artizans, Navigators, and Mariners not being Denizens, who shall please to
reside in this Kingdom, shall, during their Residence in this Kingdom, after
such time as they and their Families shall be here settled, have and enjoy the
free liberty and privileges of Natives in all respects.

18. Item, It is further ordered and established, that in regard of of the
present Estate and condition of this Kingdom, if any Catholic or Catholics
are admitted of, or permitted to continue in the Inns of Court; and to the end
the laudable Laws of England may not die amidst the Disasters of these times;
one Inn of Court shall be erected in such a place of this Kingdom as to the
Supreme Council shall be thought fit, for the training of the Gentry of this
Kingdom to the knowledge of these Laws.

19. Item, It is further ordered and established, that no Lord, Gentleman, or
any other person, shall raise or keep any Company of Soldiers, but such as
shall be authorized by the Supreme Council, Provincial-council, or
County-council, or Magistrate within their own Corporate Towns; And that the
Statute against Sesse, and Coin or Livery be duly put in execution. And that no
Company or Soldiers whatsoever shall be paid or relieved by the Country,
except such as are and shall be enrolled in the Marshal List; And none shall be
billeted but by the Constable.

20. Item, It is further ordered and established for the advancement of
Learning, that in every Province of the Kingdom Free-Schools shall be erected
and maintained, so many, and in such places, and in such manner and form as by
the Metropolitan of the Diocese in their respective Provinces shall be thought
fit.

21. Item, It is further ordered and established, that the King's Customs,
Rents, Revenues, Arrears and Debts, And the Rents, Estates and profits of the
Lands, Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels of the Enemies which are or shall be
declared by the Provincial or Supreme Council, or by the General Council to be
received and collected, and be disposed for his Majesty's use and service.

22. Item, It is further ordered and established, that Church Lands and Tithes
impropriate in the Catholick-owners before these troubles, and joining in this
Cause, may be left to them according to their several Estates, until the same
be disposed of by Parliament; they in the interim answering the Rents as
accustomed.

23. Item, It is further ordered and established, that in every County there be
Collectors and Receivers to be approved in the County-council for the same; And
that they be accountable to the County-council for the same, which
County-council shall be accountable to the Provincial-council therein
half-yearly, and the Provincial-council to the Supream-Council yearly, to the
end the same may not be concealed or misapplied.

24. Item, It is ordered and agreed, where any Archbishops, Bishops, or other
Dignitary, or any other person or persons whatsoever has, or enjoys any
Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, Tithes, or other Church Livings in one
County or Province, or does or shall keep his or their Residence in another
County or Province, and has his or their Creation, or Nomination in any other
County or Province where the said Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Tithes, or
Church Livings to the general use shall be employed within the said County or
Province, where the said Lands, Tenements, Tithes, or Church Livings do lie, as
by the several County-councils respectively shall be thought fit for the
public Cause.

25. Item, It is ordered and established by the general Assembly, that any
Woman being a Roman Catholic and Wife of any Protestant or Catholics that
has forsaken his Houses, Estate, and Wife, and adhered unto the Enemy, that
every such Wife may enter into her Jointure (if any be conveyed unto her), or
may recover her Thirds of her said Husband's Estate, as if her said Husband
were actually dead; And that every such Wife shall be in such condition and
capacity to sue and be impleaded, as if her Husband had been exiled and
banished the Realm by judgment of Law, except the Provincial-council, or
Supream-Council in Particular Cases order the contrary.

26. Item, It is ordered and established, that the possession of Protestant
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Dignitaries, and Parsons in right of their
respective Churches, or their Tenements in the beginning of these troubles,
shall be deemed taken and construed as the then Possession of the Catholic
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Dignitaries, Pastors and their Tenements
respectively, to all intents and purposes; and that those Possessions are
intended within the Precedent Order for settlement of Possessions.

27. Item, It is ordered and established, that no man being Prisoner, by
Authority of any of the Councils aforesaid (without order of the said Councils
respectively) shall be enlarged: And that no Protection be given to servants
and other men of the Enemies Party without the like Order, or the Order of the
chief Commander of the Army in the several Provinces or Counties.

28. Item, Whereas abuses have been committed in some parts of this Kingdom in
taking of Arms, Ammunition, and other Merchandises from Merchants arrived in
the Creeks and Harbors far from their intended Port, by reason of Tempest, or
the danger of Enemies, to the great discouragement of Merchants: It is
therefore ordered and established that where any Ship or Ships, or other
Vessels, shall come or arrive in any Harbor, Bay, or Creek, within this
Kingdom, laden with Arms, Ammunition or other Merehandize, that in such cases
all those that are or shall be in Command in the adjacent Counties respectively
shall protect and defend the said Merchants, procure Carriage for the said
Goods, and safely convey the same to the said Merchants intended Port, and not
to suffer the same, or any of the same under color of paying for the same, or
otherwise, to be disposed of or taken, before the same come to the intended
Port, and be entered into the List of the Commissioners: And any that shall Rob,
Steal, or Violently take away any of the said Goods contrary to this Order,
shall be deemed and punished as Enemies to the public good of this Kingdom,
and suffer death therefore.

29. Item, That certain Commissioners shall be appointed in every Port-Town of
the Freemen and Residents therein by the Provincial or Supreme Council, for
the viewing of all the Arms and Ammunition that shall be hereafter imported
into this Kingdom from beyond Seas, and to certify the same to the Supreme
Council with all speed, and to prevent abuses in the Sale for issuing or
disposing of them.

30. Item, It is ordered and established, that where Soldiers do run from
their Garrisons, or Commanders unto other Counties or or Provinces, that the
Commanders or chief Governors of the said County or Province, upon complaint
made thereof, shall send back the Fugitive Soldiers to their Commanders to be
dealt withal according to Justice.

31. Item, It is ordered and established, that the Debts and other Duties owing
to Creditors of this Union being Neuters and Enemies, shall be paid out of the
Goods, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments of the said Neuters, and Enemies
respectively, before any other public charge be answered thereout.

32. Item, It is ordered and established, that no Soldiers or other Persons,
without Command from the County-Council, meddle with the Lands or Goods of
Neuters or Enemies.

33. Item, it is ordered and established, that to prevent the springing up of
all National distinctions, the Oath of Association or Union be taken solemnly,
after Confession and receiving the Sacrament in the Parish Churches, throughout
the Kingdom, and the Names of all the Persons of Rank and Quality in every
Parish that take the same, to be enrolled in Parchment, and to be Returned,
Signed, and Sealed by the Parish Priest to the Ordinary of every Diocese, who
is to keep the same in his Treasury, and to certify a Copy thereof under Seal
to the Metropolitan, who is to keep that, and to certify a true Copy thereof
under his Metropolitical Seal to the Rolls of the Kingdom, where the same is to
be enrolled.

APPENDIX, IX. Fol. 99.
By the Lords, Justices, and Council.
W. Parsons. Jo. Borlase.
WHereas for special reasons of State moving Us thereunto, We issued diverse
Warrants, forbidding his Majesty's Army, to burn certain Houses and Corn, and
to forbear pillaging, spoiling, and taking away Goods and Cattle of diverse
persons; And whereas also not only We the Lords, Justices, or one of Us, or our
very good Lord the Earl of Ormond and Ossory, Lieutenant General of the Army,
but also the late and present Commander or Commanders of his Majesty's Forces
in the City of Dublin, or in Drogheda and other places within the Province of
Lemster (some of them having no authority or direction so to do) and issued
Warrants admitting sundry persons (many of which persons by their present ill
demerits in this General Rebellion, might justly have been forthwith prosecuted
with fire and sword) with safety to bring or send to the Markets of Dublin,
Drogheda, and other places, Corn and other provisions, to be there sold, which
was done in expectation that by that forbearance used toward them, when they
saw just vengeance taken on others for the same adhering to, and relieving
those who in this Rebellion publicly carry Arms, and commit open Acts of
Hostility, they might be moved to depart from adhering to, or relieving those
notorious Actors in the Rebellion, in gratitude to his Majesty and this State,
for so much clemency used toward them; yet so ungrateful have many or most of
those persons been found, and so insensible of the duty and loyalty of good
Subjects to his Majesty, as notwithstanding that clemency used toward them,
they have not returned the fruits of Loyalty expected from them, but on the
contrary have run on in their former rebellious courses, not so much as having
to this time offered any assistance to this State, or any the Governors or
Commanders of the Army, and have murdered many English and other Subjects in
several parts: it being observed, that if any of his Majesty's good Subjects,
Soldiers or others, pass by, not strongly guarded, they are set upon and
murdered in the Highways and passages as they travel, the very Plowmen and
those that keep Cattle, having continually Arms lying by them in the Fields, to
murder those his Majesty's good Subjects when they find them weakly guarded;
and on the other side when they find them strongly guarded, they seem to go on
in their Plowing and Husbandry, showing those Warrants for their safety, and
seeming to be poor, innocent, and harmless Laborers. And although the
aforesaid open Rebels were frequently in some of their Houses, and continually
round about them, they never gave us any intelligence concerning the
proceedings of those open Rebels, nor of the places where they had often
meetings, and where they might be found to be fallen on by his Majesty's Army,
which they might easily have done, if their affections to his Majesty and his
Government had been such as by the Laws of God they ought to be, or if they
desired to live humbly in obedience to the Laws, as some of them pretend: And
albeit in many of the said Warrants there were conditions expressed, and in
all of them Conditions employed, that the parties taking benefit thereby, should
behave themselves as becomes dutiful and Loyal Subjects, whereby We might
justly proceed to their deserved Correction, without any violation on Our parts
of the said Warrants, or the word thereby given. And albeit also that most of
those Warrants were not in themselves Protections to the parties, further than
in giving them leave to bring or send Corn and other provisions to the Markets,
whereby their Servants, or Horses, or Provisions should not be seized on by the
Soldiers when they came to the Markets, which admittance fell out as well for
their benefit, as intended for the furnishing of the Market; Yet because We
find that the further continuing of those Warrants, do now appear inevitably
to induce a great inconvenience to his Majesty's General Service, and many of
those people do either ignorantly (or perhaps purposely) mistake the true sense
and meaning of those Warrants, and do give out to interpret them to be
Protections granted to them for the safety of their Lives and Estates, how foul
soever they are in their crimes, which is an interpretation that cannot justly
be made out of the letter or meaning of those Warrants; yet in regard We (who
are entrusted here by His Majesty for the government of this His Kingdom and
People), are so tender of His Majesty's Honor, as We neither have done, nor
will do anything, that by any construction can be interpreted a Breach of any
word given by Us, neither have desired or willingly permitted any violence or
hurt to be done to any Inhabitant, or any prejudice, other than for the
necessary Defense and safety of this State, and other His Majesty's good
Subjects, against those that tookup Arms against His Majesty. And for that we
are now necessitated to resolve, not to suffer this State to be any longer
deluded and abused, and His Majesty's good Subjects murdered (even as it were
in our own view in scorn and affront of the State) and some of the actors
passing with impunity under countenance of these Warrants, We think fit
before we proceed to the just Correction of those who have so declared
themselves Enemies to the Peace of this Kingdom, hereby to publish and declare
that the said Warrants so granted by Us the Lords, Justices, or either of Us,
or by Us the Lords, Justices and Council, or by the said Lieutenant General of
the Army, or by the said late or present Commanders of the Forces of this City,
or by any His Majesty's Commanders in Drogheda, or other places, to any person
or persons within the Baronies of Castle-knock, Nethercrois, Balrothery or
Coolock in the County of Dublin, or within the Baronies of Duleeke, Skryne,
Moyfenragh, Ratoath, Deece and Dunboyne in the County of Mead, shall from and
after the four and twentieth day of this Month, stand void, and be annulled,
repealed, and revoked; and we do hereby accordingly from and after the said day
revoke, repeal, make void and annul them, and every of them, to all intents and
purposes, as if they had never been granted, and do order that from and after
the said day, they be of no force, nor derive any benefit, Protection, or
Security in the parties to whom they were granted. And this Proclamation, we
hereby require the Major and Sheriffs of the City of Dublin, to cause to be
proclaimed and published on two Market-days in and throughout the said City and
Suburbs, and to be publicly fixed up in the Marketplace, and other public
places in the said City and Suburbs, that so all men may take notice thereof,
and that hereafter (when by the power and strength of his Majesty's Army)
Offenders receive due punishment, they may appear inexcusable, and not have any
color to pretend the least Breach of word in this State.

Given at his Majesty's Castle of Dublin the 10. of June, 1642. Ormond Ossory.
Roscomon.
Ad. Loftus.
J. Temple.
Tho. Rotherham.
Fra. Willoughby.
Tho. Lucas.
Ja. Ware.
Geo. Wentworth.
Rob. Meredith.
God save the King.
This relates to what is mentioned in the end of the second Paragraph Fol: 102.
Justifying the State in the revoking of Protections, given contrary to their
Order, and the Abuse the Protected made thereof.
By the Lords, Justices, and Council.
W. Parsons. Jo. Borlase.
WHereas in the beginning of this hideous and detestable Rebellion, We the
Lords Justices and Council, desirous if it might be to give some sudden stop
thereunto; so to prevent the spreading thereof, and the growth of it to that
height to which it has sithence risen, and conceiving that at that time the
multitude were by evil Council, or false rumors seduced to partake in that
Rebellion, who not knowing the truth and depth of the Combination, We did
think, could not so wretchedly fail in their Duty and Loyalty to their most
Gracious King and Sovereign, as so universally to persist in their course of
Disobedience to his Majesty's Authority, but would with treatable and fair
admonitions, laying before them their great danger and the iniquity of their
enterprise, have returned to their obedience, We therefore on the 27th. of
October last, authorized diverse persons of quality and trust for the several
Counties of Down, Antrim, Armagh, Monaghan, Cavan, Tirone and Fermanagh
(amongst other Powers then entrusted with them) to parley with the Rebels, or
any of them, and by Proclamation, or otherwise, to proffer his Majesty's Grace
and Mercy to them, or any of them, and to receive such of them into his
Majesty's Grace and Mercy as should submit themselves and desire the same. Yet
We held fit then to accompany the said Commission with our Letters to the said
Commissioners, wherein We signified to them, that although by the said
Commission We gave them that power, yet We did then let them know that for
those who were Chief among the Rebels, and Ringleaders of the rest to
disobedience, that We adjudged them less worthy of favor then the others, whom
they had mis-guided. And therefore for those principal persons We required them
to take care not to be too forward (without first consulting this Board) in
proffering or promising mercy to those, unless they the Commissioners saw it of
great and unavoidable necessity. Which power entrusted by Us with the said
Commissioners was then granted, in respect of the conjuncture of affairs at
that time, and to answer the then sudden extremities in the public service.
And whereas We have now received information that a long time after the said
power entrusted with them, and when the State of the Country was far different
from the Condition wherein it stood at the issuing of the said Commission, and
after the general Conspiracy was fully discovered; and that the Rebels of all
degrees and conditions had with hateful and bloody obstinacy declared their
purpose to extirp the British, throughout the whole Kingdom, without hope of
reconcilement, other then by the strength of his Majesty's forces, some of the
said Commissioners (notwithstanding the premonition given them by Our said
Letters, and without consulting this Board therein) have given Protections of
late to many of the said Rebels being principal persons and freeholders, which
Protections are (in sundry respects) found to be a mighty hindrance to His
Majesty's service in those parts, and tending to His Majesty's loss and
disadvantage. And albeit We are informed that those persons so protected have
by their mis-behaviours since the Protections granted to them, violated the
express or employed conditions of all Protections, which besides the
unreasonableness of the granting of them, contrary to the intent of Our
direction in Our said Letters, might justly give cause to have those Rebels
immediately fallen upon, and cut off. Yet in regard We who are entrusted here by
His Majesty for the Government of this His Kingdom and People, are so tender of
His Majesty's honor; as We neither have done, nor will do any thing, that by
any construction, can be interpreted a breach of any word given by Us, or any
other authorized by Us. We think fit before we proceed to the just correction
of those Rebels, hereby to publish and declare, that all the said Protections
granted since the first of March last to any person or persons whatsoever, in
the County of Down, or other Counties above named, shall at the end of ten
days next after the pubishing of this Proclamation at Down-Patrick or
Strangford in the said County of Down, or at any other public place in any of
the said Counties respectively, stand void and be annulled, repealed and
revoked. And we do hereby accordingly from and after the said ten days revoke,
repeal, make void and annull them, and every of them, to all intents and
purposes, as if they had never been granted, and do Order that from and after
the said ten days, they be of no force, nor derive any benefit, protection or
security to any of the parties to whom they were so granted. And this
Proclamation We require the Sheriff of the County of Down, and the several
Sheriffs of the said several Counties respectively, to cause to be proclaimed
and published at Down-Patrick and Strangford aforesaid, and at some public
places in the said several Counties respectively, that so all persons whom it
may concern, may take notice thereof, and that hereafter when by the Power and
Strength of Hu Majesty's Army the said Offenders receive due punishment for
their high transgressions, they may not have any color to presend the beast
breach of word in this State or any the Ministers thereof.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of Dublin the 19th day of August, 1641. La.
Dublin.
Ormond Ossory.
Cha. Lambert.
Ad. Loftus.
J. Temple.
Tho. Lucas.
Ja. Ware.
Rob. Meredith.

Pope Urban the Eight's Grant of Indulgence to Owen Roe O Neal, referrable to
Fol. 136. mentioned in Mahony's Disp. Apologet. p. 41.
Dilecto filio Eugenio O Nello.
DIlecte fili, Salutem. Nullum praetermittere soles occasionem, qua non Majorum
tuorum Vestigiis insistens Eximium Zelum, and propagandae Ecclesiae studium
perspectum facis, idque luculenter in praesentia praestitisti, in Hiberniam
proficisci cogitans, ut Catholicorum rationibus praesto sis. Quam ob rem
pergratae Nobis advenerunt Literae, quibus Hujusmodi itineris deliberationem
declaras, and rei faeliciter gerendae principium a caelesti open auspicatus; non
minus humiliter quam religiose Apostolicam benedictionem a Nobis postulas.
Praeclarum hunc in te ardorem and constantiam adversus haereticos, and verae
fidei animum, non parum laudamus: tuaeque jam pridem pietatis conscii a te
expectamus in hac opportunitate strenui atque excelsi roboris documenta, quae
antehac singularem nominis famam tibi compararunt. Illorum pariter commendamus
Consilium, quos tuo excitans exemplo significasti: speramus autem fore, ut
Altissimus tuae causae praesto sit, ut Notam faciat in populis Virtutem suam.
Interim, ut confidentius cuncta aggrediamini, Nos divinam Clementiam
indesinenter orantes, ut adversariorum conatus in nihilum redigat; tibi
caeterisque Catholicorum rem in praedicto regno Curaturis nostram libenter
impartimur benedictionem Universisqne and singulis, si vere paenitentes
confessi fuerint, and Sacra Communione (si fieri possit) debite refecti,
plenariam suorum peccatorum veniam and remissionem; atque in Mortis articulo
Indulgentiam etiam plenariam elargimur. Datum Romae sub Annulo Piscatoris die
8. Octobris 1642. Pontificatus Nostri Anno 20.

APPENDIX X. Fol. 141.
By the Lords, Justices, and Council.
Jo. Borlase. Hen. Tichborne.
WHereas We have lately seen a Printed Paper, entitled, a solemn League and
Covenant for reformation and defense of Religion, the Honor and happiness of
the King, and the Peace and safety of the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, which seems to have been Printed at London, on the ninth day of
October 1643.

And forasmuch as in the said League or Covenant, there are diverse things
contained not only tending to a seditious Combination against His Majesty, but
also contrary to the municipal Laws of this Kingdom of Ireland, and destructive
to the Church Government established by Law in this Kingdom, And for that by
the Laws of this Kingdom, no Oath ought to be tendered to, or taken by any
person or persons whatsoever in this Kingdom, but before a Judge or other
person thereunto Lawfully Authorized by His Majesty, and for that the said
League or Covenant is now endeavored to be set on foot in this Kingdom,
without His Majesty's Privity, Direction, or Allowance. And in regard it is
directly contrary to the Liberty and Freedom of the Subject, to be by any such
Oath or Covenant pre-engaged, And for that the setting on foot at this time in
this Kingdom the said League or Covenant, without His Majesty's Allowance, may
not only beget much distraction and unquietness amongst His Majesty's good
Subjects, but also may prove very penal to all those who shall presume to
tender or take the same: We therefore for prevention of such mischiefs, do in
His Majesty's Name strictly charge and command, all His Majesty's good Subjects
of what degree or quality soever within this Kingdom, upon their Allegiance to
His Majesty's, that they presume not to enter into or take the said League,
Covenant or Oath. And we do likewise inhibit and forbid all His Majesty's
Subjects in this Kingdom, to impose, administer, or tender the said League,
Oath, or Covenant. And if notwithstanding this our Proclamation, any person
shall presume to impose, tender, or take the said League, Oath or Covenant, We
shall proceed against him or them with all severity according to the known Laws
of the Land.

Given at His Majesty's Castle of Dublin, the 18. day of December. 1643. Ri.
Bolton. Canc.
La. Dublin.
Ormonde.
Roscomon.
Edw. Brabazon.
Ant. Midensis.
Cha. Lambart.
Geo. Shurley.
Gerrard Lowther.
Tho. Rotherham.
Fra. Willoughby.
Tho. Lucas.
Ja. Ware.
G. Wentworth.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
APPENDIX, XI. Fol. 141.
The Copy of a Letter written by direction of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and Commons in Parliament Assembled, to several Commanders and Officers of his
Majesty's Army, and others in the Kingdom of Ireland.
AFter our very hearty Commendations. The Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament, in this His Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, have commanded us to
signify unto you, that they have lately seen a Printed Paper, entitled a
solemn League and Covenant for Reformation and defense of Religion, the honor
and happiness of the King, and the Peace and safety of the three Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, which seems to have been Printed at London, on
the ninth day of October 1643. That they have also seen a Printed Proclamation,
dated the eighteenth day of December last, and set out by the Right Honorable
the late Lords Justices and Council, expressing diverse great and Weighty
Reasons against the said League and Covenant, and therefore Commanding all his
Majesty's good Subjects, of what Degree or Quality soever within this Kingdom,
upon their Allegiance to his Majesty, That they presume not to enter into or
take the said League, Covenant or Oath, and inhibiting and forbidding all His
Majesty's Subjects in this Kingdom, to impose, administer, or tender the said
League, Oath or Covenant, That upon serious debate and consideration taken by
the Lords and Commons, of the said League and Covenant, and Proclamation, They
find the said Proclamation to have been set out with great Wisdom and Reason,
and do highly Commend the Judgment of the said Lords, Justices and Council
therein, and as both Houses do fully concur therein in all the parts thereof,
So they have expressly Commanded us to signify the same unto you, and in their
names to let you know, That it is their express Pleasure that you and all the
Commanders, Officers and Soldiers of His Majesty's Army, and all others His
Majesty's Subjects in this Kingdom, whom it may concern, do render all due
Obedience and Observation to the said Proclamation in all the parts thereof.
And this being to no there end, We remain

Your very Loving Friends Ri. Bolton, Canc.
Maur. Eustace, Speaker of the House of Commons.
Dublin Castle, xviii. die April. Anno Dom. 1644.
Fol. 142. There is mention made of the Protestants Arrival at Oxford, where
they delivered to his Majesty this Petition.
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of diverse of your Majesty's Protestant Subjects in your
Kingdom of Ireland, as well Commanders of Your Majesty's Army here, as others
whose Names are subscribed, in the behalf of themselves and other Your
Protestant Subjects in this Your Kingdom.
Shows,

THAT this Your Highness Kingdom (reduced with the vast Expense of Treasure,
and much effusion of British blood, to the obedience of the Imperial Crown of
England) has been by the Princely care of your Royal Progenitors, especially
of Queen Elizabeth, and of Your Royal Father of ever blessed Memory, and your
Sacred Majesty, in many parts happily planted, great sums of Moneys disbursed
in Buildings and Improvements, Churches edified and endowed, and frequented
with multitudes of good Protestants, and your yearly Customs and Revenues
raised to great yearly sums, by the industry of your Protestant Subjects
especially, and great sums of Money by way of Subsidies and Contributions
cheerfully paid unto your Majesty by your said Subjects. In which happiness
this your Kingdom has flourished in a long-continued Peace, and under your
Highness most glorious and happy Government, until that by the present general
Conspiracy and Rebellion raised out of Detestation of Your blessed Government,
and for rooting out of the Protestant Religion: and so for the dispossessing of
Your Majesty of this Your said Kingdom, without the least occasion offered by
Your Majesty or Your Protestant Subjects. And notwithstanding that Your Majesty
immediately before, had enlarged beyond president Your Royal favor and bounty
to them, in granting all that their and our joint Agents did desire of Your
Majesty. And we continuing amongst them in all Love and Amity, without
distrust; Your Petitioners and others who labored to oppose those damnable
Designs and Practices, have been driven from their Dwellings, Estates, and
Fortunes; their Houses and Churches burnt and demolished; All Monuments of
Civility utterly defaced, Your Majesty's Forts and places of strength thrown
down, and the Common and Statute-Laws of this Your Kingdom utterly confounded,
by taking upon themselves the exercise of all manner of Authorities and
Jurisdictions, Ecclesiastical and Civil, both by Sea and Land, proper and
peculiar to Your Sacred Majesty, being Your just Prerogatives and the Royal
Flowers of Your Imperial Diadem, to the Disherison of Your Crown, and Your
Royal Revenues brought to nothing, and the Protestant Clergy with their
Revenues and support for the present destroyed; This Your Kingdom in all parts
formerly inhabited with British Protestants, now depopulated of them, and many
thousands of Your Protestant Subjects most barbarously used, stripped naked,
tortured, famished, hanged, buried alive, drowned, and otherwise by all
barbarous cruel sorts of Death murdered; such as yet remain of them are
reduced to that extremity, that very few of them have wherewithal to maintain a
Being, and all of them so terrified and afflicted with those barbarous and
inhuman cruelties (the true report whereof being now spread abroad into the
Christian World)* Your Suppliants conceive fears, that Your Majesty's British
Subjects will be discouraged from coming again to inhabit this Kingdom, and the
remnant of what is left will be forced to depart: All this being done by the
Conspiracy of the Papists, who did publicly declare the utter extirpation of
the Protestant Religion, and all the British Professors thereof out of this
Your Majesty's Kingdom. And to the end it may the better in some measure
appear, Your Suppliants have made choice of Captain William Ridgeway, Sir
Francis Hamilton Knight and Baronet, Captain Michael Jones, and Mr. Fenton
Parsons, whom they have employed and authorized as their Agents to manifest the
truth thereof in such Particulars as for the present they are furnished withal,
referring the more ample manifestation thereof to the said Captain William
Ridgeway, Sir Francis Hamilton, Captain Jones and Fenton Parsons, or any three
or more of them, and such other Agents as shall with all convenient speed be
sent, as occasion shall require, to attend Your Majesty, from Your Protestant
Subjects of the several Provinces of this Your Kingdom.

We therefore, Your Majesty's most humble, loyal, and obedient
Protestant-Subjects, casting down our selves at Your Royal feet, and flying to
You for succor and redress in these our great Calamities, as our most gracious
Sovereign Lord and King, and next and immediately under Almighty God our
Protector and Defense, most humbly beseeching Your Sacred Majesty to admit into
Your Royal Presence from time to time our said Agents, and in Your great
Wisdom to take into Your Princely Care and Consideration the distressed
Estate, and humble desires of Your said Subjects, so that to the Glory of God,
Your Majesty's Honor, and the happiness of Your good Subjects, the Protestant
Religion may be restored throughout the whole Kingdom to its luster: that the
losses of Your Protestant Subjects may be repaired, in such manner and measure
as Your Majesty in Your Princely Wisdom shall think fit; and that this Your
Kingdom may be settled as that Your said Protestant Subjects may hereafter live
therein under the happy Government of Your Majesty and Your Royal Posterity
with comfort and security: whereby Your Majesty will render Your self through
the whole World a most just and Glorious Defender of the Protestant Religion,
and draw down a Blessing on all other Your Royal Undertakings; for which Your
Petitioners will ever pray, etc.

Subscribed by the Earl of Kildare.
Lord Viscount Montgomery.
Lord Blany, and many others.

To which they received this Answer by His Majesty's Command, At Our Court at
Oxford the 25th of April, 1644.

His Majesty being very sensible of the Petitioners Losses and sufferings, is
ready to hear and relieve them, as the Exigencie of his Affairs will permit;
and wishes the Petitioners to propose what they think fit in particular for
his Majesty's Information, and the Petitioners Remedy and future Security,

Edw. Nicholas.

Upon the reading of the Petition His Majesty was pleased to say, That He knew
the Contents of the Petition to be Truth.

APPENDIX, XII. Fol. 142.
The Propositions of the Roman Catholics of Ireland, humbly presented to His
Sacred Majesty, in pursuance of their Remonstrance of Grievances, and to be
annexed to the said Remonstrance; together with the humble Answer of the Agents
for the Protestants of Ireland, to the said Propositions made in pursuance of
Your Majesty's directions of the 9th of May 1644. requiring the same.
1. Pro. THAT all Acts made against the Professors of the Roman Catholic
faith, whereby any restraint, penalty, Mulct, or incapacity may be laid upon
any Roman Catholics within the Kingdom of Ireland, may be repealed, and the
said Catholics to be allowed the freedom of the Roman Catholic Religion.

Answ. To the first we say, that this has been the pretense of almost all
those who have entered into Rebellion in the Kingdom of Ireland at any time
since the Reformation of Religion there, which was settled by Acts of Parliament
above eighty years since, and has wrought good effects ever since for the
peace and welfare both of the Church and Kingdom there, and of the Church and
Kingdom of England, and Protestant party throughout all Christendom, and so
has been found wholesome and necessary by long experience, and the repealing of
those Laws will set up Popery again, both in Jurisdiction, profession and
practice, as that was before the said Reformation, and introduce among other
inconveniences the Supremacy of Rome, and take away or much endanger Your
Majesty's Supreme and just Authority in Causes Ecclesiastical, Administration
of honor and power not to be endured, the said Acts extending as well to
seditious Sectaries as to Popish Recusants; so as by the repeal thereof, any
man may seem to be left to choose his own Religion in that Kingdom, which must
needs beget great confusion; and the abounding of the Roman Clergy has been
one of the greatest occasions of this late Rebellion; besides, it is humbly
desired that Your Majesty will be pleased to take into Your gracious
consideration a Clause in the Act of Parliament passed by Your Majesty's Royal
Assent in England in the 17th year of Your Reign, touching punishments to be
inflicted upon those that shall introduce the Authority of the Sea of Rome in
any Cause whatsoever.

2. Pro. That Your Majesty will be pleased to call a free Parliament in the
said Kingdom, to be held and continued as in the said Remonstrance is
expressed, and the Statute of the 10th year of King Hen. 7. called Poyning's
Acts, explaining or enlarging the same, be suspended during that Parliament,
for the speedy settlement of the present Affairs, and the repeal thereof be
there further considered of.

Answ. Whereas their desire to have a free Parliament called, reflecteth by
secret and cunning implication upon Your Majesty's present Parliament in
Ireland, as if it were not a free Parliament, we humbly beseech Your Majesty to
present how dangerous it is to make such insinuation or intimation to your
people of that Kingdom touching that Parliament, wherein several Acts of
Parliament have already past, the validity whereof may be endangered if the
Parliament should not be approved as a free Parliament, and it is a point of
high nature, as we humbly conceive is not properly to be dismissed but in
Parliament; and Your Majesty's said Parliament now sitting is a free Parliament
in Law, holden before a person of honor and fortune in the Kingdom, composed
of good loyal and well-affected Subjects to Your Majesty, who doubtless will be
ready to comply in all things that shall appear to be pious and just, for the
good of the True Protestant Religion, and for Your Majesty's service and the
good of the Church and State, that if this present Parliament should be
dissolved it would be a great terror and discontent to all Your Majesty's
Protestant Subjects of the Kingdom, and may be also a means to force many of
Your Majesty's Subjects to quit that Kingdom, or peradventure to adhere to some
other party there, in opposition of the Romish Irish Confederates, rather than
to be liable to their power, which effects may prove of most dangerous
consequence; and we humbly offer to Your Majesty's consideration Your own
gracious Expression mentioned in the grounds and motives inducing Your Majesty
to agree to a Cessation of Arms for one whole year with the Roman Catholics of
Ireland, printed at Oxford, 19. October. 1643. And let all your good Subjects be
assured, that as we have for these reasons, and with caution and deliberation
consented to the Proposition to peace, and to that purpose do continue do
continue our Parliament there, so we shall proceed in the accomplishing thereof
with that care and circumspection, that we shall not admit even peace it self
otherways than it may be agreeable to Conscience, Honor and Justice. We also
humbly desire that such Laws as Your Majesty shall think fit to pass, may be
transmitted according to Poynings Law, and other Laws of explanation thereof,
or of addition thereunto now in force with great contentment and security to
Your Majesty's Protestant Subjects; but if the present Parliament be dissolved,
we humbly represent unto Your Majesty, that so many of your ablest and best
Protestant Subjects have been murdered or banished by this Rebellion, the few
or no Protestant freeholders will be found in the Countries, Cities or
Buroughs to elect and choose Knights, Citizens or Burgesses, which will be most
dangerous to your Majesty's Rights and Prerogatives and good Subjects, and may
beget great disputes in aftertimes for the repealings of Poynings Acts,
notwithstanding their feigned expressions of their loyalty; yet it plainly
appears they do not repose such trust in your Majesty's Justice as becomes
loyal Subjects to do, (and such they pretend themselves to be) for that they
seek thereby to prevent Your Majesty and your Council of England and Ireland of
so full a view and time of mature consideration to be had of Acts of Parliament
of Ireland before they pass, as in prudence is requisite, and has been found
necessary by the experience of well near 200 years; and if their Intentions
were so clear as they profess, we know not why they should avoid the strictest
view and trial of Your Majesty and your Councels of both Kingdoms; this their
desire, tending to introduce a grand diminution to the Royal and necessary
Power for the conservation of Your Regal State and protection of your good
Protestant Subjects there and elsewhere, and what special use they aim at in
seeking such a repeal, Your Protestant Subjects as they know not the
particular, so can they conjecture of none, unless the said Confederates have
some design by way of surprise to obtrude upon Your Majesty in their new
desired Parliament, some Acts of justification of their ill-done actions, and
for condemning such of your Protestant Subjects, as have in their several
degrees most faithfully served Your Majesty there, which we the rather believe,
seeing they have vowed by their Oath of Association and the Bull lately
published in Ireland since the Cessation, the destruction of the Protestants
there, when they have the Sword in their hands to put the same in Execution.

3. Pro. That all Acts and Ordinances made and passed in the now pretended
Parliament in that Kingdom since the 7th day of August, 1641. be clearly
annulled and declared void, and taken off the File.

Answ. We humbly desire that they may particularize those Orders and
Ordinances, which may prejudice Your Majesty's service; for we are well
assured, that the Parliament now sitting in Ireland, on signification of Your
Majesty's pleasure therein, will give Your Majesty full satisfaction, or repeal
any unjust Orders or Ordinances whatsoever which may be prejudicial to Your
Majesty: and there may be some Orders or Ordinances which may concern
particular persons in their Lives, Liberties or Fortunes, that may suffer
unheard, by the admitting of so general a Proposition, which is merely proposed
as we humbly conceive to put a scorn upon Your Majesty's Parliament now sitting
there, and to discourage your Protestant Subjects who have faithfully served
Your Majesty in that Parliament.

4. Pro. That all Indictments, Attainders, Out-lawers in the Kings Bench or
elsewhere since the said 7th day of August, 1641. and all Letters, Patents,
Grants, Leases, Custodiums, Bonds, Recognizances and all other Records, Act or
Acts depending thereon, or in prejudice of the said Catholics, or any of them,
be taken off the File, annulled and declared void, first by Your Majesty's
Proclamation, and after by Act to be passed in the said free Parliament.

Answ. This we conceive to be a very bold Proposition, not warranted as we also
conceive by any Example, and tending to introduce an ill president in
aftertimes, for that was never seen that the Records were taken off the File,
but where there was some corruption or fraud, or some illegal or unjust
carriage used, or concerning the procuring or making up of such Records; and
the same first we'll prove upon due Examination, and that may not only conceal,
but in some sort seem to justify their abominable Treasons, Murders,
Cruelties, Massacres and Plunders acted against your Majesty's Person, Crown
and Dignity, upon the persons of your Majesty's most loyal Protestant Subjects
in that Kingdom, and encourage the Papists to do the like again; besides the
discouragement it may beget in your Majesty's Officers and Subjects to do their
duties in the like insurrections which may happen hereafter, which also may
prove very prejudicial to Your Majesty's Rights and Revenues, if the Records to
support the Forfeitures wherein many of them are or may be grounded, should be
taken off the File and cancelled.

5. Pro. That inasmuch as under color of such Out-lawers and Attainders, Debts
due unto the said Catholics, have been granted, levied and disposed of, and of
the other side that Debts due upon the said Catholics to those of the adverse
party, have been levied and disposed of to public use; that therefore all
Debts be by Act of Parliament mutually released, or all to stand in statu quo,
notwithstanding any Grant or dispossession.

Answ. We humbly conceive, that in time of peace and most settled Government,
when the course of Law and Justice is most open and best observed, that Debts
due unto the Crown actually levied and paid in to Your Majesty's use ought not
to be restored, though the Records of the Forfeitures should be legally
reversed, which is far from the present case, and this Proposition tends to
cross that just Right of Your Majesty, and to make the disposition by the
Confederate Papists Rebels, of Debts due to Protestants, and by the said Rebels
by fraud and force levied and disposed in maintenance of their Rebellion, which
cunningly they call by the name of Public use, to be in equal degree to the
Debts owing by the Rebels, and by them all forfeited, and many of them by Law
duly levied, which is a most unequal and unjust thing, and the said Proposition
cannot, nor does make offer to have the Pope's Confederates cut off from the
Debts due to them which they have justly forfeited, but only for a color of
consideration to have the Protestants lose such. Debts (justly due to them) as
have been unjustly taken from them, who have done no act at all to forfeit them.

6. Pro. That the late Officers taken, or found upon feigned or old Titles
since the year 1634, to entitle Your Majesty to several Counties in Connaght,
Thornond, the County of Typperary, Limrick and Kelkenny, and Wicklowe be
vacated and taken off the File, and the possessors thereof settled and secure in
their ancient Estates by act of Parliament, and that the like Act of limitation
of Your Majesty's Titles for the security of the Estates of your Subjects in
that Kingdom be passed in that Parliament, as was Enacted in the 21. year of
his late Majesty's Reign in this Kingdom.

Answ. We know not of any Offices found, or feigned Titles, nor what the
Confederates may demand, in respect of any graces promised by your Majesty
which we intend not, nor have any occasion to dispute, but do humbly conceive,
that all those who have committed Treason in the late Rebellion, subsequent to
your Majesty's promise of those Graces, have thereby forfeited the benefit
thereof, together with the Lands to which the said Graces might else have
related, and so their whole Estates are now justly fallen to your Majesty by
their Rebellion, which we conceive is of great importance for your Majesty's
service to be taken into consideration; as First, with regard of the Statutes
made in the present Parliament of England. Secondly, That necessary increase of
your Majesty's Revenue decayed by the present Rebellion; Thirdly, The
abolishing the evil Customs of the Irish, and preservation of Religion, Laws
and Government there. Fourthly, The satisfaction of the Protestant Subjects
losses in some measure. Fifthly, The Arrears of your Majesty's Army, and other
debts contracted for the War, and for preservation of that Kingdom to your
Majesty. Sixthly, The bringing in of more British on the Plantation.
Seventhly, The building of some walled-Towns in remote and desolate places, for
the security of that Kingdom, and your Majesty's good Subjects there. Eighthly,
The taking of the Natives from their former dependency on their Chieftains, who
usurped an absolute Power over them, to the dimunition of all Regal Power, and
to the oppression of the inferiors.

7. Pro. That all marks of incapacity imposed upon the Natives of that Kingdom,
to purchase or acquire Lands, Leases, Offices, or Hereditaments, be taken away
by Act of Parliament, and the same to extend to the securing of Purchases,
Leases or Grants, already made; and that for the Education of Youth, an Act be
passed in the next Parliament, for the erecting of one or more Inns of Court,
Universities, Free and Common-Schools.

Answ. This we conceive concerns some of the late Plantations, and no other
part of that Kingdom, and that the restriction herein mentioned is found to be
of great use, especially for the indifferency of Trials, strength of the
Government, and for Trade and Traffic; and we humbly conceive, that if other
Plantations shall not proceed for the settling and securing of the Kingdom, and
that if no restraint be made of Popish purchasing, or buying of the Protestants
out of their former Plantations, where they were prudently settled, though now
cast out of their Estates by the late Rebellion, and unable to Plant the same
again for want of means, and therefore probably upon easy terms will part from
their Estates to the Confederates; that those Plantations will be destroyed, to
the great prejudice of your Majesty's Service, and endangering of the safety of
that Kingdom. Touching bearing of Offices, we humbly conceive that their now
conformity to the Laws and Statutes of that Realm, is the only mark of
incapacity imposed upon them; we humbly conceive that they ought not to expect
to be more capable there, then the English Natives are here in England: in like
case for Schools in Ireland, there are diverse settled in that Kingdom already by
the Laws and Statutes of that Realm; if any person well affected, shall erect
and endow any more Schools there at their own charges, so that the
Schoolmaster and Scholars may be governed according to Laws, Customs and
Orders of England, and the rest of Free-Schools here; we cannot apprehend any
just exception thereunto, but touching Universities and Inns of Court, we
humbly conceive that this part of the proposition savoureth of some desire to
become Independent upon England, or to make aspersion on the Religion and Laws
of the Kingdom, which can never be truly happy but in the good unity of both
in the true Protestant Religion, and in the Laws of England, (for as for matter
of charge) such of the Natives that are desirous to breed their Sons for
Learning in Divinity, can be well content to send them to the Universities of
Lovane, Doway, and other Popish places in foreign Kingdoms, and for Civil Law
or Physic to Padua, and other places, which draws great Treasure yearly out of
your Majesty's Dominions, but will send few or none of them to Oxford or
Cambrige, where they might as cheaply be bred up and become as Learned, which
course we conceive is holden out of their Pride, and disaffection toward this
Kingdom, and the true Religion here professed; and for the Laws of the Land
which are for the Common Law agreeable to England, and so for the greatest part
of the Statutes, the Inns of Court in England are sufficient, and the
Protestants come thither without grudging, and that is a means to civilize them
after the English customs, to make them familiar and in love with the Language
and Nation, to preserve Law in the Purity, when the Professors of it shall draw
from one Original Fountain, and see the manner of the Practice of that in the
same great Channel where his Majesty's Courts of Justice of England do flow
most clearly, whereas by separation of the Kingdoms in that place of their
principal instruction where their foundations in Learning are to be laid, a
degenerate corruption in Religion and Justice may happily be introduced and
spread, with much more difficulty to be corrected and restrained afterward by
any Discipline to be used in Ireland, or punishment there to be inflicted for
departing from the true grounds of things, which are best preserved in unity,
when they grow out of the same root, then if such Universities and Inns of
Court as are proposed should be granted, all which we humbly submit to your
Majesty's most Pious and Prudent consideration and judgment.

8. Pro. That the Offices and Places of Command, Honor, Profit and Trust
within that Kngdom, be conferred upon Roman Catholics Natives, in equality and
indifferency with your Majesty's other Subjects.

Answ. We humbly conceive that the Roman Catholics, Natives of Ireland, may
have the like Offices and Places as the Roman Catholics Natives of England
here have, and not otherwise; howbeit we conceive that in the generality they have not deserved so much by their late Rebellion, therefore we see not why
they should be endowed with any new or farther capacities or privileges then
they have by the Laws and Statutes now in force in that Kingdom.

9. Pro. That the insupportable Oppression of your Subjects, by reason of the
Court of Wards, and respit of Homage, be taken away, and certain revenue in
Lieu thereof settled upon your Majesty, without diminution of your Majesty's
profits.

Answ. We know of no Oppression by reason of the Court of Wards, and we humbly
conceive that the Court of Wards is of great use for the raising of your
Majesty's Revenues, the preservation of your Majesty's Tenures, and chiefly the
Education of the Gentry in the Protestant Religion, and in Civility and
Learning, and good Manners, who otherwise would be brought up in ignorance, and
barbarism, their Estates be ruined by their Kindred and Friends, and continue
their depending upon their Chieftains and Lords, to the great prejudice of your
Majesty's service, and Protestant Subjects, and there being no color of
exception to your Majesty's just Title to Wardships, we know not why the taking
away of your Court concerning the same should be pressed, unless it be to
prevent the Education of the Lords and Gentry that fall Wards in the Protestant
Religion. For that part of this Proposition which concerns respit of Homage, we
humbly conceive that reasonable, that some way may be settled for that, if that
stands with your Majesty's good pleasure, without prejudice to your Majesty,
or your Majesty's Protestant Subjects.

10. Pro. That no Lord not estated in the Kingdom, or estated, and not
resident, shall have Vote in the said Parliament, by Proxy or otherwise, and
none admitted to the House of Commons, but such as shall be estated and
resident within the Kingdom.

Answ. We humbly conceive that in the year 1641. by the Graces which your
Majesty then granted to your Subjects of Ireland, the matter of this
Proposition was in a fair way regulated by your utter abolishing of blank
Proxies, and limiting Lords present and attending in the Parliament of Ireland,
that no one of them should be capable of more Proxies then two, and prescribing
the Peers of that Kingdom not there resident to purchase fitting proportions of
Land in Ireland within five years from the last of July 1641. or else to loose
their Votes, till they should make such purchases; which purchases by reason of
the troubles happening in the Kingdom, and which have continued for two years and
a half, have not peradventure yet been made, and therefore your Majesty may now
be pleased and may take just occasion to enlarge that time for five years more,
from the time when that Kingdom may again be settled in a happy firm peace: and
as to members of the House of Commons, the same is most fit as we humbly
conceive to be regulated by the Laws and Statutes of that Kingdom.

11. Pro. That an Act be passed in the next Parliament declaratory that the
Parliament of Ireland is a free Parliament of it self, independent of, and not
subordinate to the Parliament of England, and that the Subjects of Ireland are
immediately subject to your Majesty, as in right of your revenue, and that the
Members of the said Parliament of Ireland, and all other the Subjects of
Ireland are independent, and no way to be ordered or concluded by the
Parliament of England, and are only to be ordered and governed within that
Kingdom by your Majesty, and such Governors as are or shall be there
appointed, and by the Parliament of that Kingdom according to the Laws of the
Land.

Answ. This Proposition concerns your Majesty's High Court of Parliament, both
of England and Ireland, and is beyond our abilities (who are not acquainted
with the Records and Presidents of this Nature) to give an answer thereunto,
and therefore we humbly desire your Majesty's pardon for not answering unto the
same.

12. Pro. That the assumed Power or Jurisdiction in the Council Board of
determining all manner of Causes, be limited to matters of State; and all
Patents, Estates and Grants illegally and extrajudiciously avoided there, or
elsewhere, be left in state as before, and the parties grieved, their Heirs or
Assigns, till legal eviction.

Answ. The Council Table has aways excercised Jursdiction in some cases ever
since the English Government was settled in that Kingdom, and is of long
continuance in cases of some Nature, as the beginning thereof appears not;
which seems to be by prescription, and has always been armed with Power to
examine upon Oath as a Court of Justice, or in the nature of a Court of Justice
in cases of some natures, and may be very necessary still in many cases,
especially for the present till your Majesty's Laws may more generally be
received in that Kingdom, and we conceive that Board is so well limited by
printed Instructions, in your Majesty's Royal Fathers time, and by your
Majesty's Graces in the seventeenth year of your Reign, that it needs for
this present little or no regulating at all, howbeit they humbly referr that to
your Majesty's great wisdom and goodness to do therein as to Law and Justice
shall appertain.

13. Pro. That the Statutes of the 11th. 12th. and 13th. years of Queen
Elizabeth concerning the Staple Commodities be repealed, referving to his
Majesty lawful and just Poundage, and a Book of Rates be settled by an
indifferent Committy of both Houses for all Commodities.

Answ. The matter of this Proposition is settled in a fitting and good way by
your Majesty already as we conceive, amongst the Graces granted by your Majesty
to your people of Ireland, in the Seventeenth year of your Majesty's Reign, to
which we humbly referr our selves.

14. Pro. That insomuch as the long continuance of the chief Governor or
Governors of that Kingdom, in that place of so great eminency and power, has
been a principal occasion that much Tyranny and Oppression has been used and
exercised upon the Subjects of that Kingdom; that your Majesty will be pleased
to continue such Governors hereafter but for three years, and that none once
employed therein be appointed for the same again, until the expiration of six
years next after the end of the first three years, and that an Act pass to
disanul such Governor or Governors during their Government, directly or
indirectly, in Use, Trust or otherwise to make any manner of Purchase or
acquisition of any Manors, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments within that
Kingdom, other then from your Majesty's own Heirs and Successors.

Answ. We humbly conceive, that this Proposition tends to lay a false and
scandalous aspersion on your Majesty's gracious Government over Ireland, and
that it touches very high upon your Wisdom, Justice and Power, and under
color of supposed Corruptions pretended to be in the greatest Officer that
Commands under your Majesty there, if he continue so long in his Government
as may well enable him to find out and discover the true State of the Kingdom,
and the dangerous disposition and designs of the Popish party there, to prevent
him therein, and to turn him out from doing Service before or as soon as he is
thoroughly informed and experienced how to do the same, and then to hold him
excluded so long, that in all likelihood he shall not live to come to that
place the second time, which we humbly conceive will be a great discouragement
to any person of Honor and Fortune to serve your Majesty in that high Trust:
and for their purchasing Lands in that Kingdom, your Majesty may be pleased to
leave them to the Laws, and punish them severely if they commit any offense, or
exercise any oppressions under color of purchasing of any Lands or Estates
whatsoever.

15. Pro. That an Act may be passed in the next Parliament, for the raising and
settling of Trained-bands, within the several Counties of that Kingdom, as well
to prevent foraign Invasion, as to render them the more serviceable and ready
for your Majesty's service, as cause shall require.

Answ. The having of Trained-bands in Ireland for the present, cannot (under
favor) be for your Majesty's service, or the safety of that Kingdom, for that
the Protestants by the said sad effects of the late Rebellion are so much
destroyed, that the said Bands must consist in effect altogether of the
Confederates, Catholics; and to continue them in Arms, stored with Ammunition,
and made ready for service by Mustring and often Training, will prove, under
color of advancing your Majesty's service against foraign Invasions, a mere
Guard and Power of the Popish Confederates, and by force of Arms (according to
their late Oaths and Protestations) to execute all their cruel designs, for
extirpation of the Protestant Religion, and English Government, both which they
mortally hate, however in cunning they dissemble it, and to prevent the settling
an Army of good Protestants, without which your Majesty's good Subjects cannot
live securely there.

16. Pro. That an Act of Oblivion be passed in the next free Parliament, to
extend to all your Majesty's said Catholic Subjects and their Adherents, for
all manner of Offenses, Capital, Criminal, and Personal, and the said Act to
extend to all Goods and Chattels, Customs, Mesne Profits, Prizes, Arrears of
Rents taken, received, or incurred since these troubles.

Answ. We humbly pray that the Laws of force be taken into consideration, and
do humbly conceive, that your Majesty in Honor and Justice may forbear to
discharge or release any Actions, Suits, Debts or Interests, whereby your
Majesty's Protestant Subjects, who have committed no offense against your
Majesty or your Laws, should be barred or deprived of any of their legal
remedies, or just demands, which by any of your Majesty's Laws and Statutes,
they may have against the Popish Confederates, who are the only Delinquents, or
any of their party, for, or in respect of any wrongs done unto them, or any of
their Ancestors or Predecessors, in or concerning their Lands, Goods, or
Estates, since the contriving or breaking forth of the Rebellion, the said
Confederates having without provocation shed so much innocent Blood, and acted
so many Cruelties as cannot be paralleled in any Story: and we conceive it to
be high presumption in them upon so weak grounds to propound an Act of Oblivion
in such general terms, some of the Confederates having been Contrivers or
Actors of such cruel Murders, and other Acts of Inhumanity, as cry to God and
your Sacred Majesty for Justice; and they having of your Majesty's Revenues,
Customs, Subsidies, and other Rights of your Crown in their hands, are
disbursed by them to the value of two hundred thousand pounds and more.

17. Pro. For as much as your Majesty's said Catholic Subjects have been taxed
with many inhumane Cruelties, which they never committed, your Majesty's said
Suppliants therefore, for their vindication and to manifest to all the the
world their desire to have all such hanious Offenders punished, and the
Offenders brought to Justice, do desire that in the next Parliament all
notorious Murders, breaches of Quarter, and inhumane Cruelties committed of
either side, may be questioned in the said Parliament, if your Majesty think
fit, and such as shall appear to be guilty, to be excepted out of the said Act
of Oblivion, and punished according to their deserts.

Answ. We conceive this Proposition is made but for a Flourish, and if the
Confederates be so desirous to try their innocence, (as they pretend) they need
not stay for another Parliament in Ireland, but submit to that which is now in
being, which is an equal and just Parliament, as in some of our Reasons
touching that point is expressed; and the offering to draw it to a new
Parliament, is in effect to desire that they may be their own Judges; for as
that Kingdom is now imbroiled, and wasted, the chief Delinquents or their
Confederates will be so prevalent a faction in the next Parliament, that they
will be able, and doubtless will clear all the Popish party, how guilty soever,
and condemn all the Protestants how innocent soever.

These Answers to the high and unexpected Demands of the Confederates, we have
have framed in humble obedience to your Majesty's directions; but being very
sensible as of the weight and great importance of the business, so also of our
own weakness and want of time, and well knowing that some of your Fol. 142.
Majesty's Privy-Councillors, Judges and Officers of that Kingdom, are now in
Town, sent for over, and here attending by your Majesty's Command, who by their
long observations and experience of the affairs and State of Ireland, are
better able to give your Majesty more full and satisfactory Answers touching
the premises then we can, and conceiving that Since printed by Husbands 1644.
entitled, The false and scandalous Remonstrance, etc. Answered; which (though
humbly desired and fled to upon all occasions) was not read, p. 114.
the Collection in Answer to the said Confederates Remonstrance, which we
humbly presented to your Majesty the 17th. of the last Month of April, may in
many things give your Majesty more light, then these our Answers do or can; We
humbly beseech your Majesty, that the said Privy-Counsellors, Judges and
Officers, as occasion shall require, may be called upon and heard to give your
Majesty the more satisfaction in these particulars, and that to the same
purpose, the Book of the said Collections may be perused and considered of, as
your Majesty shall find most requisite.

After reading of which Propositions and Answers thereunto; the King asked the
Protestant Agents, whether they had Answered unto the Rebels Propositions as
they were to be granted by Him, in Law and Justice, and fit for the Security of
the Protestants of Ireland, or prudentially as the times were? who humbly made
Answer to his Majesty, That they looked upon the Rebels Propositions as they
appeared to them destructive to his Majesty's Laws, Government, and Protestant
Subjects of Ireland. Then the Earl of Bristol said, That if they asked what by
Law and Justice was due from the Rebels, their Answers were full; But now the
King expected from the said Agents what prudentially was fit for his Majesty to
do, seeing the Protestants were not in a Condition to defend themselves* And
that the King would not admit the Protestants to join with the new Scots or any
other that had the Covenant. To which the Agents conceived not fit to Answer
more then what before in their Propositions and Answers they had Humbly
offered, pretending not to be Judges but submissive Petitioners for what was
committed to their Charge.

APPENDIX XIII. Fol. 144.
The Humble Propositions of your Majesty's Protestant Agents of Ireland, in
pursuance of the humble Petition of your Majesty's Protestant Subjects, as well
Commanders of your Majesty's Army there, as others presented to your Majesty
the 18th. day of April 1644. and answered by your Majesty the 25 of the same.
1. WE most humbly desire the Establishment of the true Protestant Religion in
Ireland, according to the Laws and Statutes in the said Kingdom now in force.

2. That the Popish Titular Archbishops, Bishops, Jesuits, Friars and Priests,
and all others of the Roman Clergy, be banished out of Ireland, because they
have been the stirrers up of all Rebellion, and while they continue there,
there can be no hope of safety for your Majesty's Protestant Subjects: And that
all the Laws and Statutes established in that Kingdom, against Popery and
Popish Recusants, may continue of force, and be put in due Execution.

3. That Restitution may be made of all our Churches and Church Rights and
Revenues, and all our Churches and Chapels re-edified, and put in as good
Estate as they were at the breaking out of the Rebellion, and as they ought to
be, at the Charge of the Confederate Roman Catholics, (as they call
themselves) who have been the occasion of the Destruction of the said Churches,
and possessed themselves of the Profits and Revenues thereof.

4. That the Parliament now sitting in Ireland may be continued there, for the
better settlement of the Kingdom, and that all Persons duly indicted in the
said Kingdom of Treason, Felony, or other heinous Crimes, may be duly and
legally proceeded against, outlawed, tried, and adjudged according to Law: And
that all Persons lawfully convicted and attainted, or to be convicted and
attainted for the same, may receive due punishment accordingly.

5. That no Man may take upon him or execute the Office of a Major or
Magistrate in any Corporation, or the Office of a Sheriff or Justice of Peace
in any City or County in the said Kingdom, until he have first taken the Oaths
of Supremacy and Allegiance.

6. That all Popish Lawyers who refuse to take the Oath of Supremacy and
Allegiance, may be suppressed and restrained from practice in that Kingdom, the
rather because the Lawyers in England do not here practice until they take the
Oath of Supremacy; And it has been found by woeful Experience, that the Advice
of Popish Lawyers to the people of Ireland, has been a great cause of their
continued Disobedience.

7. That there may be a present absolute Suppression and Dissolution of all the
assumed, Arbitrary and Tyrannical Power, which the said Confederates exercise
over Your Majesty's Subjects, both in Causes Ecclesiastical and Temporal.

8. That all the Arms and Ammunition of the said Confederates be speedily
brought into Your Majesty's Stores.

9. That Your Majesty's Protestant Subjects ruined and destroyed by the said
Confederates, may be repaired for their great losses out of the Estates of the
said Confederates, not formerly by any Acts of this present Parliament in
England otherwise disposed of, whereby they may the better be enabled to
re-inhabit and defend the said Kingdom of Ireland.

10. That the said Confederates may rebuild the several Plantation-Houses and
Castles destroyed by them in Ireland, in as good state as they were at the
breaking out of the Rebellion, which Your Majesty's Protestant Subjects have
been bound by their several Patents to build and maintain for Your Majesty's
Service.

11. That the great Arrears of Rent due to Your Majesty out of the Estates of
Your Majesty's Protestant Subjects at and since Michaelmas 1641. may be paid
unto Your Majesty by such of the said Confederates, who have either received
the said Rents to the uses of the said Confederates, or destroyed the same by
disabling Your Majesty's Protestant Subjects to pay the same; And have also
destroyed all or the most part of all other Rents or means of support belonging
to Your said Protestant Subjects. And that Your said Protestant Subjects may be
discharged of all such Arrears of Rents to Your Majesty.

12. That the said Confederates may give satisfaction to the Army for the great
Arrears due unto them since the Rebellion, and that such Commanders as have
raised Forces at their own Charges, and laid forth great sums of Money out of
their own Purses, and engaged themselves for Money and Provisions to keep
themselves, their Holds, and Soldiers under their Commands, in the due
necessary Defense of Your Majesty's Rights and Laws, may be in due sort
satisfied, to the encouragement of others in like times and Cases which may
happen.

13. That touching such parts of the Confederate Estates, as being forfeited
for their Treasons, are come, or shall duly come into Your Majesty's hands and
possession by that Title; Your Majesty, after the due satisfaction first made
to such as claim by former Acts of Parliament, would be pleased to take the
same into your own hands and possession, and for the necessary increase of Your
Majesty's Revenue, and better security of the said Kingdom of Ireland, and the
Protestant Subjects living under your gracious Government there, to plant the
same with British and Protestants upon reasonable and honorable Terms,

14. That one good walled Town may be built and kept repaired in every County
of the said Kingdom of Ireland, and endowed and furnished with necessary and
sufficient means of legal and just Government, and Defense, for the better
security of Your Majesty's Laws and Rights, more especially the true Protestant
Religion in time of Danger, in any of which Towns no Papist may be permitted to
dwell or inhabit.

15. That for the better satisfaction of Justice, and Your Majesty's Honor,
and for the future security of the said Kingdom and Your Majesty's Protestant
Subjects there, exemplary punishment according to Law may be inflicted upon
such as have there traitorously levied War, and taken up Arms against Your
Majesty's Protestant Subjects and Laws, and therein against Your Majesty;
especially upon such as have had their hands in the shedding of Innocent blood,
or had to do with the first Plot or Conspiracy, or since that time have done
any notorious Murder or Covert Act of Treason.

16. That all Your Majesty's Towns, Forts, and places of strength destroyed by
the said Confederates since the said Rebellion, may be by them and at their
Charges re-edified, and delivered up into Your Majesty's hands to be duly put
into the Government under Your Majesty, and Your Laws of your good
Protestants; And that all Strengths and Fortifications made and set up by the
said Confederates since the said Rebellion, may be slighted and thrown down, or
else delivered up and disposed of for Protestant Government and Security, as
aforesaid.

17. That according to the Presidents of former times in cases of General
Rebellions in Ireland, the Attainders which have been duly had by Outlawry for
Treason done in this Rebellion, may be established and confirmed by Act of
Parliament to be in due form of Law transmitted and passed in Ireland, and that
such Traitors as for want of Protestant and indifferent Jurors to indict them
in the proper County, are not yet indicted, nor convicted, or attainted by
Outlawry or otherwise, may upon due proof of their offenses be by like Acts of
Parliament convicted and attainted, and all such offenders forfeit their
Estates, as to Law appertains, and Your Majesty to be adjudged and put in
possession without any Office or Inquisition to be had.

18. That Your Majesty's Protestant Subjects may be restored to the quiet
Possession of all their Castles, Houses, Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and Leases, and to the quiet possession of the Rents thereof, as
they had the same before, and at the time of the breaking forth of this
Rebellion, and from whence without due Process and Judgment of Law they have
since then been put or kept out, and may be answered of and for all the Mean
Profits of the same, in the interim, and for all the time until they shall be
so restored.

19. That Your Majesty's said Protestant Subjects may also be restored to all
their Moneys, Plate, Jewels, Household Stuff, Goods and Chattels whatsoever,
which without due Process or Judgment in Law have been by the said Confederates
taken or detained from them since the contriving of the said Rebellion, which
may be gained in kind, or the full value thereof, if the same may not be had in
kind; and the like restitution to be made for all such things, which, during
the said time, have been delivered to any person or persons of the said
Confederates in trust to be kept or preserved, but are by color thereof still
withholden.

20. That the establishment and maintenance of a complete Protestant-Army, and
sufficient Protestant-Souldiers and Forces for the time to come be speedily
taken into Your Majesty's prudent, just, and gracious Consideration, and such a
course laid down, and continued according to the Rules of good Government, that
Your Majesty's Right and Laws, the Protestant Religion and peace of that
Kingdom be no more endangered by the like Rebellions in time to come.

21. That whereas it appears in Print that the said Confederates, amongst
other things, aim at the repeal of Poyning's Law, thereby to open an easy and
ready way in the passing of Acts of Parliament in Ireland, without having them
first well considered of in England, which may produce many dangerous
Consequences both to that Kingdom and to Your Majesty's other Dominions; Your
Majesty would be pleased to resent and reject all Propositions tending to
introduce so great a diminution of Your Royal and necessary Power, for the
confirmation of your Royal Estate, and protection of Your good Protestant
Subjects both there and elsewhere.

22. That Your Majesty out of Your grace and favor to your Protestant Subjects
of Ireland, would be pleased to consider effectually of answering them, that
you will not give order for, or allow of the transmitting into Ireland any Act
of general Oblivion, Release, or discharge of Actions or Suits whereby Your
Majesty's said Protestant Subjects there may be barred or deprived of their
Legal Remedies, which by Your Majesty's Laws and Statutes of that Kingdom they
may have against the said Confederates, or any of them, or any of their party,
for, or in respect of any wrongs done unto them, or any of their Ancestors or
Predecessors, in or concerning their Lives, Liberties, Persons, Lands, Goods or
Estates, since the contriving and breaking forth of the said Rebellion.

23. That some fit course may be considered of to prevent the filling, or
over-laying of the Commons House of Parliament in Ireland with Popish
Recusants, being ill-affected Members; and that provision be duly made, that
none shall Vote or sit therein but such as shall first take the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy.

24. That the proofs and manifestations of the truth of the several matters
contained in the Petition of Your Majesty's Protestant Subjects of Ireland,
lately presented to Your Majesty, may be duly examined, discussed, and in that
respect the final Conclusion of things respited for a convenient time, their
Agents being ready to attend with Proofs in that behalf, as your Majesty shall
appoint.

In answer wereunto it was replied by the Committee of Lords and others of
Irish affairs at Oxford.

1. That their Lordships did not think that the Propositions presented by the
Protestant Agents to his Majesty, and that morning read before their Lordships,
were the sense of the Protestants of Ireland. 2. That those Propositions were
not agreeable to the Instructions given the said Agents, by the Protestants of
Ireland. 3. That if those Propositions were drawn, they would lay a prejudice
on his Majesty and his Ministers to Posterity, these remaining on Record if a
Treaty should go on and Peace follow, which the Kings necessity did enforce,
and that the Lords of the Committee apprehended, the said Agents did flatly
oppose a Peace with the Irish. 4. That it would be impossible for the King to
grant the Protestants Agents desires, and grant a Peace to the Irish. 5. That
the Lords of the Committee desired the Protestant Agents to propose a way to
effect their desires, either by Force or Treaty, considering the condition of
his Majesty's Affairs in England.
To the first, the Protestant Agents replied, that they humbly conceived that
the Propositions which they had presented to his Majesty, were the sense of of
the Protestants of Ireland.

To the Second, That the Propositions are agreeable to the Instructions Fol.
144.
given to the said Agents by the Protestants of Ireland, and conduced to the
well settlement of that Kingdom.

To the Third, That they had no thought to draw prejudice on his Majesty or
their Lordships, by putting in those Propositions, neither had they so soon put
in Propositions, had not his Majesty by his Answer to the Protestant Petition
directed the same.

To the Fourth, The said Agents humbly conceived, that they were employed to
make proof of the effect of the Protestant Petition, to manifest the inhumane
Cruelties of the Rebels, and then to offer such things as they thought fit for
the Security of the Protestants in in their Religion, Lives, Liberties and
Fortunes; That the said Protestants had no disaffection to Peace, so as
punishment might be inflicted according to Law, as in the Propositions are
expressed, and that the said Protestants might be repaired for their great
losses out of the Estates of the Rebels, not formerly by any Acts of this
present Parliament in England otherwise disposed of, which the said Agents
desired might be represented to his Majesty and the Lords of the Committee
accordingly.

To the Fifth, That the said Protestant Agents were Strangers to his Majesty's
Affairs in England, and conceived that part more proper for the advice of his
Councils then the said Agents, and therefore desired to be excused, for meddling
in the treaty further then the manifessing of the truth of the Protestant
Petition, and proposing in the behalf of the Protestants, according to the
Instructions given them, which the said Agents were ready to perform whenever
they should be admitted thereunto.

Touching which and other Particulars there were many motions, but the Proofs
they would have insisted upon (by the importunity of other Affairs) never came
to their due discussion.

APPENDIX XV. Fol. 120.
THE SPEECH Of His GRACE James Duke of Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THere is no duty incident to the Place I have the Honor to serve the KING in,
to which I come with less willingness, or conscience, than to this of speaking
to such an Assembly: And by that time I have done, you will acknowledge I have
reason to be unsatisfied with the necessity imposed by custom upon all that sit
in this Place, to make Speeches; a Custom perhaps reasonably introduced by
those that did, or at least thought they did it well; but somewhat hardly
continued upon those that were sure they did it ill. And yet though I am in the
Number of the Last, I will rather obey the Necessity, than hazard the
Imputation of Sullenness or Singularity. Besides, I do not know, but that to be
silent at this time, and in this Place, may be a greater Fault than any I hope
I shall commit in speaking; for we are taught by Infallible Authority, and
enjoined by Indispensible Precept, and it seems to be agreeable to the Dictates
of NATURE and REASON, as well as of RELIGION and PIETY, that for all the
Blessings we receive from the Divine MAJESTY, we should make as proportionable
Returns as lie within our Power: And therefore Public and National BLESSINGS,
do require Public and Solemn CELEBRATIONS. This was it that induced the
Transmission of that Act for an Anniversary Thanksgiving for his Majesty's most
Happy RESTORATION; and this is it, which if it be dully, that is, sincerely
performed, is most like to perpetuate to us, and to our POSTERITY, all the
Happinesses consequent to that BLESSING.

What these Happinesses are, or at least may be, if we Our selves obstruct not
the course of them, would be best discerned, and set off, by a RETROSPECT into
the state of things for above twenty years past; and by opposing to that Dismal
Object of Our remembrance the Cheerfulness and Serenity of the Prospect
forwards.

If the Miseries and Desolations of those years could be enumerated in the time
I mean to allow this Discourse; or if they could be described to the Life, by
so ill an Orator as I am, they would be fewer, and more supportable, than I
doubt the sad experience of too many have found them to be.

I shall therefore only put you in mind of some more Remarkable and Fundamental
deliverances and Restitutions, wrought by most wonderful Providence, as a
thankful acknowledgment fit, as I conceive, to be the subject of the first
Discourse from this place, where I have the honor, how unworthily, and how
unresemblingly soever, to represent the Majesty of my Great Master.

This very Seat of Royalty is delivered from some neglected Corner, or
contemptible Use, or from a Profanation worse than either, from the Usurpation
of mean and low Aspirers, who having no shadow of right to it, had no other way
to ascend it, than by treading down and destroying whatever was ordained by God
or Man, to fence and guard it; their extravagant Ambition transporting them,
and darkning their understanding to that degree, as not to consider how short
their possession of that Throne must be, to the disarming and violation of
which, they themselves had but newly shown the way.

We see this Throne now restored to its proper place, and Natural use,
surrounded and supported by Peers and Prelates, by Officers, Magistrates, and
Judges, the Outworks, as well as Ornaments of Majesty.

We see it restored to the approach, and I doubt not to the delight of the
meanest of the Commons, whom you Gentlemen do, nor ought not disdain to
represent; for they are the Foundation upon which Monarchy is built, the
strength wherewith it is guarded, and the wealth whereby it is sustained,
enriched and beautified.

It is restored to the undoubted Lawful Possessour, the Offspring of a
long-continued Race of Princes; in whom all the Contested Titles of former Ages
are met, without the pretense of a Competitor, and in whom all the Virtues of
the Princes of those Ages are united, without the severity (to say no worse) of
some of the Great and Warlike; and without the as harmful weaknesses of others
of more devout and peaceable dispositions: A PRINCE that has given frequent
proof, that though he loves and seeks peace for his Subjects sakes, he fears
not War for his own.

This Sword, the Instrument of conferring Military Honor, and the Emblem of
inflicting Punishment, is delivered from the ridiculous Stage-like Pageantry of
later times, and from a more execrable and Tragical Abuse, from cutting off the
most Innocent, and defending the most guilty.

We see it now by the visible immediate hand of God restored, and put into
that Hand that only had His Commission to bear and use it; and let it be Our
Prayer, That he bear it long, and that he may bear it long, that he bear it not
in vain, but to the terror and extermination of Evildoers, and to the support
and Protection of those that do well.

The King himself, whose Throne and Sword these are, is accountable to God, and
we to God for him, for many and great deliverances; He is delivered from the
Murderers of his Father, and the Usurpers of his Inheritance; from their
restless endeavors to destroy his Person, and to blast his Fame; from their
open violence, and secret contrivements against both; from Exile, and all the
Afflicting consequences of that miserable state of a King; from comfortless
wanderings from Protections; from cold Receptions; from narrow supports; and
from such applications for them, as were more unsupportable, than the want of
them could be to him that was born, and delights to give, rather than receive
them. He is delivered from a continual tormenting Anxietie for the danger of
his Friends, and the oppression and slavery of his Country; from the
importunity of impertinent Arguments, drawn from his misfortunes, to draw him
from his Religion; and from a necessity of hearing, and bearing with the
Reproaches and Revilings cast upon our then Desolate Church, only because she
was desolate, and made so by her own unnatural Children.

From this dejected, despised, and in all humane appearance, desperate
condition, he is raised and restored to the Throne of his Fathers, to his
Native Country, become more dear and valuable to him, by his Experience of
others; to the free and uncontrol'd exercise of the Religion he was bred in, to
a capacity of making Royal Retribution for any kindness he has received abroad
or from home: and which is the greatest earthly Felicity, so good a KING as he
could wish, he is not only restored to, but by the love of his People, without
the chargeable, and many times dangerous assistance of Strangers, who are not
over-tender, nor much distinguishing betwixt the party they come to assist, and
that they come to subdue, when they are made Umpires in such Quarrels; for they
rarely employ their Auxiliary Treasure and Blood, purely out of Generosity and
Justice; which may in Romance be found the ultimate end of such Assistance, but
seldom in the truth of History.

Here it may be observed, that if the revolt and deviation of our Nations from
their KING, and from Monarchy it self, was the most unreasonable and prodigious
that any Age has known, their voluntary uncompelled Return to both, is as much
without Example: nor indeed could that Return have been so miraculous, if the
Revolt had not been so prodigious. And it may also be worth the observing, that
as the first most bloody Eruption from Peace to Rebellion, took birth in this
Kingdom, so from hence came the first Overtures to Peace and Submission.

By and with the Kings deliverance and Restitution, our Church is delivered
from Contempt, Sacrilege and Desolation, and restored to a due veneration, a
competent improving support, and to fair beginnings of Decency and Order.

Our Laws are delivered from corrupt, incompetent Interpreters, from monstrous,
unnatural expositions and applications, and Justice is restored to the
distribution of upright, learned, lawfully sworn and authorized Judges.

The noblest Acts of Loyalty shall now no more receive the judgment due to the
foulest Treason, due to the unrighteous Judges, that pronounced it without
Authority in the Persons, or Justice in the Sentence. High Courts of Justice
shall no more usurp that name, nor our Benches be crowded or oppressed with the
throng and wicked weight of those that ought rather to have stood manacled at
the Bar. A happy change to those for whose destruction those extravagant
Tribunals were erected, and a secure change to all; for it has been often an
observed Method in God's never-failing Justice, to catch Cruelty and Oppression
in those very snares they had prepared for others.

All Men are delivered from the intanglements of two-edged Oaths; from the
conflicts raised by them in Men's Breasts, betwixt Conscience and convenience,
betwixt the prostitution of Conscience, and the ruin of their Fortunes; than
which a harder, a more Tyrannical choice cannot be obtruded upon Christians:
For here the election was not, Swear thus against your Conscience, or you shall
have no part in the Civil Government, no Office in the Army, no Benefice in the
Church; but, Swear thus, or you shall have no House to put your Headin, no
Bread to sustain your selves, your Wives and Children.

To conclude these Observations, who is not delivered from some Oppression, and
restored to some Advantage? Even those that shall lose the wages of iniquity,
their ill-got possessions, shall be delivered from the oppression of a bad; and
if they have any, shall be restored to a good Conscience; if they have none,
they were not in the Kings, and I hope will not be in Your care.

Those that shall be kept out of their ancient Estates, the Inheritance of
their Fathers, through the defect of their Qualifications, and by the
All-disposing Providence of God, who was not pleased to make them active
Instruments in this Happy Change, are delivered from Tyrannous Confinements,
causeless Imprisonments, and a continual fear of their lives: The good Land
lies before them, their industry is at Liberty, and they are restored to the
freedom of Subjects, and protection of the Laws; If an irish Papist be oppressed,
they shall relieve him; if the blood of the meanest of them be shed, it shall
be strictly enquired after: Let this state be compared with that they were in
before the King's Restitution, and it will be found the greatest loser has got
something by it.

As it is our duty thus thankfully to commemorate these great things done for
us; so it is our duty to endeavor in our several Stations, to improve and
secure them to Our selves, and Our Posterity: And sure the most Natural way to
that end, is to call to mind, and avoid those Errors that brought us into
those miseries from which we are redeemed.

Many are the causes too boldly assigned, for the Calamities these Nations so
long labored under; But in such Inquisitions the verdict is seldom impartially
brought in, the Jury are too often the Criminals: But I think I may safely say,
that one, and that a fundamental cause, was, that the late King was maliciously
represented to the People; I am sure the Freedom, Peace, Plenty, and
Happinesses they were told they should enjoy without him, proved miserable and
fatal delusions.

Let us mistrust those that shall use the same Arts, lest they involve us in
the same misery; and let us judge of the King's intentions to His People, by
His Public Acts of grace and bounty; by His mild and easy Government; by His
desire and endeavors to make His Subjects happy at home, and renowned abroad;
and by the reluctance of His Nature to just severity, when the wickedness or
frenzy of the worst Offenders extort it from him.

That something will be amiss in the Administration of the most perfect
Government in this World, must be expected; but whoever shall think that these
things are to be rectified by force upon the Government, and that effected,
proposes to acquiesce, and return to Obedience; cannot know himself so well, as
to be sure, that Opportunity and success may not suggest more inordinate
Appetites to him; And there are those alive that know, how far further than
their first intention, the Reformers of our times were led on, till the
unwarrantable force they had raised, grew too strong for their Management, flew
in their faces, and in conclusion, acted those villainies, that I dare say their
Souls abhorred; but neither their Policy or Power could restrain.

We have had sad experience, and let us be the wiser for it, in how short a
time, in how few days, the industry of many years, nay, of an Age, may be
destroyed and laid waste, when Rage and Rapine are let loose. If once Sedition
grow too strong for the Law, and Rebellion for the Magistrate, so that the Law
is silenced, or the language of it corrupted, or invented, and the Magistrate
removed as burthensom and unnecessary, let us remember what variety of misery
and mischief is brought upon the people; how unsupportable their sufferings
are, and how Intolerable their fears of suffering they know not what more, by
whom, or how long. Let the people remember how many, and how chargeable their
Masters; nay how many and chargeable the changes of their Masters were, when
once they foolishly affected the misery, indeed the impossibility of having
none.

When Misrepresentations had taken place and root in the minds of the people,
their heart grew narrow and barren, toward the King; those that soon after
robbed them both, persuading them to keep their purses full for them to empty.

This close Oratory is seldom unsuccessful; but what the people got by
following this thrifty Counsel, some have taken the pains to compute, and it is
found, that the Impositions laid and levied upon the people, to support
Usurpation and Tyranny, in a few bad years came to more, than the most
chargeable Princes had raised in some Ages to conquer Enemies and Infidels
abroad, whilst this was employed to make Enemies of Friends, and little better
than Infidels of Christians at home.

I confess this Animadversion is not so seasonable now, or proper to he applied
to you, who in your Liberalities have outgone all Example, and prevented even
the Kings wishes; nor are those Liberalities the less, but the more valued by
Him, that he intends to apply them entirely to the security and improvement of
a true Protestant, and a right English Interest in this Kingdom.

There is nothing that declares, indeed that constitutes perfect Union, and a
happy Harmony, so much as mutual trusts and confidence, and the interchange of
gifts and benefits; it is so in private Friendship, and it is much more so, in
that good Intelligence which must make a King and His people happy.

The King has trusted you as far as ever King trusted Subjects; and He has
given you more than ever any King or Lord of Ireland had to give.

You have trusted the King with all you had, and all you had to pretend to; and
you have given Him more than he thought of to desire; Let it not therefore be
apprehended, that this Commerce must cease by the Prodigality on both sides, as
if there were no more to be given or received: No, my Lords and Gentlemen,
protection from Foreign Invasion and Rebellion at home, the due and incorrupt
administration of Government, and of the Laws, and under them the advancement
and encouragement of Piety and Learning, Trade, and all sorts of Industry and
Improvements, are benefits that may to the end of time, descend from the Throne
to you and yours: And a due subjection to that Government, and obedience to
those Laws, and application to that Piety and Learning, to that Trade and
Industry, and to those Improvements, may be as lasting Retributions from the
People to the Throne.

I should here end this unusual Exercise, but that I am commanded by the King
to let you know, that as He is abundantly satisfied with those demonstrations
of Duty, Loyalty and Affection you have given him, during the whole time of
your sitting, so he looks with great Pleasure and Delight upon those Acts of
Grace and Bounty that have past from him to you; and he commands me to be sure
not to forget to assure you, upon all Proper Occasions, that all his Promises
shall be inviolably observed; and that he will consent to whatever else may
make this Kingdom flourishing and happy, whether it shall be the Enacting of
new and profitable, or the repeal of old unuseful, or burthensom Laws.

To say anything of, or from my self in this place, may be Presumption; but to
say nothing to you, my Lords and Gentlemen, to whom I owe so much, must be
Ingratitude. You have before and since My Arrival, been pleased to make many
and obliging Expressions of your Approbation of the Kings choice of Me for this
Government: I have great reason to fear, both the King and you consulted your
Indulgence to Me, more than your judgment of Me.

Yet without much Presumption or Vanity, I think I may say, thus far the King
and you may be excusable, that He chose, and You approved a Person, whose
Fortune and Family must prosper or decay, must Ruin or Subsist by and with
this Kingdom. This has not perhaps always been the case, and it is possible
mean Abilities thus stimulated, may be more profitable and industrious than
greater, actuated by less, or by contrary Incentives. There are upon me all
imaginable Obligations to apply all that is in me, to the safety and prosperity
of this Kingdom: Those of duty, fidelity and thankfulness to the best, and most
bountiful Master in the World; those of Retribution and Gratitude to you, for
extraordinary and liberal manifestations of kindness and affection, and those
self-preservation and Happiness: Hence it may be concluded reasonably and
naturally, that my endeavors will be hearty and faithful; and my failings,
which shall be as few as I can, unvoluntarily, and therefore the more
pardonable.

You will presently, when I am retired, be at liberty to adjourn your selves to
the time you desired.

Referrable to fol. 326.
A form of Divine Service to be used October 23d. appointed by Act of
Parliament Anno Regni Car. 2di. 14. die 27. Sep. 1662. to be kept and
Celebrated as an Anniversary Thanksgiving in this Kingdom of Ireland.
THe beginning of the Service to be according to the Form of the Common Prayer:
Anno Regni Car. 2di. 14. die 27. Sep. 1662.
then proper Psalms, as 3. 9. 12. 46. 144.

Proper Lessons for the First, 2 Chronicles. 13. or Jer. 30.

For the Second Lesson, Mat. 9. or Acts 5. or Acts 23.

And after the Collect for the Sunday, this following Collect.

ALmighty God and heavenly Father, who out of thy most wise and watchful
Providence, and tender mercies toward us thine unworthy Servants, have been
pleased, as at all other times, so on this day, to prevent the extreme malice,
michievous imagination, and bloody intention of our Enemies, by revealing so
wonderfully, and opportunely their Rebellion, and cruel Enterprises, plotted
against our dread Sovereign Lord the King, and the whole State of this Realm,
for the subversion of this Government, and the utter extirpation of the truth
of thy Gospel, and pure Religion professed amongst us. We most humbly praise
and magnify thy glorious name for thine infinite goodness in this our
mavelous deliverance. We confess it was thy mercy, thy mercy alone (most
merciful Father) that we were not consumed. And therefore not unto us, not unto
us, O Lord, but unto thy name be ascribed all honor and glory, in all Churches
of the Saints throughout all Generations. For thou Lord did discover unto
thy Servants the snares of death; thou did break them, and we were delivered.
Be thou still our mighty Protector, and scatter our Enemies that delight in
blood* infatuate their Councils, enfeeble their strength; put fear in their
hearts, and accomplish this thy mercy in our safety and future deliverance. And
to that end, strengthen the hands of our gracious King, the Lord Lieutenant,
the Nobility, and Magistrates of the Land with Jugdment, Justice, and Power to
restrain such workers of Iniquity, who pretend Religion and practice Rebellion,
and devout thine Inheritance. This Lord we crave at thy merciful hands,
together with the continuance of thy powerful Protection over our dread
Sovereign, the whole Church, and these Kealms, and the speedy Conversion of all
our Enemies, and that for thy dear Sons sake Jesus Christ our only Mediator and
Advocate. Amen.

After the Litany, this Prayer for the Second Collect.
O Eternal God, in whom we live, move, and have our being, and by whom alone we
are protected in all our dangers and distresses; we thy people, and sheep of
thy Pasture, do acknowedge our selves above all others, infinitely bounded unto
thy heavenly Majesty for thy many unspeakable benefits daily conferred and
heaped upon us; especially for the enlightening us with thy heavenly truth, and
planting thy Gospel amongst us; for placing over us a most gracious King, a
faithful Professor, and Defender of the same, a wise and vigilant Lieutenant.
And as at this time especially we praise thee for the discovery and prevention
of the bloody and treacherous designs of the Enemies of thy Truth and People:
We laud and magnify thy Glorious name for these thy Mercies, and will ever
show forth thy praise from generation to generation: for it was thy goodness
alone that we were not delivered over for a prey unto their Teeth. Thy prudence
not our foresight, thy love not our merit, that we appear this day before thee:
That the Enemy did not triumph in our utter destriction, nor root up the Uine
which thy right hand had planted. O Lord God of hosts look down from Heaven,
and behold, and visit this thy Uine, water it with thy blessing, and make it to
fill the Land to the astonishment of our Enemies; but unto the joy of all that
wish well unto our Sion: So will we not go back from thee; but will serve thee
in fear and holiness all the days of our lives, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

The Third Collect after the Litany.
O Most Gracious Lord God, we of this Nation, whom thou did snatch as a brand
out of the fire of the late horrid Massacre, we this day assembled before thee,
do with shame, and sorrow acknowledge, and confess, That our Sins had most
justly provoked thee to Wrath, when thou did suffer those men of blood to
make their Sword fat with the Slaughter of so many thousand Innocents-And we
may as justly fear, that our not being made better by thy former Judgments,
thou may be compelled to make thy Sword sharper, and return upon us in
greater fury, because our sins are greater, more bold, more provoking: in
particular our neglect and contempt of thy sacred Ordinances, our vain and
false swearing (for which the Land mourns) our unchristian uncharitableness,
and shameful intemp rance, our sacrilege, and covetousness, hypocrisy,
slandering* and deep security in the midst of all our sins and dangers. These
together with a glorying in our impieties, might in justice have brought upon
us a sudden and horrible destruction. But contrary to the method of thy
proceedings against others, thou have spared us, thereby woing us to return
unto thee by unfeigned Repentance. Thou have magnified thy mercy toward us,
that we may magnify thee, as we do this day, this memorable day, O Lord, for
thy patience, and long suffering, notwithstanding all our provocations: we
repent O pardon; we return, O vouchsafe to receive us, and enable us to walk
worthy of thy great past deliverance, by a more strict, and holy future
obedience, for the merits of Jesus Christ our only Savior, and Redeemer. Amen.

At the second Service this Fourth Collect, to be said after the Collect for
the King.
MOst merciful and bountiful Lord God, seeing thou have been graciously pleased
to preserve thy most unworthy people from total desolation, and daily to follow
us with the blessing of peace and good Government; make us therefore, O Lord,
in all thankfulness to be obedient to thy will in all things; to be faithful
and constant in our duty to the King, and to all that are in Authority under
him; to be sincere in thy worship; zealous of good works; of one faith, and one
mind, studying to be quiet, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another,
even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us: so that when every one in his
several place shall labor to advance the good both of Church and State, and by
a through Reformation of our lives, shall become a people whom thou may take
delight to bless; then thy Judgments which we have deserved, and therefore
fear, may be averted, and our sinful Souls saved in the day of the Lord Jesus:
Then with one heart and voice we may all praise thee in thy Church, and always
sing joyfully; that thy loving kindness is ever more, and more toward us, and
the truth of the Lord endures for ever. These mercies, we most unworthy to ask,
humbly beseech thee to grant, for the benefit of this Church and Nation, and
glory of thy Name, through Jesus Christ our only Savior, and Redeemer. Amen.

For the Epistle Nehem. 4. from ver. 7. to ver. 16. or 2 Cor. 1. from ver. 3.
to ver. 11.

For the Gospel. Mat. 14. from ver. 23. to ver. 34. or Mat. 15. from ver. 1. to
ver. 13. or Mat. 5. from ver. 1. to ver. 14.

And then proceed as in the Book of Common Prayer.

Other Particulars We might add, but how can We conclude better then with the
voice of the Church for so wonderful a deliverance from so unnatural and
inhuman a Conspiracy, which has produced (besides other horrid effects) this
Abbreviate of so sad a Tragidy, and the expense of so vast a Treasure?

Omissions containing several Additions to the History.
FOl. 9. line. 23. Crime] which for the Honor of those Gentlemen (rather then
that it is undeniably true) I would willingly believe, it being easy to be made
out, that many of these instigated, if not headed, the Commonalty afterward

Fol: 10. l. 25. of Lands] though the Law heretofore was held otherwise, and
much of his Majesty's Revenue stands upon that Title.

Fol. 13. l. 39. Epistle] which expression of his is the more to be took notice
of, in that (being a prime Instrument of State) He has more Grounds then
others to build these Conjectures upon.

Fol. 28. l. 12. Rebellion] the Commission Granted to the Lord Gormanston was
as follows. By the Lords, Justices, and Council.
W. Parsons. Jo. Borlase.
RIght Trusty and well beloved. We greet you well. Whereas diverse and most
disloyal and malignant Persons within this Kingdom, have traitorously conspired
against his Majesty, his Peace, Crown, and Dignity; and many of them in
Execution of their Conspiracy, are traitorously assembled together in a Warlike
manner, and have most inhumanly made destruction and devastation of the Persons
and Estates of his Majesty's good and loyal Subjects of this Kingdom, and
taken, slain and imprisoned great Numbers of them. We out of our care and zeal
for the common good, being desirous by all means to suppress the said Treasons
and Traitors, and to conserve the Persons and Fortunes of his Majesty's loving
Subjects here in safety; and to prevent the further spoil and devastation of
his Majesty's good People here, do therefore hereby require and authorize you
to Levy, Raise, and Assemble all, every, or any the Forces, as well Footmen as
Horsemen within the County of Mead, giving you hereby the Command in chief of
all the said Forces, and hereby further requiring and authorizing you as
Commander of them in Chief to arm, array, divide, distribute, dispose, conduct,
lead, and govern in Chief the said Forces according to your best discretion;
and with the said Forces to resist, pursue, follow, apprehend, and put to
death, kill and slay, as well by Battle as otherways, all and singular the
said Conspirators, Traitors and their Adherents according to your discretion;
And according to your Conscience and discretion to proceed against them, or any
of them, or by Martial Law, by hanging them or any of them till they be dead,
according as it has been accustomed in time of open Rebellion; and also to
take, wast, and spoil their or any of their Castles, Holds, Forts, Houses,
Goods and Territories, or otherwise to preserve the lives of them, or any of
them, and to receive them into his Majesty's favor and mercy, and to forbear
the devastation of their, or any of their Castles, Holds, Forts, Houses, Goods,
and Territories aforementioned, according to your discretion: Further hereby
requiring and authorizing you to do, execute and perform all and singular such
other things for Examination of persons suspected, discovery of Traitors and
their Adherents, parlying with, and granting protections to them or any of
them, taking up of Carts, Carriages and other Conveniences, sending and
retaining Espials, Victualing the said Forces, and other things whatsoever
conducing to the purpose aforementioned, as you in your discretion shall think
fit, and the necessity of the service require, further hereby requiring and
authorizing you as Commander in Chief, to constitute and appoint such Officers
and Ministers respectively, for the better performance and execution of all and
singular the premises, as you in your discretion shall think fit; And do hereby
require and command all and singular his Majesty's Sheriffs, Officers, and
Ministers, and loving Subjects, of and within the County of Mead, and the
borders thereof, upon their Faith and Allegiance to his Majesty, and to his
Crown, to be aiding, helping, and assisting to you in the doing and Executing
of all and singular the premises. This our Commission to continue during our
Pleasure only, and for the so doing, this shall be your sufficient Warrant.
Given at his Majesty's Castle of Dublin, November 1641.

To our very good Lord Nicholas Gormanstowne. Vic. Com. R. Dillon. Jo. Temple.
Ja. Ware. Rob. Meredith.




Fol. 86. l. 45. Osburn's Castle] as also of the notable service of Ballially
in the County of Clare, well defended by Bridgeman and Cuff, though slenderly
succored by Bowatty (how often soever invoked) of whose neglect they were not a
little sensible.

Fol 88. l. 39. a Careful General's] not upon diffidence that his Commands
(entrusted to others) would be the insufficienter executed: No, his Soldiers
had long experienced (even the best of Quality amongst them) that no commands
were to be disobeyed; But that the Soldier (seeing his General to share in
labor) might undergo the like with more willingness and courage. Examples of
hardship, born by such as might have ease, wonderfully work on those who can
have no exemption.

Fol. 97. l. 4. Laws of the Land] This Oath of Association (the later Paragraph
excepted) was the 26th. of July 1644. in the General Assembly of the
Confederate Catholics of Ireland at Kilkenny declared, by the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and the Knights and Burgesses of that house, full and binding,
without addition of any other words thereunto, and enjoined to be took by all
sorts of People.

Fol. 104. l. 28. That War] and (by some speeches) it was apprehended that the
drift in requiring subscriptions, was to engage the Army against his Majesty;
in detestation whereof some Officers rent the Book of Subscriptions in pieces.

Fol. 105. l. 303. 8000 men.] A necessity the State was then unhappily reduced
to, and (as his Majesty takes notice) that his Ministers (who suffered the
return of his Army and their quartering in the City) were not to be blamed if
they durst not suffer the Soldiers to march far, or stay long in the Enemies
Country, when there was but 40. Barrels of Powder in all the Store.

Fol. 106. l. 14. their Weight] and afterward by the King's approbation with
C. R. with a Crown on one side, and the value on the other.

Fol. 120. l. 4. with 300 l.] In as much as their General Bourk (having a good
opinion of his Gallantry) sent a Summons signifying. That He was commanded by
the Council of the Confederate Catholics of Ireland, to demand the delivery
of the Castle to his hands for the use of his Majesty, and if not delivered
upon this Summons, Mercy was not to be expected, although (for his part) He
desired not the effusion of Christian blood, yet if such a Paper-house should
be kept against him (who had such an Army, such Artillery) a day longer, he
could not (by the practice of War) be censured cruel if no Quarter were given
a terrible Mina^e, and (considering the force he had and the Weakness of the
House) not irrational.

Fol. 140. l. 32. their Coneurrence] In November 1643. the Parliament in
Ireland sitting, the House of Commons had in debate a Remonstrance declaring
the Inhumanity of the Rebels, that it might be recommended to the King, a
Committee was sent from the House to the Lords Justices, who advising with the
upper House (at that time very thin, and highly influenced) were answered, That
there were greater matters of State to be considered, so nothing further
proceeded thereon.

Fol. 155. l. 44. with the Rebels] which Perinchief writes Fol. 61.
was procured by the Scots to make their Ware more valuable.

Fol. 156. l. 6. witnessing the Conclusion] which, as the Cessation, His
Majesty prosesseth In his Declaration for the settlement of Ireland, fol. 10.
to have been forced to during the late troubles, and was compelled to give the
Irish a full Pardon for what they had before done amiss upon their return to
their Duty, and their Promise of giving Him a vigorous Assistance, which (how
answered by their obedience) hereafter appears.

Fol. 167. l. 39. into England] who carried with them these Propositions from
the Lord Lieutenant to the Parliament of England. 1. That the said Lord
Lieutenant will prosecute the War against the Irish Rebels as vigorously as he
shall be enabled thereunto by the Parliament of England, and that he will
faithfully serve the Crown of England therein.

2. That whilst he has the Government of this Kingdom and the Command of the
Armies therein, none of the supplies of Men, Moneys, Arms, Munition, Victuals
or any other Provisions of what kind or nature soever, which shall by the
Parliament of England be sent over, or joined with the Forces already under his
Command, nor any of the said Forces now under his Command, nor any other Forces
that shall be under his Command, shall in any wise be employed either within
this Kingdom, or without it, but by the express Direction of the said
Parliament of England.

3. That he will not upon any Command, or by virtue of any Power or Authority
whatsoever, enter into any Treaty with the said Irish Rebels, or conclude any
Peace or Cessation with them without the consent and express Command of the
King and Parliament of England.

4. He will engage himself to the true performance of all these things by Oath
or any other means that can be proposed to a Man of Honor and Conscience.

September. 26, 1646. Ormond.



Which he frequently insisted on in his Treaty with the Parliaments
Commissioners, who seemed not (before) to be acquainted therewith, or thought
it expedient (upon the Treaty) to receive the same from him, which (however) as
most important He insisted upon, as also to have Directions from His Majesty
ere he would deliver up the Hoord, or render up the Garrisons (in his Power) to
their hands, waving (notwithstanding) the first Proposition rather than that
should be any le^t to the Treaty, which (in conclusion) ended in delivering up
all to the Parliament.

Fol. 169. l. 29. in the Irish] concluding thereby that there would not be only
a loss of the Kingdom, but of thousands of Protestants, and together with them
the Protestant Religion also.

Fol. 177. l. 41. other Considerations] As that the English Interest in Ireland
must be preserved by the English, and not by the Irish.

Fol. 184. l. 21. and Eloquence] as follows in these words. To the Honorable
Commissioners from the Parliament of ENGLAND.
The humble Answer and Petition of the Protestant Clergy of the City of Dublin.
Humbly showing,

THAT whereas we having received from your Honors by Anthony Dopping Esquire,
a Message consisting of two branches; one of Demand, Whether the Ministers will
officiate in their several Churches, not using the Book of Common Prayer?

The other a Concession to this effect; That such as will officiate, may use
the Directory, or such Service as is agreeable to the Word of God; but not use
the Book of Common Prayer.

We hereto with all meekness and lowliness of minds return this our joint
Answer.

1. That forasmuch as we see and know, that the Protestants of this City, for
the most part, are much grieved in heart for the want of the daily accustomed
Service of God in the two Cathedrals, and the Parish Churches of this City, and
for their late being deprived of us and our Ministry, which they have long
enjoyed; We are very much troubled, and are very sorrowful in our selves for
their grief: We acknowledge our selves bound to preach the Gospel of Christ unto
the People, and are so far from a voluntary desertion of our Churches, People,
Ministry, and the exercise thereof, as that we shall rejoice in nothing more,
than that we may finish our course with joy, and the Ministry which we have
received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the grace of God.

2. That we have been and still are effectually debarred from our Churches, and
the exercise of our Ministry by your Honors Injunction and Command, bearing
date the 24. of June, 1647. wherein you require the discontinuance of the Book
of Common Prayer, and the receiving of the Directory, etc. which Injunction
lies still upon us, with the danger of non-protection in case we disobey the
same.

3. That we cannot consent with a good conscience to the discontinuance of the
Book of Common Prayer, and receiving the Directory in lieu thereof, or any
other private form of public Service for the reasons exhibited, and alleged
in our Which being given in writing, the Copies cannot be recovered, though the
main of what is there insisted on, is here repeated.
Answer the 22. of June last, whereto we humbly annex these Reasons following,
amongst others which we debated upon in our mutual conference the 25. of June,
and on the same day touched some of the Heads of them before your Honors.

I. We all at our Ordination or being made Presbyters, have (among other
things) made this solemn Promise before God, which we account the same with or
little different from an Oath, that we would so minister the Doctrine and
Sacraments, and Discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded, and as this
Realm has received the same.

II. We have often taken the Oath of Supremacy, and sworn that the King's
Highness is the only supreme Governor of this Realm, as well in all spiritual
and Ecclesiastical things, or causes, as temporal, and that we shall assist and
defend all Jurisdictions, etc. granted or belonging to the King's Highness, his
Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this
Kingdom. Now should we receive a Directory printed, or any other form without
Royal Authority, we do not conceive how this can stand with this our Oath.

III. As the Act of Parliament 2 Eliz. still in force in this Kingdom, expressly
commands the use of this Book of Common Prayer, so it forbids Common Prayer or
Administration of the Sacraments otherwise or after any other manner or form,
with any private dispensation whereof we cannot comply, we being bound to the
obedience thereof, not only for fear of penalty, but for conscience sake, Romans
13. 5.

IV. Whereas the Book of Common Prayer is one main part of the Reformation
established in the Churches of England and Ireland; the laying aside thereof
and the receiving of the Directory or any other form would be, we conceive
(considering the present state and circumstances of things) a departing in this
from the Communion of the Church of England and Ireland.

V. It is evident, that as the Constitution of a Law in any matter
Ecclesiastical, the order ever observed in the Church since Kings became
nursing Fathers thereto, was, is, and ought to be this, That it first pass the
consultation and determination of a lawful Ecclesiastical Council; and then,
that it receive the sanction and confirmation of the civil Supreme Magistrate;
for this gives it the formal strength and vigor of a Law outwardly obliging,
and that gives it materiality and substance, and supplies ground sufficient to
make it a Law inwardly obliging Christian People to receive it. So in the
promulgation and execution of that Law, concerning a matter Ecclesiastical,
there was and is this order observed: First, the supreme civil Magistrate
remands and recommends it to the Ecclesiastical Governors, and they deliver it
to the rest of the Pastors, and they to the People. So that the immediate
actual reception of an Order Ecclesiastical by the Ministers, is from the hand
of the Bishop or Ordinary. And upon this is founded that solemn Promise made
before God by every Minister at his Ordination, That he will reverently obey
his Ordinary, and other chief Ministers, unto whom the Government and Charge
over him is committed, following with a glad mind their godly admonitions, and
submitting himself to their godly judgments.

Since then in this matter concerning the Book of Common Prayer, all the
required premises were fulfilled, and that any other form, that for the
present we can use, wants all of them, we cannot without breach of our Promise
forementioned, and disordered anticipation or neglect of the judgment of our
Ordinances, receive any such or other form, considering the King's Command
concerning the only use of the Book of Common Prayer expressed in the Act of
Parliament is still in force, and the Commands and Constitutions of our lawful
Convocation of the Bishops and Clergy, still live and speak unto us, in the
Canons made in the year 1634. whereof the third thus expressly, That Form of
Liturgy or divine Service, and no other, shall be used in any Church of this
Realm, but that which is established by Law, and comprised in the Book of
Common Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments. Which Canon with all the
rest is confirmed and published by His Majesty's Authority under the great Seal
of Ireland.

VI It may be added, that the Reformed Church of Ireland, under the Government
of our dread Sovereign the King, is and ever was reputed a free National
Church, and not subordinate unto or depending upon the convocation of any other
Church. And hence it was, that till the Convocation held at Dublin, Anno 1634.
the Articles Where by what was controverted by some, (as if the Reception of
the English Articles abolish the Irish) it was evident there was no such
Intention.
of the Church of England were not held, or reputed the Articles of the Church
of Ireland, and when they were received, they were not received in any
acknowledged subordination to the Church of England, but for manifestation of
our agreement with that Church in the confession of the same Christian Faith,
and the Doctrine of the Sacraments, as is expressed in the first Canon. Hence
it is, besides that our Canons were not imposed by the Church of England, nay
when somewhat highly the Clergy was invited to submit to the Book of English
Canons, the Convocation utterly refused the same, and framed a new Book of
Canons for the Church of Ireland. Should we therefore receive or admit of any
other form, without the Authority of this Church, we should be held and
esteemed before God and the World, guilty of unconscionably betraying of the
Liberty of the free National Church of Ireland.

VII. The Book of Common Prayer has been in use in this Church from the
beginning of the Reformation; we have preached for it, and recommended it to
the people as a form of God's public Worship and Service: the people of God in
this City for the most part generally do love it, have been edified by it, are
loath to part from it, and earnestly desire the continuance of it. Now should
we consent to the taking it away, and receive or use any other form not
established by Law, we should not avoid the guilt of Sin, it being all one to
destroy that which is well built, as to build that which a man once destroyed,
which in the Apostles judgment ( Gal. 2. 8.) renders a man a transgressor.

And withal we should, as matters stand, give great offense and scandal to the
Consciences of our Brethren, and so sin against them, who deserve better at our
hand, and for whom Christ dyed.

VIII. Lastly, that reason given by the University of Oxford in this point is
not to be forgotten, that by our leaving of the Book of Common Prayer and
receiving any other Form, we should condemn the Church and State for the
penalties and censures against Recusants, and justify them in their
accusations and imputations of injustice and tyranny, wherewith they boldly
charge both our Churches of England and Ireland.

The premises considered, as we hope your Honors discern hereby, that we have
not lightly or obstinately or out of faction, or any spirit of opposition
forborne the exercise of our Ministry since your Honors injunction; so we do
now with all humility present these our fervent Petitions to your Honors.

1. That you would be pleased in pity and compassion to the Protestants of this
City and to us the Ministers, who else by your Injunction aforesaid, are
endangered to be exposed to banishment, loss of estate, and of present
subsistence, with our wives and families; to restore us to our Churches,
Ministry, and exercise thereof, by permitting of us to use the Book of
Common Prayer, in our several Cathedral and Parish Churches, as formerly we
used the same, before your Injunction aforesaid, and to grant us your
Protection therein, till such time as further order be taken by a Convocation
of the Clergy, and an Act of Parliament in this Kingdom: and in the mean time
we shall endeavor to demean our selves in the whole course of our Ministry,
with such Christian faithfulness and moderation, as that we shall (by the help
of God) give no just occasion of offense.

2. That in case your Honors shall be pleased to grant this Petition, which we
hope you will, if after our stay and residence here, we, or any of us shall be
by the imposal of any thing against our Consciences be forced hereafter to
depart the Kingdom, we may then respectively have free passes and convenient
time to remove our persons, families, and goods.

3. That during the time of our residence here, we may enjoy the profits,
benefits and means of our several Church Livings for our subsistence, which
are due or allotted to us by the Law of the Land and Acts of State.

4. That whereas the 30. of April 1642. mentioned fol. 77.
monthly fast observed hitherto by command of authority on a Friday, was
grounded upon the horrid Rebellion of the Irish Papists, begun, and the danger
we were all in, as on that day, wherein the Rebels came to this City to
surprise it, and the evening of that day, was the time wherein that bloody
treachery, and conspiracy was discovered, that we may be permitted still to
keep the monthly Fast on that day, being a day of preparation for the monthly
Communion according to our custom these five years past.

And we shall ever pray, etc.
Delivered the 9th. day of July, 1647. Subscribed as follows. Ed. Laonensis.
Jac. Margetson. Since Armachanus.
Ben. Culme.
Ambr. Anngier.
Ja. Sybold.
Godf. Rhodes.
Hen. Hall. Since Ep. Academ.
Jos. War.
Jo. Brookbank.
Gilbert Deane.
Dud. Boswel.
Rob. Parry.
Joan. Creighton, Can.
Edw. Sing. Since Arfeitensis.
Rob. Dickson.
Rand. Ince.
Henry Byrch.
Rich. Powel.



Fol. 190. l. 36. the Loyallists An. 1603] After that the Nuncio was driven to
Galoway, He the 2d. of August took an occasion to expostulate with the Marquess
of Clanrickard, about one of the Provincial Fathers of the Franciscans being by
the Presidents Soldiers clapped up in Clare-Castle, wondering so pious and true
a Catholic should permit a Subject of the Apostolic See (to which the Clergy
are only accountable) to be so used by Laics; unto which the 342.
8th of of August the Marquess excellently replied, That unknown to him the
Father was (at the Command of the supreme Council) taken, and by their order
was to be brought to Kilkenny; He reverenced the Clergy, but could not recede
from the Order of that Council, for that the Holy Church gives not Protection
to Criminals, or the God of Peace Impunity to the Seditious, enlarging well on
that Subject; concluding that if (under pretext or title of the Immunities of
the Church) any should escape unpunished, There would be soon an end of the
State and Temporal jurisdiction. And having been thus entertained by the
Nuncio, the Marquess freely proposes to Him these Questions 344. Carul An. Hib.
314.
, That He might understand the difference betwixt the Temporal and
Ecclesiastical Authority. Quaedam percontationes Reverendissimo Domino Nuncio a
Clanrichardiae Marchione propositae.
1. QUa potestate, vel Authoritate Nuncius Regiae Magistatis subditos a fide
sua and obedientia Statuto Regni, Regnique Ordinibus debita abducat? 2. Qua
potestate vel Authoritate Tribunos and Centuriones creet, militemque
conscribat, Qui nihil in communem hostem molitus Catholicorum Majestatus
subditorum castella passim expugnet, praedas agat, omnia compilat? 3. Qua
potestate vel ratione hominibus perjurus faveat, eosque contra Rectores,
universique regni Ordines teneat ac tueatur? 4. Qua potestate manifestos
proscriptos perduelles in retinendis ac propagandis validis munitionibus contra
eos. Qui Regni clavum tenent, animet and sustentet? 5. Qua potestate Regiae
Majestatis obsequium professos, Ejusque in hoc regno proinde Praefectis
adhoerentes, quos potest, excommunicatos carceribus mancipet, aliosque omnes
promiscue excommunicet?
To which no Answer (that I could ever discover) was returned, but his Will. Or
that of Anastasius, I will command but not be commanded.



Fol. 190. l. 49. The Pope Himself.] But before we proceed to that, we shall be
so just, that wherein the supreme Council disowned the Nuntio's Exorbitances,
Oppressions and Divisions through his Insolency we shall manifest their
resentment: acquainting you first that the Nuntio (disliking the Cessation)
writes somewhat sharply to the Supreme Council inveighing (with more then
ordinary detestation) against the Lord Iuchiquin, telling them that it was
known through Europe how he had sacked Cashell, slain in St. Patrick's Church
with horrible Sacrilege several Priests and Women at the Altar, and afterward
compelled many Counties to pay Contribution, and at last (even before the Walls
of Kilkenny) insulted over the chief Magistrate: To which the Supreme Council
having replied with much respect and ingenuity, they (as to this of the Lord
Inchiquin) told the Nuntio that what he did he did as an Enemy. But upon the
Cessation (the means to induce a Peace) Cashell, the Cathedral, and all the
Churches thereabouts would fall into their Hands, putting the Nuntio further in
mind, That when there was but a rumor (only) of agreeing with the
Parliamentary Scots, he was forward to encourage them to join in that
Association; That their Treasure was low, that Jones had all necessary supplies
from the Parliament, whilst they lacked even Corn, That the Confederate
Commissioners ( Ferns and Plunket) returned from Rome only with some Relics,
but no Money. Which working nothing upon the Nuntio, (who the 27. of May
Excommunicated all that adhered to that Cessation) the supreme Council in their
Declaration of the 3d. of June first admonished both seculars and Regulars (as
all of their Association) That they no wise molest any of their respective
Subjects, Priests, or Religious, for persevering in their Loyalty or (in
pursuance thereof) for approving the late Cessation made by them with the Lord
Baron of Inchiquin: Which not prevailing, they (in persuance of the Oath of
Association) the 20th. of June 1648. enjoined this Oath to be taken by all the
Confedrate Catholics. I A. B. do swear and protest before God, and his Saints
and Angels, that I will to the uttermost of my power observe the Oath of
Association, maintain the Authority of the Supreme Council, and the Government
established by the general Assembly of the Confederate Catholics of this
Kingdom, notwithstanding the present Excommunication issued forth by the Lord
Nuncio, and four Bishops, against the Concluders, Maintainers and Adherents
thereof, and unto the Cessation concluded with the Lord Baron of Inchiquin, and
notwithstanding any other Excommunication to be issued upon the said Ground;
against which Excommunication, and those who issued it, I do appeal unto his
Holiness as the indifferent Judge. And I do further Swear, that (to the Hazard
of my life) I will suppress and oppose any Person or Party that shall stand in
Arms in opposition of the said Association.

So help me God.


And that their further sense (which they seemed to be much satisfied in) might
be fully known, We shall here give you their Prolocutors following Letter (who
though he joined with the Confederates) we must (from our knowledge of his
Parts and Affections) assure you (in his own Nature) was not averse to the
English interest. Concilii Catholicorum Regni Hiberniae Denunciatio ad Nuncium.
Domine mi,
PRaeceptum mihi est ab hoc Generali Regni Conventu, Dominationi tuae
significare varias Oppressiones, Divisiones, Exorbitantia Crimina, and
Capitales Offensas, Quas a Dominatione tua a tribus annis jam pene elapsis in
hoc regno commissas, and hoc ipso Tempore in ineffabile Religionis Catholicae
detrimentum, Nationisque jam tam Antiquae quam Catholicae ruinam ac
Subversionem, sedisque Apostolicae dedecus continuatas ac perpetratas,
faederati Hiberniae Catholici ex sua Officiosa and filiali in summum Pontificem
reverentia nimia and inaudita apud ullam Nationem patientia hactenus
toleraverunt, and in hunc usque diem tolerant, tandem compulisse haec Generalia
Comitia ad valida and legitima ejus Presidia recurrere pro conservandis
Reliquiis Majorum Regni commodorum jam ad proximum integrae Ruinae punctum Of
which and the Consequences thereupon, see Walsh f. 581. etc. Where the Clergy
(especially Regullars) opposed the Supreme Authority of the Confederates.
actibus tuis, pravaque rerum Administratione redactorum. Quapropter
Dominationem tuam certiorem faciunt, Declarationem, * ac Protestationem contra
te paratam, and ad suam Sanctitatem brevi mittendam esse, cujus argumenti
partem aliquam (quam tibi placebit notare) inclusum scriptum continet, ac
deinde ad iter Romam versus suscipiendum, ibique te contra accusationem illam
defendendam quam primum parare. Ac interim Dominatio tua sub interminatione
paenarum, caeteroqui tam divinarum quam humanarum legum vigore incurrendarum,
cavebit, ne per se, aut per ullum aliud Instrumentum, direct, aut indirecte,
ullis Regni sese hujus rebus immisceat. Maneo Kilkenniae 19. Octobris 1648.

Dominationis tuae admodum amicus, de mandato Comitiorum Generalium, Rich.
Blaka, Prolocutor.




But we suspect this Denunciation of theirs was rather delusive then entire,
for that afterward we shall find many of the Members of this Council (though
it drove the Nuncio out of the Kingdom) stomach'd his Majesty's Authority
seated in his Excellency.

Fol. 228. l. 46. or allay] In answer to whose Revolt it is said (besides what
may be drawn from the Munster Remonstrance) that Fol. 146.
those Towns declared (with the Lord Inchiquin) for the King, in hopes that the
Marquess would so have adjusted the Differences betwixt them and the Irish,
that there might have been such a visible power left in Him, as to have managed
the Government answerable to the Dignities of his Office, and the security of
the Protestants and their Religion: But when they perceived that the first was
slighted and the latter not ascertained (nay in effect at the Confederates
mercy) they again reflected on their own security and their Religion, in hope
that though they adhered to the Parliament (who at that time had shaken off the
Regal Power, whereunto they never assented) there might yet be a possibility
(through a Change) to reinvest all again in the Royal Line with a Preservation
(in the interim) of themselves and their Religion, which were like wholly to be
ruined by a joint compliance with the Confederates.

Fol. 265. l. 25. was Light] And had he done otherwise, his Provost Marshal's
Commission (being grounded on the King's Proclamation of the first of January
1641. to prosecute the Rebels with Fire and Sword, and by Orders of the State
forbidden also to allow any Quarter to those whom they found in Arms,
especially all Priests, known Incendiaries of the Rebellion and prime Actors of
exemplary Cruelties) might have been brought to have answered his Contempt at a
Council of War.

Fol. 282. l. 25. Power] touching the Articles of the Rendition, of which some
Questions have risen especially about Waterford, In as much as Ireton in
vindication thereof published There this Manifest by way of Warning to such as
he intended to free the City of, which I am the willinger to insert, for that
the Behavior of the Inhabitants, the Nature of the Place, and the Genius of
the Irish (devoted to Superstition) are hereby more clear and significant.
WHEREAS upon the Rendition of the City of Waterford to the State of England,
Articles of Agreement between Commissioners on my part, and others of theirs,
for and on the behalf of the Soldiers and Citizens of Waterford, it was agreed
and concluded (amongst other things) that all the Inhabitants of the said City
should have liberty to carry away their Goods to what place they please within
this Dominion or beyond the Seas within the space of three Months, and should
have them protected for their use in the mean time, paying equal Contribution
with the rest of their Neighbors; And that such of them as should desire, and
be thought fit to stay, should enjoy their Goods there or dispose of them
otherwise during their stay, paying the like Contribution; and when they should
desire, or have warning to depart, should have three Months time from the
warning given on their part for the removal of what they have remaining, with
safe conducts answerable in the several cases aforementioned respectively, as
in the 7th. Article of the said Agreement is expressed; I have now thought fit to
give them warning to depart according to the intent of the said Article,
whereof all the Inhabiters that then were and yet are within the said City, and
have not had such warning personally otherwise, are hereby to take notice of
it, from the tenth day of February instant at their perils, and though no other
reason need be given for the doing of a thing so consonant to, and agreeing
with, both the letter, and declared intention of the Article, yet (for more
full, and clear satisfaction to all that desire it) I think it not amiss to
publish and declare the reasons inducing me to it, as follows.

First, I held my self bound (in discharge of that trust I have from them I
serve) to put all places of strength now within our power, into such a posture
and condition, before our taking the Field, as that I may (through the blessing
of God) give a good account of them to those that have entrusted me. And this I
thought I could not do without timely giving of such warning to the people of
this City; who, by their principles and practices (at least for the most part)
do appear, so far disaffected to us, and the Cause and Interest we serve in,
and so unlikely to be faithful and trusty to us, (if we should trust them to
stay there) especially considering that there is yet no Castle, or Citadel,
whereby that City can be secured from being in the power of the people that
inhabit it, without leaving great numbers of Soldiers to overpower them. I need
not say much to demonstrate their unfitness to be (in such a case) confided in
by us, their actions speaking so loud and large as they do, to that purpose,
telling us, they are our Enemies; witness their practices all the time of this
War, but more especially in their carriage of late: As to the first, all know,
and they cannot be ignorant, that the City of Waterford has been one of the
chief places in this Dominion which has maintained and upheld the trade of
Piracy upon the English, both by receiving the Goods so taken by others from
the English, and thereby much encouraging those Thieves and Robbers in their
wicked Practices, and also by setting forth and maintaining Ships or Frigates of
their own for the same Pyratical trade. To their carriage of late (especially
since our endeavoring the reducement of the place) their continued obstinacy
even almost to utmost extremity and their refusing all overtures made to them
for returning them to their due obedience, and delivery up of that place upon
good terms for themselves (even when it was in their own power to have done it,
Lord General Farrall, vid. f. 230. putting by the Marquess of Ormond.
having no Garrison at all in it to overpower them, till they received one
from the Enemy, and fetched it in with their own Boats from the other side of
the River in view of our Army then treating fairly with them) are sufficient
arguments of their unfitness to be trusted by us in so much power of betraying
such a place, to the party they so much adhere unto, in their judgments and
affections. And to this purpose I shall desire them but to remember what was
offered by the Lord Lieutenant, and refused by them when we came In December
1649. in confidence of the weakness of his Forces, and the wetness of the
Season.
first against the City; and what trouble, hazard, and expense they have put us
to, then and since; As also what was offered by us a second time in the Treaty
at Dunkit, and by the Letters proceeding (that occasioned it.) And how it was
received by them, as some of them yet present in the City, (acting then as
Commissioners in the name of the rest) well know. And how at August 20. 1652.
last they necessitated us to march down with our whole Army and Artillery
against them before they would deliver, and we have no reason to think, they
had delivered then, but the extremity of sickness, and want of provisions
(together with their own fears of danger) induced them to it seeing us come
prepared in every respect (through God's blessing) to have forced them, if they
had not yielded: And whether persons that do their utmost to the last in
holding out a place against us, upon such an account as they did, be fit to be
let stay in that place with us (where they may have such opportunities of
betraying it, when the Army may be engaged at a remote distance) I leave to all
rational men to judge, considering we are free by the Articles to turn them out
upon due warning.

A further ground leading me to conclude them unfit to be trusted by us in such
a case, and in the power of such a place, is, the consideration of those
principles in their Religion (owned and pursued by the people of this Nation
more evidently than in many others, and so by them in that City) tending in
endless violence, injustice, falsehood and treachery toward us, wherever they
find opportunity, as That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics (which in
their sense are all persons not of their Religion) but that (at least) where
the keeping of it is to the prejudice, and the breaking of it may be of
advantage to the Catholic cause, it may be broken, and any thing (in a
manner) is lawful to be done for the advantage of that Cause (at least) if it
be with the allowance or dispensation of their Ghostly Fathers; And how
dangerous and unsafe it is to keep persons of such differing and destructive
principles to the Cause and Interest we serve, in such places of strength and
so much in the power of the Inhabitants, I wish them only to make it their own
case, and then judge: And though such principles be denied or disowned in the
expressions of some, yet sure I am, nothing has been more clear in the
practices of the generality of the people of that Religion in this Nation: as
appears in the several times of their Rebellion against the lawful authority
which God had set over them (to whom The Chief of every Sept who formerly at
the beginning of each K. since the Conquest swore Allegiance.
they have several times sworn to be true and faithful, and as often broke
their faith and obligations as engaged) and especially in this Rebellion, by
the Murders and Massacres of so many innocent English Protestants (in the
beginning of it) living in peace and Trust quietly by them: And that this is
still their practice (suitable to such principles) I desire those that question
it, but to look upon the late actions of many of those that (upon their fair
professions to us, and our trust in them for faithfulness or (at least) for
innocent and peaceable demeanors toward us) have received protection from us,
who, notwithstanding, do (most of them) make it their daily business to do us
all the mischief they can (wherever they see an opportunity) and for that
purpose do harbor, entertain and encourage those many Tories, in every corner,
that, otherwise durst not come into our Quarters, nor could subsist in them
undiscovered, or do that mischief as they do, and escape yet from all our
Forces and Garrisons (in every corner ready to pursue them) but that (as they
are assured and find) the protected people are friends to them, Tories,
Woodkerns, or any that oppose the Parliament.
and in their hearts Enemies and false to us, notwithstandstanding all their
professions to the contrary: nay many of the protected people themselves, upon
every slight occasion or ground of hope of doing mischief to us, do frequently
run from their Habitations, join with the Enemy in Arms, and deliver up their
Castles to them; And though, for the shame and ill consequences of such
principles to themselves (if owned and professed by them) many do disclaim any
such opinions, yea perhaps (from the sense of those evil consequences) may, in
their present and private Judgments, condemn them; yet whilst they hold entire
communion with that Catholic Church (as they account it) which maintains, or
holds forth the same, and implicitly resolve their private judgments into the
belief or determination of that Church, or (however) do own and adhere to a
power (both foreign and adverse to us) in their Pope, and Clergy, which, they
acknowledge, can bind and lose their consciences without limitation; It must
needs follow, that upon the determinations or allowance of that Church, or the
injunctions or absolutions of that power, they must, when it comes to trial,
unless they will renounce that Communion and Dependence, account themselves not
only absolvable thereby, from all obligations of humane right or duty toward
us, to the contrary; but also obliged, by an higher bond, and duty, to answer
and pursue any Injunctions of that CHURCH, or power, in any ways of violence
and treachery toward us, which for the upholding or advancement thereof, shall
be required, or warranted thereby, and they shall see any opportunity for. Now
though these and many more such considerations and experiences may suffice,
both to justify us in, and awaken us to, the providing for security to our
selves and our Cause, against such a generation, by all ways, to which, in
common Justice, we are free (as by this warning out these Inhabitants in this
case) and not to trust them in so visible a power and opportunity to betray or
hurt us (as their continuance in that City beyond the period of this warning
they would have) yet, in humanity and our common Christian charity we cannot
but pity Men, so miserably blind-folded and captivated in delusions (as the
generality of them appear) and heartily wish and pray, that neither they nor
any other might any longer be so; and we do not desire their hurt or prejudice,
further than justice and necessity (for our own and the public safety) do
require; and therefore (even in this warning given) we have not only consulted
the justice and necessity leading to it, but also the convenience of time (as
to them) for doing of it, that it might be at such a season, as might be most
convenient or least prejudicial to them also, which I judge the time of the
period of this warning to be, in regard that (being in the beginning of May) it
is the most fitting season for persons in such conditions, to provide for
themselves, either by hiring or building themselves places of Habitation in
some parts near adjoining (to be allotted them for that purpose) or to march,
if they so desire it, by Land, or take a Voyage by Sea, to those places unto
which they shall desire to go. And that all may see, who do not wilfully shut
their eyes, that our end is, not to ruin them and enrich our selves, but only,
to act in order to public safety and security, I do resolve (where I can find
a sufficient Character or mark of distinction concerning any person or persons,
that have not had a hand in the first years Rebellion, and Massacres, or have
discovered themselves to be Friends to the Interest and People of England, or
have not been known to have been eminently active in the prosecution of the War
or holding out of that City against us) to difference them ( by favor and
respect shown) from others, and, in all other cases, wherein mercy and favor
may be showed (without prejudice to public justice and safety) I do intend it,
and particularly in that of Orphans and Aged and decrepid people and Widows,
whose condition is the most to be pitied in regard many of them may not be able
to help themselves, but if they should be turned out with the others
immediately, might suffer much by it, I shall therefore take the best care and
course I can for them, to prevent any of those inconveniences that may
otherwise fall upon persons in their conditions, and to do for them, as near as
I can suitable to what their necessities may require, and the Condition and
State of Affairs under my charge can admit: as, either by continuing them, or
so many of them in Town, as shall be thought fit, or (for those of that
condition that do go out) by allotting for them some places, near hand, such as
may (by industry and care of any Friends in their behalfs) be, in most
respects, equal to what benefits they have in Town, or at least contribute
competently toward their livelihood and subsistence, at present, until either
the state of our Affairs or frame of their Spirits be known to be altered as
may admit their return, or a further provision for them. Given at Waterford,
March, 1650.

H. IRETON.



Fol. 316. l. 23. Consideration] No mention yet of the King, He was not to be
named, though there were but few that saw Him not at a distance improving each
Gale to further his Return, in as much as they continued till May 1660. then
readily accepting of the Kings Declaration from Breda.

Fol. 319. l. 34. Eminent Sufferings] for regulating of whose Interests a Court
of Claims was afterward instituted, wherein if the exact Method and
Institution ordered by his Majesty's Commission (grounded on the Act of
Settlement) were not regularly persued, It Is agreed on by All, that the
Commissioners were no losers by their Employment. And that the house of Commons
(who knew best their own sense of so important an Act) might have no
excentrical proceedings thereupon, they presented to his Grace an Instrument By
their Speaker, 13. Feb. 1662.
with Rules and Directions for the Commissioners proceedings That discovering a
Cloud (through the Interposition of some Malevolent Planet) it might remain
(whether persued or no) as a Record of their Endeavors, That the hard Fate and
Ruin of an English Interest in Ireland might not bear date under the best of
Kings, under so vigilant a Lord Lieutenant, under the first, and if not
prevented, like to be the last Protestant Parliament there; Which Instrument
has since magnified that house, justly sensible of intervening Evils.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
IN the Preceding History we cursorily mentioned the execrable Barbarisms the
Irish committed in their Insurrection, briefly reflected on in The Cited in our
Hist. f. 51, 52.
Remonstrance of the Clergy to the House of Commons in England 1642. out of
which, other Examinations, and Authentic Proofs in the Archives at Dublin, we
have collected the ensuing Murders, reducing them to Counties readier for
every ones view; Not mentioning the Rebels Mercy, Plundering, Stripping, or
Exposing the English to Cruelties worse than Death: All being short of that
Number which (had we time) would soon complete a Volume, especially could we
have recovered Archdeacon Bisse his Examinations taken in Munster (with greater
Artifice than Justice smothered) who (as an Eminent and Worthy Person on the
same Account the 12th of October 1678.) was most inhumanly Murdered by the
Irish (as He by the late Conspirators) expressing that to be the Cause, viz.
The Examinations that were then taken: Yet what we have here Collected, with
Dr. Robert Since (viz. 24th of March 1643.) Bishop of Kilmore.
Maxwell's Examination (whose Integrity and Candor None ever yet dared
Question) I am confident exceeds the Martyrologie of former Ages, and (as a
solid Divine ingeniously, as well as truly observed on the Fast Day, Wednesday
the 13th of November, 1678.) is a Wonder, even to Amazement, That more Arts of
Cruelty have been found out by the Romish Clergy (propagating their Religion)
than the Heathen Persecutors ever reached to.

A Collection of Murders in several Counties of Ireland committed since the
23d of October, 1641. abstracted out of certain Examinations taken by Virtue of
Commissions under the Great Seal of Ireland, which said Particulars are singled
(amongst infinite others of that kind) pointing to the Circumstances, and the
Names of the Persons (or some of them) murdering or murdered: The fuller
Evidence of which may be found (according to the Quotations) in the Archives of
Dublin, now in Possession of the Clerk of the Council.
The County of Antrim.
THE Rebels confessed to this Deponent that they killed in one Morning 954 in
this County: And that besides them, they supposed they had killed 1100 or 1200
more in that County. Dr. Maxwell's Examination, C. Armagh, p. 11, 12.


The County of Armagh.
Protestants in Multitudes forced over the Bridge of Portnedown, whereby at
several times there were drowned in the River of Banne above 1000. Gertrude
Carlisle, C. Tyrone, p. 3. Christian Stanhaw, C. Armagh, and Owen Frankland, p.
2. Marg. Bromley, C. Armagh, p. 1. Rich. Newberry, C. Armagh, p. 2. Elinor
Fullerton, C. Armagh, p. 2. Dr. Maxwell, C. Armagh, p. 11, 12. Henry Read, C.
Monaghan, p. 1. Elizabeth Price, C. Armagh, p. 1. Jone Constable, C. Armagh, p.
3. Thomas Green, C. Armagh, p. 1. William Clerk, C. Armagh, p. 1. Edw.
Saltenstall C. Armagh, p. 3 Geo. Littlefield C. Armagh, p. 3



Great Numbers of Protestants drowned at Corbridge and Kynard in the County of
Armagh. Dr. Maxwell, C. Armagh, p. 12. Alex. Creighton, C. Monaghan, p. 1 Will.
Holland, C. Monaghan, p. 3.



Mr. Fullerton, Clerk, Mr. Aubrey, Mr Gladwich murdered in the way toward
Portnedown. William Clerk, C. Armagh, p. 1. John Montgomery, C. Monaghan.



Many others Murdered; 5 murdered soon after the beginning of the Rebellion;
50 murdered at Blackwater-Church; 20 drowned near the Water of Callon, and
several others murdered. Marg. Fillis C. Armagh, p. 1. Christ. Stanhaw C.
Armagh, p. 1. Owen Frankland C. Armagh, p. 1. Anne Smith C. Armagh, p. 1.
Margaret Clerk C. Armagh, p. 1. Elinor Fullerton, C. Armagh, p. 2.



Mr. William Blundell drawn by the Neck in a Rope up and down Blackwater at
Charlemont to confess money; and three weeks after He, with his Wife and seven
Children, drowned. Four and forty at several times murdered: A Wife compelled
to hang her own Husband; with several other notorious murders. Edw.
Saltenstall C. Armagh, p. 9. Geo. Littlefield C. Armagh, p. 9.



Mr. Robinson the Minister, his Wife, and three Children, and seven more
murdered. Marg. Bromley. C. Armagh.


Two and twenty Protestants put into a thatched house in the Parish of Kilmore,
and there burned alive. Anne Smith C. Armagh, p. 1. Marg. Clerk C. Armagh, p.
1. Marg. Fillis C. Armagh, p. 1. Christ. Stanhaw C. Armagh, p. 2 Elin.
Fullerton C. Armagh, p. 2 Elinor Matchet C. Armagh, p. 2 Jone Constable, C.
Armagh, p. 1, 2.



The Lord Caufield murdered. Capt. Jo. Perkins, C. Tyrone, p. 3.


Dr. Hodges, with 43 more, murdered within a quarter of a mile of Charlemont.
Eliz. Price, C. Armagh, p. 1, 2.


The Wife of Arnold Tailor great with Child, had her belly ripp'd up, then
drowned. Eliz. Price, C. Armagh, p. 8, 9.


Thomas Mason buried alive.

Seventeen Men, Women, and Children, cast into a Bogg-pit in the Parish of
Dumcrees: Many more murdered. Thomas Green, C. Armagh, p. 1.


Fifteen hundred murdered in three Parishes; 27 more murdered; Mr. Cambell
drowned. James Shaw, C. Armagh, p. 1.


Three hundred Protestants stripped naked, and put into the Church of Loghgall,
whereof about 100 murdered within the Church; amongst whom John Gregg was
quartered alive, his Quarters thrown into the face of Richard Gregg his Father.
The said Richard was after there murdered, having received seventeen or
eighteen wounds, after cut into Quarters in this Deponents (his Wife's)
Presence. Such as were not murdered were turned out a begging amongst the
Irish naked, and into the cold, most of which were killed by Irish Cripples,
their Trulls and Children. Alice Gregg^, C. Armagh, p. 1.


One hundred and eighty drowned (at twice) at the Bridge of Callon. Capt.
Anthony Strafford, C. Armagh, p. 2.


One hundred (some say two hundred) more in a Lough near Ballimackilmorrogh.
Capt. Anthony Strafford, C. Armagh, p. 2.


Mr. Gabriel Constable, and his Mother 80 years old, murdered. Jone Constable,
C. Armagh, p. 1.


Five hundred murdered at Armagh, besides 48 Families murdered in the Parish
of Killaman. Capt. John Perkins, C. Tyrone, p. 6 Anth. Strafford, C. Armagh, p.
2.



Three had their Brains knocked out with a Hatchet within the Church of
Benburb; 8 Women drowned in a River under the same Church; Christopher Glover
murdered. John Parry, C. Armagh, p. 2.


Lieutenant James Maxwell (by order from Sir Phelim O Neil) was dragged out of
his Bed (raving in the height of a burning Fever) driven two miles and
murdered; his Wife, great with Child, stripped stark naked and drowned in the
Blackwater, the Child half born. Dr. Maxwell, C. Armagh, p. 9. John Parry, C.
Armagh, p. 3.



Mr. Starkey (about 100 years old) and his two daughters stripped naked, the
Daughters forced to support and lead their Father (he being not able to go of
himself) and having gone three quarters of a mile, were all three drowned in a
Turfpit. Dr. Maxwell, C. Armagh, p. 9. Capt. John Perkins, C. Tyrone, p. 6, 7.



Diverse Englishmen in the Parish of Levilegish murdered. John Cregge, C.
Armagh.


Mrs. Howard, Mrs. Franklan (both great with Child) and six of their Children
murdered. Katherine Harcourt, C. Armagh.


The County of Caterlagh.
Richard Lake hanged at Leighlin-bridge, 16 more hanged near that Place, two
murdered near Caterlagh, two Women hanged up by the hair of their heads all
night, the next day being found still alive, they were murdered. James Shaw,
C. Caterlagh, p. 1.


At or near Leighlin-bridge three Men with their Wives and Children murdered,
one Woman and her Daughter murdered, a Woman newly delivered of two Children,
the one of them had his Brains beaten out against the Stones, and after thrown
into the River Barrow, the other destroyed; about 40 English murdered
thereabouts. Almost all the English about Gowran and Wells hanged and
murdered. Dame Anne Butler, C. Caterlagh, p. 1. Joseph Wheeler Esquire. C.
Kilkenny. Sir John Temple f. 129.



The County of Cavan.
Many Protestants forced over the Bridge of Belturbet in the County of Cavan,
and there drowned. William North, C. Cavan, p. 2. John Whitson, C. Cavan. Arth.
Culm Esquire. C. Cavan, p. 6. Rob. Bennet C. Cavan, p. 1. Rich. Smith C. Cavan, p.
1. Jone Killin C. Cavan, p. 1. Simon Westham, C. Cavan, p. 3. Marm. Batemanson,
C. Cavan, p. 1. John Stephenson, C. Cavan, p. 3. Jane Cuthbertson C. Cavan, p.
1. Elizabeth Poke C. Cavan, p. 1. Mr. Rich. Parsons, C. Cavan, p. 6.



Adam Bailey and several others murdered at Kilkolly in the County of Cavan.
Jane Cuthbertson, C. Cavan, p. 1, 2 Alex. Anderson, C. Cavan, p. 5. Jennet
Kerns, C. Cavan, p. 1. Simon Grame, p. 1.



William Rocket drowned near Belhorbet. Sarah Ranson, C. Fermanagh.


Several Scotch Families destroyed, two of the Hovies and Abraham Jones
murdered, with several other murders committed at Butlers-bridge. Rich.
Parsons, C. Cavan, p. 5, 6.


A distracted Gentleman run through with a Pike, he laughing the while. Simon
Wesnam, C. Cavan, p. 3.


The County of Clare.
Christopher Hebditch and sixteen more English Protestants murthred at or near
the Castle of Inchecrony. Bertrice Hebditch, C. Clare, p. 1, 2


The County of Cork.
Thomas Lencome and his Wife hanged at their own door; John Seller a Miller cut
in pieces hard by Ross; John Carpenter and his Wife hanged in Mr. Morgan's
Wood, and their 3 Children starved in the Place; Mary Tukesbury hanged near
thereunto; Mr. Tamuse a Chirurgion-barber killed in the Streets of Ross by one
Christopher Cloud. Peter Perce of Ross-carborough, C. Cork.


The County of Donnegall.
William Mackenny and his Mother in Law, and his Wife great with Child,
murdered, his said Wife having her belly ripped up, and the Child cut out of
the Womb. Ralph Dutton C. Donnegall, p. 2 Anne Dutton C. Donnegall, p. 2



Robert Akins Clerk, and thirteen more murdered at Castledoe. Mulrony Carol,
C. Donneg, p. 1.


Sixty persons that came in Boats from Killala murdered by the Mac Swines and
O Boyles. Andrew Adair, Esquire. C. Mayo, p. 5


The County of Down.
Eighty forced to go on the Ice on Logh-earn till they brake the Ice, and were
drowned. Peter Hill Esquire. C. Down, p. 13, 14.


Mr. Tudge (the Minister of Newry) Lieutenant Trevor and his wife, and 24 more
(some count 50) murdered and cut in pieces at the Pass of Ballonery. Peter
Hill Esquire. C. Down, p. 13. Eliz. Pierce, C. Down, p. 1. Capt. Hen. Smith, C.
Down, p. 7. Arth. Maegennis, C. Down, p. 1.



Diverse murdered at Castle-Island and Down. Will. Gore, C. Down, p. 1.


A Scotchman, an Englishman, and a Welchman imprisoned in the Stocks at
Newcastle, where they lay without breeches upon raw Hides, that their joints
rotted, insomuch that when two of them were afterward hanged, one of their
feet fell off by the Anckle. Eliz. Pierce, C. Down, p. 2.


A Scotchman being driven out of the Newry, was knocked on the head by the
Rebels; yet recovering himself, came naked again into the Town, whereupon the
Rebels carried him and his wife out of Town, cut him all to pieces, and with a
skein ripped up his wives belly, so as a Child dropped out of her womb. Owen
Frankland of the City of Dublin, Sir John Temple. Hist. p. 96.


A Dier's wife of Ross-Trevor was killed at the Newry, and her belly ripped up
by the Rebels (she being great with Child of two Children) who threw her and
her Children into a ditch, and that he, this Deponent, drove away Swine from
eating one of her Children. Philip Tailor, C. Armagh, Sir Jo. Temple Hist. p.
97.


The Rebels confessed that Col. Brain O Neil killed about 1000 in this County,
besides 300 killed at Killelagh. Dr. Maxwell's Examination.


At Servagh-bridge 100 drowned, more 80, more 60, more 50, more 60, 27 men
murdered. Cap. Hen. Smith, C. Down, p. 7.


The County of Dublin.
About the 28th of December, 1641, the wife of Joseph Smithson Minister, was
carried from Deans-grange near Dublin to Stellorgan, from thence to
Powerscourt, and there she and her servant hanged. Joseph Smithson, C. Dublin,
p. 1.


Henry Maudesley hanged at Moore-town. Geo. Cashell, C. Dublin, p. 1.


Mr. Pardoe a Minister, and William Rimmer a packet Post, murdered at
Balrothery, Mr. Pardoe being afterward cast on a Dunghill, and his head eaten
with Swine. Tho. clitheroe Clerk, C. Dublin, p. 2.


Derrick Hubert of Holm-Patrick Esquire* murdered the 2d of December, 1641. Marg.
Hubert, C. Dublin, p. 1.


Nicholas Kendiff murdered near Dublin since the Cessation. John Johnson, C.
Dublin, p. 1.


Robert Fagan murdered at Clunduff. Marg. Fagan, C. Dublin.


The County of Fermanagh.
Arthur Champion and 16 more murdered at Shanock-Castle; at another time 24;
at another time two more murdered. William Ban, p. 2. Patrick O Bryan, C.
Ferman. p. 2. Rob. Aldrick, C. Monaghan. Eliz. Dowsbury, C. Fermanagh.



One Fermency killed, and 14 hanged. Eliz. Fletcher, C. Fermanagh, p. 1. Marg.
Fermency, C. Fermanagh.



Seven hanged at one time, and diverse others put to death. Marg. Barlow, C.
Fermanagh.


Eighty (some write 150) Men, Women, and Children, burned and killed in the
Castle of Lisgorl in the County of Fermanagh. Matthew Brown, C. Monaghan. Alice
Champian, C. Fermanagh, p. 3. Jo. Sympson Gent. C. Fermanagh.



Ninety Protestants murdered at Moneagh-Castle, 80 at Tullagh-Castle; near
Cordiller three hanged; one more hanged. Tho. Wenstow, C. Fermanagh, p. 1, 2


Mr. Middleton and 100 more murdered by Rowry Mac-Guire at Castleskeagh. Sir
John Dunbar's Relation.


Fourteen Protestants hanged. Rob. Flack, C. Fermanagh, p 2, 3.


Forty Protestants in the Parish of Newtown murdered. John Parry, C.
Fermanagh.


Eighteen (some write seventeen) half hanged in the Church of Clownish, and so
buried. Mrs. Aldrich, Sir John Temple Hist. p. 95.


Thirty murdered in the Parish of Clankelly. Hugh Stokes, C. Fermanagh.


Twelve more murdered in Newtown. Robert French, C. Fermanagh.


William Ogden murdered. Anne Ogden his wife, C. Ferman.


Parson Flack and 40 more (after promise of safe conveyance to Balgshanon,
drowned by Rowry Mac-Guire and his Confederates. Sir John Dunbar's Relation.


One hundred fifty and two (another says 100) murdered at Tully, after quarter
given or promised them. Rob. Aldrich, C. Monaghan, p. 1. Rich. Bourk, C.
Fermanagh, p. 1.



Fifteen hanged at Lowtherstown; two murdered at Kynally. Rich. Bourk, C.
Fermanagh, p. 1.


A Child of Thomas Strattons of Newton boild to death in a Chaldron. Marg.
Parkin, Eliz. Bursell, Sir John Temple's Hist. p. 101.


The County of Gallway.
Mr. Adam Novell and six more, hanged and murdered by the Lord of Clanmorris.
Will. Shuttleworth, C. Gallway.


Hugh Langridge murdered near Loghreoge, having received near sixteen wounds,
and his Son having nine wounds and left for dead, yet recovered. Ralph Lambert,
C. Gallway, p. 1, 2


Mr. Corbet an ancient Minister, had his head cut off by two young Cowheards
near Loghreogh. Idem p. 2.


The Son of an Englishman murdered; a Child so beaten as he died within three
days. Idem p. 2, 3.


Sixty five Protestants (some say eighty, some ninety, many of them Ministers)
were murdered at the Bridge of Shreel alias Shruel, Ludovicus Jones being
amongst the rest hurried there to that intent, but escaped and died at Dublin
1646. aged 104. Eliz. Bucanan, C. Mayo, p. 1. Hen. Bringhurst, C. Mayo, p. 2,
etc. John Goldsmith Clerk, p. 6. Hen. Langford C. Roscommon, p. 3. Rob. Brown
C. Roscommon, p. 3. James Brown C. Roscommon, p. 3. Thomas Johnson, C. Mayo, p.
3. Andrew Adaire Esquire. C. Mayo, p. 5 Thomas Hawet, C. Mayo, p. 3.



The County of Kerry.
Mrs. Whittell, her husband, and eight more murdered on Sir Valentine Brown's
Lands; John and Simon Heard killed near Castlehaven; Goodman Cranbee his wife
and children murdered; seven drowned by O Doinfaint's Rebels. John Heard and
Fortune his wife of Kilarney in the County of Kerry.


Anthony Field's wife and seven more destroyed by Sir Valentine Brown's
Tenants. Anthony Field, C. Kerry.


Mrs. Burrill killed in her house by her own Servant; Laurence Parry, his two
Sisters, and Mr. Edward Lassell starved to death; Mrs. Hussie, her son and
daughter, and many more killed going from Macrone to Cork (with a Convoy which
the Lord Muskerry did allow her) within a mile of Cork. Eliz. Wellington, C.
Kerry.


The County of Kildare.
Ralph Heyward (having turned to Mass) was murdered, his wife and children
hanged, the one at her neck, the other at her girdle; a Dog and a Cat hanged
with them. Will. Hewitson Clerk, C. Kildare


Robert Woods shot to death. Will. Collis, C. Kildare, p. 1.


John Morley, his wife and children, and one John Plivie (after they were
turned to Mass) murdered. Robert Brown, C. Kildare, p. 1.


The County of Kilkenny.
About the 20th of December, 1641. the Protestants were stripped naked at
Kilkenny, and whereas some of those stripped People with Ropes of Straw covered
some part of their nakedness, the Rebels set the Straw on fire, thereby burning
and grievously scorching them. Six Soldiers and two Boys having quarter given
them, were nevertheless hanged at Kilkenny. John Mayor of the City of Kilkenny,
p. 1, 3.


A young Girl stripped about Easter 1642. in the City of Kilkenny by a Butcher,
her belly ripped up that her Intrals fell out; where the Mayor (upon Complaint
of the Mother) bade away with her and dispatch her, whereupon the mother
received seventeen or eighteen wounds, and her other Child was also extremely
wounded, and all forced out of the City by Men, Women, and Boys, throwing
stones and dirt at them, so as the two Children died in a Ditch. Will.
Parkinson, C. Kilkenny, p. 4. James Benn, City Kilkenny, p. 1, 4. John Maire,
City Kilkenny, p. 2. 3. Anne Madesly, C. Kilkenny, Sir John Temple Hist. p. 96.



At Kilkenny seven Englishmen hanged, and one Irishman because he was taken in
their company. Anne Madesty, C. Kilkenny, p. 1.


Twelve murdered at the Graige, one of them (being a woman great with child*)
had her belly ripped up, the child falling out alive, and a child of a year and
a half old hanged. Another of them named Robert Pyne (being twice hanged up)
was cast into his Grave, where he sat up, saying, Christ receive my soul, and
so was buried quick. Joseph -- Wheeler Esquire. Commit. Kilkenny, p. 5.


An old man hanged, and afterward dragged up and down till his Bowels fell out.
Idem p. 5.


Christopher Morley and two English boys at Castle-Comer hanged. Another had
his head clove, and before he was dead, hung on his Father's Tenter-hooks.
Will. Parkinson, C. Kilkenny, p. 3. Jo. Watkinson, Clerk Com. Kilkenny, p. 2.



About sixty men, women, and children more murdered at the Graige; many of
them buried alive. Jo. Maire City Kilkenny, p. 3, 4


At Balincolough, within four miles of Ross, April 1642. John Stone of the
Graige, his son, his two sons in Law, and his two daughters were hanged; one of
his daughters being great with child, had her belly ripped up, her child taken
forth, and such barbarous beastly actions used to her, as are not fit to be
mentioned. Owen Frankland of the City of Dublin.


In Kilkenny, Richard Philips* and five other Soldiers under Capt. Farrall (a
Captain on his Majesty's Party) were (by the command of the Lord Mountgarret)
at the end of an House hanged to death about Easter, 1642.

The King's County.
Mrs. Jane Addis of Kilcoursie (after her going to Mass) murdered in her House
in Fox Country Com. Regis, having a child not a quarter old; the Murderers
putting the dead woman's Breast into the child's mouth, bade it such English
bastard, and so left it. Margery King, King's County, p. 1. James Dowdall, K.
C. p. 3. John Wild, C. Westmeath, p. 1. Thomas Fleetwood, C. Westmeath, p. 5, 6.



Arthur Scot murdered at Lislooney, having twenty wounds given him: Another
Englishman hanged at the same place. Thomas Scot, C. Regis, p. 2.


Two men murdered at Philips-town. James Dowdall K. C. p. 3.


Seven murdered at the Birr. Rich. Wilkinson, K. C. p. 2.


Thomas Horam hanged at Philips-town. Hugh Robert, K. C. p. 1.


Henry Bigland and eleven more hanged and murdered about Knocknemeis. Rob.
Bigland, K. C.


A woman aged eighty years stripped naked in frost and snow by two daughters of
Rowry Coghlan of Fercall-wood, before whose door she died. Henry Ayliff, K. C.
p. 1.


John Lurcan murdered and chopped in pieces. Idem p. 6.


Four English murdered at Terence Coghlans House ( Kilkolgan) about December
1641. Tho. Le'Strange K. C. p. 5.


Two and twenty widows, and several stripped naked, who covering themselves in
a House with straw, the Rebels fired the straw, and threw it amongst them to
burn them; and they had been burned had they not been rescued by others, who
turned them out naked in frost and snow, so as many died, yea the children died
in their mothers arms. Magdalen Redmain, K. C. p. 1. Isabel Porter alias Bryan,
K. C. p. 1, 2.



The County of Lytrim.
Mr. William Liston and Mr. Thomas Fullerton (Clerks) kept two days without
meat or drink, and then murdered near Manor Hamilton 24 of January 1641.
Andrew Adaire, C. Mayo, p. 6.


An English child taken by the heels, had its brains dash't out against a block
of Timber. Andrew Adaire, C. Mayo, p 6.


The County of Limerick.
A Minister, his wife, and four children murdered by Hugh Kenedy and his
followers near Limerick. Anne Sherring, C. Tipperary.


The County of Londonderry.
Six hundred English murdered at Gervagh by Sir Phelim O Neil. Dr. Maxwell.


The County of Longford.
Many cruelly murdered at Longford after quarter promised. Rich. Martin, C.
Longford, p. 1. Eliz. Trafford, C. Longford, p. 2. Isabel Allen, C. Longford,
p. 1.



William Steel and four others hanged at a Windmill near to Racleen till they
were half dead, and then cut in pieces by the Rebels. John Stibbs, C. Longford,
p. 1. Susanna Steel, C. Longford, p. 2.



The wife of Henry Mead hanged; the said Henry himself being placed in a Ring
amongst the Rebels, each stabbing of him as he was forced to fly from side to
side, and so continued till his shoulder and breast were cut in two with a
Bill-hook. Susanna Steel, C. Lanford, p. 2.


George Foster, his wife and child, and the wife of John Bizell murdered at
Ballinecorr; one other drowned; some children there buried alive. Eadem p. 3.


The County of Lowth.
Eighteen of the Lord Moore's Servants murdered at Mellifont by Col. Cole Mac
Bryan, Mac Mahon and his Followers, who would not suffer them to be buried.
John Montgomery, C. Monaghan.


The County of Mayo.
About seven and twenty Protestants, besides Children drowned in the Bay or
Harbor near Killala, by the Instigation of the Friars. Hen. Bringhurst, C.
Mayo, p. 8.


Thirty or forty English (formerly turned Papists) drowned in the Sea near
Killala. John Goldsmith Clerk, p. 8.


A young boy (Mr. Montgomerie's son) killed by one that had been his
Schoolmaster; the boy the while crying, Good Master do not kill me, but whip
me as much as you will. A man wounded and buried alive. A Minister murdered
after he had gone to Mass: another hanged near Ballyhen. Idem p. 9.


At the Moyne alias Mogne, 59 Protestants stripped naked, and after barbarously
murdered; some increase the number much. Tho. Hewet, C. Mayo, p. 6. Hen.
Langford, C. Roscommon, p. 3.



William Gibb and his wife (both very old) murdered at the Moyn. John Shrewly
Clerk, C. Sligo.


One hundred and twenty men, women, and children stripped naked, and after
murdered at Bellick alias Belleeke. Andr. Addire Esquire. C. Mayo, p. 4, 5.


George Buchanan mortally wounded, was near the Strade buried alive by Edmond O
Maghery and his followers. Thom. Hewet, C. Mayo, p. 6.


August 1643. the wife of John Gardener of the Barony of Carrogh, having leave,
and a Convoy of two Irishmen, to visit her children at Bellick, was by the said
Convoy cruelly murdered. Idem p. 7.


At the Moyn the Rebels forced one Simon Lepers wife to kill her husband, and
then caused her son to kill her, and then hanged the son. John Rutledge, Sir
John Temple's Hist. p. 100.


The County of Mead.
Near Navan the son of James Wignall murdered about November. 1641. James
wignall C. Mead, p. 1, 2.


Mrs. Heglin and her daughter, with two children, murdered at Wilkins-town by
two men hired thereto for two barrels of wheat; and Robert Robin murdered near
Sir William Hill's House. William Medcalf, C. Mead. James Pennicook* C. Mead,
p. 2, 3



Mr. John Ware murdered at Moylagh. Four more hanged at the Navan. William
Potter, p. 1, 2. 3. Dennis Kelly, C. Mead, p. 1.


An English woman (a Papist) murdered at Gerald Fitz-Gerald's House at
Clonard. James Dowdall, K. C. p. 3.


The murder of Thomas Pressick and others at Trim. See for that part of a
Letter from Mr. Richard Tannison of Trim, Minister, April 13. 1674. to an
honorable and right reverend Pe^^^n. In the first year of the late horrid
Rebellion, etc. as in annexed paper.


The County of Monaghan.
Many Protestants hanged at Carrick-maccross. Robert Branthwait. Robert Boil
Clerk, p. 1. Jane Hughes p. 2. Eliz. Williams p. 2. All of the County of
Monaghan.



Sixteen Protestants at once hanged at Clounish; several others there also
hanged; and sixteen women and children drowned in a Turfpit. Rob. Aldrich, p.
3. C. Monaghan. James Gowen, p. 2. C. Monaghan. Heneragh Beamond, p. 1 C.
Monaghan. Francis Winn, C. Fermanagh, p. 1.



The Deponent's father and son murdered. Eliz. Northop, C. Monaghan, p. 1.


Richard Blancy Esquire. hanged. Geo. Cottingham C. Monagh, p. 1. Hen. Steel C.
Monagh, p. 1.



Some murdered in Monaghan. Bridget Leigh, C. Monagh, p. 1.


Seven murdered in the Fews, Ensign Lloyd and others murdered, and one buried
quick. Jo. Mongomery, C. Monaghan, p. 11.


John Hughes and 24 murdered. Jane Hughes, C. Monaghan, p. 1.


Eighteen murdered. John Martin, C. Monaghan, p. 1.


Seventeen men, women, and children drowned at Ballyross. Eliz. Clerk, C.
Monaghan, p. 1.


Many murdered, and four drowned. Geo. Cottingham, C. Monaghan.


Cornet Clinton and his Grandchild drowned; many others murdered. Will.
Holland, C. Monaghan, p. 2.


The Queens County.
Five murdered, whereof one was an English woman (turned to Mass) great with
child, who was shot. John Carpenter, Queen's County, p. 2.


John Nicholson and his wife murdered by Florence Fitz-Patrick and his
Servants on the Sabbath Day, the first Deponent hardly escaping death for
burying them. Elizabeth Baskervile says that Mrs. Fitz-Patrick blamed the
murderers because they brought not Mrs. Nicholsons fat or greese wherewith she
might have made Candles. Walter Dishcome, Q. C. p. 1. Emanuel Beale, Q. C. p.
1. Thomas Berry Q C. p. 1. John Berry Q C. p. 1. Eliz. Baskervile, Q. C. p. 2.



Thomas Keys (a Justice of Peace of the Queens County) Esquire. aged 66. and
Thomas Dubbleday hanged near Buroughs Castle, and Dubbleday shot as he was
hanging, both being first stripped naked, gored and pricked in several Parts of
their Bodies. Thom. Holt, Q. C. p. 1, 2, 3. Elinor Reges, Q. C. p. 1. Samuel
Ring, Q. C. p. 2.



Amy Mamphins husband murdered, and she compelled to stand in his blood, and
she being stripped naked, was drawn by the Hair through Thorns, and after sent
away. Amy Mamphin, Q. C. p. 1.


An English Girl half hanged, and so buried. Joseph Wheeler Esquire. C. Kilk. p. 2.


Six English hanged by Florence Fitz-Patrick after quarter given 1641. Lieut
Hen. Gilbert, Q. C. p. 1.


Near Kilfeckell an English man and his wife and four or five children hanged
by command of Sir Morgan Kavanagh, and Mr. Robert Harpole, all afterward cast
into one hole, the youngest child (not fully dead) putting up the hand, and
crying Mammy, Mammy, yet buried alive. William Parkinson Esquire. C. Kilkenny, p. 4.


Mary Harding put in the Stocks and whipped to death, and her husband starved to
death by Florence Fitz-Patrick and his Followers, after they had given him all
their Goods in his Promise to relieve them and theirs. Joan Bidel of Montrah.


The County of Roscommon.
Sixteen English hanged at Ballilegue by Oliver boy Fitzgerald of Bellilegue.
Edw. Pierson, C. Roscommon, p. 1.


Nine murdered at Ballinafad, whereof four were children, and one woman great
with child, through whose belly the Rebels thrust their Pikes as she was
hanging, because (as they said) the child should not live. Eliz. Holywell, C.
Roscommon, p. 1.


John Price and several others murdered in Athlone. John Dodwell, C.
Roscommon, p. 2


William Stewart had Collops cut off him being alive, fire coals put into his
mouth, his belly ripp'd up, and his entrals wrapped about his neck and wrists.
Andr. Adaire Esquire. C. Mayo, p. 6.


The County of Sligo.
Mr. Thomas Stewart Merchant, and seven and thirty Protestants put into the
Goal of Sligo, all except two or three murdered there the same night, by
diverse breaking in upon them at midnight; for proof whereof see the
Examinations of Edw. Braxton, C. Sligo, p. 1. Amy Hawksworth, C. Roscommon
Ralph Lambert C. Gallway, p. 3. Hen. Langford C. Rosc. p. 1, 2, 3. Rob. Brown
C. Rosc. p. 1, 2, 3. James Brown C. Rosc. p. 1, 2, 3. Will. Welsh, C. Sligo, p.
3. John Harrison Esquire. C. Sligo, p. 1. John Goldsmith Clerk, C. Mayo, p. 8.



Four murdered that day in the Streets of Sligo. Jane Stewart, C. Sligo, p. 1.
as


Elizabeth Beard was killed in the River by a Friars man. her Examination
before Sir George Shurley.


A Friar with some Soldiers undertaking to conduct Mr. Thomas Walker a
Minister, his Man, and two Gentlewomen from Roserk to Abbeyboyle, the Friar
riding away, they fell into an ambush laid for them, where Mr. Walker (being on
his knees at prayer) they cleft his skull to his mouth, killed his man, and
stripped the women, one of which was afterward murdered at Ballymoate. John
Shrawly Clerk, C. Sligo, p. 1, 1.


Five and forty men, women, and children murdered and destroyed near
Ballysekerry Idem p. 2.


Mr. William Ollifant Clerk, stripped half naked at Temple-house, and after
dragged with a rope about his neck at a Horse-heels up and down, because he
would not turn Papist; another Minister at the same time murdered, 1641.
Andrew Adaire, C. Mayo, p. 4. Jane Brown, p. 7. John Harrison Esquire. p. 1.



At Ardneglas and Skreen about thirty Protestants, men, women, and children
murdered. Hen. Langford, C. Rosc. p. 3.


Ten men, women, and children buried alive near Titemple or Temple-house. Andr.
Adaire Esquire. C. Mayo. p. 4*


In Sligo the Rebels forced one Lewis the younger to kill his Father, and they
hanged the Son. John Rutledge, Sir John Temple's Hist. p. 100.


The County of Tipperary.
January 1641. fifteen men, women, and children, Protestants, murdered in
Cashell, and near Cashell three or four Children murdered by a Convoy. Edw.
Banks Clerk, p. 1, 2.


Four and twenty English (after they had revolted to the Mass) murdered at the
Silvermines. Anne Sherring, C. Tipperary, p. 1. William Tims, C. Tipperary, p.
1. John Powell, C. Tipperary, p. 1. William Tims, C. Tipperary.



James Hooker Gent. and Mr. John Stuckley and six more murdered on Sir Richard
Everet's Land; Mr. Richard Walker and ten more hanged at Rathell. George
Crawford and above fifty more murdered. Joyce a Maid of Mr. Walkers buried
alive; Mr. Carr, Mr. Carter, and some eighteen more hanged and murdered near
Cashell; Mr. Dashwood (to whom the Rebels gave Quarter and Convoy to
Michaels-town) by one Prender-gast-Prender murdered on his own Land. Anne Long
widow, C. Tipperary, Examination.


The County of Tyrone.
Robert Bickerdick and his wife drowned in the black Water; Thomas Carlisle put
to death; James Carlisle and his wife also murdered; and so were about 97
more. Gertrude Carlisle C. Tyrone, p. 2, 3


The murder of Mr. John Mather and Mr. Blyth (both Clerks) in or near
Dungannon, though Mr. Blyth had Sir Phelim O Neils Protection; and sixty
Families of the Town of Dungannon murdered. John Perkins Esquire. C. Tyrone, p. 1.
Anthony Stratford, C. Armagh, p. 1.



Near three hundred murdered in the way to Colrain by direction from Sir
Phelim O Neil and Firlagh his Brother. Idem Perkins, p. 6.


In and about Dungannon three hundred and sixteen murdered; between Charlemont
and Dungannon above four hundred murdered; drowned at and in the River of
Benburb and Blackwater 206. Idem Stratford, p. 1.


Thirteen murdered one morning by Patrick mac Crew of Dungannon; Two young
Rebels did murder in the County of Tyrone one hundred and forty women and
children; the wife of Bryan Kelly of Loghgall murdered five and forty with her
own hands. Idem Stratford, p. 1.


At a Milpool in the Parish of Killamon were drowned in one day 300. Idem p. 2.


Eighteen Scotch Infants hanged on Clothiers Tenterhooks; and one young fat
Scotchman murdered, and Candles made of his Grease; another Scotchmans belly
ripp'd up, and the end of his small guts tied to a Tree, then he drawn about
till his guts were pulled out, that they might try (said they) whether a Dogs
or a Scotchmans guts were longest. Idem p. 3.


The County of Westmeath.
In Kilbeggan a boy and two women hanged, one of them having a sucking child,
desired it might be buried with her, knowing it would suffer afterward, but it
was cast out and starved to death. John Naghtin, C. Westmeath, p. 2


William Sibthorp Parish-Clerk of Mollingar hanged; Edmund Dalton and Mr.
Mooreheads Son murdered. Thomas Fleetwood Clerk, C. Westmeath, p. 6, 7, 8.


The County of Wickloe.
Edward Snape and two others hanged ( Nov. 1641.) in Knockrath-Park. Thom.
Hollway, C. Wickloe.


John the Son of William Leeson, stripped and hanged at Balligarny, Nov. 1641.
Will. Leeson, C. Wickloe p. 1. Eliz. Leeson, C. Wickloe p. 1.



A young child of (a year and quarter old) the Deponents taken from her back,
thrown and trodden upon that it died, the Mother and three other children
stripped naked, so as the said Children died; this was done upon the Lands of
Bordkillamore about the 11th of November. 1641. Anne Hill, C. Catherlagh. p. 1.


The Scene of which Murders was ever so deeply impressed on the English, that,
though they were sufficiently inclined to be generous where they found the
Irish resolute and gallant, yet they never took any considerable City, Fort, or
Castle by Agreement, but it was constantly inserted (amongst the Articles) that
the benefit of whatever they allowed should not extend to any that had been
Guilty of murdering the English, or adhering to them since the 23 of October,
1641. Nor to any Officer or Soldier that had taken away the Lives of any of
the English, or others after quarter given, or to such as sat in the first
General Assembly or Council, or acted upon any Commissions or Powers derived
from either; and that all (who commanded in the first year of the Rebellion)
should be liable to a Trial at Law for any Action committed since the 23 of
October. 1641. But how far these Provisoes were observed, when his Majesty's
gracious Declaration the 30th of November. 1660. (for the Settlement of each
Interests) came in force, is better understood by the Records of the Age, then
to be descanted on now.

An Alphabet of the Counties wherein such Murders (as are here mentioned) were
committed.
Counties. fol. ANtrim 109 Armagh ibid. Catherlagh 111 Cavan 112 Clare ibid.
Cork ibid. Donnegall ibid. Down 113 Dublin 114 Fermanagh ibid. Gallway 115
Kerry ibid. Kildare 116 Kilkenny ibid. Kings County 117 Leytrim 118 Limerick
ibid. Londonderry ibid. Longford ibid. Lowth ibid. Mayo 119 Mead ibid.
Monaghan 120 Queens County ibid. Roscommon 121 Sligo 122 Tipperary 123 Tyrone
ibid. Westmeath 124 Wickloe ibid.

Dr. Robert Maxwell (since Bishop of Kilmore) his Examination, worthy
deliberate and serious Reflections, but not here to be flied to as quoted in the
Abstract, That only to be sought for in the Archives of Dublin.
DOctor Robert Maxwell, Rector of Tynon in the County of Armagh, sworn and
examined: and first touching the nature of the Rebellion, deposes and says,
that (to begin higher than the 22th of October. 1641.) at the coming in of the
Scots The Conspirators joy'd at the coming in of the Scots, dejected at their
going out from Newcastle.
to Newcastle, he observed Sir Phelim O Neil, Tirlagh oge O Neil his Brother,
Robert Hovenden Esquire. deceased, and generally all his Popish Neighbors
overjoyed; and at their peaceable disbanding as much cast down and dejected,
calling the English base degenerate Cowards, and the Scots dishonorable
Bragadochies, who came into England not to fight, but to scrape up wealth,
merchandising their honors for sums of money. But he, this Deponent, did not
much heed those distempered speeches, as every where rise in those days, and as
proceeding from bankrupt and discontented Gentlemen; and the rather because
many in Ireland at that time, measuring the Scots Laws by their own, accounted
the Scots subjection not much better than Rebellion, although since by the
Event their Judgments* are now rectified; yet he asked what they meant to be
thus sad at good News, but joyful at evil? They said, if the two Kingdoms had
gone by the ears, they hoped the Earl of Strafford (whose Government had been
most avaritious and tyrannical) would (in regard of his forwardness) have
perished in the Combustion. But this he, the Deponent, thought not worth the
informing, because what they said most men thought from the disbanding of the
Scots, until the breaking out of the present Rebellion. He observed also
frequent and extraordinary meetings of Priests and Friars almost every where
under color of Visitations, and at the first summons of Friars (to the number
of two or three thousand in a Company) they would usually meet together for a
twelvemonth before the Rebellion, who, with others The Irish before their grand
Eruption, borrowed what they could of the English.
of the same stamp, borrowed what sums of money they possibly could from the
British, ane often without any apparent necessity; neither did it afterward
appear what they did with the money so borrowed, for they would not pay any man
a penny. And the Deponent further says, That in April 1641. there went a
report amonst the Irish (the Deponents next Neighbors) that the Earl of Tyrone
was seen with Sir Phelim O Neil in the Wood of Ballynametash, but upon
Examination they denied it; yet since the Rebellion they told the Deponent,
That a great man out of Spain was at that time with him, but they would not
name him; and about three years before that, one Priest mac Case came from Rome
with the Pope's Bull for the Parish of Tynon, and (being kept out by Sir
Phelim) talked freely of a Rebellion plotted and intended by him and others:
Upon which the Priest went to Dublin to inform the Lord Deputy Christopher
Wendisford, Esquire.
thereof, by whom (being examined) he either said nothing to the purpose, or
was not believed, or was taken off by Sir Phelim. And further says, That Sir
Phelim O Neil (a little before the Rebellion) brought two Hogsheads of
Gunpowder from Dublin, under color of Wine, by Patrick O Powder (otherwise
then by such little Quantities not to be parted with) so ordered by the State.
Dogherty Vintner of Kynard; he bought a great part thereof by ten or twelve
pounds in the name of most of the Gentry in the Country. This he bragged of to
the Deponent afterward; and that he likewise told this Deponent, (when the
Lord Magwyre, and other Rebels, were taken in Dublin) his man, James Warren,
and Friar Paul O Neil, were apprehended amongst them, having sent them thither
a little before to assist and attend the Issue of the business, but said, that
upon Examination at Council Table, they were both dismissed contrary to his
expectation. He said also, that some Lord or other spoke for them See the
History, f. 20.
. This Deponent further says, That * A Favor not the first of that kind.
he heard Sir Phelim O Neil (upon his first return from Strabane) say, that
this Plot was in his head five or six years before he could bring it to any
maturity: but said that after it was concluded by the Parliament (meaning the
Popish party) he was one of the last men to whom it was communicated. He said
likewise, That to bring about his own ends, he had formerly demeaned himself as
a fool in all great men's Company, but that he hoped (by that time) the greatest
of them saw, that Sir Phelim O Neil was no such fool as they took him for: And
further says, That he, this Deponent, heard Sir Phelim's Brother Tirlagh oge O
Neil say, that this business (meaning the Rebellion) was communicated by the
Irish Committee (meaning the Popish Irish) unto the Papists in England, who
promised their The English Papists charged with the knowledge of the Irish
Rebellion.
assistance; and that by their advice, some things formerly resolved upon were
altered; saying, it was a good Omen, and undoubted sign of Divine Approbation,
that the Parliament here should send over a Committee, the major part whereof
were Papists. He also affirmed, that when the Protestants of the lower House in
Ireland withdrew themselves apart unto Chichester-Hall, The Papists at the same
time, (never dreaming the Deponent should live to tell it again) debated,
concluded, and signed a combinatory Writing of this Rebellion under their hands
in the Tollbooth or Tolsell; which (he said) that Session drew on, and hastened
sooner than it was intended: and when the Deponent answered, That the Papists
in all former Parliaments (which either of them had seen) usually, and without
exception, consulted apart as often as they pleased: He replied in great
choler, But so did never the Protestants before. And this Deponent further
says, That in December. 19. 1641. he the Deponent heard Sir Phelim in his own
House, and in the hearing of Mr. Joseph Traverse, and others, The Gentry
(besides those of Ulster) accused.
say, That if the Lords and Gentlemen (meaning Popish) of the other Provinces,
then not in Arms, would not rise, but leave him in the lurch for all, he would
produce his Warrant signed with their hands, and written in their own blood,
that should bring them to the Gallows; and that they sat every day at
Council Board, and whispered the Lords Justices in the ear, who were as deep in
that business as himself. And says also, That on the third day after this
Rebellion began, Tortlagh oge O Neil's wife (a most bloody woman, It is a known
Truth, that though he took not the Castle, yet all his Horses in the Stable
were both ready furnished and in good equipage, which by several was observed
and wondered at.
and natural Daughter to the late Earl of Antrim) told this Deponent, that all
Ireland was in the same case with Ulster; for (said she) my Brother the Earl of
Antrim, has taken the Castle and City of Dublin, having lately moved thither
for the same purpose, and not to please the Duchess (as was given out) and my
brother Alexander mac Donnell (according to the general Appointment) has taken
the Town and Castle of Carrickfergus. He, the Deponent, then asked what they
meant to do with those whom they had disarmed and pillaged? She said, as long
as their preservation should be deemed consistent with the public safety, they
should enjoy their lives; when otherwise, better their enemy perish than
themselves: which was but a very cold comfort to a Freshman prisoner (as my
self was). And also said, That Sir Phelim O Neil told this Deponent in December
last, that his stock in money amounted to 80000 sterling, wherewith he said he
was able to maintain an Army for one year, though all shifts else failed. And
that Captain Alexander Hovenden told him, that as soon as his brother Sir
Phelim was created Earl of Tyron, and great O Neil, he wrote Letters, and sent
them by Friars to the Pope, and Kings of Spain and France, but would not
discover the Contents. And further says, That about the first of March last,
the said Alexander told the Deponent, that the Friars of As is evident in the
History, f. 63.
Drogheda (by Father Thomas brother to the Lord of Slane) had the second time
invited Sir Phelim thither, and offered to betray the Town unto him, by making,
or discovering (the Deponent knows not whether) a breach in the Wall, through
which he might march six men a breast. The Deponent saw this Friar the same
time in Armagh, whom Sir Phelim took by the hand, and brought to the Deponent,
saying, This is the Friar that said Mass at Finglass upon Sunday morning, and
in the Afternoon did beat Sir Charles Coote at swords. I hope, said the Friar,
to say Mass in Christ-Church Dublin within eight weeks. And further Deposed
that he, this Deponent, asked many, both of their Commanders and Friars, what
chiefly moved them to take up Arms: They said, Why may not we as well, Reasons
why the Rebels assumed Arms.
and better fight for Religion, which is the Substance, than the Scots did for
Ceremonies, which are but Shadows? and that my Lord of Strafford's Government
was intolerable. The Deponent answered, That that Government, how insupportable
soever, was indifferent, and lay no heavier upon them, then on him, and the
rest of the British Protestants. They replied, That the Deponent, and the rest
of the British, were no considerable part of the Kingdom; and that over and
above all this, they were certainly informed, that the Parliament of England
had a plot to bring them all to Church, or to cut off all the Papists in the
Kings Dominions, in England by the English Protestants (or as they call them,
Puritans) in Ireland by the Scots. And further deposes, That he asked (as
seeming very careful of their saftety) what hope of Aid they had? and from
whom? as also what discreet and able men they had to employ as Agents to their
Friends beyond the Sea? They said, if they held out this next Winter, they were
sure and certain in the Spring to receive Aid from the Pope, France, and Spain;
and that the Clergy of Spain had already contributed five thousand Arms and
Powder for a whole year then in readiness. They said, their best and only
Agents were their Priests and Friars, but especially the forenamed Paulo Neil,
upon Paul O Neil, a prime Instrument in the Rebellion.
whose coming (with advice from Spain) they presently opened the War; and that
since the War began, in the very dead of Winter, he both went with Letters, and
returned with Instructions from Spain in one Month, professing the good Cause
had suffered much prejudice if he had been hanged in Dublin. And this Deponent
further says, That he demanded why sometimes they pretended a Commission from
the King, at other times from the Queen, since all Wisemen knew How the King
and Queen came to be charged with the Rebellion.
that the King would not grant a Commission against himself, and the Queen
could not. They being Commanders and Friars, said, That it was lawful for them
to pretend what they could in advancement of their Cause: That many of the
Garrison Soldiers (now their Prisoners, whom they determined to employ in the
War, and to train others) would not serve them in regard of their Oath, unless
they were made so to believe: That in all Wars, rumors and lies served many
times to as good purpose as Arms, and that they would not disclaim any
advantage. But they said for the Queen (in regard, as Reasons why the Queen not
to be named.
a Catholic, she had enemies enough already) they would command their Priests
publicly (at Mass) to discharge the people from speaking of her as a Cause, or
Abetter of the present Troubles. And the Deponent also asked Sir Phelim O Neil,
what his demands were Sir Ph. O Neil's Motives to the Rebellion.
without which his Lordship and the rest would not lay down Arms? At first he
told this Deponent, That they required only Liberty of Conscience. But
afterward as his Power, so his Demands were multiplied. They must have no Lord
Deputy, great Officers of State, Privy Counselors, Judges, or Justices of
Peace, but of the Irish Nation; no standing Army in the Kingdom; all Tithes
payable by Papists to be paid to Popish Priests; Church Lands to be restored to
their Bishops; All Plantations, since primo Jacobi, to be disannulled, none
made hereafter; no payments of debts due to the British, or restitution of any
thing taken in the Wars; all Fortifications and Strengths to be in the hands of
the Irish, with power to erect and build more, if they thought fit; all
Strangers (meaning British) to be restrained from coming over; all Acts of
Parliament against Popery and Papists, together with Poynings Act to be
repealed, and the Irish Parliament to be made Independent. But says, that
others told him, this Deponent, that although all these Demands were granted,
yet Sir Phelim for his own part was not resolved to lay down Arms, unless his
Majesty would confirm unto him the Earldom of Tyrone, with all the ancient
Patrimony and Privileges belonging to the O Neils Commissions (however so
large without the title of O Neil) not satisfactory.
And further says, that in March 1641. Alexander Hovenden, by Sir Phelim's
direction, sent from the Camp before Drogheda a The Vanity Sir Phelim was
heightened with.
Prophecy said to be found in the Abbey of Kells, importing that Tyrone, or Sir
Phelim (after the Conquest and Settlement of Ireland) should fight five set
Battles in England; in the last whereof he should be killed upon
Dunsmore-heath, but not before he had driven King Charles, with his whole
Posterity, out of England, who should be afterward profugi in terra aliena in
aeternum. The Paper it self, with the Deponents whole Library, to the value of
seven or eight hundred pounds, was lately burnt by the Scots under the Conduct
of the Lord Viscount Montgomery: since that Prophecy the Deponent says, he
has often seen Captain Tirlagh mac Brian O Neil, a great man in the County of
Armagh, with many others, no mean Commanders, drinking Healths upon the knee to
Sir Phelim O Neil, Lord General of the Catholic Army in Ulster, Earl of
Tyrone, and King of Ireland. But the Deponent professes ( in verbo Christiani)
he did never pledge that Health; although sometimes he fled it with hazard of
his life, if he had been observed. And this Deponent further says, That Art
oge O Neil his eldest Son (whose name if it be not Art, he has forgotten) now,
and of a long time a Captain, and one of the stoutest Rebels in the County of
Armagh, was, as he told the Deponent, in Dublin at School, and dieted at an
Aldermans house, whose name he also does not remember in the beginning of the
rebellion, and that being found in Dublin, the Alderman aforesaid became bound
at Council Board in one thousand pounds for his forthcoming; but afterward
seeing how business sorted, he The perfidiousness of the City Aldermen to the
State.
came unto this young man, and said, Boy, get you gone, and shift for your
self: Alas, says he, Sir, you are bound for me in one thousand pounds. No
matter Boy, said he, I must loose that and many thousands more: whereupon he
faith he fled upon foot, and escaped to the Army about Drogheda that same
night. And further says, That in May 1642. Captain Walter White told Edward
Bleeke an Englishman, and the Deponent, in Hovenden's Garden, that amongst
others, Roger Moore, or Moore and Bryan O Neil were designed to take, and man
the Postern door of the Castle of Dublin; and that he was in Dublin, and
himself of the Plot, that told them this of his own knowledge. It may be
enquired if there were any more Bryan O Neils in Town at that time then one;
the Deponent durst not ask what Bryan he meant. And further says, That Tirlogh
oge O Neil told Sir Phelim O Neil's carriage at Strabane.
him in Armagh, three or four days before the Irish Army went to Strabane, that
the Lady of Strabane had by Letters invited Sir Phelim thither, assuring that
the Town should be betrayed unto him, or yielded, he knows not whether: And
Sir Phelim himself (at his return from taking Strabane) told him the same over
again; yet he said, when he came to the Castle to avoid suspicion, they shot
ten or twelve shots over him. He told the Deponent likewise, that nothing
withstood his present marriage with the said Lady, but the want of a
Dispensation impetiable from their Lord Primate for a Vow which she made not to
marry for three years to come. He said also, That at his entrance into the
Castle, the Ladies Priest (a Scotch Jesuit) exacted, and ministered an Oath unto
him, that he, and those his noble Cavaliers, came thither for the propagation
of the Catholic Faith, and not in any way to violate the Lady, since it is
reported very credibly that they are married. Captain Alexander Hovenden told
the Deponent, that when Sir Phelim brought her to Kynard from her own Castle of
Strabane, she did pray him to burn and raze it, least thereafter it might be
useful to the Scots, and was of opinion Sir Phelim did very ill in neglecting
so good advice. The Deponent, and the rest of the British, expected much
favor by her means, but immediately after her coming to these parts, the Sword
was let fly, whether at her entreaty or not, the Deponent cannot affirm. More
the Deponent has heard, but because it is not Treason, and she is a Lady nobly
descended, he will not publish it. And further the Deponent says, That in
March last a Footman of the Earl of Antrims was denied lodging, as was reported
by Mrs. Hovenden, Sir Phelim's mother, which gave much occasion of Discourse in
the Country, and that he heard Dr. Daly say, That Sir Phelim would never have
undertaken The Earl of Antrim expected to have joined with Sir Phelim O Neil.
the Province of Ulster, if he had not been persuaded that the said Earl would
have taken up Arms as soon as himself; and he himself has heard others say,
that his approbation of the business was as much as theirs; but that when it
came to Action, he durst not show his face in the field for fear of
discomposing his clothes: And that Owen mac Clymon (at his parting from the
Earl in March last, as himself reported to diverse in the Country) told him that
the common Cause suffered by his Non-concurrence: But he replied, The business
The Reasons why Antrim complied not
was already spoiled, especially in Ulster, by bloodshed and robbery; and that
he would not declare himself, either one way or other, until after May Day
following. And the Deponent has heard many of the Rebels call Sir Phelim a
Confident of the Earls, for letting him go when he was taken Prisoner by the
Captain of Charlemont, saying, That he deserved to loose his Head for some
words he spoke, going through Armagh, about the last of April, or first of May
last, viz. That he saw nothing amongst them but desolation and execrable
cruelty; for which God's wrath, and the King's just revenge hung over their
heads, and would very speedily overtake them. As he rode through the Parish of
Derenoose, he would very gladly (although the Deponent is a stranger unto him)
have seen him the said Deponent, but could not procure the Friars Guides to
send a messenger for him; they were afraid (as some of them told him
afterward) that he would have rescued the Deponent, but he the Deponent
thinks, they more feared, least he might have labored to divert his Lordship
from joining with them, which was then presently expected: so that a man can
see no part of This Tragedy wherein there is not a Devil or a Friar, or both.
And the Deponent further says, That he was certainly informed by the chief of
the O Donnellies and O Donnellies and O Lappans, and many others, whereof some
were very near unto Sir Phelim, and it is generally reported in those parts,
where the Deponent lived, that Mrs. May, Widow to Mr. Edward May late of Dublin
(a mere Irish woman, whom the General long kept for his fancy, and thereafter
married out of Conscience) Mrs. May of Dublin, Sir Phelim's Intelligencer.
is and was ever (since the Rebellion began) Sir Phelim's chief and unsuspected
Intelligencer; that he addressed all his Packets sent to Dublin unto her, and
by her means, and for the most part by Owen mac Clymon aforesaid, and other of
her Servants received Answers; perhaps the truth may be found out by sudden
search for Letters, or unexpected examination of her and her Servants apart.
And also says, that he has heard many of the Rebels say amongst themselves,
that they feared nothing so much, as the corrupting and spoiling Monroe's
Neglect.
of their Harvest: and that if G. M. Monroe had put three thousand men in the
Towns of Armagh, Dungannon, and Monaghan, before they were burnt, he had made
himself absolute Master of all the Corn in the three Counties, without which
they could not possibly subsist this Winter. And says moreover, That Sir
Phelim O Neil, his deputed Lieutenants and Governors (in all their
Commissions, Passes, and Warrants) leave out these words ( in his Majesty's
name) yet if any be tendered by the British in the old style, they seldom
except against them de nomine, and as seldom sign them. And the Deponent also
says, that the last, who were devoured, were The last that suffered were those
who had complied.
Apostates through fear, and Revolters to Popery, who (though but a very
handful) yet such was their insatiable thirst of blood, they could not spare
them. And further says, That it was credibly told him, that the Rebels (least
they should hereafter be charged with more murders then they had committed)
commanded their Priests to bring in a true account of them; and that the
persons so slaughtered (whether in Ulster, or the whole Kingdom, the Deponent
154000 slaughtered by the Priests estimate.
durst not enquire) in March last, amounted unto one hundred, fifty four
thousand. Sir Phelim O Neil asked the Deponent very scornfully once in Armagh,
and in the hearing of many, why the Scots in so many weeks came not to relieve
or revenge the Death of their Countrymen? The Deponent durst not reply in this
so dangerous a question; but one that stood by said, That they did wisely to
stay until his Lordship made them more elbow room. This Riddle was soon after
interpreted upon the March of the Scottish Army from the Newry back to
Carrickfergus, by the bloody Massacre of above five thousand of the British in
three days. About two hundred persons, within seven weeks after, that were
relieved by the Lord Conways Army, sent for the same purpose, so that the
Deponent does confidently say, that now of all the Royal Plantation in Ulster,
there The Scots destroyed.
does not remain alive two hundred more amongst the Rebels. And further says,
That a Nephew of Art. O Neil's, Brother to Henry O Neil Lord of the Fewes, told
him, this Deponent, that his Uncle the said Art. had but one Scotchman upon his
Land, and that about two days foregoing, gave directions to have him murdered,
thereby to give to Sir Phelim a proof of his zeal in the common Cause, from
which there was a suspicion he meant to Revolt. And further says, that there
went a common report amongst the Irish in Armagh, that the Bishop of Derry had
undertaken to betray the Town of Derry Sir Phelims design to have cut off Dr.
Bramhall Bp. of Derry.
unto Sir Phelim O Neil, which he remembering, or being put in mind thereof at
Strabane, as he told the Deponent upon his return, he resolved from thence to
have written unto him a Letter, promising to be with him such a night, and
desiring admittance at the Gate appointed. This Letter, said he, I intended to
send by a Prisoner, with whom (upon search finding this Letter) the Scots
(without more examination) would have cut the Bishop into Collops, but he said
somewhat put this project out of his head. He may in time do as much for
others, as then he intended to do for the Bishop, wherefore the Deponent
thought this passage not worthy the inserting. And the Deponent further says,
That Tirlagh oge O Neil, then Governor of Armagh, caused an English Ditcher to
be killed upon a proof made, that he should say he was a better preacher then
James Usher Primate of Armagh: this he did (as he said) to suppress Brownisme
in his Government. And further says, That amongst the Rebels he has seen some
laugh and wonder at the English for keeping their words or protestations given
to the Irish; and some said in mockery, that this was a secret Confession of
the Protestants, that the Papists were not Heretics: and for some instance of
extreme cruelty used by the Irish in Ulster, the Deponent says, that by
special command from Sir Phelim O Neil, they dragged the Deponents brother,
Lieutenant James Maxwell, out of his bed in the rage and The Deponents Brother
murdered, and his Wife drowned.
height of a burning Fever, and least any of his Acquaintance or Friends should
bury him, they carried him two miles from any Church, and there cruelly
butchered him, when he knew neither what he did or said: and thus Sir Phelim
paid him two hundred and sixty pounds which he owed him. And that his Wife
Grizell Maxwell, being in Childbirth, the Child half born, and half unborn,
they stripped stark naked, and drove her about an arrow flight to the Blackwater,
and drowned her. The like they did to another Englishwoman in the same Parish
in the beginning of the Rebellion, which was little inferior (if not more
unnatural and barbarous) then the roasting of Mr. Watson roasted alive.
Watson alive, after they had cut a Collop out of either Buttock. That a
Scotchwoman was found in the Glyn-wood lying dead, her belly ripped up, and a
living Child crawling in her Womb, cut out of the Others barbarously murdered.
Cawl. That Mr. Starky, Schoolmaster at Armagh, a Gentleman of good parentage
and parts, being upwards of one hundred years of age, they stripped naked,
caused two of his Daughters (Virgins) being likewise naked, to support him
under each arm, not being able to go of himself, and in that posture carried
them all three a quarter of a mile to a Turf-pit, and drowned them, feeding the
lust of their eyes and the cruelty of their hearts with the self same objects
at the same time. At the Siege of Augher, they would not kill any English
beast, Cruelties to Beasts.
and then eat it, but they cut Collops out of them being alive, letting them
there waste till they had no more flesh upon their backs; so that sometimes a
beast would live two or three days together in that Torment. The like they did
at Armagh, when they murdered Hugh Echline Esquire. they hanged all his Irish
Servants, which had any ways proved faithful or useful unto him during this
Rebellion. And as touching exemplary constancy in Religion, the Deponent says,
that Henry Cowell Esquire. a gallant and well-bred Gentleman, was murdered,
because he would not consent to marry a beastly Trull, Mary ny Neil, a near
Kinswoman of Sir Phelim's: He was proffered his Echline and his Son constant in
the Faith.
life without the Blowse if he would have gone to Mass, but he chose rather to
dye then do either. There was made the like proffer of life for going to Mass
unto Robert Echline, Son to the abovenamed Hugh Echline, a Child of eleven or
twelve years of age, but he also refused it, saying, He saw nothing in their
Religion for which he would change his own. And the Deponent further says,
That his, and the rest of the British chief and best Friends amongst the
Rebels were, Mrs. Katherine Hovenden Widow, Mother to Sir Phelim O Neil: she
Sir Phelim's Mother charitable.
preserved four and twenty English and Scots in her own house, and fed them for
seven and thirty weeks out of her own store; and when her Children took her
away upon the approach of an Army, she left both them, and this Deponent, to
their liberty, and gave them free leave to escape: many more she would have
saved, but that while she lay sick ten weeks of an Ague, none of them were
suffered to come near her, she swooned twice, as was said, when she heard that
six and fifty were taken out of the Deponent's House, and murdered in one day.
She used often to say, she had never offended the English, Captain Alex.
Hovenden's good Service.
except in being Mother to Sir Phelim and Captain Alexander Hovenden, Son to
Mrs. Hovenden, and half Brother to Sir Phelim; he conducted five and thirty
English out of Armagh to Drogheda, whereof some were of good quality, when it
was thought he had secret directions to have murdered them: twenty more he
sent safe to the Newry, and would trust no other Convoy then himself. It is to
be observed, that all others perished under color of Convoys, except The
Protestants trusting to Convoys, were betrayed.
only those whom he undertook. At the Deponents Request he saved Armagh twice
from burning, and would have saved it the third time, but that he lay sick of a
Fever. When he beheld the Ruins thereof, but especially of the Church, it is
said he wept bitterly, saying, Who will ever trust the Irish again, who have
neither kept their promises to God, nor protestations to men? When he ( viz.
Captain Alexander Hovenden) saw Sir Phelim's Warrant for the last general
Massacre, after the taking of the Newry, he solemnly swore he would never draw
his Sword again in Sir Phelim's quarrel or cause, cursing (in his passion) the
British, if ever they spared Irish man, woman, or child. He was desirous to
submit himself to the King's mercy upon the Lord Montgomery his protection,
offering to root out that bloody Sept of the Huges, with his own Followers and
Arms, out of Ireland: But the motion was rejected; perhaps worse will be
admitted. He never had his hand in blood out of Battle. That this Deponent
knows he is not yet (which may plead some favor) full two and twenty years
of age, and does not pretend to one foot of Inheritance. Dr. Dally preached so
vehemently against murdering, Some sensible of the Protestants condition.
that in the end he was forced to fly himself for a safeguard of his life.
Patrick Kelly, and Gilduffe mac Tynny, would suffer nothing robbed from the
British to come within their doors. And this Deponent further says, That very
many of the British Protestants, the Rebels buried alive, and took a great
pleasure to hear them speak unto them, as they dug down old Ditches upon
them. Except those, whom they thus buried, they (the Rebels) buried none of the
Protestants, neither would permit any, who survived, to perform the duty for
them. And further says, That the Rebels would send their Children abroad in
great Troops, and especially near unto Kynard, armed with long wattles and
whips, who would therewith beat men's bodies about their privy Members, until
they beat, or rather thrashed them off; then would return in great joy to their
Parents, who received them for such service, as it were in triumph. And further
says, If any women were found dead, lying with their faces downward, Dead
women abused.
they would turn them upon their backs, and in great flocks go unto them,
censuring all parts of their bodies, but especially such as are not to be
named, which afterward they abused so many ways so filthily, as chaste ears
would not endure the very naming thereof. And further says, That many of the
Protestants the Rebels would not kill outright, but being half dead, would
leave them, entreating for no greater favor at their hands, two or three days
after, but to kill them outright, which sometimes was granted, sometimes
denied. A young youth having his backbone broken, was found in a field, having
like a beast eaten all the grass round about him. The Deponent One not able to
stir forced to eat grass.
could not learn that they killed him, but that they removed him to a place of
better pasture: so that in these most bloody and execrable wretches, that of
the Holy Ghost is clearly verified, The very mercy of the wicked is cruelty.
And further says, That the Rebels themselves told him, this Deponent, that
they murdered nine hundred fifty and four in one morning in the County of
Antrim; land that besides them, they supposed they had killed above eleven or
twelve hundred more in that County. They told him likewise that Colonel Bryan O
Neil killed about one thousand in the County of Down, besides three hundred
killed near Killeleagh, and many hundreds both before and after in both those
Counties. At Sir Phelim's return from Lisnegarvy some of his Soldiers forced
about four and Some burned alive.
twenty British into a House, where they burned them alive, whose terrible
outcries they delighted very much to imitate and express unto others; and
says, that he heard Sir Phelim likewise report, that he killed six hundred
English at Garvagh in the County of Derry, and that he had neither left man,
woman, nor child alive in the Barony of Muntulony in the County of Tyrone, and
that betwixt Armagh and the Newry in the several Lands and Plantations of Sir
Arthur Atcheson, John Hamilton Esquire. the Lord Cawfield, and the Lord
Mountnorris. And says also, that there were above two thousand of the British
murdered in their own Houses, for the most part, and that he was informed
hereof by a Scotchman, who was in these parts with Sir Phelim, and saw their
Houses filled with their dead bodies. In the Glenwood, toward Drummore, there
were slaughtered (as the Rebels told the Deponent) upwards of twelve hundred,
who were all killed in their flight to the County of Down. The number of
people drowned at the Bridge of Portadowne are diversely reported, according as
men stayed among the Rebels. The Deponent (who stayed as long as any, and had
better intelligence then most of the English amongst them) had better reason to
know the truth, and Drowned at Portadown Bridge.
says there were by their own report one hundred and ninety drowned with Mr.
Fullerton. At another time they threw one hundred and forty over the said
Bridge; at another time six or seven and thirty; and so continued drowning
every day, more or fewer, for seven or eight weeks, so that the fewest, which
can be supposed there to have perished, must needs be above one thousand,
besides as many more drowned betwixt that Bridge and the great Lough of
Mountjoy, besides those who perished by the Sword, Fire, and Famine in
Clanbrazill, and the English Plantation adjacent, which in regard there escaped
not three hundred out of all those quarters, must needs amount to many
thousands. Near unto the Deponents own House, six and thirty persons were
thrown from the Currbridge at one time; at another Drowned in other places.
time eighteen or nineteen; at another time six and fifty men, women, and
children, all of them being taken out of the Deponents own House; and at
several other times several other numbers besides these, who were drowned in
the Blackwater at Kynard: In which Town and Parish of Tynon, whereof the
Deponent was Rector, there were drowned, slaughtered, and died of Famine, and
for want of Clothes, about six hundred. And says, he might add to these mamany
thousands more, but the Diary, which he the Deponent wrote amongst the Rebels,
being burned with his House, Books, and all his Papers, he refers himself to
the number in gross, which the Rebels themselves have upon enquiry found out
and acknowledged, which notwithstanding will come short of all that have been
murdered in Ireland, there being above One hundred fifty and four thousand now
wanting of the British within the very Precinct of Ulster. And the Deponent
further says, that it was common Table-talk amongst the Rebels, that the
Ghosts of Mr. William Fullerton, Timothy Apparitions of those flung over
Portadown.
Jephes, and the most of those who were thrown over Portadown Bridge, were
daily and nightly seen to walk upon the River, sometimes singing of Psalms,
sometimes brandishing of naked Swords, and sometimes screeching in a most
hideous and fearful manner. The Deponent did not believe the same at first, and
yet is doubtful whether to believe it or not; but says, that diverse of the
Rebels assured him, that they themselves did dwell near to the said River, and
being daily frighted with those apparitions (but especially with their horrible
screeching) were in conclusion forced to remove further into the Country. Their
own Priests and Friars could not deny the truth thereof, but as often as it was
by the Deponent objected unto them, they said, That it was but a cunning slight
of the Devil to hinder this great work of propagating the Catholic Faith, and
killing of Heretics; or that it was wrought by witchcraft. The Deponent
himself lived within thirteen miles of the Bridge, and never heard any man so
much as doubt of the truth thereof; howsoever the Deponent obliges no man's
faith, in regard he saw it not with his own eyes, otherwise he had as much
certainty as morally could be required of such a matter. And the Deponent
further says, That the Degenerated Those of the Pale cruel.
Pale-English were most cruel amongst the British Protestants, being beaten
from their own Lands, and were never satisfied with their blood, until they had
in a manner seen the last drop thereof, affrighting Sir Phelim O Neil every day
with their numbers, persuading him that while they (meaning the Protestants)
lived, there would neither be room for them, nor safety for him. It was easy
to spur on the cowardly bloody Rebel; yet no sooner were the Protestants cut
off, but contrary to their expectation, the mere Irish took present possessions
of their Lands and Houses, whereat they (of the Pale) very much grumbled, and
said Sir Phelim had not kept promise with How this was resented, see the
History f. 69.
them; howsoever they were forced to swallow those and many other injuries. And
further says, That he knew one boy near unto himself, not exceeding fourteen
years of age, who killed at Kynard in one night fifteen able strong men with
his Skean, they being disarmed, and most of their feet in the stocks. Another
not above twelve years of age killed two women and one man at the siege of
Augher. A woman, Tenant to the Deponent, killed seven men Cruelties in which
their children were encouraged.
and women of her English Fellow-tenants in one morning: And it was very usual
in all parts for their children to murder the Protestants children; and
sometimes with lath Swords, heavy and well sharpened, they would venture upon
men and women of riper years; cruelties not to be believed, if there were not
so many Eyewitnesses of them. And the Deponent further says, That the first
three days and nights of this present Rebellion, viz. October. 23, 24, and 25. it
was generally observed, That no Cock crew, or any Dog was heard to bark, no
not when the Rebels came in great multitudes unto the Protestants Houses by
night to rob and murder them: and about three or four nights before the six
and fifty persons were taken out of the Deponent's House and drowned, and
amongst those the Deponents brother, Lieutenant James Maxwell, in the dark of
the Moon, about one of the clock at night, a Light was observed in manner of a
long Pillar to shine for a long way through the Air, and refracted upon the
North Gabel of the House. It gave so great a light about an hour together, that
diverse of the watch read both Letters and Books of a very small Character
thereby, The former the Deponent knows to be most true both by his own
Experience, and the general observation of as many as the Deponent met with
within the County of Armagh. The later was seen by all those of the Deponents
Family, and besides by many of his Irish guard. For some of them at that time
were drunk, and could see nothing, who interpreted the same to be an immediate
expression, and token of Divine Providence and watchfulness over the
Protestants, affirming that many times the Rebels had purposed to destroy the
Deponent, and his Family, but were always hindered and interrupted, but which
way themselves could not tell; But the Deponent (as is well known) made a far
contrary interpretation thereof, which shortly after fell out to be the truer
of the two, for (presaging thereby that bloody Massacre which ensued) the
Deponent (with the rest of his Family) gave themselves to Fasting and Prayer,
expecting each hour that universal cutting off, which fell out very shortly
after.

Robert Maxwell.

Deposed 22 August 1642. John Watson. William Aldrich.

Post-Information the 7th of July, 1643.
AND further this Deponent says, that the Rebels having exposed the murdered
bodies of the British so long unto the public view and censure, that they
began to stink, and infect the Air (which commonly being a thing very strange,
would not sometimes happen until four or five weeks after the murders
committed) they usually permitted some of their bodies to be removed, and cast
into Ditches, but so, as they must ever be laid with their faces downward; the
reason whereof this Deponent not understanding, asked the Rebels themselves
what was meant thereby, who readily answered that they so placed them to the
intent they might have a prospect and sight of Hell only, and therefore, when
they killed any of us, they used always these words, Anima Dewll, which is, thy
soul to the Devil. And this Deponent further says, That notwithstanding all
the moderation formerly pretended by the forenamed Alexander Hovenden, and the
many real favors done by him unto many of the British, and in particular to
this Deponent, that yet he heard him both say and swear, That he wished them
all damned, both body and soul, who were against them in this cause. Further,
this Deponent says, That it was usual sport with one mac Mahon, Capt. of the
Castle and Town of Monaghan (as he said Mr. Mahon confessed before Mr. Hugh
Echline and many others) to take a wooden Prick or Broach, and thrust it up
into the Fundament of an English or Scotchman, and then after drive him about
the Room with a Joyntstool, until through extreme pain he either fainted or
gave content to the Spectators by some notable skips and frisks, which rare
invention he offered to put in practice at the same time, and in the same place
where he boasted thereof, but that the said Mr. Echline prevailed with him to
omit it, as sufficiently (without any further demonstration) believing the
excellency of the sport. And it is further of undeniable truth, That the said
mac Mahon, and other Rebels in the Castle of Monaghan, after a great Feast
there held, took an English or Welshman, and bound him naked upon the Table, at
which they drank after dinner, and at every Health gave him a gash or wound
(but not mortal) until his whole body became (as it were) one continued wound,
and thereafter flung him out upon the Dunghill, where he died, partly of his
said wounds, and partly of famine, none daring to relieve him.

Robert Maxwell.
Jurat. ut supra.
William Aldrich.
John Watson.

THE INDEX.
A
THe Abbey of Multifarnan the place where the Conspirators first considered what
to do after they had raised a Rebellion. fol. 25 An Anniversary Act to be
observed on the 23 of October. fol. 323 An Address of certain Commissioners to
the King about Ireland, and his Answer. fol. 122 Affairs why they proceeded so
slowly in 1642. fol. 101 Agents sent to Kilkenny. fol. 233 from the
Confederates sent to the Duke of Lorrain. fol. 286
The Earl of Antrim sent by the Confederates (with others) to the Queen at
Paris. fol. 199 Arguments why the Irish Soldiers should not be transported to
Spain. fol. 8, etc. The Army of 8000 foot and 1000 horse raised in Ireland.
fol. 4 disbanded. They being too good Englishmen to wish that a standing Army
should be kept in the Bowels of that Country. fol. 10
Atherdee taken by the English. fol. 67 Sir Arthur Aston made Governor of
Tredagh, fol. 223 slain. ibid.
The General or National Assembly begins. fol. 95 justifies the Commissioners.
fol. 172 agree with the Congregation at Waterford. ibid. Acts when the Earl of
Clanrickard is Deputy. fol. 279
Assembly at Clanmacnoise convene fol. 234 their acts from fol. 235 to 239

B
BAggatrath ordered to be fortified, fol. 219 Balintober Battle fol. 81 Sir
James Barrie's account of King Charles the First's Letter of a Plot. fol. 8
Lieutenant General Barry beaten before Cork. fol. 88 Colonel Barry employed to
compose Differences with the Greatest. fol. 233 The Earl of Barrimore's Success
at Cloghleigh. fol. 86 Bealing's repulse at Lismore. fol. 85 is sent to Rome,
brings in the Nuncio fol. 153
Dr. Bedel Bishop of Kilmore his Information of the Papists Insolences fol. 2
Death and Character. fol. 32
Belfast surrendered to the Parliamentarians fol. 225 The Bishop of Clogher
defeated fol. 253 his Death fol. 253 Character fol. 253
of Fern's insolent Letter touching the M. of Clanrickard. fol. 286 Ossory's
Excommunication fol. 163 Ross hanged. fol. 240
The Bishops at James-town publish an Excommunication. fol. 261 a malicious
Declaration. ib.
The Lord Blaney, etc. give Intelligence of the Rebels Proceedings. fol. 27 Sir
John Borlase Senior (and others) has Letters directed to him to regulate
affairs. fol. 6 when instituted Lord Justice. fol. 7 receives a Letter from Sir
Henry Vane of a Plot. ibid. his answer to the Parliaments Committee of Ireland
for Arms. fol. 12 has the Plot discovered to him. fol. 20 is again made Lord
Justice. fol. 121 quits his Justiceship. fol. 141
Sir John Borlase Junior goes to Tredath. fol. 29 his Service there. fol. 63 is
sent to the State from thence. fol. 64 returns. ibid. his Service at Colp. fol.
66 in Lowth and Mead. fol. 101
his Regiment reduced. fol. 180 disbanded. fol. 225
The Lord Broghill gallantly defends Lismore. fol. 85 defats Muskery in a
pitched Battle. fol. 283 the Bishop of Ross. fol. 240

Murtogh O Bryan stood longest in Rebellion. fol. 315 Lieut. Col. Byron goes to
Tredath fol. 29 is one of the Commissioners from Tredath to the State. fol. 64
his excellent Service at Tallaghallon. fol. 66 Prisoner at Tredath. fol. 195
C
DR. Cale brings Propositions to the State. fol. 45 is sent with Propositions
to the Rebels. fol. 48
Cappaquim Battle. fol. 86 Carrickmacross ordered to be demolished. fol. 102
Cavan's Remonstrance, and the History of that County. fol. 31 The Treaty of
Cessation begings at Castle-Martin fol. 125 proceeds at Sigginstown, fol. 127
is concluded. fol. 130 begets Heats betwixt King and Parliament. fol. 134 is
broken by the Irish. fol. 139 is renewed. fol. 145
The Character of the Irish. fol. 14 The Marquess of Clanrickard's good usage
of the English. fol. 76 his fidelity to the Lord Lieutenant. fol. 179 mediating
Col. Preston signs to come in. fol. 170 made Lieutenant General of the Army
fol. 171 is desired Governor but till an Assembly. fol. 275 accepts of the
Government. fol. 279 his Proclamation to inhibit any to leave the Irish
Quarters fol. 281 routed by Coot. fol. 284 impowers a Committee to treat with
Lorrain's Agent. fol. 285 his Reply to him. fol. 286 his excellent Letter to
the Duke of Lorrain. fol. 290 his Reasons against complying with the
Confederates clandestine proceedings with Lorrain, evidencing his integrity to
his Prince and Nation. fol. 292 deceived by the Irish in their obedience. fol.
293 demands Justice against Geoghehan. ibid. notwithstanding assists the Irish
at Gallway. fol. 301 after the Surrender of Gallway persues the King's Interest
fol. 302 is beaten by Coot fol. 303 quits the Kingdom ibid. his Character ibid.
The Protestant Clergies Remonstrance to the Parliaments Commissioners fol. 184
The Popish Clergy foments misconceits of the Lord Lieutenant fol. 233 their
reply to the Lord Lieutenant from Jamestown, from fol. 258 to 260
Clothes bestowed upon the stripped Protestants of Ireland fol. 94 Sir William
Coals Information of the suspicion of Troubles fol. 19 Service at Eniskellin
fol. 87
Commissions to raise forces for the Spaniards Service fol. 8 sent into the
North fol. 27 Munster fol. 27 Connagh fol. 27
of Martial Law granted to several Papists fol. 28
Most of the Irish Committee engaged in the Rebellion fol. 13 The Parliament of
England's Committee arrive in Ireland fol. 103 depart, so necessities increase,
fol. 105
The Committee from the Councel-board in Ireland at Oxford much troubled
betwixt the Protestant and Confederate Agents fol. 142 Commissioners authorized
to state the Condition of the deplorable English fol. 15 sent from the
Parliament in England into Ireland fol. 151 as also fol. 256 Supreme Council to
Waterford fol. 164 foreign Princes fol. 174
Commissioners from the Parliament treaty about surrendering Dublin. The Effect
fol. 169 of Trust constituted fol. 204 dissent from the L. Lieutenant fol. 227
suspected not to be entire fol. 233 their address to the Marq. of Ormond's
Letter. fol. 249

The Convention called how long it lasted what it gave to the King D. of York
Gloucester fol. 316 A Confederacy betwixt the Irish and old English of the Pale,
the Oath fol. 56 The Confederates treat about a Peace fol. 152 unite with the
Lord Lieutenant fol. 168 are treacherous, so the Lord Lieutenant agrees with
the Parliament fol. 173 send Agents to Oxford fol. 141 their high demands fol.
142 the King's admonition to them fol. 143
Agents behavior at their return to Ireland fol. 145 come to the Lord
Lieutenant at Carrick fol. 201 desire a Privy Council fol. 242 meet at
James-town fol. 256 think to treat with Ireton fol. 280 cherish good opinion of
the Independents fol. 293 in Munster meditate a compliance with the Parliament
fol. 301
The Congregation at Waterford declare the Peace of 1646. void fol. 161 The
Conspiracy though discovered, yet the Massacres continued fol. 30 Sir Charles
Coot Senior Governor of Dublin fol. 27 his success in Wickle fol. 38
vindicated from the Rebels aspersions fol. 41 beats the Enemy from Clantarf
fol. 43 Swords fol. 52 with the Lord Lisle relieves the Lady Offalia fol. 78
takes Trim ibid.
is killed ibid.
After whose death much was not attempted till the Battle of Ross, where the
Gallantry of the English and the Life of their General wonderfully appeared
fol. 80 Sir Charles Coot Junior prospers against Con ORourk, etc. in Connaght
fol. 50 beats the Rebels in Connaght fol. 76 relieves Athlone ibid. his good
Service in Connaght fol. 146 his Reply to the Presbytery at Belfast fol. 207,
208 censured for complying with Owen O Neil fol. 217 takes Colrain fol. 218
besieges Carickfergus ibid. routs the Scots in Ulster fol. 229 beats the
Marquess of Clanrickard fol. 284 defeats a Party of Fitz. Patricks and Odwyrs
forces fol. 300 streightens Gallway fol. 301 has it delivered to him ibid.
impeaches several fol. 316 his and other Officers memorable Declaration ibid.
Captain Richard Coot's Service in Connaught fol. 120 Lord Costiloe presents to
the State the Longford Letter fol. 34 goes for England ibid.
The Covenant or Solemn League disowned fol. 141 The Supreme Councels insolent
Letter to the Lords Justices fol. 120 Letter touching the Scots fol. 137 to the
Pope touching the Nuncio fol. 154

Col. Crafford beats the Enemy from Finglass fol. 43 his good Service at
Kilrush fol. 75 his Service at Monaster, even with 1300 foot, not 13000 fol.
112 against those who alarmed Dublin fol. 128

Cromwell appointed the Parliaments Lord Lieutenant in Ireland fol. 209 lands
at Dublin fol. 222 storms Tredath fol. 223 takes Trim ibid. Carlingford ibid.
Newry ibid.
returns to Dublin fol. 225 takes Wexford, etc. ibid. his Assurance that Mass
was not to be allowed in the Parliaments Quarters fol. 226 takes Ross fol. 227
is beaten from Waterford fol. 229 goes to Dungarvan, having taken Passage-Fort
fol. 230 begins the Campaign fol. 239 takes Clonmel ibid. disturbs the-Rebels
Council in VVestmeath ibid. is summoned into England fol. 241 to be prayed for,
not the King, by Popish Injunction ibid.
Henry Cromwell goes for Ireland fol. 316 indulges Learning fol. 316 is well
accepted fol. 316 yields up all to Steel fol. 316 leaves Ireland fol. 316
The Rise of Custodiums fol. 98
D
AN Abbreviate of the Parliaments Declaration of the miserable condition of
Ireland fol. 124 The Lord Dillon, one of the Lord Justices, soon displaced fol.
6 Dowdall's Deposition touching the union of the Pale and the Northern Rebels
fol. 39 Dundalk recovered by the English fol. 67 The Lady Dowdall's magnanimous
defense of Kilfinny-Castle fol. 87
E
UPon Edgehill fight the Supplies for Ireland failed fol. 103 By what means
the English proceeded in the War from 89 to 92 Ever mac Mahon discovers to the
Lord Deputy Wentworth a Plot fol. 2 Exceptions taken against the Irish
Commissioners Title and Cause fol. 126 The Excommunication against the Marquess
of Ormond, why suspended fol. 268 The Clergy's Excommunication not forcible
against the Commons resolve to deliver Limerick to Ireton fol. 295
F
FAnning displaces the Mayor of Waterford, and by the Rebels is made Mayor fol.
161 is countenanced by the Nuncio ibid.
The Lord Forbes against Gallway fol. 82 Forces going to strengthen Tredath
beaten at Gellingston-bridge fol. 37 Under Col. Venables, Hnnks, and Reynolds
land at Dublin fol. 218
A Fast Proclaimed fol. 38 by the King's Order the 8th. of Jan. fol. 54 to be
observed Monthly fol. 77
Fitzgerald Edict stating his Cause. App. 8 The Anniversary Form of Prayer for
the 23 of October. App. 88 The Fate of those who had egregiously failed in their
Duty to the King in Limerick. fol. 300 Fleetwood goes for Ireland fol. 302
encourages the Sectarians fol. 315
Col. Flower's Regiment reduced, fol. 180 disbanded 225* sent Prisoner to
Chester fol. 195

G
GAlbreth gives security, being found to have made fictitious Matters fol. 152
The Garrisons in Munster revolt to the Parliament fol. 228 Geoghehan's
Insolency against the State fol. 293 Gibson takes Carickmam fol. 73 goes into
VVickloe fol. 83
Glamorgan's Agency with the Rebels disowned fol. 145 Gormanston General of the
Pale fol. 42 Defects of Government happily correed (though Carue in his Annals
of Ireland, p. 389. will have it that the King promoted One in Ireland, Ex mero
odio in hibernos ad tantam honoris amplitudinem, an Expression like himself.
The Person having been entire to his Principles and Allegiance) fol. 16, 18
Several Graces vouchsafed to the Irish fol. 6 Sir Richard Greenvile's good
Service in Kilrush Battle fol. 75 at Raconnel fol. 105 Ross fol. 109

H
SIr Frederick Hamilton's Service at Manor Hamilton fol. 88 Ensign Hammond
first enters Carrickmain fol. 73 Sir Simon Harcourt arrives at Dublin fol. 52
his Expedition into VVickloe fol. 72 death at Carrickmain fol. 73

The Herald at Arms barbarously used at Limerick fol. 160 King Henry the
Eighth's Censure of the Popish Clergy fol. 301 A High Court of Justice erected
in Ireland fol. 303 where first instituted fol. 304 cut not off above two
hundred Persons fol. 315

I
JEalousies arise in the Lord Lieutenants Army when the Munster Garrisons are
delivered up to Cromwell fol. 228 The L. Inchequin appointed President of
Munster fol. 89 his carriage at the Battle of Lis^arrel ibid. and the Munster
Forces withstand the Gessation fol. 146 his Letter and Declaration to 150
revolt to the Parl. how taken fol. 151 articled against fol. 168
his good Service at Knocknones fol. 187 Letter to the Speaker fol. 188
joins with the Marquess of Ormond fol. 190 his Cessation with the Irish fol.
209 Attempts to bring over Jones fol. 209 beats a Party of Jones's Horse fol.
213 routs Col. Chidley Coot ibid. takes Tredagh fol. 214 beats Farrall fol. 215
takes Dundalk ibid. Trim fol. 217
suspecting Cromwell would land in Munster, went there fol. 219 is addressed to
by the Irish as One acceptable to his Country fol. 245 leaves Ireland fol. 278
his character fol. 278
Instruments of State not to be censured by every Capacity fol. 3 Intermission
of Legal Proceedings against the Papists, the cause of the Irish Insolences
fol. 1 Quo tempore Carolus VValliae Princeps in Hispania immorabatur, omnes
Religiosi Ordinis Pontificiae Religionis sibi domicilia pro divino Cultu
celebrando Extruxerunt, quae tamen postmodum jussu Regis Vice-comes Faulkland
tum Hiberniae Prorex in Coronae profanos usus convertit. So belches Carue in
his Annals of Ireland fol. 318 Col. Mich. Jones arrives at Dublin fol. 180 is
made Governor thereof, and Commander of the Lemster Forces ibid. beaten by
Preston fol. 186
gains the Battle at Dunganhill ibid. his good Service with Monk fol. 187
fortifies Dublin fol. 195 sends several suspected into England ibid. his Answer
to the L. Lieutenants Letter fol. 209 L. Inchequin's Letter ibid.
beats Clanrickard's Regiments fol. 213 his intention to besiege Tredagh
hindered fol. 222 his Victory at Rathmines fol. 221, 222 his death * character
fol. 230
Sir Theophilus Jones returned with a Supply into Ireland fol. 210 made General
of Dublin fol. 223 with Col. Reynold's Service in VVestmeath fol. 240 beats
Phelim mac Hugh coming to relieve Finagh fol. 283 Seizes Dublin-Castle fol. 316
The bleeding Iphigenia answered in reference to a Calumny on the State fol. 55
his Doctrine of the lawfulness of assuming Arms to prevent an Evil, confuted by
Andrew Sall in his Book entitled -- fol. 16
Ireland never subdued till the Laws were as communicable to the Irish as
English fol. 1 neglected fol. 93
Ireton, left by Cromwell his Deputy fol. 241 takes Waterford fol. 255 his
service at Kilkenny fol. 282 sits down before Limerick fol. 283 takes Limerick
fol. 290 dies there fol. 300 his Reasons (after he had taken Waterford) why he
put out the Irish App.1
The Irish pretend a Commission under the broad Seal fol. 29 cruel before the
Parliament meddled with their Religion fol. 50 taunt the Lords of the Pale with
old miscarriages fol. 69 hearken not to the Cessation whilst they stormed
Castle-Coot fol. 120 petition upon the Cessation to be admitted to their Houses
fol. 140 Intentions suspected fol. 153 as false to Clanrick as Ormond fol. 284,
285 upon their Heats with the Marquess of Ormond, threaten to return to their
confederacy fol. 272 surrender on the Kilkenny Articles fol. 302 charged with
the guilt of Royal Blood fol. 303 transplanted into Connaght fol. 315 Agents
admitted to inspect the Act of Settlement fol. 320 carriage and dismission fol.
321

The Judges Reasons for the Continuance of the Parliament fol. 131 The Lords
Justices equal Government fol. 7 cheerfulness to comply with the request of
both Houses fol. 13 adjourn the Parliament to the 9th of Nov. ibid. summon the
Lords of the Pale to consult what to be done fol. 40 Proclamation of the 28 of
December. fol. 45 Mercy to such as should return to their obedience in time fol.
51 Letter to the Speaker touching Ross Battle fol. 106 Letter to the King of
the Affairs of Ireland fol. 122

K
KIlrush Battle from 73 to 75 K. Charles I. censure of the Rebellion fol. 14
refers the care of Ireland to the Parliament of England fol. 36 sends Arms and
Ammunition out of Scotland into Ireland fol. 38 his speech checking the
Parliaments slow proceedings fol. 44 his second speech to that Intent ibid. his
offer to raise 10000 Volunteers for the Irish service fol. 45 his Proclamation
against the Rebels fol. 53 his Reasons why it came forth no sooner fol. 54 his
Letter of Grace to the Irish fol. 6 oflers to go into Ireland fol. 70 his
Resentment of that Rebellion fol. 92, 93 his Commission to hear the Rebels
Remonstrance fol. 114 his first Letter about the Cessation fol. 118 his second
Letter to that Intent fol. 121 his third Letter to the same purpose fol. 124
his fourth Letter for the same fol. 130 his fifth Letter for it, and ordering
how the Soldiers should be disposed of fol. 132 his motive to the Cessation
fol. 130
K. Charles I. his answer to the Parliament touching Ireland fol. 200 his
Letter to the Marquess of Ormond ibid. his Reasons for the Peace 1648 fol. 202
his Judgment on Glamorgans Agency fol. 153
K. Charles II. upon the Defeat of Rathmaines is diverted from Ireland fol. 222
being informed of the disobedience of the Irish, permits the L. Lieutenant to
withdraw his Authority fol. 246 Declaration in Scotland against the Peace 1648.
fol. 269 his Proclamation touching the Rebels fol. 318
Captain King's good Service at Balintober fight fol. 81 Lord Kynalmechy slain
at the Battle of Liscarroll fol. 89
L
THe Laity (even those who would be thought the greatest Royalists) where the
Clergy were concerned would not punish without the Bishops Cooperation fol. 267
Lambert thought on for Ireland, but disappointed fol. 301 A Letter from Sir
Henry Vane to the Lords Justices intimating a Conspiracy fol. 7 The Earl of
Leicester designed Lord Lieutenant, not permitted to go. fol. 5 However
afterward by the Act of Settlement his Arrears were allowed, 6. but that was
not so satisfactory to him as his missing an opportunity to express his virtue
and courage was really unhappy
Limerick refractory, 251. governed by the Clergy, 244. delivered upon Articles
fol. 296 governed by Sir Hardr. Waller for the Parliament fol. 299
The Lord Lisle lands at Dublin fol. 77 relieves the Lady Offalia fol. 78 beats
the Rebels from Trim fol. 79
The Lord Lisle's expedition into Westmeath fol. 102 good service at Ross fol.
109 voted Lord Lieutenant by the Parliament fol. 168 his Arrival ibid. Service
ibid. Return ibid.

Lisnegarvey Fight fol. 38 The Lords of the Pale except against words in the
first Proclamation fol. 22 Sir Thomas Lucas arrives at Dublin fol. 29 is in a
Council of War at Tredagh fol. 67 his Service in the Expedition toward Kilrush
fol. 73 at the Battle of Kilrush fol. 74, 75 Ross fol. 109
prisoner at Tredath fol. 195 admitted to have (besides Officers) 30 Soldiers
in his Troop fol. 141
Ludlow succeeds Ireton fol. 301 Lowther one of the Commissioners from Ormond
to Oxford fol. 142 the Parliament fol. 167
his excellent Speech at the trial of Sir Phelim O Neil fol. 305

M
THe Lord Macguire's Examination fol. 23 Trial fol. 200 Execution fol. 200
Mac Mahon's Examination fol. 20 Trial fol. 99 Execution fol. 99
The Mayor of Dublin and his Brethren scarcely advance 50 l. fol. 27 Dr.
Maxwell's large Examination touching the Plot App. 126 Means to reduce Ireland
to Peace and Quietness fol. 46 Mellifont besieged by the Rebels fol. 37 Active
Men of the House of Commons fol. 8 Protestant Members of Parliament inveigled
by the Papists to seek ease and redress fol. 10 Money appointed for Ireland
misapplied fol. 33 Lieut. Col. Monk arrives in Ireland fol. 52 his Advance at
Kilrush Battle fol. 75 relieves Balanokill fol. 105 his Expedition against
Preston fol. 128 seizes Carrickfergus, Colrain, Belfast fol. 195 his Cessation
with O Neil disallowed of by the Parliament fol. 215 dismissed the Parliaments
Service ibid.
Monro's Letter in disgust of the Cessation fol. 136 The Lord Moore enters
Tredagh fol. 60 his excellent Service there fol. 63 in Mead fol. 101
appears before Port-Leicester-Mill fol. 128 his death fol. 129 character ibid.

A Motion to call in a Foreign Prince fol. 174 The Lord Moungarret head of the
Munster Rebels fol. 84 The Lord Muskery joins with the Rebels ibid. Munster
Service fol. 93 Murder why a greater offense in Ireland then England fol. 311
A Collection of Murders from f. 119 in the App. to 125. in which ( viz. f.
120) there is mention made of the Murder of Thomas Prestick, the proof of
which is referred to a Letter accidently left out, but (on occasion) may be
seen in my hands.
N
LUke Nettervile and others assemble at Swords fol. 41 Some of the Nobility
desire the King to compose Extremes betwixt the Protestants and Confederates
fol. 145 The Northern Scotch Forces refuse to aid ours in Lemster fol. 83 The
Nuncio arrives in Ireland fol. 153 his exorbitant carriage fol. 161 besieges
Dublin fol. 162, 166 forbids those delegated to treat with the Lord Lieutenant
about the Peace, to proceed on censure of Excommunication fol. 163 his
Excommunication fol. 165 is persued by the Confederates to Gallway fol. 190 a
Narrative of his insolent carriage in Ireland fol. 191 his Answer to it, from
fol. 192 to 194 Summons a National Synod fol. 190 Quits the Kingdom ibid.

O
THe Oath of Association, with several Acts depending thereupon fol. 95 to 98
of the Confederates against the Nuncio App. 99 against the Peace of 1646. taken
by the Officers in Tredagh fol. 62
Owen O Conally's Examination fol. 20 sent to the Parliament with Letters fol.
27 rewarded fol. 36 slain fol. 225
The Lady Offalia's generous carriage against the Rebels fol. 77 Certain
Officers out of Ireland their Address to the King fol. 112 receive his Answer
fol. 113
Offers made to the Parliament disowned by Inchiquin fol. 196 Sir Phelim O
Neil's cruelties in the North for his Repulse at Tredagh fol. 68 besieges
Charlemont fol. 28 present at Loghress when the Plot was determined fol. 24
approaches Lisnegarvy fol. 38 besieges Tredagh fol. 59 is beaten near Raphoe
fol. 83 assists Clanrickard fol. 302 his Trial at the High Court of Justice
fol. 304 hanged, drawn, and quartered fol. 327 his character ibid.
Daniel O Neil moves his Excellency to come with an Army into England fol. 152
sent by his Excellency to win over his Uncle fol. 227
Owen O Neil endeavors to surprise the Lord Lieutenant fol. 161 his
Declaration for the Catholic Religion, King, etc. fol. 194 persued by the
Confederates, retires to the great Towns fol. 190 endeavoring to relieve
Port-Falkland worsted fol. 196 offers to be entertained by the Parliament ibid.
falls upon Clanrickard's Party fol. 201 and the Parliaments party agree fol.
214 his Service in relieving Londonderry fol. 217 agrees with the Lord
Lieutenant, but before he brought his Forces to him, dies fol. 228
The Order of Parliament of England concerning Ireland fol. 36 The Earl of
Ormond made Lieutenant General of the Army fol. 37 visits Tredagh fol. 67
Gallantry at Kilrush fol. 75
The Marquess of Ormond's Expedition to Ross fol. 108 just Edict against
plundering fol. 111 unwillingness to yield to the Rebels unjust demands fol.
153 concludes the Peace 1646. fol. 155 Lord Lieutenant goes to Kilkenny fol.
159 besieged by the Nuncio in Dublin fol. 167 makes a show to deliver the City
to the Parliament ibid. forced to return to Dublin fol. 172 his Reason for his
delivery up of his Power to the Parliament fol. 177 has the King's concession
fol. 179 delivers up Dublin fol. 183 goes into England ibid. has free access to
the King fol. 184 is suspected by the Army fol. 185 Meditates to return to
Ireland fol. 189 lands in Ireland fol. 197 his Declaration then ibid. Letters
to the Council of Kilkenny fol. 200
is congratulated by the Supreme Council ibid. concludes the Peace 1648. fol.
202 his Speech then ibid. endeavors to win Jones to his Party fol. 209 his
Difficulty in forming his Army fol. 211 Marches toward Dublin fol. 212 appears
before Dublin fol. 213 his Declaration touching affairs in Ulster fol. 215
blocks up Dublin fol. 218 after Rathmines defeat retires to Kilkenny fol. 222
not obeyed by the principal Towns fol. 224 intends to fight Cromwell fol. 226
uses means to bring in Owen O Neil fol. 227 his endeavor to impede Cromwell's
return to Dublin fol. 230 his Gallantry in relieving such who intended to
surprise Passage fol. 231 denied leave to hut his men under Waterford fol. 232
gives the King an Account of the Affairs in Ireland ibid. demonstrates to the
Commissioners of Trust his ill usage fol. 233 receives the Grievances of the
Deputies of the Counties fol. 239 goes to Limerick ibid. Summons the Romish
Bishops thither fol. 242 Conference with them ibid. receives not outward
Civility there fol. 243 calls an Assembly at Loghreogh, its Effects, ibid. 244
another Assembly at Loghreogh fol. 245
is addressed to by them fol. 246 Answer worthy himself fol. 247, 248 Proposals
to be received into Limerick fol. 251 is ill used by the Mayor of that Town
fol. 252 his Commission to the Bishop of Clogher on O Neils death ibid.
Resentment of the Bishops voluntary meeting at Jamestown fol. 257 Answer to the
Bishops Declaration at James-town fol. 261 clears himself of their Accusation
from 261 to 267 Declaration upon the Confederates Resentment of the Declaration
made in Scotland against the Peace 1648 fol. 269, 272 is affronted by the Guard
at Gallway fol. 273 his reply to the Confederates reasons for the removal of
his Authority in him from 273 to 277 Deputes Clanrickard Deputy fol. 278
departs the Kingdom ibid.

P
THe Papists ready to contribute that a toleration might ensue fol. 1 of the
Pale equasly involved in the Conspiracy fol. 41 countenanced the Robberies,
etc. at Clantarf and Skerries fol. 43 join to infest Dublin ibid. after the
Relief of Tredagh offer to come in fol. 66 rejected, and why ib.
Petition sent to the King fol. 112
The Parliament at Dublin why called fol. 3 meets fol. 32 prorogued fol. 35
's of Ireland Declaration to the Parliament of England fol. 178 Remonstrance
to the Lord Lieutenant fol. 182
of England declares all Traitors who deserted the Service of Ireland fol. 223
A Parliament summoned at Dublin, fol. 319 under the Precedence of Sir Maurice
Eustace and the Earl of Orrery Lords Justices, and continued under the Duke of
Ormond its Acts fol. 320

Sir William Parsons Lord Justice fol. 6 accused of misdemeanors fol. 123
Amiscreant Party, no true Protestant ever justly, charged with the King's
Murder fol. 304 The Peace of 1646. concluded fol. 155 's Articles fol. 156 as
necessary as the Cessation fol. 159 disclaimed at Waterford fol. 160
1648. concluded fol. 204 's Articles fol. 205 refused by O Neil, Antrim and
the Scots fol. 206
The Peoples devotion to the Clergy fol. 267 Pope Urban the Eighth's Bull fol.
135 Indulgence to Owen Roe fol. 136
Milo Power's good Service to the Lord Lieutenant fol. 231 The Presbytery at
Belfast endeavor to draw Sir Charles Coot to their Party fol. 207 The
President of Connaght esteemed remiss fol. 101 Preston and O Neil's Letter and
Demands to the L. Lieutenant fol. 166 beats Jones fol. 186
A Proclamation by the Lord Falkland against the Popish Clergy fol. 1
discovering the Plot fol. 22 forbidding strangers the City fol. 28 publishing
the King's detestation of the Rebellion fol. 30 against people flocking to the
City fol. 32 prizing Corn fol. 48 against Pillagers ibid. prohibiting the
Soldiers to return to England ibid.
A Proclamation calling in Protections fol. 99 for the Peace 1646. fol. 156
Propositions from the Rebels by Sir Thomas Carry and Dr. Cale fol. 45 by
Fitz-Williams about the Peace with the Queens consent fol. 154
Protections granted by Commissioners revoked fol. 102 The Protestants Petition
for Agents to go to Oxford fol. 140 to the King, App. 62 allowed by his Masty
fol. 140
Agents to go to Oxford fol. 142 receive a gracious promise from his Majesty
fol. 143 Agency questioned by the Councel-board fol. 144
of Ireland acknowledged by the King to bear a great part in his Restoration
fol. 316 How Protestant Heretics are to be buried fol. 171
Q
QUarter not to be given to any in arms, especially Priests fol. 264 The Queen
Regent of France thought a convenient Person to procure the Peace fol. 152 of
England her Answer to to the Irish Agents fol. 199
Querie whether the Protestant Agents at Oxford acted by the Protestant
Committee of the Parliament of Ireland at Dublin fol. 144 Queries expounded by
several Members in a Committee of the House of Commons against the sense of the
Judges fol. 12
R
RAconnel Battle fol. 105 The Lord Rannelagh pent up in Athlone till relieved
by the Lieutenant General fol. 44
Rathmines Disaster fol. 221 Reasons why O Neil consulted not with the Council
at Kilkenny fol. 254 The Irish Rebellion discovered fol. 19 its success in
Ulster fol. 27, 60 progress in Lemster fol. 38
breaks out in Munster fol. 49 Connaght, ibid.
Remonstrance presented at Trim fol. 114
The Rebels tear the Order of Parliament fol. 35, 55 Mercy was cruelty fol. 50,
51 slanders cast on the English profligated fol. 57 endeavor to make
themselves Masters of Lemster fol. 59 of Longford* Letter by Costilough App. 25
Unskilful in Sieges fol. 71 Cruelties ibid. send Agents to foreign Princes
fol. 98 receive Ministers from them ibid. are declared Subdued fol. 303
Several Rebellions fol. 14, etc. Five Regiments arrive at Dublin fol. 52 Not
the Defense of Religion, Prerogative, or Liberty, but the Extirpation of the
English Interest, principally aimed at by the Rebels, fol. 10, etc. The
Officers Remonstrance threatening much danger fol. 111 Col. Reynold's takes
Carrick fol. 227 Ross Battle fol. 109 Sir Benjamin Rydiard's Speech in defense
of Religion fol. 35 touching Collections for Ireland fol. 27

S
SIr William Saintleger President of Munster fol. 49, 83 his good Service there
ibid. at Talloe fol. 85
his Letter to the Lord Lieutenant App. 35 takes Dungarran fol. 85 his
vigilance and faithfulness fol. 88 death ibid.

Upon the recalling the King's Ships, principal Commanders land in Ireland fol.
83 The Scots thought the King's Offer to go for Ireland a great Demonstration
of his Care fol. 70 Yet the Scotch Council, as well as the two Houses,
interceded earnestly against this design, pretending the hazard his Sacred
Person would be in Burnet fol. 163 The mere Scots did little in Ireland, the
English Scots did good Service fol. 101, 152 The Scots beaten at Benburgh fol.
162 in Ulster join with Hamilton to invade England fol. 195 Declaration against
the standing Army in Ireland fol. 210
Soldiers sent into England fol. 138 receive an Oath ibid. disobey what
Preston engaged for fol. 171 The Spaniard prevails with the Irish to send no
men into England fol. 160 Stafford betrays Wexford-Castle to Cromwell fol. 225
The States first dispatch to the King at Edinburgh fol. 27 second dispatch to
the King fol. 30 his Warrant to the Earl of Ormond and Ossory to fight the
Rebels fol. 42 Letter to the Lord Lieutenant expressing the sad Condition they
were in fol. 43
Captain Stutfield's good Service in the relief of Tredagh fol. 63, 64 Colonel
Synnot's Propositions for the delivery of Wexford fol. 226
T
THe Lord Taaff goes for England fol. 34 returns to Ireland fol. 123 beaten by
Inchequin fol. 187 is at Rathmines Battle fol. 190 helps to expel the Nuncio
fol. 221 goes to the D. of Lorrain fol. 285
Tecroghan delivered to the Parliamentarians fol. 255 Sir Hen. Titchbourn sent
Governor of Tredagh fol. 29 certifies the Lord Lieutenant that Mellifont was
besieged fol. 37 his excellent Service at Tredagh fol. 61, 62, etc. Lord
Justice fol. 121 at Dungan Hill fol. 186
Sir Arthur Tirringham gives the State notice of the Rebellion fol. 27 his
Conduct at Lisnegarvy fol. 38
Tool of Wickloe accused by Rely fol. 315 Tredagh forewarned to be besieged by
the Reverend and Vigilant Dr. Jones fol. 28 besieged by the Rebels fol. 59
relieved with Provisions, fol. 63, 64
Col. Trevor beaten by Captain William Meredith fol. 224 New Troubles
meditated in Ireland fol. 226
V
SIr Charles Vavasor lands at Youghall fol. 85 his excellent Service at the
Comroe fol. 116 takes Cloghleigh fol. 117 is taken Prisonner fol. 118
Captain William Vaughan's resolution in relieving Carrickmacros fol. 102
Knighted fol. 105 his Service at Ross Battle fol. 110 slain at Rathmines fol.
220

The pious and learned Primate Usher's Prophecy of the Rebellion fol. 24
agreement with Bishop Bramhall fol. 3 goes for England fol. 25
Col. Venables lands at Dublin fol. 218 appearing at Rathmines Defeat (a few
days after) with exemplary Virtue, he goes with Cromwell to the siege of
Tredagh, where the Assailants having been twice beaten off, he (the third time)
forced his entrance into the Town over the bodies of the slain, Cromwell
following. At the Bridge (in the midst of the Town) he found some considerable
opposition, which would have been more, could they within have drawn up the
Drawbridge, which his Capt. Lieut. Thomas Chetam, and Ensign Done hindered
with a set of Pikes; so the Town being taken, he was sent to oppose George
Monro in the North fol. 224 he is set upon in his March by Col. Trevor ibid.
has Belfast surrendered to him fol. 225 takes in Charlemont and other Garrisons
fol. 255



VV
LIeut. Col. Waineman goes to Tredagh fol. 29 his Service at Marlington fol. 66
Dundalk fol. 67

An Abbreviate of the War in Munster 1642. from 83 to 89 1643. from 115 to 119
Connaght 1642. from 80 to 83 1643. from 119 to 120

Waterford content at last to receive a Supply of Soldiers, so they might be
old Irish of Ulster, under Lieutenant General Farrall fol. 229, 230 VVendesford
Lord Deputy fol. 6 his Affection to the Earl of Strafford, dies ibid.
Viscount Wentworth, Lord Deputy fol. 2 his Government fol. 2, 3 made Earl of
Strafford fol. 4 Lord Lieutenant of Ireland fol. 3
his Trial fol. 5 Death ibid.

Sir Francis Willoughby Governor of Dublin Castle fol. 27 is sent from the
Marq. of Ormond Commissioner to the Parliament fol. 167 his eldest Son, Capt.
Willoughby, Governor of Wallway-Fort fol. 82 his Son, Col. Francis
Willoughby's Regiment reduced fol. 180 disbanded fol. 225 is sent Prisoner to
Chester by Jones fol. 195

Colonel VVogan Governor of the Fort of Duncannon fol. 230 Major VVoodhouse
returns unsatisfied from England fol. 105 VVolf's Insurrection in Limerick when
the Lord Lieutenant should have entered fol. 251
Y
CAptain Yarner lands in Ireland fol. 29 is at Kilrush Battle fol. 73

Z
COlonel Zanckey routs the Party which intended to retake Passage fol. 231
assists in the taking of Arkenon, etc. fol. 240

FINIS.

