Boteler's Case.

Being an Impartial NARRATIVE Of the TRIAL, and PENITENT BEHAVIOR OF, Master
William Boteler.

Executed, September 10 th. At Chelmsford, about the Murder of Capt. WADE With
the Substance of a SERMON Preached on that Occasion.

AND His Last Speech Faithfully Taken.

With Allowance; To. L'Estrange.

Printed for J. Clarke, and P. Brooksby.

Boteler's CASE. etc.
THou art here Christian Reader Presented with a Candid and Impartial Relation
of a deplorable Tragedy, which yet the good Hand of Providence, that sometimes
through seeming severities Waits to be Gracious, and calls Sinners by
Inscrutable Methods even at the Eleventh Hour, was pleased at last to Crown
with a Blessed Catastrophe, though waded unto through Waters of Marah, and
frightful streights of an Ignominious Temporal Death.

The Design of this Publication is far from casting the least Reflections or
murmuring Surmises on the Judicial Proceedings, owned by the Deceased to be
Just and Legal; Nor is it out of any over-bias'd fondness to his Memory. For,
alas! The Dead have no flattorers, and he is now (we hope) in Glorious Rest,
regardless either of Detraction or Applause, as much beyond the Good Offices of
Friends, as Malice of Enemies.

There are far more Worthy Reasons and Useful Motives, that seem not less to
Necessitate, than Invite the Divulging of these Papers. -- As
First for the Discovery of Truth, and Checking those swarms of Different, yet
equally false Reports every where spread concerning this unhappy Accident: The
Quality of the Gentleman slain engaged a General pity, and some ungrateful
Circumstances, a just and more than ordinary Detestation against it is Author;
whence busy fame snatching up some partial Rumors Composed of Dark
Probabilities, and many real Mistakes, aggravated it to that hideous
proportion; that not only the Credulous Vulgar (who are neither able nor
willing to Examine things to the Bottom, or Distinguish a right) became
Prepossessed; but likewise some more Intelligent, seemed carried along with the
Impetuous Torrent, and to Disabuse such from undue Impressions is but Justice
to the Dead, and Charity to the Living: Let Malefactors suffer according to
their Demerits, yet still it is below the Generosity of a Gentleman, and the
Dignity of a Christian, to Blacken any Man's memory with Feigned crimes, and
groundless Imputations: He that does not Detect Calumnies when he can, is
tacitly guilty of them, and those that scatter Slanders on another Tomb,
deserve to have their own Monuments sullied with Ignominy.

2. A yet greater and most Important Inducement, is to promote Gods Glory by
Proclaiming the Infiniteness of his Love, the Riches of his Grace, and
Miraculousness of his power in working good out of evil, making Destruction
Instrumental to Conversion: Sanctifying Affliction, bringing a Wretched Soul to
a sense of his misery: and (as Charity oblieges us to hope) to a hearty sincere
Repentance not to be Repented of; If the Blessed Spirits of Just Men made
perfect, and Holy Angels in Heaven rejoice at the Conversion of a Sinner; ought
not Mortals on Earth to Remarque it, by magnifying the Mercies of so good a
God, and publishing his Wondrous Works, that the present and succeeding
Generations may Celebrate them with due Praises and Thanksgivings.

3. Nor can this certain and well known Narrative but be highly useful (if
rightly improved) to the Readers; (especially such as were Master Boteler's
Acquaintance) by way of Caution and Information; You that were his Friends (and
without reflection let me add, sometimes perhaps Companions in Riot and
Extravagance) would you Meet him again with Joy in Happiness; Imitate him then
in his contrition and Repentance; You whose Vicious practices have first
prevailed to make you Wish there were no future state of reward or Punishment,
and further continuance in Sin so seared your consciences, stupesied your
understandings, and degraded your Reason: As with the Fool in the Psalmist, To
say in your Hearts there is no God: Here you may behold how Empty and Idle, how
Pernicious and Frightful, how Loathsome and Detestable such conceits appear;
when once Serious Apprehensions of Death Approach, Opening the self-blinded
Eyes of the Soul, and taking off those Vain Imaginations, which the Depravity
of Nature, the Inconsiderateness of Youth, the madness of Wine, or a Proud
Fantastic Humor of Singularity have Raised, and which tend no less to the
Disturbance and Distraction of Humane Society in General; than to the
particular Ruin and Destruction, (as well Temporal as Eternal,) of all those
that suffer themselves to be Infatuated by them.

As for the Truth of what is here offered to public view; Let me assure thee
(Christian Reader!) That there is nothing contained, but what was either found
in Mr. Boteler's own Handwriting, solemnly declared by him as therein
mentioned, taken from his Dying Lips, or known matter of Fact; All ready to be
Attested by Worthy Persons, Ministers Instrumental to his conversion, and
attending him in his last Agonies, or others of approved Integrity: Nay so
conscienciously scrupulous has the Collector been, that many Remarkable
Expressions, though well remembered in substance, (and which might much have
Embelisht these Memoirs) yet because not taken in the very Words they were
delivered in, are wholly Omitted; His aim in this undertaking not being at any
private Lucre or Interest, but general Satisfaction and Edification. To which
End, may his pains be Sanctified by the Divine Blessing, and Gratified by thy
kind Acceptance, serious Perusal, and everlasting Advantage.

But we too long detain the greedy Reader from matter of Fact, to which we now
proceed.

MAster William Boteler was born in Northamptonshire, about the Year 1650.
Descended of an Ancient Family, and in his Youth Liberally Educated in
Litterature and Exercises, tending to the accomplishment of a Gentleman: Since
the present Wars between the Confederates and French, he went over, attending a
Person of Quality into the Campagn, and at the Battle of Seniffe, gave Signal
proofs of his Courage; Where his Patron Unfortunately happening to be Killed,
the whole Care and Management of his Stately Funeral was left to him, who
dispatched the same with so much Decency, Gallantry, and Fidelity, as much
Indear'd him to the Deceased Gentleman's Relations: Amongst whom he has past
most of his time since in the North in very good Repute; Till coming up to
London (the great Randevous of Business) as a Candidate of Fortune, in
Expectation of some Employ: He suddenly and most unexpectedly met with that Sad
and Disasterous Fate; which put a Period to his Life.

The wicked Instrument that drew this Mischief upon him, was one Parsons, a
fellow of a Debauched Life and Ill Fame; who having heretofore insinuated into
the Affections of one Mr. Wade, living in the County of Essex, and not above
Four Miles from the Town of Bishops-Starfford, A Gentleman of considerable
Quality, and Captain of the Train-bands: He was pleased commonly to entertain
him at His House, assist him upon any Occasions, and in a word had conferred
many singular Obligations from time to time upon him: But in July last a
Difference suddenly arising between them upon some small Occasion, which is
differently Related, and nothing Necessary to be known: High Words past on
either side, so long till Captain Wade called him Thief or High-way-Man; And he
in return gave the Captain the Lie, who was thereupon so far provoked as ('it is
said not without some blows) to turn him out of his company: Thus away goes
Parsons in a Huff, meditating Revenge, and coming up to London, concealing the
Quarrel, Trepans Mr. Boteler down to Bishops-Starfford, and at length tells him
the difference, that he was resolved to have satisfaction, withal requesting
him to be his Second: which Boteler (also declared at his Death) absolutely
refuses, but is at last unhappily persuaded to go to Captain Wade, (whom he had
often seen in London, but had never been at his House) and tell him how enraged
Parsons was, and that he staid then in such a Meadow; But withal offering his
Mediation to reconcile them; But after a little way they parted.

Boteler declared further, that he parted with Captain Wade before the Murder
was committed, and saw him not afterward; but endeavored all he could to
avoid his Company; We shall referr the more particular Relation of
circumstances to Master Boteler's Solemn confession, taken after his
condemnation by the High Sheriffs Chaplain, according to the Honorable Judges
order, which he twice took the Sacrament upon, and Dyed in; the true copy
whereof shall herein in it is due place be inserted.

What is here inserted out of a tenderness to the memory of a true Penitent, is
not intended as any sort of Reflection upon the Honorable Bench, the
Witnesses, or the Jury: he himself at his Execution acknowledging the Sentence
to have been just and legal: but however having satisfied Public Justice in
suffering according to the Law; and having also freely submitted both to the
Sentence, and to the Punishment, it is looked upon as an Act of christian
charity, to divide as far as the case will bear it, his crime from his
Misfortune. The Evidences themselves agreeing with a great part of what he
himself delivered, and not contradicting any part of the rest: But however so
it was, that upon Thursday the 26 th. of July, he was Arraigned at Chelmsford
Assizes; Whereupon hearing of the Evidence, he was brought in Guilty.

He behaved himself at his Trial with a very becoming modesty, protesting his
Innocence as to being present when they fought, or that he saw a Sword drawn
between them: but for further discovery of the Truth, the Ministers attending
him, were commanded to press him to a full and candid confession of all
circumstances: which he freely consented to, as follows.

The Confession of Mr. Boteler, after his Condemnation, taken from him by the
Chaplain to the High Sheriff, according to the Honorable Judges order.
UPon a strict and serious examination of the Prisoner condemned, he humbly
confessed as follows, Viz. That Parsons came to his lodging in London on the
Saturday morning (July 14.) and beginning to renew the former Acquaintance
betwixt them, (Mr. Boteler having for a long time declined his company by
reason of his being reported a common Robber on the Highway) desired of him,
that he would accompany him to Mrs. Ainsworths at Bishops-Starfford, where they
would be merry, and take the Country air; which Mr. Boteler refused, assuring
him that he was going into a course of physic for his health, and therefore
not willing to leave the town; However upon Parsons's importunity, at last
consented, and as they rode together (not before) he told Mr. Boteler, that
Captain Wade, and himself had lately quarreled, and that the Captain had called
him Theif, and given him such Opprobrious Language, that he could not put it
up, but resolv^d to have satisfaction of him, and therefore if the Captain
would fight with Seconds, desired Mr. Boteler he would do him the kindness to
be his Second; but this Mr. Boteler absolutely refused, and told Parsons he
would rather endeavor to compose the Difference, and make them friends, which
if he could accomplish, it would not repent him of his Journey, but he should
be glad of the friendly Office.

They came to Mistress Ainsworths that night, and there lay, and also Sunday
night; on Monday morning Parsons called up one of the Servants early, and
ordered him to make ready the Horse he usually rode upon, and also one for Mr.
Boteler, telling him he would show him a neighboring Park, which was very
pleasant and worth seeing; whereupon they rode out together; in the way Parsons
told Mr. Boteler, it would then be a very fit time to know Captain Wades mind;
Mr. Boteler answered, it was most proper for him to go himself, and he would
willingly go along with him, for he knew not the way alone; Parsons replied, he
was afraid to go to the Captains House, least the Servants should take an
advantage of him, who knew very well he had lately quarreled with their Master,
but if he would go to the Captains house, he would direct him the way, and wait
his return in a field not far distant; Mr. Boteler accordingly went, telling
him at his departure that if he did not return in a short time, he should ride
back again toward Bishops-Starfford, and he would follow him, Mr. Boteler came
to the Captains House, asked for him, and understanding he was at home,
alighted from his horse, and was conducted by a Servant into the house, who
immediately acquainting his Master, he not long after came down, and treated
Mr. Boteler with great kindness and civilty, offering him a breakfast, which he
refused, but Drank with him, and in their Discourse told him, he was concerned
to hear there had been a quarrel betwixt him and Parsons, and that he should
think himself happy could he be an instrument to reconcile them: Capt. Wade
answered in a passion, that Parsons was a very ungrateful Rogue, that he had
affronted him and given him the lie twice, and he would never put it up; Mr.
Boteler replied, that if they both continued in such a heat, Parsons demanding
satisfaction for the opprobrious language given him, and he resolving on the
other side not to pass by the affront offered by Parsons, there was little
hopes of a Reconciliation; Captain Wade then asked him where Parsons was: Mr.
Boteler answered, in a field not far off: then the Captain demanded why he came
not himself to his house; he answered, because he feared his servants, or that
himself would take advantage of the challenge; Capt. Wade protested he scorned
any thing of that Nature, and then enquired of Mr. Boteler, whether parsons had
not importuned him to be his second; he answered he had very earnestly desired
it, but he altogether refused him, and therefore desired the Captain he would
forgive parsons and be Reconciled: the Captain solemnly protested he would not,
but he would go and speak with parsons himself: which Mr. Boteler hearing, was
very earnest with him, that in regard he was thus wheadled down by parsons, not
knowing any thing of the Difference, and yet might seem concerned in it, that
he would put off the meeting of parsons for that Day at least, and then if
parsons resolved to fight, he would be a second to the Capt. rather than to
parsons; but the Capt. not hearkening thereunto, in a rage took up his sword,
and told Mr. Boteler he would walk a little way with him, and so speak with
parsons: Mr. boteler desired him to desist, because being both in a heat danger
might ensue: however the Capt. went to the Door with Mr. boteler, who called
for his horse, and would have immediately got up, but the Capt. told him again
he would willingly walk a little way with him, and then Mr. boteler seeing he
could not prevail, led his horse in his hand, and so they walked on together;
the Capt. asking Mr. boteler in the way, which field he had left parsons in, he
pointed to the Field, but desired the Captain to retorn, which he absolutely
refusing, Mr. Boteler told him, if he was resolved to go to parsons he would
leave him, for he feared some mischief would, follow; the Capt. replied,
Farewell then honest Will, God bless thee, and so shook hands and parted: Mr.
boteler got on horseback, and rode on gently toward bishops-starfford, and
after he had rode half way, or thereabouts, parsons upon a swift Gallop
overtook him, and crying out to him only, He is fallen, passed by him, and
never stopped till he came to Bishops-Starfford; M. Boteler rode after him, and
when he came into Mrs. Ainsworths house, found her crying upon the bed, and
Parsons in the Room with his Boots on: No sooner did Mr. Boteler come in, but
she cried out, Oh! Mr. Boteler, what have you done? Parsons hearing that, swore
that Mr. Boteler was not near when they fought, and if the Capt. were dead, he
only had killed him, and moreover that what he had done, be had done fairly:
and having thus said, quitted the Room, called for his horse, and rode away:
Mr. Boteler after he was gone, thought it convenient for him to stay there, and
whilst he was considering what to do in this case, Mrs. Ainsworth and her
Servant plainly told him he should not stay there; and bringing the Horse to
the door, would not let him be quiet till they had prevailed with him to be
gone, not suffering him to stay to take his Coat and his other Perriwig which
he left behind. After he had rode four miles, or thereabouts, he saw Parsons
standing at a Smiths shop, whilst his Horse was shooed, having dropped a shoe
by the way: and after that riding a little way with Parsons, ask't him the
manner of their Duel, who told him, that after they had chose a smooth green
place at the end of a Land, they made several passes at one another, and it was
his fortune to break the Captains sword, and then catching hold of his hand and
wringing it behind him, he ask't whether he would beg his life; the Capt.
saying he scorned it, he stabbed him into the breast, and so he fell: after he
was fallen he thrust his own sword into the ground, and it breaking, he took
the piece broke off, and whirled it from him, and so took Horse and rid away.
Mr. Boteler hearing this, told Parsons he thought it not safe to keep him
company, and desired him to ride on by himself: then said Parsons, prithee Will
don't leave me, but let us ride together to London, and assure thy self if thou
be questioned, I will quickly clear thee and own the fact; but Mr. Boteler
still desired Parsons to ride before, and then he did; and Mr. Boteler kept at
some distance from him in hopes to be left behind, but when he came to the
Green-Man, Parsons having dropped another shoe, staid there at the Smiths, when
Mr. Boteler came by, who seeing him there, took the way over Hackney-Marshes in
hopes to loose him, and so they rode into London together; when they came into
Drury Lane, where they set up their horses, Mr. Parsons sent for some women of
his acquaintance; and declared to them that he had fought a duel, and that Mr.
Boteler was not near the Capt. and himself when they fought, and if Mr. Boteler
was called in question about it, he wished that he might be struck blind and
dumb, and many other horrid Judgments befall him, if he did not surrender
himself and own the fact. Mr. Boteler upon this left him, and went to his own
lodging where he commonly lay before; and the next day dined with his friends
at the usual Ordinary, and being admonisht by a Gentleman that had heard that
he was searched for by the Hue and Cry, sent immediately to secure Parsons: but
missing of him, was advised to take another lodging till Parsons was taken:
whereupon he went to a friends house, being an Inn in Bloomsbury, and being
seized by the Constable and Watch, at the first surprise betwixt sleeping and
waking, denied his name, but afterward confessed it, and protested his
innocence, submitting to the Officers, and so was brought to Prison.

This Confession he Solemnly made, declaring it to be the whole Truth, as far
as he was concerned in, or privy to the Death of Mr. Wade, either before or
after the same was committed; and upon this he received the Sacrament. And of
the Verity thereof there is this further probability, That he declared the very
same to several friends upon his first Apprehension, and all along to his Death
continued constant therein, without variation or contradicting himself in any
circumstances, even to his Death; Nor was any part thereof disproved by any of
the Witnesses, but several particulars confirmed.

Being now under a Sentence of Death he began to consider his latter End; and
as by the Christian Charity of Authority he was indulged a larger space of time
than ordinary to fit himself for that great and dreadful Change, so he improved
those precious minutes most frugally to his spiritual advantage, by frequent
converse with Ministers, reading the Holy Scriptures, and other pious Books;
and lest he should be tempted to mispend any part of his time vainly, or worse,
instead of redeeming that which was past, which was now become his great
business, as well as interest, he was very cautious of being spoken withal by
any without first knowing their names; so that if any of his old profane idle
Acquaintance came, he put off their impertinent Visits by sending word of his
being retired, and busy; but with the Ministers and others, whose discourse
savoured of Heavenly things, and tended to the edification of his Soul; he
declared himself much delighted and refreshed in their society, yielding up
himself to follow to his power all their wholesome directions: He was now much
given to meditation and private Prayer, mightily bewailing the wickedness of
his past life, and magnifying God that had made him sensible of the danger he
was formerly in: In a word, There appeared a perfect real change; and that the
Reader may judge how happy a frame of spirit he was under, let him peruse the
following Engagement or Covenant drawn up by Mr. Boteler himself, soon after
his condemnation, and found in his own Handwriting in his Book: The Original
remaining in the hands of a worthy Minister, Chaplain to a Noble Lord, whence
this is faithfully copied.

Mr. Boteler's solemn Covenant with God, private-lately drawn up by himself,
and found in his own Manuscript.
OH! most dreadful God for the Passion of thy Son, I beseech thee, accept of
thy poor Prodigal, now prostrating himself at thy door; I have fallen from thee
by mine Iniquities, and am by Nature the Son of Death, and a thousand-fold more
the Child of Hell by my wicked practices; but of thine infinite Grace, thou
have promised Mercy to me in Christ, if I will turn to thee with all my Heart:
Therefore upon the Call of thy Gospel I am now come in, and throwing down my
Weapons, submit my self to thy Mercy: And because thou requirest, as the
conditions of my peace with Thee, that I should put away my Idols, and be at
defiance with all thine Enemies, whom I acknowledge I have wickedly sided with
against thee; I do here from the bottom of my heart renounce them all, firmly
covenanting with thee, not to allow my self in any known sin, but
conscientiously to use all means that I know thou have prescribed for the death
and utter destruction of all my Corruptions: And whereas I have formerly
inordinately and Idolatrously let out all my Affections upon the World, I do
here resign my heart to thee that made it, humbly protesting before thy
glorious Majesty, that this is the firm resolution of my heart, and that I do
unfeignedly desire Grace from thee, That when thou shall call me thereunto, I
may practice this my Resolution, through thy Assistance, to forsake all that is
dear unto me in this World, rather than to turn from thee to the ways of sin;
and that I may watch against all its Temptations, whether of Prosperity or
Adversity, lest they should withdraw my heart from thee; Beseeching thee also
to help me against the Temptations of Satan, to whose wicked suggestions I
resolve by thy Grace never to yield my self a servant; and because my own
Righteousness is but as filthy rags, I renounce all confidence therein, and
acknowledge that I am of my self a hopeless, helpless, undone Creature, without
righteousness or strength.

And for as much as Thou have of thy bottomless Mercy offered most graciously
to me, wretched sinner, to be again through Christ my God, if I would accept of
Thee, I call Heaven and Earth to record this day, That I do here solemnly
avouch Thee for the Lord my God, and with all possible veneration, bowing the
neck of my Soul under the feet of thy Sacred Majesty, I do here take thee the
Lord Jehovah, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost for my Portion and chief Good, and do
give up my self, Body and Soul for thy Servant, promising and vowing to serve
thee in Holiness and Righteousness all the days of my life; and since thou have
the Lord Jesus Christ the only means of coming unto thee, I do here upon the
bended knees of my Soul accept of him as the only new and living way, by which
sinners may have access to thee, and do here solemnly join my self in
Marriage-covenant to him.

Oh! blessed Jesus! I come to thee hungry and hard bested, poor and wretched,
miserable, blind, and naked, a most loathsome polluted wretch, a guilty
condemned Malefactor, unworthy for ever to wash the feet of the Servants of my
Lord, much more to be married to the King of Glory; but since such is thine
unparalled love, I do here with all my power accept thee, and do take thee
for my Lord and Husband, for all times and conditions, to love, honor, and
obey thee before all others, and this to death; I embrace thee in all thy
Offices, I do renounce my own worthiness, and do here own thee to be the Lord
my Righteousness; I renounce my own wisdom, and do here take thee for my only
Guide; I renounce my own Will, and take thy Will for my Law.

And since thou have told me I must suffer if I will reign; I do here covenant
to take my Lot as it falls with thee, and by thy Grace assisting to run all
hazards with thee, verily confiding, That neither life nor death shall part
between thee and me.

And because thou have been pleased to give me thy holy Laws as Rules of my
Life, and the ways in which I should walk to thy Kingdom, I do here willingly
put my neck under thy Yoke, and set my shoulder to thy Burden, and subscribing
to all thy Laws as holy, just, and good; I solemnly take them as the Rule of
Words, Thoughts and Actions, promising, that though my flesh contradict and
Rebel, yet I will endeavor to order and govern my whole life according to thy
Directions, and will not allow my self in the neglect of any thing that I know
to be my duty.

Only because through the frailty of my flesh, I am subject to many failings, I
am bold humbly to protest that unallowed miscarriages, contrary to the settled
bent and resolution of my heart, shall not make void this Covenant, for so thou
have said.

Now Almighty Searcher of all hearts, thou know that I make this Covenant
with thee this day, without any known Guile or Reservation, beseeching thee,
that if thou espyest any flaw or falsehood therein, thou would discover it to
me, and help me to do it aright.

And now Glory be to thee, O God the Father, (whom I shall be bold from this
day forwards to look upon as my God and Father) that ever thou should find
out such a way for the Recovery of undone Sinners; Glory be to thee O God the
Son, who have loved me, and washed me from my Sins with thine own blood, and
art now become my Savior and Redeemer: Glory be to thee O God the Holy Ghost
who by the finger of thy Almighty Power have turned about my heart from Sin to
God; O dreadful Jehovah, the Lord Omnipotent, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Thou
art now become my Covenant-Friend, Amen, So be it, And the Covenant which I
have made on Earth, let it be Ratified in Heaven.

Will. Boteler.

HAving thus by sincere Repentance, a lively Faith, and hearty Endeavors to
work out his salvation with fear and trembling; secured his Eternal interests,
his Affections were wholly set on things above, so as to be little solicitous
for, or about his Temporal concerns, for though several of his Friends did
strenuously endeavor to obtain a Pardon, (or at least further Reprieve) yet he
appeared freely willing to pay the forfeiture of his Life, often sighing out
his Cupis dissolvi, and expressing a Godly jealousy over his own Heart, lest it
should start back again to Vanity: But at last the fatal day is prefixed for his
Execution, viz. Monday the 10 th. of September, the news whereof he received
from Mr. High Sheriff (to whom for his many civilities he gratefully expressed
his Acknowledgments) with an unmoved Christian-courage, as tidings he had long
expected, serving only to waft him out of the rageing straights of a sinful
world into an Ocean of Bearitude; so that having the day before devoutly again
received the Sacrament, and care being taken to have his Funeral Sermon
Preached before him alive on the morning of his Execution; he was about 10 a
Clock conveyed to the Church, where a numerous Congregation being assembled,
the Minister before designed, and for whom Mr. Boteler himself had chosen the 7
th. of Micah and the 8 th verse for his Text on this occasion, being disabled
by unexpected indisposition, another able Divine supplied the place, and after
an excellent practical Discourse from a very suitable Scripture, viz. Revel.
2.16. the former part of the Verse, Repent, or else I will come unto thee
quickly. Toward the close, applied himself to the particular solemnity in
these words following.

The latter part of the Sermon Preached at Mr. Boteler's Execution.
I Have now done with my Text, and must entreat your Patience and attention,
whilst I apply my self to this most unfortunate person before you, which is the
sole Occasion of this most sad and sorrowful solemnity: A person whom God has
thought fit to come upon, and surprise by a most dreadful visitation, a death
whose very ignominious Pomp and base formalities are most terrible and
affrighting, to feeble, unconstant and starting Nature; and yet I have very
great inducements to believe, that his natural courage, and Christian
Fortitude, will make him both willing and able to drink of this bitter cup,
which he acknowledges to be much sweetened by some circumstances in the mixture
and preparation thereof. I must confess according to the Common Law of England,
he has had a very just sentence past upon him, and he has often, with Tears
in his eyes, and groans in his expressions, bewailed all the unlucky
circumstances of that fatal concern, and has also (in sincerity I hope)
implored the Almighties pardon and forgiveness for associating himself with
that most ungrateful Villain, who so barberously Murdered his too kind, and
over-obliging Friend, and notwithstanding his solemn and frequent protestations
to the contrary, suffers this miserable Gentleman to pay the price of that
blood, the guilt of which still blushes in the concealed murderers face, as
being the true Reflections of his accusing and convicted Conscience, all which
does really demonstrate the overwhelming pressures of that heart, which could
not but conscionably burst forth into a vocal confession of its own Guilt.

However, through goood Report and bad Report, the Condemned is now hasting to
his Execution, and having received the Holy Sacrament as his strengthening and
Spiritual Viaricum, is now in hopes through the conduct and security of his
Blessed Saviors merits, to be brought through this Red Sea of Blood, into the
most Glorious and satisfying Land of Promise; he knows indeed it is a bitter
Passover, and must be eaten with sour herbs, but still desires to remember it
is the Lord's Passover, and therefore hopes he shall not think of the herbs,
nor be angry with the hands that gathered them, but rather look up to him only
in whose power it is to institute that, and also to govern these, being assured
that all misfortunes upon Earth, are permitted by him who is supreme in Heaven,
and that all these little and inconsiderable motions in Nature, are moved and
guided by the great and irresistible wheel of Providence.

I cannot but acknowledge myself placed here as the faint Echo of this Dying
person, and therefore it is but fit I repeat that, which he desired might be part
of his last words, and the subject of my present discourse, had I had a
convenient time allotted for a matter of so great weight and importance. Hear
then (I beseech you) hear this Dying Penitent, breaking forth into the
Pathetical words of the Church, spoken by the Prophet, Mic. 7.8.9.10. Rejoice
not against me, O mine Enemy, when I fall, I shall arise, when I sit in
darkness, the Lord shall be a Light unto me; my shameful fall will be my
glorious rise, this little darkness upon nature, and shadow of death, I am now
about to pass through, will be but an happy entrance and passage into
everlasting Light and Brightness; Now in full assurance of this, give me Sir,
leave to exhort you, who are now going to Suffer, to persevere and continue
steadfast to the end, and to be constant to the last gasp, in your devout and
pious resolutions, that you would bear with patience the indignation of the
Lord, consider the rod and who has appointed it. Let me prevail with you
heartily and sincerely to forgive that Enemy, leaving that vindication of your
self to that great God to whom vengeance belongs, you may resolve to Die in
that Christian Charity, which must complete your sincere and acceptable
Repentance. To conclude, let me further Exhort you, seriously to consider, that
you are passing from the Church to the last Scene of your fatal Tragedy, and
therefore in the midst of every preparative and Religious Exercise, let the
thoughts of Dying at the next instant, heighten your zeal and vigor, quicken
your graces and virtues, and highly inflame your Devotion: Mariners who
foresee a storm or tempest ready to encounter them, begin then to use their
utmost Art and Diligence to secure themselves, and cry loud to their Gods for
assistance, as they did in the Ship that carried Jonas. And thus whilst you
with seriousness, contemplate on your sudden and succeeding Execution, whilst
you are offering up your last Prayers, you cannot but be earnest with God to
save you from perishing, you cannot but cry mightily, and beg heartily that you
may take hold on that secure plank, your Savior's Cross, which may carry you
to your desired Haven, that you may be thrown upon Christ, the Rock of your
salvation, and so escape eternal Shipwreck; that you may be hid in the clefts
of his wounds, till your Heavenly Father's wrath is gone and passed over: the
very meditation of that ignominious Death which your God thought fit you should
at this time suffer, (considering also what your Savior has suffered before
you) ought to enliven your Faith, strengthen your Patience, inflame your Love,
confirm your hope, and will then carry you out of a pleasing contemplation into
a perfect enjoyment of the blessed vision, into that impassible state of
eternal joy and felicity, where there shall be no more doubts, nor fears, no
more troubles nor distractions, no more sorrow, nor crying, nor pain, To which
God of his infinite mercy, etc.

From the Church the Prisoner walked on foot to the usual place of Execution,
marching to meet the King of Terrors, with the courage of a Roman shall I say?
nay rather the Fortitude of a Christian: For indeed he only can look death in
the face undauntedly, upon solid grounds, who knows that his Redeemer lives,
without this the Flower of Nature shrinks and droops at the sight of a chilly
Grave: For when others brave it, their unconcernedness is the effect only of
stupidity, or a feverish Passion; let them but consider it in cool blood, and
they shall be ready with the Emperor Adrian in a fit of trembling and
perplexity to cry out: O Animula vagula, blandula
Hospes; Comesque Corporis
Quae nunc abibis in Loca
Pallidula; rigida, nudula,
Nec, ut soles, dabis joces.


On the contrary, here you might behold a staid and even Resolution, equally
void of womanish fear, or Hectorly impudence, that showed a due consideration
of the weighty Errand he was going about, and that upon true measures he could
bear with the difficulties of the way out of a sense and comfortable prospect
of his Journeys end: And now too might you see the most marble-hearted
Spectators in all the numerous crowd to melt at their Eyes, and compassion to
seize the most obdurate breasts.

Being arrived at the place* where he was to suffer, he mounted two or three
rounds of the Ladder, and thence with a modest look, and cheerful voice spoke
as follows:

The last Confession, or Speech of Mr. Boteler at place of Execution.
Gentlemen:
I Have very great reason to believe, that I shall die here with as little
pity, and as much malice as ever any did; but I beg of you to hear the words of
a dying man, who within a few minutes must go out of this World.

In the first place, as to the thing I suffer for, I am very well satisfied,
and am content to die, believing that I die justly and righitously by the Law
of the Land; but as touching the murder of Mr. Wade, I am not guilty; Parsons
came to me, and desired me to go to Mr. Wade, to tell him that he was in such a
place, and would speak with him, which I was loath for to do; but upon his
persuasions I went to him. (This Captain Wade I never had any malice or envy in
my heart against in my life, nor any provocation from him) But, as I said, I
went to him, and told him that Parsons was resolved not to put up the affront
he had given him: I told him also that Parsons was in a Field in such a place:
I said, Sir, I am sorry that Parsons has any thing against you, that he is so
enraged; He desired me to go with him to the Field, and show him where Parsons
was, for he would go to him: But I was unwilling to go with him, and more than
once desired him to let me be gone, that I might not be concerned one way or
other, desiring him likewise to forbear, or at least defer meeting, to see if a
reconciliation might not be had, and if afterward Parsons would fight with
Seconds, I would serve him rather than Parsons: But he would needs have me go
forth of his House with him; so I walked with him a little way, and then I
said, Fare ye well, Sir, God bless you. And he said, God bless thee, honest
Will, and so we parted.

I do declare that I never saw them near one another, nor any Sword drawn.

If any thing lies upon my Conscience, it is this, (and I have laid it before
the Lord with humility, and am satisfied that God has pardoned it through the
Merits of Christ (That I should be an occasion to bring him out of his house,
whereby he came to his end.

I do declare, That Parsons told me both before and when he was come to London,
that he did believe the Captain was not dead.

But I have very justly deserved a greater death than this, by my many sins
that I have committed against God, and I do desire that my fall may be to the
saving of many a man here.

My wickedness was great, I was come to mere Atheism, I did not believe there
was a God, but lived in continuual practice of sin; going to bed profaning of
his holy Name, and rising again with curses in my mouth, let all that hear me
this day repent, and not forget the Lord that made them.

I was educated like a Gentleman (as many do know) and very well brought up as
to Religion, but I had left all that, and kept bad company, and was drawn in
only as you have heard, but you see, he that did the fact is escaped, and I
must dye.

Now I desire that every one that lives, and sees me here, may take example by
me, who am going out of this world within a few minutes; there is never a one
here, but does provoke the Almighty every minute to cut him off, were not his
mercies infinite; and I can freely lose this life, confessing I have deserved
an eternal death, yet I believe through the merits of my dear Savior that he
will receive me immediately into glory.

Now there is another aspersion that is cast upon me, that I was a Highway
Robber, and I do declare, that I never had any such design, never was of any
gang to that purpose, nor ever saw any man robbed that I remember in all my
life.

As touching the bloody coat that people judge I did the Act in, I do declare
that it was done by my being let blood, and that six or seven weeks before the
murder was committed, as many Gentlemen can witness, nor had I that coat on
then.

Another thing I would clear that was cast upon me, which is, that I was a
Roman Catholic, But I do declare that I am not, but am a Protestant and of the
Church of England, though one of the least and worst thereof.

Now I have done, and leave it to you, whether you will believe the words of a
dying man or no; for how could I expect to be saved, if I should go out of the
world with a lie in my mouth.

I pray God of Heaven freely to forgive Parsons, that has brought me to this,
and to give him to consider what he has done, and grant him repentance for it,
and to have mercy on his soul.

But though I dye I am confident that he will clear my innocence, but I find
that I was so little believed, that people thought I would say any thing to
save my life.

And now I desire you all to join with me in Prayer to Almighty God to forgive
me my sins, to have mercy upon me, and to save my soul.

So he kneeled down to Prayer, and prayed very affectionately, humbly, and
enlargedly, with much brokenness of heart, and such pathetical expressions,
that, being not exactly taken, it would be injurious to represent them with the
least variation from his own words, then a Minister went to Prayer with him,
and after he had prayed to God again in few words, he then rise up and said,
The God of Heaven bless you all, and when he was on the Ladder, he said. The
Lord Jesus Christ have mercy on me, then the Hangman asking him to forgive him,
he answered, Oh with all my Soul I forgive thee; and then last of all gave the
signal of his innocence that he promised to the Minister, by clapping his
hands, and said, Jesus Christ receive my Soul, and so was turned off.

There were present a great many persons of Quality; and a vast number of
common people, but so affecting was his language and behavior, extorting tears
from his very Enemies, so that scarce any there but wept, and bewaild his
untimely end, as if he had been one of their own Relations: His body in a fair
Cofin was conveyed back to Chelmsford, and that evening decently buried, being
atttended to the Church with a very numerous company.

Considering the original occasion of all this sad Tragedy, wherein these two
Gentlemen so unfortunately lost their lives one in the field by the sword of an
ungrateful villain, and the other by the hand of Justice; I know not how I can
more usefully close this Narrative, than with a few words against the
mischievous humor of Duels, it is most strange how such an unreasonable, brutish
and bloody custom should so far prevail against the Laws, as still to be
accounted brave and Honorable, as if a Gentleman were obliged to hazard his
life, or forfeit his Honor at the pleasure of every desperate Ruffin; that
Honor is too thin and brittle, that a foolish rash word can pierce; it is
certainly a dear purchased Conquest, that stains a man with the deserved title
of a Murderer, a sorry triumph where the Conqueror must either run away and
hide his head, or ignominiously fall a sacrifice to expiate the guilt of his
victory; does not he who denies that he can be wronged more nobly, then he who
confesses that he is both subject to wrongs, and has received so great an one
that he cannot but pursue its revenge, he who conceals his wrong, is only
wronged in private, whilst he who revenges his wrong, is wronged in public,
and certainly the public wrong is more ignoble; and seeing we conceive our
selves concerned in honor to punish such as would divulge an affront that was
smothered as soon as given, we cannot but be said to wrong our own Honor, when
we in seeking revenge, proclaim such wrongs as had else either vanished, or been
lessened by the concealment. Thus have I heard of a prudent old man, at whose
bald head a rotten Orange being thrown, in the street, clapped his hat upon it,
and said, I shall spoil that knaves sport, who expected to see me come showing
my head all besmeared over, and complaining of the injury: It Is one of the most
picquant revenges to undervalue our Enemies, so far as not to think them worthy
of our notice; and we show our selves to be greater then they, when we let the
world see, that they cannot trouble us, when children and natural foolls, or
mad men do the same things that we fret at in others of more advanced years,
and understanding, we pass them without a frown; which shows, that it is not
the acts done us by our enemies, but our own resentment, which in effect
injures us; he who pardons, proclaims he fears not his Enemies for the future,
but revenge implies apprehensions of what we desire on that account to lessen;
thus cowards are generally cruel, never counting themselves secure till their
Enemies have lost all capacity to resist: in revenge we act the Executioner,
but we personate a Prince when we pardon, in the one we bestow a favor, and so
are noble, in the other we discover our infirmity. May such considerations or
(if reason cannot be heard) at least such direful examples, as this we have
here impartially presented the world with prevail, for the future to abate this
wicked custom, grounded on fantastic punctilio's of Honor, generally
promoted on trifling, shameful occasions, always attended with black and fatal
consequences, and chiefly practiced by those that may justly claim the least
share in the noble virtues of real Magnanimity and Fortitude.

Pascitur in vivis livor, post fata quiescit. FINIS.

